3rd
edition
Veterinary
Microbiology
EDITORS
D. Scott McVey, Melissa Kennedy.
and M.M. Chengappa
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
Third Edition
VETERINARY
MICROBIOLOGY
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Third Edition
VETERINARY
MICROBIOLOGY
Editors
D. Scott McVey, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Research Leader, Supervisory Veterinary Medical Officer, and Professor of Immunology
USDA ARS CGAHR
Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research Unit
Manhattan, KS
Melissa Kennedy, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Associate Professor and Director
Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences Department
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN
M.M. Chengappa, BVSc, MVSc, MS, PhD, DACVM
Department Head and University Distinguished Professor
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This editiori first publishied 2013 @ 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
Chapters 1, 3, 15, 18, S5, S9 arid 64 are with thie U.S. Goverrimert.
First editiori, @ 1999 Blackwell Scierice, Iric.
Secorid editior1, @ 2004 Blackwell Publishirig Ltd.
Editorial offices:
 2121 State Averue, Ames, Iowa S0014-8300, USA
Thie Atrium, Southierri Gate, Chichiester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsirigtor Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services arid for irifomatiori about hiow to apply for
permissiori to reuse thie copyrighit material iri this book please see our website at
www. wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
 Authiorizatiori to phiotocopy items for iriterrial or persorial use, or thie iriterial or persorial use of specific
clierts,is grarted bylackwell Publishing, provided thatthebase feeis paid directlyto the Copyight
log so aay ai aire aaq s siaed o ass edas e o Aq asai aooiod e pea
users of thie Trarisactiorial Reportirig Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5949-7/2013.
 Desigriatioris used by comparies to distiriguishi thieir products are ofteri claimed as trademarks. All brarid
rames arid product riames used iri this book are trade rames, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of thieir respective owrers. Thie publishier is riot associated withi arly product or veridor
meritioried iri this book.
Thie coriterts of this work are iriterided to furthier gerieral scieritific research, uriderstaridirig, arid discussior1 
orily arid are riot iriterided ard shiould riot be relied upori as recommerdirig or promotirig a specific
methiod, diagriosis, or treatmerit by healthi scierice practitioriers for arly particular patierit. The publishier 
 arid thie authior make rio represeritatioris or warrarities withi respect to thie accuracy or completeriess of thie
coriterits of this work arid specifically disclaim all warrarties, iricludirg withiout limitatiori arly implied
charges iri goverrimerital regulatioris, arid the corstarit flow of infomatiori relatirg to the use of
mediciries, equipmerit, arid devices, thie reader is urged to review arid evaluate thie iriformatior provided ir1 
the package irisert or iristructiors for each medicire, equipmerit, or device for, amorg othier thirigs, ariy
chiariges iri thie irstructioris or iridicatiori of usage arid for added warririgs arid precautiors. Readers shiould
work as a citatiori arid/or a poteritial source of furthier irifomatiori does riot mear thiat thie authior or thie 
 publishier eridorses thie iriformatiori thie orgarizatiori or Website may provide or recommeridatioris it may
make. Furthier, readers shiould be aware thiat Iriterriet Websites listed iri this work may hiave chiariged or
disappeared betweer1 whieri this work was writteri arid whier1 it is read. No warrarity may be created or
exterided by ariy promotiorial statemerits for this work. Neithier thie publishier rior thie authior shiall be liable
for ariy damages arisirg herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publicafion Data
Veteririary microbiology. - 3rd ed. / editors, D.S. MeVey, Melissa Keririedy, M.M. Chergappa.
P. ; cm.
Iricludes bibliographical refererices arid iridex.
ISBN 978-0-470-95949-7 (softback : alk. paper) - ISBN 978-1-118-65054-7 (eMobi) -
ISBN 978-1-118-6S0S6-1 (ePDF) - ISBN 978-1-118-65062-2 (ePub) - ISBN 978-1-118-6S338-8 -
ISBN 978-1-118-65340-1
I. MeVey, D. Scott  II. Keririedy, Melissa (Melissa Aririe), 1959-  III. Chierigappa, M. M.
[DNLM: 1. Arimal Populatiori Groups-microbiology. 2. Veteririary Medicirie. QW 70]
SF780.2
636.089 69041-dc23
2013002830
 A catalogue record for this book is available from thie British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books ir a variety of electroric fomats. Some cortent that appears ir prirt may
rot be available iri electrornic books.
Cover desigr by Moderri Alchiemy LLC
Set iri 9/1 1pt ITC Storie Serif by Aptara? Iric., New Delhi, Iridia
12013
Contents
Contributors
vii
16 Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia
pseudomallei
134
Preface
xi
SANJEEV NARAYANAN
17
Francisella fularensis
139
Acknowledgments
xili
PETER C.IWEN
18
Moraxella
145
About the Companion Website
XV
HUCHAPPAJAYAPPA AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
19
Pseudomonas
148
 SANJEEV NARAYANAN
PARTI INTRODUCTION
1
20
151
 Pathogenicity and Virulence
3
MEGAN E.JACOB
D. ScoTT McVEy AND
21
 Spiral-Curved
CHARLES CZUPRYNSKI
Organisms I: Borrelia
155
2
 Immune Responses to Infectious Agents
RANCE B. LEFEBVRE
LAUREL J. GERSHWIN
22 Spiral-Curved Organisms II: Brachyspira
3
 Laboratory Diagnosis
18
(Serpulina) and Lawsonia
158
D. ScoTT McVey
JEROME C. N1ETFELD
4
 Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
26
 23  Spiral-Curved Organisms Ill: Campylobacter
JOHN F. PRESCOTT
and Arcobacter
167
Vaccines
45
JEROME C. NIETFELD
RONALD D. SCHULTZ AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
24
 Spiral-Curved Organisms IV: Helicobacter
175
MEGAN E.JACOB
25
 Spiral-Curved Organisms V: Leptospira
179
PARTII BACTERLA AND FUNGI
51
RANCE B.LEFEBVRE
6 Family Enterobacteriaceae
53
26
 Staphytococcus
184
RODNEY MOXLEY
 MARK S. SMELTZER AND KAREN E. BEENKEN
7
Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
62
27
 Streptococcus and Enterococcus
194
RODNEY MOXLEY
GEORGE C.STEWART
8
 Enterobacteriaceae: Salmonella
75
Arcanobacterium
203
RODNEY MOXLEY
T.G. NAGARAJA
6
 Enterobacteriaceae: Yersinia
85
29
Bacillus
206
RODNEY MOXLEY
GEORGE C. STEWART AND
10
Enterobacteriaceae: Shigella
95
BRIAN M. THOMPSON
RODNEY MOXLEY
30
 Corynebacterium
212
11
Pasteurellaceae: Avibacterium, Bibersteinia,
T.G. NAGARAJA
Mannheimia, and Pasteurella
101
31
Erysipelothrix
218
AMELIA R. W0OLUmS
TIMOTHY FRANA
12
 Pasteurellaceae: Actinobacillus
108
32
Listeria
223
BRADLEY W.FENWICK AND
 SANJEEV NARAYANAN
AMELIA R. WOOLUMS
33
Rhodococcus
228
13
 Pasteurellaceae: Haemophilus and Histophilus
115
 SETH P. HARRIS AND JOSHUA B. DANIELS
AMELIA R. WOOLUMS
 Gram-Negative, Non-spore-Forming
14 
Bordetella
120
Anaerobes
234
BRADLEY W.FENWICK
T.G. NAGARAJA
15
Brucella
127
35
 Clostridium
245
 STEVEN OLSEN AND BRIAN BELLAIRE
JOHN F. PRESCOTT
Contents
36
 Filamentous Bacteria: Actinomyces, Nocardia,
 Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
408
Dermatophilus, and Streptobacillus
263
CHRISTOPHER C.L.CHASE
MEGAN E.JACOB
58
 Orthomyxoviridae
425
37
Mycobacterium
270
WENJUN MA
RAUL G. BARLETTA AND DAVID J. STEFFEN
59
 Bunyaviridae
433
38
 Chlamydiaceae
279
D. ScoTT McVey, BaRBARa DrolET, AND
ROMAN R. GANTA
WILLIAM WILSON
39
Mollicutes
283
601
 Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and
ERIN L. STRAIT AND MELISSA L. MADSEN
Bornaviridae
438
40
 Rickettsiaceae and Coxiellaceae: Rickettsia and
 STEFAN NIEWIESK AND MICHAEL OGLESBEE
Coxiella
293
61
Rhabdoviridae
448
ROMAN R. GANTA
DEBORAHJ.BRIGGS
41
 Anaplasmataceae: Ehrlichia and Neorickettsia
297
62
Coronaviridae
456
ROMAN R. GANTA
UDENI B.R. BALASURIYA
42
 Anaplasmataceae: Anaplasma
302
63
 Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
474
 ROMAN R. GANTA
UDENI B.R. BALASURIYA
43
 Bartonellaceae
306
64
Reoviridae
491
 BRUNO B. CHOMEL AND RICKIE W. KASTEN
D. ScoTT McVey, WillIAm WIlSon,
44
 Yeasts—Cryptococcus, Malassezia, and Candida
313
AND BARBARA DROLET
LISA M. POHLMAN AND M.M. CHENGAPPA
65
Birnaviridae
501
45
 Dermatophytes
321
MELISSA KENNEDY
M.M. CHENGAPPA AND LISA M. POHLMAN
66
Retroviridae
503
46
Agents of Subcutaneous Mycoses
326
FREDERICK J. FULLER
LISA M. POHLMAN AND M.M. CHENGAPPA
67
Transmissible Spongiform
47
Agents of Systemic Mycoses
332
Encephalopathies
523
M.M. CHENGAPPA AND LISA M. POHLMAN
DONGSEOB TARK AND JUERGEN A. RICHT
PARTIII VIRUSES
345
PART IV CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
533
48
 Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
347
 68  Circulatory System and Lymphoid
MELISSA KENNEDY
Tissues
535
 Parvoviridae and Circoviridae
353
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
RICHARD A. HESSE, BENJAMIN R. TRIBLE, AND
69
 Digestive System and Associated Organs
544
RAYMOND R. ROWLAND
DOUGLAS E. HoSTETLER
50
 Asfarviridae and Iridoviridae
363
70
 Integumentary System
555
MELISSA KENNEDY
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
51
 Papillomaviridae and Polyomaviridae
366
71
 Musculoskeletal System
564
MELISSA KENNEDY
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
52
Adenoviridae
369
72
 Nervous System
570
MELISSA KENNEDY AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
53
Herpesviridae
372
Ocular Infections
577
REBECCA P. WILKES
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
54
 Poxviridae
387
74
 Respiratory System
582
GUSTAVO A. DELHON
DoUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
55
Picornaviridae
396
75
Urogenital System
591
 LUIS L. RODRIGUEZ AND PETER W. KRUG
DOUGLAS E. HoSTETLER
56
Caliciviridae
403
 MELISSA KENNEDY
Index
599
Contributors
Udeni B.R. Balasuriya, BVSc, MS, PhD
Charles Czuprynski, PhD
Associate Professor of Virology
Professor in Microbiology
 Department of Veterinary Science
Department of Pathobiological Sciences
University of Kentucky
School of Veterinary Medicine
Lexington, KY
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI
Raul G. Barletta, PhD
Professor
Joshua B. Daniels, DVM, PhD, DACVM
 School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Assistant Professo1
University of Nebraska-Lincoln 
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Lincoln, NE
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Brian Bellaire, PhD
Columbus, OH
Assistant Professor
Veterinary Microbiology and Preventative Medicine
Gustavo A. Delhon, DVM, MS, PhD
 College of Veterinary Medicine
 Associate Professor
lowa State University
School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Ames, IA
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE
Karen E. Beenken, PhD
Fellow
Barbara Drolet, MS, PhD
 Department of Microbiology and Immunology
Research Microbiologist
College of Medicine
USDA ARS CGAHR
 University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
 Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research Unit
Little Rock, AR
Manhattan, KS
Deborah J. Briggs, MS, PhD
Bradley W. Fen wick, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVM
Professor of Virology
 Professor and Jefferson Science Fellow
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
University of Tennessee
College of Veterinary Medicine
Knoxville, TN
Kansas State University
 Manhattan, KS
Timothy Frana, DVM, MS, MPH, PhD, DAVPM,
DACVM
Christopher C.L. Chase, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVM
Associate Professor
Professor of Virology
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
 Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
South Dakota State University
lowa State University
Brookings, SD
Ames, IA
M.M. Chengappa, BVSc, MVSc, MS, PhD, DACVM
Frederick J. Fuller, MS, PhD
Department Head and University Distinguished Professor 
Professor of Virology
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
 North Carolina State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
Raleigh, NC
 Manhattan, KS
Roman R. Ganta, MS, PhD
Bruno B. Chomel, MS, PhD
Professor
Professor
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
University of California
Colfege of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
Kansas State University
 Department of Population Health and Reproduction
Manhattan, KS
Davis, CA
vli
vii
Contributors
Laurel J. Gershwin, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Peter W. Krug, PhD
Professor of Immunology
Research Molecular Biologist
University of California
USDA ARS PIADC
College of Veterinary Medicine
Foreign Animal Disease Research Unit
 Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Greenport, NY
Immunology
Davis, CA
Rance B. LeFebvre, PhD
Professor and Associate Dean of Student Affairs
Seth P. Harris, DVM, PhD
University of California
Assistant Profess01
School of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
 Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Immunology
Lincoln, NE
Davis, CA
Richard A. Hesse, MS, PhD
Wenjun Ma, BVSc, MVSc, PhD
Professor
Assistant Professor
 Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Center of Excellence in Emerging and Zoonotic Diseases
Kansas State University
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Manhattan, Ks
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS
Douglas E. Hostetler, DVM, MS
Associate Professo1
Melissa L. Madsen, PhD
 School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Research and Development Project Leader
Sciences
CEVA Biomune
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Olathe, KS
Lincoln, NE
D. Scott McVey, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Peter C. Iwen, MS, PhD, D(ABBM)
Research Leader, Supervisory Veterinary Medical Officer,
Professor of Pathology and Microbiology
and Professor of Immunology
Pathology and Microbiology
USDA ARS CGAHR
NE Public Health Laboratory
 Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research Unit
Nebraska Medical Center 
Manhattan, KS
Omaha, NE
Rodney Moxley, DVM, PhD
Megan E. Jacob, MS, PhD
Professo1
Assistant Professor of Clinical Microbiology
School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
and Director, Clinical Microbiology Laboratory
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
North Carolina State University
Lincoln, NE
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Population Health and Pathobiology
T.G. Nagaraja, MVSc, MS, PhD
Raleigh, NC
University Distinguished Professor
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
Huchappa Jayappa, BVSc, MVSc, PhD
College of Veterinary Medicine
Associate Director
Kansas State University
Merck Animal Health
Manhattan, KS
Elkhorn, NE
Sanjeev Narayanan, BVSc, MS, PhD,
Rickie W. Kasten, MS, PhD
DACVM, DACVP
Staff Research Associate
Associate Professo1
University of California
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Coliege of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Population Health and Reproduction
Kansas State University
Davis, CA
Manhattan, KS
Melissa Kennedy, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Jerome C. Neitfeld, DVM, MS, PhD
Associate Professor
Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
 Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Tennessee
Kansas State University
Knoxville, TN
Manhattan, KS
Contributors
IX
Stefan Niewiesk, DVM, PhD, DECLAM
Mark S. Smeltzer, PhD
Associate Professor
Professor
 Department of Veterinary Biosciences
Department of Microbiology and Immunology
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Medicine
The Ohio State University
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
Columbus, OH
Little Rock, AR
Michael Oglesbee, DVM, PhD, DACVP
DavidJ. Steffen, DVM, PhD, DACVP
 Professor and Chair
Professor
 Department of Veterinary Biosciences
 School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
College of Veterinary Medicine
Sciences
The Ohio State University
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Columbus, OH
Lincoln, NE
Steven Olsen, DVM, PhD, DACVM
George C. Stewart, MS, PhD
 Research Leader and Supervisory Veterinary Medical
Chair and McKee Professor of Microbial Pathogenesis
Officer
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
USDA ARS NADC
University of Missouri
Infectious Bacterial Disease Unit
Columbia, MO
Ames, IA
Erin L. Strait, DVM, PhD
Lisa M. Pohlman, DVM, MS, DACVP
Director, US Swine Biological R&D
Assistant Professor and Director, Clinical Pathology
Merck Animal Health
Laboratory
De Soto, KS
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Dongseob Tark, DVM, PhD
Kansas State University
Animal Plant Quarantine Agency, Manan-gu, Anyang-si
Manhattan, KS
Gyeonggi-do, South Korea
John F. Prescott, MA, Vet MB, PhD
 Brian M. Thompson
Professor
MS, PhD
 Department of Pathobiology
 President and CEO
University of Guelph
Elemental Enzymes, Inc.
Guelph, Ontario
Columbia, MO
Juergen A. Richt, DVM, PhD
Benjamin R. Trible, MS
Regents Distinguished Professor and KBA Eminent Scholar
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
 Director of the Center of Excellence in Emerging and
College of Veterinary Medicine
Zoonotic Diseases
Kansas State University
 Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
Manhattan, KS
Center of Excellence in Emerging and Zoonotic Diseases
College of Veterinary Medicine
Rebecca P. Wilkes, DVM, PhD, DACVM
Kansas State University
Research Assistant Professor
Manhattan, KS
Diagnostic Sciences and Education
College of Veterinary Medicine
Luis L. Rodriguez, DVM, PhD
University of Tennessee
 Research Leader and Supervisory Veterinary Medical
Knoxville, TN
Officer
USDA ARS PIADC
William Wilson, MS, PhD
 Foreign Animal Disease Research Unit
Research Microbiologist
Greenport, NY
USDA ARS CGAHR
Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research Unit
Raymond R. Rowland, MS, PhD
Manhattan, KS
Professor
Diagnostic Medicine Pathobiology
Amelia R. Woolums, DVM, MVSc, PhD, DACVIM,
Colfege of Veterinary Medicine
DACVM
Kansas State University
Senior Teaching Fellow
Manhattan, KS
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Ronald D. Schultz, MS, PhD, Honorary DACVM
Athens, GA
Professor and Chair
Department of Pathobiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI
Preface
This collection of chapters and supporting materials is
covers a very diverse set of pathogens and many diseases,
intended to provide a very broad overview of veterinary
but yet the similarities of pathogenesis, virulence proper-
microbiology and infectious diseases. The writings repre-
ties, and host responses among these organisms are strik-
sent a combination of the biology of the organisms that
ing. The third section of the book describes viral diseases
cause or are associated with disease and the diseases them-
and the viruses responsible. We have tried to emphasize the
selves. The scope of this book is intended to be general
consequences of virus infections and the host responses.
The last section of the book is a systematic approach of
and to seasoned veterinary practitioners and scientists. Like
describing infection and disease of animals. In the spirit of
many textbooks, this book will hopefully be a strong start-
one medicine, the chapters take a comparative approach
ing place for the study of veterinary infectious diseases as
to describing both differences and similarities of diseases
well as a good reference text. The content emphasizes dis-
across many affected species.
eases that occur in North America, but many global, trans-
We have invited a group of outstanding microbiolo-
 boundary disease content is included.
gists/experts to contribute to this book. We believe the con-
The first section of the book is an introduction to infec-
tents are accurate and up-to-date. However, we welcome
    n soss  s 
ment. These chapters are intended to provide a basis of
the contents of this book.
understanding and discussion for later chapters describ-
ing specific organisms and diseases. The second section
describes bacterial and fungal pathogens. This section
D. Scott McVey, Melissa Kennedy, and
M.M. Chengappa
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Drs Dwight C. Hirsh, N. James Mac-
outstanding research and diagnostic microbiologists. We
Lachlan, and Richard L. Walker for allowing us to retain
also thank the respective institutional support for making
a significant portion of the second edition of the book.
the book possible. Finally, we would like to acknowledge
Also, we thank all of the chapter authors who contributed
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., and its staff for their guidance and 
to the second edition, as we have retained some of their
support in completing the book. We also wish to thank
contributions in the revised edition. This book would not
Ms Brandy Nowakowski for assisting in the preparation of
 have been possible without the contributions of many
manuscripts.
xii
About the Companion Website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/mcvey/microbiology
The website includes:
Review questions and answers
● Powerpoints of all figures from the book for downloading
PART I
Introduction
Pathogenicity and
Virulence
D. SCOTT MCVEY AND CHARLES CZUPRYNSKI
Veterinary microbiology deals with microbialagents affect-
Potential pathogens also vary in their effects on differ-
ing animals. Such agents are categorized by their ecologic
ent tissues in the same host. The Escherichia coli strains that
associations with animals: parasites live in permanent asso-
 are commensals in the intestine can cause severe disease in
ciation with, and at the expense of, animal hosts; sapro-
the urinary tract and peritoneal cavity. Some microorgan-
phytes normally inhabit the inanimate environment. Par-
isms that are commensals in one habitat may be pathogenic
asites that cause their host no discernible harm are called
in the same, or some other, habitat that is pathologically
commensals. The term "symbiosis" usually refers to recip-
altered or otherwise compromised. For example, oral strep-
tococci, which occasionally enter the bloodstream, may
ment is also called mutualism. Pathogenic organisms can be
colonize a damaged heart valve and initiate bacterial endo-
either parasites or saprophytes, and cause disease in one 01
carditis. In the absence ofsuch a lesion, however, the strep-
more animal species. The process by which they establish
tococci would not colonize and would be cleared unevent-
themselves in a host individual is infection, but infection is
fully by the innate immune system. Similarly, the frequent
not necessarily followed by clinical illness. The term “viru-
translocation of intestinal bacteria across the intestinal
lence” is sometimes used to express degrees of pathogenic-
mucosa, and into the vascular channels, normally leads
ity that may be related to the severity of clinical illness
to their clearance by innate and adaptive defense mecha-
(Table 1.1).
nisms. In immunodeficient hosts, however, such entrance
may lead to fatal septicemia.
Commensalism is the stable form of parasitic existence.
Gaining entrance into a novel host or tissue, or a change
Some Attributes of Host-Parasite
in host resistance, is a common way that commensal par-
Relationships
asites are con verted into active pathogens that ensure the
survival of the microorganism. Active disease can jeopar-
Many pathogenic microorganisms are host specific in that
dize agent survival by killing the host or evoking an active
they parasitize only one or a few animal species. For exam-
immune response. Either outcome can deprive the agent
ple, the cause of equine strangles, Streptococcus equi sub-
of its habitat. Evolutionary selective pressure, therefore,
species equi, is essentially limited to infection of horses.
tends to eliminate host-parasite relationships that threaten
Others—certain Saimonefla serotypes, for example—have
the survival of either partner. Less virulent strains of the
a broad host range. The basis for this difference in host
pathogen, which permit survival of the host, tend to arise
and thereby replace the more lethal strain. Evolutionary
 part be related to the need for specific attachment devices
selection also favors establishment of a resistant host pop-
 between hosts (receptors) and parasites (adhesins)
ulation by eliminating highly susceptible stock. The trend
Some agents infect several host species with varying
of host-agent adaptation is thus toward commensalism.
effects. For example, the plague bacillus Yersinia pestis
Most agents causing serious disease have alternative modes
behaves as a commensal parasite in many small rodent
of survival as commensals in tissues (e.g., E. coli in the intes-
species but causes fatal disease in rats and humans. Evo-
tine) or hosts not subject to disease (e.g., plague in small
lutionary pressure may have produced some of these dif-
rodents) or in the inanimate environment (e.g, coccid-
ferences. For instance, Coccidioides immitis, a saprophytic
ioidomycosis). Some pathogens may cause chronic infec-
fungus that requires no living host, infects cattle and dogs
tions lasting months or years (tuberculosis and syphilis),
with equal ease; yet it produces no clinical signs in cattle
during which time their dissemination to other hosts can
 but frequently causes progressive fatal disease in dogs.
occur and ensure their survival.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
4
PARTI
Introduction
Table 1.1.
 Degrees of Pathogenicity
of disease-producing agents (e.g., plague, ehrlichiosis, and
viral encephalitides).
Saprophytes
 No disease environmental bacteria
Attachment to host surfaces requires interaction
Commensal
 Colonize host tissue no disease
between the agent's adhesins, which are usually proteins,
 organisms
and the host's receptors, which are most often protein o1
Symbiotic species
 Beneficial relationship for the host; colonize
carbohydrate residues. Examples of bacterial adhesins are
host tissue—mutually and parasitic 
fimbrialproteins (E. coli and Salmonella spp.), P-1 protein of 
microorganisms
Mycoplasma (Mycoplasma pneumoniae), and afimbrial sur-
Opportunistic
 Colonize host tissue (may usually be
face proteins (some streptococci). Examples of host recep-
parasites
commensal) but cause disease with tissue
tor substances include fibronectin for some streptococci
damage or change in environment 
 Pathogenic
Infection directly causes disease (although 
and staphylococci, mannose for many E. coli strains, and
sialic acid for M. pneumoniae.
 microorganisms
this may be host specific?
 Attachment is inhibited by normal commensal floras
that occupy or block available receptor sites or discour-
age colonization by excreting toxic metabolites, bacteri-
Criteria of Pathogenicity—Koch's Postulates
ocins, and microcins. This “colonization resistance" is an
 is      
host-determined antibacterial substances (e.g., defensins,
The presence of a microorganism in diseased individuals
lysozyme, lactoferrin, and organic acids) or by mucosal
does not prove its pathogenic significance. To demonstrate
antibodies.
the causal role of an agent in a disease, the following quali-
 Penetration of an epithelial or mucosal host surface is
fications or "postulates" formulated by Robert Koch (1843-
a variable requirement among pathogens. Some agents,
1910) should be satisfied:
having reached a primary target cell population, pen-
etrate no farther (e.g., enterotoxigenic E. cof). Others
1.
 The suspected agent is present in all cases of the dis.
traverse surface membranes after inducing cytoskeletal
ease.
rearrangements, resulting in “ruffles" that entrap adhered
2.
 The agent is isolated from such disease and propa-
bacteria or passage between epithelial cells (e.g., Salmonella
gated serially in pure culture, apart from its natural
 and Yersinia). Inhaled facultative intracellular parasites
host.
like Mycobacterium tubercufosis are ingested by pulmonary
3.
 Upon introduction into an experimental host, the
macrophages, in which they may multiply and travel via
isolate produces the original disease.
lymphatics to lymph nodes and other tissues. Percuta-
4.
 The agent can be reisolated from this experimental
 neous penetration occurs mostly through injuries, includ-
infection.
ingarthropod bites. Dissemination within tissues oramong
adjacent tissues takes place by invasion, aided perhaps by
These postulates are ideals that cannot be completely
 satisfied in all cases of infectious diseases. The presence
which are produced by many pathogens. Microorganisms
of some microorganisms cannot be demonstrated at the
are also spread via lymph and blood vessels, the bronchial
time of disease, especially in tissues affected by intoxication
tree, bile ducts, nerve trunks, and mobile phagocytes
(e.g., tetanus and botulism). Other pathogens are diffcult
Except for the few foodborne pathogens that produce
to isolate or die rapidly after isolation (e.g., Leptospiraspp.).
toxins in foodstuffs prior to ingestion, growth in or on
Still others, although clearly pathogenic, require undeter-
 host tissue is a prerequisite for all pathogenic organisms.
mined accessory factors to cause disease (e.g., Pasteurefla
In order to multiply to pathogenic levels, they must be
related pneumonias). For some human viral pathogens
able to circumvent host defense efforts. Pathogenic adap-
(e.g., Cytomegalovirus), no experimental host is known.
tations of various bacteria include firm attachment to pre.
Finally, some agents (e.g., Mycobacterium leprae) cannot
vent mechanical removal, avoidance of phagocytosis, and
be grown in culture apart from their natural hosts.
interference with phagocytic function by release of toxins
01 other components that prevent phagocytic digestion.
Some bacteria digest or divert antibodies or deplete comple-
Elements in the Production of an
 ment. Other pathogens alter the vascular supply to tissue,
Infectious Disease
restricting defensive resources and impairing antimicrobial
activity in the affected area.
Effective transmission of a microbial agent occurs by inges-
When host defenses are significantly inhibited, micro-
tion; inhalation; or mucosal, cutaneous, or wound contam-
 bial growth can proceed if nutritional supplies are adequate
 ination. Airborne infection takes place largely via droplet
 and the pH, temperature, and oxidation-reduction poten-
nuclei, which are 0.1-5 mm in diameter. Particles of this
tial are appropriate. Iron is often a limiting nutrient. Micro-
 size stay suspended in air and can be inhaled. Larger parti-
 cles settle but can be resuspended in dust, which may also
teins (transferrin and lactoferrin) is an important factor in
harbor infectious agents from nonrespiratory sources (e.g.,
virulence. Gastric acidity accounts for the resistance of the
skin squames, feces, and saliva). Arthropods may serve as
stomach to most pathogenic bacteria, although expression
mechanical carriers of pathogens (e.g., Shigefla and Der-
of alternative sigma factors when bacteria are in stationary
matophius) or play an indispensable part in the life cycles
phase results in an RNA polymerase that transcribes genes
Chapter I Pathogenicity and Virulence
whose products help the pathogen survive in an acidic envi
these toxins produce injury by destroying the cells in which
ronment (e.g., Saimonella and enterohemorrhagic E. cof).
they replicate or by altering cell function, appearance, and
The higher body temperature of birds may explain their
growth characteristics.
resistance to some diseases (e.g, anthrax and histoplas-
Endotoxins are lipopolysaccharides (LPs) that are part
mosis), while requirements for an anaerobic en vironment
 of the gram-negative cell wall and outer membrane. They
account for the restriction of anaerobic growth to devital-
consist of polysaccharide surface chains, which can act
ized (i.e., nonoxygenated) tissues or tissues in which simul-
as an adhesin or virulence factors and are the somatic
 taneous aerobic growth has lowered the available oxygen.
(O) antigens recognized by the immune response; a core
polysaccharide; and lipid A, which is the toxic moiety.
LPS may bind directly to leukocytes, or to LPS-binding
Pathogenic Action
protein (a plasma protein), which in turn transfers it to
CD14. The CD14-LPS complex binds to receptor proteins
Microbial disease manifests itself either as direct damage
(e.g., Toll-like receptor 4) on the surface of macrophages
to host structures and functions by exotoxins and other
and other cells, triggering the release of proinflammatory
products of microbial growth, or as collateral damage due
cytokines. CD14-LPS complexes elicit the manifestations
to host inflammatory or immune reactions triggered by the
 of endotoxemia, which includes fever, headache, hypoten-
microbe or microbial components (endotoxin).
sion, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, intravascular coag-
ulation, inflammation, endothelial damage, hemorrhage,
Direct Damage
fluid extravasation, and circulatory collapse. Many of
these outcomes result from (1) activation of the com-
Exotoxins are usually bacterial proteins, which are freely
plement cascade and (2) production of arachidonic acid
excreted into the environment. The differences between
metabolites (prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and thrombox-
endotoxins and exotoxins are described in Table 1.2.
anes). The manifestations ofendotoxemia closely resemble
Two general types of exotoxins exist. One acts
the pathology associated with gram-negative septicemias.
extracellularly or on cell membranes, attacking inter-
Although mediated by different bacterial components
cellular substances or cell surfaces by enzymatic or
(lipoproteins) and host receptors (Toll-like receptor 2),
detergent-like mechanisms. Examples of these toxins
 most of these same manifestations can also be induced by
include bacterial hemolysins, leukocidins, collagenases,
the cell walls (peptidoglycans) of gram-positive bacteria.
and hyaluronidases, which may play an ancillary role in
infections.
Another type of exotoxin consists of proteins or
Immune-Mediated Damage
polypeptides that enter cells and enzymatically disrupt cel-
lular processes. Many, but not all, of these usually consist
Tissue damage due to immune reactions is consid-
of an A fragment, which has enzymatic activity, and a B
fragment, which is responsible for binding the toxin to its
responses (such as inflammation) and reactions resembling
target cell. Exotoxins are encoded chromosomally, on plas-
immediate-type allergic phenomena can occur in response
mids or on bacteriophages. In a manner similar to viruses,
to endotoxins or to peptidoglycan without preceding sen-
sitization.
Specific immune responses participate in the patho-
Table 1.2.
Exo- and Endotoxins Compared
genesis of many infections, particularly chronic gran-
ulomatous infections such as tuberculosis. Granulomas
form as a result of cell-mediated hypersensitivity, which
Exotoxins
Endotoxins
is initiated in the early stages of infection. Cell-mediated
Often spontaneously difusible
 Cell-bound as part of the
immune responses intensify inflammatory responses and
 cell wall 
tissue destruction upon subsequent encounters with the
Proteins or polypeptides
 LPS (lipid A is a toxic
agent or its protein through the release of effector sub-
component)
stances from T lymphocytes (e.g., cytokines and perforins).
 Produced by gram-positive and 
 Limited to gram-negative
 Immune mechanisms apparently contribute to anemias
 gram-negative bacteria
bacteria
 Produce a single, pharmacologically
seen in anaplasmosis, and the hemotrophic mycoplasmas.
Produce a range of effects.
specific effect
largely due to host-
The antibody response to hemoparasitism does not distin-
guish between the parasite and the host erythrocyte. Both
derived mediators
Each is distinct in structure and 
Allsimilar in structure and 
are removed by phagocytosis.
reactivity according to its
effect regardless of
bacterial species of origin 
 bacterial species of origin 
 Lethal in minute amounts 
 Lethal in larger amounts
(mice = nanograms)
Further Reading
(mice = micrograms)
Labile to heat, chemicals, and 
Very stable to heat.
storage
 chemicals, and storage
Gyles CL (2011) Relevance in pathogenesis research. Vet Micro-
Converible to toxoids (nontoxic.
Not convertible to toxoids
biol, 153 (1-2), 2-12. Epub April 22, 2011.
 immunogenic toxin-derivatives):
Hajishengallis G, Krauss JL, Liang S et al. (2012) Pathogenic
elicit antitoxin production 
microbes and community service through manipulation of
innate immunity. Adv Exp Med Biol, 946, 69-85.
6
PART I 
Introduction
Henderson B and Martin A (20ll) Bacterial virulence
Hunt PW (20ll) Molecular diagnosis of infections and resis-
in the moonlight: multitasking bacterial moonlighting
tance in veterinary and human parasites. Vet Parasitol, 180
 proteins are virulence determinants in infectious dis-
(1-2), 12-46. Epub May 27, 2011.
ease. Infect Immun, 79 (9), 3476-3491. Epub June 6,
Livorsi DJ, Stenehjem E, and Stephens DS (2011) Virulence fac-
2011.
 tors of gram-negative bacteria in sepsis with a focus on Neis-
 Hoiby N, Ciofu O, Johansen HK etal. (2011) The clinical impact
seria meningitidis. Contrib Microbiol, 17, 31-47. Epub June 9,
of bacterial biofilms. Int / Oral Sci, 3 (2), 55-65.
2011.
Immune Responses
to Infectious
s Agents
LAURELJ. GERSHWIN
The ability of the host animal to respond to infection
molecules and their signaling pathways are important for
by pathogens is generated by a unique and connected
detection of in vading pathogens in fruit flies, mammals,
 a aa d s  s r s
and plants. There are 10 known TLRs in mammals. Each
 system in response to pathogen invasion. The initial con-
TLR recognizes a specific component of a pathogen. For
tact between sentinel cells and pathogens serves to alert
example, TLR1, 2, and 6 recognize various microbial com-
antigen-presenting dendritic celis to the type of pathogen
ponents. TLR2 recognizes lipoproteins, lipoteichoic acid
that has been encountered. This information determines
how the dendritic cell responds: with the production
mycobacteria. TLR3 recognizes double-stranded RNA and
of appropriate cytokines to simulate primarily humoral
is, therefore, important in viral recognition. TLR4 has a
01 cellular responses. The messengers in this system are
role in transducing the signals of LPs from gram-negative
cytokines, produced first by the sentinel cell, then by the
bacteria. TLR5 is activated by flagellin, its specific ligand.
differentiated dendritic cell and acting on the ultimate tar-
Thus, TLR5 is important in the response to motile bacteria,
get cell, a T lymphocyte. Once the appropriate response has
but not to those that lack flagella. When the basolateral
been induced, products of the adaptive immune system act
surface of the intestinal epithelium is exposed to flagellin,
to decrease the spread of the infectious agent within the
an inflammatory response occurs. This is the site of expres-
body.
sion of the TLR5. TLR7 is activated by certain synthetic
compounds that have antiviral activity. TLR9, a receptor
expressed within the cell, recognizes bacterial CpG motifs
Innate Immunity
in DNA.
Detection of Pathogen-Associated Molecular Patterns
(PAMPs) by Sentinel Cells and the Effects on Immune
Anatomic Features, Physiological Processes.
System Stimulation
and Normal Flora
When a pathogen enters a host, it encounters cells that
There are a variety of anatomic structures and physiologi-
line the portals of entry to the bodyskin and mucous
cal processes that serve to prevent entry of pathogens into
 membranes. These sentinel cells display pattern recogni-
the host. The skin and mucous membrane form bairiers,
tion receptors that serve as ligands for various components
of bacterial and viral organisms. Sentinel cells include mast
rier has been breached. Infected skin wounds are one exam-
cells, dendritic cells, Langerhans' cells, and macrophages.
ple. The protective role of desiccation is best illustrated by
The receptors on the sentinel cells detect PAMPS, which
the horse that becomes infected with Dermatophilus con-
vary by pathogens but consist of substances like bacte-
golensis after rain-soaked skin is debilitated sufficiently for
rial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), flagellar protein, and viral
the organism to gain access to the epidermal tissues. The
proteins. Binding of the PAMPS to their ligands triggers
condition called "Thrush" occurs when the desiccated state
sentinel cell activation and production of proinflamma-
of the horny equine hoof is compromised after the horse
tory cytokines—interleukin 1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor
stands for prolonged times in wet and muddy conditions.
α (TNFα), and IL-6. Among other functions, these cytokines
 The importance of the mucociliary apparatus in protection
trigger the “sickness behavior" that is associated with
infection.
of the consequences of abnormal cilia lining the trachea.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern-recognition recep-
In cases of ciliary dyskinesis, the affected dog has recur-
tors that are present on sentinel cells and on a variety
rent bouts of pneumonia because the abnormal cilia fail
 of other cells. Originally described in Drosophila, these
to move the mucous blanket containing inhaled bacteria
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
8
PART I 
Introduction
of these peptides helps them to get close to negatively
macrophage is capable of removing material that makes its
charged cell membranes of pathogens and to ultimately
way into the lower airways and alveoli, and their exit from
 integrate. TheAMPs thatare bestcharacterized in mammals
the body is facilitated by this mucociliary elevator.
 are defensins and cathelicidins. Defensins are configured as
The normal flora that is present in the gut plays an
a β-pleated sheet and cathelicidins are in an α-helix con-
important role in prevention of colonization by more viru-
figuration. Defensins are subdivided into three groups—α,
lent organisms. These bacteria and fungi establish a unique
β, and θ—depending on the distribution of cysteines and
relationship with the host, a relationship that begins as
disulfide bonds. AMPs line up in multimeric units on the
the microbiologically sterile fetus begins its journey down
cell membrane to create pores that lead to osmotic fragility
the birth canal. Acquisition of bacteria and fungi begins
 and cell rupture. In addition, defensins can stimulate pro-
immediately, with infection (colonization) of all exposed
duction of proinflammatory cytokines. The major source of
surfaces, including mucosal surfaces (alimentary canal,
α-defensins is the neutrophilic leukocyte, although other
upper respiratory tract, and distal genitourinary tract),
cell types can also produce them. β-Defensins are produced
with microorganisms from the birth canal and from the
by epithelial cells in the respiratory and gastrointestinal
mother's immediate environment. The association of the
tracts as well as by epithelial cells in skin and other sites.
microbe with the host is not haphazard but rather is an
Cathelicidins are made not only by neutrophils but also by
association that depends upon (1) receptors (usually in the
epithelial cells, NK cells, and mast cells.
form of carboh ydrates that are part of glycoproteins on the
surface of the host cell) and adhesins on the microbe cell
surface, (2) the chemicals in the immediate environment
Effector Cells of the Innate Immune System
of the microbe-host interaction, in part due to products
secreted by competing microorganisms (e.g., microcins,
Neutrophil. The polymorphonuclear leukocyte, neu-
bacteriocins, and volatile fatty acids) and in part due to
 trophil, is a bone-marrow-derived end cell that normally
products secreted by the host (e.g., acid environment of
comprises 30-70% of the total leukocytes in the peripheral
the stomach, defensins secreted by Paneth cells, the con-
blood of various species. The neutrophil is a granulocytic
tents of bile in the upper small intestine, or the content
 leukocyte and contains two types of granules: primary or
of sebum on the skin), and (3) the availability of nutrient
azurophilic granules and secondary or specific granules.
substances.
Neutrophils spend only about 12 h in circulation, and then
The establishment of the normal flora is a dynamic
go into the tissues where they survive for additional 2-
one, with replacement at various exposed locations with
3 days. Within the bone marrow, there is a large storage
microbes more capable of living at a particular site (niche)
 compartment for neutrophils. A bacterial infection within
than the ones preceding. In addition, the immune system
 the body causes a rapid mobilization of this pool, and the
appears to play some role, since it has been shown that
 neutrophils accumulate at the site of the infectious pro-
members of the normal flora are very poorly immuno-
cess. They are attracted by the chemotactic factors, C3a and
 genic in the host from which the microbes are isolated.
C5a, which are generated subsequent to activation of the
This suggests that immune responses to microbes attempt-
complement system. The process of neutrophil accumu-
ing to colonize a particular location (niche) will result in
lation begins by adherence of the circulating neutrophils
the blockage of association between the adhesin (microbe)
to the vascular endothelium (margination), extravasation
and the receptor (host). If a microbe cannot associate, then
into tissue spaces, and chemotaxis of the cells toward the
it will be replaced with one that will. This occurs until a
focus of injury (Figure 2.1). Invading microorganisms are
strain of microbe is encountered that is more similar to the
ingested by neutrophils in a process called phagocytosis
hostthan its predecessor, which is subsequently “accepted"
(Figure 2.2A-C).
 as part of the normal flora of that particular animai. The
 Phagocytosis of bacteria by neutrophils involves several
result is an ecosystem composed of numerous species of
steps. First, initial recognition and binding occur. This pro-
bacteria and fungi that are associated with an abundance of
cess is made more efficient by the presence of opsonins
niches, each of which is occupied with a particular species
consisting of immunoglobulin and/or complement com-
of microbe most suited to live at that location. This “occu-
ponents. Opsonization coats the surface of a particle, neu-
 pation" results in a barrier to colonization (infection) by
tralizing the net negative charges, which might otherwise
microbes that are not members of the normal flora, thus
cause the neutrophil and bacterial cell to repel each other
the term “colonization resistance." We notice a disruption
(Figure 2.2C). In addition, on the cell membrane ofthe neu-
of this effect when long-term antibiotic treatment removes
trophil, receptors are present for antibodies (Fc receptors)
a population of bacteria, leaving a space that can be occu-
pied with other organisms; diarrhea is a common result of
attachment of the opsonized bacterium to the neutrophil.
such long-term antibiotic therapy.
 Next, pseudopodia form around the organism and then
fuse to form a phagocytic vacuole containing the organism.
Some organisms are more readily engulfed than others. For
Antimicrobial Peptides and Their Role in Innate Immunity
example, the presence of a polysaccharide capsule causes an
Antimicrobialpeptides (AMPs) have been found in a diverse
organism to be resistant to phagocytosis. After engulfment,
alray of organisms, including bacteria and Xenopus as well
lysosomal granules fuse with the phagosome membrane to
as mammals. In general, AMPs are about 30 amino acid
form the phagolysosome. The eventual elimination of the
residues and are cationic in nature. The cationic nature
engulfed organism occurs within this structure.
Chapter 2  Imumune Responses to Infectious Agents
FIGURE 2.1.
Neutrophils respond to chemotactic signals by binding to endothelial cells with L-selectin molecules; firmer
site of infection, the process of phagocytosis engulfs and destroys the bacteria. (Reproduced with permission from
http:/ap-projectstew.wikispaces.com/Chapter+15+The+immune+System.)
Rolling
--selectin
Sheddingof
Blood
L-selectin
vessel
wall
Adhesion
Diapedesis
Neutrophil
Integrin
E-selectin
Sialyl-Lewisx
Activating substances
releasedbybacteria and
Lipopolysaccharides,
damaged tissues
interleukin-1,and
tumor necrosisfactor a
C3a C5a,
chemokines,
histamine,
prostaglandins,
andleukotrienes
Phagocytosis and destruction
of C3b-coated bacteria
FIGURE 2.2.
(A) Neutrophils were incubated with Staphylococcus aureus in saline solution. Numbers of bacteria (small purple
dots) enguifed are smalf. (B) Neutrophils were incubated with 5. aureus in the presence of normal serum (contains some antibody and
complement components).(C) Neutrophis were incubated with S.aureus in serum containing antibodies specific for S. aureus.This
demonstrates the role of opsonization in enhancing phagocytosis.
 Note the very small nurmber of engulfed bacteria 
(A)
(B)
Bacteria
(S.aureus)
Bacteria
within the cell
5neutrophils
Note the larger 
when the neutrophils are mixed with normal serum
(C)
Note the even greater nummber of engulfed bacteria when
the neutrophils are mixed with immune serum. Immune 
serum contains antibodies specific for the bacteria.
Neutrophils containing
many bacteria ~
Bacteria
Bacterie
Eosinopil
10
PARTI
 Introduction
Bacterial killing is accomplished by a series of metabolic
digest. When this occurs, the macrophage may migrate to a
and enzymatic events. Metabolic activity increases within
mucosal surface such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal
a neutrophil during phagocytosis. Oxygen consumption
tract for elimination from the body.
increases and light energy is emitted (chemiluminescence).
Unlike the neutrophil, which is a cell of the innate
This metabolic or respiratory burst involves oxidation of
immune system, the macrophage can serve as a link
glucose by the hexose monophosphate shunt. Bacterici-
between innate and acquired immunity. After destruction 
dal products are generated. Superoxide radicals are pro-
of a pathogen, the macrophage can serve as an antigen-
duced and converted to HzO2 by superoxide dismutase.
ad o d a  aa  
Hydrogen peroxide is toxic for bacteria that lack cata-
that are subsequently bound to major histocompatibility
lase. The enzyme myeloperoxidase, present in azurophil
complex (MHC) class II molecules on the cell membrane
granules, catalyzes the oxidation of halide ions to hypo-
(described under Section “Adaptive Immunity").
halite, which is also toxic to microorganisms. Thus,
Some pathogens have developed mechanisms to elude
the myeloperoxidase-hydrogen-peroxide-halide system is
immune defenses. A group of organisms, often refered
efficient in bacterial killing. Susceptible organisms are
to as the facultative intracellular bacteria, have devel-
killed within minutes. Inside the primary granules of
oped such abilities. For example, bacteria in the Mycobac-
neutrophils, enzymes released during degranulation act
terium genus are able to prevent fusion of the lysosomes
on proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids to
with the phagosome, thereby preventing the release of
degrade the kilied bacterial cells. Some of these enzymes
destructive enzymes into the vacuole and hence preven-
are collagenase, elastase, acid phosphatase, phospholipase,
tion of microbe killing. This accounts for the chronic and
lysozyme, hyaluronidase, acid ribonuclease, and deoxyri-
severe nature if in fection with pathogens such as Mycobac-
bonuclease. Lysozyme can cleave glycosyl bonds in the bac-
terium species, Brucella species, Nocardia, and Listeria. Other
terial cell wall, making the cell susceptible to lysis. Also,
bacteria that are not capable of surviving within phago.
lysosomes contain cationic peptides (defensins), described
somes have polysaccharide capsules that make them less
above, that form lethal pores in bacteria as well as fungal
cell walls.
Opsonizing antibody or complement components must
be present to coat such organisms before phagocytes can
Macrophage.
The macrophage is a mononuclear cell
engulf them. Thus, innate defenses often require the assis-
derived from the bone marrow. For several days after release
tance of products of the acquired immune response.
from the bone marrow, it circulates as a blood monocyte
before going into the tissues, where it becomes a functional
Natural Killer Cell. Natural killer (NK) cells are a central
d   sd  s  
 and important component of the innate immune response
of the body and are named accordingly, for example, alveo-
to viruses and some bacteria. NK cells are a distinct lineage
la1 macrophages (lung) and peritoneal macrophages. Fixed
of lymphocytes that, unlike the T and B lymphocytes, do
macrophages line sinus cavities that filter blood. These
not have a specific receptor for antigens—i.e., they do not
include the Kupffer cells (liver), Langerhans cells (skin),
rearrange genes encoding membrane receptors. Yet, this
histiocytes (connective tissue), mesangial cells (kidneys),
cell type is able to recognize and target cells for destruction.
and sinus-lining cells of the spleen, lymph nodes, and
NK cells comprise 5-20% of lymphocytes in the periph-
bone marrow. Some of these macrophages are important in 
eral blood and more than 90% of lymphocytes in the pla-
 antigen processing for induction of an immune response
 centa. Their function includes cell-mediated immunity,
(described later in this chapter).
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), produc-
The macrophage differs from the neutrophil in that it
tion of interferon y early in infection, and secretion of a
has a longer life span in tissue and can reuse phagolyso
variety of other cytokines. In the adult mammal, NK cells
somes. In addition, macrophages stimulated by cytokines
develop within the bone marrow from hematopoietic cell
(e.g., interferon y) or microbial products (e.g, LPS) result
precursors. NK cells are responsive to several cytokines and
in activation of nitric oxide synthase that catalyzes
they secrete cytokines, including interferon y and TNFo.
the production of nitric oxide (NO) from L-arginine.
The NK cell response is coordinated and modulated by
NO is toxic to many bacteria, especially those residing
cytokines that include interferons α and β and IL-2, IL-
within macrophages (e.g, Satmonela and Listeria). The
12, IL-15, and IL-18. Recently, a variety of receptors have
macrophage is similar to the neutrophil in that toxic oxy-
been identified on NK cells. These receptors allow the NK
 gen metabolites are generated for bacterial killing and the
cell either to kill a target cell or to turn off the poten-
lysosomes contain potent hydrolytic enzymes and cationic
tial killing response. Inhibitory receptors expressed on NK
peptides (defensins). While the neutrophil responds to
cells include the killer immunoglobulin-like receptor. This
a stimulus rapidly, the macrophage is not present until
receptor binds to MHC class I molecules on body cells
later in an infectious process, often after 8-12 h. In some
and facilitates an inhibitory response through activation
instances, neutrophils may eliminate an organism before
of intracellular tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs. This func-
macrophages arrive in any great number. When tissue
tion prevents the powerful killing capacity of the NK cell
destruction has occurred as a result of an inflammatory
from acting on normal body cells. In contrast, when a cell
response, macrophages are attracted to the area by products
lacks MHC class I, the NK cell recognizes the absence and
from dying neutrophils and bacteria. They phagocytose
begins the process of killing that target cell.
the debris and remove it. In some instances, macrophages
The NK cellis particularly effective in eliminating tumor
may engulf particulate material that they are unable to
cells and cells infected with some viruses. A number of
Chapter 2
 Immume Responses to Infectious Agents
11
viruses (and some tumor cells) downregulate cellular MHC
 Recognition of viruses by TLR has been reported for some
class I molecule synthesis. These viruses effectively evade
viruses. TLR4 binds to one of the major surface proteins on
the acquired T cytotoxic cell (CD8) response (detailed
respiratory syncytial virus (RsV), an important pathogen
later in this chapter) by removing the MHC molecule
of human children and bovine calves. In an experimen-
that presents antigens to cytotoxic T cells. However, the
tal mouse model with mutated TLR4, RSV was found to
NK cell targets these cells that display the “missing self"
be cleared less efficiently than from mice that had nor-
appearance. The mechanism for pathogen recognition uses
mal TLR4. Other viruses, such as mouse mammary tumor
activating and inhibitory receptors; normal cells that dis.
virus, have been shown to bind TLR4 to envelope proteins.
play MHC class I molecules (all nucleated cells) provide
In addition, signaling through TLR3 and TLR7 has been
an inhibitory signal to the receptors of the NK cell. How-
shown to induce synthesis ofα and β interferons.
ever, the absence of these molecules triggers activation and
Other studies with TLR-mutant mice have demonstrated
thus allows the NK cell to kill the target cell. NK cells are
the importance of these receptors in resistance to bacte-
important in elimination of herpesviruses. For example,
rial infection. TLR4-mutant mice are highly susceptible
in human beings who lack NK cells, the diseases varicella
to infection with the gram-negative bacteria, Salmonella
zoster and cytomegalovirus infection (both herpesviruses)
typhimurium; whereas mice defective in TLR2 are highly
are often fatal, whereas the normal individualis able to suc-
sensitive to infection with gram-positive bacteria, Strepto-
cessfully recover from these infections. The ultimate killing
coccus pneumoniae.
mechanism involves secretion of perforin molecules that
 are able to poke holes in the cell membrane, permitting
caustic granzymes entry to the cytosol.
Adaptive Immunity
 s      no d  
 a asi a I d ie   
The sentinel cells that are so important in alerting the host
in this chapter) that activates macrophages for more effi-
that PAMPs have been detected also serve to instruct the
cient killing of some bacteria. Other killing mechanisms
T helper cells in selection of the appropriate cytokines to
that are used by NK cells include ADCC. NK cells dis-
produce for modulation of the immune response in the
play the cell membrane receptor CD16, a low-affinity IgG
correct direction for optimum pathogen killing. For exam-
receptor. By using this receptor to bind IgG, the NK cell is
ple, production of IL-12 by a dendritic cell can enhance
able to participate in ADCC, killing cells that are recognized
the differentiation of T helper cells into T helper type
by the attached immunoglobulin. In this way the NK cell
1 cells that make interferon y, a cytokine that helps to arm
collaborates with the acquired immune system to eliminate
macrophages for elimination of those bacteria that prefer-
infected cells.
entially resist phagosome killing. In contrast, the PAMPS
present on a heavily polysaccharide encapsulated bacteria
such as S. pneumoniae would preferentially stimulate the
y8 I Cell.  T cells that display membrane receptors called
dendritic cell to make IL-4, which stimulates B lympho-
y& chains (y& T cells) constitute a small percentage of the
cytes to develop into the plasma cells making opsonizing
circulating pool of lymphocytes in nonruminant species.
antibodies that are required for this pathogen to be effec-
  d   s     
tively endocytosed and then killed.
of the circulating lymphocyte pool. In most species, y& T
The stimulation of the appropriate T helper cell requires
cells are present in the lamina propria underlying mucosal
not only the production of cytokines, but also the binding
epithelia, strategically beneficial sites for cells involved in
to antigenic peptides presented within the groove of the
host defense.
T cell receptor. In the primary immune response, the cell
Functional studies in mouse models and data from
type that performs this antigen presentation function is
human beings have demonstrated a role for these cells in
the dendritic cell, sometimes referred to as a “professional 
defense against mycobacterial pathogens. The role of y& T
antigen-presenting cell" because antigen capture, process-
cells in innate defense against Mycobacterium huberculosis
ing, and presentation constitute its primary role. The den
appears to be most important early in the infection. Acti-
dritic cell is the main antigen-presenting cell in a primary
vation of these cells by M. fuberculosis antigens is depen-
immune response. When an antigen is encountered in a
dent on accessory cells, such as alveolar macrophages,
host that has had previous contact with it, there are other
which provide costimulatory molecules. The ligands on the
cell types that can present the antigen to T lymphocytes.
mycobacterium that stimulate the y& T cells have recently
been shown to be small phosphate-containing molecules.
tant to note that all cells that present antigens to CD4+ T
The major effector function of y& Tlymphocytes in defense
lymphocytes express the MHC class II molecule on their
against M. uberculosis is in cytokine secretion and in cyto-
sur face.
toxic effector cell function. These cells produce interferon
The process of antigen presentation occurs either by
y, TNFα, and a small amount of IL-2.
 y & T cells have a role in limiting viral replication in some
(cytosolic) pathway. Inactivated and killed organisms, once
viral diseases. In mouse models ofinfluenza virus infection,
digested and processed in a phagosome, are bound to MHC
these cells accumulate in the lung presumably to resolve
class II molecules and are brought to the cell surface for pre.
the pneumonic process. In both mouse models and human
sentation to CD4 T (helper) lymphocytes. This occurs after
patients, the role of y& Tcellsin resolution of herpes simplex
the antigen has been broken down into peptides in endo-
virus type 1 in fection has been demonstrated.
somes; fusion of the endosomes with other endosomes that
12
PARTI  Introduction
contain newly synthesized MHC class II molecules brings
pathogen has skewed the T helper cell response toward TH1
them together so that then peptide containing endosomes
cytokine production (this occurs with facultative intracel-
can fuse with the MHC classII containing endosomes. The
lular bacterial and viral pathogens), cytokines are produced
peptide replaces an invariant chain (II) CLIP (class I asso-
to activate macrophages and CD8 T cells to become more
ciated invariant peptide) molecule, which has served as
effective killers.
a space holder, in the antigen-binding site of the MHC
 molecule. The MHC class II with the peptide in the groove
is then transported to the cell surface to await recognition
Humoral Immunity (Antibody Response)
by a T cell receptor. Recognition of the antigenic peptide-
The initial introduction of an antigen to a host followed by
MHC class II complex by a T cell with the same MHC class
II is referred to as MHC restriction and is a characteristic
presentation of antigenic peptides to CD4 T cells results
in stimulation of these cells to become T helper type 2
of the acquired immune response. Production of IL-2 by
the T cell occurs after binding with the antigenic peptide
cells, secreting cytokines that assist B cells in differenti-
and costimulatory molecules. IL-2 is a T cell growth factor
ating into cells that become antibody-producing plasma
cells. Production of IL-4 by these Th2 cells results in expan-
that facilitates clonal expansion of the participating T cell.
These T cells, which are phenotypically CD4 and function-
sion of B cell clones specific to the different epitopes on the
antigen. The B cells also recognize antigenic epitopes on
ally called helper T cells, produce additional cytokines to
influence the development of B cells, which are specific for
the microbe and in addition develop binding of costimu-
the antigen. Under the influence of T cell-produced IL-4, B
latory molecules on the T cell. Then under the influence of
cells develop and mature into plasma cells secreting anti-
T cell cytokines, these B cells differentiate into antibody-
 producing plasma cells.
bodies. Helper T cells predominan tly produce IL-4 (T helper
type 2 cells or Thz), which facilitate production of IgG1
The first antibody to be produced is IgM and it appears
and IgE.
in the circulation 7-10 days after initiation of the immune
 The T helper cells mentioned above that have been stim-
response. Next, IgG appears but does not rise to very
 ulated by dendritic cells making IL-12 must also recognize
high titers in this primary immune response. Subsequent
the antigenic peptide on MHC class II. These cytokines are
encounters with antigen result in a secondary or anamnes-
 important in activation of macrophages for killing facul-
tic response. In the secondary response, the kinetics of
tative intracellular bacteria and for supporting other cell-
antibody appearance in the circulation is more rapid
mediated responses. T helper type 1 cells produce inter-
and the quantity of antibodies produced is greater. Most
feron y and IL-2, in addition to IL-12. As noted above, the
importantly, the isotype that predominates in the sec-
initial production of IL-12 by the dendritic cell or NK cell
ondary response is predominantly IgG. The longer half-
can prejudice the T helper cell response toward Th. This
 life of IgG facilitates the maintenance of an antibody titer
higher for a longer duration (Figure 2.3). Often evalua-
response may be initiated through TLR binding to the den-
dritic cell.
tion of the immune response (IgG vs. IgM) to a disease
 Antigen presentation for intracellular pathogens follows
agent can yield important information as to the chronic-
the endocytic pathway through the cytosol. When a virus
ity of the exposure. It is a well-accepted diagnostic pro-
is replicating in the cytosol, viral proteins are processed
cedure to obtain acute and convalescent serum samples
and united with MHC class I molecules. The way in which
 to be evaluated for antibody titer and isotype. Generally,
this occurs is not like the process described for MHC class
when a disease agent is responsible for clinical signs 2-
 3 weeks after the initial appearance of signs, the titer
II presentation. Unused proteins are continually broken
will have increased by at least fourfold if the agent was
down in the cytosol; they are ubiquitinated and targeted
 involved in the infectious process. In an initial exposure
to the proteosome in which further breakdown occurs to
to a disease agent, IgM is the predominant isotype, while
peptides that are between 8 and 15 amino acids in size.
When a virus is replicating within the cytosol of a cell,
a second or tertiary exposure (or vaccination) will elicit
the viral proteins have this same fate and are subsequently
mostly IgG.
bound to transporter proteins (TAP1 and TAP2) for move-
ment from the cytoplasm to the endosomes. There, they
are further shortened and bound to MHC class I molecules.
These peptide-MHC complexes are then sent to the surface
FIGURE 2.3.
The initial antibody response is primarily
 of the cell where they are recognized by T cell receptors on
IgM in a primary immune response; subsequent exposures to
the CD8 cytotoxic T cells. This is a very important point
the same antigen elicit igG as the predominant isotype.
as it explains why a vaccine that is able to replicate in the
Antibody
cell is more likely to induce a cytotoxic T cell response than 
concentration
a killed vaccine. MHC class I recognition is required for
IgG
cytotoxic T cell activation.
Primaryre
Secondaryresponse
The ultimate result of antigen presentation to CD4 T
 lymphocytes is the development of an immune response.
gM
As stated above, the type of cytokine environment that has
been created mediates this response. Ifthe TH2 cytokines are
present, and for most pathogens there are usually some,
14
21
28
there will be a humoral (antibody) response. When the
Daysafterantigenexposure
Chapter2
Imumume Responses to Infectious Agents
13
Effector Functions of Antibody
Antibodies are most effective against viruses that
undergo a viremic phase, when there are numerous virus
Antibodies can neutralize virus, bacteria, and soluble tox-
particles in the extracellular environment. For example,
ins. Some isotypes of an antibody (IgG and IgM) can lyse tar-
viruses such as influenza viruses are neutralized by anti-
get cells after activating the complement cascade. Antibod-
bodies specific for the major surface antigens (hemag-
ies can facilitate phagocytosis by acting as opsonins to help
glutinin and neuraminidase). Other viruses, such as her-
phagocytes adhere to microbes. The antibody response that
 pesvirus, remain closely associated with cells and do not
is important in defense against bacterial disease depends on
present much opportunity for antibody-mediated inactiva-
the pathogenic mechanisms involved, the site of the in fec-
tion. The IgA isotype is especially effective on mucosal sur-
tious process, and the isotype of the antibody elicited. In
faces and functions to neutralize viruses before entry into
a disease caused by an extracellular toxin, such as tetanus,
the body. SlgA is an extremely effective defense against res-
antitoxin antibodies are important to neutralize and bind
piratory and gastrointestinal viruses, as well as viruses that
the toxin before it can bind to cellular sites and initiate clin-
cause systemic disease but enter via the oral route. Virus
ical signs. This mechanism is important in diseases such
neutralization occurs because the antibody binds to sur-
as tetanus, anthrax, and botulism—all toxin-mediated dis-
face determinants of the virus and prevents the virus from
eases. In some instances, when a nonimmune host is at risk
binding to the cellular receptors to which it must attach in 
of developing a toxin-mediated disease, immediate admin.
order to initiate the in fectious process.
istration of antitoxin (a solution containing antibodies to
The relative importance of antibodies and cell-mediated
the toxin) is required to prevent the disease. In order to
immune response depends upon the pathogenesis of the
eliminate infectious agents, antibodies serve as opsonins
disease. For example, bacteria that produce potent exo-
as well as initiating the complement cascade (activation
toxins, such as Closfridium fetani, require antibodies to
through the classical pathway). Opsonins lead to increased
neutralize the toxin. Heavily encapsulated bacteria, such 
uptake by phagocytic cells, whereas complement activa-
as Klebsiella pneumonia, require opsonizing antibodies for
tion leads to initiation of inflammation and generation
effective removal of the bacteria and ultimate killing by
of compounds that are detrimental to the infectious agent
phagocytes. In contrast, bacteria that are capable of liv-
(e.g., membrane attack complex), as bacteria that have cap
ing within phagocytes, such as Listeria monocytogenes, are
sules are particularly resistant to engulfment by phagocytes
not effectively killed by an antibody, and require the TH1
unless they have opsonins present.
response for effective elimination. Similarly, viral infec-
Generally, the IgE response is limited to parasitic infec-
tions that produce viremia, such as influenza, are handled
tions and hypersensitivity reactions to various environ-
mental allergens, such as pollens and grasses. Occasionally,
herpesviruses that are cell-associated and require a cell-
IgE is elicited in response to vaccination against some bac
mediated immune response for effective con trol.
terial and viral pathogens. When this occurs, very serious
adverse responses, such as anaphylactic shock, can result.
Cell-Mediated Immunity
Often there is a hereditary predisposition toward IgE pro.
duction, and these individuals are at increased risk of hav-
Cell-mediated immune responses mediated by T cells
ing such a vaccine reaction. For immunity to parasite in fec-
in volve two different mechanisms: macrophage activation
tions, IgE may assist in the phenomenon of “self-cure," in
and cytotoxic T cell activity.
which large numbers of nematodes are purged from the gut
by mast cell mediator-induced smooth muscle contraction.
Alternatively, some infestations are controlled by ADCC,
Killing of Facultative Intracellular Bacteria by Activated
 in which IgE binds to eosinophils by low-affinity Fc recep-
Macrophages
tors and facilitates release of major basic protein and other
As previously mentioned, as a mechanism of immune eva-
caustic enzymes on the parasite sur face.
sion some bacteria have the ability to prevent phagosome-
IgA is a very desirable response to in fectious agents that
lysosome fusion. Bacteria in this category include Brucella,
affect mucosal surfaces. Since secretory IgA (SIgA) is pro-
Mycobacterium, Listeria, Salmonella, and Rhodococcus equi.
tected by a secretory component from digestion in the gut
Infection by one of these organisms often results in death
by proteolytic enzymes, it is the most efficient antibody to
of the macrophage. In the presence of CD4 T lymphocytes
be active in the en vironment of the gastrointestinal lumen.
that produce interferon y, the macrophage is armed and
There, it can neutralize viruses and bacteria to prevent their
able to circumvent the bacteria and to kill. The cytokine
respective attachment to cellular receptors. Similarly, SlgA
induces lysosomal fusion and increases macrophage bacte-
is effective within the secretions of the respiratory tract.
riocidal activity. Thus, macrophages are activated follow-
Before a virus or a bacterium can infect a cell, it must first
ing the production of interferon y by these Thi cells, and
bind to a cell surface protein that acts as a receptor for the
the “arming" of macrophages results in destruction of the
 infectious agent that the macrophage previously had been 
an antibody can inhibit binding to the receptor, and thus
unable to destroy.
lower the infectivity of the agent. For example, influenza
virus expresses a hemagglutinin that binds to certain gly-
Killing of Virus-lnfected Cells by Cytotoxic T Cells
coproteins expressed on epithelial cells in the respiratory
tract. Binding of antibodies to the hemagglutinin prevents
Pathogens, such as viruses, that live and grow inside of cells
entry of the virus into these cells, and disease is preven ted.
are best contained by elimination of the cell in which they
14
PARTI  Introduction
are reproducing. As previously described, viral proteins
 made in the cytosol associate with MHC class I molecules
FIGURE 2.4.
(A) Solid phase ElisA based detection of
for presentation to T cells. Cytotoxic T cells (CD8) recog-
feline leukemia antigens in cat blood. Note the line indicating
nize an antigenic peptide that is held in the groove formed
positive serum compared with the positive control line. (B)
by the chains of the MHC class I molecule on the cell sur-
Microtiter well FeLV ElisA compares color in the test well with
that in positive and negative wells.
face. All nucleated cells have MHC class I on their surface
and are, therefore, able to bind and present antigens from
(A)
inside the cell in this manner. Recognition of the combi-
nation of MHC class I and the antigenic determinant by T
cell receptors on the cytotoxic T cells stimulates release of
perforins that make small pores in the cell membrane. This
allows destructive enzymes called granzymes to enter the
cytoplasm. In addition, TNFo is produced. Death of the cell
can also be facilitated by the interaction of Fas-Fas ligand
system, stimulating apoptosis. One CD8 T cell can repeat-
edly kill infected target cells, programming one to die, and
then moving on to the next cell to kill it. The cytotoxic
T cell is an efficient way to decrease viral progeny in an
(B)
infected host.
Effector Cells Can Use Antibody to Bind Target Cells
ADCC occurs when an antibody binds to a cell that has
receptors for the Fc portion of IgG or IgE. The Fc receptor
for the y chain is CD21 and the low-affinity IgE receptor is
 CD23. These molecules are present on several types of effec-
tor cells, including neutrophils, macrophages, NK cells, and
         
previously had no receptor for antigens renders it antigen-
specific and capable of binding antigens. Besides NK cells,
eosinophils and macrophages can become involved in
ADCC. ADCC is an effective method of killing cells infected
with microorganisms (viral, bacterial, or fungal) as well as
parasites. In the case of parasites, the eosinophil releases
granules containing major basic protein, rendering the
or complement fixation. Depending on the disease to be
cuticle of the parasite permeable.
diagnosed, ELISA can be designed to detect antigens (as in
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and canine parvovirus infec-
tions) or antibodies (as in feline immunodeficiency virus).
Evaluation of Immune Responses to
ELISA has the advantage that the format is easily adaptable
Infectious Agents
 8 1 o (aa  sd) h 0 r 0
determination. Numerous test kits are available for the vet-
The use of serological assays to evaluate exposure to 01
erinarian to evaluate the FeL V in fection status of a cat. Some
infection with bacterial and viral pathogens has been a
use a solid phase format (Figure 2.4A), while others use a
mainstay for control of infectious diseases. In addition, for
well-based assay (Figure 2.4B).
some infections, such as those with mycobacterial species,
When using antibodies as an indication of potential pro-
the in vivo skin testing for cell-mediated responses has been
tection, it is important to remember that the ELISA detects
 of even greater use. For determination of recent infection
binding antibodies, which is notalways equivalent to effec-
status, serum samples are obtained during acute illness and
tive neutralizing antibodies. The serum virus neutralization 
again 2-3 weeks later. These acute and convalescent sam-
(SVN) assay uses serum as a source of antibodies, incubated
ples are then assayed for antibody titer. When the titer
with virus, which is then tested forability to infectan appro-
has increased at least fourfold (two dilutions), serocon-
priate cell culture. When a neutralizing antibody is present
version has occurred and the disease agent for which the
in a sample, it will prevent viral entry into the cells and
titers are specific is confirmed as having stimulated a recent
 subsequent cell infection and death. Thus, a high SVN titer 
response.
is more meaningful than a high ELISA titer for prediction
of protection (Figure 2.5).
 For many years a gel diffusion test has been used for
Antibody-Based Serology
detection of antibodies to equine infectious anemia virus
The current trend for immunodiagnosis utilizes the
(Coggins test). Recently, several commercially available
solid phase-binding assays, such as the enzyme-linked
ELISA kits have become available. The comparison of these
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). These assays are generally
testing formats is a good illustration of differences in
more sensitive than assays based on precipitin formation
sensitivity, because the gel diffusion test is very much
Chapter 2
Imumune Responses to Infectious Agents
FIGURE 2.5.
Virus neutralization assay: serum from an exposed patient is incubated with a virus and inoculated onto tissue-
positive serum showing 100% neutralization of infectivity) and the virus only showing extent of CPE without antibody protection.
The serum shows a protective titer through the 1:40 dilution.
Virus +
positive
only
1:10
1:20
1:40
1:80
1:160
1:320
1:640
1:280
dependent on concentration of antigens and antibodies
of antibody titers to a number of viral pathogens. Although
for a positive test result; whereas the ELISA, a primary bind-
detection of antibodies against feline coronavirus is not
ing assay, is more sensitive and less dependent on con-
specific for the clinical syndrome of feline infectious peri-
centration effects. The ultimate effect is that a positive
tonitis, an indirect immunofluorescence assay is some-
Coggins test, when read by an approved laboratory tech-
times used to determine the titer of antibodies in a feline
nician, is thought to be diagnostic, while a positive ELISA
in fectious peritonitis suspect patient (Figure 2.7).
needs to be confirmed by a Coggins test, so as to prevent
Direct immunofluorescence has been used for many
false-positive readings. The gel diffusion test can also be
years to detect the presence of virus in cells and in organ sec-
used for detection of antibodies against other pathogens,
tions at necropsy. For example, a conjunctival swab from
such as Aspergillus fumigafus, which stimulates a strong
a canine distemper virus (CDV)-infected dog can be used 
IgG/precipitating antibody response in infected dogs
to demonstrate the presence of virus (Figure 2.8). With the
(Figure 2.6).
introduction of RT-PCR tech niques, the application of this
Indirect immunofluorescence is still used as a diagnos-
technique is less common than previously. For detection of
tic test, and although the requirement for a microscope
 pathogens in tissue, direct immunofluorescence has been
equipped for immunofluorescence limits the use outside of
 replaced in many laboratories with immunohistochemi-
diagnostic laboratories, it is a sensitive assay for evaluation
cal techniques, such as immunoperoxidase staining. The
FIGURE 2.7.
indirect immunofluorescence: showing
FIGURE 2.6.
Detection of antibodies against A.
fumigatus: the center well contains antigens. Sera are
antibodies specific for feline corona virus. Celfs were infected
with the feline corona virus and the fixed slide was incubated
distributed clockwise with positive sera at 12 and 6 locations.
The presence of a line of identity with positive controls
with dilutions of cat serum followed by fluroscein
indicates the presence of antibodies binding to the antigens in
isothiocyanate (FiTC) -conjugated rabbit antifeline igG.
the center welf.
16
PARTI
 Introduction
FIGURE 2.8.
Conjunctivalepithelialcels infected with
FIGURE 2.10.
Serial difutions of patient serum are
CDV are demonstrated by direct immunofluorescence using
performed: 1 : 50, 1 : 100, 1 : 200, and so on; whole bacteria
FiTC-conjugated antibodies against CDV.
are added to each test tube. After incubation, tubes are
evaluated for agglutination and a titer is determined.
Conjunctival epithelial cells
Brucella canistubetest
Intracellular
viralparticles
 mined using the tube agglutination test, as seen in Fig-
ure 2.10. Soluble antigens can be made particulate for use
 in a passive agglutination test by covalently linking them
ability to perform the latter technique on fixed tissues
to latex particles. Antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii are iden-
makes it a more logical choice for necropsy specimens.
tified and tittered this method in a microtiter plate format
For example, CDV is readily identified in lung tissue from
(Figure 2.11).
an infected dog using anti-CDV sera conjugated with
horseradish peroxidase (Figure 2.9).
Cell-Mediated Immunity-Based Diagnostics
 For determination of antibody titers to those viruses
that have hemagglutinins, the hemagglutination inhibi-
 For those pathogens that induce a strong T helper 1 type
tion test is often used. For example, influenza virus will
immune response with production of associated cytokines
agglutinate red blood cells, but if preincubated with serum
(such as interferon y), an intradermal skin test with anti-
 containing hemagglutinin-specific antibodies, the hemag-
gens from the pathogens can often be used to demonstrate
glutination will not occur. The last dilution of serum that
exposure or infection. Recently, in vitro correlates have
still inhibits the hemagglutination is the end point that
been used for some diseases. Mycobacterium bovis in fection
determines the titer.
can be diagnosed with intradermal injection of tuberculin.
The principle of agglutination is a standard method for
Within 48-72 h of antigen injection, erythema and indura-
demonstrating antibody responses to bacteria. Theseassays
tion at the site are apparent in infected patients. Infection
depend upon the ability of antibodies to cross-link the
with Mycobacterium avium subspecies pseudotuberculosis
 cells to form a lattice of agglutinated cells as opposed to
(Johnes disease agent) can be detected by invitro incubation 
a pellet which would result from the settling of unagglu-
tinated cells. Brucella canis antibody titers are often deter-
FIGURE 2.11.
Latex agglutination test for T. gondii.
Serum is serially twofold diluted from left to right starting
A necropsy specimen of the lung from a
with 1:16. PC indicates positive control; NC indicates negative
FIGURE 2.9.
dog infected with CDV; immunoperoxidase staining shows the
control. Row C shows high-titer serum (2048). Row F shows a
presence of viral antigens in lung cells.
fow-titer (64), and row E demonstrates a prozone with
high-titer serum.
Demonstration of canine distemper viral antigen in lung
by immunochemistry (X50)
Chapter 2
 Immume Responses to Infectious Agents
17
of patient lymphocytes with antigens and subsequentanal-
Summary
ysis of interferon y levels in the culture supernatant. Infec-
tion by additional organisms that are among the group
The immune system is composed of innate and acquired
called facultative intracellular pathogens can be detected
responses that recognize pathogens or their component
using similar testing strategies.
parts and respond to induce the most effective response
Evaluation of cytotoxic T cell responses has been prob-
to that particular pathogen. Cytokines, cell receptors and
lematic in domestic animal species and in humans; only
ligands, and a variety of effector mechanisms are initiated
in syngeneic mouse strains is it easy to evaluate virus-
depending on the need, as initially directed by the den-
infected target cell killing by effector T lymphocytes. This
dritic cells that first interact with the pathogen. We can
is because MHC restriction (discussed above) requires that
detect these responses for diagnostic purposes and in some
targets have the same MHC type as effectors; and that tar-
cases may be able to modulate the responses with targeted
gets with noncompatible MHC will be attacked by heterol-
vaccines and adjuvants.
ogous T cells regardless of infection status. Nonetheless,
there have been studies carried out in veterinary species
in which autologous target cells were infected with virus
 Further Reading
and T cell killing evaluated using either dye or radioactive
chromium incorporation as a readout.
Cederlund A, Gudmundsson GH, and Agerberth B (201l)
 Another way to examine T cell responses to pathogens
Antimicrobial peptides important in innate immunity. FEBS
is to perform in vitro cultivation of the animal's T lym-
I,278 (20),3942-3951.
phocytes with inactivated antigens of the pathogen. The
 Marcenaro E, Carlomagno S, Pesce S et al. (2011) NK cells and
culture supernatant is then assayed for production of
their receptors during viral infections. Immunotherapy, 3 (9),
cytokines by ELISA or Luminex assay, and the demon-
1075-1086.
stration of Th1 cytokines is indicative of specific T cell
Oliphant CJ, Barlow JL, and McKenzie AN (2011) Insights into
responses. An older version of this type of assay is the
the initiation of type 2 immune responses. Immunology, 134
lymphocyte stimulation test in which tritiated thymidine
(4), 378-385.
incorporation is measured as an indication of T cell activa.
Zhang N and Bevan MJ (2011) CD8(+) T cells: foot soldiers of
tion by the antigen.
the immune system. Immunity, 35 (2), 161-168.
Laboratory Diagnosis
D. ScoTT McVEY
Bacteria and Fungi
sample collection and processing may range from minutes
to hours to days. Drying (all microorganisms) and expo-
A key decision made early in the microbiological diagnos-
sure to a noxious atmosphere (oxygen for obligate anaer-
tic workup is whether the patient's clinical signs indicate
obes) are the major factors that compromise specimens and
 a possible infectious etiology. This decision is important
lead to inaccurate diagnosis. For this reason, it is important
because drugs used to treat conditions with noninfectious
that the specimen be kept moist and, if conditions war-
etiologies—corticosteroids, for example—are often con-
rant (see below), air excluded. Moistness is maintained by
traindicated for treatment of conditions with an infectious
placing the sample in a transport (holding) medium com-
 one, for which antibiotics are appropriate.
posed of a balanced salt solution usually in a gelled matrix.
One of the first major goals of the microbiology labo-
Because this medium does not contain any nutrient mate-
ratory is to isolate or detect clinically significant microor-
rial, microorganisms in the sample multiply poorly if at
ganisms from an affected site and, if more than one type of
all (and thereby relative numbers and ratios are preserved)
microorganism is present, to isolate them in approximately
 isa e r a  as r  i i
the same ratio as occurs in vivo. Whether an isolate is "clin-
48 h. Swabs should always be placed in transport medium,
ically significant" or not depends upon the circumstances
regardless of the time elapsed between processing and col-
lection. Fluids that may contain anaerobic bacteria (e.g.,
of isolation. For example, the isolation of large numbers of
a particular microorganism from a normally sterile site in
exudate from draining tracts, peritoneal and pleural effu-
sions, abscess material) should be inoculated onto appro-
preted as significant.
priate media immediately. If this material is contained in 
Attention must be given to the site cultured as well as to
a syringe, then the air should be expelled and a sterile
the method of obtaining the sample for culture. The deter-
stopper placed over the needle. If a swab is used to collect
  s        
the sample, it should be placed in an anaerobic transport
sample is obtained from a normally sterile site. Obtaining
medium. If a syringe full of sample cannot be processed
a sample from the alimentary canal, and expecting mean-
immediately, the syringe should be emptied into an anaer-
ingful answers, may be unrealistic unless one is looking for
obic transport medium and held at room temperature. It
the presence or absence of a specific microorganism, for
is best not to refrigerate samples suspected of containing
example, Salmonella or Campylobacter.
anaerobes because some species do not tolerate reduced
temperatures.
Sample Collection
Demonstration of an Infectious Agent
Attention must be given to how the diagnostic specimens
The presence of an infectious agent is accomplished by
are collected; if not, interpretation of results may be dif-
examination of stained smears made from a portion
ficult. Most infectious processes arise subsequent to the
of the clinical sample, culture techniques, molecu-
contamination of a compromised surface or site by
lar/immunological methods, or a combination of these
 microorganisms that are also a part of the flora occurring
methods.
On a contiguous mucosal surface. In other words, microor-
ganisms isolated from an affected site are often similar (if
Direct Smears. Information obtained from examination
not identical) to those found as part of the normal flora of
of a stained smear is valuable because it may be the first
the patient.
indication (and sometimes the only one) that an infec-
tious agent is present. Also, what is seen (shape, staining
characteristics) will help guide the choice of therapy 24 h
Transport of Samples
before culture results are available. At least 104 microor-
The sooner the specimen is processed in the microbiol-
ogy laboratory, the better. Realistically, the time between 
be readily detected microscopically.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Kermedy ard M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Sors, Iric.
18
Chapter 3  Laboratory Diagnosis
19
As is the case with a sample obtained from a normally
nated by microorganisms able to survive in such environ-
sterile site, the presence of bacteria in bladder urine is a sig-
ments (Pseudomonas, for example).
nificant finding. However, interpretation of the results of
Media plates may be streaked in any fashion as long
as individual isolated colonies are produced after incuba-
is difficult because of the confounding presence of flora
tion. Assessing relative numbers is very subjective. Rela-
flushed from the distal urethra. Finding bacteria by direct
tive numbers of microorganisms may be reported by not-
ing how much growth occurs on the surface of the plate.
Obviously, growth of one colony (presumably from one
is a significant finding. Demonstration of one bacteria cell
bacterium) versus growth of colonies over the whole plate
per oil feld in a drop of unconcentrated urine (which has
would be viewed differently with respect to clinical signif-
been allowed to dry and then stained) represents about
icance. Determination of the actual numbers of bacteria
10-106 bacteria/ml of urine.
present is only important when analyzing urine obtained
Two types of stains are available, the gram stain and
by "catch" or catheter because of the problem of contam-
 Romanovsky-type stains such as Wright's or Giemsa. Each
ination of the sample by bacteria in the distal urethra. In
type of stain has advantages and disadvantages. The gram
this instance, disposable calibrated loops containing 0.001
stain is useful in that the shape and the gram-staining char-
0r 0.01 ml of urine are used to inoculate appropriate media.
acteristics of the agent are seen. The disadvantage of the
Greater than 10 bacteria/ml of urine obtained by catheter
gram stain is that the cellular content of the sample is not
01 “catch" is considered significant (i.e., the bacteria are
readily discerned. On the other hand, a Romanovsky-type
more likely to be coming from the bladder rather than the
stain gives the observer a feeling for the cellular nature
distal urethra).
of the sample and whether or not there is an infectious
agent present. Cytologic evaluation of the sample is very
Aerobic Bacteria.
The standard medium inoculated for
important in assessing the significance of the microorgan -
the isolation of facultative microorganisms is a blood agar
ism observed and subsequently isolated by culture.
plate (usually sheep blood suspended in a growth medium
in a semisolid matrix containing agarose). Many laborato-
ries include a MacConkey agar plate as well. MacConkey
Culture Techniques. Media are inoculated with a por-
agar is useful because enteric microorganisms (members of
tion of the specimen. Inoculation should be performed in
the family Enterobacteriaceae, e.g., Escherichia coli, Kleb-
a semiquantitative fashion (especially samples of bladder
siella, and Enterobacter) grow very well, as does the nonen-
urine obtained by catheter or catch).
teric Pseudomonas. Most other nonenteric gram-negative
Determination of the relative numbers of microorgan-
rods and all gram-positive microorganisms do not grow
ismsin a sample greatly helps interpretation of significance.
well on this medium. Assessing growth on MacConkey agar
Colonies of microorganisms growing on all four quadrants
will facilitate detection of enteric organisms (Figure 3.1).
of a petri plate indicate that there are large numbers of
microorganisms in the sample. If a sample yielded one 01
Anaerobic Bacteria. Anaerobic bacteria will grow on
two colonies growing on the plate, the significance of these
blood agar that is specially prepared to eliminate oxygen.
colonies and thus the question as to the infectious etiol-
After anaerobic plates are inoculated, they should be placed
 ogy of the condition would be in doubt. Enrichment prior
 in a closed, anaerobic en vironment. Processing specimens
to plating of a sample obtained from a normally sterile
for anaerobic culture is time-consuming and expensive.
site should usually not be unless necessary because one
The most common sites that contain anaerobic bacteria are
microorganism may replicate to numbers that equal man y
deep tissue wounds; draining tracts; abscesses; pleural, peri-
thousands in a very short period of time. Enrichment cul-
 cardial, and peritoneal effusions; pyometra; osteomyelitis;
ture procedures lead to the proliferation of contaminating
and pneumonic lungs. Anaerobic culture of sites that con-
microorganisms.
tain a population of anaerobic bacteria as part of the normal
Determination of clinical significance is aided by the
flora is often unrewarding (e.g., feces, vagina, distal ure-
cytology of the sample obtained from the affected site. Iso-
 thra, and oral cavity) unless the diagnostician is looking
lation (demonstration) of numerous microorganisms from
for a specific species or type of anaerobic organism. Anaer-
a normally sterile site without the presence of inflamma-
obic culture of the urinary tract is not routinely performed
tory cells should be suspect. One exception to this rule is
because the recovery of these microorganisms from this site
cryptococcal infection wherein the sample may contain
is extremely rare.
a large number of yeast cells but very few inflammatory
cells (the cryptococcal capsule is immunosuppressive). The
Molecular/lmmunological Methods.
Sometimes it  is
isolation or demonstration of a “significant number" of
important to determine the presence or absence of a par-
microorganisms from a normally sterile site without evi-
ticular microorganism as quickly as possible so that appro-
dence of an inflammatory response can be explained by
contaminated collection devices; contamination of the col-
true when infectious agents are suspected that pose a
lection device from a contiguous, normally nonsterile site;
threat to other animals, including human care givers (e.g.,
contamination of the medium inoculation device in the
Salmonella and Leptospira). Likewise, some in fectious agen ts
microbiology laboratory; or contamination of the medium
take so long to isolate in culture that formulation of a ratio-
before inoculation. Collection devices (e.g., catheters) ster-
ilized by liquid disinfectants quite often become contami-
and Mycobacterium). Still others are hard to detect because
20
PARTI 
Introduction
FIGURE 3.1.
Escherichia coli on blood agar piate (hemolytic, A) and MacConkey agar (B). Purple color indicates acid production
(lactose fermentation).
[A]
B]
they are difficult to culture (e.g., Leptospira and rickettsiae)
rate diagnosis is critical to the institution of control
01 have not been cultured in artificial media (e.g., Closirid-
methods (such as vaccination).
ium piliformis and Mycobacterium leprae). In these instances,
3.1
 In instances of potentially zoonotic diseases such as
other diagnostic techniques are available.
rabies, West Nile fever, and equine encephalomyeli-
Immunologically based techniques make use of anti-
tis, particularly when human exposure has occurred.
bodies specific for the microorganism in question. These
4.1
 In determining the etiology of new disease, or in
 antibodies are usually immobilized on a solid support and
defining uncharacterized aspects of existing ones.
 are used to trap the agent. The presence of the trapped
agent is then detected with a specific antibody that has been
Tissues for vinus isolation should be collected from
labeled in some way (usually with a color reagent). Some
kits making use of this approach are commercially avail-
recently dead animals whenever possible (Table 3.1). Col-
lection of appropriate specimens during the acute phase of
able (e.g., Salmonella). Molecular techniques utilizing DNA
the disease, and inclusion of additional submissions from
probes specific for a segment of DNA that is unique to the
similarly affected animals, enhanices the likelihood of iso-
microorganism in question, or the polymerase chain reac.
 tion (PCR) using specific DNA primers, have been designed
lating viruses. The following factors should be considered
for a number of agents.
in selecting clinical specimens: (1) type of disease (e.g,
respiratory—lung or trachea, or vesicular— vesicle or skin
biopsy), (2) the age and species of the host, (3) the nature of
Virus
the lesions in affected animals, and (4) the size of carcasses
 or tissues (able to be shipped on ice?). The following is a
systematic approach for the rapid laboratory diagnosis of a
General Considerations
viral-caused disease in animals:
 The diagnosis of viral diseases traditionally has been both
tedious and time-consuming, but modern technologies
1.1
Examination (gross and histologic) of the diseased
such as the PCR have increased the utility of this approach.
animal/tissues as a presumptive diagnosis for a viral
Prompt and accurate diagnosis of viral diseases is therefore
etiology.
essential to determine an effective course of disease preven-
2.
 Detection of viral-specific antibodies (ideally using
tion and control.
acute and convalescent sera to demonstrate
 Proper methods of collecting and processing clinical
responding antibodies) during clinical disease.
3.
Immunohistochemical staining of tissue sections
isolation of viruses. Tissues that are extensively autolyzed
with virus-specific antibodies to detect individual
01 poorly stored usually do not yield infectious viruses
viral antigens in the tissue.
because of the susceptibility of most viruses to detrimental
4.
Examination of feces, plasma, or serum by
environmental conditions. Viral isolation and/or identifi-
immunoassays that detect specific viral antigens
cation should be attempted in the following conditions:
(e.g., the rotavirus in feces, feline leukemia vinus
in serum, and bovine respiratory syncytial vinus in
1. During outbreaks of vesicular disease in livestock
lung).
(e.g., foot-and-mouth disease in cattle, pigs, sheep,
 Examination of positive- or negative-stained speci-
or goats).
mens by electron microscopy to identify the mor-
2.
 During outbreaks of disease in large animal popu-
phology of viruses. This diagnostic procedure is lim-
lations such as feedlots, poultry houses, or catteries
ited by the concentration of viral particles required
where many animals are at risk and prompt, accu-
for detection (>105/ml).
Chapter 3
3 Laboratory Diagnosis
21
Table 3.1.
Suggested Specimens from Mammalian Species for Virus Isolation and Identification
Type of
Illness or
Common Name or
Diagnostic
Infection
Associated Virus
Other Infections
 Clinical Specimens to Collect
Identification Tests
Respiratory Adenovirus (bovine, porcine.
Nasal and ocular secretions, feces, lung, brain, tonsil 
VI (CPE), HA, CF, FA, VN 
canine)
 Infectious canine hepatitis
 Spleen, liver, lymph nodes, kidney, blood
VI (CPE), HA, FA, VN 
(adenovirus)
 Bovine viral diarrhea (mucosal
Genital, abortions.
Nasal sections, oral lesions, lung, spleen, blood,
V (CPE and virus
disease) (pestivirus)
enteric
mesenteric lymph nodes, intestinal mucosa, vaginal 
interference), FA, VN
 secretions, fetal tissues, unclotted blood 
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Central nervous
Nasal and ocular secretions, lung, tracheal swab.
V (CPE), FA, VN
(herpesvirus)
system (CNS).
tacheal segment, brain, vaginal secretions, serum.
 genital,
aborted fetus, liver, spleen, kidney 
abortions
Feline rhinotracheitis (herpesvirus)
Nasal and pharyngeal secretions, conjunctival
VI (CPE and inclusions).
membranes, liver, lung, spleen, kidney, salivary
FA
gland, brain
Equine rhinopneumonitis
Genital, abortions 
 Placenta, fetus, lung, nasal secretions, lymph nodes 
FA, VI (ECE and CPE), VN
[herpesvirus)
Influenza (equine, porcine)
Nasal and ocular secretions, lung, tracheal swab
VI
(orthomyxovirus)
Influenza (equine, porcine)
Nasal and ocular secretions, lung, tracheal swab
VI (ECe), HA, HI
(orthomyxovirus)
 Parainfluenza (bovine, equine.
Nasal and ocular secretions, lung, tracheal swab
VI (ECE), HA, HI, VN 
porcine, ovine, canine?
(paramyxovirus)
 Bovine respiratory syncytial virus
Trachea, lung, nasal secretions, clotted blood 
VI (CPE), FA, ELISA
(pneumovirus)
 Bovine herpesvirus 4 (Movar.
Abortions
Trachea, lung, nasal secretions, fetus, clotted blood 
VI (CPE), FA, VN
DN599
 Reovirus (bovine, equine, canine.
Feces, intestinal mucosa, nasal and pharyngeal
VI, HA, HI
feline?
secretions
African horse sickness (orbivirus)
Whole blood in anticoagulant, lesion material, nasal
V (CPE), ELISA, FA, VN,
 and pharyngeal secretions 
EM
 Malignant catarrhal fever
 Whole blood in anticoagulant, lymph nodes, spleen,
VI (CPE), ELISA, FA, VN.
(herpesvirus)
lung
EM
Pseudorabies (herpesvirus)
CNS, genital,
 Nasal secretions, tonsil, lung, brain (midbrain, pons.
VI (CPE and rabbits), VN,
 abortions 
medulla), spinal cord (sheep and cattle), spleen
ELISA, FA
 (swine), vaginal secretion, serum
Canine herpesvirus
Kidney, liver, lung, spleen, nasal oropharyngeal, and
V (CPE and inclusions),.
vaginal secretions
FA,VN
Porcine inclusion body rhinitis
Turbinate, nasal mucosa
EM, VI (CPE), FA, VN 
(cytomegalovirus)
Equine rhinovirus
Nasal secretions, feces 
VI (CPE), FN 
 Maedi-Visna, ovine progressive
CNS
CSF, whole blood, salivary glands, lung, mediastinal
V {CPE), VN
pneumonia (retrovirus.
bymph nodes, choroid plexus, spleen 
lentivirus)
Bovine rhinovirus
Nasal secretions
VI (CPE), VN
Rift Valley fever (bovine, ovine.
Whole blood in anticoagulant, fetus, liver spleen.
VI (CPE and mice), VN,
phlebovirus)
kidney, brain
CF,FA
Enteric
Bovine enterovirus
Feces, oropharyngeal swab
VI (CPE), VN
Transmissible gastroenteritis
Feces, nasal secretions, jejunum, ileum
VI (newborm pigs) FA, EM
(coronavirus)
Neonatal diarrheas
1. Rotaviruses
 Feces, small intestine 
VI (CPE with trypsin).
ELISA, FA, EM
2. Parvoviruses
Abortion
 Feces, intestinal mucosa, regional lymph nodes, brain.
V (CPE), FA, EM, HA, HI,
heart 
VN
3. Coronaviruses
 Feces, small intestine 
Vl (CPE with trypsin), FA,
EM
(Continued)
22
PARTI
Introduction
Table 3.1.
(Continued)
Type of
Illness or
 Common Name or
Diagnostic
Infection
Associated Virus
Other Infections
Clinical Specimens to Collect
Identification Tests
 Piconavirus SMEDl (enterovirus)
Feces, intestine, brain, tonsil, liver
VI (CPe, VN, EM)
 Polioencephalitis (Teschen, Talfan), CNS
Brain, intestine, feces
VI (CPE, VN)
enterovirus)
Rinderpest (morbillivirus)
Blood in anticoagulant, spleen, mesenteric lymph nodes  VIl (CPE and cattle), AGID,
CF, VN
 Peste des petits ruminants
Blood in anticoagulant, spleen, mesenteric lymph nodes VI (CPE and goats), AGID
(morbillivirus)
CNS
Rabies (lyssavirus)
 Brain, salivary gland 
Vl (mice)
 Equine encephalomyelitis (VEE,
Whole blood, brain, cerebrospinal fluid, nasal and 
V (ECE and mice), VN, CF
EE, WEE) (alphavirus)
 pharyngeal secretions, pancreas
 Louping ill encephalomyelitis 
Whole blood, brain, cerebrospinal fluid 
Vl, ECE, and CPE
(flavivirus)
 Hemagglutinating
Brain, spinal cord, tonsil, blood 
 encephalomyelitis virus 
(coronavirus)
Vl, virus isolation; CPE, cytopathic effect; HA, hemagglutinin; CF, complement fixation; FA, fluorescent antibody; VN, virus neutralization; ECE, embryonating chicken eggs: Hl,
 hemagglutination inhibition; ELISA, enzymelinked immunosorbent assay; EM, electron microscopy; AGID, agar gel immunodiffusion.
6.1
 Isolation or amplification of infectious viruses in cell
aseptic technique during specimen collection procedures
 cultures and identification of the virus propagated
will improve the probability of successful virus isolation.
from clinical submission. Alternatively, detection
Specimens should be collected from live animals dur-
 of virus-specific RNA or DNA may be an acceptable
ing acute phases of the disease. Depending on the specific
approach.
disease process, excretions or secretions, swabs of body
orifices or liquids (lymph or blood), and tissue collected
Many viral diseases do not kill the host, but the host may
by biopsy are all suitable specimens for viral isolation. In
serve as a reservoir of viruses and disseminate the vinus to
the laboratory, tissue specimens are processed as a 10% 01
other contact animals. Serologic assays can sometimes be
20% (w/v) homogenate in a balanced salt solution along
with antibiotics. Heavily contaminated specimens may be
used to determine which animals carry specific viruses and
which animals may be susceptible to in fection.
filtered to remove other microorganisms. Vinus isolation
 Isolation of a virus from an animal does not necessarily
should be conducted in cell cultures free of contaminat-
implicate that vinus as the causative agent of any disease
ing agents such as the noncytopathic bovine viral diarrhea
that is occurring in that animal. It is very important to con-
vinus or Mycoplasma. The cell culture medium may contain
low concentrations of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
firm that the isolated virus produces a similar disease in
 To isolate the virus, tissue homogenates are placed onto
the same or related species, which may even involve the
inoculation of susceptible or nonimmune animals. When
cellular monolayers and absorbed 1 h or longer at 35-37 *C,
two or more viruses are isolated from a specimen, a clear
and the inoculum is left on or removed and fresh media
 interpretation of the role of each isolate in the disease pro-
ad ded. Inoculated and unin fected cell cultures are observed
cess is also necessary. Finally, it must be remembered that
evident between 24 h and 72 h for most cytopathic viruses
vaccine strains of attenuated viruses can also be reisolated
from vaccinated animals, and can be confused with true
(Figure 3.2). However, for most clinical material contain-
field strains.
ing low concentrations of viruses, several (>3) blind cell
passages are recommended.
After a virus has been demonstrated at limiting dilution
Isolation of Virus from Clinical Specimens
to replicate in a cell by CPE or other parameters, the infec-
  s   n   si  
Cultivation in Tissue Culture.
Viruses are isolated from
thaw or sonication, followed by centrifugation and stor-
clinical specimens by inoculating susceptible primary 01
age to maintain maximum infectivity. Each virus isolated
continuous cell cultures derived from the host or related
should be identified as to species of origin, morphologic
species, embryonated eggs, or laboratory animals. Spec-
type, passage level, and host cell used for propagation.
vinus transport media (e.g.,abalanced saltsolution contain-
ing antibiotics) in sealed containers for safety in handling.
Embryonated Eggs. A number of mammalian viruses and
They should be clearly identified by appropriate labeling.
and submitted on ice (4 *C) or frozen (-20 *C). Attention to
ing chicken eggs (ECEs). A key to successful viral isolation
Chapter 3
 Laboratory Diagnosis
23
Animal Inoculation. The inoculation of susceptible lab-
FIGURE 3.2.
CPE (syncytial) on bovine fetal kidney cells
oratory animals remains a useful procedure for the iden-
by the herpesvirus of malignant catarrhal fever (x200).
tification procedure for the identification of some viral
pathogens, particularly those that are highly fastidious and
difficult to propagate in other systems.
Identification of Viruses or Viral Antigens in Clinical
Specimens
 Electron Microscopy. Electron microscopy (EM) can be
Aue jo azis pue Aooudo au Anuai Aiide on pasn
vinus present in a specimen or isolated in cell culture of
ECEs. Tentative diagnosis of viral diseases can be made
by EM on thin sections of affected tissues and cell-free
homogenates of clinical specimens. The use of EM for diag-
nosis is limited, however, because the method is not very
sensitive (>105 virus particles/ml are required to see a sin-
gle viral particle on a 200-mesh grid), and viruses from
different species have similar morphology and size.
Immune Electron Microscopy. Immune electron micros-
copy (IEM) enhances detection of viruses in tissues, cells,
01 fecal specimens by reacting specific immune sera with
in ECEs is the route of inoculation (Figure 3.3). Candled
viruses. In IEM, a specific antibody to a vinus, preferably
ECE that die within 24 h after inoculation are considered
polyclonal, is mixed with the virus for 1 h to produce
traumatic deaths. Subsequent deaths of inoculated ECE are
antigen-antibody complexes. These immune complexes
placed at4°C for several hours (to avoid hemorrhages) prior
are centrifuged at 1000 × gonto Formvar-coated grids, then
to collection of fluids or visual examination of the embryos
stained with 4% phosphotunstic acid (PTA), pH 7.0, and
and egg membranes. Embryos that are stunted, deformed,
examined by EM. The reaction of viral fluids with specific
edematous, or hemorrhagic, and membranes that contain
acute or convalescent serum as viewed by EM determines
lesions (i.e., pocks) should be homogenized in a sterile bal-
if a vinus is associated with a specific disease. This proce-
anced saline as a 10% (w/v) suspension and repassaged in
 dure has been used successfully for viruses associated with
ECEs or cell cultures.
infectious diarrhea.
Immunofluorescence. Immunofluorescence is a visible
fluorescence accentuated by ultraviolet light as a specific
antibody covalently bound to a fluorochrome (e.g., fluores-
FIGURE 3.3.
Inoculating an embryonated chicken egg
cein isothiocyanate and rhodamine) that combines with
(10-12 days old). For chorioallantoic membrane inoculation, a
a fixed antigen. This technique provides a sensitive and
hole is first drilled through the egg shelf and shelf membrane;
the sheff over the air sac is then perforated, causing air to
rapid method for detecting and identifying specific viruses
enter betwveen the shell membrane and the chorioallantoic
in either tissues or cell cultures (Figure 3.4). Immunofluo-
membrane, creating an artificial air sac, where the sample is
 rescence is detectable by either a direct or indirect proce-
deposited. The sample comes in contact with the chorionic
dure. The direct immunofluorescence test employs a virus-
epithelium. Yolk sac inoculation is usually carried out in
specific antibody labeled with fluorescein that combines
yahiei s! nes yion aui yya u! soigwa (pio sep g) yahunon
with a specific viral antigen located in cells or tissues. The
(Courtesy of Dr. Bill Wiison, USDA ARS.)
indirect test requires the use of a fluorescein-labeled anti-
serum to a virus-specific immunoglobulin.
Immunohistochemical staining uses the same app-
roach, except that the virus-specific antibody is either
 directly or indirectly labeled with an enzyme. The presence
of the enzyme is determined by addition of its substrate,
 and the reaction detected by a color change. The advantage
 of immunohistochemical staining over immunofluores-
cence is that a fluorescent microscope is not required, and
the use of an enzyme-enhancement step greatly increases
the sensitivity of the procedure.
Nucleic  Acid  Hybridization. 
 Molecular hybridization
techniques have led to the synthetic production of viral
DNA probes that are highly specific for individual viruses.
These probes are labeled with various detection systems
24
PARTI 
 Introduction
response is often used to determine prior infection of an
FIGURE 3.4.
immunohistochemistry assay demonstrating
animal with a viral pathogen. Serologic assays measure
the presence of Rify Valley fever virus in the liver of an
humoral immunity in animals, and assays for measuring
infected mouse. A Rift Valley fever virus antigen-specific
cellular immunity to viruses are used infrequently in vet-
antibody reacts specifically to viral antigen in the tissue (red
erinary diagnostic medicine.
color). (Courtesy of Dr. Barbara Drolet, USDA ARS.)
Viruses have certain antigens that are type- or group-
Serologic diagnosis of virus infections typically requires the
collection of paired samples: an acute (at or prior to the
onset of clinical signs) and a convalescent serum (10-28
days later). A fourfold or greater rise in antibody titer (the
reciprocal of the serum dilution) indicates recent or ongo-
ing viral infection. Antibody titers in single serum samples
are more diffcult to interpret, although the presence of
antibodies is indicative of prior exposure (or resulting from
the passive transfer of maternal antibodies in young ani-
 mals), which is especially important in chronic diseases
with a carrier state like the bovine leukemia vinus in cat-
tle, equine infectious anemia, and the equine arteritis virus
infection of stallions.
 Serology can help to rapidly establish a diagnosis when
viral isolation procedures are negative. Serology can also be
used to definitively rule out the absence of specific viruses in
a given disease outbreak, whereas a negative viral isolation
cannot.
that allow identification of the presence of individual
Serum Virus Neutralization Test.  Most viruses produce a
viruses, either in tissues or in extracts of them.
visible CPE in cell cultures. CPE is used to determine the
presence of protective or virus-neutralizing antibodies in a
Polymerase Chain Reaction. The relatively recent devel-
serum. To quantify the amount of neutralizing antibodies,
opment of the PCR has revolutionized the rapid diagnosis
of many viral diseases. The importance of the procedure
serum from an animal is serially diluted and mixed with a
known amount of virus (generally 50-300 infectious doses
lies in its ability to amplify small amoun ts of viral DNA 01
of virus-TCID50) for 1 h at 37 *C prior to inoculation
RNA even from contaminated specimens, and on its abil-
of a volume of the mixture into animals, ECEs, or cell cul-
ity to be conducted on a large scale so that vast numbers
tures. The serum neutralization (SN) test is very specific and
of samples can simultaneously be evaluated. Furthermore,
highly sensitive, but it is time-consuming and expensive.
technical developments such as real-time PCR allow the
The SN can be used to confirm recent infection of animals
quantitation of template that is present in a sample, which
if paired sera are evaluated.
is reflective of the viral load. The PCR assay is based on
the cyclic synthesis of a DNA segment limited by two spe-
cific oligonucleotides that are used as primers to specifically
Hemagglutination Inhibition Test. Viruses that possess a
amplify portions of the viral genome. Properly run, the PCR
assay is both sensitive and specific, although the identifica-
a fact that has been used to quantify the amount (titrate)
tion of viral nucleic acid does not prove that an infectious
of these viruses present in a sample. The hemagglutina-
tion inhibition (H1) test can be used to identify or type a
virus was present, so PCR-positive samples often should be
subjected to traditional virus isolation procedures.
virus through the inhibition of hemagglutination by virus-
specific antiserum.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay for Antigen Detec
tion.
 The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Hemadsorption Inhibition Test. The hemadsorption
is a rapid, highly sensitive immunoassay adapted to mea-
inhibition test is based on the ability of certain vinus-
sure viral antigens or antibodies (see Chapter 2). ELISAs
infected cells (monolayers) to attract specific erythrocytes
  e     
to their surface. The presence of hemadsorbing erythro-
(e.g., the avian laryngotracheitis virus, avian encephalitis,
cyte clusters on a cellular monolayer indicates that viral
Newcastle disease virus, infectious bronchitis virus, and
 protein (hemagglutinin) has accumulated on the surface
reovirus), and increasingly are being developed to detect
of the cell membrane. The hemadsorption phenomenon
viruses that in fect other species of domestic animals
can be inhibited by pretreatment of virus-infected cells for
30 min,usually at ambient temperature with twofold dilu-
tions of antisera followed by the addition of 0.05-0.5%
Serologic Detection of Viruses
erythrocytes. Antibody (Ab) can be quantified by compar-
Most viruses usually elicit an immune response in the host;
ing the observed washed virus-infected cell monolayers
thus, the detection of a humoral (antibody) or cellular
that contain ad hered clumped erythrocytes on the surface
Chapter 3  Laboratory Diagnosis
25
of the cell (Ab negative) with the cell monolayers that con-
tain free-floating erythrocytes (Ab positive).
FIGURE 3.5.
Western immunobiot demonstrating
antibody binding to specific protein antigens separated by gel
Complement Fixation. Complement fixation (CF) tests
electrophoresis chromatography. Baculovirus-expressed
EHDV-2 or BTV-11 VP-7 from cell supernatant (S) or cell pellet
employ the complement cascade in reactions with viral
(C). Membrane blotted with 1 : 2000 monoclonal antibody
antigens that fix complement—usually from guinea pig
[EHDV(4F4.H1) or BTV(1AA4.E4)] and 1 : 4000 goat α-mouse
serum—when combined with specific, anti-viral antibod-
HRP (Courtesy of Dr. Chris Lehiy, USDA ARS.)
ies. Although CF has been used in early test tube assays to
detect viruses (e.g., leukemia viruses), virus-infected cells,
EHDV-VP7
BTV-11 VP7
 01 virus-specific antibodies, the complexity of the assay and
S
C
S
C
the time required have led to its replacement by simpler
procedures.
VP7
Immunodiffusion. The immunodiffusion procedure is
expected size
routinely used as a diagnostic tool to monitor the spread of
specific viral pathogens in various animal diseases (e.g.,
bluetongue, equine infectious anemia, bovine leukosis,
caprine arthritis, encephalitis, and infectious bursal dis-
ease). The basis of the test is the ability of certain soluble
viral antigens to diffuse in a semisolid medium (agar) with
the formation of a precipitin line with specific antisera.
as revealed on a strip of nitrocellulose paper as discrete
bands by electrophoresis. When a serum sample is applied
Radioimmunoassay.
The radioimmunoassay (RIA) is an
to the nitrocellulose strip, antibodies from animals infected
exquisitely sensitive method for quantifying antigens
with a specific virus bind to the specific viral proteins at the
or antibodies when one component is radio-labeled.
appropriate positions. These bands become dark and dis-
Although RIA has an advantage for detecting minute
tinct when the nitrocellulose paper is treated with a reagent
amounts of antibodies, the need for a scintillation counter
(Figure 3.5). Because it provides a full viral antibody pro-
to measure radioactivity and very pure reagents limits use
file of the serum sample, this test is the most specific viral
diagnostic test currently available.
tories.
ELISA for Antibody Detection. ELISAs are highly specific
 Further Reading
 reaction can be enhanced by increasing the level of purifi-
cation of the antigen or antibody employed. The ELISA can
Coghe F, Orri G, Pautasso M et al. (201l) The role of the labo-
detect nanogram levels of IgG-, IgM-, and IgA-type antibod-
ratory in choosing antibiotics. / Matern Fetal Neonatal Med,
ies. ELISAs can be made quantitative if appropriatestan dard
curves are developed. Numerous commercially available
24 (Suppl 2), 18-20.
O'Brien TF and Stelling J (2011) Integrated multilevel surveil-
assays for avian and mammalian viruses provide qualita-
lance of the World's infecting microbes and their resistance
tive information on antibodies to various viruses, whereas
to antimicrobial agents. Clin Microbiol Rev, 24 (2), 281-295.
 others detect the vinuses themselves in clinical specimens.
doi:10.1128/CMR.00021-10.
The blocking ELISA evaluates the ability of a test serum to
Weinstein MP (2011) Diagnostic strategies and general topics,
displace the binding of a virus protein-specific antibody to
in Manual of Clinical Microbiology, vol. 1. Section I, 10th edn
its antigen.
(ed. JH Jorgensen), ASM Press.
Wilson D, Howell V, Toppozini C et al. (2011) Against all odds:
Western Immunoblot Assay. The Western immunoblot
diagnosing tuberculosis in South Africa. / Infect Dis, 204
assay can detect antibodies to a full range of viral proteins
(Suppl 4), S1102-$1109.
Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy
JOHN F. PRESCOTT
Antimicrobial drugs exploit differences in structure or bio-
(bacitracin and vancomycin) or mainly gram
chemical function between the host and parasite. Modern
negative bacteria (polymyxin), whereas broad-
chemotherapy is traced to the work of Paul Ehrlich, who
spectrum drugs such as tetracyclines inhibit both
 devoted his life to discovering agents that possessed selec-
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Other
tive toxicity. The first clinically successful broad-spectrum
drugs such as penicillin G or lincosamides are most
antibacterial drugs were the sulfonamides, developed in
active against gram-positive bacteria but will inhibit
1935 as a result of Ehrlich's work with synthetic dyes. It
some gram-negatives.
was, however, the discovery of penicillin by Fleming in
3.1
Bacteriostatic or bactericidal: This distinction is an
1928 and its later development by Chain and Florey in
approximation that depends on drug concentra-
World War I that led to the subsequent discovery of furthe1
tions and the organism involved. For example, peni-
antibiotics, chemical substances produced by microorgan-
cillin is bactericidal at high concentrations and bac-
isms that at low concentrations inhibited or killed other
teriostatic at lower ones. The distinction between
microorganisms. The chemical modification of many of
bactericidal and bacteriostatic is critical in certain
the drugs discovered earlyin the antibiotic revolution led to
circumstances, such as the treatment of meningitis
the development of new and powerful antimicrobial drugs
Or of septicemia in neutropenic patients.
with properties distinct from their parents. Antibiotics and
4. Pharmacodynamic activity: Antibacterial action is
their derivatives have more importance as antimicrobial
concentration or time dependent (see Section
 agents than do the fewer synthetic antibacterial drugs. By
"Design of drug dosage and pharmacodynamic
contrast, antiviral drugs are all chemically synthesized. The
properties" for the effect of this activity on dosing
term antimicrobial will be used throughout to include both
considerations)
antibiotics and synthetic antimicrobial drugs. The thera-
 5. Mechanism of action: Like pharmacodynamic activ-
peutic use of antimicrobial drugs in veterinary medicine
ity, this is dependent on the drug class and is dis-
has followed their use in human medicine because of the
cussedlater. This is probably the most useful of the
high cost of their development.
classifications, since it determines the previous four
This chapter discusses systemic antibacterial and anti-
classification approaches.
fungal agents, and their use, as well as the important topic
of antibiotic resistance.
Mechanism of Action of Antimicrobial Drugs
Classification of Antimicrobial Drugs
The marked  structural and biochemical differences
between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells give greater
 Antimicrobial drugs can be classified in a number of ways,
opportunity for selective toxicity of antibacterial drugs
each of which has clinical importance:
compared to antifungal drugs because fungi, like mam-
malian cells, are eukaryotic. Developing selectively toxic
1. Spectrum of activity against class of microorgan-
 antiviral drugs is particularly difficult because viral replica-
ism: Penicillins are narrow-spectrum because they
tion depends largely on the metabolic pathways of the host
inhibit only bacteria; sulfonamides, trimethoprim,
cell. This chapter mainly discusses antibacterial drugs.
and lincosamides are broader because they inhibit
 The mechanisms of action of antibacterial drugs fall into
both bacteria and protozoa. Polyenes only inhibit
four categories:(1) inhibition of cell wall synthesis, (2) dam-
fungi.
age to cell membrane function, (3) inhibition of nucleic
2. Anfibacterial activity: Some antibiotics are narrow-
acid synthesis or function, and (4) inhibition of protein
spectrum in that they inhibit only gram-positive
synthesis (Figure 4.1).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
26
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
27
FIGURE 4.1.
Mechanisms of action of antibacterial drugs.
 Beta-lactam antibiotics
 Glycopeptides
Nitomidazoles
 Bacitracin 
DNA
Nitrofurans
Cell wall
Streptogramins
 Cell membrane
Polyenes
Sulfonamides
Purine
Trimethoprim 
synthesis
Fluoroquinolones
Novobiocin
Ribosome
New
Rifampin
protein
30S
Messenger RNA
Transfer RNA
Amino acid
Tetacyclines
 Aminoglycosides
Oxazolidinones
Phenicols
Lincosamides, macrolides
Inhibition of Cell Wall Synthesis
N-acetylmuramic acid in 3-1,4 linkage, a tetra peptide
attached to the N-acetylmuramic acid, and a peptide bridge
Antibiotics that interfere with cell wall synthesis include
penicillins and cephalosporins (β-lactam antibiotics), bac-
from one tetrapeptide to another, so that the disaccha-
itracin, and vancomycin. The bacterial cell wall is a thick
ride backbone is cross-linked both within and between lay-
ers. The cross-linkage between transpeptides gives the cell
envelope that gives shape to the cell. This tough wall out-
side the cell membrane is a major difference between bac-
wall remarkable strength. Several enzymes are involved in
teria and mammalian cells. In gram-positive bacteria, it
transpeptidation reactions.
consists largely of a thick layer of peptidoglycan, which
The effect of β-lactam antibiotics (penicillins and
gives the cell rigidity and maintains a high internal osmotic
cephalosporins) is to prevent the final cross-linking in the
pressure of about 20 atmospheres. In gram-negative bac-
cell wall, inhibiting division and creating weak points.
teria, this layer is thinner and the internal osmotic pres-
Among the targets of these drugs are penicillin-binding
proteins (PBPs), of which there are three to eight in bacte-
ria; many of these PBPs are transpeptidase enzymes. They
a polysaccharide chain made up of a repeating dis-
accharide backbone of alternating N-acetylglucosamine-
are responsible for the formation and remodeling of the
28
PARTI  Introduction
cell wall during growth and division. Different PBPs have
1. Benzyl penicillins and its long-acting forms: Injectable
different affnities for drugs, explaining the variation in
penicillins, highest activity against gram-positive
the spectrum of action of different 3-lactam antibiotics.
 Degradative mechanisms are also in volved in cell wall pro-
lactamase inactivation (e.g., penicillin G).
duction. These are carried out by autolysins, and some
2.
Orally absorbed penicillins: Spectrum similar to benzyl
penicillins act partly by decreasing normal inhibition of
penicillins (e.g., penicillin V).
the autolysins.
Antistaphylococcal isoxazolyl penicillins: Relatively
 The action of β-lactam antibiotics is thus to block pep-
resistant to staphylococcal β-lactamases (e.g,
tidoglycan synthesis, which severely weakens the cell wall,
cloxacillin and methicillin).
and to promote the action of the autolysins, which lyse
Extended-spectrum penicillins: Aminopenicillins (e.g.,
the cell. β-Lactams are active only against actively growing
amoxicillin and ampicillin).
cells. The greater activity of some β-lactams against gram-
5. Antipseudomonal penicillins: Carboxy- and ureido-
positive bacteria is the result of the greater quantity of pep-
penicillins (e.g, carbenicillin, piperacillin, and ticar-
tidoglycan and higher osmotic pressure in gram-positive
cillin).
bacteria, the impermeability of some gram-negative bacte-
6. β-Lactamase resistant penicillins: Temocillin.
ria because of their lipopolysaccharide and lipid exterior,
and the presence of 3-lactamase enzymes in many gram-
Antimicrobial Activity. Penicillin G is the most active of
negative organisms. The remarkable activity of some of
 the penicillins against gram-positive aerobic bacteria such
the newest penicillins and cephalosporins against gram-
as non-β-lactamase-producing coagulase-positive staphy-
negatives is the result not only of their improved abil-
lococci, β-hemolytic streptococci, Bacillus anthracis and
ity to enter gram-negative cells and bind PBPs but also
of their ability to resist a variety of β-lactamase enzymes
other gram-positive rods, corynebacteria,Erysipelothrix, Lis-
 normally found in the periplasmic space of gram-negative
teria, and against most anaerobes. It is moderately active
against the more fastidious gram-negative aerobes such
bacteria. More recently, β-lactamase-inhibiting drugs with
as Haemophilus, Pasteurella, and some Actinobacillus, but
no intrinsic antibacterial activity, such as clavulanic acid
it is inactive against members of the family Enterobac-
and sulbactam, have been combined with amoxicillin or
teriaceae, and the genera Bordetella, and Pseudomonas.
ticarcillin to expand the spectrum of activity of these latter
The penicillinase-resistant isoxazolyl penicillins (oxacillin,
compounds by neutralizing enzymes that might otherwise
cloxacillin, methicillin, and nafcillin) are resistant to
degrade them.
Bacitracin and vancomycin inhibit the early stages in
coagulase-positivestaphylococcalpenicillinase, but are less
active than penicillin G against other penicillin-sensitive
gram-positive bacteria. Most gram-negative bacteria are
positive bacteria.
resistant to them. Ampicillin and amoxicillin are slightly
less active than penicillin G against gram-positive and
Penicillins. Sir Alexander Fleming's observation that
colonies of staphylococci lysed on a plate that had become
produced by coagulase-positive staphylococci. They have
contaminated with a Penicillium fungus was the discov
considerably greater activity against gram-negative bacte.
ery that led to the development of antibiotics. In 1940,
Chain, Florey, and their associates succeeded in pro-
ria. They are ineffective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
ducing therapeutic quantities of penicillin from Penicil-
Carbenicillin and ticarcillin resemble ampicillin in spec-
trum of activity with the notable difference of having activ-
lium notahum. Almost a decade later, penicillin G became
ity against P. aeruginosa. Temocillin is highly resistant to
widely available for clinical use. In the years that fol-
3-lactamases including extended-spectrum cephalospori-
lowed, this antibiotic was found to have certain limita-
tions: its relative instability to stomach acid, its suscep-
 nases, and has broad-activity against members of the family
Enterobacteriaceae, including otherwise resistant isolates.
   d    
 inactivity against most gram-negative bacteria. Isolation
Mycoplasma and mycobacteria are resistant to penicillins.
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to all β-
of the active moiety, 6-aminopenicillanic acid, in the peni-
lactam antibiotics.
cillin molecule has resulted in the design and development
of semisynthetic penicillins that overcome some of these
limitations.
Resistance. In  gram-positive  bacteria  (particularly
The development of the cephalosporin family, which
coagulase-positive staphylococci), resistance is mainly
shares with penicillin the 3-lactam ring, has led to a
through production of extracellular β-lactamase (peni-
-d   dn a s jo  an
cillinase) enzymes that break the β-lactam ring of most
etrate different gram-negative bacterial species and to
penicillins. Resistance in gram-negative bacteria results,
resist β-lactamase enzymes. In recent years, other natu-
in part, from a wide variety of 3-lactamase enzymes
rally occurring 3-lactam antibiotics have been described
and also from low bacterial permeability or lack of PBP
that lack the bicyclic ring of the classical β-lactam peni-
receptors. Most or all gram-negative bacteria express
cillins and cephalosporins. Many of these new drugs have
 low levels of species-specific chromosomally mediated
potent antibacterial activity and are highly resistant to β.
3-lactamase enzymes within the periplasmic space, and
lactamase enzymes.
these sometimes contribute to resistance.
Clinically important penicillins can be divided into six
Plasmid-mediated
β-lactamase
production
iS
groups:
s    
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
29
The enzymes are constitutively expressed and cause
laxis; milder hypersensitivity reactions {urticaria, fever,
high-level resistance. The majority are penicillinases
angioneurotic edema) are more common. All penicillins
rather than cephalosporinases. The most widespread are
are cross-sensitizing and cross-reacting. Anaphylactic reac-
TEM-type β-lactamases, which readily hydrolyze penicillin
tions are less common after oral penicillin administration
G and ampicillin rather than methicillin, cloxacillin, 01
than after parenteral administration. Many of the acute
carbenicillin. The less widespread OXA-type β-lactamases
toxicities reported in animals are the toxic effects of the
hydrolyze isoxazolyl penicillins (oxacillin, cloxacillin, and
potassium or procaine with which the penicillin is com-
related compounds). SHV-type β-lactamases are found
bined. The use of penicillin and ampicillin in guinea pigs
particularly in Kebsiella pneumoniae but may be found
invariably causes fatal Clostridium difficile colitis, and use of
in other members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. In
ampicillin in rabbits causes fatal C. difficile or Clostridium 
recent years, B-lactamases resistant to third-generation
spiroforme colitis.
cephalosporins have emerged. These include AmpC
hyperproducers (such as the CMY2 β-lactamase), as well
Cephalosporins. Cephalosporins are natural or semisyn-
as extended-spectrum β-lactamases (mostly TEM and
thetic products ofthe fungi Cephalosporiumspp.; the related
SHV gene variants, but including PER, CTX-M, VEB,
cephamycins are derived from the actinomycetes type of
and other β-lactamase groups) and metallo-3-lactamases
bacteria. The nucleus of the semisynthetic cephalosporins,
including the IMP, SPM, and VOM β-lactamases.
. These
7-aminocephalosporanic acid, bears a close structural
latter enzymes are not inhibited by clavulanic acid.
resemblance to that of the penicillins, which accounts for a
A major advance was the discovery of broad-spectrum
inhibitors of β-lactamase (e.g, clavulanic acid and sul-
by these two classes of drugs. They are bactericidal. Like the
bactam). These drugs have weak antibacterial activity but
penicillins, cephalosporins have short half-lives, and most
show extraordinary synergism when administered with
are excreted unchanged in the urine. Attachment of various
penicillin G, ampicillin, amoxicillin, or ticarcillin because
R groups to the cephalosporanic acid nucleus has resulted
they irreversibly bind the β-lactamase enzymes of resistant
bacteria.
ity. Though not an ideal description, the classification of
cephalosporins as belonging to four generations relates to
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. The penicillins
their increasing spectrum of activity against gram-negative
are organic acids that are generally available as the sodium
bacteria because of improved penetration of cells and their
0r potassium salt of the free acid. Apart from the isoxa
progressive resistance to the β-lactamases of gram-negative
zolyl penicillins and penicillin V, acid hydrolysis limits the
bacteria.
systemic availability of most penicillins from oral prepara-
tions. Both ampicillin and amoxicillin are relatively stable
Antimicrobial Activity. The first-generation  cephalos-
in acid.
porins (e.g., cephalothin, cephalexin, cephaloridine, and
The penicillins are predominantly ionized in the blood
cefadroxil) have a similar spectrum of activity to ampicillin,
plasma, have relatively small apparent volumes of distribu-
with the notable difference that β-lactamase-producing
tion, and have short half-lives (0.5-1.2 h) in all species of
staphylococci are susceptible. They are active against a vari-
domestic animals. After absorption, penicillins are widely
ety of gram-positive bacteria such as coagulase-positive
distributed in body fluids. Because of their high degree
staphylococci, many streptococci (except enterococci),
of ionization and low solubility in lipid, they attain only
corynebacteria, and gram-positive anaerobes (Clostridium).
low intracellular concentrations and do not penetrate well
Among gram-negative bacteria, Haemophilus and Pas-
into transcellular fluids. The relatively poor diffusibility
teurella are susceptible, as are some Escherichia coli, Kleb-
of penicillins across cell membranes is reflected in their
siella,Proteus,and Salmonella.Enterobacterand P. aeruginosa
milk-to-plasma concentration ratios (0.3). The relatively
are resistant. Many anaerobic bacteria, except members of
low tissue levels attained may, however, be clinically effec-
the Bacteroides fragilis group, are susceptible. The second-
tive because of the high sensitivity of susceptible bacte-
generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefoxitin and cefuroxime)
ria to penicillins and their bactericidal action. Ampicillin
have increased resistance to gram-negative β-lactamases
and amoxicillin, in addition to having a wider spectrum
and thus broader activity against gram-negative bacte-
 of antimicrobial activity, penetrate cellular barriers more
ria as well as against bacteria susceptible to the first-
readily than penicillin G. Their somewhat longer half-lives
 s  ne     
might be attributed to enterohepatic circulation. Pene-
Enterobacter and against cephalothin-resistant E. coli, Kleb-
tration to cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) is usually poor but is
siella, and Proteus. Some B. fragilis are susceptible. Like
enhanced by inflammation. In addition, active removal of
the first-generation cephalosporins, these drugs are not
penicillin from CSF is diminished by inflammation. The
active against P. aeruginosa or Serratia. The third-generation
penicillins are eliminated almost entirely by renal excre-
cephalosporins (e.g., cefotaxime, ceftiofur, and cefopera-
tion, which results in very high levels in the urine. The
- s Aoe p Aq pzao a (a
renal excretion mechanisms include glomerular filtration
positive bacteria, modest activity against P. aenuginosa,
and mainly proximal tubular secretion.
and remarkable activity against members of the family
Enterobacteriaceae.Some third-generation cephalosporins
Adverse Fffects. Penicillins are remarkably free of toxic
(e.g, ceftazidime) are highly active against P. aeruginosa
effects, even at doses grossly in excess of those rec-
at the expense of activity against members of the fam-
ommended. The major adverse effect is acute anaphy-
ily Enterobacteriaceae. Fourth-generation cephalosporins
30
PARTI
 Introduction
(e.g., cefepime and cefpirome) have very broad-spectrum
teria, with the greatest activity of all antimicrobials against
gram-negative bacteria.
Resistance. Methicillin-resistant
coagulase-positive
Damage to Cell Membrane Function
staphylococci   are
resistant
t to all generations
of
cephalosporins. Plasmid-mediated resistance to first-,
Antibiotics that damage cell membrane function include
second-, and third-generation drugs has been described
the polymyxins, monensin, and the antifungal polyenes
in gram-negative bacteria. Emergence of resistance in
(amphotericin, nystatin) and imidazoles (fluconazole, itra-
Enterobacter, Serratia, and P. aenuginosa during treatment
conazole, ketoconazole, miconazole), discussed under
with third-generation drugs results from derepression of
antifungal drugs. The cell membrane lies beneath the cell
inducible,
， chromosomal β-lactamase enzymes, which
wall, enclosing the cytoplasm. It controls the passage of
in turn results in broad-spectrum resistance to 3-lactam
materials into or out of the cell. If its function is damaged,
antibiotics. In addition, plasmid-mediated resistance to
cellular contents (proteins, nucleotides, ions) can leak from
third-generation cephalosporins is increasingly reported.
 the cell and result in cell damage and death.
It can involve either TEM- or SHV-β-lactamases or other
β-lactamase families including CTX-M1, which hydrolyses
Polymyxins. The structure of the polymyxins is such
cefotaxime. These β-lactamases are inhibited by clavulanic
that they have well-defined separate hydrophilic and
acid. More recently, broad-spectrum cephalosporinases
hydrophobic sectors. Polymyxins act by binding to mem-
(cephamycinases), CMY-2 β-lactamases, have been recog-
brane phospholipids, which results in structural disorgani-
nized on plasmids of E. coli and Salmonella; these are not
zation, permeability damage, and cell lysis. The polymyx-
inhibited by clavulanic acid.
ins are selectively toxic to gram-negative bacteria because
of the presence of certain phospholipids in the cell mem-
brane and because the outer surface of the outer membrane
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. Cephalosporins
drugs.
of gram-negative bacteria consists mainly of lipopolysac-
are
water-soluble
Ofthe
first-generation
charide. Parenteral use is associated with nephrotoxic,
cephalosporins, cephalexin and cephadroxil are rela-
neurotoxic, and neuromuscular blockingeffects. The major
tively acid-stable and sufficiently well absorbed from the
clinical applications are limited to the oral treatment of
g 's p so o Ao ps aq on as
 gram-negative bacterial infections, although these drugs
not to herbivores. Other first-generation cephalosporins
must be administered parenterally although they are
arel
becoming again more commonly systemically
in
 often painful on intramuscular injection and irritating
human patients, because of the absence of alternative treat-
ments for multiresistant bacterial pathogens.
on intravenous injection. Second- and third-generation
cephalosporins are sometimes available for oral use and
n 1aei anoi sh Aq sien pue ssop 0n uaai aq pino
Inhibition of Nucleic Acid Function
parenterally. Following absorption from injection sites,
Examples of drugs that inhibit nucleic acid function
cephalosporins are widely distributed into tissue and
body fluids. Third-generation cephalosporins penetrate
are nitroimidazoles, nitrofurans, nalidixic acid, the flu-
oroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, danofloxacin, difloxacin,
        
enrofloxacin, orbifloxacin, sarafloxacin), novobiocin,
against gram-negative bacteria have particular potential
rifampin, sulfonamides, trimethoprim, and 5-flucytosine.
application in the treatment of meningitis.
Because the mechanisms of nucleic acid synthesis, replica-
tion, and transcription are similar in all cells, drugs affect-
Adverse Effects.
 Cephalosporins are relatively nontoxic
ing nucleic acid function have poor selective toxicity. Most
antibiotics in humans. Allergic reactions occur in 5-10%
act by binding to DNA to inhibit its replication or tran-
of human patients who are hypersensitive to penicillin.
scription. Drugs with greater selective toxicity are the sul.
Intravenous and intramuscular injections of some drugs
fonamides and trimethoprim, which inhibit the synthesis
are an irritant.
of folic acid.
Other β-lactam Antibiotics. Other naturally occurring
Nitroimidazoles. Nitroimidazoles, such as metronidazole
3-lactam antibiotics discovered in recent years include the
and dimetridazole, possess antiprotozoal and antibacte-
cephamycins, clavulanic acid, thienamycin, the monobac-
rial properties. Activity within bacterial cells is due to
tams (such as aztreonam), the carbapenems (such
1as
the unidentified, reduced products of the drug, which are
imipenem), the Ps-compounds, and the carpetimycins-
only seen in anaerobes or microaerophiles. Nitroimidazoles
all compounds with the basic β-lactam ring but without
cause extensive DNA strand breakage either by inhibiting
the bicyclic ring structure of the classical β-lactams. All
the DNA repair enzyme, DNase 1, or by forming com-
are highly resistant to 3-lactamases, and many possess
plexes with the nucleotide bases that the enzyme does
 potent antibacterial properties or are used in combination
not recognize. Nitroimidazoles are bactericidal to anaer-
with earlier β-lactams (ampicillin, amoxicillin, ticarcillin)
obic gram-negative and many gram-positive bacteria and
for their potent β3-lactamase inhibitory effects (clavulanic
are active against protozoa such as Tritrichomonas fehus,
acid, sulbactam, tazobactam). Carbapenems (biapenem,
Giardia lamblia, and Histomonas meleagridis. Chromoso-
imipenem-cilastatin, meropenem) have exceptional activ-
mal resistance may cause slight increases in minimum
ity against clinically important aerobic and anaerobic bac.
inhibitory concentrations (MlC), but as is the case for
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
31
nitrofurans, plasmid-encoded resistance is rare. Nitroim
used on its own but rather is used in combination with
idazoles are generally well absorbed after oral administra-
 other antimicrobial drugs.
tion, but parenteral injection is highly irritating. They are
well distributed throughout body tissues and fluids, includ.
Sulfonamides and Trimethoprim.
Sulfonamides are syn-
ing brain and CsF. Excretion is through the urine. The most
thetic drugs with broad antibacterial and antiprotozoal
serious potential hazard is the controversial report of car-
properties. They interfere with the biosynthesis offolic acid
cinogenicity in laboratory animals. For this reason, these
and prevent the formation of purine nucleotides. Sulfon-
drugs are not used in food animals.
amides are functional analogs of para-aminobenzoic acid
(PABA) and compete with it for the same enzyme, tetrahy-
Nitrofurans. Like the nitroimidazoles, the nitrofurans are
dropteroate synthetase, forming nonfunctional folic acid
antiprotozoal but have wider antibacterialactivity; they are
analogs and inhibiting bacterial growth. Selective toxic-
most active under anaerobic conditions. After entry into
ity of sulfonamides occurs because mammalian cells have
the cell, bacterial nitroreductases produce uncharacterized
lost their ability to synthesize folic acid but rather absorb
unstable reduction products, which differ with each type of
it from the intestine, whereas bacteria must synthesize it.
nitrofuran. These products cause strand breakage in bacte-
In the bacterial cell, preformed folic acid is progressively
rial DNA. The nitrofurans are synthetic 5-nitrofuraldeh yde
exhausted by several bacterial divisions.
derivatives with broad antimicrobial activity. Toxicity and
Other drugs affect folic acid synthesis by interfering
low tissue concentrations limit their use to the local treat-
with the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase. One example is
 A no t a n p s n i
trimethoprim, which is selectively toxic to bacteria rather
infections.
than to mammalian cells because of greater affinity for the
bacterial enzyme. The enzyme inhibits the con version of
dih ydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, producing with sulfon-
Fluoroquinolones.  Fluoroquinolones (e.g, ciprofloxacin,
amides a sequential blockade of folic acid synthesis.
danofloxacin, difloxacin, enrofloxacin, orbifloxacin, and
 sarafloxacin) are active against gram-negative bacteria.
Sulfonamides. The sulfonamides constitute a series of
They cause selective inhibition of bacterial DNA synthe.
weak organic acids that enter most tissues and body fluids.
sis by inhibiting DNA gyrase (topoisomerase II) and DNA
The degree of ionization and lipid solubility of the large
topoisomerase IV. DNA gyrase is involved in packing
number of individual sulfonamides influences absorption,
(supercoiling) DNA into bacterial cells, whereas topoiso-
determines capacity to penetrate cell membranes, and can
merase IV is involved in relaxing supercoiled DNA. Flu-
affect the rate of elimination. Sulfonamides exert a bac-
oroquinolones are bactericidal drugs. Nalidixic acid (a
teriostatic effect against both gram-positive and gram-
quinolone rarely used because of toxicity) is most active
 negative bacteria and can also inhibit other microorgan-
against gram-negative bacteria except P. aeruginosa, but the
isms (some protozoa). They are available in a wide variety
d   s  
 of preparations for either oral or parenteral use. They have
and active against some gram-positive bacteria, includ-
largely been abandoned because of widespread resistance,
ing mycobacteria. Activity against Mycoplasma and rick-
difficulties in administration, and the existence of bet-
ettsia is also an important attribute of the newer fluo-
ter alternatives. Certain individual sulfonamides are com-
roquinolones. The fluoroquinolones are rapidly absorbed
bined with trimethoprim in fixed ratio (5 : 1) combination
after oral administration and have half-lives varying from
preparations that have the advantage of both synergistic
4 to 12 h. They are widely distributed in tissues, and may
and bactericidal effects.
be concentrated, for example, in the prostate. Penetration
Individual sulfonamides are derivatives of sulfanil-
into CSF is about half that of serum, which makes these
amide, which contains the structural prerequisites for
drugs useful to treat meningitis. They are being introduced
antibacterial activity. The various derivatives differ in
rapidly into veterinary use, particularly for use against
physicochemical and pharmacokinetic properties and in
gram-negative bacteria and Mycoplasma. One significant
degree of antimicrobial activity. The sodium salts of sulfon-
drawback is the fairly rapid development of chromosoma-
amides are readily soluble in water, and parenteral prepara-
lly mediated resistance, which in Campylobacter jejuni and
tions are available for intravenous administration. Certain
P. aeruginosa can produce high-level resistance after single
sulfonamide molecules are designed for low solubility (e.g.,
nucleotide mutations but is more gradual in other bacte-
phthalylsulfathiazole) so that they will be slowly absorbed;
lia, usually as the result of cumulative rather than individ-
these are intended for use in the treatment of enteric
ual nucleotide mutations. Resistance can also result from
infections.
decreased permeability of the cell wall as well as from acqui-
sition or enhanced activity of an efflux pump that actively
Antimicrobial Activity. Sulfonamides are broad-spectrum
transports fluoroquinolones from the cell.
antimicrobial drugs. They are active against aerobic gram-
positive cocci and some rods and some gram-negative bac-
Rifampin. Rifampin, which has particular activity against
teria, including members of the family Enterobacteriaceae.
gram-positive bacteria and mycobacteria, has remark-
Many anaerobes are sensitive.
able selectivity of inhibition of bacterial DNA-dependent
ribonucleic acid (RNA) polymerase. Rifampin prevents ini-
Resistance. Resistance to sulfonamides in pathogenic
tiation of transcription. Resistance develops rapidly as the
and nonpathogenic bacteria isolated from animals is
result of chromosomal mutation, so that this drug is rarely
widespread. This situation reflects their extensive use in
32
PARTI
 Introduction
       
resistant to sulfonamides, synergism may still be obtained
 amide resistance may occur as a result of mutation causing
in up to 40% of cases, even when bacteria are only mod-
overproduction of PABA or as a result ofa structural change
erately susceptible to trimethoprim. Because of differences
 in the dihydrofolic acid-synthesizing enzyme with a low-
between the trimethoprim and sulfonamide in distribution
ered affinity for sulfonamides. Most often, sulfonamide
pattern and processes of elimination, the concentration
resistance is plasmid mediated.
ratios of the two drugs will differ considerably in tissues
and urine from the ratio in the plasma. This variation is
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. Most sulfon-
not important since the synergistic interaction occurs over
a wide range of concentration ratios of the two drugs.
and distributed widely to all tissues and body fluids, includ-
ing synovial and CsF. They are bound to plasma proteins
Resistance. Resistance to sulfonamides is due to struc-
to a variable extent. In addition to differences among sul-
tural alteration in the dihydrofolic acid synthesizing
fonamides in extent of binding, there is variation among
enzyme (dihydropteroate synthetase), whereas resistance
species in binding of individual sulfonamides. Extensive
to trimethoprim usually results from plasmid-encoded syn-
(80%) protein binding serves to increase half-life. They
thesis of a resistant dihydrofolate reductase enzyme. Bacte-
enter CSF well.
rial resistance to the combination has progressively devel-
 Sulfonamides are eliminated by a combination of renal
oped with use of these preparations in animals.
excretion and biotransformation processes in the liver.
This combination of elimination processes contributes to
Absorption, Distribution, and Elimination. Trimethoprim
the species variation in the half-life of individual sulfon-
is a lipid-soluble organic base that is approximately 60%
amides. While a large number of sulfonamide preparations
bound to plasma proteins and 60% ionized in the plasma.
are available for use in veterinary medicine, many of these
This combination of physicochemical properties enables
are different dosage forms of sulfamethazine. This sulfon-
the drug to distribute widely, to penetrate cellular barriers
amide is most widely used in the food-producing animals
by nonionic diffusion, and to attain effective concentra-
and can attain effective plasma concentrations (within
tions in most body fluids and tissues, including brain and
the range 50-150 μg/ml) when administered either orally
CSF. Hepatic metabolism is the principal process for elim-
O1 parenterally. Due to their alkalinity, most parenteral
ination of trimethoprim. The half-life and fraction of the
preparations should only be administered by intravenous
dose that is excreted unchanged in the urine vary widely
injection. Prolonged-release oral dosage forms of sulfamet
 among different species. The drug is well absorbed follow-
hazine are available.
ing oral administration in dogs, cats, and horses or from
Adverse Effects. The sulfonamides can produce a wide
injection sites in these and other species.
variety of side effects, some of which may have an aller-
Adverse Effects. Serious side effects are uncommon; those
gic basis whereas others are due to direct toxicity. The
more common adverse effects are urinary tract distur-
that do occur can usually be attributed to the sulfon-
amide component. Oral trimethoprim-sulfonamide has
bances (crystalluria, hematuria, or even obstruction) and
hematopoietic disorders (thrombocytopenia and leukope
the advantage over other oral antimicrobials of causing
nia). Some adverse effects are associated with particular
little disturbance among the normal intestinal anaerobic
sulfonamides. Sulfadiazine and sulfasalazine given for long
microflora.
periods to dogs to control chronic hemorrhagic colitis have
caused kerafoconjunctivitis sicca.
Inhibition of Protein Synthesis
Irimethoprim-Sulfonamide Combinations. Trimethoprim
Examples of drugs that inhibit protein synthesis
is combined with a variety of sulfonamides in a fixed ratio.
 are tetracyclines; aminoglycosides (amikacin, gentam-
 The combination produces a bactericidal effect against a
icin, kanamycin, neomycin, streptomycin, tobramycin,
wide range of bacteria, with some important exceptions,
and others); aminocyclitols (spectinomycin); chloram-
and also inhibits certain other microorganisms. Veterinary
phenicol; lincosamides (clindamycin, lincomycin); and
preparations contain trimethoprim combined with sulfa-
macrolides (azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin,
diazine or sulfadoxine in the 1 : 5 ratio. Other antibacterial
tylosin, tiamulin, and others). Because of the marked dif-
diaminopyrimidines combined with sulfonamides for use
ferences in ribosomal structure, composition, and function
 in animals include baquiloprim and ormetoprim.
between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, many impor-
tant antibacterial drugs selectively inhibit bacterial pro-
Antimicrobial Activity. Trimethoprim-sulfonamide com-
tein synthesis. Antibiotics affecting protein synthesis can
 binations have a generally broad-spectrum and usually
be divided into those affecting the 30s ribosome (tetracy.
clines, aminoglycosides, aminocyclitols) and those affect-
negative aerobic bacteria, including members of the fam-
 ing the 50s ribosome (chloramphenicol, macrolides, lin-
ily Enterobacteriaceae. The combination is active against a
cosamides).
large proportion of anaerobic bacteria, at least under in viro
conditions. Mycoplasma and P. aeruginosa are resistant.
Tetracyclines. Tetracyclines interfere with protein syn-
   n   n
thesis by inhibiting the binding of aminoacyl tRNA to
tive to both drugs in the combination. When bacteria are
the recognition site. The various tetracyclines have similar
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
antimicrobial activity but differ in pharmacologic charac
CSF and aqueous humor. The half-life of chloramphenicol
teristics.
varies widely in animals from a low of 1 h in horses to 5 or
6 h in cats. In neonates, the half-life is considerably longer.
Antimicrobial Activity. Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum
The drug is mainly eliminated by glucuronide conjugation
drugs active against gram-positive and gram-negative bac-
in the liver.
teria, including rickettsia and chlamydia, some mycoplas-
mas, and protozoa such as Theileria. Tetracyclines have
Adverse Effects. The fatal aplastic anemia seen in 1 in
 good activity against many gram-positive bacteria, the
25 000-40 000 humans treated with chloramphenicol does
more fastidious nonenteric bacteria such as Actinobacil-
not occur in animals, alth ough prolonged high dosing may
lus, Bordetella, Brucella, Haemophilus, some Pasteurella, and
cause reversible abnormalities in bone malrow activity.
  e     
The potential for nondose-related fatal aplastic anemia in
bacteria and against members of the family Enterobacte-
humans has led to its prohibition for use in food animals
riaceae are limited by acquired resistance. P. aeruginosa is
in most countries because of fear of the presence of drug
resistant, except in urinary tract infections where, because
residues in meat products. Florfenicol does not have this
of their high concentrations, tetracyclines may be drugs of
effect and so has selective use for food animals.
choice.
Resistance. Widespread resistance to the tetracyclines has
Aminoglycosides
considerably reduced their usefulness, which is largely
The aminoglycosides are bactericidal. The mode of action
limited to intracellular bacterial pathogens of different
of streptomycin is best understood. Streptomycin has a
types. Such resistance is high level and usually plasmid-
variety of complex effects in the bacterial cell: (a) it binds
and transposon-mediated. Cross-resistance between tetra-
to a specific receptor protein in the 30s ribosomal subunit,
cyclines is complete.
distorting the codon-anticodon interactions at the recog-
nition site and causing misreading of the genetic code so
Adverse Effects. Tetracyclines are generally safe antibi-
otics with a reasonably high therapeutic index. The main
ribosomes to prevent the formation of 70s ribosomes; and
adverse effects are associated with their severely irritant
(c) it inhibits the elongation reaction of protein synthesis.
nature, with disturbances in gastrointestinal flora, with
theirability to bind calcium (cardiovascular effects, teeth or
in causing mistranslation of the genetic code and in irre.
bone deposition), and with the toxic effects of degradation
versible inhibition of initiation, although the extent and
products on liver and kidney cells. Their use in horses has
type often differ. They have multiple binding sites on the
largely been abandoned because of a tendency to produce
ribosome, whereas streptomycin has only one, and can also
broad-spectrum suppression of the normal intestinal flora
inhibit the translocation step in protein synthesis. Specti-
and fatal superinfection with Salmonella or C. difficile.
is believed to inhibit polypeptide chain elongation at the
Chloramphenicol and Florfenicol. Chloramphenicol and
translocation step.
florfenicol are broad-spectrum, generally bacteriostatic
The aminoglycoside antibiotics are polar organic bases.
drugs that bind the 50s ribosome, distorting the region
Their polarity largely accounts for the similar pharmacoki-
and inhibiting the peptidyl transferase reaction. They are
netic properties that are shared by all members of the
stable, lipid-soluble, neutral compounds.
group. Chemically, they consist of a hexose nucleus to
Antimicrobial Activity.  Chloramphenicol  and florfeni-
All are potentially ototoxic and nephrotoxic. The newer
col are active against gram-positive and gram-negative
aminoglycosides are more resistant to plasmid-mediated
bacteria, including chlamydia and rickettsia, and some
enzymatic degradation and are less toxic than the older
mycoplasmas. Most gram-positive and many gram-
compounds. Amikacin > tobramycin > gentamicin >
ceptible, though resistance is increasing in members of the
trum of activity, and stability to plasmid-mediated resis-
family Enterobacteriaceae. Florfenicol is less active against
tance. This activity mirrors the chronology of in troduction
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae but has high
of the drugs, with streptomycin being the oldest of the
activity against Haemophilus, Mannheimia haemolytica, and
aminoglycosides.
 Pasteurelia. The drugs are generally bacteriostatic.
Resistance. Most resistance is the result of plasmid-
active against gram-negative bacteria as well as against
encoded acetylase enzymes.
mycobacteria and some Mycoplasma. Anaerobic bacteria are
usually resistant. As a general rule, gram-positive bacteria
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. In dogs, cats, and
preruminants, chloramphenicol is well absorbed from the
intestine; in ruminants the drug is inactivated after oral
particularly useful property is the activity of newer amino-
administration. Because of its low molecular weight, lipid
glycosides against P. aeruginosa. Their bactericidal action
solubility, and modest plasma protein binding, the drug is
on aerobic gram-negative bacilli is markedly influenced
well distributed in most tissues and fluids, including the
by pH; they are most active in an alkaline environment.
34
PARTI  Introduction
and apnea. This is most likely to occur in association with
account for the failure of an aminoglycoside to kill usually
anesthesia.
susceptible microorganisms at infection sites or in abscess
cavities. Combinations of aminoglycosides with penicillins
Aminocyclitois. Spectinomycin is an aminocyclitol antibi-
are often synergistic; the concurrent administration of the
otic with a spectrum of activity and mechanism of action
newer β-lactam antibiotics with gentamicin or tobramycin
 has been used to treat serious gram-negative infections, for
similar to that of kanamycin but without the toxic effects
of the aminoglycosides. It is normally bacteriostatic and is
example, those caused by P. aeruginosa.
not particularly active on a weight basis. Its activity against
gram-negative bacteria is unpredictable because of natu-
Resistance. Most clinically important resistance is caused
rally resistant strains. Chromosomal resistance develops
 by a variety of plasmid-specified degradative enzymes
readily but does not cross-react with aminoglycosides. Plas-
 located in the periplasmic space. Certain of these enzymes
 mid resistance is uncommon but often extends to strepto.
inactivate only the older aminoglycosides (streptomycin,
mycin. The drug has most of the pharmacokinetic proper-
 O1 neomycin and kanamycin), but others are broader spec-
ties of aminoglycosides but appears to penetrate CsF better.
trum. The remarkable property of amikacin is its resistance
 It has been used in agricultural practice to treat salmonel-
to many of the enzymes that inactivate other aminoglyco-
losis and mycoplasma infections.
sides. Plasmid-mediated and transposon-based resistance
to streptomycin is widespread and commonly linked to
sulfonamides, tetracyclines, and ampicillin. Chromosomal
Macrolides. Macrolide antibiotics are bacteriostatic with
resistance to streptomycin, but not to the other aminogly.
    d 
Mycopiasma. They bind to 50s ribosome in compe-
cosides, develops fairly readily during treatment.
tition with chloramphenicol and inhibit the translo-
cation step of protein synthesis. The precise mech-
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. Aminoglycosides
anism of action is unknown. Macrolide antibiotics
are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, bind to
(azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin, tylosin, tia-
a low extent to plasma proteins, and have limited capac-
mulin, tulathromycin, and spiramycin) have action and
 '  d      
pharmacokinetic properties similar to the lincosamides.
do not readily attain therapeutic concentrations in tran-
Like the lincosamides they are lipid soluble, basic drugs that
scellular fluids, particularly cerebrospinal and ocular fluid.
are concentrated in tissue compared to serum and penetrate
Poor diffusibility is because of their low degree of lipid sol-
cells well.
ubility. Their apparent volumes of distribution are rela-
tively small, and their half-lives are short (2 h) in domestic
animals. Even though these drugs have a small volume of
Antimicrobial Activity. Erythromycin has an antibacterial
distribution, selective binding to renal tissue (kidney cor-
spectrum similar to penicillin G, but it includes activity
tex) occurs. Elimination takes place entirely by renal excre-
against penicillinase-producing coagulase-positive staphy-
Adi si np pan ue '(oey rao) on
lococci, Campylobacter, Leptospira, Bordetella, rickettsia,
excreted in the urine. Impaired renal function decreases
chlamydia, some Mycoplasma, and atypical mycobacteria.
their rate of excretion and makes adjustment of the main-
It may be bactericidal at high concentrations. Tylosin and
tenance dosage necessary to prevent accumulation with
spiramycin are less active than erythromycin against bacte-
attendant toxicity
ria but moreactive againsta broad range of Mycoplasma. Tia-
 Major changes have taken place in recommendations
mulin has better activity than the other macrolides against
for intramuscular dosage with aminoglycosides, which has
anaerobes, including Brachyspira hyodysenteriae, and is dis-
moved from three times daily to a single daily dosage.
tinguished for its remarkable activity against mycoplasmas.
This has the effect of increasing therapeutic efficacy, since
Azithromycin and clarithromycin are particularly active
 antibacterial activity depends on both peak concentrations
against nontuberculous mycobacteria. The activity of these
and total concentration, and of reducing toxicity, since the
two drugs against a variety ofintracellular bacteria depends
nephrotoxic effects depend on a threshold effect, concen-
not only on their intrinsic activity but also on the often
trations above which have no further action. This dramat-
remarkable concentration of the drugs in cells, including
ically changed understanding of aminoglycoside dosage
macrophages. Azithromycin may concentrate 200-500-
may increase the use of the less toxic members.
fold inside macrophages compared to its serum concen-
trations.
Adverse Effects.
All aminoglycosides can cause varying
degrees of ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity. The tendency
Resistance. One-step chromosomal resistance to ery-
to produce vestibular or cochlear damage varies with the
thromycin develops fairly readily, even during treatment,
drug: neomycin is the most likely to cause cochlear damage
but is generally unstable. Plasmid-mediated resistance is
and streptomycin to cause vestibular damage. Nephrotoxi-
common. Cross-resistance between erythromycin and lin-
city (acute tubular necrosis) occurs in association with pro-
cosamides and other macrolides is common. There is little
 s  sa e  
information about resistance of veterinary pathogens to
aminoglycoside (particularly gentamicin) in plasma. The
tylosin. Development of resistance to tiamulin appears to
aminoglycosides can produce neuromuscular blockage of
be relatively uncommon; organisms resistant to tiamulin
the nondepolarizing type, which causes flaccid paralysis
show one-way cross-resistance with other macrolides.
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
35
Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion. Erythromycin
stearate and estolate are well absorbed after oral adminis-
is predictable and clinical experience has established effec-
tration, but the base is not. Intramuscular injection of ery-
tive dosages for infections caused by these organisms. In
thromycin is very irritating. The absorption of tylosin from
many bacteria, however, the presence of various mech-
the intestine varies with the formulation. Tiamulin is well
anisms for acquiring resistance means that susceptibil-
absorbed. These drugs are well distributed through body tis-
ity to a particular antibacterial drug may need to be
sues and fluids, except the CsF. Tissue concentrations often
tested.
exceed serum concentrations, notably for azithromycin
and clarithromycin, which are, therefore, often dosed once
a day or less frequently. In the case of spiramycin, such tis-
Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
sue concentration is extreme and is associated with tissue
There are two general methods for antimicrobial suscepti-
 papeap si shnp asau go uoodod asei y lua
bility testing in vitro: the dilution method and the diffusion 
the body, but some is excreted through the kidney and the
method. The dilution method gives quantitative informa-
liver.
tion on drug susceptibility while thediffusion method gives
qualitative (or at best semiquantitative) information. The 
Adverse Effects. Macrolides are generally safe drugs
tests must be performed under standardized conditions.
though painful on injection. Their potential for causing
The description of a bacterium as susceptible or resistant
irreversible diarrhea in adult horses means that they should
   sd  p  
be avoided in this species. The drugs should not be given
success or failure of treatment. Quantitative information
orally to ruminants because of their potential for disturbing
on susceptibility is obtained in the laboratory under artifi-
the rumen flora.
cial circumstances, which cannot easily take into account
host defenses, the dynamics of drug disposition, or the
Lincosamides.
Lincomycin
and
clindamycin
have
dynamics of interaction of a varying drug concentration
antibacterial activity mainly against gram-positive aerobic
with a bacterium in the host environment. Nevertheless,
pa sp a  re ise e e 
infections caused by bacteria classified as resistant in sus-
the 50s ribosomal subunits at binding sites that overlap
ceptibility tests rarely respond successfully to treatment,
with those of chloramphenicol and the macrolides. They
except under exceptional circumstances. Infections caused
inhibit the peptidyl transferase reaction. The lincosamides,
by bacteria classified as susceptible can be predicted to do
lincomycin and clindamycin, are products of an actino-
so, depending, however, on the clinical circumstances, the
mycete with activity and mechanism of action similar to
nature of the infection, appropriate dosage, and a variety
that of the macrolides. Lincomycin is most commonly
of other factors, some of which are discussed later.
used in veterinary medicine, although it is less active on
a weight basis than clindamycin. Lincosamides are active
Dilution Antimicrobial Tests. Antimicrobial drugs of
against gram-positive aerobic and all anaerobic bacteria,
known potency are prepared in doubling dilutions of con-
and against mycoplasmas, but most gram-negative aerobes
centrations similar to those achievable in the tissues of
are resistant. Clindamycin is more active than lincomycin
patients given usual drug dosages. The highest dilution at
against anaerobes and may be bactericidal.
which there is no visible bacterial growth following inocu-
Chromosomal stepwise resistance develops fairly read-
lation and incubation is the MlC, which is usually less than
ily, and plasmid-mediated resistance is common. Cross-
the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) for drugs
resistance between lincosamides is complete and com-
(Table 4.1).
monly occurs also with macrolides. Lincomycin is readily
absorbed after oral or intramuscular administration. Food
delays and reduces absorption. The absorption of different
Table 4.1.
 Minimum Concentration of Tetracycline
clindamycin compounds is variable. The lincosamides are
Inhibitory to Selected Veterinary Pathogens
widely distributed in body tissues and fluids, including the
prostate and milk, but CsF concentrations are low. They
penetrate intracellularly because of their lipophilic proper-
Minimum Inhibitory
Concentration ( μug/ml)
ties. Most excretion is through the liver. The major adverse
effect of lincosamides is their ability to cause fatal C. difficile
MIC50d
MICgoa
typhlocolitis in horses, rabbits, guinea pigs, and hamsters.
In rabbits, fatal diarrhea may also result from proliferation
Bordetella bronchiseptica
2
2
Brucella canis
0.25
0.25
of C. spiroforme. Oral lincosamides at low concentrations
Corynebacterium
0.25
0.25
produce severe ruminal disturbances in adult ruminants.
pseudotuberculosis
Escherichia coli
4.0
64.0
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Antimicrobial Susceptibility and Drug
2.0
64.0
Mycoplasma canis
4.0
8.0
Dosage Prediction
Pasteurella multocida
0.5
0.5
The use of antimicrobial drugs in treating infections
aHighest MICso of 50% of isolates tested, MICgo of 90% of isolates tested. The
depends on the relation of the quantitative susceptibility
 MIC of different organisms varies with strain and species.
of the microorganism to tissue concentrations of drug. The
36
PARTI 
 Introduction
The advantage of determining quantitative susceptibil-
infection include the MIC, MBC, concentration-dependent
ity of an organism is that this information can be related to
killing effect, postantibiotic effect, sub-MIC effect, postan-
knowledge of drug concentrations in particular tissues in
tibiotic leukocyte enhancement effect, as well as first expo-
the prediction of appropriate drug dosage. In medical prac-
sure effect. For the “concentration-dependent" antimi-
tice, MIC results are usually interpreted by the system of cat-
crobials (aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones), killing is a
egories suggested by the Us Clinical Laboratory Standards
function of antimicrobial concentration relative to MlC, a
Institute (CLSI). These interpretative guidelines take into
function that may persist long after drug concentrations
account the inherent susceptibility of the organism to each
are below MlC. For these drugs, the total amount of the
drug, the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic proper-
drug above MlC ("area under the curve") is also impor-
ties of the particular drug, dosage, site ofinfection, and drug
tant. By contrast, for the “time-dependent" antimicrobials
toxicity. These categories are (1) susceptible, meaning that
(3-lactams, chloramphenicol, lincosamides, macrolides,
the infecting organism is usually inhibited by concentra-
tetracyclines, trimethoprim-sulfonamides), bacterial inhi-
tions of a particular antibiotic attained in tissues by usual
bition is a function of the time that tissue concentrations
dosage; (2) intermediately susceptible, meaning that the
exceed MIlC; these drugs, therefore, have to be dosed to
infecting organism is inhibited by blood or tissue concen-
 maintain concentrations at the site ofinfection above MIC.
trations achieved with maximum dosage; and (3) resistant,
 For these drugs, the total amount of drug above MlC is not
meaning that it is resistant to normally achievable and tol-
important since no additional killing occurs with increased 
erated concentrations of antimicrobial drugs. A fourth cat-
concentrations (and indeed for some drugs killing may
egory, flexible, has been introduced by the CLSI Subcom-
actually decrease at high concentrations). The maximum
mittee on Veterinary Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing.
interval of drug dosing should preclude resumption of bac-
This indicates the availability in the United States of the US
terial growth.
Food and Drug Administration flexible label, which allows
veterinarians to adjust the dose, within a given range, based
Factors Affecting Tissue Drug Concentrations
on the MlC of the pathogen.
Dosage. The dosage regimen is made up of the size of the
Diffusion Antimicrobial Tests. A standard concentration
dose, which is limited by drug toxicity, and the dosage
 interval, which is determined by the half-life of the drug.
of a pure culture of the pathogen is placed on appropri-
The dosage interval required to maintain therapeutic tissue
  ss dd n i  e 
concentrations of individual antibiotics are placed on the
concentrations by intravenous dosing should not exceed
agar, which is incubated for 18 h at 35 *C. The zone of inhi-
twice the half-life for most antibiotics, but giving drugs by
bition around each disc is measured and the measurement
other routes lengthens the dosage interval.
is referred to a chart that classifies the organism as being
susceptible, resistant, or intermediately susceptible to the
Routes of Administration. Antibacterial drugs can be
particular antibiotic in each disc. Standards for performing
administered by a wide variety of routes—for exam-
these tests are defined. Under standard conditions, there is
ple, intravenous, intramuscular, oral, subcutaneous, intra-
a linear inverse relationship between the diameter of the
mammary, intrauterine, or respiratory:
zone of growth inhibition and MIC. The interpretation
of zone diameters as susceptible, resistant, or intermedi-
1. Intravenous injection of a drug gives immediate
ate relates to serum drug concentrations of antibiotics in
high serum drug concentrations, which rapidly
different animal species commonly achievable under stan-
decline as the drug is distributed. Intravenous dos-
dard dosage regimens. From these drug concentrations,
ing may be the only way to exceed the MIC of some
MIC breakpoints have been selected and extrapolated to
pathogens, but frequent dosing by this route is gen-
zone diameters in providing the interpretative standards.
erally impractical in veterinary medicine.
A specialized modified diffusion system is the E test, which
2. Intramuscular injection is commonly used in veteri-
 is a modifed diffusion concentration gradient strip system
nary medicine because it gives good serum concen-
that gives quantitative results.
trations within 1-2 h of administration. The major
advantage is that intramuscular injection gives the
highest serum concentration of all routes other than
Design of Drug Dosage and Pharmacodynamic Properties
intravenous, although subcutaneous injection is a
 Pharmacokinetic descriptions of drug disposition in dif-
reasonable alternative. Drug formulation can be pre-
ferent animal species, when combined with quantitative
 pared to give slow release of the drug after intramus-
susceptibility (MlC) data and knowledge of the pharmaco-
cular injection and thus prolong dosage intervals to
dynamic properties of the antimicrobial, allow prediction 
reduce handling of animals.
of reasonable drug dosage in animals.
3.
 The oral administration of antimicrobial drugs is
 Pharmacokinetic properties include the route of admin-
limited to monogastric and preruminant animals
 istration, rate of absorption, rate of distribution, volume
and to young foals. The oral dose is generally several
of distribution, and route and rate of elimination. Pharma-
times greater than the parenteral dose because the
codynamic properties include concentration versus time
drug is less well absorbed. Although the oral route
in the tissue and other body fluids, as well as at the site of
is often the easiest way to administer drugs, it is
infection, toxicologic effect, and antimicrobial effect at the
not always the most reliable. Some drugs (amino-
site of in fection. The pharmacodynamic effects at the site of
glycosides, polymyxins) are not absorbed from the
 Chapter 4 Antimuicrobial Chemotherapy
37
intestine, others are destroyed by stomach acidity
been defined. The response of different types of infection
(benzyl penicillin), and absorption may be impaired
to antibiotics varies, and clinical experience with differ-
by food (as occurs with ampicillin, tetracyclines, lin-
ent types of infection is important in assessing response
comycin). Administration of antibiotics in water is
to treatment. In general, if no response to treatment is
nevertheless a particularly simple, convenient, and
observed after 2 days, diagnosis and treatment should be
inexpensive way to treat livestock because itinvolves
reassessed. Treatment should be continued for 48 h after
little if any handling of animals and avoids the
symptoms have resolved, depending on the severity of
expense of mixing antibiotics in feed.
infection. For serious infections, treatment should last 7-
4.
 Infections of the udder, female genital tract, exter-
10 days. Some uncomplicated infections, such as cystitis in
nal ear canal, and skin are commonly treated by local
women, have been successfully treated with single doses of
 application of antibiotics.High drug concentrations
antibiotics.
are obtained without systemic toxic effects. The con-
centration of free drug in the serum largely deter-
Use of Antibacterial Combinations. Combinations of
mines the concentration in tissue fluids, since pene-
drugs sometimes have dramatic success where individual
tration of drugs into interstitial fluids in most tissues
drugs fail. An outstanding early historical example was
 of the body is through pores in capillary endothe-
the use of penicillin-streptomycin combinations in ente-
lium.
rococcal endocarditis in humans. However, early studies of
the outcome of combination treatment of pneumococcal
Physicochemical Properties of the Drug. These character-
 meningitis in humans showed the serious clinical effects
istics largely determine the extent of the distribution of
of mixing bacteriostatic and bactericidal drugs. The impor-
a drug in the body. Most antimicrobial drugs distribute
tance of antagonistic interactions between drugs is great-
well in extravascular tissue fluids, principally the intersti-
est in those infections or patients where immune defenses
tial fluid. They penetrate capillary endothelium through
are poor (meningitis, endocarditis, or chronic osteomyeli-
pores that admit molecules with a molecular weight of
tis), or where immunodeficiencies are present, and where
less than about 1000. Passage across biological membranes
a bactericidal action is needed. If a bacteriostatic drug
such as into tissue cells or across nonfenestrated capillary
is mixed with a bactericidal drug, then the former may
neutralize the latter, which may be crucial for clearance
molecular weight, and the amount of free drug present.
of infection from certain sites or infections (meningitis,
Lipid-soluble and nonionized drugs such as the macrolides
endocarditis, chronic osteomyelitis). In other patients 01
and chloramphenicol distribute well and even concentrate
diseases, because of the complexity of the host-bacterial-
in tissue, whereas ionized and weakly lipid-soluble drugs
antimicrobial interaction, it is harder to detect either syn-
ergistic or antagonistic effects clinically, and it is likely that
These physicochemical differences largely determine the
antagonistic effects of drugs are “laboratory artifacts" with
pharmacokinetic characteristics of the drugs; thus, amino-
no clinical meaning.
glycosides and penicillins have small apparent volumes of
A drug combination is additive if the combined effect
distribution and short half-lives after intravenous injec-
of several drugs is the sum of their independent activities
tion and are eliminated through the urinary tract, whereas
measured separately, synergistic if the combined effect is
 macrolides and tetracyclines have large apparent volumes
significantly greater than their independent effects, and
of distribution and longer half-lives and are eliminated in
part through the liver. Penetration of special sites in the
dent effects. Synergism and antagonism are not absolute
body such as the central nervous system, eye, and prostate
characteristics; such interactions are often difficult to pre-
(which among other differences lack capillary pores) is only
dict, vary with bacterial species and strains, and may occur
by low molecular weight, lipid-soluble, nonionized drugs.
only over a narrow range of concentrations. No single in
vitro method detects all such interactions. The methods
Protein Binding of Drug. In general, serum protein binding
used to determine in viro interactions are generally time-
of drugs up to 90% is of little clinical importance. Amino-
consuming and are not often available in the laboratory.
glycosides and polymyxin bind extensively to intracellular
Antimicrobial combinations are frequently synergistic
constituents and thus are inactivated by pus.
if they involve the following mechanisms: (1) sequen-
tial inhibition of successive steps in metabolism (e.g.,
Excretion Mechanisms. These determine the concentra-
trimethoprim-sulfonamide combination); (2) sequential
tion of drugs in the organs of excretion. Remarkably high
inhibition of cell wall synthesis (e.g, vancomycin-
 concentrations of drugs may be achieved in urine or bile.
penicillin and mecillinam-ampicillin); (3) facilitation of
drug entry of one antibiotic by another (e.g, β-lactam-
Physiological Barriers. Anatomic-physiologic barriers in
aminoglycoside and polymyxin-sulfonamide); (4) inhibi-
the brain, CsF, eye, and mammary gland reduce the entry
tion of inactivating enzymes (e.g., ampicillin-clavulanic
of drugs from the blood. Inflammation reduces but does
acid); and (5) prevention of emergence of resistant popu-
not abolish these barriers.
lations (e.g., erythromycin-rifampin combination against
Rhodococcus equi).
Duration of Treatment. Although it is axiomatic that a
As suggested earlier, to some extent, antagonism
drug must be present for adequate time at the site of infec.
between antibiotic combinations is a laboratory artifact
tion, the variables affecting time of treatment have not
that depends on the method of measurement and is thus,
8E
PARTI  Introduction
with some exceptions, unimportant clinically. The antago
sterol of the fungal membrane, causing leakage of the
nistic effects of some combinations are, however, detected
cell contents. It is a broad-spectrum, generally fungicidal
 clinically. Antagonism may occur if antimicrobial combi-
antimicrobial. It is active against Blastomyces dermatitidis,
nations in volve the following mechanisms: (1) inhibition
Candida spp., Coccidioides immitis, Cryptococcus neoformans,
of bactericidal activity (e.g., bacteriostatic and bacteri-
Histoplasma capsulatum, and Sporothrix schenckii. Strains
cidal drugs used to treat meningitis where, depending
of filamentous fungi, though commonly susceptible, vary
 On the time-dose relation, bactericidal effects are pre-
from extreme susceptibility to resistance. Amphotericin B
a) ss   rg uod () (
must be administered intravenously. Renal toxicity is an
macrolide-chloramphenicol combinations, which are of
inevitable side effect of such treatment and must be moni-
unclear clinical significance); (3) inhibition of cell perme-
tored; the effect is reversible if the drug is stopped. Ampho-
ability mechanisms (e.g., chloramphenicol or tetracycline-
tericin is still an important drug available for treating sys-
aminoglycoside combinations, which are of unclear clini-
temic mycoses caused by dimorphic fungi and by yeasts.
cal significance); and (4) derepression of resistance enzymes
The drug is given by slow intravenous injection, usually
(e.g., new third-generation cephalosporin antibiotics with
every other day 0ver 6-10 weeks.
older β-lactam drugs).
Flucytosine. 5-flucytosine is deaminated in the fungalcell
Antifungal Chemotherapy
to 5-fluorouracil, which is incorporated into messenger
RNA to produce garbled codons and faulty proteins. It has
 a narrow-spectrum of activity, which includes many Can-
The susceptibility of fungi to different drugs is often, but
dida and most C. neoformans, but most filamentous fungi
are resistant. Resistance develops readily during treatment.
is technically complex and simple methods paralleling the
disk diffusion antibacterial susceptibility test are not gen-
Therefore, flucytosine is often used only in combination
erally available.
with other drugs, usually amphotericin.
Imidazoles.  Imidazoles interfere with the biosynthesis of
Antifungal Agents for Topical Use
Many chemicals have antifungal properties and are used
to cause leakage of cell contents. Fluconazole, itracona-
for topical treatment of fungal infections of the skin
zole, ketoconazole, and miconazole are fungistatic against
and sometimes of the mucosal surfaces. These include
a wide range of yeasts, dimorphic fungi, and dermato-
phenolic antiseptics such as hexachlorophene; iodides;
 phytes; they also have some antibacterialand antiprotozoal
quaternary ammonium antiseptics; 8-hydroxyquinoline;
activity. Ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole are
salicylamide; propionic, salicylic, and undecanoic acids;
more active than miconazole and are the drugs favored for
and chlorphenesin. Among the more effective topical
systemic administration because they can be given orally
rather than intravenously. They produce few significant
antimicrobial), clotrimazole (an imidazole compound),
adverse effects in humans and animals, but liver dam-
 age has been reported in people given ketoconazole. They
nystatin (a polyene antimicrobial), and ketoconazole and
 appear to be an effective treatment for many systemic fun-
miconazole (some of which are briefly described in Section
"Antifungal Agents for Systemic Use").
gal infections in dogs and cats, but there has been little
experience with their use in other animal species. They
 have the disadvantage of fungistatic action; prolonged
Antifungal Agents for Systemic Use
treatment may be necessary in serious infections to pre-
Historically, the major antifungal drug for systemic use,
vent the relapses that have occurred, and this is expensive.
amphotericin B, had the disadvantages of toxicity and
intravenous administration, but it did have the advantage
Resistance to Antibacterial Drugs
of fungicidal activity. The development of the imidazoles
(ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole) was a major
advance in systemic fungal therapy because of their oral
The speed and scale with which resistance has emerged
administration, relative lack of toxicity, and effectiveness.
in many bacterial pathogens has caught many veterinar-
ians and physicians by surprise. Resistance has increased
Griseofulvin. Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antimicrobial
markedly in the last two decades. In human medicine, the
that inhibits mitosis and is active only against dermato-
 antibioticresistance crisis hastaken the approaches to treat-
phytes (ringworm fungi). Resistance in some dermato-
ing some totally resistant bacterial infections back to the
phytes has been reported to develop during treatment.
preantibiotic era, including surgery such as the amputa-
Griseofulvin is effective against ringworm fungi only if
tion of infected limbs. The emergence and spread of highly
administered orally. The drug is incorporated into keratin 
in the basal cells of the epidermis and reaches the super-
and surgery.
ficial dead and parasitized keratinized epithelium through
The potential for mutation and for genetic exchange
progressive maturation of the basal cells.
between all types of bacteria, combined with the short
bacterial generation time, is of major importance in limit-
Amphotericin. Amphotericin B is a polyene antimicro.
 ing the use of antimicrobial drugs in controlling infection
bial, like nystatin, which binds ergosterol, the principal
 in animals and humans. The use of antimicrobial drugs
Chapter 4 Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
39
d oes not induce resistance in bacteria but rather eliminates
The rate of mutation differs for, and is characteristic
the susceptible bacteria and leaves the resistant bacteria
 of, each antibiotic. Sometimes, as discussed earlier, antibi-
already present in the population. The exposure of animals
otics are used in combination to overcome the possibil-
to antimicrobials is the basis of selection for the evolution
ity of mutation to resistance, since the chance of muta-
and spread of resistance genes and resistant bacteria. The
tion to resistance to two antibiotics is the product of the
geneticprocesses in volved in the developmentof resistance
chances of mutation for each antibiotic alone. In veteri-
in bacteria are precisely those involved in the evolution of
nary medicine, mutational resistance has limited the use
bacteria generally; it is natural, Darwinian, selection for
of streptomycin, novobiocin, rifampin, and, to a lesser
"fitness."
extent, erythromycin. It is increasingly limiting the use
Resistance to antimicrobial drugs can be classified as
of fluoroquinolones. Interestingly, for fluoroquinolones,
constitutive or acquired.
there are differences between species in the importance
of single-step mutations in the development of resis-
tance. For C. jejuni and P. aeruginosa, a single nucleotide
Constitutive Resistance
change at a particular site in the gyrA DNA gyrase gene
can lead to clinical resistance, whereas in E. coli, a single
      
because the cellular mechanisms required for antibiotic
nucleotide change may lead to only a slight reduction in
susceptibility are absent from the cell. Bacteria in the genus
susceptibility.
 Mycoplasma, for example, are resistant to benzyl penicillin
A chromosomal mutation resulting in multiple antibi-
G because they lack a cell wall; similarly E. coli is resistant
otic resistance has been described for clinically relevant
bacteria. The region involved, the Mar (multiple antibi-
into the cell.
otic resistance) locus, controls eflux systems resulting in
resistance to a variety of drugs without modification of the
drugs.
Acquired Resistance
Horizontal Drug Resistance Transfer. Horizontal gene
Acquired, genetically based, resistance can arise because
 transfer as a cause of antibiotic resistance is of major impor-
of mutation or, more importantly, through horizontal
tance in veterinary and human medicine. Unlike chromo-
gene transfer ("transferable drug resistance")—the acqui-
somal mutation to resistance, which occurs in individual
sition of genetic material from other bacteria by different
bacteria, transfer of genetic material produces “in fectious"
means (bacteriophages, plasmids, transformation, or trans-
resistance. The three ways in which bacteria can acquire
posons). Mutations, especially in the chromosome, tend to
foreign resistance genes are by transformation (uptake of
produce changes in bacterial cell structures, whereas hori-
naked DNA), by bacterial viruses (transduction), and by
zontal gene transfer tends to encode synthesis of enzymes
( ai) (spsed jo sua Aq Sue) uoenluo
that modify antibiotics. Mutation-based resistance is often
 Depending on the type of horizontal gene transfer, this
a gradual, stepwise proces, whereas transferable resistance
may result in transfer of resistance to several or even many
is often high-level, all-or-none, resistance.
antibiotics at one time, which can spread to and between
Important mechanisms of acquired resistance include
bacteria from the original source. The extrachromosomal
(1) enzymatic inactivation of antibiotics, (2) failure of bac-
DNA molecules responsible for most infectious antibiotic
terial permeability, (3) alteration in target receptors, (4)
resistance are usually plasmids, called R plasmids
development of bypass mechanisms in metabolic path-
The development of resistance genes including those
ways, (5) development of enzymes with low drug affinity,
associated with horizontal gene transfer is often an enor-
and (6) removing antimicrobial drugs from the cell through
mously complex combination of different mobile genetic
eflux pumps, or combinations of these mechanisms.
elements, but includes also mutation and recombination
within these elements, all of which enable bacteria possess-
Mutation to Resistance.
Mutation to resistance is a minor
ing these elements and genes to have selective advantage
problem relative to horizontal gene transfer. Mutations
("fitness") in surviving exposure to antibiotics (and some-
to antibiotic resistance are spontaneous events involving
times concurrently to disinfectants and heavy metals) to
 changes in DNA sequences uninfluenced by the presence
which they may be exposed. To add further complexity,
of antibiotics. Such mutations, especially in the chromo-
these same transferable elements may also acquire other
some, may lead to other changes that leave the cell at a
determinants that enhance their fitness, such as the ability
disadvantage so that, in the absence of antibiotic selection,
to form biofilms in the case of hospital-associated Entero-
these mutants may gradually be lost. Mutation to antibi-
coccus species.
otic resistance can be dramatic, as in the case of single-step
mutation to streptomycin resistance where MlC increases
Plasmids. Plasmids that carry DNA responsible for resis-
a thousandfold, or gradual, as in the case of chromoso-
tance can reproduce themselves within a cell and spread to
mal resistance to penicillin where a series of mutational
other cells by conjugation. Plasmids themselves are com-
events may gradually increase the MlC of the organisms.
monly partly constructed from transposons and integrons
These differences occur because, when antibiotics affect
One target site, chromosomal mutation is a single-step pro-
 grons" immediately below).
cess, whereas when several targets are affected, mutation to
Conjugation refers toplasmid-mediated transfer of resis-
resistance is a multistep process.
tance (Figure 4.2). In this common process of gene transfer,
40
PARTI
 Introduction
FIGURE 4.2.
Mechanisms ofhorizontal gene transfer ofresistance in bacteria.
IS1
S7
Kan
1S6
IS1
Transposon
Resistance
plasmid
Transposon
IS6
Integron
Beta-lactamasegene
1S3
insertion sequence, IS6 L
TetA
S3
Amp
Gen
Multiple antibiotic resistance plasmid
Plasmid
Bacteriophage
 conjugation
(transduction)
Plasmid DNA
Complimentary
strand made
 in recipient
Single stranded
DNA transferred
Chromosomal DNA
 to recipient,
probably in
Naked DNA
a pitus
(transformation)
Donor
Recipient
a donor bacterium synthesizes a sex pilus, which attaches
diverse sources often possess identical antibiotic inactivat-
 to a recipient bacterium in a mating process, resulting in 
 ing genes. Because of the widespread nature of insertion
transfer of copies of plasmid genes to the recipients. The
sequences in many bacteria, there is essentially no gene
donor retains copies of the plasmid but the recipient has
 in bacterial genomes (including genes that encode resis-
now become a potential donor. Conjugation can occur not
tance) that cannot be mobilized and moved to other bac-
only between species of the same genera but also across
 terial genomes as a transposon. In addition, because of the
 genera and families, so that similar plasmids can be found
 DNA homology between insertion sequences, DNA recom-
in a wide range of unrelated bacteria. The large intestine is
bination events frequently modify resistance plasmids that
a site where bacterial conjugation through resistance plas-
 can combine to add DNA with additional resistance genes.
mids commonly occurs.
Plasmids may also carry integrons encoding for resistance
Much plasmid-mediated resistance, and indeed some
(as discussed later in this section on “horizontal gene trans-
chromosomally mediated resistance, is associated with
fer"). Conjugative transposons may cause bacteria to con-
transposons (Figure 4.2). The simplest form of transposon 
 jugate, in the way that conjugative plasmids will.
is a resistance gene flanked on either side by an insertion
A well-known example of a resistance gene spread by
sequence, the smallest form of mobile genetic element.
 plasmids is the blacay.2 gene encoding resistance to third-
These short DNA sequences known as transposons ("jump-
generation cephalosporins. This gene, which likely origi-
ing genes") can transpose from plasmid to plasmid, from
nated from the chromosome ofa Citrobacter spp., has spread
plasmid to chromosome, or from chromosome to plas-
 among related plasmids within the Enterobacteriaceae, for
 mid. A transposon copy usually remains at the original
example, to Salmonella serovars and to E. coli. The plasmids
site. The frequency of transposition is characteristic of the
particular transposon and bacterium. The importance of
resistance gene has disseminated rapidly among commen-
transposition as a key element in resistance transfer is that
saland pathogenic members ofthe Enterobacteriaceae. The
transposition is independent of the recombination pro-
emergence of this resistance has been encouraged by the use
cess of the bacterial cell; homology with the interacting
 of third-generation cephalosporin antibiotics in animals in
 DNAis not required. Because of transposons, plasmids from
cattle and in chickens.
Chapter 4  Antimicrobial Chemotherapy
41
Bacteriophage.  Bacterial viruses  (bacteriophages) can
Acquired resistance to penicillins  is frequent  in
transfer resistance genes originating in the chromosome or
coagulase-positive staphylococci, and recently methicillin -
in plasmids between bacteria in a process known as trans-
duction (Figure 4.2). An example is transfer of β-lactamase
 pseudintermedius infections have emerged in domestic ani-
genes from penicillin-resistant to previously penicillin-
mals on a global basis. Acquired multiple antibiotic resis-
susceptible staphylococci. The importance of transduc-
tance to many common antibiotics seriously limits their
tion in spread of antimicrobial resistance may have been
use in members of the family Enterobacteriaceae such as
underestimated, although the narrow specificity of bacte-
Salmonella and E. coli. In animals, acquired resistance is
riophages has likely limited their role.
increasingly observed in nonenteric bacteria such as Borde-
tella, Haemophilus, and Pasteurella, and has been identified
Iransformation. Transformation is a special type of hor-
 in virtually every pathogenic bacterial genus as well as in
izontal gene transfer that occurs in some bacterial
the normal flora.
pathogens (Figure 4.2). Transformation describes a process
There is to some extent a causal relationship between
by which DNA released by dying bacteria is taken up from
antimicrobial drug use and the development of resistance
the environment by other usually closely related bacteria
but its importance varies with different pathogens and
and then recombines during DNA replication to produce
essentially reflects their ability to adapt to changing cir-
novel forms of existing genes. The best-known example of
cumstances, that is, to evolve, as well as to colonize differ-
this is the emergence of penicillin resistance in Streptococ-
ent animal species.
cus pneumoniae, an important human pathogen, through
The development of resistance is particularly notable
the development of novel PBPs.
among enteric bacteria in animals. The intestine is a major
site of transfer of antibiotic resistance because of the vast
Other Genetic Elements Associated with Resistance.
numbers of bacteria present and their ability to transfer
resistance genes horizontally, the use of oral antimicro-
Integrons. Integrons are increasingly recognized
las
widespread genetic elements associated with multiple drug
of these bacteria through focally contaminated environ-
resistance in gram-negative enteric bacteria. An integron is
ments. Within the intestine, “promiscuous" plasmids may
 a gene capture and dissemination system, consisting of an
transfer resistance between bacteria within families of bac-
integrase gene and a site-specific integration site ("gene
teria, for example, between members of the Enterobacteri-
capture") into which the integrase can insert antimicrobial
aceae such as from E. coli to Salmonella or Proteus, or even
drug resistance “cassettes" ("gene dissemination"). Over
between bacteria belong to unrelated taxonomic families
nine types of integrons and over 60 different gene cas-
such as E. coli to Bacteroides. The emergence and spread
settes have been identified in gram-negative enteric bac-
of drug resistance in Enterobacteriaceae and other oppor-
teria, with some integrons containing as many as seven dif-
tunist infections is increasingly well documented in indi-
ferent resistance gene cassettes. In addition, some bacteria
vidual companion animals such as dogs, and may reflect in
may carry cassettes in their genomes that have not incorpo-
some cases infections acquired from their owners through
rated into integrons but are capable of so doing. Integrons
antibiotic use in human medicine.
(with or without resistance-gene cassettes) may be found
Where multiple drug resistance genes are present on a
in the chromosome, in plasmids, or in transposons.
plasmid or an integron, the use of any antimicrobial to
Genomic Resistance islands.
 Genomic resistance islands
help maintain the entire collection of resistance genes. Plas-
are large chromosomal regions that contain multiple
 mids may gradually accumulate resistance genes through
resistance genes, mostly associated with different inte-
acquisition by their integrons of resistance cassettes 0r
grons, and which can be moved between bacteria by plas-
through acquisition of transposon-mediated resistance
mids. A well-known example is the Salmonella genomic
genes.
island 1 associated with multidrug resistance in S. serovar
Typhimurium DT104, but also found in strains of other
Intestinal E cofi. Extensive study of antimicrobial resis-
multidrug resistant serovars, as well as in other Enterobac-
tance in intestinal E. coli in food animals has provided
teriaceae.
considerable information on the mechanisms and ecol-
ogy of antimicrobial resistance. These studies have shown
the relationship between the extent of resistance and the
Clinical Importance of Antimicrobial Drug Resistance
degree of antimicrobial use. For example, resistance in
Acquired drug resistance has become a major problem in
E. coli from adult ruminants at pasture is slight, whereas
some pathogenic bacteria of veterinary importance and has
it is pronounced in intensively reared young animals
been described as a crisis in human medicine. It is common
where antibiotic use is common and the intestinal flora
in many bacterial species, although notably some bacteria,
is immature. As a result of plasmid-mediated resistance,
particularly gram-positive bacteria such as many strepto-
these E. coli may be resistant to many clinically use-
cocci and corynebacteria, have remained highly suscepti-
ful drugs. Among enterotoxigenic E. coli from farm ani-
ble to commonly used drugs. As a result, diseases produced
mals, plasmid-mediated resistance to tetracyclines, sul-
by these bacteria have in many cases declined considerably
fonamides, and streptomycin is now practically univer-
in importance, to be replaced by infections produced by
sal. Antibiotic-resistance encoding plasmids in enterotox-
bacteria that have the ability to evolve more readily.
igenic E. coli in swine and calves may also include genes
42
PARTI
 Introduction
for virulence determinants such as toxin production o1
Hospital-Acquired
Resistant
 Infections. Acquired
adhesins.
 antimicrobial resistance in resident hospital bacteria is
Within the intestine, R plasmids are found in E. coli
 si  s  n d r 
 and in the more dominant anaerobic flora of the large
recognized in veterinary hospitals. In human medicine,
bowel. Within a short time of treating an animal with an
hospital-associated infections with multiresistant bacteria
 antibiotic, the E. coli and much of the anaerobe population
belonging to the so-called ESKAPE group can become
become resistant to that antibiotic, principally because of
a major problem. The ESKAPE bacteria are Enterococcus
selection of resistant strains but also because of enhanced
faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Kebsiella species, Acineto-
transfer of R plasmids. In the absence of antimicrobials,
bacter baumannii, P. aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species.
conditions in the large bowel seem generally to prevent the
transfer of R factors. Short-term oral use of antimicrobials
 infections but hospitals are inevitably a breeding ground
is followed by high levels of E. coli resistance, which fall
for the development and selection of resistance in bac-
once the antimicrobials are removed because the majority
terial pathogens. There is a causal relationship between
of R plasmid bearing E. coli are not good intestinal coloniz-
antimicrobial use in hospitals and the development of
ers. However, the continuous presence of antimicrobials
resistance in bacteria. Colonization of patients by resistant
is associated with extensive resistance, which persists long
opportunist bacteria is hard to prevent because of shared
after the antimicrobial is removed since resistant E. coli that
air spaces and environment, utensils, and veterinary
 are good intestinal colonizers have been selected.
staff. In addition, patients with serious and sometimes
Salmonella. Multiple antimicrobial resistance is a
edly treated with numerous broad-spectrum antimicrobial
major problem in selected serovars and in individual
drugs, thus removing the normal colonization resistance
strains within serovars of Salmonella, including serovar
of the body, including the large intestine, provided by
Typhimurium. It is often the result of a chromosomally
the normal microbial flora. Under such circumstances
incorporated genomicisland containingintegrons. Among
these patients can readily be colonized by bacteria that are
S. Typhimurium strains, clones of certain phage types such
either intrinsically resistant to many antimicrobial drugs
as DT104 are characterized by the presence of a multiple-
(ESKAPE group) or that have acquired resistance.
 antimicrobial resistant genomic island, which has spread
to other serovars. The extent of resistance can be marked
 Public Health Aspects of Antimicrobial Resistance
 among calf isolates because the extensive use of antimi-
 in Animal Pathogens
crobials in some types of calf rearing and because the
nature of salmonellosis in calves apparently provides an
The use of antimicrobial agents in animals can result in
opportunity for the development and spread of resistant
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria and their resistance genes
Salmonella. Multiply resistant and more virulent clones ofS.
reaching the human population through a variety of routes
Typhimurium have a history of emerging to spread within
Figure 4.3). The scale of the contribution via these routes
some cattle populations, and to spread from cattle into
has not been determined and indeed, because of the com-
 other species including humans, and then to decline in
plexity of resistance in bacterial pathogens, is hard to
importance. For example, the multiply resistant clone DT
determine.
104 disseminated widely through cattle on a global basis
Most antimicrobial resistance in human pathogens
before declining after a decade. This clone had a region
comes from antimicrobial use in human medicine. How-
containing florfenicol and tetracycline resistance encod-
ever, antimicrobial-resistant bacteria of animal origin, such
ing gene flanked by two integrons carrying a β-lactamase
as Enterococcus spp. E. coli and Salmonella, can colonize
and streptomycin resistance gene cassette. This cluster of
the intestines of people. Heavily exposed humans (e.g,
genes formed part of the larger, distinctive, Salmonella
farmers whouse feed containing antimicrobials, slaughter-
 genomic island 1, which may have been a plasmid inte-
house workers, cooks, and other food handlers) often have
grated into the chromosome. This island or its variants
 a higher incidence of resistant E. coli in their feces than the
has also been identified in other Salmonella serovars, such
general population. Contamination of meat by intestinal
as S. Agona and S. Newport. Salmonella carrying these
bacteria at slaughter is extensive and an important route
multidrug resistance genes have caused serious infections
by which resistant bacteria reach people. Although many
in people.
of these bacteria are nonpathogenic, many pathogenic bac-
As
discussed
earlier, use ofthird-generation
terial species from the intestines of animals cause zoonotic
cephalosporins in farm animals has been associated
infections in humans (e.g, Salmonella and C. jejuni) and
with selection of Salmonella strains carrying plasmids
these infections may be harder to treat because of acquired
encoding the blacmy.2 gene encoding resistance to these
resistance. The nonpathogenic bacteria ofanimals acquired
antibiotics. For example, in Canada and the United States,
by humans are a potential source of resistance genes for
use of ceftiofur injection of eggs to prevent navel infections
human pathogenic bacteria other than the zoonotic bac-
has resulted in selection of ceftiofur-resistant S. Heidelberg
teria. These bacteria may reach humans not only through
as well as ceftiofur-resistant E. coli. These resistant S.
the food chain but also through water contaminated by
Heidelberg have reached and caused serious illnesses in
 resistant bacteria of animal origin.
people. The significance of this is that third-generation
The topic of the contribution of antimicrobial use
cephalosporins are drugs of choice for serious Salmonella
in food animals, particularly for growth promotion and
infections in infants and pregnant women.
 disease prophylactic purposes, to resistance in human
Chapter 4
Antimucrobial Chemotherapy
FIGURE 4.3.
Aquaculture
Sea/
 Swimming 
lakes
Drinking
water
Drinking 
Rivers and
water
streams
Industrial &
household
antibacterial
Farme ffluents and
 chemicals
manure spreading 
Wildlife
Rendering
Dead
Offal
stock
Vegetation,
seed crops, fruit
Food
Human
animals
Animal 
Sheep
Cattle
Commercial
Handling
Community
feeds
abattoirs /
Meat
preparation
Hospitalized 
-Urban 
Swine
 processing 
B.ny-
Veal
Poultry
consumption
plants
calves
Other
farmed
Extended
livestock
care 
facilities
Companion
animals
Direct
Contact
qfter Linton AH (1977),modified by Irwin RJ
pathogens has been the subject of repeated review over
all antimicrobial drugs as growth promoters and disease
many years, but the last 15 years has seen the issue subject
prophylactics for many years, in order to bring its prac-
to the most intense scrutiny. The major driving force for
tices into line with those of other EU countries either it
the renewed debate on the prudence of using antimicro-
had to change its regulations or it had to change to those
bial drugs in food animals for growth promotion and dis-
of the EU. It used the VRE evidence to persuade the EU to
ease prophylactic purposes has been the alarming increase
 change policies on the use of antimicrobial growth promot-
in resistance in human pathogens, particularly those caus-
ers, most of which (avoparcin, bacitracin, spiramycin, and 
ing "community-acquired" (e.g., S. pneumoniae) infections
tylosin) were banned in Europe in late 1999. A similar ban
rather than hospital-acquired infections. Resistance has left
has occurred in Australia.
the hospital to enter the community. This has led to a total
In the United States, there has also been extensive reex-
reappraisal of the use of all antimicrobial drugs in all cir-
amination of the use of antimicrobials in animals. One
cumstances. Another factor driving the change is evidence
notable decision in 2001 was to reverse the approval of flu-
from Europe that vancomycin-resistant E. faecium (VRE),
oroquinolones for treatment of E. coli septicemia in chick-
a serious and essentially untreatable hospital-acquired
ens because of the rapid development of fluoroquinolone-
pathogen of immunocompromised human patients, was
resistance in C. jejuni. It was estimated that as many as
being selected in intensively reared farm animals by the
14 000 people annually treated for campylobacteriosis had
use of avoparcin, a glycopeptide antimicrobial drug used 
their treatment affected because they were infected with
as a growth promoter and disease prophylactic. These
resistant bacteria acquired from fluoroquinolone-treated
VREs were almost universal in the intestines of treated
chickens. In 2003, the Center for Veterinary Medicineof the
animals and were found in a small proportion of healthy
US Food and Drug Administration developed a guidance
 humans in Europe. Paradoxically, they were not present
document for the evaluation of the impact of resistance as
in healthy humans in the United States, where the drug
was not used. The European findings were a demonstra-
The document takes into account the relative importance
tion of the scale of the movement of resistant bacteria
of different antimicrobial drug classes in human medicine
from animals to humans, which was clearly measurable.
and analyzes the risks of production of resistance and its
Another factor was the entry of Sweden into the European
aesn pasodod a uo sda 'snu Aq uosn
Union (EU) in 1999. Since Sweden had banned the use of
of the drug. In 2010, the Center for Veterinary Medicine
44
PARTI  Introduction
 associations have published prudent-use guidelines for the
moted two principles, the first that use of antibiotics in
optimal use of antimicrobial agents that are readily avail-
animals be limited to prevention, treatment, and control
able on their web sites. Prudent use is defined as optimizing
of disease (i.e., not for growth promotion) and that all use
the effcacy of antimicrobial drug use while minimizing
in feed be under veterinary oversight (i.e., not available
the development and spread of resistance. Although these
over-the-counter).
s as ae  ados  a are s
 It seems likely that antimicrobial drugs important in
human medicine will be removed from use as growth pro-
that are sometimes case specific. Further refinement of such
moters or long-term disease prophylactics throughout the
 guidelines will occur into the future and are part of a global
world. This is in keeping with the important prudent-use
 movement of antibiotic stewardship in medicine and vet-
principle that antimicrobial drugs should only be used
erinary medicine. The topic of antibiotic stewardship is
when the benefits are clear and substantial.
beyond the scope of this book, but includes appropriate
choice of antibiotics and optimal dosage based on suscepti-
 bility and understanding of pharmacokinetic and pharma-
Control of Antimicrobial Resistance
codynamic principles, implementing effective infection
Avoiding the use of a drug is the best way to control antimi-
 control measures to limit spread of bacteria, and finding
crobial resistance. Most major national veterinary medical
alternatives to antibiotics in controlling infection.
Vaccines
RONALD D. SCHULTZ AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
Introduction
Activated macrophages are mononuclear phagocytic
cells that have come in contact with interleukin 1 (IL-1) and
Vaccines are substances that are used to elicit immune
inteferon gamma (INF-). Such cells haveincreased phago-
responses to prevent or minimize disease produced by
cytic and enzymatic activity, contain increased amounts of 
infectious agents. Vaccines can be composed of the infec-
nitric oxide, and have increased production of cytokines,
tious agent itself (either live or killed), a portion of the
such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-1, and increased
agent that induces a protective immune response (toxoid
expression of major histocompatibility complex class I
or subunit vaccine), or a product of the agent. Products
(MHC-1). This increase in activity is thought to be respon-
containing a killed bacterial agent are more properly called
sible for the destruction of infectious agents that non-
bacterins. Products that have toxic activities are called
activated mononuclear cells cannot destroy following
toxins, and toxins that have been inactivated are called
uptake. Some term this immune state (i.e., activation of
toxoids.
 macrophages) cellular hypersensitivity.
To be effective, vaccines should stimulate an immune
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize affected and
response that ideally prevents infection but, at the very
in fected host cells (e.g., cells infected with viruses or bacte-
least, should interfere with the development of severe
ria). In so doing, these lymphocytes secrete substances that
disease.
result in the death of the affected host cell. If the affected
host cell contained an infectious agent, that agent would
now be either destroyed or liberated from the cell and be in
Humoral Immunity
contact with other host immune effectors (e.g., antibodies,
complements, and activated macrophages).
topes on the surface of the infectious agent and/or one
Generation of the Immune Response
of its products. By binding to the surface of an infectious
agent, antibodies interfere with attachment to host target
Antigens that are processed by antigen-processing cells via
cells by stearic interference and/or by changing the charge
the exogenous pathway elicit antibodies. Thus, extracellu-
 or hydrophobicity of the surface of the agent (enhancing
lar bacteria (live or killed), inactivated viral particles, por-
phagocytosis by multiple cell types), and trigger the com-
tions (subunits) ofa virus, and products are processed by the
plement cascade generating products that are opsonic (lie
antibodies) and products that are damaging to agents that
system in context of MHC-1I by an antigen-presenting cell
have surface membranes. Antibodies that bind to products
that secretes IL-1 and little, if any, IL-12. T helper cells (TH2
of infectious agents can block the attachment of the prod-
subset of CD4 lymphocytes) respond to this stimulus by
uct to receptors on cellular targets and/or change the con-
secreting cytokines that trigger an antibody response (IL-4,
figuration of the product resulting in a change in binding
IL-5, and IL-13).
affinity.
Some infectious agents replicate within cells. If the agent
multiplies within a mononuclear phagocyte, then antigens
Cell-Mediated Immunity
are processed by way of the exogenous and/or endoge-
nous pathways (see below). As outlined above with extra-
cellular antigens, antigens of intracellular agents are pre-
Cell-mediated immunity (CMl) is an immune response
sented in context of MHC-Il, but the antigen-presenting
that results in the generation of "activated" macrophages
cell secretes IL-1 and IL-12. IL-12 stimulates T helper cells
and/or specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. This aspect of the
(TH1 subset) while turningoffcells oftheTh2 subset. TH cells
immune response concerns agents that live inside of cells,
secrete INF-Y, resulting in the activation of mononuclear
which are thus protected from interaction with the ele-
phagocytic cels. Some ofthese “intracellular” agents (some
ments of the humoral components of the system.
viruses, bacteria, and fungi) replicate in the cytoplasm of
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
45
46
PARTI  Introduction
 mononuclear phagocytic cells. Antigens from these agents
tors activate macrophages and increase efficiency of anti-
are also processed by the endogenous pathway, as are anti-
gen processing.
gens liberated within nonphagocytic cells, so that epitopes
are presented to the immune system in context of MHC-1.
Epitopes presented in this fashion are recognized by CD8
Viral Vaccines
cytotoxic lymphocytes. These lymphocytes function by
lysing infected targets, that is, cells expressing epitope-
Immunization of animals with viral vaccines is critical to
MHC-I complexes.
the prevention of many viral diseases. The basis of an effec-
tive vaccine is its ability to induce an immune response
o1 responses capable of eliciting protection to subsequent
DNA Vaccines
field exposure to path ogenic viruses. A multitude of vaccine
 preparations have been developed and used over the years,
DNA vaccines are those in which the gene encoding
with variable success. The success of a potential vaccine is
the antigen in question is inserted into a plasmid vec-
tor that has a strong promoter (e.g., cytomegalovirus
nomics also determine vaccine design, development, and
ultimate production on a commercial basis.
will result in expression of the target gene, a termina-
Various approaches to vaccination have been employed
 go s e  ( od) as 
over the years. These include (1) administering a live viru-
phosphate-guanosine (CpG) motifs. The function of the
lent virus in an anatomical site so that the target tissue or tis-
CpG motif (a motif common in bacterial genomes) is to
sues are not infected, (2) administering a live virulent virus
direct the antigen-processing cell to secrete lymphokines
to animals at a time of relative resistance to disease expres-
that favor Thi lymphocytes. The construct is administered
sion, (3) concurrent administration of a live virulent virus
in any number of ways (intramuscular, intradermally, upon
and immune serum, which no longer is acceptable for obvi-
a mucosal surface), but intramuscularly is the most com-
ous reasons,(4) use of live avirulent viral strains (e.g., atten-
mon. Myocytes that become transfected serve as antigen-
uated or “modified live” viruses), and (5) use of inactivated 
presenting cells and express antigens in context of MHC-1
viruses. In recent years, additional approaches to vaccine
(turn on CD8 T lymphocytes). It is unclear how an anti-
development have become available. These include sub-
gen is expressed in context of MHC-1I (for CD4 T lym-
unit, syn theticpeptide, and recombinantproducts. Regard -
phocytes). Possibilities include MHC-1I antigen-presenting
less of the vaccine type, the desired result is to induce
cells (macrophages/dendritic cells/B lymphocytes) becom-
immune responses specific for viral antigens expressed on
ing transfected, or transfected myocytes transferring
the virion surface or on the surface of infected cells, so that
the plasmid construct to MHC-11 antigen-presenting
the immunized host is immune when exposed to the viru-
cells.
lent virus. The rational development of an efficacious viral
 DNA vaccines have been experimentally successful in
vaccine requires an understanding of viral pathogenesis, of
eliciting protective immune responses (both humoral and
protective immune responses induced following infection,
cellular) to a variety of bacterial, viral, and protozoal
 and of their protein specificities. The latter point is of obvi-
microorganisms. Commercial DNA vaccines are now avail-
 ous importance for developing recombinant and synthetic
able for vaccinating horses against the West Nile virus and
peptide vaccines.
as an oral therapeutic vaccine for dogs to treat malignant
 Concerning pathogenesis, the following three general
melanomas.
types of viral in fections occur:
Adjuvants
1. Infections that are confined to the mucosal surfaces
of the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. In such
Adjuvants are used to influence the types of immune
instances, local immunity in the form of a secretory
antibody (e.g., IgA) is important. The role of CMI is
    e n   
enced at various stages, depending upon the adjuvant.
less well characterized in such infections.
2. Infections that begin at mucosal surfaces but then
Some adjuvants function as depots, so that the antigen
cause a systemic infection with viremia, and sub-
is slowly released over an extended period of time to max-
imize the immune response. Examples include water/oil
sequent infection of distant target tissues. In these
infections, both immunity at the mucosal surface
emulsions, minerals/salts (bentonite and aluminum), and
 and systemic immunity are important.
 3. Infections that gain direct entry into the host's cir-
ity to the processing step in the initiation of the immune
response. Examples include “immune-stimulating com-
culation via insect bite (arthropod-borne viruses),
plexes" (ISCOMs) composed of cholesterol-phospholipid
inadvertent inoculation, or a traumatic break in
 an epithelial surface. In such infections, systemic
structures that contain the immunogen, and liposomes
 immunity is the primary line of defense.
s a sdn sa l, (sisa 
various cytokines as adjuvants can influence immune
responses. For example, IL-1 activates Tlymphocytes, IL-12
These mechanisms of viral infection and subsequent
and INF- influence the helper T lymphocyte subset selec-
dissemination must be considered in vaccine develop-
tion, and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating fac-
ment. Modified live (attenuated) and inactivated (killed)
Chapter 5
Vaccines
47
Table 5.1.
Types of Viral Vaccines
The basis of attenuation of many modifed live virus vac-
cines, however, is poorly characterized, and the possibility
1. live viral vaccines
of reversion to virulence after growth in the natural host is
a. Attentuation for low virulence of viruses that produce natural
always a concern.
diseases.
Conditional lethal mutants have been generated with
b. Host-range mutants—-use of different viral strains infecting different
the intent that such viruses would exhibit limited repli-
host species that are related antigenically to the virus strain that
cation in the host and so serve as vaccines. Temperature-
 produces a natural disease in the original host.
C. Recombinant heterologous viral vector vaccines—-construction of an
phenotypically selected on the basis of temperature. Cold-
Jo (suahue anaioud sassadxa ieut hueuiguoa pea snoau!
another virus that produces a natural disease. Construction of a
sively lower temperatures, the end product being inca-
recombinant virus with insertion of genes with known antiviral
activities or with known immunoregulatory functions.
pable of replication at normal body temperatures. The cold -
d. Recombinant homologous viral strains attenuated by targeted 
mutations on deletions of genes coding for specific virulence factors
genes encoding virulence and are relatively more stable
that produce a natural disease.
than temperature-sensitive mutants.
e. Nonreplicating recombinant viral vector vaccines capable of
 A unique approach to expression of cloned viral genes
replicating to high titer in vitro but unable to grow efciently in vivo.
is the use of heterologous viral expression vectors. The vac-
2. Inactivated viral vaccines
cinia virus has widely been used for many years as an infec-
a. Inactivated viral vaccines by chemical methods.
tious vaccine expression vector because it is a virus that
b. Inactivated viral vaccines by physical methods.
has widely been used as a human vaccine and the fact
C. Purified viral antigens using monoclonal antibody immunoaffinity
 dhromatography.
that at least 22 kilobases of the vaccinia genome can be
deleted without loss of infectivity. The latter attribute pro-
d. Cloned viral protein subunit vaccines produced in eukaryotic or
 prokaryotic cells by recombinant DNA technology.
vides ample space in which to insert foreign cloned genes
e. Synthetic viral polypeptide vaccines representing immunologically 
urpident domains of viral surface antigens.
eign viral genes for the purpose of designing multivalent
f. Direct injection of plasmid DNA encoding viral protective antigens
and multiviral vaccines. A major potential advantage of
into tissues in vivo.
such infectious vaccine vectors is the potential for induc-
9. Use of anti-idiotypic antibodies as antigens to induce an antiviral
tion of both humoral and cellular immunity by inserting
antibody response.
expressed viral proteins into the host cell membrane in
context with histocompatibility antigens.
Construction of deletion mutants is another potential
mechanism of virus attenuation; thus, the selective dele-
virus vaccines dominate the veterinary vaccine market
tion of genes that express factors for virulence, persistence,
(Table 5.1).
 or immunosuppression can often be accomplished with-
out compromising viral replication . This approach requires
a thorough understanding of the virus and the pathogen-
Live Attenuated Viral Vaccines
esis of the respective disease. A deletant vaccine has been
developed to prevent pseudorabies in swine. The thymi-
The attenuated viral vaccines include artificially attenu-
dine kinase gene is deleted in the pseudorabies vaccine
ated (modified live) strains of viruses or naturally occurring
strain, which is able to inducean immune response without
viruses with reduced virulence for the host. The origin of
producing disease. Furthermore, the genes encoding virus
these naturally attenuated isolates may be the natural host,
glycoproteins gpl, gplll, or gpx are deleted in the vaccine
01 a closely related virus isolated from a different host; for
strain. The presence of an antibody to these specific virus
example, the cowpox virus was initially used to vaccinate
antigens can be used to differentiate field-strain infected
humans against smallpox. The major requirements of such
animals from vaccinated animals, an important advance
an approach are that it induces adequate immunity and
in defining the epidemiology and control of this disease.
that the attenuation (lack of virulence) ofthe vaccine strain
These vaccines are referred to as DIVA (differentiation of
be stable. The majority of vaccines currently used today
infected from vaccinated animals) vaccines.
in veterinary medicine are attenuated viruses. The most
Nonreplicating recombinant viral vectors that are not
common approach to viral attenuation is the developmen t
capable of replication in vivo but that can express foreign
 of host-range mutants. Other approaches include develop-
proteins during abortive infections can induce humoral
ment of temperature-sensitive and cold-adapted mutants
and CMl in immunized hosts. Experimental studies show
(missense mutations), deletion mutants, and recombinant
that dogs or cats are resistant to wild-type rabies viral chal-
viruses.
lenge when inoculated with avian pox-rabies glycopro-
 Host-range mutants are developed by serial passage in
tein recombinant viruses. There are effective commercial
a host system different from the natural host to be vacci-
recombinant canarypox-vectored vaccines for canine dis-
nated, usually laboratory animals, embryonated chicken
temper (hemagglutinin and fusion protein antigens), for
eggs, or, increasingly, cell cultures. Upon serial passage in
and for the feline leukemia virus, and rabies (glycoprotein
these systems, viruses often lose their virulence for the nat-
G) vaccine for cats. This type of viral vaccine has the distinct
ural host due to accumulation of mutations in the viral
advantage of being safe even in the immunosuppressed
genome that result in changes in virus-specified proteins.
host.
48
PARTI
Introduction
Table 5.2.
 Relative Advantages and Disadvantages of Live
the attenuated virus in the environment, transmission to
versus Inactivated Virus Vaccines
susceptible species may occur.
A major concern in the use of attenuated viruses is rever-
Criteria
Live
Inactivated
 sion to virulence. This phenomenon has plagued vaccine
Long
Short
development and licensing over the years. Reversion to vir-
Immunity
ulence is a more serious possibility with those viruses that
Adjuvant
No
Yes
enjoy a wide host range or that are biologically transmitted
Safety
Variable
Usually very safe
by arthropod vectors. While the virus may appear stable
Complications
 Reversion to virulence.
Sensitization
(potential)
spread to 
in the host for which the vaccine was intended, reversion
susceptible animals
to virulence may occur in the vector or in other species.
Potential
 Possible
Minimal
Vaccination of pregnant animals may also be of concern,
 contamination
Interference
 Possible
Minimal
ing fetus. Vaccinating animals with reduced immunologic
1503
Minimal
 Significant 
responsiveness can result in expression of clinical disease
Immunomodulation 
Not required
Required
and death.
Vaccine marker
 Possibly genetic
 Serologic marker
Additional negative features of attenuated virus vac-
marker 
Stabiity 
Poor
cines include (1) the potential for reassortment (viruses
Good
with segmented genomes) or recombination between vac-
CMI induction 
Yes
No
Local secretory
Yes
No
cine strains or with wild-type viruses to create new viruses,
 immunity
(2) lack of a vaccine marker for serologic differentiation of
Reassortment;
Possible
No
vaccine and wild-type virus exposure, (3) development of
 recombination
persistent infections, (4) poor stability of vaccine viruses,
 Persistent 
Yes
No
especially in hot tropical areas, and (5) replication interfer-
ence between viruses in multivalent vaccines. Viruses that
exhibit continued antigenic drift present another dilemma
since new isolates must be continually attenuated and
There are advantages and disadvantages to all vaccines
tested for safety and efficacy.
including the attenuated viral vaccines. Table 5.2 lists the
general characteristics of live attenuated as compared to
killed viral vaccines. A major advantage of live viral vac-
Inactivated Virus Vaccines
cines is their ability to replicate within the host and thereby
elicit both humoral and cellular immune responses. In the
Many inactivated vaccines have been developed for
case of viral infections attacking primarily the mucosal sur-
use in veterinary medicine. Virus inactivation has most
faces of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, adminis-
commonly employed formalin, β-propiolactone, acetyl
tering attenuated viruses by nasal or oral routes stimulates
ethyleneimine, or binary ethyleneimine. Additional meth-
local immunity. Therefore, local routes of administration
ods include ultraviolet light, gamma irradiation, psoralen
are often more effective than systemic administration. Eco-
nomic considerations also favor attenuated vaccines due to
tivated virus vaccines is safety--many potential disadvan-
 the lower cost of production and the typical absence of a
tages of live virus vaccines are eliminated since no virus
requirement for adjuvants, immunopotentiating agents,
replication occurs. Viruses for inactivation have been pro-
and the need for multiple immunizations.
 duced in laboratory animals, embryonated chicken eggs,
While attenuated viral vaccines continue to be the most
and, most commonly today, in cell cultures. From an eco-
commonly used veterinary vaccines, there are serious dis-
nomic viewpoint, viruses that grow to high titer in cell cul-
advantages to their use. With some vaccines, attenuation
tures and exhibit first-order inactivation kinetics provide
 the best candidates for vaccine preparation. Adjuvants are
Thus, modifed live vaccine strains of viruses may require
typically required to induce good immunity with killed
a compromise between loss of virulence of the virus and
viral products, and multiple doses are usually required to
loss of its immunogenicity because some viruses exhibit
 provide an active immunity. Some highly effective adju-
reduced immunogenicity as they become attenuated. Fur-
vants can lead to undesired consequences that include
thermore, accurate assessment of viral attenuation can
severe local tissue reactions, reduced weight gain in grow-
often be difficult since experimental reproduction of clini-
ing animals, systemic hypersensitivity, and even death.
cal disease is difficult with certain viruses. In such instances,
With the continued development of better adjuvants and
 a vaccine virus considered to be attenuated may not pro-
ISCOMs, inactivated vaccines will become more effective.
vide complete protection or it may produce clinical dis-
 Inactivated vaccines are also relatively stable under adverse
ease under special circumstances, involving stress, physio-
environmental conditions, and their potential for strain
logic imbalance, or concurrentin fections with other organ-
interference in multivalent preparations is reduced com-
isms. If any of these circumstances occurred, the vaccine
 pared to attenuated vaccines.
would be removed from the market and improved. Viruses
There are, however, certain disadvantages associated
that have a wide host range are also problematic. Virus
with the use of inactivated virus vaccines. Some inactivat-
attenuated for one animal species may retain virulence for
 ing agents are toxic, and some are carcinogenic. Also, inac.
more susceptible species. If the vaccinated animals shed
Chapter 5
 Vaccines
49
in the final product. Unlike a live virus, an inactivated vac-
determining critical peptide sequences: (1) indirectly, from
cine virus is not quantitatively amplified, so it requires
nucleotide sequences derived from cloned viral genes, and
adjuvant and multiple inoculations. Furthermore, such
(2) directly, by sequencing purified peptides. Immunolog-
 preparations do not induce strong cellular immunity, since
ically based peptide and epitope mapping to determine
inducing such responses requires that the antigen be pre-
the regions involved in protective immunity facilitate the
sented in association with histocompatibility antigens on
latter approach. An additional approach to determining
 cell surfaces (processed via the endogenous pathways, see
Critical peptide sequences is based upon the projected ter-
the preceding text). Nor are such vaccines associated with
tiary structure of the viral protein, with the areas that
development of local secretory immunity due to the usual
demonstrate hydrophilic characteristics serving as candi-
parenteral route of vaccination.
date sequences. One major drawback of synthesizing pep-
The success of viral inactivation depends on the inac
tide vaccines is the potential for critical epitopes to be
tivant and viral characteristics. While most viruses can be
formed by the tertiary structure (an epitope formed by jux-
successfully inactivated, the retention of critical antigenic
taposition of two separated peptide sequences). Such epi-
integrity is variable. Antigens responsible for inducing pro-
topes confound attempts to deduce the peptide sequence
tective immunity must be preserved. A possible complica-
and realize such complex configurations in the synthetic
tion of inactivated vaccine use is the potential for animal
product.
sensitization such that an exacerbated clinical disease is
The use of anti-idiotypic antibodies as immunogens
experienced upon exposure to a virulent field virus. This
to stimulate the production of viral neutralizing antibod-
sensitization is not well understood, butitis often immuno-
ies has also been explored. The advantage of this type of
immunogen may overcome viral variability problems by
incomplete antibody responses that lack effective avidity,
inducing broadly neutralizing antibodies. However, this
 antibody responses to nonneutralizing epitopes, preferen-
type of vaccine induces only antibody responses in most
tial stimulation of IgE (antibodies that mediate type I hyper-
cases. Production and formulation technologies have not
sensitivities), or other aberrant stimulation of immune-
been developed for these vaccines.
mediated inflammation.
  i s  m  
area of extensive research; it includes purification of viral
Toxoids, Bacterins, and Bacterial Vaccines
subunits, recombinant technology, and peptide synthe-
sis. The basis of a subunit vaccine is an immunogenic
As with viral vaccines, the basis of an effective toxoid, bac-
protein (or peptide sequences) capable of eliciting protec-
terin, or bacterial vaccine is the ability to induce an immune
tive immunity. Such proteins would typically be found on
response or responses capable of eliciting protection from
the virion surface and contain epitopes capable of induc-
field exposure to the pathogenic microorganism. Most of
ing neutralizing antibodies. Vaccines can be prepared by
the principles outlined above with respect to viral vaccines
disruption of the virus followed by protein purification.
 apply to products designed to induce protective immunity
The potential cost of such preparations has sometimes pre-
to bacterialagents. The developmentof an effcacious prod -
cluded their commercial development, but recent biotech-
uct depends on understanding the pathogenesis of the bac-
nological advances have offered alternatives via recombi-
terial disease that is to be prevented. However, in general,
nant DNA and peptide synthesis tech nologies.
it is more difficult to develop a vaccine to a bacteria or fun-
 The approach to developing recombinant vaccines
gal pathogen than it is to a virus. Most pathogenic bacteria
involves insertion of DNA that contains the desired viral
have multiple virulence factors, and neutralization of one
such factor may only partially reduce the virulence of the
vector. The viral o1 complementary DNA (cDNA) is inserted
infection. Vaccines to bacterial infections often do not pre-
into a plasmid or bacteriophage followed by infection of
vent infection. In contrast, many attenuated viral vaccines
susceptible prokaryotic cells such as Escherichia coli, yeast
will prevent in fection.
cells, or mammalian cells. Multiple strategies have been
 In general terms, diseases produced by bacteria can be
used to construct vaccine expression vectors, and most
grouped into three categories: (1) those that result from
include a strong promoter (constitutive or inducible). Fol-
 association with a bacterial toxin, (2) those that result from
lowing infection of the cell with the plasmid, the cloned
the sequelae of extracellular multiplication of the bacte-
cDNA can be expressed and the desired gene product puri-
rial agent, and (3) those that result from the sequelae of
fied for vaccine use. Over thelast 15 years,attention has also
intracellular multiplication.
been focused on the inoculation of plasmid DNA encoding
viral antigens directly into animals. Such DNA vaccines
offer the potential advantage of having viral proteins and
Toxoids
glycoproteins expressed on the surface of transfected cells
and inducing immunity without interference from pas-
Bacterial toxins are of two kinds: exotoxins and endotox-
sively acquired viral antibodies.
ins. Endotoxins are strictly defined as the lipopolysaccha-
Synthetic peptide vaccines have also been developed.
ride portion of the gram-negative cell wall (it is the lipid A
As with cloned viral vaccines, the successful development
portion that is specifically responsible for the “toxie" man-
 of synthetic peptide vaccines requires extensive knowl-
ifestations). Muramyl dipeptide, which is present in gram-
edge of the viral proteins involved in inducing protec-
positive cell walls and to a lesser extent in gram-negative,
tive immunity. Two basic approaches are available for
also has “toxic" properties. We have used quotation
50
PARTI  Introduction
marks around “toxic" because both endotoxin and
Thus, bacterins and toxoids administered parenterally are
ing the production of a variety of cytokines by host cells.
not as effective against intracellular pathogens. Bacterins
It is the degree of vigor of the host response that defines
placed on a mucosal surface have extremely short half-lives,
the toxicity. Exotoxins are proteins that interact with host
a serious disadvantage. Another disadvantage is that the
cells (usually after binding to a specific receptor), resulting
in deregulation of host cell function without undue harm
in vivo may not be expressed. This can result in a product
to the cell, interference of the normal physiology of the
 that elicits antibodies with inappropriate specificities.
host cell(s), or death of the host cell.
Antibodies elicited to various epitopes on toxins that
result in neutralization are sometimes called antitoxins.
Bacterial Vaccines
As mentioned previously, an antibody may block interac-
Bacterial vaccines are composed of attenuated versions of
tion between a toxin and its cellular receptor or change
the pathogen; that is, they are live but reduced in viru-
the configuration of the toxin so that it no longer has an
lence. Attenuation may be accomplished in a number of
effect on the host cell. Antibodies to exotoxins have been
 shown to be efficacious in preventing disease. Antibodies
ways: selection of a naturally occurring attenuated strain,
 to endotoxins have had mixed results as far as preventing
repeated passage on artificial media, or elimination of a
disease.
virulence trait by mutation of the gene encoding the trait.
The major advantages of bacterial vaccines are directly
 Toxoids are toxins without toxic activity that can elicit
related to their being alive. Live vaccines not only have
 an immune response, that is, antibodies (see above for
longer half-lives than their dead counterparts (regardless of
explanation). Toxoids can be produced by chemical inacti-
location) but they will also express epitopes that may only
vation of the native toxin or by manipulations of the gene
be expressed in vivo, thus eliciting antibodies to epitopes
encoding the toxin so that the toxin is inactivated. For
that the pathogen will also express following infection.
example, in the case of A-B toxins (see Chapter 8), where
Another advantage is that live vaccines will elicit antibody
the A subunit is responsible for the toxic activity of the
and cellular immunity. A major disadvantage is that live
toxin and the B subunits are responsible for binding of the
vaccines may produce disease, for example, through rever-
toxin to the host, the gene encoding the A subunit can be
 eliminated and a toxoid produced that is composed of B
 sion to the virulent phenotype. Also, if the vaccinated host
has reduced resistance or if used in alternative host species,
subunits. An antibody to lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin)
then the vaccine may produce disease.
is elicited by immunization with mutants (called “rough"
 mutants) that produce very little of the O-repeat unit of the
lipopolysaccharide (see Chapter 8).
The main advantage of toxoids is that they are safer
Further Reading
than the disease-associated toxin. Toxoids administered
 parenterally elicit antibodies (IgM and IgG) that interfere
Bassett JD, Swift SL, and Bramson JL (2011) Optimizing
with toxin-host cell interactions that are not at a mucosal
vaccine-induced CD8(+) T-cell immunity: focus on recom-
surface. On the other hand, the administration of toxoids
binant adenovirus vectors. Expert Rev Vaccines, 10 (9), 1307-
on a mucosal surface elicits antibodies (slgM and sIgA) that
1319.
interfere with toxin-host cell interaction at the mucosal
Gilbert SC (2012) T-cell-inducing vaccines—what's the
surface. The main disadvantage of toxoids used for immu-
future. Immunology, 135 (1), 19-26. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
nization by way of a mucosal surface is their extremely
2567.2011.03517.x
short half-life, thus they are unable to stimulate an immune
Hillaire ML, Osterhaus AD, and Rimmelzwaan GF (2011)
 response that is sufficient for protection.
basis for the development of broadly protective influenza
vaccines. / Biomed Biotechnol, 2011, 939860. Epub October
Bacterins
5,2011.
Bacterins are killed pathogenic bacteria. They are usually
Lousberg EL, Diener KR, Brown MP, and Hayball JD (2011)
Innate immune recognition of poxviral vaccine vectors.
 produced by chemical kiling of the infectious agent, with
Expert Rev Vaccines, 10 (10), 1435-1449.
the aim to preserve bacterial structures expressing epitopes
important in eliciting a protective immune response. The
Meeusen EN (2011) Exploiting mucosal surfaces for the devel-
opment of mucosal vaccines. Vaccine, 29 (47), 8506-8511.
Epub September 22, 2011.
 ilar to toxoids as described above in the toxoids section.
Murtaugh MP and Genzow M (201l) Immunological solutions
The advantage of bacterins is that they are safe. Ifadmin-
for treatment and prevention of porcine reproductive and 
istered parenterally, the antibody elicited will be effective
respiratory syndrome (PRRS). Vaccine, 29 (46), 8192-8204.
if the bacterin is made from a pathogen that has an extra-
Epub September 17, 2011.
cellular life style. If the bacterin is administered by way of a
Pinheiro CS, Martins VP, Assis NR et al. (2011) Computational
mucosal surface, the antibody elicited (slgM and sIgA) will
interfere with interactions of pathogens with hostcells. The
tial S. mansoni vaccine candidates. /Biomed Biotechnol, 2011,
disadvantage is that the main immune response is an anti-
503068. Epub October 15, 2011.
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Enterobacteriaceae
RODNEY MOXLEY
The family Enterobacteriaceae currently includes 46 gen-
ing pore-like structures with hydrophilic lumens, allow-
era and 263 names species and subspecies (Table 6.1). Some
ing ions and aqueous solutions to pass through the oth-
species are significant causes of intestinal or extraintesti-
erwise hydrophobic lipid bilayer. ECA contains N-acetyl-
nal disease in food and companion mammals, poultry,
D-glucosamine, N-acetyl-D-mannosaminuronic acid, and
other avian species, reptiles, and humans. Extraintestinal
4-acetamido-4,6-dideoxy-D-galactose.
infections often involve the urinary tract, respiratory tract,
The proximal portion of the LPS macromolecule con-
bloodstream, and wounds. The genera that contain sig-
sists of the hydrophobic lipid A region. This region is a
nificant pathogens of animals and humans include Citr-
polar lipid in which a backbone of glucosaminyl-3-(1→6)-
robacter, Cronobacter, Enterobacter, Escherichia, Klebsiella,
glucosamine is substituted usually with six or seven satu-
Morganella, Plesiomonas, Proteus, Providencia, Salmonella,
rated fatty acid residues. Distally, the lipid A backbone is
Serratia, Shigella, and Yersinia. Some genera predominantly
connected to the inner core polysaccharide region, and
include pathogens of plants (Brenneria, Dickeya, Erwinia,
both the inner core and the lipid A backbone contain
Pantoea, and Pectobacterium) and insects or nematodes
many charged groups, most of which are anionic. The
(Arsenophonus,Buchnera,Photorhabdus，Shimwellia,Wig-
outermost region of the LPS consists of the hydrophilic,
glesworthia, and Xenorhabdus).
O-antigen polysaccharide region. Core polysaccharide is
positioned between the lipid A region on the proximal
side (inner core) and the O-antigen region on the distal
Descriptive Features
side (outer core) (Figure 6.4). The lipid A component is a
polar lipid in which a backbone of glucosaminyl-3-(1→6)-
Morphology and Staining
glucosamine is substituted usually with six or seven fatty
acid residues, all of them saturated. In bacteria that pro-
These organisms are gram-negative straight rods (Fig-
duce smooth LPs, the core polysaccharides are divided into
ure 6.1), most ranging from 0.3 to 1.0 μm wide by 0.6-
two regions: inner core (lipid A proximal) and outer core.
6.0 μm long (Figure 6.2). Members of the family Enterobac
The outer core region provides an attachment site for O-
teriaceae are indistinguishable from one another based
polysaccharide (O-antigen). Within family and genus, the
simply on morphology.
structure of the inner core tends to be well conserved. The
inner core typically contains residues of Kdo and L-glycer0-
Cellular Structure and Composition
D-mannoheptose (Figure 6.2).
The somatic antigens (O-antigens) are composed of
The cell wall is consistent with that of other gram-
repeat units that can differ in the monomer glycoses,
negative bacteria, containing both inner (cytoplasmic)
the position and stereochemistry of the O-glycosidic link-
 and outer membranes (OM), a thin peptidoglycan layer,
ages, and the presence or absence of noncarbohydrate sub-
and periplasm (Figure 6.3). The OM is an asymmetric
stituents (Figure 6.2). O-repeat units from different struc-
bilayer with phospholipids on its inner surface, and lipid
tures may comprise varying numbers of monosaccharides,
A (endotoxin), the hydrophobic anchor of lipopolysac-
may be linear or branched, and may form homopolymers
charide (LPS) on the outside. The OM contains proteins,
or more frequently, heteropolymers. Extensive heterogene-
(Braun's) lipoproteins, and an acidicpolysaccharide known
ity in the sizes of molecules occurs due to variations in
as the enterobacterial common antigen (ECA). OM phos-
the chain length of the O-polysaccharides, giving rise to
pholipids are similar in composition to those in the cyto-
the classical “ladder" pattern in sodium dodecyl sulfate-
 plasmic membrane. Outer membrane proteins (OMP) vary
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, where each “rung" in
considerably, but OmpA and other porins are major com-
the ladder represents a lipid A-core molecule substituted
ponents. Porin proteins are assembled as trimers, form-
with an increment of one additional O-unit.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergaa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
53
54
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 6.1.
Taxa of the Family Enterobacteriaceae?
FIGURE 6.1.
E. coli, gram-negative rods, magnification
1000 x. (Courtesy of Hans Newman, Bacteria in Photos,
Number of
Copyright 2011, www.bacteriainphotos.com, accessed January
 Species and
Genus
Subspecies
10, 2013.)
Type Species
Arsenophonus
1
nasoniae
Brenneria
5 μm
5
salicis
Buchnera
1
aphidicota
Budvicia
2
aquatica
Buttiauxella
7
agrestis
Cedecea
davisae
Citrobacter
11
feundi
Cosenzaea
1
myxofaciens
Cronobacter
9
sakazakii
Dickeya
6
chrysanthemi
Edwardsiella
4
tarda
Enterobacter
21
cloacae
Erwinia
17
amylovora
Escherichia
5
coli
Ewingella
1
americana
Hafnia
2
alvei
Klebsiella
7
pneumoniae
Kuyvera
ascorbata
Leclercia
1
adecarboxylata
Leminorella
2
grimonti
Lonsdatea
3
quercina
Moellerella
Wisconsensis
rough" mutants) makes the strains exceptionally sensitive
 Morganella
morgani
to many different hydrophobic compounds. These include
Obesumbacterium
proteus
Pantoea
20
dyes, antibiotics, bile salts, other detergents, and mutagens;
agglomerans
Pectobacterium
9
carotovorum
thus, this area is involved in maintaining the barrier prop-
Photorhabdus
16
luminescens
 erty of the OM. The lipid A component is essential for the
Plesiomonas
1
shigelloides
assembly of the OM.
Pragia
fontium
 Enterobacteriaceae often expresses a capsule that con-
 Proteus
4
vuigaris
 sists of an acidic polysaccharide. Two types of capsular
Providencia
8
alcalifaciens
 polysaccharides may be produced. The first type, known
Rahnella
1
aguatiis
 as M (mucous) antigen, consists of colanic acid and is pro-
Raoultella
3
planticola
 duced by moststrains. M antigen is thought to provide pro-
Salmonella
8
enterica
 tection against desiccation. The second type, known as K
Samsonia
1
erythrinae
Serratia
16
 antigen, K for kapsel (capsule in German), isa component of
marcescens
Shigella
4
dysenteriae
the serotype and may provide antiphagocytic, serum resis-
 Shimwellia
2
pseudoproteus
 tance, and mucosal adherence properties depending on the
Sodalis
1
glossinidius
chemical composition.
Tatumella
5
ptyseos
Many members of this group express adhesins that
Thorsellia
1
anopheles
 generally behave as lectins, recognizing oligosaccharide
Trabulsiella
2
guamensis
residues of glycoproteins and glycolipids. These adhesins
Wigglesworthia
glossinidia
consist of proteins embedded in the outer cell mem-
 Xenorhabdus
22
nematophila
brane that are composed of subunits and assembled into
Yersinia
18
pestis
Yokenella
organelles, or consist of a single OMP. Those assembled
1
regensburger
into organelles include fimbria (pili) and afimbrial (non-
 fimbrial) adhesins.
Total: 46 genera 263 speties and subspecies (when subspeties are present they
replace the respective species in the total.
Adapted from the Leibniz-nstitut DSMZ-Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorgan-
fusely on the surface of the bacterial cells. Fimbriae are thin-
ismen und Zelkulturen GmgH Bacterial Nomenclature Up-to-Date database
 ner and typically shorter and more numerous than flagella;
http://old.dsmz.de/microorganisms/bacterial_nomenclature.php (accessed March,
-u A pn 'a   g o z o s a
20, 2013), and the1.P. Euzeby: List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomen-
clature, htp:/www.batterio.cictfr(atcessed January 10, 2013).
ber 100-1000 per cell. The fimbriae bind to receptors on
the surfaces of host cells, and different types of fimbriae
vary in their binding specificities. A single bacterial isolate
The O-antigen serological specificity of an organism is
defined by the structure of the O-polysaccharide; how-
ral) is used interchangeably with fimbriae, although some
ever, there is great variability in the numbers of unique O-
authors reserve “pili" for those structures (F pili) that are
antigens within a species. The O-antigen portion of the LPS
involved in conjugation.
molecule provides protection against phagocytosis. Fur-
The fimbrial structure consists of a shaft and an adhesin
ther, loss of the more proximal part of the LPs core ("deep
tip, with the latter conferring binding specificity to the
Chapter 6
 Family Enterobacteriaceae
55
FIGURE 6.2.
Colorized scanning electron photomicrograph (magnification 6836 x) of gram-negative E. coli O157:H7. (Courtesy
of Us Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Heaith information Library, ID# 10068.)
Det WD Exp
5μm
host cell. The construction of fimbriae requires the coordi-
and these properties have been used to group them into
 nated folding, secretion, and ordered assembly of multiple
F-types. The adhesive properties of fimbriae have also been
distinct protein subunits. Both shaft and adhesin tip are
used for their classification, for example, whether or not
made up of repeating protein subunits called fimbrins. The
they bind to mannose-containing host cell receptors. The
fimbrin composition of the shaft and the adhesin tip may
binding of fimbriae to a man nose-containing receptor can 
differ or be the same. The fimbrin proteins are antigenic,
 be inhibited by exposing the fimbriae to mannose prior to
FIGURE 6.3.
Molecular model of the inner and outer membranes of E. coli K-12. Ovals and rectangles represent sugar residues.
lipopolysaccharide; Kdo, 2-keto-3-deoxyoctulosonic acid; MDO, membrane-derived oligosaccharide. (Reproduced by permission of
Raetz and Whitfield 2002; original publication in black and white, Raetz et al. 1991.)
人
O-antigen
repeat
HO
H
Heptose
Outer
Glucose
LPS
core
H
Galactose
H
Heptose
PPEtn
Inner
Porin
H
H
Kdo
core
H
LipidA
Outermembrane
Lipoproteins
Peptidoglycan
Periplasm
H
MDO
Undecaprenyl
phosphate-sugars
Phospholipids
Innermembrane
0
Protein
Cytoplasm
56
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
FlGuRE 6.4.
Chemical structure of endotoxin from E. coli O111 : B4 according to Ohno and Morrison 1989. Hep.
l-glycerol-d-manno-heptose; gal, galactose; Gic, glucose; Kdo, 2-keto-3-deoxyoctonic acid; NGa, N-acetyl-galactosamine; NGc,
Gal
Gal
NGa
NGa
n = 4-40 O-antigen
Gal
Gal
NGa
NGa
Glc
IGr
Gal
Gc
Core oligo-
saccharide
Hep
.OH
Hep
HN
Kdo
Cell exterior
+
Cell interior
HO
NH
?
OH
Lipid A
exposure to the receptor; those that are inhibited are called
of red blood cells of different species; hence, hemagglu-
"mannose-sensitive" (MS) and those that are not are called
tination reactions have been used to test for the pres-
"mannose-resistant" (MR). The type 1 fimbria of Escherichia
 ence of MS and MR fimbria. Molecular-based methods that
coli, also known as F1, is an example of an MS adhesin.
are more practical and specific are now more commonly
Mannose-containing receptors are found on the surfaces
used for diagnostic purposes, for example, assays such as
Chapter 6Family Enterobacteriaceae
57
polymerase chain reaction, which may be used to detect
scription of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. In addition, expression
the genes that encode fimbrin proteins.
of tissue factor by endothelial cells and B7 costimulatory
Afimbrial adhesins are associated with an amorphous
molecules by macrophages and dendritic cells is activated.
capsule-like, outer membrane-associated structure, and do
These proinflammatory and procoagulatory responses are
not form visible fimbriae on the bacterial surface. The
responsible, in part, for the clinical signs associated with
first afimbrial adhesin discovered was found on certain
endotoxemia. However, the elicitation of this pathway is
uropathogenic E. coli strains and named AFA (for afimbrial
also necessary for host resistance to the bacteria. Diver-
adhesin). Afimbrial adhesins were later found on the sur-
sity in lipid A molecules among bacterial species prevents
faces of some pathogenic E. coli in calves and lambs (see
the innate immune systems of some hosts from respond-
Chapter 7).
ing. This is especially true with some of the most virulent
 Most wild-type strains of the Enterobacteriaceae family
members of the Enterobacteriaceae, for example, Yersinia
are motile, a property imparted by flagella. The number of
pestis, and host species that are susceptible to sepsis with the
flagella expressed varies, but typically there are about 5-10
respective pathogen. In contrast to E. coli, whose lipid A is
Snd sd e   a n   d
hexa-acylated with five 14-carbon and one 12-carbon fatty
Each flagellum is typically about 5-10 μm in length and
acids, Y. pestis is tetra-acylated with four 14-carbon fatty
20 nm in diameter. The extracellular portion includes, from
acids. Consequently, Y. pesfis lipid Ais poorly recognized by
the TLR4s of some host species, thereby preventing, among
cific proteins (in parentheses): a curved hook region (FlgE)
other functions, costimulatory molecule expression, which
that extends from the surface of the outer cell membrane;
is needed for activation of T helper cells and ultimately
a hook-filament junction (FlgK and FlgL); a long helical fil-
macrophages, which interferes with the host's ability to
 ament (FliC); and a filament cap (FliD). The filament con-
clear the infection.
sists of flagellin (FliC) subunits arranged in a cylindrical or
tubular pattern, giving it a hollow lumen. Despite having
Siderophores. Iron is an important inorganic cation
a hollow structure, the filament is rigid, making it suitable
micronutrient as it is present in almost all bacterial cells.
for its function as a propeller. The flagellum is anchored in
Iron is a cofactor for many different metalloproteins needed
the cell envelope by its basal body. The basal body also has
for bacterial growth and survival, for example, heme-
an approximately cylindrical symmetry, and consists of a
containing proteins such as cytochromes; iron-sulfur pro-
  ' ''d'i-s a s ao as e  o
teins, for example, some enzymes involved in amino acid
 named for the plane in which they are found—LPs, pepti-
and pyrimidine biosynthesis, the electron transport chain,
doglycan, membrane (cytoplasmic), supramembrane, and
and the tricarboxylic acid cycle; and non-iron-sulfur pro-
cytoplasm, respectively.
teins, for example, some enzymes required for DNA syn-
 The mol% guanine-plus-cytosine (G+C) content of the
thesis, amino acid synthesis, and antioxidant activity.
DNA is 38-60.
Although animal hosts contain abundant amounts of iron,
it is not readily available to bacteria, since it is tightly bound
to such carrier proteins as transferrin and lactoferrin. Also,
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
in culture conditions, iron availability is affected by the
Cellular products of medical interest common to all or most
pH of the media and aeration. In aerobic conditions, iron is
of the members of the family are endotoxins and various
present in the ferric (Fe?+) state and forms insoluble oxyhy-
siderophores. Products produced by many include serine
droxide polymers at neutral pH. In contrast, ferrous (Fe2+)
protease transporters of Enterobacteriaceae and extended
iron is relatively soluble and accessible to bacterial cells
spectrum β-lactamases.
growing under anaerobic conditions. To obtain ferric iron
that is tied up in insoluble complexes, bacteria synthesize
Endotoxin.
Endotoxin (lipid A) elicits severe toxic reac-
and release small iron-chelating molecules into the envi-
tions in animals due to its effects on the innate immune
ronment called siderophores. Siderophores have a molec-
and coagulatory systems. Lipid A binds to LPs-binding pro-
ular mass generally less than 1 kDa, are synthesized only
tein (a serum protein), which converts oligomeric micelles
under iron-deficient conditions, and have an affinity and
of LPS into a monomer for delivery to CD14. CD14 con-
specificity for iron in the ferric state. More than 100 differ-
centrates lipid A for binding to the TLR4-MD2 complex,
ent siderophores have been described in bacteria; however,
found on the surfaces of macrophages, dendritic cells, and
all are broadly categorized as either catecholates or hydrox-
endothelial cells. TLR4 is a transmembrane protein that
amates. Enterobacterin (also known as enterochelin) is
complexes with MD2 and CD14. Binding of lipid A to CD14
the prototype catecholate siderophore and is commonly
triggers a signal transduction cascade that results in expres-
found among members of the Enterobacteriaceae family.
sion of proinflammatory cytokines. This binding results
Some strains also produce the hydroxamate siderophore
in the association of the cytosolic domain of TLR4 with
aerobactin. When in low iron conditions, the bacteria syn-
myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) adaptor pro-
thesize and release siderophores that bind to Fe?+ ions and
tein, which is necessary for the recruitment of the protein
in turn bind to a receptor on the outer cell membrane,
kinases interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1)
which then transports the ferrisiderophore complex into
and IRAK6 and TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) to
the cell. A given bacterial cell may also utilize siderophores
the complex. Ultimately, the Ix B kinase is phosphorylated,
   s  o  
which phosphorylates IxB, which allows nuclea1 factor
     
(NF)-xBto translocate to the nucleus and activate the tran-
of ferric iron, bacteria utilize a low-affinity system that
58
PART II Bacteria and Fungi
functions without a siderophore. Iron is taken across the
grons located in the genome and in plasmids) (see Chap-
outer cell membrane by several different transport systems.
ters 4 and 5). Persistent use of antibiotics to treat infec-
In E. coli, six Fe3+ transport systems can function in aero.
tions (e.g., swine herds with enzootic enteric colibacillosis)
bic conditions, and another, for Fe2+ transport, functions
 may potentially select for and result in an increased herd-
under anaerobic conditions. Five of these transport systems
level prevalence of pathogens resistant to the antibiotics
utilize siderophores and include en terochelin, aerobactin,
being used.
citrate-Fe?+, ferrichrome, and ferrioxamine B hydroxam-
ate. These five systems have separate outer membrane
Variability
receptors but share a dependency on an inner membrane
protein called Ton B for functioning of the outer membrane
Variability ofone isolate ofentericorganism as compared to
receptor proteins. In addition, there is a low-affinity sys-
tem that functions at high concentrations of Fe3+ without
genetic basis for the trait under consideration. Differences
 a siderophore transport cofactor. The genes governing aer-
 in the capsular, somatic, or flagellar antigens account for
obactin uptake may be on the chromosome in some organ-
variability among isolates of the same genus and species.
isms, or on a plasmid, such as the ColV class plasmids in
Some variation among members of the same genus and
enteric bacteria. Once accumulated within the cell, the iron 
species in the family, as well as among members of different
cations are either incorporated into iron-specific proteins
genera and species, is accounted for by the presence of genes
(both heme- and non-heme-containing) or stored in either
residing on plasmids encoding certain phenotypic traits.
of two E. coli iron storage proteins, namely ferritin and
Such traits as resistance to antimicrobialagents, production
bacterioferritin.
of toxin, or secretion of hemolysin may be plasmid encoded
and will vary depending on the presence or absence of a
particular plasmid.
Growth Characteristics
 Transition from the smooth to the rough phenotype
occurs with all members of the family, and is often the result
Members of this group of microorganisms are nonspore-
of phase variation. Likewise, change in the O-antigens has
forming, nonacid-fast, facultative anaerobes, which grow
been shown to occur following lysogeny by certain bacte-
rapidly under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Their abil-
riophages (lysogenic conversion).
ity to grow in the presence or absence of oxygen reflects
Susceptibility to various bacteriophages (phage typing)
both a respiratory and fermentative metabolism, alth ough
is sometimes useful in demonstrating differences in isolates
fermentation is the more common method of utilization of
(strains) of the same genus and species. Phage typing is a
carbohydrates, and often with production of acid and gas.
useful epidemiological tool.
Almost all members of this group ferment glucose to pyru-
vic acid via the Embden-Meyerhof pathway. Some produce
succinic acid, aceticacid, formicacid, and ethanol by way of
Laboratory Diagnosis
the mixed acid fermentation pathway, whereas others pro-
The family is composed ofa large number of related, faculta-
duce butanediol from pyruvic acid. These microorganisms
tively anaerobic, oxidase-negative, nitrate-reducing, gram-
utilize a variety of simple substrates for growth, although
negative rods. Differentiation within the family is accom-
most have simple growth requirements. Some are capable
plished by some or all of the following: culture, biochemical
of utilizing D-glucose as the sole source of carbon. Under
tests, immunological tests (i.e, serotyping ofO : K : H anti-
aerobic conditions, the range of suitable substrates includes
gens and detection of virulence products), and PCR. 16S
organic acids, amino acids, and carbohydrates. Members
rRNA sequencing is beginning to be used in some clinical
of this family are usually motile with peritrichous flagella,
laboratories to identify organisms that can not be cultured
catalase positive, and oxidase negative (due to a lack of
or phenotypically classified.
cytochrome c), and reduce nitrate to nitrite. Most grow
A number of manuals deal exclusively with this fam-
well on MacConkey medium, and on peptone or meat
ily, and because of the extreme clinical importance and
extract without supplements or sodium chloride; however,
 prevalence of these organisms, an increasing number of
some require vitamins and/or amino acids. Most grow well
 programmed and/or computerized identification schemes
at 22-35 °C.
are becoming commercially available.
Resistance
Morphology and Staining
Members of this group are susceptible to killing by sunlight,
drying, pasteurization, and common disinfectants, for
All are gram-negative rods have similar morphological fea-
example, chlorine-, phenol-, and quaternary ammonium-
tures (Figures 6.1 and 6.2).
based compounds. They can survive for weeks to months
in moist, shaded en vironments, such as pastures, manure,
litter, and bedding. Although many are susceptible to
Cultural Characteristics
broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents, their susceptibil-
Methods used to isolate members of the Enterobacteri-
ity is not accurately predictable and can change rapidly
 aceae family vary depending upon whether the sample
through acquisition of R plasmids, or resistance-encoding
normally contains intestinal or other background flora,
DNA cassettes (which may insert into numerous inte-
or is normally sterile. When the source is normally sterile
Chapter 6  Family Enterobacteriaceae
59
Substrate. Lactose and sucrose—Salmonella (and some
FIGURE 6.5.
Colonies of E. coli growing on blood agar
strains of Proteus) does not ferment these sugars. Neither
culture medium. (Courtesy of Hans Newman, Bacteria in
does Shigella, but Shigella grows poorly (if at all) on this
Photos, Copyright 2011, wwv.bacteriainphotos.com, accessed
medium.
January 10, 2013.)
Phenol Red. If sugars are not fermented (alkaline),
colonies will be red; if sugars are fermented (acid), colonies
will be yellow-green (due to the color of the background
dye).
Usefulness.
Excellent for isolating Salmonella.
Cefsulodin-lrgasanTM-Novobiocin (Yersinia Selective
Agar)
Inhibitor. Bile salts, crystal violet, cefsulodin, Irgasan,
novobiocin.
Substrate. Mannitol.
4mm
Neutral Red. If mannitol is fermented (acid), colonies will
be colorless with a red center ("bulls-eye” appearance); if
mannitol is not fermented (alkaline), they will remain col-
orless, translucent.
Usefulness. Excellent for isolating Yersinia enterocolitica.
(e.g., extraintestinal specimen) are used, isolation of any
member of the Enterobacteriaceae family is significant. The
Eosin Methylene Blue (EMB). Agar, Levine.
medium for this purpose is sheep blood agar, and incuba-
tion is at 35-37 *C(Figure 6.5). In the case of intestinal sam-
Inhibitor. Eosin Y, methylene blue (these dyes inhibit
ples, commensal strains of E. coli will be present and cannot
gram-positive bacteria to a limited degree).
be differentiated from pathogenic strains of E. coli simply
by colony phenotype on such standard culture media as
Substrate: Lactose
blood agar or MacConkey agar. In the case of some tar-
 geted serotypes (e.g., E. coli O157:H7), commercially avail-
Fosin Y and Methylene Blue. These dyes play a role in
able chromogenic media are available, and these media are
differentiating between lactose-fermenters and nonfer-
menters. Bacteria that ferment lactose, especially the col-
designed to allow for presumptive differentiation of the
pathogen from other flora on the plates.
iform bacterium E. coli, appear as colonies with a green
Different enteric media have been devised to favor the
metallic sheen or blue-black to brown color. Bacteria that
identification of Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, or E. coli
  s    nn  
O157:H7 or other Shiga toxin-producing E. coli. The bases
light purple colonies.
of the media are as follows:
Usefulness.
 Isolation of gram-negative enteric bacteria
with good differentiation between Escherichia and Enter-
1.
An inhibitory substance, for example, bile salts, a
 obacter species.
dye, 0r antibiotics. These substances inhibit gram-
 positive or other competing enteric bacteria from
Hektoen Enteric Agar
growing.
2.
 A substrate whether utilized or not by the pathogen
Inhibitor.
Bile salts.
of in terest.
3.1
A pH indicator to tell if the substrate has been
Substrate.
 Lactose and salicin—Salmonella, Shigella, and
changed, for example, utilization of a carbohydrate 
 some species of Proteus and Providencia are lactose-negative
with production of fermentation products.
and salicin-negative.
The following are useful selective media for isolating
Ferric Salt.
 Organisms producing H2S will form black-
enteric pathogens.
centered colonies.
Brilliant Green Agar
Bromthymol Blue. Fermentors of salicin and/or lactose
will form yellow to orange colonies;isolates not fermenting
Inhibitor. Brilliant green dye (suppresses the growth
these sugars will form green or blue-green colonies.
of most members of the family except nontyphoidal
Salmonella).
Usefulness. Excellent for Salmonella and Shigella.
60
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
MacConkey Agar
straw-colored colonies. Organisms with β-glucuronidase
activity will cleave the substrate, leading to a distinct blue-
 green coloration of the colonies.
Jnhibitor.
 Bile salts and crystal violet (inhibit gram-
positive bacteria).
Usefulness. Presumptive detection of E. coli O157:H7.
Substrate.
Lactose—Salmonella, Shigella, and Proteus do
Xylose Lysine Deoxycholate Agar
not ferment lactose.
Inhibitor.
Bile salts.
Neutral Red. If lactose is fermented (acid), colonies will be
Substrate.
(1)
pink; if lactose is not fermented (peptides digested—-basic),
(Salmonella ferments xylose). (2) Lysine—isolates that
colonies will be colorless.
ferment xylose, but not lactose and sucrose, and are
lysine decarboxylase-negative (Proteus mirabilis) produce
colonies that will be amber-orange. Salmonella decar-
Usefulness. Very permissive medium. Salmonella and
boxylates lysine. The ratio of xylose to lysine is such that
po isou op se) una s uo mos Aeai vas
an alkaline pH predominates (more decarboxylation).
Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas).
Shigella does not decarboxylate lysine. (3) Lactose and
sucrose—Salmonella and Shigella do not ferment these
sugars rapidly.
Sorbitol MacConkey Agar
(4) Ferric salt—colonies of organisms producing H2S
(Salmonella; Proteus) will have black centers (iron sulfide).
Inhibitor. Bile salts and crystal violet (inhibit gram-
positive bacteria).
Phenol Red. Acid colonies (non-Satmonella or non-
Shigella)  will
be yellow. Alkaline colonies (possible
Salmonella or Shigella) will be red.
Substrate.
.Sorbitol. More than 98% of E. coli ferment so1-
bitol within 24 h; E. coli O157:H7 is an exception.
Usefulness.
An excellent all-purpose medium for both
Salmonella and Shigella.
Neutra! Red.
. If sorbitol is fermented (acid), colonies will
Enrichment Media. At times, the numbers of Saimonella
 be pink; if sorbitol is not fermented (peptides digested-
 or Shigella in fecal samples may be too low (<104/g) to be
basic), colonies will be colorless.
detected on the primary plating media discussed above.
Therefore, in addition to being plated directly to a selec-
tive medium, the fecal sample is placed in an enrich-
Usefulness. Screening for E. coli O157:H7. The addi-
 ment medium. To detect Saimonella by utilizing enrich-
tion of 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-glucuronide (MUG) or 5-
ment methods, at least 100 salmonellae/g are needed.
bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-glucuronide (BCIG) to the
 For Salmonella, enrichment may be achieved by incu-
medium increases its specificity for E. coli O157 : H7 (see
bating feces for 12-18 h in selenite F broth or tetrathionate
Sorbitol MacConkey Agar BCIG, cefixime, and potassium
broth. During this time, the growth of organisms other than
tellurite).
Salmonella is suppressed, whereas the growth of Salmonella
is not. After the 12-18 h has elapsed,an aliquot of the broth
is streaked onto a plate of selective medium (e.g., brilliant
Sorbitol MacConkey Agar BClG, cefixime, and potassium
green agar).
tellurite
 Enrichment for Shigella is not easy because it is rather
sensitive to commonly used inhibitory substances found in
selenite F and tetrathionate broths. An enrichment broth
Inhibitor. Bilesaltsand crystal violetinhibitgram-positive
called gram-negative (or GN broth) is used in the same
bacteria. Addition of cefixime and potassium tellurite
manner as selenite is used for Salmonella. GN broth and
inhibits sorbitol nonfermenters (e.g., Proteus and Providen-
trypticase soy broth with novobiocin are both excellent for
cia).
enrichment of fecal samples for E. coli O157:H7.
 Members of the genus Pseudomonas (especially P. aerugi-
 nosa) may be found in feces, but this is probably an insignif-
Substrate.
 Sorbitol. More than 98% of E. coli ferment so1-
icant finding. Pseudomonas (not a member of the fam-
bitol within 24 h; E. coli O157:H7 is an exception.
ily Enterobacteriaceae) will grow on enteric media. This
microorganism does very little to the substrates other than
the peptides and peptones and thus mimics Salmonella
Neutral Red and BCiG. The nonsorbitol-fermenting and
 and Shigella on selective media. Pseudomonas is oxidase-
β-glucuronidase-negative E. coli O157:H7 will appear as
positive, a useful distinction.
Chapter 6
Family Enterobacteriaceae
61
References
Further Reading
Magalhaes PO, Lopes AM, Mazzola PG et al. (2007) Methods of
Abbott, SL (2011) Klebsiella,Enterobacter, Citrobacter,Serratia,
endotoxin removal from biological preparations: a review.
Plesiomonas, and other Enterobacteriaceae, in Manual of Clin-
/ Pharm Pharmaceut Sci, 10 (3), 388-404.
ical Microbiology, 10th edn (ed. J Versalovic), ASM Press,
 Ohno N and Morrison DC (1989) Lipopolysaccharide inter-
Washington, DC, pp. 639-657.
action with lysozyme. Binding of lipopolysaccharide to
Atlas RM and Snyder JW (2011) Reagents, stains, and media:
lysozyme and inhibition of lysozyme enzymatic activity.
bacteriology, in Manual of Clinical Microbiology, 10th edn
/ Biol Chem, 264, 4434-4441.
(ed. J Versalovic), ASM Press, Washington, DC, pp. 272-303.
 Raetz CRH and Whitfield C (2002) Lipopolysaccharide endo-
 Farmer, JI II, Boatwright KD, and Janda JM (2007) Enterobacteri-
toxins. Ann Rev Biochem, 71, 635-700.
aceae: introduction and identification, in Manual of Clinical 
 Raetz CR, Ulevitch RJ, Wright SD et al. (1991) Gram-negative
Microbiology, vol. 1, 9th edn (eds PR Murray, EJ Baron, JH
endotoxin: an extraordinary lipid with profound effects on 
Jorgensen, ML Landry, and MA Pfaller), ASM Press, Wash-
eukaryotic signal transduction. FASEB /, 5, 2653.
ington, DC, pp. 649-669.
Enterobacteriaceae:
Escherichia
RODNEY MOXLEY
The genus Escherichia contains five species: albertii, coli
membrane protein, in either case forming a filamentous
fergusonii, hermannii, and vulneris; the species blattae has
structure that projects out from the surface of the cell.
recently been moved into the Shimwellia genus. Escherichia
Those assembled into organelles include fimbria (pili)
is the type genus of the Enterobacteriaceae family, with
and afimbrial (nonfimbrial) adhesins. The construction of
coli the type species of the genus. Escherichia coli is the
 fimbriae requires the coordinated folding, secretion, and
 Only species that includes important pathogens of animals.
ordered assembly of multiple distinct protein subunits.
Many E. coli are commensals of the intestinal tract, espe.
 In E. coli, fimbriae are assembled by several pathways,
cially the large intestine; however, many are opportunistic
but the chaperone-usher pathway is the most frequent in
Or primary pathogens too. Pathogenic E. coli are broadly
pathogenicstrains. Most E. coliproduce type 1 (F1) fimbriae,
divided into diarrheagenic and extraintestinal strains. Diar-
 and these bind to mannose. Thus, F1 are called mannose-
rheagenic E. coli are economically important pathogens
sensitive because their ability to bind can be blocked by
of neonatal piglets, calves, and lambs. Postweaning diar-
pretreatment with mannose. Mannose-resistant fimbriae,
rhealinfections are also important in swine. Extraintestinal
which include many fimbrial types on pathogenic strains,
infections commonly occur in the urinary tract, umbilicus,
are not inhibited by mannose. F1 plays a role in E. coli
blood, lung, and wounds in any location, and these infec.
urinary tract infections in which it mediates adherence to
tions occur in most animal species. E. coli causes septicemia
 in neonates of most species, but especially calves, piglets,
Fimbrial adhesins found on E. coli that cause disease
lambs, foals, puppies, and kittens, and causes opportunistic
(colibacillosis) in animals include F4 (with ab, ac, and ad
septicemia in older immunosuppressed animals. In avian
subtypes), F5 (K99), F6 (987P), F11 (PapA), F17 (with a, b,
 species, E. coli is an important cause of ai sacculitis, pneu-
C, and d subtypes), F18 (with ab and ac subtypes, formerly
monia, septicemia, and omphalitis. Zoonotic infections
known as F107), F41,and F165 complex (F1651 and F1652).
with Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) and host-specific
Several of the fimbriae on enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
diarrheagenic and extraintestinal infections are of major
isolates from humans are called colonization factor anti-
importance in human medicine.
gens (CFA), for example, CFA/I (also known as F2), CFA/II
(also known as F3), and others. Some fimbriae in ETEC iso-
Descriptive Features
lates from humans are called coli-surface (Cs) antigens, for
example, CS1, CS2, CS3, and others. Finally, other ETEC
fimbriae from human isolates are called putative coloniza-
Cellular Structure and Composition
tion factors (PCF), also numbered sequentially. Approxi-
Escherichia are straight, cylindrical, gram-negative rods
mately 75% of ETEC isolates from humans express CFA/l,
with rounded ends that are approximately 0.5 μm in diam-
CFA/I1, 0r CFA/IV.
eter and 1.0-3.0 μm in length (see Figures 7.1 and 7.2). The
 In animals, strains that express F4, F5, F6, F18ac, or F41
cell wall contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS), outer mem-
fimbria are ETEC and cause enteric colibacillosis mani-
brane proteins, lipoproteins, porins, and a thin peptidogly-
fested as diarrhea. Genes for expression of F4, F5, and F6
can layer (see Figure 7.3). Cells with a complete LPs layer
are usually carried on plasmids, whereas those for F41 are
will typically express an O-antigen, although not all are
on the chromosome. F4, formerly known as K88, mediates
typable. Celis may express a capsule (K-antigen), flagella
adherence to brush border receptors on small intestinal
(H-antigen), and adhesins.
enterocytes of piglets (Figure 7.1). In pigs, the resistant and
susceptible phenotypes for F4ab and F4ac are inherited as
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
a monogenetic trait, with the susceptibility allele being
dominant over the resistance one. The F4ab/ac receptor is
Adhesins.
 Adhesins are composed of protein subunits
 a mucin-like sialoglycoprotein that is encoded on a locus
assembled into organelles or consist of a single outer
distal to the mucin-4 gene on chromosome 13. Piglets
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior. Edited by D. Scott McVey, MelissaKerrdy ard MM. Chrga.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
62
Chapter 7
Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
63
FIGURE 7.1.
The photomicrograph taken at an objective
FIGURE 7.3.
Higher magnification scanning electron
magnification of 60x shows mucosal epithelium in the
photomicrograph of colon of neonatal gnotobiotic caff. Shiga
jejunum of an 11-day-old gnotobiotic piglet infected with
toxin-producing E. coli strain 84-5406 (serotype O5:K4:H-,
porcine-origin enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) strain WAM2317
arrow) cover the apical cel membranes of enterocytes. Cuplike
(O8:K87:H- :F4). Immunohistochemistry was used to
Or pedestal-fike distortions of the apical cell membranes
demonstrate the bacteria that are adherent to the enterocytes.
(arrowhead) are present at sites where bacteria were detached
Rabbit anti-O8 was used as the primary antiserum. Aikaline
during tissue processing. Microvilli between attached bacterial
phosphatase-iabeled goat antirabbit serum and fast red were
 celis are prominent and elongated. Enterocytes are swollen
 subsequently used in the staining procedures.
and are in the process of detachment from the mucosal
surface (original negative magnification 5000x; bar = 1 μm).
(Copyright @ American Society for Microbiology. Moxley RA
福
and Francis DH 1986; with permission.)
expressing the F4ab/ac receptor are susceptible to F4ab-
01 F4ac-mediated fimbrial adherence. Enterotoxigenic col-
ibacillosis caused by F4-positive strains is often clinically
Strains expressing F5, formerly known as K99, cause
severe, and may be seen in piglets only a few hours old to
diarrhea in piglets less than 1 week old and in calves
and lambs during only the first few days of life. In pigs,
approximately 8 weeks of age. F4-positive bacteria adhere
to the full length of the small intestine, a feature that
resistance to F5-mediated fimbrial adherence results from
greatly increases the severity of disease. F5-positive fimbria
a decrease in the number of receptors on the intestinal
mediate adherence to receptors on the brush borders of
epithelium. Similar to F5, F6-positive fimbriae mediate
enterocytes in the distal half of the small intestine.
colonization of only the distal small intestine. Strains
expressing F6, formerly known as 987P, cause diarrhea
 only in piglets, and clinical disease is usually limited to
piglets less than 1 week old. Age-mediated resistance to
β-Hemolysis produced by α-hemolysin.
F6 results from shedding of fimbrial receptors into the
FIGURE 7.2.
Porcine-origin enterotoxigenic E. coli strain 3030-2
intestinal lumen, facilitating bacterial clearance rather
(O157:H-:F4) was streaked for isolation on tryptic soy agar
than colonization. F18ab- and F18ac-positive fimbriae
containing 5% sheep red blood cells, and incubated at 37 *C
mediate colonization of the small intestine in postweaned
for 24 h. (Xing 1996.)
swine. Strains that express F18ab typically produce Shiga
toxin-2e and cause edema disease. Strains that produce
F18ac are typically enterotoxigenic. F18ab colonization
may occur in either the proximal or distal part of the small
intestine.
F17-positive E. coli are typically isolated from 4- to 21-
half of the F17-positive E. coli strains isolated from calves
with diarrhea are resistant to complement and produce aer-
obactin, suggesting a role in septicemia. Approximately,
one-fourth of the F17-positive E. coli strains isolated from
calves produce cytotoxic necrotizing factor-2 (CNF-2) and
afimbrial adhesin (Afa), findings also suggesting a role in
extraintestinal infections. Most bovine strains expressing
F17c subtype fimbriae also produce the afimbrial Cs31A
adhesin. Genes for expression of F17c fimbria are often
found on a self-transmissible plasmid that also encodes fo1
CS31A adhesin, aerobactin, and antibiotic resistance.
64
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
F165i and F1652 fimbriae have also been found on E.
important causes of infantile diarrhea in humans in the
coli isolates from piglets and calves with septicemia. F165-
world. EPEC infections occur naturally in pigs, calves, dogs,
positive isolates from piglets are usually nonenterotoxi-
and cats, but only a small fraction of the causative strains
genic, serogroup O115, and express F11 (PapA) fimbriae,
produce Bfp.
aerobactin, K “V165" O-antigen capsule, and additional
 Afimbrial (nonfimbrial) adhesins in various pathogenic
virulence factors, many of which are found other in extrain -
E. coli include CS31A, AfaE-VII, Afa-VIlI, AIDA-1, LifA, Efa1,
testinal pathogenic E. coli strains. F165-positive strains col-
ToxB, Paa, Saa, OmpA, Iha, and TibA. CS31A is typically
onize the distal small intestine of piglets, but cause sep-
found on neonatal calf septicemia isolates that are also pos-
ticemia and polyserositis instead of diarrhea. The bacteria
itive for F17c fimbria and aerobactin. CS31A is present as
are thought to enter extraintestinal tissues by transloca-
fine, wiry, fibrillae that collapse onto the surface of the bac-
tion from the intestine and are known to resist phagocytic
terium, forming a capsule-like structure. Cs31A mediates
killing by porcine neutrophils. Both F165 fimbriae and
adherence to N-acetylneuraminic acid receptors on host
the K"vi65" capsule are required for complete resistance
cells. Afa-Vll and Afa-Vlll are afimbrial ad hesins found on 
to killing by neutrophils.
bovine isolates. Afa-Vll has been found on isolates from
Curli are thin, coiled, fibrillar fimbriae that promote
diarrhea cases and Afa-Vlll has been found on isolates from
adherence to extracellular matrix proteins, for exam-
 diarrhea and septicemia cases in calves. Isolates express-
ple, fibronectin and laminin. Curli fimbriae play a role
ing Afa-VIII usually also produce CNF-1 or CNF-2. Afa-VIII
in biofilm formation, which assists bacterial survival in
is produced more often than Afa-Vll by bovine isolates.
the environment. Curli fimbriae are produced by both
 as is CNF-2 than CNF1. AIDA-1 (adhesin involved in dif-
pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains of E. coli, as well
as by other members of the Enterobacteriaceae family.
adherent E. coli (DAEC) of humans, and mediates the dif-
Aggregative adherence fimbriae (AAF/l and AAF/Il)
fusely adherent phenotype. AIDA-I has been found in iso-
 mediate adherence of enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC) to
lates from pigs with edema disease and postweaning diar-
HEp-2 cells in vitro. Following growth, adherent bacteria
rhea. Many porcine isolates that are genotypically positive
form an autoaggregative, “stacked-brick" pattern on the
for AIDA-I are also positive for heat-stable enterotoxin-b
surfaces of the host cells. EAEC are an important cause of
(STb) alone orin combination with enteroaggregativeE. coli
 persistent diarrhea in children and adults in developing
heat-stable toxin-1 (EAST1). LifA (lymphostatin) in EPEC
and developed countries. In humans, EAEC are thought to
and its homolog Efa1 (enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC)
primarily colonize the colon. EAEC with ability to cause
factor for adherence) in EHEC mediate enterocyte adher-
disease usually contain a large set of virulence genes reg-
ence. LifA also inhibits lymphocyte activation and produc-
ulated by the AggR transcription activator. These include
tion of certain cytokines. Efa1 is produced by non-O157
plasmid (pAA) genes encoding the AAF, aprotein coatsecre-
EHEC strains and it mediates adherence to epithelial cells
tion system (Aat), secreted dispersin protein (Aap), plasmid-
in vitro and in the bovine intestine. ToxB is a homolog
encoded toxin (Pet; a serine protease autotransporter that
 of LifA and Efa1 and is produced by EHEC O157:H7. Paa
targets spectrin), Shf (a protein involved in intercellular
(porcine attaching-and effacing-associated) factor is found
(ss us n ad and e) ie pe (se
 in porcine EPEC and EHECisolates;its role in the pathogen-
EAEC also express virulence factors that are encoded by
esis is unknown. Saa (STEC-autoagglutinating adhesin) is
genes on the chromosome. Protein Involved in Coloniza-
found in non-O157 STEC strains thatlack the locus of ente-
tion (Pic) (which is a type of serine protease autotransporter 
rocyte effacement (LEE) and is much more highly preva-
of Enterobacteriaceae (SPATE) that functions as a secreted
 lent in cattle than human isolates. OmpA (outer mem-
 mucinase and Irp2 (yersiniabactin, a siderophore) are two
brane protein A) is a putative adhesin used by EHEC in 
important virulence factors encoded on the chromosome.
adherence to large intestinal enterocytes. OmpA is also
A newly emergent EAEC clone of serotype O104:H4 is
produced by meningitis-associated E. coli in human iso-
highly virulent in humans. It produces most of the afore.
lates. Saa (STEC autoagglutinating adhesin) is produced
mentioned EAEC virulence factors, plus Shiga toxin (Stx)-
by EHEC. Iha (lrgA homolog adhesin) is produced by
2, aerobactin (iutA), iha (lrgA homolog adhesin), extended
EHEC O157:H7, EAEC O104:H4 and many STEC isolated
spectrum β-lactamases, and two additional SPATEs rarely
from cattle. TibA is produced by a subset of ETEC isolates
found in EAEC (SepA (unknown function) and SigA (which
of humans.
cleaves the cytoskeletal protein spectrin). Based on detec-
 E. coli cell surface antigens are subject to phase variation.
tion of aggregative adherence, EAEC have been detected in
Phase variation is the reversible change of one or more
piglets and calves,but these isolates contained almost none
cell surface antigens of a bacterium at a high frequency,
of the virulence factors found in human EAEC isolates, and
and involves the regulation of genes at the transcriptional
consequently were not likely to be pathogens of animals or
level. Phase variation of uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) fim-
humans.
brial pap genes involves the switching “on" or "off" of tran-
 The bundle-forming pilus (Bfp) is a fimbrial ad hesin pro-
scription in response to en vironmental signals. Similarly,
duced by class I (typical) enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC).
ETEC F4 fimbriae are expressed in vitro when cultured on
These fimbriae form “bundles" and mediate localized
blood agar at 37*C, but suppressed at 18 *C. Hence, through
adherence to HEp-2 cells in culture. In vivo, together with 
phase variation, the bacteria sense environmental signals
the type Ill secreted outer membrane protein known as
 and expend energy and nutritional resources only to the
EspA, they mediate the first stage of EPEC adherence to
 extent necessary (e.g., shut off fimbrial expression when it
small intestinal epithelial cells. EPEC are one of the most
is not needed).
Chapter 7
 Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
65
STb, and EAST1. LT is labile when heated to 70 *C for 10
FIGURE 7.4.
Transmission electron photomicrograph of
min, whereas STa and STb are stable at 100 *C for 15 min.
rectum of neonatal gnotobiotic calf inoculated with Shiga
toxin-producing E. coli strain 84-5406. The attachment of
Heat-Labile Enterotoxin. LT is very similar structurally,
bacteria to this enterocyte results primarily in pedestal-fike cel!
antigenically, and functionally to cholera toxin. The genes 
membrane evagination (P), with occasional cuplike
for LT expression, eltAB, are organized in an operon and
invagination (Cp). Microvilli between sites of bacterial
typically carried on a large, transmissible plasmid. Expres-
attachment are elongated (arrow). Some bacteria are in the
process of binary fission (arrowhead). The cytoplasm lacks a
sion of the eltAB operon is enhanced by exposure of the
discernibie terminal web and contains numerous vacuoles
cells to free glucose. This is due to derepression as a result of
(original negative magnification x 15 000; bar = 1 μm).
inhibition of the cAMP receptor protein (CRP). Enhanced
(Copyright @ American Society for Microbiology Moxley RA
and Francis DH 1986; with permission.)
effects of glucose exposure on expression of the genes for
STa and STb, both of which are subject to catabolite repres-
sion. Since an individual ETEC strain often carries both LT
and STb or LT and STa, expression of one or the other toxin 
is enabled in either condition.
LT is a rather large macromolecule with a molecular
weight of approximately 86 000 daltons. The LT holo-
toxin includes one 28-kDa A-subunit and five 11.5 kDa
 B-subunits. The A-subunit contains a serine-protease cleav-
age site that allows for separation into an A2- and an
enzymatically active Al-chain. The A-subunit is linked
noncovalently to the B-subunit via the A2-chain, and
the Al- and A2-chains are bridged together by a disul-
fide bond. The B subunits are arranged in a homopen-
tamer around the A subunit, and bind with greatest affin-
ity to Gal33GalNAcβ4(NeuAcα 3)Glcβ1-ceramide, more
commonly known as monosialoganglioside Gm1. The B-
subunits also bind with lower affinity to the disialogan-
Capsule. The capsule consists of an acidic, high molecu-
glioside GD1b, and to terminal galactose units on other
lar weight polysaccharide that is anionic and hydrophilic.
molecules, forexample, intestinalglycoproteins. Lipid rafts
The negative charge of the capsule helps protect the bacte-
in the apical cell membranes of intestinal epithelium are
ria against phagocytosis, since the phagocytes also have a
enriched in Gmi, and this serves as a route by which LT
negative charge on their cell surfaces. The capsule is usually
enters the host cell. While either in the intestinal lumen
antigenic, and if so,listed as a K-antigen type. Some capsu-
01 upon binding to the apical membrane of the cell, the A
subunit is proteolytically cleaved ("nicked") into A1- and
resistance"; that is, it protects the outer cell membrane from
A2 chains. Trypsin is able to cleave the A subunit, but the
the membrane attack complex of the complement cascade
identity of the protease(s) involved in this step is not actu-
(C5b-C9). This property is especially important for survival
ally known. Following this nicking event, the two chains
of pathogenic strains causing extraintestinal infections.
remain attached by the disulfide bond.
Based on studies with cholera toxin, after being bound
Cell Wall. The cell wall is typical of the Enterobacteri-
to Gm1, the holotoxin is taken up by a variety of endocytic
B          
mechanisms, including clathrin- and caveolin-dependent,
membrane is an important virulence determinant by virtue
as well as caveolin- and dynamin-independent ones. Fol-
of the biological effects of lipid A (endotoxin) and the O-
lowing uptake, the holotoxin traffcs through early and
antigen repeat unit (see Figure 7.4). The effects of lipid A
recycling endosomes, and then enters the trans-Golgi net-
are described in detail in Chapter 6. A thick O-antigen layer 
work. From there it bypasses the Golgi cisternae and trav-
 may provide effects similar to a K-antigen capsule. These
els to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), utilizing v- and t-
effects may include protection against phagocytosis and
SNARES, and other transmembrane vesicle fusion proteins.
the membrane attack complex of the complement system.
From the initial endocytic step to entry into the ER, the
Thick O-antigen layers that mediate these protective effects
B-subunit is bound to Gm . While in the ER lumen, the A1-
 are sometimes referred to as an O-antigen capsule.
chain is unfolded by protein disulfide isomerase and disso-
ciates from the A2-chain and the B-subunits. The un folded
A1-chain is then recognized by the ER Hsp70 chaperone BiP
Enterotoxins
and solubilized by the ER-associated degradation lumenal
Some pathogenic strains, especially those belonging to the
pathway. At this point, the A1-chain retro-translocates into
 diarheagenic class known as ETEC, may produce one 0r
the cytosol by an as yet unidentified pathway; the Sec61
more enterotoxins. These enterotoxins are protein exo-
translocon and the Hrd-1 complex are hypothetically pos-
toxins encoded by genes usually carried on transmissible
sible routes. Upon reentry into the cytosol, the Al-chain
plasmids. E. coli produces four different enterotoxins: heat-
refolds into its native conformation, and catalyzes the ADP-
labile enterotoxin (LT), heat-stable enterotoxin-a (STa),
ribosylation of arginine 201 of the α-subunit of the host Gs
66
PART II
I Bacteria and Fumgi
protein that regulates adenylyl cyclase. This modification
Heat-Stable Enterotoxin-a. STa (STI, ST) is a small, non-
leads to inhibition of the GTPase activity of Gso of the host
 immunogenic polypeptide of approximately 2.0 kDa, and
G, protein. Adenylyl cyclase, located at the basal surface of
encoded by estA which is carried on transmissible plasmids.
the cell, is constitutively activated.
Expression of estA is subject to catabolite repression; hence,
Constitutive activation of adenylyl cyclase results in a
exposure of cells to free glucose results in gene repres-
marked intracellular increase in cAMP, which causes acti-
sion. ETEC strains isolated from pigs express a form of STa
vation of protein kinase A. Protein kinase A causes phos-
referred to as STp (STla), which is an 18-amino acid variant.
phorylation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc
Isolates from humans express either STp or a 19-amino acid
tance regulator (CFTR), an anion channel in the apical cell
variant called STh (STlb). The receptor for both forms of STa
membrane. Phosphorylation opens the channel, resulting
is the transmembrane protein, guanylyl cyclase-C (GC-C),
in excessive secretion of Cl- and bicarbonate ion (HCO3 -)
located in the apical cell membrane of intestinal epithelial
into the gut lumen. Secretion mainly occurs by cryptalente.
cells. STa is active on enterocytes of a variety of species (e.g.,
rocytes, making the electric potential of these cells nega-
humans, mice, pigs, and cattle) and causes fluid accumula-
tive and their serosal potential positive, both relative to
tion in ligated intestinal loops of neonatal mice and pigs,
the lumen. The transmural potential drives the diffusion
and in the natural disease mainly causes diarrhea in the
of Na+ through the tight junctions into the gut lumen. The
 neonatal animal.
increased Na+ concentration in the gut lumen results in
The mature 18- or 19-amino acid STa peptide is ini-
an increased osmotic pressure and corresponding diffusion
tially produced as a 72-amino acid pre-pro form. The lat-
of water into the gut lumen, which presents clinically as
 o- e on asdad ps e a p si r
diarrhea.
pro-STa peptide. Another protease then cleaves this pre-
 A second mechanism by which LT may cause secretory
cursor to form the mature toxin. Upon binding to GC-C,
diarrhea is through stimulated synthesis of prostaglandins
this enzyme is activated to convert guanosine triphosphate
of the E series (e.g., PGE2) and platelet-activating factor
(GTP) to cyclic 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP), causing an
(PAF). Binding of the B subunit to Gm1 activates phos-
increased intracellular concentration of cGMP in the cell.
 pholipase Az, resulting in release of arachidonic acid and
This causes activation of a cGMP-dependent protein kinase
generalized enhancement of cyclooxygenase activity, that
(protein kinase G), which phosphorylates the CFTR, opens
is, production of PGE2. Fibroblasts, mast cells, and leuko-
the channel, causing secretion of Cl- and accumulation of
cytes are major sources of prostaglandins and leukotrienes.
Na+ and water in the intestinal lumen. Guanylin, a hor-
Binding of the B subunit to these cells could potentially
mone produced by goblet cells, is the natural ligand fo1
stimulate electolyte transport and motility in the intestine
GC-C, and bears significant amino acid homology to STa.
through induced synthesis of PGE2 . Prostaglandins, includ-
The enterotoxic domain of STa is homologous to the active
ing PGE2, have prosecretory and antiabsorptive effects on
site of guanylin and the enterotoxic domains of EAST1
the intestine through induction of Ca2+ uptake, activation
and Yersinia enterocolifica heat-stable toxin. In the case of
of protein kinase C, and increased intracellular cAMP in
 guanylin, its natural function is thought to be the hydra-
such target cells as neurons and epithelial cells. In addi-
tion of mucus secreted by goblet cells.
tion, PGE2 causes increased transcription of proinflamma-
tory cytokines, for example, interleukin-6 (IL-6).
Heat-Stable Enterotoxin-b. S
STb is synthesized as a 71-
A third mechanism by which LT may cause secretory
 amino acid precursor, and contains a 23-amino acid N-
diarrhea is through stimulation of the enteric nervous sys-
 terminal signal sequence that is cleaved during export to
tem (ENS). The ENS has highly significant control over
the periplasm. The mature STb (STI1) enterotoxin is secreted
secretion and absorption in the intestine. Both cholera
toxin and LT cause the release of vasoactive intestinal
mately 5.2 kDa. The gene for Stb (estB) is carried on a trans-
polypeptide (VIP), an ENS neurotransmitter that acts on
missible plasmid and is often lin ked (i.e., in close proximity
to the genes for LT). Similar to estA, estB is subject to catabo-
effects. VIP binds to its receptor on secretory epithelial cells.
lite repression; glucose represses gene expression.
The VIP receptor is a G protein-linked activator of adeny-
STb is unrelated to STa in terms of its amino acid
lyl cyclase; hence, VIP binding to its receptor has the same
sequence and mode of action. STb does not cause an
result on these cells as does the direct binding by cholera
increase in intracellular cAMP or cGMP, in contrast to LT
toxin or LT. Cholera toxin also causes release of two other
and STa. STb is thought to only be involved in disease in
prosecretory and antiabsorptive neurotransmitters that LT
 pigs, because with few exceptions it is active only on ente-
does not, namely, serotonin and substance P. This effect
  (x   n  d  s
has been proposed as an explanation for why cholera toxin 
 inactivated in the gut lumen by trypsin. Diarrheic piglets
tends to be a more potent toxin than LT.
less than 1 week old have a lower incidence of carriage of
 In addition to its pathogenic effects, LT is antigenic and
estB-positive ETEC strains. Studies with gnotobiotic piglets
a mucosal adjuvant. Antibodies against the B subunit neu-
 inoculated with isogenic and complemented estB mutants
tralize the toxin by preventing its binding to Gm. Active
support the hypothesis that STb is less effective as a viru-
 and toxoided LT holotoxin have marked adjuvant activity,
len ce factor in neonatal piglets. The high con tent of trypsin
and both have been used to boost the immune responses to
in the small intestines at this age may play a significant role
a large variety of antigens, especially those applied mucos-
in this regard. Studies with gut loop assays and cariage
ally. The A subunit of the toxin provides the adjuvant
of estB-positive strains both provide evidence that STb is
effects.
more important as virulence factor in weaned pigs, that is,
Chapter 7
 Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
67
postweaning colibacillosis. E. coli strains that produce AIDA
Other Toxins
as the adhesin and either STb alone or in conjunction with
EAST1 have the potential to cause of diarrhea in pre- 0r
Shiga Toxin. The Shiga toxin family includes the pro-
postweaned swine.
totype Shiga toxin (Stx) produced by Shigella dysenteriae
 The receptor for STb on enterocytes is a glycosphin-
golipid known as sulfatide. STb is internalized and stim-
E. coli strains present in reservoir hosts, food, environment
ulates a pertussis toxin-sensitive GTp-binding regulatory
01 other sources, known as STEC. Those STEC strains iso-
protein. This results in an influx ofCa2+ through a receptor-
lated from human patients with hemorrhagic colitis and/or
dependent ligand-gated calcium channel, which activates
hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) are known as enterohe-
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I1. This activates the
morrhagic E. coli, and are discussed below.
opening of an intestinal ion channel, and may also acti-
vate protein kinase C and consequently, the CFTR. The
Shiga-like toxins, and all members of the Stx family are
increased calcium level regulates phospholipases A2 and C
also known as verotoxins or verocytotoxins. The Stx pro-
activities, and the release of arachidonic acid from mem-
duced by E. coli strains fall into two major immunologically
brane phospholipids leading to the formation of PGE2 and
noncross-reactive groups, Stx1 and Stx2. The prototypical
serotonin. As noted earlier, PGE2 and serotonin both have
Stx1 and Stx2 toxins have 55% and 57% sequence iden-
prosecretory and antiabsorptive effects on the intestine.
tity in the A and B subunits, respectively. Stx1 exists as two
STb causes HCO3 - and Cl- (but especially the former) secre-
variants; one (called Stx1) is identical to or varies by only
tion from the enterocytes, which results in diffusion of Na+
 one amino acid from Stx produced by S. dysenteriae serotype
and osmotic accumulation of water into the gut lumen.
1. The other, Stx1c, has only 97.1% and 96.6% amino acid
sequence identity to Stx1. Stx2 variants include Stx2, Stx2c,
Stx2d, Stx2e, and Stx2f; the last four are 84-99% homolo-
Enteroaggregative E. cofi Heat-Stable Toxin-1. EAST1 is
gous to Stx2. Stx2e is the toxin that causes edema disease
a 38-amino acid peptide of approximately 4.1 kDa. EAST1
in swine.
is encoded by the astA gene, which may be caried on plas-
 E. coli strains acquire the genes for all Stx except Stx2e
mids or the chromosome, in one or more copies. EAST1
through infection with lambdoid bacteriophages. These
shares 50% identity with the enterotoxic domain of STa,
phage become integrated in the chromosome, but in
binds to the same receptor as STa, guanylyl cyclase-C, and
response to stress may be induced to excise from the chro-
causes increased cGMP concentrations in target host cells.
mosome and assume a cytosolic replicating form (lytic
However, anti-STa antibodies do not neutralize EAST1, and
cycle). Treatment of patients with some antibiotics (e.g.,
EAST1 does not contain an N-terminal signal sequence
quinolones) is contraindicated because it may cause induc-
region as does STa, hence the two toxins differ signifi-
tion of prophage with cytosolic replication the phage; this
cantly outside of their enterotoxic domains. EAST1 has
results in increased expression of Stx and bacterial lysis,
been demonstrated to be freely secreted from the bacterial
releasing much greater Stx products than before.
cell.
Stx family members have an ABs molecular config-
EAST1 was first detected in an EAEC strain isolated from
uration, in which the B subunits bind to receptors on
a child with diarrhea, hence the name. However, besides
the plasma membranes of target cells, and the A subunit
EAEC, EAST1 has since been found to be highly prevalent
 mediates the toxic activity following endocytosis of the
among EHEC, atypicalEPEC, ETEC, DAEC, and other bacte-
holotoxin. Functionally, the Stx belong to a larger family
rial genera such as Salmonella. In astA-positive E. coli isolates
of ribosome-inactivating toxins that includes such other
from diarrheic swine, astA is found most often as the sole
potent toxins such as ricin, produced by castor beans,
enterotoxin gene. The second most common presentation
although the activity of Stx is not limited to inhibition
is carriage of astA in conjunction with the STa gene (estA).
of protein synthesis. The host cell receptor for all Stx
Detection of astA in combination with genes for STb, LT,
except Stx2e is the neutral glycosphingolipid globotriao-
Stx2e, and fimbrial F4, F5 F6, or F18 genes is also seen. The
sylceramide (Gb3, also known as CD77). The Stx2e B sub-
astA gene is highly prevalent among diarrheagenic E. coli
units bind to globotetraosylceramide (Gb4). The molecular
isolated from preweaned piglets, but also has been associ-
mass of the A subunit is 32 kDa, whereas that of each B sub-
ated with postweaning diarrhea and edema disease isolates.
unit is 7.7 kDa. Similar to LT, the holotoxin assembles in
The astA gene has been found in E. coli bacteremia iso-
the periplasm and consists of a B-subunit homopentamer
lates from cattle. In these extraintestinal isolates, carriage
surrounding and becoming noncovalently bound to the A
of astA was significantly associated with carriage ofthe clpG
subunit. Although some EHEC contain genes for a type II
gene encoding the major subunit of Cs31A, and with afa-8.
secretion system, to date there is no evidence that Stx is
EAST1 has been detected in conjunction with STb in E. coli
actively secreted by the bacterium. Instead, Stx is released
isolates from diarrheic pigs that express AIDA-1. Despite the
following death of the cell, and phage-mediated lysis is
in vitro evidence for activation guan ylylcyclase-C, no in vivo
thought to play a major role in this process.
studies have shown that EAsT1 by itself will cause diarrhea.
Trafficking of Stx in the target cell also bears many simi-
In each study, diarrhea has been caused by astA-positive
larities with the mechanisms employed by LT, described
strains that produced at least one other enterotoxin.
earlier. Following contact with the receptor, the holo-
Hence, clarification is still needed on the role of EAST1
toxin molecule is endocytosed into the cell via clathrin-
in diarrhea, in addition to other clinical manifestations of
dependent and -independent mechanisms. During the
disease.
early entry process, probably at the stage of the early
68
PART l1  Bacteria and Fungi
endosomes, a protease-sensitive loop located in the C-
and similar in size. The activation of Rho GTPases causes
terminal region of the A-subunit is cleaved by the
reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton with formation
membrane-associated endoprotease furin. This “nicking"
of stress fibers, membrane ruffles, and filopodia. The cells
process divides the A-subunit into the catalytic Al frag-
 become flattened and multinucleated and are increased in
ment and a B-subunit-associated A2 fragment. The A1 frag-
their phagocytic behavior. CNF also activates NF-x B, result-
ment remains linked to the A2-B subunit complex via a
ing in increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines,
disulfide bond. This disulfide bond is ultimately reduced in
 and protection of the cell against apoptotic stimuli. The
the ER lumen, releasing the enzymatic A1 fragment, which
 gene encoding CNF1 is located on the chromosome on a
is thought to use the ER-associated protein degradation
pathogenicityisland (PAI), whereas that encoding CNF-2 is
 pathway to become subsequently retro-translocated to the
located on a plasmid. CNF1 is produced by extraintestinal
cytosol. The N-terminal 27-kDa fragment of A1 acts as an
E. coli isolates from humans, especially UPEC and E. coli
N-glycosidase and removes an adenine from the 28S rRNA
that cause meningitis in the human infant. The PAl car-
of the 60s ribosomal subunit. This causes an alteration
rying cnf1 in these strains also contains genes that encode
of rRNA and prevents elongation factor (EF)-1-dependent
for α-hemolysin (hlyA) and fimbriae (papC and sfa). CNF-2
binding of aminoacyl tRNA to the ribosome.
is produced by E. coli isolates from the intestines of calves
The result of Stx intoxication of a cell depends, at least
with diarrhea, or the blood of calves or lambs with bacteria.
in part, on the cell type. Endothelial cells respond to Stx
intoxication by apoptosis, the initial stage of vascular
Cytolethal Distending Toxin. The CDTs are a family of
 n d  sn n a 
related toxins that affect the mammalian cell cycle. They
and microtubular rearrangement. Some cells, such as,
cause growth arrest at the GM2/M phase of the cell cycle,
which ultimately leads to cell death. Three adjacent genes,
upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines, for example,
cdtA, cdtB, and cdfC, are required for protein expression,
GM-CSF and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). TNF in the circu-
 and five CDT types (CDT-I to CDT-V) have been described.
lation induces the expression of Gb3 by endothelial cells,
The CDTs have not been associated with any particular
thus exacerbating the exposure of the latter cells to Stx. In
pathogenic type of E. coli except for a few isolates of EPEC,
those cells that respond to Stx intoxication by intracellular
and a role in pathogenicity has not been determined.
signaling, a ribotoxic stress response is generated that
 Strains that express CDT may produce a number of other
 may activate kinases such as JUN N-terminal kinase and
virulence factors.
mitogen-activated protein kinase p38.
 The clinicopathologic effect of Stx-mediated tissue dam-
Cycle-Inhibiting Factor. Cif is mainly produced by EPEC
age is mainly seen in the human host and is manifested as
and EHEC. In vitro,Cif causes irreversible cytopathic effects
bloody diarrhea caused by hemorrhagic colitis and HUS.
characterized by the progressive recruitment of focal adhe-
Most of these effects stem from the direct and indirect
sions, assembly of stress fibers, and arrest of the cell cycle
effects of Stx (apoptosis of endothelium and upregulated
at the GM2/M phase.
cytokine expression by monocytes, macrophages and other
cells).
Serine Protease Autotransporters of Enterobacteriaceae.
The SPATEs are a subfamily of serine protease autotrans-
Cyclomodulins. Cyclomodulins are a family of bacterial
porters that are produced by diarrheagenic E. coli, UPEC,
toxins and effectors that interfere with the eukaryotic cell
and Shigella spp.
cycle. Pathogenic strains of E. coli are known to produce
any of three different ones, including CNF, cytolethal dis-
Plasmid-Encoded Toxin. Pet is a 104-kDa SPATE that
tending toxin (CDT), and cycle inhibiting factor (Cif). The
cleaves spectrin (also known as v-fodrin, a part of the
effects of these toxins have mainly been studied in vitro;
cytoskeleton) and is produced by EAEC. Fodrin cleavage
other studies have tried to assess the relationships between
disrupts the actin cytoskeleton in intestinal epithelial cells,
carriage of a respective virulence gene and natural disease.
causing loss of stress fibers and release of focal contacts.
In general, these toxins cause cell death or interference with
These changes also stimulate an inflammatory response.
cell function, both of which arguably increase the poten-
Diarrhea is thought to result from prostaglandin synthesis
tial for colonization or invasion of an epithelial surface. A
by the recruited PMNs and affected epithelial cells, as well
study of E. coli isolates from calves and dogs with diarrhea,
as activation of various inositol-signaling pathways within 
cystitis, or no disease revealed that the E. coli isolates posi-
affected host cells. The net result is the secretion of chloride
tive for cyclomodulin genes were almost always from cases
ions and water. Pet is encoded on a large virulence plasmid
of disease (diarrhea or cystitis). In another study in volving
in close proximity to the gene encoding AAF.
bovine isolates, the cnf2 and cdt-lll genes were found to
be colocalized on the Vir plasmid. It is thought that the
Protein Involved in Colonization. Pic isa SPATE produced
different cyclomodulins may be synergistic in their effects.
by UPEC, EAEC, EIEC, and Shigella spp. It is a mucinase and
a protease. The pic gene is encoded on the chromosome,
Cytotoxic Necrotizing Factor. CNFs are large (110-
in the same locus but on the opposite DNA strand from
115 kDa), monomeric proteins that cause permanent acti-
the gene encoding Shigella enterotoxin 1 (ShET1). Pic is
vation of the Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 GTPases of target cells by
thought to be involved in the early stages of the pathogen-
deamidation of a glutamine residue. There are two types of
esis of EAEC infection, and most likely promotes intesti-
CNF, CNF1 and CNF2, which are immunologically related
nal colonization. It does not damage epithelial cells, cleave 
Chapter 7
 Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
69
fodrin, or degrade host defenses (e.g., secretory IgA, lacto.
tially transcribes genes responsible for acid tolerance (sur-
ferrin, or lysozyme) embedded in the mucus layer. Pic also
vival at pH, 5), allowing safe transit through the stomach.
induces intestinal mucus hypersecretion, which is thought
to enhance bioflm formation.
Locus of Enterocyte Effacement. The LEE is a PAl on the
chromosome in EPEC and EHECstrains that contains genes
Hemolysins. E. coli produce at least three hemolysins: α-
needed for proteins that cause attaching-and-effacing (A/E)
hemolysin, enterohemolysin (Ehx for enterohemorrhagic
lesions in the host cell (Figures 7.3 and 7.4).
E. coli toxin), and cytolysin A (Cly).
Intimin and Translocated Intimin Receptor. Intimin is a
α -Hemolysin. α-Hemolysin (Hly) is the prototype of the
transmembrane, outer membrane protein encoded by eae
RTX toxin family. RTX is an acronym for repeats-in-
located in the LEE5 operon. The N-terminus of intimin is in
 toxin, and named on behalf of the repeats in glycine-rich
the periplasm, and the C-terminus projects out above the
sequences within the protein. Hly isa pore-forming protein
surface of the bacterial cell. The N-terminus has a rather
exotoxin that is secreted by a type I secretion system. Hly
constant amino acid sequence, whereas the C-terminus
is commonly produced by extraintestinal E. coli isolates in
is variable and forms the basis of intimin types and sub-
humans and animals and is also ubiquitous in F4-positive
types. At least 17 different intimin types and subtypes have
ETEC isolates from swine. Hly is encoded by the operon,
been described, and these are differentiated by Greek let-
hlyCABD, and loss or gain of hly by genetic manipulation
ter and number designations (e.g, αl, α2, β1, and β2).
produces corresponding changes in virulence of extrain-
The C-terminus of the intimin molecule binds to another
secreted bacterial protein, translocated intimin receptor
testinal E. coli strains. In human extraintestinal isolates, hty
genes are carried on PAls on the chromosome, in conjuc-
(Tir), encoded by fir, also located in the LEE5 operon. The
tion with pap and prs genes. In contrast, in porcine ETEC
Tir protein is inserted into the host cell membrane with
isolates hly genes are carried on transmissible plasmids.
the C- and N-termini located in the host cell cytoplasm
Hly causes hemolysis, and is detected by the presence of
and the mid-region of the polypeptide external to the cell 
forming a hairpin loop. It is this hairpin loop to which the
β-hemolytic zones surrounding isolated colonies on blood
C-terminus of the intimin molecule binds. Numerous adja-
agar medium (Figure 7.2). Lysis of erythrocytes provides
a source of iron, but perhaps even more important is its
cent intimin -Tir molecular complexes result in an intimate
effects on granulocytes. Neutrophils exposed to sublytic
anchoring of the bacteria to host cell membrane, signifi-
concentrations of Hly have impaired capabilities of
cantly enhancing colonization.
responding to chemotactic signals, phagocytosis, and
bacterial killing. In addition, exposure of neutrophils to
Type Ill Secretion System. The genes encoding a type Ill
sublytic concentrations of Hly causes release of inflamma-
secretion system (an assemblage of proteins-more than
tory mediators that can cause tissue damage and increase
20—that form a hollow tube-like structure through which
the ability of the bacteria to evade the epithelial barrier.
effector proteins are injected into host target cells) are also
encoded on the LEE (see LEE).
Enterohemolysin. Enterohemolysin (Ehx, for enterohe-
E. cofi Secreted Protein. The genes encoding E. coli
morragic E. coli toxin) also is an RTX toxin, and is produced
secreted protein (Esp) proteins are also located on the
by many STEC serotypes. Its virulence features are essen-
LEE. EspA forms the hollow, syringe-like structure through
tially the same as that of α-hemolysin. The genes for ehx are
which Tir, EspB, EspD, and other effectors are injected into
carried on large plasmids along with other virulence genes
the host cell. EspB and EspD form the pore in the host cell.
for a catalase-peroxidase (KatP) and an extracellular serine
Several other effectors elicit cytoskeletal rearrangements
protease (EspP).
leading to effacement of the microvilli. Other less-well
defined effectors, such as Cif and Map, are thought to medi-
Cytolysin A. A gene encoding a cryptic hemolysin called
ate toxic effects to the host cell, for example cell cycle arrest
clyA (cytolysin A), sheA (for silent hemolysin) or hlyE, is
and mitochondrial damage. Diarrhea occurs secondary to
found on the chromosome of essentially all E. coli strains.
increases in intracellular calcium ions and activation of
The hemolytic protein is 34-kDA and a pore-former. Both
 protein kinase C. Protein kinase C is responsible for phos-
activators and repressors regulate the transcription of the
phorylation of proteins composing the chloride channels
gene. Since the protein has hemolytic activity, it is pre-
resulting in loss of chloride and water into the intestinal
sumed to have a potential in vivo role in iron release from
lumen, as well as the phosphorylation of the membrane
erythrocytes.
associated ion transport proteins resulting in blockage of
absorption of NaCl.
Iron Acquisition. Iron is an absolute growth requirement
for most, if not all, living things. Siderophores (e.g., aer-
Variability
obactin) that remove iron from host iron-binding proteins
are necessary if a microbe is to have invasive capabilities
One measure of variability of E. coli resides in the anti-
(see Chapter 6).
genic makeup of the O-repeat units (type of sugar subunits,
how the subunits are hooked together, and the length of
Acid Tolerance. RNA polymerase containing RpoS (the
the chain), the composition of the flagellar protein (flag-
sigma factor associated with stationary phase) preferen-
ellin), and the composition of the capsule. The O-, H-, and
70
PART II
Bacteria and Fumgi
K-antigens are used in serotyping a particular isolate. There
 appear transiently during the first week or so of life. Anal.
are 174 O-antigens, at least 80 distinct K-antigens, and 53
ogous receptors are present in pigs throughout the first 6
H-antigens in the international serotyping scheme. The O-
weeks of life. There are many uncharacterized adhesins that
antigens are numbered 1-181, but several numbers have
 probably play a role.
been deleted due to cross-reactivity with other antigens.
Also as discussed above, some enterotoxigenic strains of
Fo1 example, O8:K87:H19 describes an isolate with anti-
E. coli express fimbria known as curli. Curli fimbria medi-
 gens of the O-antigen number 8, capsular-antigen number 
 ate adherence to glycoproteins on the surface of epithelial
87, and flagellar-antigen number 19.
cells and to extracellular matrix proteins, and are impor-
tant in the formation of biofilms. The presence of curli may
explain the increase in the window of age susceptibility to
Ecology
enterotoxigenic disease in animals concurrently infected
Reservoir and Transmission
 may cause enough tissue damage to lead to exposure of
Strains of E. coli capable of producing disease reside in the
extracellular matrix proteins.
lower gastrointestinal tract and are abundant in en viron-
In addition to adherence to the target tissues of the small
intestine, enterotoxigenic strains must have the genetic
ments inhabited by animals. Transmission is through the
fecal-oral route. The lower intestinal tract has been termed
capability of synthesizing enterotoxins. As noted above,
the “"primary habitat" and the environment outside the
there are four different enterotoxins produced by ETEC
strains, and although there are clones that have become
animal, the “secondary habitat" of E. coli. This reflects
highly prevalent throughout the world (e.g, porcine
the importance of the lower intestine in providing the
necessary nutrients and warm temperatures for E. coli (a
strains that produce the combination of F4, LT, and STb),
 mesophile) to be in a positive growth state, and also the
with time and extensive testing (usually by PCR), just about
 every possible combination is detected.
need for it to exit one host in order to enter a new one to
complete its "life cycle."
Some of the ad hesins and enterotoxins are encoded on
plasmid DNA. As a consequence, it is difficult to predict 
which strain of E. coli possesses the genetic information
Pathogenesis
necessary to produce disease. Some adhesins prefer to be
associated with certain serotypes. In particular, the genes
Mechanisms and Disease Patterns
encoding the protein for the F41 adhesin are almost always
found within strains of E. coli of the O9 and the O101
In order for E. coli to produce disease, it must have the
serogroups. As might be expected, the genes encoding the
necessary genes encoding the virulence factors needed to
proteins for F41 adhesin are located on chromosomal DNA.
 do so. If the genes are acquired (by transduction, conju-
Following ingestion by the host, enterotoxigenic strains
 gation, or transformation), the nonpathogenic strain may
of E. coli adhere to target cells, multiply, and secrete entero-
be changed to one with pathogenic potential. This lateral
toxin (Figure 7.1). Fluid and electrolytes accumulate in the
form of gene acquisition, often through bacteriophages or
lumen of the intestine, resulting in diarrhea, dehydration,
 plasmids, is of paramount importance in the emergence of
and electrolyte imbalances. In time, the infecting strain
is moved distally away from the target cell, and the dis-
depends upon the genes acquired.
ease process stops, due probably in part to the cessation of
expression ofthe adhesin along with a decrease in available
Enterotoxigenic Diarrhea. This disease occurs in neona-
substrate following the almost explosive multiplication of
tal pigs, calves, and lambs, and in weanling pigs. It has been
the strain in the small intestine. Unless steps are taken to
 reported in dogs and horses.
correct the fluid and electrolyte imbalances, the disease has
Enterotoxigenic diarrhea is caused by strains of E. coli
high mortality.
that produce adhesins that promote attachment to glyco.
The diarrhea produced is watery and nonbloody. There
 proteins on the surface of epithelial cells of the jejunum and
are minimal inflammatory changes, if any, in the small
ileum, and an enterotoxin(s) that affects the epithelial cell
intestine. Bacteria will be observed histologically coating
(to which the enterotoxigenic strain of E. coli is adhered),
the villi of the mid to distal portions of the small intestine.
resulting in fluid secretion and diarrhea. Both traits are nec-
essary for disease to result, since unless the ingested strain
Enteroaggregative E. cofi. As noted above, strains of E.
adheres to these cells, peristalsis will move it into the large
coli that express the AAF and therefore defined as EAEC
bowel. The cells of the jejunum and the ileum are suscepti-
 have been isolated from weaned pigs and calves with diar-
ble to the action of enterotoxin; the cells of the large bowel
rhea. However, these isolates contained almost none of the
are not.
other virulence factors found in human EAEC isolates, and
 As discussed above, at least four fimbrial adhesins may be
consequently were not likely to be pathogens of animals or
found on ETEC, F4, F5,F6, and F41.They possessome host
humans. EAEC are noted pathogens of humans and have a
species specificity: F4 and F6 are almost always associated
number of other virulence factors that are described earlier.
with isolates from swine; F5 with isolates from cattle, sheep,
and swine; and F41 with those from cattle. The epithelial
Extraintestinal E. cofi. Association of susceptible animals
cell receptors for these adhesins regulate the age incidence
(usually a neonate that has received inadequate amounts
of this disease as well. In calves and lambs, the receptors
of colostrum or colostrum of inadequate quality) with
Chapter 7
 Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
71
strains of E. coli that have some ability to invade the gut
Enteropathogenic E. cofi. Enteropathogenic strains of
epithelium and are able to survive outside of the intes-
E. coli produce diarrhea in all animal species, including
tine may occur by way of the conjunctivae, an inade-
human beings. EPEC do not produce ST, LT, or other
quately treated umbilicus, or ingestion. If these strains are
enterotoxins. Most notably, they cause A/E lesions in
acquired by ingestion, they first adhere to target cells in
the small intestines in humans, which they colonize the
the distal small bowel. Adherence is probably related to
small intestine. In animals, EPEC colonize and cause A/E
expression of afimbrial adhesins, namely Cs31A, AfaE-VII,
lesions in both the distal small intestine and the large
and AfaE-Vll1. Likewise, the fimbrial adhesin F17c and the
intestines. The characteristic lesion is named so because
siderophore aerobactin originally described on a plasmid
the microvilli are effaced and at these sites of efface-
termed Vir (so-called because of its association with vir-
ment, the bacteria are intimately attached to the apical
ulent E. coli) are prevalent on these E. coli strains. Fol-
plasma membrane. Cytoskeletal rearrangements induced
lowing adherence, these strains may induce their own
by effector proteins (discussed earlier) cause the forma-
uptake by expression of either CNF1 or CNF2, resulting
tion of pedestals, to which the bacteria attach (Figures 7.3
in an endocytotic process that allows them to enter the
and 7.4).
intestinal epithelial cells. Entry into the lymphatics and
subsequently the bloodstream follows. The mechanism by
Shiga Toxin-Producing E. coff. As described above, STEC
which these strains gain access to lymphatics after uptake
that produce intimin and other LEE gene products are
by the epithelial cell is unknown. Likewise, the mecha-
called enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC). These strains have
nism of entry into lymphatics after association with con-
a greater virulence since they most likely have the abil-
junctivae or the umbilicus is unknown. Once the epithe-
ity to produce A/E lesions and they produce Stx. E. coli
lial surface is traversed, expression of ad hesins is repressed
O157:H7 is the prototype of the EHEC and is thought to
(otherwise adhesin-expressing bacteria could adhere to
have evolved from EPEC O55:H7, a human infantile diar-
host phagocytic cells with disastrous consequences for the
rhea pathogen. E. coli acquire Stx genes via lysogeny with
bacterium).
the bacteriophage(s) that encode Shiga toxin (Stx)-1 and/or
The infecting strain multiplies in the lymphatics and
-2. Cattle are reservoir hosts for STEC; for some reason,
 bloodstream and endotoxemia develops. Death of the host
the bovine intestine has become a natural primary habitat
occurs if antibacterial therapy, the immune system, or both
for these organisms. Many different serotypes of E. coli are
do not remove the microorganism.
now known to be STEC; however, a much smaller subset
Extraintestinal E. coli have special qualities, for exam-
of these contain the LEE PAl. As noted above, some non-
ple,they mustescape phagocytosis, complement-mediated
O157 STEC that lack the LEE genes produce an alternative
lysis, and must have a mechanism to acquire iron. Capsule
adhesin known as Saa. Human patients are highly suscep-
and various outer membrane proteins confer resistance to
tible to the effects of Stx, whereas cattle are not. Cattle
 complement-mediated lysis (serum resistance). How cap-
lack the Gb3 receptor for Stx on their vascular endothe-
sules protect the outer membrane from insertion of the
lial cells; in addition Stx that enters into the enterocytes
membrane attack complex is not known. Certain capsules
of cattle ends in the lysosomes instead of the trans-Golgi
(such as K1) are chemically similar to the surface of host
and ER, which prevents toxic effects. Human patients are
cells in that they are composed mainly of sialic acid. Com-
susceptible to vascular necrosis, thrombosis and infarction 
plement components associating with surfaces composed
of the large intestine, which is manifest as hemorrhagic
 of sialic acid are shunted to degradative pathways rather
than amplification and formation of membrane attack
postdiarrheal sequelae, namely, HUS. Although the patho-
complexes.
genesis is complex, Stx plays a major role through the
Escape from phagocytosis is also related to capsule and
direct causation of endothelial apoptosis and induction of 
certain outer membrane proteins. How outer membrane
cytokine production by leukocytes, which in turn increase
proteins function as antiphagocytic factors is not known.
the expression of Gb3 on the endothelial cells. Clinically,
The genes encoding the adhesin (e.g., Cs3lA and
HUS is characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic ane-
F17) and those responsible for siderophore production
mia, thrombocytopenia, and uremia.
reside on plasmids. As mentioned above, the genes encod-
All affected animals acquire EPEC and STEC by fecal-oral
ing F17 have been associated with the plasmid 
Vir,
 transmission. Both STEC and EPEC have zoonotic poten-
as has the gene encoding CNF2; those responsible for
tial, but STEC strains areof greater concern due to the poten-
siderophore production have been associated with the plas-
tially life-threatening effects of Stx. Human beings primar-
 mid pColv. In the latter instance, the siderophore genes
ily become infected following ingestion of contaminated
are linked closely with the genes for the production of
food and water, or through direct contact with reservoir
colicin V. The siderophore, aerobactin, has a high affinity
hosts (all ruminants). Petting zoos have become a source of
for iron.
infection. At slaughter, the surface of the carcass becomes
 Many of the strains with invasive capability, except
contaminated with fecal microorganisms. The surfaces of
those from foals, produce α-hemolysin (Hly) and are β-
cuts of meat derived from an infected carcass are usually
hemolytic on blood agar.
adequately decontaminated by cooking. However, when
Histopathologically there are inflammatory changes in
meat is ground, the microorganisms on the surface become
 liver, spleen, joints, and meninges. There may be hemor-
introduced throughout the product. Though proper cook-
rhages on the pericardium, peritoneal surfaces, and ad renal
ing will readily kill surface microorganisms, includingSTEC
cortices.
O157:H7, those inside may not be killed. Currently in the
72
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
United States, non-O157 STEC cause more cases of illness
Adherent-lnvasive E cofi. Adherent-invasive E. coli
than does O157:H7. In the United States, six serogroups,
(AIEC) were first described in human patients with Crohn's
namely, 026, 045, 0103, 0111, 0121, and 0145, cause
disease. They have been significantly associated with
approximately 71% of the cases of non-O157 STEC-related
Crohn's disease, but a definite cause-and-effect relation-
illness in humans. Recently, the USDA-FSIS declared these
 ship has yet to be determined. AIEC have also been found
 serogroups, in addition to O157:H7 as adulterants in beef.
in dogs with histiocytic ulcerative colitis, and in this dis-
ease there is considerable scientific evidence for an etio-
logical role. AIEC adhere to and invade intestinal epithe-
Edema Disease. Edema disease is an acute, often fatal
lial cells. Entry into these cells is dependent upon induc.
enterotoxemia of weaned pigs. The disease is character-
tion of actin microfilament and microtubule recruitment.
ized by subcutaneous and subserosal edema, and neuro-
 The bacteria then gain entrance into macrophages beneath
logical signs that reflect infarcts in the brain stem. These
the epithelial layer, within which they replicate in endo-
lesions are caused by absorption of Stx2e from the intes-
cytic vacuoles without causing host cell death. Infection
tine. Causative strains are usually of certain serotypes, for
of the macrophages induces these cells to produce large
example, 0141:K85, 0138:K81, and 0139:K82, and usu-
amounts of TNF-α. This upregulation of cytokine produc
ally express α-hemolysin and F18ab fimbria. F18ab fim-
tion is thought to significantly exacerbate inflammation
brial expression enhances bacterial colonization of the dis-
and tissue damage.
tal small intestine. Stx2e is absorbed from the intestine
into the blood stream, and binds predominantly to the
surfaces of erythrocytes, which are rich in Gb4. Erythro-
Immunologic Aspects
cytes are thought to then deliver the toxin to endothelial
cells, which also express the Gb4 receptor. Stx2e enters the
Immunologic defense against diseases produced by
endothelial cells as described earlier and intoxicates the
pathogenic E. coli occurs at two levels: at the site of attach-
cells by inactivating the ribosomes, shutting down pro-
ment to the target cell and through destruction of the bac-
tein synthesis, and causing cell death. Vascular leakage and
teria or neutralization of its products.
thromboses result in edema and infarcts, respectively, in
different tissues and organs. Grossly, pigs typically exhibit
Enterotoxigenic Diarrhea.
Specific anti-adhesin anti-
subcutaneous edema of on the forehead, in the eyelids, and
body (sIgA and sIgM) found in colostrum and milk prevents
 also in the wall of the stomach, mesocolon, and other areas.
bacterial attachment to small intestinal enterocytes. Like-
wise, specific anti-LT neutralizes LT enterotoxin, although
the importance of this effect is incompletely understood.
Avian-Pathogenic E. cofi. Avian-pathogenic E. coli
LT has been shown to be delivered directly to the entero-
(APEC) cause colibacillosis of fowl, which is economi
cyte by the bacteria, which may bypass the effect of luminal
cally important to the poultry industry. APEC are inva-
antibodies.
sive, extraintestinal strains of E. coli that are usually of cer-
tain serotypes, and bear several virulence genes in com-
Extraintestinal Disease. The neonate acquires immunity
mon with UPEC of humans. One common serotype is
from the dam, and depending upon the isotype of the
O1:K1:H7. Notably, K1 is a capsular antigen that plays an 
immunoglobulin (IgA, IgG, or IgM), the type of protection 
important role in the pathogenesis of infection of human
differs. For the first 36 h or so of life, ingested IgG and IgM
infants, causing meningitis in these cases. In addition, O1
attach to receptors on the surface of epithelial cells of the
is notably an invasive serogroup. Virulence factors in com-
small intestine. Transfer across the cell into the systemic cir-
mon with human UPEC strains include the siderophores
culation follows attachment. If the antibodies are specific
enterobactin, aerobactin, salmochelin, and yersiniabactin,
for a virulence determinant, then disease may not result if
as well as a hemin uptake system. In addition, both
the neonate encounters a pathogenic strain expressing that
APEC and human UPEC strains produce Pap and type
virulence determinant. For example, anticapsular antibod-
1 fimbriae.
ies acquired from the dam will protect the newborn from
The disease takes many forms in fowl, depending upon
fatal invasive disease by strains of E. coli possessing that
the age of the host and mode of infection. In the case of
particular capsule.
egg infections, the egg surface may be contaminated with
potentially pathogenic strains at the time they are laid.
EPEC and STEC Infections. Specific antibodies to intimin
The bacteria penetrate the shell and infect the yolk sac. If
and type IlI secreted proteins that mediate A/E lesions may
the bacteria grow, the embryo dies, usually late in incuba-
provide some degree of protection. Studies with a type III
tion. Embryos that survive may die shortly after, with losses
secreted vaccine for STEC O157:H7 have shown efficacy in 
 occurring as late as 3 weeks after hatching. A very impor-
cattle. In the case of the neonate, slgA and sIgM found in
tant clinical manifestation in poultry is respiratory and sep-
 colostrum and milk are thought to prevent attachment to
ticemic disease. The course may be rapidly fatal or chronic,
enterocytes.
manifested by debilitation, diarrhea, and respiratory dis-
tress. Air sacculitis and pneumonia are common presenta-
Edema Disease.
Antibody specific for Stx2e prevent
tions. Other clinical syndromes caused by APEC include
endothelial  and 
1 vascular damage, further preventing
cellulitis, synovitis, pericarditis, salpingitis, and panoph-
ischemic lesions. It is imperative, therefore, that the
thalmitis.
dam be exposed either naturally or artificially to the
Chapter 7
 Enterobacteriaceae: Escherichia
73
microorganism and its virulence determinants before par-
same sites are cultured, plus those grossly affected (lung.
turition. Such exposure allows for antibodies to be made
air sac). Dead in-shell embryos are cultured. Culture of the
for secretion into colostrum and milk.
liver is to be avoided even though the Kupffer cells remove
bacteria from the blood, because retrograde movement of
enteric bacteria during the agonal stages of the disease com-
Laboratory Diagnosis
plicates the microbiologic findings.
Demonstration of Enterotoxigenic Strains of E. cofi. The
Demonstration of EPEC and STEC Strains. H
Histopathol-
currently preferred diagnostic method for microbiological
ogy can allow for detection of A/E bacteria, but will not
diagnosis of ETEC is detection of virulence genes, that is,
result in definitive identification of the pathogen. Specific
fimbrial and enterotoxin, in isolated E. coli colonies on cul-
protocols and special media for isolation of E. coli from fecal
ture plates by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A multiplex
01 intestinal samples are now available. Other media, for
 PCR format is commonly used in diagnostic laboratories
example, for non-O157 STEC are also available, but have
that targets a variety of virulence genes besides those of
not been validated for all serogroups of interest. Some of
concern with ETEC, for example, Stx, intimin, and others.
the selective media for this purpose, for example, sorbitol-
Bacterial isolates chosen for PCR should first be subcultured
MacConkey, are described in Chapter 6. Once E. coli isolates
 onto a nutrient medium (e.g., blood agar), both to ensure
that are suspect to be STEC (e.g., showing the proper phe-
purity and to remove the possibility of inhibitors of the
notype on chromogenic media) are obtained in cases of ani-
DNA polymerase.
mal infection, detection of Stx genes by PCR is the preferred
Histopathology on animals submitted for necropsy
method for confirmation of these organisms as STEC. The
most important virulence gene targets are stx1, stx2, and
mal that has been euthanatized. Selection of an acutely
eae; ehx is also a useful target for diagnostic purposes. Fecal
affected animal that has not undergone postmortem autol-
isolates also may be obtained from a more general-purpose
ysis and postmortem bacterial overgrowth will greatly
selective medium for E. coli (e.g., MacConkey agar), and
enhance the chances of detecting the pathogen among
these can be tested by PCR.
a background of commensal flora. Detection of bacterial
 adherence to enterocytes in the small intestine is pathog-
Demonstration of Strains-Producing Edema Disease.
nomonic.Immunohistochemistry also could be conducted
The microbiological diagnosis of edema disease depends
if the laboratory has antiserum that includes most of
upon the isolation and demonstration of certain serotypes
the common serogroups (Figure 7.1). However, culture is
that have been shown to play a role in this disease. The
needed for detection of the specific pathogen involved
characteristic gross and microscopic tissue changes make
from the standpoint of virulence factor production. Cul-
this disease relatively easier to diagnose pathologically than 
ture on blood and MacConkey agars are standard pro-
microbiologically.
cedures for ETEC diagnosis, although detection of some
fimbrial types may be enhanced by culture on additional
media, namely, E medium for F4; Minca medium for F5 and 
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
F6; and E or Minca medium for F41. Detection oflarge num-
bers of E. coli, that is, 108 to 10° colony-forming units per
Treatment of an animal that has diarrhea due to an infec-
milliliter of luminal contents, is supportive of a diagnosis
tious cause centers on correcting fluid and electrolyte
of ETEC infection.
imbalances. If the animal is in shock due to cardiovascular
Immunological approaches may still be used, for exam-
collapse, then the fluid and electrolytes (sodium bicarbon-
ple, slide agglutination tests run on each colony using
ate, KCl) are given IV; if not, oral electrolyte solutions are 
antiserum specific for the various adhesins. An enzyme-
given. Since the animals are acidotic, sodium bicarbonate is 
linked immunosorbent assay may be used to measure
included. Adding glucose to oral electrolytes will enhance
 directly the presence of F4 and F5 adhesin-expressing bac-
theabsorption of the sodium ions being excreted. The use of
teria in feces. Fluorescent-labeled antibody techniques still
antimicrobials is controversial. Because the concentration
provide an easy method of detection of fimbria. Bacte
of antimicrobic achievable (and available) in the lumen of 
rial colonies or smears of scrapings taken from the small
the bowel is not known, the results of in viro susceptibility
intestine are flooded with antisera that are specific for
tests to guide therapy are of doubtful reliability. Adminis-
the various adhesins. After treatment with fluorescent-
tration of nonabsorbable antimicrobics (such as neomycin)
labeled secondary antiserum, preparations are examined
will suffciently reduce the numbers of E. coli in the upper
for labeled bacteria adhering to the epithelial cells. STa or
small bowel to allow correction of fluid and electrolyte
LT enterotoxin production by isolated strains of E. coli can
imbalances. Such reduction occurs even though in vitro
be detected with an ELISA test. This test is reputed to detect
tests show that strains of E. coli commonly test “resistant"
140 pg/ml of STa (> 100 times more sensitive than the suck-
to neomycin. The fact that in vitro tests measure suscepti-
ling mouse assay) and 290 pg/ml of LT.
bility to microgram amounts, whereas milligram amounts
may be available locally accounts for the discrepancy.
Demonstration of Extraintestinal Strains.
The microbi
 Antimicrobial agents, fluid, and electrolyte augmen-
 ological diagnosis of extraintestinal disease is based upon
tation are necessary to successfully treat septicemic dis-
the demonstration of E. coli in normally sterile sites or loca-
ease produced by invasive strains of E. coli. Invasive dis-
tions (joint, bone marrow, spleen, or blood). In fowl, the
ease results in an endotoxemia progressing to a lactic
74
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
acidosis because of decreased organ perfusion secondary to
Table 7.1.
Properties of Klebsiefla, Enterobacter, and
hypotension and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Citrobacter
This should be taken into account when the electrolyte
replacement is chosen. Antimicrobialagents should be cho-
Properties
Kiebsiella
Citrobacter
Enterobacter
sen according to susceptibility trends in the practice area.
Usually E. coli isolated from farm animals are susceptible
Lactose fermentation
+
+
to gentamicin o1 amikacin, trimethoprim-sulfonamides,
Urea hydrolysis
(+}
V
V
and ceftiofur. They are usually resistant to tetracyclines,
 Citrate utilization
(+}
(+)
(+)
streptomycin, sulfonamides, ampicillin, and kanamycin.
Hydrogen sulfide
一
(+}
Voges-Proskauer
The severity of the signs of endotoxemia has been reduced 
+
+
Motility
(+)weak
experimentally by administering antibodies to the lipid A
+
 Common species 
pneumoniae
freundii
cloacae
portion of the LPS.
oxytoca
rodentium
aerogenes
 Prevention and control of the enteric diseases produced
十, posive (+), most positive -, negative V, variable.
by pathogenicstrains of E. coli are oneand the same. The key
is sound husbandry practices. It is important that the dam
be exposed to the antigenic determinants of the various
virulence factors expressed on or by the infecting strains.
surfaces may contribute to the probability of infection.
Once tissue infection is established, the organism may
 Exposure can be provided naturally by placing the dam into
spread and eventually cause a fulminating septicemia.
the environment in which parturition will take place or
Klebsiella will also rapidly acquire extended spectrum β.
 artificially by vaccinating the dam with preparations con-
taining the antigenic determinants perceived to be a threat
lactamase resistance. Virulence factors associated with
Klebsiella are similar to other Enterobacteriaceae. The cap-
to the newborn. Commercially produced preparations con-
taining monoclonal antibodies to the adhesins (for ETEC)
sule is essential for resistance to host defense mechanisms
can be given orally to the neonatal animal. Although this
(phagocytosis, opsonization, and cytolysis). Endotoxins,
practice will not significantly reduce the incidence of diar-
adhesins, enterotoxins, siderophores, and cell wall compo-
 rhea, it will reduce the severity and mortality
nents are also important.
Klebsiella are easily identified through routine diagnos-
tic laboratory culture at 37 *C. The colonies on blood
Other Coliforms
 agar are nonhemolytic, large and very mucoid. Klebsiella
ferment lactose and are generally indole-negative (see
There are a few other medically important members of the
Table 7.1).
family Enterobacteriaceae. Like E. coli, the bacteria usually
ferment lactose, resulting in the traditional reddish-pink
Enterobacter and Citrobacter
colonies on MacConkey agar. The genera Kebsiella, Enter-
obacter, and Citrobacter are also facultative anaerobes. These
Like Klebsiella, bacteria of the genera Enterobacter and Cit-
organisms are not hemolytic on blood agar and although
they produce some toxins, these bacteria are generally
cause infections in contaminated wounds or the urogenital
opportunistic pathogens.
tract. Both Enterobacter and Citrobacter are identified using
 traditional colony morphology and biochemical testing
(Table 7.1). Enterobacter are usually motile. The Citrobac-
Klebsiella
ter produce hydrogen sulfide in triple sugar-iron slant agar
The most common pathogens in veterinary medicine are
tubes, thus sometimes these cultures may be confused with
Klebsiella pneumoniae and K. oxytoca. These bacteria, like
Salmonella. These bacteria are notably resistant to most
most coliforms, are commensals of the intestinal tract of
B an  n sd n s
animals. Therefore, fecal-contaminated environments are
forms of antibiotic resistance.
often the source of perinatal infections of young rumi-
nants. However, bovine mastitis attributed to K. pneumo-
niae spp. pneumoniae can be a very serious condition with
References
case-fatality rates ranging from 10% to 80%. This form of
coliform mastitis is associated with cool, wet weather and
 Moxley RA and Francis DH (1986) Natural and experimen-
various forms of sawdust bedding. Many of the affected
tal infection with an attaching and effacing strain of
cattle develop severe mammary gland infections with sep-
Escherichia coli in calves. Infect Immun, 53, 339-346.
ticemia and endotoxic shock.
 Xing J (1996) Pathogenicity of an enterotoxigenic Escherichia
 Klebsiella spp. have been associated with many forms
    (  
of opportunistic in fections. Contaminated obstetric equip-
MS Thesis. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. R.A. Moxley,
ment, surgical equipment, cleaning devices, and clinic
Advisor.
Enterobacteriaceae:
Salmonella
RODNEY MOXLEY
The genus Salmonella is a member of the family Enter
serovar Typhi and Paratyphi C strains, some Citrobacter
obacteriaceae, and is composed of three species: S. bongori,
strains, and occasionally by strains of serovar Dublin. The
S. enterica, and S subterranea. S. enterica contains six sub-
cell wall is typical of gram-negative bacteria, composed
species (Table 8.1); these include enterica (also known as
of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and protein. As described in
subspecies I), salamae (subspecies II), arizonae (subspecies
Chapter 6, the kind and the number of sugars together with
Illa), diarizonae (subspecies IlIb), houtenae (subspecies IV),
the linkage between them in the outermost portion of the
and indica (subspecies Vl). Subspecies V was reclassified as
LPS macromolecule determine the O-antigen serogroup of
S. bongori. The type species is S. enterica ssp. enterica. The
the particular isolate. The O-antigens, together with the
type strain is S. enterica ssp. enterica serotype Typhimurium
antigenic determinants on the surface of the flagella (H-
strain LT2 (Lilleengen strain type 2). Subspecies I strains
antigens), which are possessed by most salmonellae, define
are commonly isolated from humans and warm-blooded
the serotype. This classification is called the Kauffmann--
animals.S. enterica includes more than 2500 serotypes, also
White scheme.
known as serovars (ser.) or varieties (var.), and approxi-
mately 60% of these fall within subspecies I. In the United.
States, approximately 99% of the reported Salmonella iso-
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
lates from humans belong to subspecies 1. S. bongori and
S. enterica subspecies I1, IHla, IHb, IV, and VI mainly infect
Adhesins. Depending on the serotype, S. enterica con-
cold-blooded vertebrates and live in the en vironment. S.
tains gene clusters for more than 10 different fimbriae.
subterranea is a recent addition to the genus and was iso-
S. Typhimurium potentially encodes at least 13 fimbrial
lated from low pH subsurface sediment contaminated with 
operons: agf (csg), fm, pef, lpf, bcf, saf, stb, stc, std, sth, sti,
nitrate and hexavalent to tetravalent uranium.
and sti). Production of at least 11 of these fimbriae has been
The Salmonella nomenclature has been problematic for
detected, with expression being dependent on growth con-
 many years due to the use of several different taxonomic
ditions. The fimbria mediates adherence to mucosal epithe-
schemes and the listing of serotypes as species. In 2005,
lial in the gastrointestinal tract. Because of theil relative
Judicial Opinion 80 was published in the International Jour-
hydrophobicity, fimbrial adhesins may also promote asso-
nal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology and clarified
ciation with the membrane of phagocytic cells. Adhesins
are important virulence factors only when the microbes are
written in Roman letters in which the first letter is upper
on mucosal surfaces.
case; others are denoted by antigenic formulae.
Of the aforementioned fimbriae, there is evidence for
 In this chapter, the subspecies designation will not be
Pef, Agf, and Lpf as being important adhesins for the
used unless important to the discussion. For example,
intestinal tract. Pef (plasmid encoded fimbriae) mediate
S. enterica ssp. enterica serovar Typhimurium will first be
attachment to murine small intestinal epithelial cells. The
denoted as S. enterica serovar Typhimurium, and then, sim-
genes for Pef are carried on the virulence plasmid of S.
ply S. Typhimurium.
Typhimurium, pSLT. Mutations in pef increase the oral
tive fimbriae, or curli) are analogous to curli fimbriae of
Descriptive Features
Escherichia coli (see Chapter 7). Agf promote autoaggrega-
tion, biofilm formation, and virulence. Agf also mediate
attachment to small intestinal epithelial cells. Lpf (long
Cellular Description and Composition
polar fimbriae) mediate attachment of s. Typhimurium to
There is one capsular type, a polysaccharide antigen that
M cells, but not to the absorptive en terocytes. Mutations in
 has been named Vi (for virulence). Vi is produced by
Ipfincrease the oral LDso by about fivefold, and delay death
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
75
76
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 8.1.
 Subspecies of S. enterica
are designated by numerals, “1,” “2,” “3,” and so on. As
Numeral Designation
Nomenclature
 tination testing using specific antiserum.
enterica
salamae
SPl, Type Ill Secretion Systems, and Effector Proteins.
Illa
arizonae
Many genes responsible for Salmonella virulenceare located
b
diarizonae
IV
on pathogenicity islands (PAIs). PAIs are large contiguous
houtenae
VI
indica
blocks of DNA on the chromosome that contain insertion
sequences and genes for virulence factors, integrases, and
mobility factors. In Salmonella, the PAIsare known by name
as Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs); to date there are
by about 3 days compared to the wild-type parent strain.
22 reported SPIs, numbered SPI-1 through SPI-22. S. bon-
The Pef, Lpf, and Agf fimbriae are thought to be function-
gori contains a different collection of SPls than different
ally redundant. Inactivation of all three genes results in an
serotypes of S. enterica. No strain studied has contained all
increase in the oral LDso by about 30-fold.
22 PAIs, and there is variation in the SPIs among S. enter-
ica serotypes. This variation in SPIs reflects the variation in
Capsule.  The Vi capsule is a linear homopolymer ofα-1,4
host range and the degree of adaptation of the pathogen for
2-deoxy-2-N-acetylgalactosamine uronic acid, which can
the host. S. bongori contains SPI-1, SPI-3A, SPI-3B, SPI-4, SPI-
be acetylated at the C-3 position. The role of the capsule
9, and SPI-22. S. Typhimurium contains SPI-1 through -6,
(Vi) is unclear. Since salmonellae are primarily intracellu-
-9, -12 through 14, and -16.S. Enteritidis and S. Gallinarum
lar parasites, possession of a capsule does not seem to be a
contain SPI-1 through SPI-6, SPI-9, SPI-10, SPI-12 through 
strategy that is consistent with the role this structure has
SPI-14, SPI-16, SPI-17, and SPI-19. S. Typhi contains SPI-1
in other microorganisms (i.e., antiphagocytic). However,
through SPI-10, SPI-12, and SPI-15 through SPI-18. SPI-1
Vi protects the outer membrane from effective interactions
through SPl-5 each contain genes encoding type IlI secre-
with membrane attack complexes generated by the com-
tion systems (T3ss), and these are named according to the
plement system. This is useful in protecting salmonellae
SPI in which they are located; for example, T3ss-1 is on SPI-
when extracellular.
1 and T3SS-2 is 0n SPI-2. Each T3SS consists of an assembly
of more than 20 proteins that form a hollow tube-like struc-
Cell Wall.  As described in detail in Chapter 6, the LPS in
ture through which effector proteins are injected into host
the outer membrane is an important virulence determi-
target cells.
nant. Not only is the lipid A component toxic (endotoxin),
The major function of SPl-1 is to promote invasion of
but the length of the side chain in the O-repeat unit hin-
the intestinal epithelium. It does so by induction of actin
ders the attachment of the membrane attack complex of
cytoskeletal rearrangement (membrane ruffle formation),
the complement system to the outer membrane. LPs binds
which results in bacterial entry into the enterocyte (Fig-
 to LPs-binding protein (a plasma protein), which in turn
ure 8.1). The SPI-1 locus contains approximately 35 genes
transfers it to the blood phase of CD14. The CD14-LPS
that encode components of a T3ss apparatus, several effec-
complex binds to Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 protein (see
tor proteins, transcriptional regulators of genes encoded
Chapter 6) on the surface of macrophages triggering cell-
both within SPl-1 and elsewhere in the chromosome, and
signaling pathways that ultimately cause release of proin-
 chaperones required for assembly of the apparatus or secre.
flammatory cytokines. Recent studies have shown that TLR
tion of effectors. The effector proteins encoded on SPI-1
signaling is required for the virulence of s. Typhimurium.
include SipA (SspA), AvIA, and SptP. SPI-1 also encodes
       
translocon proteins SipB, SipC, and SipD. Effectors secreted 
TLR2, TLR4, and TLR5. Mice deficient in both TLR2 and
by the SPI-1 T3SS that are encoded on other PAIs include
TLR4 are highly susceptible to S. Typhimurium, consis-
SopA, SopB (SigD), SopD, SopE (SopE1), SopE2, SspH1, and
tent with reduced innate immune function. TLR signal-
SlrP. SopE, SopE2, and SopB promote actin rearrangement
ing enhances the rate of acidification of the Salmonella-
by acting as GDP/GTP exchange factors for Racl, Cdc42,
containing phagosome, and inhibition of this acidification
and RhoG. Rac1, Cdc42, and RhoG are Rho family GTPases,
prevents induction of the Salmonella pathogenicity island
and their activation results in extensive actin rearrange-
2 (SPI-2). Hence, S. Typhimurium fails to induce virulence
ment in the host cell. SopB is an inositol phosphatase and
 genes when deprived of innate immune signals.
produces a molecule that acts as an indirect activator of
Cdc42. SipA and SipC are actin-binding proteins that pro-
Flagella. All salmonellae except S. enterica serotype Pullo-
motes bacterial-mediated endocytosis. Binding of SipA to
rum and S. enterica serotype Gallinarum are motile. Motil.
actin decreases the critical concentration required for actin
ity is mediated by peritrichous flagella. The flagella are
polymerization and binding of T-plastin. SipC is a two-
highly immunogenic. Subspecies I, 1, Illa, and VI are bipha-
domain protein that nucleates and bundles actin. SptP is
sic, capable of producing two and sometimes three types
a GTPase-activating protein for both Cdc42 and Rac1 that
of functional and immunologically distinct flagella. Sero-
promote actin depolymerization, opposing the activating
logical distinction among the H-antigens constitutes the
functions of SopE, SopE2, and SopB. These depolymeriza-
 second part of the Kauffmann-White scheme. Phase 1 H-
tion events return the cell to a normal architecture. SipB,
antigens are designated by lower case letters, “a" through
also a member of the translocon, interacts with caspase
Chapter 8 Enterobacteriaceae: Salmorella
77
FIGURE 8.1.
SPi-1 T3ss-induced changes in host celis. On contact with the epithelial cell, salmonellae assemble the
SPi-1-encoded T3Ss and translocate effectors (yellow spheres) into the eukaryotic cytoplasm. Effectors, such as SopE, SopE2, and SopB,
actin-binding proteins SipA and SipC, lead to bacterial uptake. MAPK signaling activates the transcription factors AP-1 and NF-x B,
apical surface, paracellular fluid leakage, and access of bacteria to the basolateral surface. However, the transmigration of PMNs also
occurs in the absence of tight-junction disruption and is further promoted by SopA. The actin cytoskeleton is restored and MAPK
University of Washington, USA; Haraga et al. 2008.)
Membrane
Tight
junction
Salmonella-
spp.
Actin
Epithelial
SopE
SipA
○SopA
。
cell
SopE2
SipC
..
SptP
SopB
SopB
RhoGTPases
Rho GTPases
MAPK
MAPK
SspH1
AvrA
CI
NF-kB
NF-kB 
AP-1
IL-8
IL-TB
IL-18
PMI
1 to cause apoptosis of macrophages. The expression of
SopB, SopE, SopE2, and SipA also promotes intestinal dis-
the SPI-1 T3sS is controlled in response to environmen-
ease by causing disruption of tight junctions. SipB (SspB)
tal signals; for example, it is activated in response to high
adds to the inflammatory response by increasing produc-
tion of IL-13 and IL-18 through binding and activating
marily by control of the level of HilA, a transcriptional
caspase-1. SopA and SopD also contribute to enteritis in 
regulator that itself is encoded on SPI-1. HilA is regulated
calves. Inflammation of the intestine in calves and many
by other SPI-1-encoded proteins, namely, HilC and HilD,
and by other gene products encoded outside the SPI-1.
severe (Figures 8.2 and 8.3).
The major function of SPl-2is topromote survival within
tems, repress expression of the SPI-1 T3SS; PhoBR does
macrophages. SPI-2 encodes a T3SS and effectors that play
S0 through repression of expression of hilA. SirA/BarA is
an important role in survival in macrophages; expression
another two-component regulatory system that is required
of the SPI-2 genes is induced once the bacterium is within
for maximal expression of hilA.
the macrophage (Figure 8.4). There are at least 21 known
The stimulation of Cdc42 by SopE, SopE2, and SopB also
SPI-effector proteins in addition to the translocon proteins
triggers several mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
SseB, SseC, and SseD. These include GogB, PipB, PipB2,
pathways, including the Erk, Ink, and p38 pathways, which
SifA, SifB, SopD2, SpiC, SpvB, SseF, SseG, SseI (SrfH), SseJ,
results in the activation of the transcription factors acti-
SseK1, SseK2, SseL, SspH2, SteA, SteB, and SteC. The func-
vator protein-1 (AP-1) and nuclear factor-xB (NF-xB) (Fig-
tions of GogB, PipB, SifB, SseK1, SseK2, SteA, SteB, and SteC
ure 8.1). These transcription factors then direct the pro-
are unknown. PipB2 and SopD2 contribute to Salmonella-
duction of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin 
induced filament (Sif) formation. Sifs are long, filamen-
(IL)-8, which stimulate polymorphonuclear neutrophil
-d rdd a r ssa ss a s
(PMN) transmigration and the inflammatory response
tioning ofthe Salmonella-containing vacuole (ScV) in close
leading to diarrhea. Activation of Rho family GTPases by
proximity to the Golgi apparatus and near the perinuclear
78
PART II
Bacteria and Fumgi
IL-8 secretion and has E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. SrlP and
FIGURE 8.2.
Jejunum of a 7-day-old calf naturally
 SspH1 are also encoded on SPI-1.
infected with s. Typhimurium. The mucosa is hyperemic and
The functions of the genes located on the other SPIs
juaiaupe ue Ag pieano s! pue suoisoia yin snoiewapa
are less well understood. The effector proteins associated
fibrinosuppurative exudate that extends into the fumen.
with SPI-3 include Mgts (magnesium transport system,
encoded by a number of mgt genes, located within SPI-
 3). These genes (e.g., mgtC) are induced by low concentra-
tion of magnesium ions (as occurs within macrophages),
-ns pop pueod aq o readde suaoid papoua  pu
vival inside of macrophages. Different studies have con-
cluded that SPI-4 genes are required for both the intesti-
nal and systemic phases of disease. SPI-4 is a 27-kilobase
(kb) region that carries six genes designated siABCDEF.
  se os a e n s  ' '
secretion of SiiE. SiE is an adhesin that contributes to the
colonization of bovine intestines, and is required for effi-
cient translocation of SPI-1 effectors in S. Typhimurium.
region of the host. Sif tubules extend from the surface of
All six genes (siiABCDEF) are required for S. Typhimurium
the SCV and appear to be derived from late endosomal com-
virulence in a mouse model. Like SPI-1, SPI-4 and SPI-5
partments. They contain lysosomal associated membrane
 are under the control of the SirA/HilA global regulatory
protein 1 (LAMP-1), vacuolar adenosine triphosphatase,
cascade.
lysobisphosphatidic acid, and cathepsin. SifA induces Sif
formation, maintains the integrity of the SCV, and down-
Enterotoxin. Salmonella has been reported to produce an
regulates kinesin recruitment to the SCV. SpiC interferes
enterotoxin called Stn (Salmonella enterotoxin). Original
with endosomal trafficking. SpvB is an actin-specific ADP-
reports noted that Stn induced water and electrolyte secre-
ribosyltransferase and downregulates Sif formation. SseF
tion by host target cells. However, subsequent studies, one
and SseG contribute to Sif formation and microtubule
very recently conducted, have found no evidence that Stn
bundling. Ssel (SrfH) contributes to hostcell dissemination.
 is enterotoxigenic, nor has a role in virulence. The latter
SseJ maintains the integrity of the SCV and has deacylase
study suggests that Stn may play a role in maintenance of
activity. SseL is a deubiquitinase. SspH1, SspH2, and SrlP
membrane integrity of the bacterium.
con tribute to virulence in calves. SspH2 inhibits the rate of
actin polymerization. SspH1 inhibits NF-x B signaling and
Siderophores. In response to iron limitation, all
pathogenic Salmonella serovars produce the catecholate
siderophore enterobactin, and all salmonellae with the
exception S. bongori produce the glycosylated enterobactin
FIGURE 8.3.
Photomicrograph of jejunum from a
derivative salmochelin. Salmonella mutants deficient in
2-week-old calf naturally infected with S. Typhimurium. There
salmochelin but not enterochelin synthesis or secretion
is severe diffuse villus atrophy with an attenuated,
exhibit reduced virulence during systemic infection of
regenerative epithelial layer where intact. Neutrophils
mice.
dliffusely infitrate the mucosa and submucosa, and are
especially numerous at the mucosal surface which is necrotic
and eroded. Capillaries and venules in the mucosa and
Stress Proteins. Stress proteins are expressed when the
submucosa are hyperemic. The lesions are compatible with
bacterium is placed under stressful conditions (e.g., heat,
severe acute diffuse necrosuppurative enteritis caused by
cold, low pH, high pH, oxidative, hyperosmotic, and
saimoneffosis.
other environments). Different RNA polymerase (Rpo)
 sigma factors govern transcription initiation when the
 cell is under environmental stress; for example, Rpos is
shock and RpoE to hyperosmotic states. In addition to
a  s   s  
in response to these signals, and are needed for survival.
Exposure to mild stress prior to more severe stress helps
the bacteria adjust. S. Typhimurium can survive extremely
low pH after growth in mildly acidic conditions (pH 4-5),
a process termed the acid tolerance response (ATR). S.
Typhimurium contains two different ATR systems, one
in log and another in stationary phase. The log phase
ATR induces the expression of more than 50 proteins,
termed acid shock proteins. Several regulatory proteins
are required for the log phase ATR, including RpoS, Fur,
and PhoPQ. A second ATR system in S. Typhimurium is
   d s  
Chapter 8 Enterobacteriaceae: Salmorella
79
FIGURE 8.4.
Formationof theSCVand induction of theSPi-2T3SSwithin thehost cell.Shortly afterinternalizationby
sasny awosobeud aun saten 'sny aueigwaw Ag pawa si teut awosobeyd snoeds e u! pasoua are aeliauowes 'sisoouidoeu
with lysosomes, acidifies, and shrinks to become adherent around the bacterium. This is called the ScV, which contains the endocytic
microtubules (green) and regulate microtubule motor (yellow star shape) accumulation on the Sif and the ScV. Ssel is a deacylase that
is active on the phagosome membrane. SseF and SseG cause microtubule bundling adjacent to the SCV and direct Goigi-derived
vesicle traffic toward the SCV. Actin accumulates around the SCV in an SPi-2 T3SS-dependent manner, in which SspH2, SpvB, and Ssef
are thought to have a role. (Haraga et al. 2008.)
Salmonella spp.
SspH2
SifA
SpvB
Spacious
Ssel
PipB2
phagosome
 Epithelial cell
Nucleus
SseF
SseG
+
Golgi
Secretory vesicles
OmpR/EnvZ. RNA polymerase containing RpoS regulates
tions the bacterium is exposed to, for example, those within
genes found on Salmonella virulence plasmid (Spv) (see in
the phagosome of the macrophage; carbon starvation; low
the following text). Many other stressful environmental
pH and low iron environment in the presence of carbon;
conditions require similar types of responses involving
and stationary phase under the control of Rpos (see Sec-
different regulatory proteins. Some of these are encoded
tion “Stress Proteins"). Other genes on these plasmids are
on the Spv (see Section "Virulence Plasmids").
responsible for serum resistance and may be involved in
adherence and invasion of the cellular target. The virulence 
plasmids modulate the immune reaction, including com-
Virulence Plasmids. Salmonellae possess plasmids of var-
plement activation (serum sensitivity), of the animal host
ious sizes, some of which have been associated with viru-
in favor of the infecting salmonellae. There are a number
lence. The most notable is a family of large (~50-100 kb)
of loci that influence the serum sensitivity of the organism.
plasmids, termed Spv plasmids that are found within
The rck gene is required for serum resistance; it encodes an
those serovars with potential to produce disseminated dis-
 outer membrane protein that prevents C9 insertion into
ease. Within subspecies I, nine serovars, namely, Abortus-
the bacterial outer cell membrane.
ovis, Abortus-equi, Choleraesuis, Dublin, Enteritidis, Gal-
linarum, Pullorum, Sendai, and Typhimurium, are known
to harbor a serovar-specific virulence plasmid that con-
Miscellaneous Products. The transcriptional regulator,
tains the spv operon. The spv operon consists of five genes,
SlyA (for salmolysin), is in part responsible for survival of
spvRABCD. The spvR gene product regulates spvABCD. In
salmonellae within macrophages, by activating the expres-
addition to the virulence plasmid, the spv operon can be
sion of proteins that afford protection from the toxic prod-
found in the chromosome of subspecies I, Il, Illa, IV, and 
Vll. The spv genes are essential for virulence of the differ-
ucts of the phoP/phoQ operon (PhoP and PhoQ) comprise
ent serovars in their specific hosts. Expression of spvgenes is
a two-component system. PhoPQ regulates genes (e.g.,
induced in the intracellular environment of the phagolyso
pagABC for pho-activated genes) important for survival in
some. Expression of these genes is regulated by the condi-
macrophages, resistance to cationic proteins (defensins),
80
PART l1  Bacteria and Fungi
acidic pH, and invasion of epithelial cells. The following
Pathogenesis
conditions are sensed by PhoQ and activate PhoP: carbon 
starvation, nitrogen starvation, low pH, and high oxygen
Mechanisms
levels. PhoQ is a kinase that phosphorylates (activates)
PhoP, which is a transcriptional regulator of other target
The most common clinical manifestation of salmonellosis
genes, thereby transmitting the signal. phoP mutants are
is diarrhea. In certain instances (defined by host factors,
avirulent. The products of Pho-repressed genes (prg) are
the strain of Salmonella, and dose) septicemia occurs. Host
mainly located in the outer membrane, and assist in secre-
factors include age, immune status, concurrent disease, and
tion of proteins through the outer membrane.
composition of the normal flora (i.e., providing resistance
The product of the shdA (for shedding) gene governs
to colonization).
fecal sheddingof salmonellae by an in fected host. This gene
-i on pns isaq reade aos asud Aeois
is restricted to serotypes of subspecies I. Arc (for aerobic
tiate disease, because under these conditions, RNA poly-
regulation control) is a two-component global regulator
merase containing the alternative sigma factor, Rpos, ini-
 system involved in intracellular survival.
tiates transcription of genes responsible for acid tolerance
and subsequent survival through the stomach. Also, RNA
polymerase containing Rpos is a positive regulator for the
Ecology
genes found on the Spv plasmids.
The target cells are the M cells in the follicle-associated
Reservoir
epithelium overlying gut-associated lymphatic tissue in the
The reservoir for members of the genus Salmonella is the
 gastrointestinal tract of warm- and cold-blooded animals.
 otics may potentially reduce the infectious dose. Adhe-
Sources of infection include contaminated soil, vegeta-
sion to the M cell is the first step in the disease process,
tion, water, and components of animal feeds (such as
mediated by one or more of the adhesins, namely, Agf,
bone, meat, and fish meal), particularly those containing
g  a on  s aq n g p 
milk-, meat-, or egg-derived constituents, and the feces
ing adhesion, salmonellae are internalized following the
of infected individuals. Lizards and snakes are commonly
induction of membrane ruffles in the target cells triggered
infected with several serotypes, although these infections
by Ssps and Sops subsequent to their injection by the T3Ss.
are usually subclinical. Subspecies I is almost exclusively
The target cell is irreversibly damaged by this interaction,
found in warm-blooded mammals and birds (evidence
suggests that the possession of the shdA gene product is
the target cells, the lymph nodule, and submucosal tissue.
responsible).
     i   
 Some salmonellae have become adapted to certain hosts;
ous chemokines from affected host cells, as well as release
that is, they are not usually detected in host species other
of proinflammatory cytokines following host interaction 
than the one to which they have adapted. Examples include
with cell wall LPs—activities that result in an influx of
Abortus-equi in horses, Abortus-ovis in sheep; Cholerae-
PMN leukocytes and macrophages. The influx of PMNs
suis in swine (and occasionally humans); Dublin in cat-
may be reflected in a transient peripheral neutropenia.
tle (and occasionally humans); Gallinarum (the cause of
PMNs are highly efficient in phagocytosing and killing
fowl typhoid) in poultry; Pullorum (the cause of pullorum
salmonellae, whereas nonactivated macrophages are less
disease) in poultry; Typhi (the cause of typhoid fever) in
so. If the immune status of the host and the characteris-
humans; and Paratyphi (also a cause of typhoid fever) in 
tics of the salmonellae are such, the infectious process is
humans.
arrested at this stage. Diarrhea is thought to result from
 Some salmonellae are non-host-adapted, that is, capa-
prostaglandin synthesis by the recruited PMNs (and per-
ble of infecting many different host species. These include
haps by the affected host cells), as well as activation of var-
Anatum, Derby, Newport, Tennessee, and Typhimurium.
 ious inositol-signaling pathways within affected host cells.
The net result is the secretion of chloride ions and water.
Transmission
 If the infecting strain of Salmonella has properties that
allow dissemination (possession of SPI-2, SPI-3, SPI-4,
Salmonellae are primarily transmitted by the fecal-oral
and SPl-5—associated gene products that allow growth
route, often through ingestion of contaminated food and
within macrophages; Spv plasmid encoding ability to
water. The outcome of the interaction between the host
grow intracellularly and serum resistance; PhoQ/PhoP
and Salmonella depends upon the state of the colonization
system allowing resistance to defensins; SlyA allowing
resistance of the host, the infectious dose, and the partic-
ular species or serotype of Salmonella. Disease may or may
ticemia may result. The likelihood of this occurring is
not occur following ingestion. If it occurs, it may do so
increased if the immune status of the host is diminished.
immediately, or at some later date. In the latter instance,
Salmonellae disseminate and multiply within phagocytic
the initial interaction may result in the colonization (with-
cells (macrophages mainly) within phagosomes. Follow.
out disease) of the host, but with a change in the intestinal
ing systemic dissemination of the salmonellae, septicemia
environment, brought on, for example, by stress or antibi-
and endotoxic shock may develop. Strains producing this
otics (activities that affect the normal flora), and disease
form of disease escape destruction by the host and mul-
may follow.
tiply within macrophages of the liver and spleen, as
Chapter 8  Enterobacteriaceae: Salmonella
81
well as intravascularly. During the dissemination pro
is seen occasionally. Colic, gastrointestinal surgery and
cess, salmonellae are occasionally outside of the intra-
antimicrobial agents predispose the horse to the develop-
cellular environment and therefore at risk from the for-
mation of complement membrane attack complexes on
(as in ~3% of clinically normal horses) or acquired from
their surfaces. This occurrence is discouraged by at least
other sources (e.g., a veterinary hospital). S. Typhimurium
two mechanisms: a product of the Spv plasmid and the
and S. Anatum are most commonly isolated.
length of the O-repeat unit of the LPS (there is a direct
correlation between O-repeat length and virulence). Inva-
Dogs and Cats.
 Salmonellosis is uncommon in dogs and
sive salmonellae are capable of secreting a siderophore,
cats, although carriage is reportedly high in clinically nor-
 salmochelin that removes iron from the iron-binding pro-
 mal pound dogs (upward of 35%). When outbreaks occur 
teinsofthe host. Uncontrolled multiplication ofthe organ-
they are usually associated with a common source, such as
ism results in endotoxemia, severe vascular damage, and
(siea s,sid paup "s'a) sheann, 1o pooy sop paeuo
death.
Salmonella should be high on the microbiological differen-
 tial list for cats with signs of septicemia.
Pathology
Poultry. See Section “Salmonellosis of Poultry."
 If the infectious process is limited to the intestinal tract,
the lesions will consist of a fibrinosuppurative, necrotizing
Epidemiology
and hemorrhagic inflammation of the distal small intes-
tine and large bowel. Necrosis of the intestine is at first
Salmonella spp. are ubiquitous geographically and zoo-
erosive and frequently becomes ulcerative, resulting in the
logically. Some serotypes are relatively host-specific (S.
formation of a diphtheritic membrane. This lesion is espe-
Dublin—cattle; S. Typhisuis—swine; S. Pullorum—fowl),
cially common in cattle (Figures 8.2 and 8.3) and swine. The
while others, notably S. Typhimurium, S. Anatum, and S.
liver is frequently affected with random, multifocal necro-
Newport, affect a wide host range among which feral birds
tizing inflammation that reflects bacterial spread via the
and rodents play important roles in interspecific dissemina-
portal vein and phagocytosis by Kupffer cells without effec.
tion of infection. Long periods of subclinical and convales.
tive bacterial killing. In the septicemic form of the disease,
cent shedding ensure widespread, unchecked distribution
there may be fibrinoid change in blood vessels in many dif-
of the organisms.
ferent organs as well as vasculitis, thromboembolism, hem-
Clinical outbreaks are correlated with depressed
orrhages, and infarcts. In swine with septicemic S. Choler-
immune states, as in newborn animals (e.g., calves and
aesuis infection, the spleen is usually markedly enlarged
foals) and stressed adults, parturient cows, equine surgical
due to hyperemia, and the ears of white-skinned pigs may
patients, and swine with systemic viral diseases. Allanimals
be dark blue from thrombosis and venous congestion.
are at increased risk of developing disease if theil normal
flora is disrupted (e.g, stress and antibiotics). These circum-
stances render animals susceptible to exogenous exposure
Disease Patterns
Or activation of silent infections.
Ruminants. Salmonellosis is a significant disease of rumi-
Humans appear to be susceptible to all Salmonella
nants, mainly cattle. The disease affects young (usually 4-
serotypes, with typhoid fever caused by S. Typhi, a disease
6 weeks of age) as well as adult animals, although neonatal
restricted to humans, and infections with other serotypes
calves may also be affected, especially in dairies. Animals
being food-borne zoonoses. Poultry and poultry products
in feedlots and dairies are commonly affected. The disease
(eggs) are a major source of salmonellosis in humans. S.
may be a septicemia or be limited to an enteritis or entero-
Enteritidis (e.g., phage type 4) is especially adapted for egg
colitis (Figures 8.2 and 8.3). Pneumonia, hematogenously
transmission. Whether aperson develops disease following
ingestion of salmonellae from the environment depends
ticemia due toS. Dublin. Abortion may follow septicemia.S.
upon the dose of organisms, the serotype of Salmonella,
Typhimurium, S. Dublin, and S. Newport are the serotypes
and the colonization resistance of the infected individual.
commonly isolated from cattle, and S. Typhimurium the
S. Typhimurium is most common, usually producing gas-
 main serotype affecting sheep.
 troenteritis. Some serotypes have greater invasion potential
and greater potential for causing septicemia, for example,
Swine. Salmonellosis in swine can presentas an acute,ful.
S. Choleraesuis (from swine) and s. Dublin (contaminated
minating septicemia or as a chronic debilitating intestinal
milk).
disease. The form depends upon the strain of Saimonella,
 S. Typhimurium DT104 is a more virulent strain in
the dose, and the colonization resistance of the infected
both animals and humans than most other strains of this
animal. The disease is seen most often in pigs that have
serotype. The case-fatality rate with DT104 is 3%, com-
been stressed. Such conditions occur often in feeder pigs,
pared to 0.1% with other nontyphoid salmonellae. DT
an age group in which salmonellosis commonly occurs.
is the definitive type designation, which specifies a par-
S. Typhimurium and S. Choleraesuis are the predominant
ticular phage type. In addition to increased virulence,
serotypes.
DT104 isolates are multidrug resistant, by definition, resis-
tant to ampicillin, chloramphenicol, streptomycin, sulfon-
Horses. Adult horses are commonly affected with
amides, and tetracycline. DT104 infection in humans is
Salmonella. The pattern is diarrhea, though septicemia
usually acquired by eating contaminated beef, pork, 01
82
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
poultry, or by direct contact with animals, particularly
those with diarrhea (e.g., cattle and cats). In the United
FIGURE 8.5.
Colonies of 5. enterica ssp. enterica
States, the prevalence of S. Typhimurium isolates with the
serotype Enteritidis on biood agar. Bacteria were cultivated for
five-drug pattern of resistance increased from less than
24 h in an aerobic atmosphere at 37 *℃.
1% in 1979-1980 to 34% in 1996, most of which were
(www.bacteriainphotos.com, accessed january 3, 2013.)
DT104 with one pulsed-field electrophoresis pattern pre-
 dominating among the DT104 types. Reptiles have also
become an important source of Salmonella in humans,
with pets (e.g., turtles) in classrooms a common means
of exposure.
Immunological Aspects
 Protection depends upon both innate and adaptive immu-
nity. Competitive floras help reduce the numbers of
pathogens by competing for nutrients, masking receptors,
and producing toxic compounds. Direct-fed microbials, for 
example, certain strains of Lactobacillus acidophilus or other
bacteria, may help prevent infections through providing
competitive exclusion. However, complete protection can1
1cm
only be afforded by an adaptive immune response in the
form of specific antibodies and T cells. Antibodies specific
for surface structures of Salmonella, possibly adhesins, pre-
vent adherence to target cells. The neonate is protected
passively by ingesting specific sIgA or IgGi (bovine). The
Laboratory Diagnosis
immunologically mature animal is protected by the active
secretion of specific immunoglobulins (lgM, IgG, or IgA)
In cases of intestinal infection, fecal samples are collected;
into the intestinal lumen by plasma cells in the lamina pro-
in systemic disease, a blood sample is collected for standard
 pria, which prevent bacteria from adhering and invading
blood culture. Spleen and bone marrow are cultured for
gut epithelial cells.
the salmonellae when postmortem diagnosis of systemic
Antibodies in the circulation act as opsonins and pro.
salmonellosis is required.
mote the phagocytosis of the organism. Destruction of
Fresh fecal samples are placed onto nutrient, for exam-
the salmonellae that have been phagocytosed follows the
 ple, blood agar (Figure 8.5), and one or more selective
media, including MacConkey agar (Figure 8.6), xylose
cally stimulated lymphocytes (T1 cells) though activated
lysine deoxycholate (XLD) agar (Figure 8.7), Hektoen
macrophages are damaged or killed by Ssps. NK cells lyse
Salmonella-infected cells.
Acquired  immunity revolves around  activation  of
macrophages, which takes place as follows. After initial
FIGURE 8.6.
Colonies of S. enterica ssp. enterica
interaction between salmonellae and macrophage, IL-12
serotype Enteritidis on MacConkey agar. Bacteria were
is released by the affected macrophage. IL-12 activates
cultivated for 24 h in an aerobic atmosphere at 37 *℃.
the Thl subset of T helper cells. This subset secretes,
(www.bacteriainphotos.com, accessed january 3, 2013.)
among other cytokines, interferon-y, which activates
macrophages. Activated macrophages are efficient killers
of intracellular salmonellae.
Artificial immunization against salmonellae is difficult.
Bacterins have had limited success.Apparently, they do not
stimulate strong cellular immunity, even though abundant
antibody is produced. Antibodies that are produced locally
01 passed in colostrum or milk interfere with adsorption to
the target cell and protect against disease in this location.
Macrophages can be activated and antibody production
stimulated in response to modified live vaccines. If given
orally, these vaccines stimulate local secretory immunity
 and cell-mediated activation of phagocytic cells. Aromatic-
dependent mutants of Salmonella show promise as effective
modified live vaccines, especially for calves. aroA mutants
of Salmonella cannot multiply within the host since ver-
tebrate tissue does not contain the needed precursors for
5mm
aromatic acid synthesis.
Chapter 8  Enterobacteriaceae: Salmonella
8
is controversial. Some studies show that antibiotics do
FIGURE 8.7.
 Salmonella colonies, XLD agar. When xylose
not alter the course of the disease. In addition, there is
lysine (Xl) agar is supplemented with sodium thiosulfate,
evidence that antibiotics promote the carrier state and
ferric ammonium citrate, and sodium deoxycholate, it is then
select for resistant strains. Treatment of the systemic form
termed XiD agar. The presence of any black-colored area
 of salmonellosis includes nursing care and appropriate
indicates the deposition of hydrogen sulfide (HzS), under
antimicrobial therapy as determined by retrospectively
alkaline conditions, and is highly suggestive of Saimonella. (Us
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
acquired susceptibility data. Since salmonellae survive
Prevention, Public Heaith Information Library, ID# 6619.)
in the phagocytic cell, the antimicrobial drug should
be one that penetrates the cell. Examples of those that
distribute in this manner include ampicillin, enrofloxacin,
trimethoprim-sulfonamides,  and
chloramphenicol/
florfenicol. Treatment options may be compromised
due to acquisition of R plasmids or integrons encoding
resistance to multiple antibiotics. A serious global epi-
demic of S. Typhimurium DT104, a type of salmonella
that affects humans and other animals worldwide, con-
tains a cluster of antibiotic resistance-encoding genes
within its chromosome. This cluster, called Salmonella
genomic island 1 (SGI1), contains the genes for resistance 
to
ampicillin, 
 chloramphenicol/florfenicol,
strepto-
mycin/spectinomycin, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines
bounded by two integrons. SGl1 has moved into S. enterica
serotype Albany (fish in Southeast Asia) and S. enterica
serotype Paratyphi B (tropical fish in Singapore).
Salmonellosis is controlled through strict attention to
protocols designed to curtail the spread to susceptible
animals of any contagious agent found in feces. Artifi-
cial immunization with modified live products has shown
promise (e.g., aroA mutants). Attempts have been made to
treat and prevent the endotoxemia produced by the sys-
temic form of the disease by administering serum contain-
ing antibodies to the core LPS. Likewise, the administration
enteric medium, and brilliant green agar. For enrichment,
of J5, a rough variant of E. coli, has been shown to stimulate
 selenite F, tetrathionate, or gram-negative broth is recom-
the production of antibody to the core LPs. Both methods
mended.
 appear to prevent and control the signs of disease produced
Salmonellae appear as lactose-non-fermenting colonies
by systemic salmonellosis.
on lactose-containing media (Figure 8.6). Since most
serotypes of salmonellae produce H2s, colonies on iron-
containing media (e.g., XLD agar), they will have a black
Salmonellosis of Poultry
center (Figure 8.7). Suspicious colonies can be tested
Paratyphoid.“
"Paratyphoid" of poultry (in quotation
directly with polyvalent anti-Saimonella antiserum or inoc-
marks because true paratyphoid is a disease of humans
ulated into differential media and then tested with antisera.
caused by paratyphoid serotypes of Salmonella) is salmonel-
To cultivate salmonellae from tissue, blood agar (Fig-
losis produced by any of the motile strains of Salmonella.
ure 8.5) can be used.
Definitive  identification involves determination of
enterica serotype Gallinarum are motile. The disease pro-
duces its highest losses in the first 2 weeks of life as a sep-
type.
ticemic disease. Survivors become asymptomatic excretors.
Various Salmonella-specific DNA probes and primers for
Infection is through ingestion. The source is usually feces 01
the polymerase chain reaction have been developed for
fecally contaminated materials (e.g, litter, fluff, and water).
identifcation as well as detection in samples (food, feces,
Diagnosis is made by culturing the organism from
 and water) containing other microorganisms.
affected tissue (e.g., spleen and joints) from birds that had
A multiplex polymerase chain reaction assay using
been showing clinical signs of disease. It is more difficult to
primers designed to detect the common diarrhea-
detect a subclinical carrier because such carriers only peri-
associated microorganisms of swine (Brachyspira hyodysen-
odically shed the organism in feces. Some have suggested
teriae, Lawsonia intracellularis, and Salmonella) has been
that culture of fluff and litter could be used to detect carrier
described.
flocks.
Treatment does not eliminate carriers, although it
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
does control mortality. Treatment regimens have included
avoparcin, lincomycin, furazolidone, streptomycin, and
Nursing care is the principal treatment for the enteric
form of salmonellosis. The use of antimicrobial agents
tails" of normal flora has been used with some success to
84
PART I1 Bacteria and Fungi
reduce the number of salmonellae shed by carrier birds
serologic types affecting fowl, with type 7: 1, 7, and 8 most
(competitive exclusion).
commonly isolated in the United States.
S. enterica ssp. arizonae and S. enterica ssp. diarizonae
Pullorum Disease. Pullorum disease, caused by S. Pullo-
are maintained in turkey flocks via hatching eggs, which
rum,is rare in North America but notin the restof the world.
 become infected following ingestion by the hen. Feces also
The disease has almost been eliminated in the United States
spread it.
due to a breeding flock testing program.
 Diagnosis is made by culturing salmonellae from the
S. Pullorum infects the ova of turkeys and chickens.
liver, spleen, blood, lungs, or kidneys of affected birds, 01
Thus, the embryo is already infected when the egg is
from dead poults and hatch debris.
 hatched. The hatchery environment is contaminated fol-
    ds   ro s 
lowing hatching of an infected egg, leading to infection of
ica subsp. diarizonae possess R plasmids, which sometimes
other chicks and poults. Mortality is due to septicemia and
 makes it difficult to prevent and treat this disease. Various
is greatest in the second to third weeks of life. Surviving
antimicrobial agents such as furazolidone and sulfamer-
birds carry the bacterium and may pass it to their offspring.
azine added to feed have shown some success in lowering
It is difficult to detect infected breeding hens by bacterio-
mortality. Injection of day-old poults with gentamicin or
logic means. Agglutination titers, produced 3-10 days after 
spectinomycin decreases mortality, but survivors still har-
infection, are used to detect carrier birds.
bor (and shed) the organism.
 Eliminating infected breeding birds detected serologi-
Control measures should be aimed at prevention rather
cally controls this disease. Treatment with antimicrobial
than treatment. Because of the multiplicity of serotypes,
 agents (mainly sulfonamides) reduces mortality in infected
no effective vaccine is available.
flocks.
Fowl Typhoid. Fowl typhoid, caused by S. Gallinarum,
Reference
 is an acute septicemic or chronic disease of domesticated
adult birds, mainly chickens. Fowl typhoid is rare now in
 Haraga A, Ohlson MB, and Miller SI (2008) Salmonellae inter-
the United States due to control programs.
play with host cells. Nat Rev Microbiol, 6, 53-66.
 The disease is diagnosed by culturing the organism from
liver or spleen. It is treated with antimicrobial agents,
Further Reading
mainly sulfonamides (sulfaquinoxaline) and nitrofurans.
Fowl typhoid is controlled by management and eliminat-
Ellermeier CD and Slauch JM (2006) The genus Salmonella.
ing infected birds. A bacterin made from a rough variant of
S. Gallinarum, 9R, has been shown to decrease mortality.
Prokaryotes, 6, 123-158.
Euzeby JP (2012) List of prokaryotic names with standing
in nomenclature—genus Salmonella, http://www.bacterio.
Avian Arizonosis. S. enterica ssp. arizonae and S. enterica
cict.fr/s/salmonella.html (accessed January 3, 2013).
ssp. diarizonae are most often isolated from reptiles and
Nataro JP, Bopp CA, Fields PI et al. (2011) Escherichia, Shigella,
fowl, although these species can be isolated from any ani-
and Salmonella, in Manual of Clinical Microbiology, 1Oth edn
mal. Turkeys are most commonly affected. There are 55
(ed. J Versalovic), ASM Press, Washington, DC, pp. 603-626.
Enterobacteriaceae:
Yersinia
RODNEY MOXLEY
The genus Yersinia is included in the family Enterobac-
Descriptive Features
teriaceae. Yersinia includes 17 species: aldovae, aleksiciae,
bercovieri, enterocolitica, entomophaga, frederikseni, interme-
Morphology and Staining
dia, kristenseni, massiliensis, mollareti, nurmii, pekkanenii,
Members of the genus Yersinia are gram-negative coc-
pestis, pseudohuberculosis, rohdei, ruckeri, and similis. Yersinia
enterocolitica includes two subspecies, enterocolitica and
cobacilli (Figure 9.1) that exhibit bipolar ("closed safety
pin") staining, especially when seen in smears from tis-
palearctica. The type species is Y. pestis.
Disease caused by Yersinia infection is called yersiniosis.
sue specimens and stained with Giemsa (Figure 9.2). Most
Yersinioses are zoonotic infections that predominantly
 species are flagellated at ambient temperatures.
affect rodents, pigs, and birds. Humans and nonhuman
primates are affected only by Y. pestis, Y. pseudotuberculosis,
Growth Characteristics
and Y. enterocolitica. Y. pesfis is the cause of plague, a
septicemic disease of major importance in humans,
Yersinia grow on blood, chocolate, MacConkey, and other
rodents, and occasionally domestic animals that is pri-
ordinary laboratory media incubated at 35 *C in ambient
marily acquired through bite wounds of rodent fleas. Y.
air, although their rate of growth is relatively slow com-
cnterocolitica mainly causes disease in domestic animals
pared to most other members of the family Enterobacte-
and primates, and is the most prevalent species in humans.
riaceae. Hence, they may be outcompeted by other bac-
Y. pseudonuberculosis mainly affects birds and rodents,
teria in cultures of clinical and environmental samples.
and only occasionally domestic animals and primates.
 Yersiniae grow well at a temperature range of 4-43 *C, with
Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudohuberculosis infections are
optimum temperatures ranging from 25 *C to 28 *C, and
food- and water-borne illnesses that result in mesenteric
form 1-2 mm diameter colonies after 48 h of incubation
lymphadenitis, terminal ileitis, acute gastroenteritis, and
(Figure 9.3). The ability of yersiniae to grow at 4 *C is a
septicemia.
concern for blood banks because some donors may carry
The three main pathogenic species have several fea-
species such as Y. enterocolitica asymptomatically.
tures in common, including tropism for lymphoid tissues;
Yersiniae in culture yield colonies that range from <1
capacity to resist nonspecific immune responses; behav-
to 1.5 mm in diameter, with those at the low end of the
io1 as facultative intracellular pathogens; ability to resist
spectrum being more typical of Y. pestis. Yersiniae are not
phagocytosis by macrophages; cause formation of extracel-
hemolytic on blood agar (Figure 9.3). They are catalase-
lular colonies in tissues; carriage of a plasmid of 70-75 kb
positive, oxidase-negative, and ferment glucose with the
that contains virulence genes, pCD1 in Y. pestis, pYV (also
production of acid but no gas. Yersiniae do not typically
known as pCad and pIB1) in Y. pseudohuberculosis, and pYV
grow well nor form turbid suspensions in liquid media. All
in Y. enterocolitica; carriage ofa pathogenicity island known
Yersinia spp. except Y. pestis are motile at 25 *℃.
as a high-pathogenicity island (HPl) on the chromosome;
production of Yersinia outer proteins (Yops); and having
animals as a reservoir, with transmission to humans occur-
Y. pestis (Plague Bacillus)
ring directly or indirectly.
Yersinia ruckeri affects only fish and causes red mouth,
Y. pestis is the cause of the disease called plague. As are
a septicemic disease of salmon and trout. The zoonotic
all yersinioses, plague is a zoonotic disease with rodents,
aspects of Y. intermedia, Y. frederikseni, and Y. kristensenii
the reservoir for the pathogen. In human patients and sus-
are uncertain. Yersinia aldovae, Y. rohdei, Y. mollaretii, and
ceptible domestic animal species (mainly cats), plague is
Y. bercovieri are without known pathogenic potential.
manifested as a local lymphadenitis called a bubo (bubonic
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
85
86
PART II
Bacteria and Fumgi
FIGURE 9.1.
Y. pestis, gram stain, showing
FIGURE 9.3.
Y. pestis colonies on sheep blood agar after
gram-negative bacilli. (Courtesy of Larry Stauffer, Oregon
72 h of cufture. Y. pestis grows welfl on most standard
State Public Health Laboratory, and US Health and Human
laboratory media. After 48-72 h of incubation, colonies are
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public
ue aneu pue pasiei pue anbedo onan Aubis oi any-rah
Health Image Library, 1D#1914.)
have a "hammered copper” shiny surface.(Courtesy of US
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Public Heaith Image Library, ID#1921.)
plague, Figures 9.4 and 9.5), pneumonia (pneumonic
plague, Figure 9.6), or septicemia (septicemic plague, Fig-
ures 9.7 and 9.8). Analysis of DNA sequences of the genes
encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA indicates that Y. pestis is
1351. An estimated 17-28 million people in Europe died
a subspecies of Y. pseudohuberculosis that has lost a number
from the Black Death during this time, representing 30-
of the enteropathogenic Yersinia virulence genes.
 40% of the European population. Epidemics during mod-
 Historically, there have been three pandemics: AD 541-
ern times are often seen in war-torn countries (e.g., an
544 (Justinian plague), AD 1330-1346 to 1600s, and AD
epidemic 0ccurred in Vietnam in the 1960s and 1970s).
1855 topresent. The second pandemic was called “the Black
From 1990 to 1995, about 12 000 cases and 1000 deaths
de a sem s aseaa eia, pnn sm ii ,ea
 Occurred worldwide; these were mainly seen in Africa, Viet-
ance of acral necrosis caused by infarcts as a component of
nam, China, South America, and India.
 septicemia affecting the digits of the hands and feet (Figures
9.7 and 9.8). The Black Death pandemic was characterized
by extremely high mortality, especially from about 1347 to
FIGURE 9.4.
An axillary bubo and edema exhibited by a
patient with bubonic plague. After the incubation period of
 2-6 days, symptoms of the plague appear including severe
FIGURE 9.2.
Y. pestis, Wright's stained blood smear from
malaise, headache, shaking chills, fever, and pain and swelling,
a plague victim showing dark stained bipolar ends of bacteria.
or adenopathy, in the affected regional lymph nodes, also
(Courtesy of Us Health and Human Services, Centers for
known as buboes. (Courtesy of Us Health and Human Services,
Disease Control and Prevention, Public Heaith image Library.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health
ID#2050.)
Image Library, ID#2061.)
Chapter 9
Enterobacteriaceae: Yersinia
87
FIGURE 9.5.
Histopathology of lymph nodes in fatal
FIGURE 9.7.
Acral gangrene of the digits of the right
human plague. Medullary necrosis with fluid and Y. pestis.
foot of a patient with septicemic plague. Systemic infection
(Courtesy of Us Heaith and Human Services, Centers for
with Y. pestis resulted in thrombosis and infarction of the
Disease Control and Prevention, Public Heaith image Library.
terminal segments of the digits. it was because of this type of
(D#731.)
lesion that the disease became known as the "Black Death."
(Courtesy of Us Heaith and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Public Heaith image Library.
ID#4139.)
Initial signs and symptoms in human plague victims
appea1 2-6 days after contact with the organism. They have
fever, headache, chills, and swollen tender lymph nodes
(buboes). Buboes usually involve the inguinal and femoral
lymph nodes, which is reflective of lymphatic drainage of 
organisms originating from fleabites on the lower legs. If
characterized clinically by prostration, lethargy, high fever,
and seizures.
 In humans, presepticemic plague if untreated has a 40-
organisms from other pneumonic cases (human or animal),
60% case-fatality rate, and if treated has a 14% case-fatality
infected tissues, or cultured organisms. The case-fatality
rate. Septicemic plague, if untreated, has a 100% case-
fatality rate; with treatment, it has a 30-50% case-fatality
rate in untreated pneumonic cases is essentially 100%, and
often1 exceeds 50% in treated cases.
rate. Pneumonic plague can be a rare secondary compli-
cation of bubonic or septicemic plague or can be the pri-
Necropsy of animals infected with plague is a dis-
tinct risk factor for veterinarians. In 2007, a fatal case of
 mary infection following direct inhalation of aerosolized
FIGURE 9.8.
A shaved anterior thoracoabdominal region
ofa rock squirrel,permophilusvariegatus,afficted withthe
FIGURE 9.6.
Radiograph of the thorax of a patient with
plague. This squirrel is displaying a petechial rash, which is
pneumonic plague. There is bilateral invoivement, with
similar in appearance to those found on humans also afficted
greater consolidation of the left side of the fung. (Courtesy of
with Y. pestis. (Courtesy of US Health and Human Services,
US Heaith and Human Services, Centers for Disease Contro!
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health
and Prevention, Public Heaith Image Library, ID#4068.)
Image Library, ID#6720.)
88
PART II
Bacteria and Fumgi
pneumonic plague occurred in a Grand Canyon National
Hns Phenotype. The Hms (for hemin storage) phenotype
Park wildlife biologist who had necropsied an infected
is associated with iron acquisition and colonization of fleas
mountain lion carcass 7 days earlier. Face-to-face contact
(see Section “Iron Acquisition"). In addition to playing a
with infected pets and laboratory exposure are two other
role in iron acquisition, the hms locus encodes proteins that
examples of hazards associated with veterinary practice (see
serve to block the proventriculus of the flea with aggregated
Sections "Ecology," and “Pathogenesis").
e d   s  
at feeding. Although this enhanices the possibility of trans-
mission of the bacteria to new rodent hosts, it also even-
Descriptive Features
tually causes death of the flea. Hemin is Fe2+ heme and
contains chloride. The Hms+ phenotype is dark greenish-
Cellular Composition and Products of Medical Impor-
brown colonies on hemin agar.
tance. The majority of Y. pestis strains regardless of bio-
type or origin contain three virulence plasmids: pCD1 (70-
Iron Acquisition. Iron is an absolute growth requirement
low calcium response genes); pMT1 (100-110 kb encoding
and must be removed from iron-binding proteins of the
host. The genes encoding products involved with iron
the Cafl (F1) capsule and Yersinia murine toxin (Ymt); and
acquisition reside on the HPl, an integrase protein, a spe-
pPCP1 (9.5 kb encoding pesticin, coagulase, and plasmino.
cific insertion site, and mobility. The HPl of Y. pestis
gern activator(Pla). Theybtgenes encoding the siderophore,
encodes the genes for the iron-acquiring siderophore
yersiniabactin, are found on the 35 kb HPl, which in turn
yersiniabactin, and the Hms (for hemin storage) pheno-
is within the 102 kb pgm (pigmentation) locus on the chro-
type. Colonies growing on the surface of blood agar plates
mosome. An additional operon within the pgm region and
unique to Y. pestis is the 6 kb hms locus. The hms genes
are not) due to the binding of hemoglobin (dark greenish-
encode hemin storage proteins, which enable biofilm for-
brown) or Congo red if present. It is probable that bound
mation and proventricular blockage in fleas. Also located
hemoglobin is used as a source of iron. The genes responsi-
on the chromosome are the genes encoding the protein Gsr
ble are encoded by the pgm (for pigment) locus.
(global stress requirement).
Type ll Secretion System. The type IlI secretion system
Capsule (Fra1, Caf1, or F1). The capsule plays many roles,
consists of an assemblage of proteins (more than 20)
the most important of which are interference with phago-
 encoded by ysc (Yop secretion apparatus) genes that form
cytosis, and the protection of the outer membrane from
a hollow tube-like structure through which effector pro-
the deposition of membrane attack complexes generated
teins (Yops and LcrV) are injected into host target cells.
by activation of the complement system. The capsule of Y.
The ysc genes encoding the proteins needed by the type
pestis is called Fra1 for fraction 1 or Cafl (for capsular anti
III secretion system reside on plasmid pYV (along with
gen fraction 1) or F1 (fraction 1 antigen), and is encoded
the genes encoding Yops and LcrV, see Section "Toxins").
by genes that reside on the 110 kb plasmid pMT1 (which
Most of the proteins of the type Ill secretion system make
also carries the genes encoding the toxin Ymt, see Section
up the membrane-spanning channel that will eventually
"Toxins"). In contrast to Ymt, F1 is expressed at tempera-
fuse with the eukaryotic cell to form the injection pore.
tures >30 *C and during mammalian infection. Upon flea
Genes for the core of the membrane-span ning complex are
 inoculation of Y. pestis, some of the bacteria are engulfed
expressed at 37 oC. Contact with the eukaryotic cell is not
 and transported to regionallymph nodes by macrophages.
needed for this core to form, only exposure to body tem-
Here, during intracellular growth, F1 is expressed and forms
perature (37 *C).
a capsule on the bacterial surface. Subsequent to release of
Y. pestis from its intracellular location, the antiphagocytic
Toxins.
 Y. pestis produces a number of toxins and other
properties of the new F1 surface enable widespread dissem-
effector proteins:
ination and replication and result in host sepsis.
1. Yops: Following their injection into macrophages,
Yops (for Yersinia outer protein) interfere with the
Cell Wall.
1.Y. pestis has lost the genetic capacity to express
actin cytoskeleton, thereby blocking phagocytosis,
a complete lipopolysaccharide (LPS) layer; hence, it lacks
and downregulating the inflammatory responses
 an O-antigen. This organism does, however, elicit clinical
by the inhibition of nuclear factor-x B. Injection of
effects typical of those due to endotoxemia. This is the
Yops into neutrophils results in a decrease in the
 result of LPs binding to the LPs-binding protein and then 
expression of endothelial cell adhesion proteins,
to Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4. The mechanism of endotoxin-
thereby reducing effective inflammatory responses.
mediated effects is described further in Chapter 6.
The genes encoding Yops reside on the pCD1 or pYV
plasmid. The genes residing on this plasmid encode
High-Pathogenicity Island. The HPI is so-called because its
Yops, LcrV, and the type Ill secretion system. They
presence is related to increased virulence as compared to
 are downregulated at 26°C, and upregulated at 37 C
strains that do not contain it. It is a pathogenicity island
and low calcium ion concentrations.
that contains genes encoding the siderophore, yersini-
The six Yops that are injected into the target cell
abactin, and hemin storage proteins (see Sections “Hms
namely, YopB, YopD, YopE, YopH, YopM, and YopT,
Phenotype" and “lron Acquisition").
are not secreted unless contact with the cell is made.
Chapter 9
Enterobacteriaceae: Yersinia
89
YopB and YopD are translocated early; they form the
tion (coagulase), plasminogen activation (fibrinoly-
portion of the pore that transits the membrane of
sis), and complement C3 proteolytic activity. Genes
the eukaryotic cell. However, the low Ca2+ response
on plasmid pPCP1 encode Pla (along with pesticin
keeps the channel closed in the absence of contact.
and the periplasmic protein that confers immunity
The cytoplasm of the eukaryotic cell is low in free
to pesticin). Pla is closely related to OmpT of E. coli,
Ca2+ due to its content of calcium-binding proteins,
an outer membrane protein found in many enteric
for example, calmodulin. Exposure of the tip of the
bacteria. Pla en hances the ability of Y. pestis to col-
 secretion apparatus to the low calcium en vironment
onize the viscera and thus cause lethal infection.
of the eukaryotic cytoplasm is thought to be the
Adherence to host basement membranes and extra-
signal that causes the pore to open. If Ca+ concen-
cellular matrix is dependent upon Pla expression,
trations are high, the protein gate remains closed
where plasminogen activation facilitates bacterial
and no effector proteins are translocated. YopB and
metastasis. The fibrinolytic and coagulase activities
YopD form the part of the pore that transits the
of Pla are temperature dependent. The fibrinolytic
 eukaryotic cell membrane. YopH blocks phagocyto-
and proteolytic activities are higher at 37 *C than
sis and inhibits the oxidative burst. Italso elicits tyr0-
at 28 *C, whereas the coagulase activity is higher at
sine phosphatase activity, which blocks signal trans-
28 *C than at 37 *C. When Pla protease is activated,
duction pathways in the phagocyte. YopE depoly-
it lyses the blood clot in the proventriculus of the
 merizes actin filaments in phagocytes, providing an
flea. This liquefies the blood and lets the bacteria
antiphagocytic effect. YopM prevents thrombin-
pass through the flea's midgut and hindgut (provid-
platelet aggregation, and this reduces inflammatory
ing it with nourishment). Bacterial replication and
response and clot formation. YopT disrupts actin
production of coagulase (e.g., at 28 *C) results in
filaments by inactivation of Rho GTPases.
blockage of the proventriculus; consequently, the
2.
LcrV: LervV (for low calcium response virulence, also
flea regurgitates blood and bacteria out of its mouth-
known as factor V) is a protein located on the sur-
parts, transmits the bacteria to the mammalian host,
face of Y. pestis. LcrV has several roles: it aids in the
and starves.
injection of effector proteins (e.g., Yops) into target
Gsr: Gsr is expressed at 37 *C while Y. pestis is within
cells; after injection into phagocytic cells, it reduces
the macrophage phagolysosome. The Gsr protein is
the excretion of proinflammatory cytokines and
responsible for the survival of Y. pesfis within this
inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis. The genes encod-
en vironment.
ing LcrV reside on the plasmid pYV (also known as
7.
Ypk: Ypk (for Yersinia protein kinase) is a ser-
pCD1). As noted earlier, the genes residing on this
ine/threonine kinase that interferes with signal
plasmid encode Yops, LcrV, and the type Ill secre.
transduction events in the phagocyte.
tion system, and they are downregulated at 26 *C,
8.1
PsaA: PsaA (for pH 6 antigen) is a fibrillar protein
and upregulated at 37 *C and low calcium ion con-
that provides entry into macrophages and mediates
centrations.
delivery of certain Yop proteins (e.g., YopE) into the
3.
 Ymt: The genes encoding Ymt (for Yersinia murine
phagocyte. It is named for the observation that it
toxin) reside on the plasmid pMT (which also con-
is expressed at acidic pH (5-7). It is also expressed
tains the genes for the F1 capsule, see Section Capsule
at low calcium concentrations and at 37 *C. Acidic
(Fral, Cafl or F1). Ymt is a phospholipase D, and
conditions in the phagolysosome induce its expres-
previous studies have indicated that this protein is
 sion. It is expressed when bacteria infect the spleen 
toxic to mice and rats, causing circulatory collapse of
and liver.
the animal. However, it is poorly expressed at 37 *C.
More recent studies have shown that it is expressed
Variability. Y. pestis is serologically uniform. There are
at lower temperatures (e.g., 25 *C), more typical of
-Auoqien uo paseq (sieaonq se umoux osie) sadoiq nog
the flea vector. Its main function is to enhance bac-
drate fermentation and ability to reduce nitrate: Antiqua,
terial colonization within the midgut of the flea, by
Medievalis, Orientalis, and Microtus. Genetic analyses sug-
helping to protect it from digestive enzymes.
- se iss  s si a a e is
4.1
 Pesticin: Pesticin is a bacteriocin produced by Y.
tive of Y. pseudohuberculosis.
pestis with an uncertain role in the production of
disease. Genes on plasmid pPCP1 encode pesticin
Ecology
(along with Pla). Pesticin inhibits growth of Y. pseu-
donuberculosis serotype IA and IB, highly invasive
Reservoir.
 Tolerant rodents in endemic areas (see Sec-
serovar O:8 isolates of Y. enterocolitica, and certain
tion “Epidemiology") constitute the plague reservoir. They
clinical strains of Escherichia coli. Pesticin utilizes
rarely develop fatal disease and are called maintenance 01
siderophore receptors to enter into sensitive bacte-
enzootic hosts. In North America along the coastal regions
ria, and their antibacterial activity can be inhibited
of California, the meadow mouse Microhus californicus is
by exogenous Fe3+ that downregulates these recep-
such a host. In the urban cycle, the rat is the main interme-
tors. Yersiniae that produce pesticin are protected by
diate host and the oriental rat flea is the main vector.
 a periplasmic immunity protein encoded on pPCPi.
5.
Pla and coagulase: Pla is an outer membrane pro-
Transmission.
Transmission is by fleas (Figure 9.9). They
tein of Y. pesfis that provides prothrombin activa-
may carry Y. pestis to more susceptible, epizootic, 0r
90
PART II
Bacteria and Fumgi
disease process, Y. pestis is an intracellular parasite, and
FIGURE 9.9.
Xenopsylla cheopis, oriental rat flea, with a
later, an extracellular one.
proventricular plague mass. During feeding, the flea draws
Extracellular multiplication made possible by iron
viable Y. pestis organisms into its esophagus, which multiply
acquisition systems and capsule production elicits a hemor-
and block the proventriculus just in front of the stomach, later
rhagic inflammatory lesion, followed by local lymph node
forcing the flea to regurgitate infected blood unto the host
 involvement (bubo). This form is called bubonic plague.
when it tries to swallow. (Courtesy of Us Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public
The infection commonly becomes septicemic and, if
Health Image Library, 1D#2025.)
untreated, terminates fatally (an endotoxemia aided by
the function of Pla, which accelerates initiation of dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation). Some individuals
develop plague pneumonia and shed Y. pestis in sputum
and droplet nuclei. Others contract primary pneumonic
plague from this source and transmit it by the same route.
Under epidemic conditions this form is nearly always fatal.
Among domestic animals, cats acquire natural clini-
cal infection, often by ingestion of infected prey. Signs
include regional (particularly mandibular) lymphadeni-
tis, fever, depression, anorexia, sneezing, coughing, and
occasionally central nervous system disturbances. Most
cases end fatally. Lesions, mainly in the respiratory
and alimentary tracts, include lymphadenitis, tonsilli-
tis, cranial and cervical edema, and pneumonia. Cat
tle, horses, sheep, and pigs are apparently not suscep-
tible to clinical plague. However, goats and camels are
susceptible.
amplification hosts, such as ground squirrels or rats. In
 sylvatic (rural) environments, squirrels, prairie dogs, deer
Human plague can be acquired directly from infected
cats, ingestion of meat from infected animals (e.g., goats or
mice, gerbils, voles, rats, and rabbits—are all intermedi
camels), and necropsy of infected animals (e.g., rodents
ate hosts. Some species are more resistant than others to
and mountain lions). In the case of domestic cats, sus-
full-blown disease and septicemia. However, like humans,
pected inoculation routes are via cuts, bites, scratches, and
prairie dogs, ground squirrels, and many other species
 airborne and flea-borne pathways, although the latter is
develop bubonic or septicemic plague (Figure 9.8). When 
unlikely since the cat flea (Ctenocephalides felis) does not
these die, still other hosts, such as humans, are attacked.
become blocked.
 Infected mammals may spread plague by the airborne
route. Oral acquisition is by predation, cannibalism, and
Epidemiology. Plague is concentrated in certain endemic
scavenging.
areas in southern and southeastern Asia, southern and
west central Africa, western North America, and north
central South America. Endemicity largely parallels pres-
Pathogenesis
ence of enzootic and epizootic rodent hosts. Human
 Fleas feed on an infected host. Y. pestis in the midgut of the
plague epidemics have historically been precipitated by
fleas proliferate until they block (obstruct) the flea's proven -
importation of infected rats on board ships coming
triculus (function of Ymt and Hms), a process that takes
from endemic regions. Today, most human cases result
about 2 weeks. Blocked fleas infest a new host and contam-
from infection following contact with rural wild animals
inate the feeding site with Y. pestis when attempting to feed.
(sylvatic plague).
At flea temperature, the type Ill secretion system, Yops,
Plague is a disease of rodents. The organism is main-
LcrV, Cafl, and Gsr are not produced. The bacteria, thus
tained in endemic hosts (certain species of Micronus and
 introduced into a vertebrate host, lack defense against the
Peromyscus, i.e., voles and meadow mice). Endemic hosts
host's innate immune system, and are killed when ingested
are infected following the bite of infected fleas. Although
by neutrophils (an inflammatory response is generated due
endemic hosts are fairly resistant to development of seri-
to products of the flea bite along with the gram-negative cell
ous disease, when their populations rapidly increase and
wall components of Y. pestis). In mononuclear phagocytes,
 spread of Y. pestis is rapid, dying-off of endemic hosts
at mammalian temperatures, and low calcium ion concen-
occurs. Infected fleas, having a shortage of preferred
trations, and while protected by Gsr, Y. pestis activates the
hosts, feed on epidemic, highly susceptible species such
type II secretion system; produces Yops, LcrV, and F1; and
as prairie dogs, rats, mice, and ground squirrels. What con-
 is released from the phagocytic cell following initiation of
stitutes an endemic host and an epidemic host is some-
apoptosis. Yersiniae acquire resistance to further phagocy-
what clouded since there is considerable overlap between
tosis and intracellular killing by neutrophil and mononu-
the two.
clear phagocytes (LcrV reduces the excretion of proin-
 In endemic areas, infections are clustered during the
flammatory cytokines and inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis;
warm months. "Off-season" plague mostly affects persons
injected Yops prevent phagocytosis; Cafl prevents phago-
handling infected rabbits, bobcats, and occasionally house
cytosis and promotes serum resistance). Thus, early in the
cats. Carnivores such as canids (wild and domestic), bears,
Chapter 9E
Enterobacteriaceae: Yersinia
91
raccoons, and skunks, as well as raptors, seroconvert follow-
Y. pseudotubercufosis
ing infection (ingestion and flea bite), but rarely develop
clinical disease. Cat fleas and dog fleas, C. felis, and C.
Y. pseudonuberculosis is associated with mesenteric lym-
canis do not transmit Y. pestis efficiently because neither
phadenitis, terminal ileitis, acute gastroenteritis, and sep-
flea becomes blocked. Thus, infection of humans from an
ticemia, affecting mainly birds and rodents, and only occa-
infected cat (rarely dogs) occurs from infections of scratches
sionally domestic animals and primates. Y. pseudonuberculo-
or bites with infected saliva or from inhalation of infected
sis is closely related to Y. pestis, and many consider Y. pestis
droplets.
to be a subspecies.
Immunologic Aspects
Descriptive Features
Specific resistance to plague probably requires antibody
Cellular Composition and Products of Medical Impor-
and cell-mediated responses. Capsular antigens (Fl anti-
tance. Y. pseudohuberculosis contains the plasmid pYV
gen) evoke opsonin formation. Antibody to the LcrV
(encodes the type II secretion system, Yops, and LcrV).
antigen is protective. Disposal of intracellular organisms
A chromosomallocus called the HPl contains the genes for
depends on activated macrophages. Immunity following
 iron uptake.Also located on the chromosome are the genes
recovery is good, but temporary.
encoding the proteins Ail, Inv, YadA, and Gsr.
Detection of antibodies to Y. pestis in resistant species
(e.g., canids) is a way of determining the presence of the
Adhesins. Y. pseudonuberculosis produces three adhesins
 organism in a particular environment.
that are responsible for adherence to 3-integrins on the
luminal surface of M cells and the basolateral surface of
Laboratory Diagnosis
ileal epithelial cells—Ail, Inv, and Yad:
Diagnostic attempts should be supervised by qualified pub-
1. Ail (for attachment invasion locus) adheres to recep-
tors on the surface of M cells. Ail also protects the
trol"). Samples from affected sites (i.e., edematous tissues,
outer membrane from insertion of the membrane
lymph nodes, and nasopharynx), transtracheal aspirates,
attack complexes generated by activation of the
cerebrospinal fluid, and blood (for culture and serology)
complement system.
are collected.
2.1
 Inv (for invasin) adheres to receptors on the surface
Direct smears are examined following immunofluores-
of M cells and the basolateral surface of ileal epithe-
cent, Wayson's staining, or gram staining. Culture is done
lial cells.
on blood or infusion agar. Identification is confirmed
3.
 Yad (for Yersinia adhesin) adheres to receptors on
the surface of M cells and the basolateral surface of
Mice or guinea pigs injected subcutaneously with Y. pestis
ilealepithelial cells. Yad also protects the outer mem-
die within 3-8 days. DNA techniques utilizing molecular
brane from insertion of the membrane attack com-
probes or the amplification of specific DNA sequences by
plexes generated by activation of the complement
the polymerase chain reaction are available.
system.
 Serologic tests (hemagglutination, hemagglutination-
inhibition, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) are
Cell Wall. The cell wall of Y. pseudonuberculosis has O-
useful for retrospective studies.
antigens (smooth phenotype). The cell wall of the mem-
bers of this genus is one typical of gram-negatives. The LPS
Treatment and Control
in the outer membrane is an important virulence determi-
nant. Not only is the lipid A component toxic (endotoxin),
If plague is suspected in domesticcats, the following recom-
but the length of the side chain in the O-repeat unit hin-
 mendations from the Centers for Disease Control apply:
ders the attachment of the membrane attack complex of
the complement system to the outer membrane. LPS binds
Alrange immediately with local and state public
to LPs-binding protein (a plasma protein), which in turn
health officials for laboratory diagnostic assistance
transfers itto the blood phase ofCD14. The CD14-LPS com-
and steps to prevent spread and contamination
plex binds to TLR proteins (see Chapter 6) on the surface
2.
 Place all suspect cats in strict isolation.
of macrophage cells, triggering the release of proinflamma-
3.
When handling such cats, wear gown, mask, and
tory cytokines.
gloves.
4.
 i p  s  d  i
High-Pathogenicity Island. See Section "Cellular Composi-
residual effect).
(Plague Bacillus)."
Flea elimination should precede rodent con trol.
Aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, fluoroquinolones,
Jron Acquisition.  Iron is an absolute growth requirement
and tetracycline are effective antimicrobics. No vaccines fo1
and must be removed from iron-binding proteins of the
animals are available. Protection of humans by bacterins is
host. The genes encoding products involved with iron
transient.
acquisition reside on a chromosomal pathogenicity island.
92
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
The HPI of Y. pseudohuberculosis encodes the genes for the
lar yersiniae avoid phagocytosis (Yops), and destruction
iron-acquiring siderophore yersiniabactin.
by complement-mediated mechanisms by expression of
Ail and YadA, both of which impart complement resis-
Type Ill Secretion System.S
See Section“Cellular Composi-
tance. Y. pseudonuberculosis acquires iron from iron-binding
tion and Products of Medical Importance,” under “Y. pestis 
proteins of the host following secretion of yersiniabactin
(Plague Bacillus)."
(encoded within the HPl). Diarrhea is thought to result
 f1om prostaglandin synthesis by the recruited PMNs (and
Gsr. See Section “Cellular Composition and Products of
perhaps by the affected host cells), as well as activation of
Medical Importance,”" under “ Y. pestis (Plague Bacillus)."
various inositol-signaling pathways within affected host
cells. The net result is the secretion of chloride ions and
Toxins. Y. pseudohuberculosis produces toxins that are
water. Septicemia results from the host's inability to "clear"
involved with pathogenicity:
yersiniae from infected sites (serum resistance, antiphago-
 cytic traits, and iron scavenging). The result is enteritis and
1. Yops: See Section "Cellular Composition and Prod-
septicemia.
Y. pseudohuberculosis causes intestinal infections with
Bacillus)."
formation of necrotic foci in the intestinal wall, abdominal
2.
LcrV: See Section "Cellular Composition and Prod-
lymph nodes, and viscera, particularly liver (Figure 9.10)
ucts of MedicalImportance," under “ Y. pestis (Plague
and spleen. There may be vomiting, diarrhea, or consti-
Bacillus)."
pation, and weight loss, pale to subicteric mucous mem-
branes, and depression. Fever is inconsistent. Few cases are
diagnosed clinically antemortem. Mastitis is seen in cattle
Variability
and abortion in ruminants and monkeys. In immunocom-
 There are 21 serotypes based on variability of the somatic
petent humans, the disease is generally an enteritis and
(O) antigens.
abdominal lymphadenitis that is self-limiting or respon-
sive to treatment.
Ecology
Epidemiology.  Pseudotuberculosis occurs  worldwide.
Reservoir.
Y. pseudohuberculosis is a parasite of wild
Cases tend to cluster in the cold months. In cats, preva-
rodents, lagomorphs, and birds, but it infects other mam-
lence is biased toward adult, rural, outdoor cats.
mals and reptiles and persists in the environment. The cat
 is the most commonly infected domestic mammal. Minor
Immunologic Aspects
epidemics occur among sheep, pigs, nonhuman primates,
fowl, and pet birds.
Natural infection leaves surviving individuals immune.
Avirulent live vaccine protects against homologous chal-
 Transmission. Transmission is fecal-oral, with exposure
lenge. It is not available commercially.
primarily through ingestion of contaminated food and
water.
Laboratory Diagnosis
 Diagnosis involves isolation of the agent antemortem from
Pathogenesis
feces or lymph node aspirates. Isolation, particularly from
Y. pseudohuberculosis attaches to M cells of lymphoid nod-
mixed sources, is enhanced by cold enrichment, that is,
incubation of a 10% mixture of inoculum in a minimal
ules of the distal small intestine following expression of
the cell surface proteins Inv, Ail, and YadA. Attachment
medium for several weeks at 4 *C. DNA techniques utiliz-
 ing molecular probes or the amplification of specific DNA
ing” phenomenon that leads to the enclosure of the cell
sequences by the polymerase chain reaction are available.
membrane around the attached yersiniae, resulting in their
 internalization. Internalized microorganisms pass through
Treatment and Control
to the lymphoid nodule where they are phagocytosed by
macrophages within the nodule. Expression of Gsr per-
Pseudotuberculosis responds to the same antimicrobics as
mits intracellular survival. Within macrophages (37 *C,
plague.
'e i ee as i ad a '( mo
and Yops and LcrV are produced. Ingested yersinae are
Y. enterocolitica
Now extracellular, yersiniae interfere with further phago-
Y. enterocolitica is associated with mesenteric lymphadeni-
cytosis. Invasion of the basolateral surface of ileal epithe-
 tis, terminal ileitis, acute gastroenteritis, and septicemia in
lial cells occurs following attachment of YadA and Inv, and
domestic animals and primates.
internalization follows. Inflammation induced by extra-
cellular yersiniae (lps), together with interferon secretion 
Descriptive Features
by natural killer cells and y& T cell recognition of infected 
epithelial cells (as well as LPS), results in an influx of poly-
Cellular Composition and Products of Medical Impor.
morphonuclea1 neutrophil (PMN) leukocytes. Extracellu-
tance. Y. enterocolitica contains the plasmid pYV (encodes
Chapter 9
Enterobacteriaceae: Yersinia
6
FIGURE 9.10.
the Lorisidae family) that died from yersiniosis. The animal was found dead, and at necropsy had multiple 1-2 mm white foci in al!
liver lobes. Histopathologic sections of liver, as shown in this figure, revealed severe multifocal coalescing massive necrosis associated
Brown-and-Brenn gram stain.
(A)
the type IlI secretion system, Yops, and LcrV). A chromoso-
3. Yst: Yst (for Yersinia stable toxin) is a chromoso-
mal locus called the HPI contains the genes for iron uptake.
mally encoded enterotoxin unique to Y. enteroco-
Also located on the chromosome are the genes encoding
litica. Yst affects the guanylyl cyclase system by
the proteins Ail, Inv, YadA, Gsr, and Yst.
deregulating cGMP synthesis (increase in intracel-
lular cGMP leads to the opening of chloride chan-
Adhesins. See Section “Cellular Composition and Prod-
nels with the resultant flow of chloride and water
ucts of Medical Importance,” under "Y. pseudouberculosis."
into the intestinal lumen), resulting in fluid and
electrolyte accumulation in the bowel lumen subse-
Cell Wall. See Section "Cellular Composition and Products
quent to blockage of sodium and chloride ion (and
thus water) absorption (tip cells) and loss of chloride
ions (crypt cells) (see also, STa enterotoxin of E. coli,
Chapter 7).
Gsr. See Section “Cellular Composition and Products of
High-Pathogenicity Island. See Section "Cellular Composi-
Variability
tion and Products of Medical Importance," under “ Y. pestis
(Plague Bacillus)."
Y. enterocolitica includes two subspecies, enterocolitica and
palearctica. The enterocolitica subspecies was proposed for
strains with the 16S rRNA type of American origin, whereas
Jron Acquisition. See Section “Cellular Composition and
 palearctica was proposed for strains of European origin. Y.
Products of Medical Importance," under “ Y. pseudoubercu-
enterocolitica strains are differentiated by bio- and serotyp-
losis."
ing. Serotyping is based on reactivity to O-antigen poly-
saccharides. There are more than 70 serotypes, although
Type lll Secretion System. See Section "Cellular Composi-
only a small number are pathogenic. O groups 3, 5, 8, 9,
tion and Products of Medical Importance," under “ Y. pestis
and 27 are associated with classical disease of the gastroin-
(Plague Bacillus)."
testinal tract in human patients. There are six biogroups
(biotypes), namely, BT1A, BT1B, BT2, BT3, BT4, and BT5.
Toxins. Y. enterocolitica produces a number of toxins that
BTlA strains are mostly nonpathogenic; the rest (BT1B
are involved with pathogenicity:
through BT5) are pathogenic. BT1B predominates in the
United States. BT1A and BT2 through BT5 are found in
1.
 Yops: See Section "Cellular Composition and Prod-
the basis of reactivity to esculin, indole, D-xylose, trehalose,
Bacillus)."
pyrazinamidase, β-D-glucosidase, and lipase. Strains are
2.1
LcrV: See Section “Cellular Composition and Prod-
also referred to by a combination of the serotype and bio-
type; for example, a strain that is serotype O:3 and BT4 is
Bacillus)."
referred to as serobiotype O:3/4.
94
PART II
I Bacteria and Fungi
Ecology
Immunologic Aspects
Reservoir and Transmission. Y. enterocolitica has been
Y. enterocolitica is an extracellular microorganism. Phago-
isolated from a wide range of sources, for example, soil,
cytic cells readily destroy it, even though the microorgan-
water, food (fruits, vegetables, milk, retail meat products,
ism excretes proteins (Yops) that inter fere with this process.
cheese, and eggs), and animals. The number of species of
Most often, Y. enterocolitica disease is self-limiting due to the
animals from which it has been isolated is also numerous
innate immune response: phagocytosis, lysis of infected
and includes pets (cats and dogs), stock (chinchilla, mink,
epithelial cells, iron sequestration, and complement pro-
pig, rabbit, cow, goose, horse, sheep, and buffalo), zoo ani-
teins.
mals (monkeys), wild animals (raccoon, fox, snail, frog.
Aserologic relationship between O:9 serotype, common
beaver, deer, ocelot, crab, flies, fleas, birds, oysters, and
 in swine, and Brucella spp. has complicated swine brucel-
 many species of small rodents). Pathogenic BT2 through
losis eradication programs.
 BT5 are mainly isolated from animals (sheep, cattle, goat,
and poultry) or food. Serobiotype O:3/4 strains are fre-
Laboratory Diagnosis
quently isolated from pigs; O:9/2 strains are often iso-
lated from cows and goats; and O:2,3/5 strains are isolated
Samples of feces, lymph node biopsy, and biopsy from
from sheep, rabbits, and goats. Expression of certain vir-
affected tissues are examined microbiologically. Selective
ulence determinants at 22-25 *C suggests that mammals
media containing bile salts are somewhat inhibitory to
acquire Y. enterocolitica from a "cold” source (e.g., water
Y. enterocolitica, especially at 37 *C. MacConkey agar is
and food) rather than a warm-blooded animal. Infection
least inhibitory. There are special media designed for
follows ingestion of organisms expressing the adhesin. One
the isolation of Y. enterocolitica (e.g., cefsulodin-lrgasan-
of the major sources of human infection with serobiotype
novobiocin medium; see Chapter 6). Cold enrichment of
O:3/4 is through the handlingofswine and consumption of
the sample at 4 *C aids in attempts to isolate small numbers
pork. Pigs are known to carry the organism in their orophar-
of Y. enterocolitica from a contaminated environment. Iso-
ynx, nasopharynx, and their intestine. Human-to-human
lation from tissue necessitates the use of blood agar plates
transmission may also occur, although it is rarely docu-
incubated at 37 *C. DNA techniques utilizing molecular
mented.
the polymerase chain reaction are available.
Transmission. Transmission is by the fecal-oral route.
Infection is mainly acquired through ingestion of food and
Treatment and Control
water that has been contaminated with animal feces o1
Antimicrobial agents useful for treating disease produced
by direct contact with animal feces (e.g., abattoir worker).
by Y. enterocolitica are the fluoroquinolones, tetracy-
Children younger than 5 years are much more prone to Y.
cline, trimethoprim-sulfonamides, and chloramphenicol.
enterocolifica infections.
R plasmids are common in Y. enterocolitica, and genes
encoding resistance to tetracycline and streptomycin are
most commonly found.
Pathogenesis
Y. ruckeri
the same as Y. pseudohuberculosis (see Section, "Pathogene-
sis", under “Y. pseudohuberculosis"). In addition to diarrhea
"Enteric redmouth" is a hemorrhagic inflammation of the
associated with invasion of epithelial cells and inflamma-
perioral subcutis of freshwater fish, particularly rainbow
tion (as with Y. pseudotuberculosis), Y. enterocoliticaproduces
trout. Infection is systemic and causes significant mortality
Yst.
in hatcheries of North America, Australia, and Europe. The
agent is disseminated by asymptomatic carrier fish and pos-
Epidemiology. As noted earlier, certain subspecies,
sibly riparian mammals (muskrats). Outbreaks appear to be
serotypes, and biotypes are geographically restricted. Sub-
related to massive exposure.
 species enterocolitica is found in the United States and sub-
The pathogenesis of this disease has not been described.
 species palearctica is found in Europe. BT1B predominates
A protease, Yrp (Y. ruckeri protease) appears to play an
in the United States. BT1A and BT2 through BT5 are found
important role since inactivation of the encoding gene sig-
in Europe. Serotype O:8 is indigenous to the United States
nificantly reduces virulence.
but not the rest of the world. Until recently, serotype O:3
Outbreaks are brought under control with antimi-
was rarely isolated in the United States but is common
crobics (e.g., sulfonamides, tetracycline, trimethoprim-
in the rest of the world, and is becoming more so in the
sulfonamide), and bacterins have been successful in low-
 United States. Serotype O:9 has not been reported outside
ering mortality.
of Europe.
10
Enterobacteriaceae:
Shigella
RODNEY MOXLEY
Members of the genus Shigella belong to the family Enter-
ically, Shigella spp. lack many of the traits characteristic
obacteriaceae and cause bacillary dysentery (shigellosis)
of E. coli. They express neither capsules (K antigens) no1
in human and nonhuman primates. The genus includes
flagella (H antigens). The latter trait is the result of muta-
four species: (1) Shigella dysenteriae, (2) Shigella flexneri, (3)
tions in or complete loss of the master operon of flagel-
Shigella boydii, and (4) Shigella sonnei (Table 10.1). These
lar synthesis, flhDC. While E. coli are usually prototrophic,
species are also known as serogroups (or subgroups) A, B,
C, and D, respectively. The type species for the genus is S.
On synthetic media with Simmon's citrate, and are nega-
dysenteriae. The chromosomal DNAs of the four members
tive for the deaminases for phenylalanine and tryptophan.
of the Shigella genus are nearly identical to Escherichia coli,
They are also negative for arginine and lysine decarboxy-
fo1 example, the sequence divergence between S. flexneri
lase, growth in KCN medium, liquefaction of gelatin, oxi-
and E. coli K-12 is 98.5%. The exception is S. boydi serotype
dation of gluconate, production of H2s (on triple-sugar-
13, which has been reclassified as Escherichia albertii. Based
iron agar), urease, and utilization of Christensen's citrate
on the extensive DNA sequence homology between Shigella
Or malonate. Like E. coli, shigellae yield both a positive
and E. coli, some taxonomists have proposed that the four
methyl red and a negative Voges-Proskauer reaction. As do
species of Shigella be reclassified as serological biotypes of
all Enterobacteriaceae, they ferment glucose, but, with the
E. coli. However, this reclassification has not occurred. The
exception ofS. flexneri type 6,S. boydii types 13 and 14, and
main reason is that the medical community prefers to con-
tinue to associate the distinctive clinical disease with the
S. flexneri, and S. boydii do not ferment lactose, but after
name shigellosis. Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) share bio-
several days of culture, S. sonnei and S. boydii serotype 9
chemical characteristics, essential virulence factors, and
do yield lactose-positive results. Similarly, S. sonnei slowly
        
ferments saccharose. Shigella spp. do not ferment adonitol,
even more closely related to Shigella spp. than to commen-
inositol, or salicin.
sal E. coli strains. Comparative genomics studies indicate
 Shigella spp. have a typical gram-negative (GN) cell wall
that Shigella spp. and EIEC evolved from multiple E. coli
that includes lipopolysaccharide and, like other Enter-
strains by convergent evolution.
obacteriaceae, express an O-antigen that is useful fo1
In nonhuman primates, shigellosis occurs almost
serogrouping and serotyping. Serogroup determination is
required for the identification of the species of Shigella.
to stressful situations (e.g., transportation, crowding)
Slide agglutination assays with commercially available spe-
or immunological dysfunctions (e.g., simian acquired
cific antisera are used to determine the serogroup (sub-
immunodeficiency syndrome). Cases in nonhuman pri-
group) and serotype. S. dysenteriae has 15 serotypes; S.
mates are due to infection with S. flexneri, S. boydii, or S.
flexneri has 6 serotypes and 2 variants, with serotypes
sonnei, whereas cases in humans may be due to any of these
1-5 subdivided into 11 subserotypes; S. boydi has 19
01 S. dysenteriae. In both humans and nonhuman primates,
serotypes, and S. sonnei has only 1 serotype (Table 10.1).
lesions of shigellosis are limited to the colon, and may be
g oz on I o pananu ae sdas oa s
focal or diffuse (Figure 10.1).
serotype 13 was removed as it has been reclassified as
E.
alberti. S. sonnei undergoes phase variation from a
Descriptive Features
smooth, virulent phase I to a rough, avirulent phase
Il, which has lost the capacity to synthesize its O-side
chains. Conversion of one serotype to another within a
Cellular Structure and Composition
species is under the regulation of the genes contained
The structure of each of the Shigella spp. is typical for the
within the Shi-O pathogenicity island (PAI), as described
family Enterobacteriaceae. Though closely related genet-
below.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
95
96
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 10.1.
Shigefla Serogroups, Species, and Serotypes
 membrane, the insertion of which is guided by IpaD. IpaA
is injected through the translocon into the host cell, and
Serogroup
Species
Number of Serotypes
targets β1 integrins, vinculin, and the GTPase, Rho. This
induces en try of the bacteria into the host cell into a phago-
A
dysenteriae
15
      
B
flexneri
6
formation of membrane ruffles (pseudopodia) that engulf
C
boydii
19
the bacteria. IpaC targets actin and β-catenin, causing
sonner
1
effects on actin polymerization that assist in membrane
ruffle formation. In addition, IpaC is thought to disrupt
the integrity of the phospholipid bilayer, causing rupture
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
of the phagosome and escape of the bacteria into the cyto-
plasm. IpgB1 is secreted by the T3SS and plays a significant
Cell Wall.  The cell wall of the members ofthis genus is one
role in bacterial invasion by mimicking the GTPase RhoG,
typical
 of GNs, and also participates in the pathogene-
and thereby activating Rac1 through the ELMO-Dock180
sis by typical means, that is, through the effects of lipid
pathway. IpgB1 also activates Cdc42, but to a lesser extent.
A (endotoxin) and resistance to complement-mediated
Activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 induce membrane ruffling
lysis (both described in detail for Enterobacteriaceae in 
through their effects on actin cytoskeletal rearrangement.
Chapter 6).
The gene encoding IpgB1 (ipgB1) is located upstream of the
ipaBCDA operon on the large virulence plasmid.
Type Ill Secretion System (T3sS) and Invasion Proteins.
IpaBa and IpaC also cause release from the phagosome
A requisite
 step in the pathogenesis of shigellosis is
in macrophages. Release of IpaB into the cytoplasm of the
invasion of the large intestinal epithelium, which occurs
 macrophage results in it being integrated into organel-
through M cells (Figure 10.2). The initial contact between
lar membranes in a cholesterol-dependent manner. This
 the bacterium and the host cell is at lipid raft domains and
causes the proteolytic activation of procaspase-1 to caspase-
is mediated by the receptors CD44 and αsβ integrin. This
1, and resultant causation of apoptosis of the macrophage.
binding induces early actin cytoskeletal rearrangements,
This process also results in the cleavage and activation of
but efficient and complete bacterial uptake requires T3SS
 proinflammatory cytokines IL-13 and IL-18, which results
effector proteins that are encoded on alarge virulence (220-
in release of these cytokines and elicitation of the marked
kb) plasmid. The virulence plasmid contains a mosaic of
 inflammatory response that characterizes shigellosis.
 approximately 100 genes.
Mxi-5pa I3ss. A second group of genes on the large vi1-
Invasion Plasmid Antigen (ipa) and Ipg Proteins. Ipa
ulence plasmid
 encode for the more than 25 proteins
effector
proteins, viz., IpaA, IpaB, IpaC, and IpaD are
needed for the molecular structure, assembly, and func-
encoded by one group of genes that are carried on the
tion of the T3SS apparatus (Figure 10.3). These include the
large virulence plasmid. The Ipa proteins are secreted by
membrane expression of ipa (mxi) and surface presentation 
the T3sS and mediate invasion of M cells and escape from
of ipa antigen (spa) genes. The Mxi-Spa T3SS consists of four 
the phagosome (Figure 10.3). IpaB and IpaC mediate the
main parts: (1) a basal body that spans the bacterial en ve-
formation of a translocon (pore) in the host cell plasma
lope; (2) a hollow needle structure that is anchored in the
basal body and protrudes extracellularly; (3) a translocon
at the needle tip; and (4) a cytoplasmic ring that energizes
and mediates the transport of proteins from the bacterial
FIGURE 10.1.
Diffuse hemorrhagic inflammation of the
cytoplasm into the needle structure.
colon in a Rhesus monkey affected with shigellosis. (US
A third group of genes on the large virulence plasmid
Department of Heaith and Human Services, Centers for
encodes for two transcriptional activators, VirB and MxiE,
Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health information
which regulate T3ss-associated genes. A fourth group of
Library, PHIL_5166.)
genes encodes chaperones (ipgA, ipgC, ipgE, and spal5)
needed to unfold and insert proteins into the needle com-
plex. Approximately 25 proteins are secreted by the T3SS.
Intercellular Spread (lcs) Proteins. Another group of genes
on the large
 virulence plasmid encodes the Ics proteins.
Once in the host cell, the bacterium uses the Ics proteins to
 move within the cytoplasm and spread to adjacent epithe-
lial cells (ECs). The IcsA (VirG) protein moves to one pole of
the bacterium and targets N-WASP (neural Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome protein). Binding of N-WASP allows for nucle.
ation of actin at that site. Once actin polymerization at one
pole of the bacterium has begun and progresses, it propels
the organism through the host cell cytoplasm (Figure 10.4)
Positioning of IcsA to one pole of the organism is medi-
ated by PhoN2, an apyrase (adenosine diphosphatase) . IcsB
Chapter 10 Enterobacteriaceae: Shigella
97
FIGURE 10.2.
Cellular pathogenesis of Shigella spp. Shigella flexneri passes the epithelial cell (EC) barrier by transcytosis
cell death, which is accompanied by proinflammatory signaling. Free bacteria invade the EC from the basolateral side, move into the
the EC lining, which initially exacerbates the infection and tissue destruction by facilitating the invasion of more bacteria. Uitimately.
Hiibi 2008.)
Gutlumen
Epithelialcells
M-cell
Macrophages
IL-8
L-1β
Submucosa
个IL-18
Apoptotic
activation
macrophage
NK-cell
camouflages IcsA to preventit from autophagic recognition
O antigens and serotype con version. SRL contains genes
and destruction. IcsA does notutilize the T3Ss; it enters the
encoding for iron acquisition (fecA to fecE, fecl, and fecR),
host cell by its properties as an autotransporter protein. IesP
and resistance to antibiotics. SRL genes encode resistance to
(SopA) is a serine protease that cleaves IcsA and modulates
tetracycline (tetA to tetD, and tetR), chloramphenicol (caf),
the actin-based motility.
ampicillin (oxa-1), and streptomycin (aadA 1).
Virulence A (VirA) Protein. VirA, also encoded by a gene on
Shiga Toxin (Stx).
With rare exceptions,  S. dysenteriae
the large virulence plasmid, is secreted by the T3Ss. VirA is
serotype 1 is the only member of the genus thatcontains the
a cysteine protease that targets α-tubulin and assists in the
genes for Stx production. As in essentially all Shiga toxin-
mediation of intracellular motility by causing disassembly
of microtubules (Figure 10.4).
producing E. coli (STEC), except edema disease strains, the
Stx genes in S. dysenteriae are carried on the chromosome.
However, unlike STEC, S. dysenteriae serotype 1 does not
Shigella Enterotoxin 2 (ShET-2). ShET-2 is encoded by
carry intact Stx-converting phages. This is thought to be
genes (sen, for Shigella enterotoxin) on the large virulence
the result of loss of essential phage genes caused by trans-
plasmid. ShET-2 is produced by S. dysenteriae, S. sonnei, and
 position and recombination events. A human isolate of
S. flexneri. In contrast, ShET-1, is encoded by setlA and set1B
S. sonnei with an integrated bacteriophage carrying Stx
genes on the chromosome(described below), and produced
genes has been detected. Experimentally, other S. sonnei
only by S. flexneri. ShET-1 and ShET-2 are thought to cause
strains could be lysogenized with the phage and thereby
the watery diarrhea that precedes dysentery. Watery diar-
produce Stx. The six DNA sequence in this phage was more
rhea occurs in all patients, but dysentery does not; henice,
closely related to stx2 than stx. These findings suggest
the enterotoxins should be considered as important viru-
that Stx-positive S. sonnei and other Stx-positive species
lence factors.
of Shigella may possibly emerge as important pathogens in
the future
Proteins Encoded by Genes on Pathogenicity Islands
The production of Stx is iron-regulated (by way of Fur
(PAls). Shigella spp. isolates may contain as many as five
(ferric uptake regulator), see Section “Regulatory Genes"),
PAIs on their chromosomes, four of which are referred to
with more toxin being produced in conditions of low
as Shigella pathogenicity islands (SHl), and one of which
iron concentration. Although the other virulence factors
is called SRL (for Shigella resistance locus). SHI-1 contains
described above are important in the pathogenesis, the vir-
sigA, pic, and set genes, which encode, respectively, an
ulence of a particular S. dysenteriae strain is also directly
related to the amount of Stx produced. As described for
protease/mucinase (Pic), and Shigella enterotoxin 1 (ShET-
STEC, Stx causes severe vascular lesions in the colonic
1). SigA is a cytopathic toxin, Pic causes mucus permeabi-
mucosa, renal glomeruli, and other organs that result in
lization, and Sh ET-1 induces intestinal fluid accumulation.
hemorrhagic colitis and, in some cases, hemolytic uremic
SHI-2 and SHI-3 contain copies of the genes (iucA to iucD)
syndrome (HUS). The molecular, cellular, and pathophys-
for production of aerobactin, although SHI-3 is only found
iologic mechanisms of Stx toxicity and the corresponding
in S. boydii. SHI-O contains genes for modification of the
clinical effects are described in detail in Chapter 7.
98
PART II
 Bacteria an d Fumgi
FIGURE 10.3.
Architecture of the Shigella flexneri
FIGURE 10.4.
Intracelflular movement of Shigella
Mxi-Spa type ilf secretion system (T3Ss). The S. flexneri Mxi-Spa
flexneri by directed actin polymerization. Due to the activity of
T3SS consists of four main parts. The seven-ringed basal body
the serine protease SopA/icsP, 5. flexneri fcsA focalizes to one
spans the bacterial inner membrane (iM), the periplasm, and
pole of the bacterium, where it interacts with the host cel!
the outer membrane (OM). The hollow needle is attached to a
N-WASP (neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein). The
socket and protrudes from the basal body to the bacterial
IcsA/N-WASP complex recruits and activates the Arp2/3
surface. Contact with host membranes (HM) triggers the
complex, thereby mediating actin nucleation. Elongation of
IpaD-guided membrane insertion of the ipaB-ipaC transiocon
the actin tail pushes S. flexneri through the cytoplasm. The
movement is facilitated by VirA, which opens a path by
ring, which is comprised of proteins that energize the
degradation of the microtubule network. To avoid
transport process and mediate the recognition of substrates.
chaperone release, and substrate unfoiding. (Reproduced by
recognition site on IcsA is masked by the protein lcsB.
permission of Schroeder and Hiibi 2008.)
(Reproduced by permission of Schroeder and Hiibi 2008.)
Target cell
IpaB
Ipac
Microtubule
HM
degradation
IpaD
MxiH
Autophagy
OM
CHHHH
Actine
Arp2/3
Peptidoglycan
Periplasm
MxiJ
HMXiG
Spa33
Fur and an RNA polymerase containing RpoS are addi
IM
ATPase
tional regulatory genes. The Fur protein “senses" available
(MxiK
Spa47
iron concentration, and when low (as would be inside
Spa32
the host, since most iron is bound to host iron-binding
Effector
proteins) it activates the synthesis and secretion of aer-
Shigella
Chaperone
obactin, ShET-1, and Stx (see Sections "Proteins Encoded by
Genes on pathogenicity islands (PAls)" and “Shiga Toxin
(Stx)"). RNA polymerase containing RpoS preferentially
 transcribes genes effecting acid tolerance (survival at pH
Regulatory Genes. S
Shigellae possess a number of genes
 5), providing protection against the acidic pH of the gastric
whose activation
 results from specific environmental
lumen.
cues. The primary elements of the regulatory cascade that
 sense and respond to environmental changes are encoded
on the chromosome. Achange in pH, temperature (increase
Variability
to 37 *C), or change in osmolarity would be sensed by
 Shigellae are serogrouped and serotyped solely on the basis
chromosomally encoded sensor proteins (e.g., VirR), which 
would activate expression of virF on the virulence plas-
of the O-antigen, since no H or K antigens are expressed.
mid. VirF then activates transcription of icsA and virB,
Serogroup determination is essential for the identification 
also located on the virulence plasmid. VirB activates T3SS
of the species of Shigella, and within three of the four
assembly genes (ipa, mxi, spa), and “first-set” effectors.
species, there are a multiple serotypes (see Table 10.1).
The “first-set" effectors lead to increased transcription of
"second-set" T3ss effectors. In this manner, an environ-
Ecology
 mental change indicating presence of the bacterium in
the host would initiate a cascade of sequential gene activa-
Reservoir
tion steps culminating in bacterial invasion of the colonic
epithelium. Some genes that are activated in this pro-
The distribution of Shigella is essentially limited to the
 cess serve as negative regulators, preventing wasted energy
intestinal tracts of humans and large, captive primates in
usage by the bacteria as they invade the host.
which shigellosis naturally occurs, and sewage. Humans
Chapter 10Enterobacteriaceae: Shigella
99
are the reservoir host; there is no evidence that the dis-
per ml of luminal contents. Abdominal pain, cramping.
ease occurs naturally in nonhuman primates in the wild
and fever occur while the bacteria are localized in the small
without prior contact with humans. Shigellae are consis-
intestine.
tently present in sewage, and accidental contamination of
The bacteria pass to the colon and invade the colonic
mucosa by a series of steps (Figure 10.2). The events at the
of shigellosis in humans. In humans, Shigella is endemic
molecular level are described above. Shigellae adhere to the
throughout the world, although 99% of the cases occur in
surfaces of M cells, and are taken up into phagosomes. The
the developing world.
bacteria escape from phagosomes, multiply in the cyto-
plasm, and move to adjacent enterocytes by causing the
Transmission
induction of actin cytoskeletal rearrangement at one pole
of the organism. This propels the bacteria through the cyto-
The disease is transmitted by the fecal-oral route, but the
plasm and allows contact to be made with adjacent ECs.
infective dose is so small (only 10-100 cells) and the organ-
Spread to adjacent absorptive ECs occurs by induction of
isms survive long enough that fomites also play a role.
endocytosis through the cell membranes of both cells. The
S. flexneri serotype 4 is associated with periodontal dis-
bacteria continue to spread through the epithelial layer in
ease of nonhuman primates; the mode of transmission
this man ner and the cycle continues to be repeated. Phago-
is unknown, but it is assumed to be feces. Antimicrobial
drugs, stress, or dietary changes promote risk by reducing
but the bacteria cause apoptotic cell death of macrophages,
colonization resistance (by decreasing the numbers of the
thereby reducing the effectiveness of the host defense and
competing normal flora), which may lead to disease in sub-
causing the release of IL-13 and IL-18, which exacerbate
clinically infected nonhuman primates or humans, or by
the inflammatory response. Neutrophils effect bacterial
lowering the oral dose needed for infection and subsequent
killing, but also cause tissue damage that enhances bacte-
disease. Studies have demonstrated that an important vehi-
rial spread. Infiltration and death of neutrophils generates
cle for transmission of shigellosis is the hand, which points
the lesion, purulent colitis. Bacteria are released by dead or
out the importance of thorough hand washing in disease
dying ECs and macrophages, and drain via the lymphatics
prevention. S. dysenteriae serotype 1 survives for up to 1 h
into gut-associated lymphoid tissue, where they are ulti-
in culturable form on human skin.
mately killed.
In addition to the effects of inflammation and necro-
Clinical Disease
sis of the colonic mucosa, diarrhea is brought about by
the activation of phospholipase C leading to increase in
intracellular calcium ions, activation of protein kinase C,
The classical disease begins as watery diarrhea, then after
3-4 days the feces becomes scant and contains blood and
and subsequent phosphorylation of proteins of the chlo-
ride ion channels and those of the membrane-associated
mucus. There is fever, abdominal pain, cramping, and
ion transport proteins involved in NaCl absorption.
straining. There may be malaise, myalgia, and anorexia.
The severity of the clinical course usually varies with the
Based on mutagenesis and animal model studies, ShET-
species. S. sonnei mainly causes a watery diarrhea, whereas
1 and ShET-2 are thought to play a significant role in the
S. flexneri and S. dysenteriae produce more severe signs (e.g.,
causation of watery diarrhea; however, the mechanism for
these effects is poorly understood.
more pronounced blood in the stool with either S. flexneri
-odode sasneo I adoras aniauasip s Aa panpid xis
01 S. dysenteriae and systemic complications such as HUS
sis of vascular endothelial cells and activation of leukocytes
or brain damage in the case of S. dysenteriae). In all forms
of shigellosis, microscopic examination of the stool will
with upregulation and expression of tumor necrosis factor-
reveal large numbers of leukocytes.
α (TNF-α). TNF-α induces increased expression of the Gb3
Shigellosis is characterized pathologically by a mucopu-
receptor for Stx, which increases the extent of endothe-
lial toxicity and vascular damage. The vasculature in the
rulent and hemorrhagic colitis. Microscopic abscesses may
mucosa of the colon is affected by Stx toxicity, causing
be seen in the colonic mucosa, involving the crypts or inter-
cryptal regions. Crypt abscesses often slough, producing
thrombosis and infarction of the colonic mucosa. These
effects exacerbate those of colonic inflammation and cause
ulcers.
 HUS may be seen in human patients infected with
hemorrhagic colitis. Stx may also affect the vasculature
S. dysenteriae 1, mainly the result of the effects of Stx
in extraintestinal locations, for example, the kidneys and
brain, resulting in the development of the HUs. The effects
production. Reiter's syndrome, characterized by arthritis,
sometimes appears after the intestinal infection has
of Stx are described in more detail in Chapter 7.
passed. This syndrome also may be seen with the other
bacterial infections, viz., Yersinia enterocolitica, Salmonella
Epidemiology
enterica var. Typhimurium, Kebsiella pneumoniae, and
As noted above, among animals, the disease is seen almost
Campytobacter jejuni.
exclusively in large, captive primates. Humans are the reser-
voir host. In developed countries, shigellosis is a disease of
Pathogenesis
the disadvantaged and those having close contact in group
settings. In the United States, shigellosis is also mainly a
Within 12 h after ingestion, the bacteria multiply in the
disease of children 1-4 years old, and is caused by S. sonnei.
small intestine to concentrations of 10?-108 viable cells
Outbreaks are often seen in preschoolchildren and toddlers
100
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
 in day care centers. Outbreaks are also seen in mental insti-
tutions. Large urban outbreaks have been seen following
FIGURE 10.5.
Shigella boydii, isolated colonies on
Hektoen enteric (HE) agar. This photograph depicts the
accidental contamination of a city water supply by sewage
effluents. Worldwide in humans, S. flexneri and S. sonnei
colonial morphology displayed by S. boydi bacteria cultivated
are typically responsible for endemic shigellosis, whereas
on a HE agar surface; colonies of S. boydi bacteria grown on
HE agar display a raised, green, and moist appearance. (US
S. dysenteriae 1 is responsible for the epidemic form of the
Department of Heaith and Human Services, Centers for
disease.
Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health information
(8899 71Hd Kieiq!7
Immunologic Aspects
immunoglobulin in the intestinal lumen. These antibod.
ies prevent adherence and subsequent uptake. Shigellae are
serum-sensitive (i.e., they are susceptible to complement-
trophils. As a result, shigellae do not typically cause sep-
ticemia.
Whether nonhuman primates are resistant to reinfec-
tion followingrecovery from shigellosis is notknown. Rein-
fection or exacerbation does occur in humans in stressful
situations such as in prisoner-of-war camps. Bacterins given
 orally or parenterally have been ineffective. Some protec-
tion has been demonstrated following vaccination with
 avirulent, live oral vaccines, but these are not universally
available.
This assay has been used to detect and identify members
of this genus. However, there are no FDA-approved nucleic
Laboratory Diagnosis
acid detection methods for the clinical diagnosis of Shigella
infections.
Fecal samples from the live animal, or in the case of
necropsy, colonic samples, should be plated onto a selec-
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
tive medium that is less inhibitory than media for isolation
of salmonellae. There is no reliable enrichment medium
for all shigellae; however, GN broth is preferred for gen-
 Treatment of shigellosis involves nursing and supporting
eral use. Selenite broth and tetrathionate broth, both pri-
care. Antimicrobial agents are indicated in serious cases but
not routinely since their use in an animal facility selects
marily intended for enrichment of Salmonella, are usu-
for resistant strains. The first choices are ampicillin 01
ally too inhibitory. For the optimal isolation of Shigella,
both a medium of low selectivity, viz., MacConkey agar,
trimethoprim-sulfonamide, and if the causative organism
 is resistant to these, a fluoroquinolone; these are effective
and a more selective agar medium, such as xylose-lysine-
against most strains and these drugs do not disrupt the nor-
deoxycholate (XLD) agar should be used. Hektoen enteric
mal flora (colonization resistance) as much as other antimi-
(HE) medium is a suitable alternative to XLD (Figure 10.5),
whereas Salmonella-Shigella (SS) agar is often too inhibitory
crobials.
for some strains of shigellae, for example, S. dysenteriae 1.
Shigella will not grow on more inhibitory media primarily
Further Reading
intended for isolation of Salmonella, for example, brilliant
green agar.
Germani Y and Sansonetti PJ (2006) Chapter 3.3.6. The genus
 Shigellae appear as lactose-nonfermenting colonies on
Shigella. Prokaryotes, vol.6, Springer, pp. 99-122.
lactose-containing media, although some species (S. son-
Nataro JP, Bopp CA, Fields PI et al. (2011) Chapter 35.
Escherichia,Shigella,and Salmonella,in Manual of Clinical
days of incubation. Suspicious colonies are tested directly
Microbiology, 10th edn (ed. J Versalovic), ASM Press, Wash-
with shigellae-specific antisera or inoculated into differen-
ington, DC, pp. 603-626.
tial media and then tested with antisera.
Schroeder GN and Hilbi H (2008) Molecular pathogenesis of
 Primers have been designed to amplify (by the poly-
Shigella spp.: controlling host cell signaling, invasion, and
 merase chain reaction) DNA targets specific for shigellae.
death by type Il secretion. Clin Microbiol Rev, 21, 134-156.
Pasteurellaceae:
Avibacterium,Bibersteinia
Mannheimia,and
Pasteurella
AMELIA R. WOOLUMS
The family Pasteurellaceae contains many organisms that
fracheale, a bacterium that is not a member of the family
contribute to animal disease. Many are normal inhabitants
Pasteurellaceae, but phenotypically (and clinically) resem-
of the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts and
bles some strains of Avibacterium paragallinarum.
cause disease opportunistically when other factors enhance
Also discussed in the chapter are Actinobacillus (A.)
their ability to advance to deeper levels of these systems.
equuli ssp. equuli, A. equuli ssp. haemolytica, A. lignieresii,
Others are infrequently isolated from normal individuals
A. suis, A. pleuropneumoniae, and members of the genus Gal-
and cause severe disease when animals are exposed to these
libacterium. Additional information is provided in Chapter
agents.
12 on Actinobacillus. As with other members of the family
There have been many changes in the taxonomy of
Pasteurellaceae, all of these agents are gram-negative coc-
the family Pasteurellaceae since the second edition of
cobacilli. They are facultative anaerobes, and are typically
this textbook was written, and more changes will likely
oxidase-positive (which sets them apart from members of
occur in the future. At the time of this writing, there are
the family Enterobacteriaceae).
16 genera included in the family: Actinobacillus, Aggre-
gatibacter, Avibacterium, Basfa, Bibersteinia, Chelonobac
ter,Gallibacterium,Haemophilus,Histophitus，Lonepinella,
Descriptive Features
Mannheimia, Necropsobacter, Nicoletella, Pasteurella, Pho-
coenobacter, and Volucribacter. Bacteria from genera that
Morphology and Staining
contribute to important diseases of animals are described
here and in Chapters 13 and 14. At this time bacteria in
Members of the genera Avibacterium, Bibersteinia, Pas-
teurella, and Mannheimia are gram-negative coccobacilli
associated with animals. The sources of agents in the gen-
measuring 0.2 μm by up to 2.0 μm. Bipolarity, that is, the
era Basfia, Chelonobacter, Lonepinella, Necropsobacter, Nico-
staining of only the tips of cells, may be demonstrable with 
letella, and Necropsobacter are listed in Table 11.1, but these
polychrome stains (e.g, Wright's stain).
 agents are not discussed further here.
All the members of the family Pasteurellaceae are gram
Structure and Composition
negative coccobacilli. They are facultative anaerobes, and
typically oxidase-positive (which sets them apart from
Capsules contain acidic polysaccharides. The capsule of
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae).
Pasteurella multocida type A is made of hyaluronic acid, the
Discussed in this chapter are the genera Avibacterium,
capsule of type D is made of heparin, and the capsule of
Bibersteinia, Mannheimia, and Pasteurella, whose members
type F is made of chondroitin (see Section “Variability"
play an important role in diseases of several animal species
for discussion of P. multocida capsule nomenclature). Some
(Table 11.1). Briefly discussed is also Ornithobacterium rhino-
P. multocida and Mannheimia haemolytica strains express
adhesins.
Cell walls are typical of gram-negative microorganisms
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
Some of the latter are iror-regulated (i.e., they are expressed
Ernst L. Biberstein.
under iron-poor conditions).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
101
102
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 11.1.
Some Members of the Family Pasteurellaceae of Importance in Animal Disease
Genus and Species
Associated Disorder or Site
Avibacterium avium (formerly Pasteurella avium)
 Normal respiratory flora of chickens
Avibacterium endocarditidis
Endocarditis in chickens
Avibacterium gallinarum (formerly Pasteurella galinarum)
Respiratory disease in poultry
Avibacterium paragallinarum formerly Haemophilus
 Infectious coryza in chickens 
paragallinarum)
 Avibacterium volantium formerly Pasteurella volantium)
Normal respiratory flora of chickens 
Basfia succiniciproducens
 Normal rumen flora
Bibersteinia trehalosi?
Respiratory disease in ruminants, bacteremia in lambs 
Chelonobacter oris
Various infections in tortoises
Lonepinella koalarum
 Tannin-degrading bacterium in normal koala feces
Mannheimia glucosida
Mastitis in sheep, respiratory disease in ruminants
 Mannheimia granulomatis
Respiratory and other infections in deer, ruminants, and hares; skin disease (lechiguana)
 in cattle; mastitis in sheep
Mannheimia haemolytica?
Respiratory disease in ruminants, mastitis in sheep
Mannheimia ruminalis
 Normal rumen flora, mastitis in sheep
 Mannheimia varigena
Respiratory infections and bacteremia in ruminants and swine, mastitis in cattle
Necropsobacter rosorum
Isolated from birds, significance uncertain 
 Nicoletella semotina
Respiratory disease in horses
 Pasteurella aerogenes
Gastroenteritis in swine, abortion in swine
Pasteurella caballi
Respiratory disease in horses
Pasteurella canis?
 Respiratory and oral infections in dogs, canine bite wound infections
 Pasteurella dagmatis
Normal respiratory flora of birds, respiratory and oral cavity infections in dogs and cats,.
 anine or feline bite wounds
Pasteurella langaaensis (formerly Pasteurella langaa)
Normal respiratory flora of birds
 Pasteurella lymphangitidis
Bovine lymphangitis 
Pasteurella mairii
Abortion in swine, bacteremia in piglets 
 Pasteurea multocida ssp. galicida?
 Fowl cholera-like disease in birds
 Pasteurella multocida ssp. multocida?
Fowl cholera, respiratory disease in ruminants and swine, bacteremia/septicemia in
ruminants, mastitis in ruminants, respiratory disease and other infections in rabbits.
respiratory and oral cavity infections in dogs and cats, canine and feline bite wound 
infections
 Pasteurella multocida ssp. septica?
 Fowl cholera-like disease in birds, respiratory and oral cavity infections in dogs and cats.
anine and feline bite wound infections, respiratory and other infections in bats
Pasteurella pneumotropica?
Respiratory disease in rodents
Pasteurella skyensis
Bacteremia/septicemia in farmed Atlantic salmon
Pasteurella stomatisa
Respiratory and oral cavity infections in dogs and cats, canine and feline bite wound
 infections
Pasteurella testudinis
Infections in tortoises and turtles
Phocoenobacter uteri
Isolated from uterus of harbor porpoise, significance uncertain
Organisms that cause disease of particular impotance as defined by relatively frequent identification of infection and relative severity of disease assotiated with infection.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
“covering" sites for complement activation (and thus
Adhesins.
 n     
 Some and probably all members of the fam-
ily Pasteurellaceae produce adhesins (and possibly more
membrane attack complexes) as well as those recognized
by serum proteins (collectins/ficolins) that opsonize for-
  (       
described for avian strains of P. multocida, and an
eign particles. The hyaluronic acid capsule of type A
strains P. multocida serves as an adhesin probably simila1 to
with other microorganisms, the expression of adhesins
ter 28), which binds to human epithelial cells via CD44, a
  e    
hyaluronic acid-binding glycoprotein
adhesins are expressed while the microorganism inhabits
an epithelial surface, but repressed when the microor-
ganism is inside the host where adherence to a phago-
Capsule.S
 Several species within these genera produce cap-
cytic cell could be disastrous. M. haemolytica and Biber-
sules. The capsule plays many roles, the most important of
steinia trehalosi produce fibrinogen-binding proteins. The
which are interference with phagocytosis (antiphagocytic)
role of these proteins is unclear at present, but in the
and the protection of the outer membrane from the depo.
streptococci (see Chapter 28) fibrinogen-binding pro-
sition of membrane attack complexes generated by activa-
   aad o   s
tion of the complementsystem. The amountof capsule pro-
coccal particle by “coating" the bacterial cell, thereby
duced is inversely proportional to the amount of available
Chapter 11 Pasteurellaceae: Avibacterium, Bibersteinia, Mannheimia, and Pasteurella
103
iron. In vivo, where the amount of available iron is low, the
monia due to M. haemotytica is evidenced by the fact
amount of capsule formed is less (but sufficient to protect
thatstrains of M. haemolytica with the gene for leuko-
the microorganism from phagocytosis and complement-
toxin disrupted produce much less severe disease
mediated lysis). P. multocida type A capsules are made of
than strains that can express leukotoxin normally.
hyaluronic acid, type D capsules are made of heparin, and
2.1
Rho-activating toxin: The Rho-activating toxin is pro-
type F capsules are made of chondroitin. These substances
duced by P. multocida capsule type D, associated with
are similar (if not identical) to host tissue components,
atrophic rhinitis of swine. The toxin, Pmt (P. multo-
and are thus poorly antigenic; they also bind complement
cida toxin), stimulates two different signaling pro-
components poorly(and are therefore antiphagocytic). The
teins: the small GTPase Rho and heterodimeric G
hyaluronic acid capsule also serves as an adhesin for respi-
proteins. Unlike similar toxins (cytotoxic necrotiz-
ratory tract epithelial cells as in the case of capsule type A
ing factor produced by Escherichia coli, see Chapter
strains of P. multocida (see above “Adhesins").
8; and dermonecrotic toxin produced by Bordetella
bronchiseptica, see Chapter 15), Pmt does not enzy-
Cell Wall. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) elicits an inflamma-
matically affect either of these regulatory proteins.
tory response following binding to LPs-binding protein
However, the interaction of Pmt with either results
(a serum protein), which in turn transfers it to CD14 on
in toxicity mediated by increases in intracellular cal-
the surface of leukocytes. The CD14-LPS complex then
cium. In addition, Pmt binds to vimentin, an intra-
binds to Toll-like receptor 4 on the surface of macrophages
 cellular intermediate filament responsible for pro-
and other leukocytes, triggering the release of proinflam-
viding mechanical strength to the cell.
matory cytokines and inducing local or systemic inflam-
3.1
Miscellaneous toxins: Some strains ofP. multocida pro-
matory responses. LPS also acts synergistically with the
duce hyaluronidase and neuraminidase. The role
M. haemolytica leukotoxin by increasing expression of the
played by these enzymes in the pathogenesis of
leukotoxin receptor, CD18, on the surface of macrophages
disease is unclear. It is tempting to speculate that
and other leukocytes (see below, "RTX toxin").
hyaluronidase is active in vivo and may be respon-
sible for the microorganism's ability to "spread"
Toxins. Bibersteinia, Mannheimia, and Pasteurella produce
through tissue. Neuraminidase has been postulated
a number of proteins with toxic activity. At least two of
to play a role in the colonization of epithelial
these are important in the pathogenesis of disease: an RTX,
surfaces by removing terminal sialic acid residues
and a Rho-activating toxin:
from mucin, thereby modifying normal host innate
immunity.
1.
RTX toxin: The RTX {repeats in toxin, so-called
because of the common feature of repeats in glycine-
Iron Acquisition.
Because iron is an absolute growth
rich sequences within the protein) type of toxin is
requirement, microorganisms must acquire this substance
a leukotoxin produced by all species of Mannheimia
if they are to exist within the host. Some avian strains of
(with the exception of some isolates of Mannheimia
P. multocida produce a siderophore, multicidin, which is
numinalis) and B. trehalosi. Though similar in amino
acid sequence to other members of the RTX fam-
Siderophores have not been demonstrated in Pasteurella
ily, leukotoxin specifically affects bovine leukocytes
01 Mannheimia from other sources or species. However,
and erythrocytes; cells of nonruminant species are
Pasteurella and Mannheimia bind transferrin-iron com-
resistant to the effects of leukotoxin. The effect on
plexes by virtue of iron-regulated outer membrane pro-
erythrocytes probably has little importance in vivo,
teins expressed under iron-poor conditions (so-called
but is responsible for the hemolysis observed when
transferrin-bindingproteins, orTbps). Iron is acquired from
most Mannheimia and B. frehalosi isolates are grown
the transferrin -iron complexes that bind to the surface of
the microorganism. Iron-regulated outer membrane pro-
on blood agar plates. Leukotoxin binds to CD18
(a β2 integrin), which is expressed on the surface
teins are also upregulated in conditions of low iron avail-
of bovine leukocytes (neutrophils, macrophages,
ability. P. muitocida also binds heme and hemoglobin,
platelets, and lymphocytes). At low concentrations,
which are other possible sources of iron.
leukotoxin causes target cell activation, at higher
Miscellaneous Products.S
 Some avian strains of P. multo-
concentrations, apoptosis is initiated, and at very
cida express an outer membrane protein that is toxic to
high concentrations, necrosis is produced (due to
phagocytic cells. It is unclear what role this protein might
 production of transmembrane pores). Upon contact
play in the pathogenesis of disease. If capsule formation is
with leukotoxin, neutrophils degranulate releasing
downregulated in vivo due to low available iron concentra-
potent enzymes that induce as well as aggravate
tions, then the toxic outer membrane protein might serve
inflammation, macrophages release proinflamma-
 to protect the microorganism from phagocytosis.
tory cytokines (magnified in the presence of LPS),
Growth Characteristics
platelets respond by increased adhesion. In addi-
tion, tissue mast cells degranulate releasing vasoac-
Avibacterium, Bibersteinia, Mannheimia, and Pasteurella
tive amines. In summary, leukotoxin drives a tissue
grow best in the presence ofserum or blood. After overnight
destroying inflammatory response. The importance
incubation (35-37 *C), colonies are up to 2 mm in diame-
of leukotoxin in the path ogenesis of ruminant pneu-
ter, clear to grayish, and smooth or mucoid. Mannheimia
104
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
haemolytica, M. glucosida, and some isolates of B. fre-
in capsule composition similar to that seen among differ-
halosi produce hemolysis on ruminant blood agar. All are
ent capsular types of P. multocida. There are three serotypes
gram-negative, nonmotile coccobacilli. They are faculta-
of A. paragallinarum (Page serotypes A, B, and C).
tive anaerobes, typically oxidase-positive, reduce nitrates,
 and attack carbohydrates fermentatively. The pattern of
Ecology
carbohydrates fermented can be used to differentiate indi-
vidual species.
Reservoirs
 Members of these genera vary in their requirement fo1
β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (β-NAD, also known
Bacteria in the
genera Avibacterium, Bibersteinia,
as V factor), with Avibacterium avium, A. volantium, and
Mannheimia, and Pasteurella are carried on mucous
some isolates of A paragallinarum requiring β-NAD and the
membranes (most commonly in the oropharyngeal
remaining members of these genera characterized to date
region) of susceptible host species. Carriage may be
not requiring β-NAD. A. paragallinarum isolates not requir-
widespread, as with P. multocida in carnivores, 01 excep-
ing β-NAD are designated as biovar 2 isolates, while isolates
tional, as with avian cholera-producing strains in birds or 
requiring 3-NAD are designated as biovar 1. Phenotypi-
hemorrhagic septicemia-producing strains in ruminants.
cally, A. gallinarum, A. endocardifidis, and biovar 2 isolates
One host species may serve as reservoir for another, as
of A. paragallinarum can be difficult to differentiate from
 has been recognized for avian cholera and for respiratory
Gallibacterium anatis (see Chapter 12), but differentiation
 disease due to M. haemotytica in bighorn sheep.
is possible based on differences in the ortho-nitrophenyl-
 β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG) reaction and fermentation
Transmission
of glycerol, D-mannitol, D-galactose, and maltose. Biovar
2 isolates of A paragallinarum can also be difficult to dif-
Infection is by inhalation, ingestion, or bites and scratch
ferentiate phenotypically from O. rhinotracheale, another
wounds. Many infections are probably endogenous.
bacterial pathogen also associated with respiratory disease
 In bovine hemorrhagic septicemia and avian cholera,
in poultry (see Section “O. rhinotracheale'). Differentiation
environmental contamination  contributes  to  indirect
 a    i   
transmission.
chain reaction (PCR) testing.
Pasteurella aerogenes and Actinobacillus rossii (Chapter
Pathogenesis
13), both of which can be associated with reproductive tract
infections in sows, can be difficult to differentiate based on
Mechanisms
 phenotypic and even genotypic testing. B. trehalosi and P.
 multocida can both overgrow M. haemotytica in culture (and
In general, there are three manifestations of disease
possibly invivo), a fact that may be relevant to accurate diag-
induced by bacteria in the genera Avibacterium, Bibersteinia,
nosis of cases of ruminant respiratory disease.
Mannheimia, or Pasteurella: respiratory tract disease, sep-
ticemia, and trauma-associated conditions:
Resistance
1. Respiratory tract involvement is either pneumonia
Cultures die within 1 or 2 weeks. Disinfectants, heat (50 *C
 Or pleuropneumonia or upper respiratory tract dis-
 for 30 min), and ultraviolet light are promptly lethal. P.
ease (e.g., atrophic rhinitis in swine and infectious
multocida survives for months in bird carcasses.
coryza in chickens). Pneumonia is seen most fre-
Pasteurella and Mannheimia have become increasingly
quently in ruminants and is usually associated with
resistant to penicillins, tetracyclines, and sulfonamides, to
M. haemotytica, P. multocida, or B. trehalosi. Envi-
which they were originally susceptible. The gene encod-
ronmental stress (e.g., recent shipment or wean-
ing tetracycline resistance is unique to Pasteurella and
ing), virus infection, or other bacterial infections
Mannheimia. Resistance encoding genes are frequently
(e.g., mycoplasma) usually precede pneumonia, and
associated with R plasmids.
are thought to decrease host defenses of the tract,
 allowing commensal bacteria living in the upper
Variability
respiratory tract (M. haemolytica, P. multocida, o1 B.
trehalosi) to infect the lung. M. Haemolytica or B. fre-
P. multocida consists of 5 capsular serogroups (A, B, D, E,
halosi from the upper respiratory tract is deposited
and F) and 16 somatic serotypes (1-16). Serotypes are often
in the lung, and secrete Lkt and, along with LPS
related to host specificity and pathogenicity. The serotype
from their cell walls, initiate an intense inflamma-
is designated with a letter designating the capsule type and
tory response with fibrin deposition and thrombo-
a number designating the somatic type (e.g., A : 1).
sis. Although P. multocida has not been shown to
M. haemolytica consists of 12 capsular types (1, 2, 5-9,
produce Lkt, its deposition in the lung initiates an 
12-14, 16, and 17), while B. frehalosi consists of four (3,
inflammatory response by virtue of having LPs. Cap-
4, 10, and 15). Capsular typing alone cannot be used to
sule, iron-scavenging abilities, and perhaps binding
identify M. haemolytica as some other species within the
of fibrinogen enhance survival of the bacteria within
genus Mannheimia also react with typing sera used to clas-
the lesion.
sify M. haemotytica. A. paragallinarum is also encapsulated,
A. paragallinarum causes outbreaks of primar-
with evidence suggesting that there may be differentiation
ily upper respiratory tract disease in chickens
Chapter I1  Pasteurellaceae: Avibacterium, Bibersteinia, Manrheimia, and Pasteurella
105
(infectious coryza). Likewise, P. multocida in com
 nia) without tissue necrosis and fibrin deposition is more
bination with B. bronchiseptica (Chapter 15) causes
commonly seen in pneumonia associated with B. trehalosi
the serious upper respiratory tract disorder known as
or P. multocida.
progressive atrophic rhinitis in swine.In this disease,
Atrophic rhinitis of pigs (see also under B. bronchiseptica,
B. bronchiseptica first adheres to the nasal mucosa
Chapter 15) is a chronic rhinitis accompanying disturbed
and secretes a toxin called dermonecrotic toxin,
Osteogenesis adjacent to the inflamed areas. Increased
which mildly damages the epithelium. Capsule type
osteoclastic and diminished osteoblastic activity destroys
D strains of P. multocida adhere to this mildly dam-
the turbinates and bones of the snout, resulting in dis-
aged epithelium (these strains do not readily ad here
tortions of facial structures. Histologically, fibrous tissue
to normal epithelium) and secrete P. multocida toxin
replaces osseous tissue. Bone atrophy is accompanied by
(Pmt) . It is Pmt that is responsible for the destruction
inflammation of varying acuteness.
of the nasal turbinates. The action of B. bronchisep-
The pathology of lesions that are “mouth" related is
fica toxin alone, without the participation of P. mul-
unremarkable with neutrophils predominating.
tocida, results in a mild, nonprogressive turbinate
hypoplasia.
Disease Patterns
 Bacteremic and septicemic disease is produced by P.
multocida in ruminants and avian species. P. mul-
Cattle
tocida ssp. multocida causes hemorrhagic septicemia
in cattle {currently a disease exotic to the United
Pneumonia.
 The most common form of bovine “pas-
States). P. multocida ssp. multocida and B. trehalosi
teurellosis," which most commonly involves M. haemolyt-
cause septicemia in sheep, and P. multocida ssp. mul-
ica or P. multocida ssp. multocida, is "shipping fever," a bron-
tocida causes avian cholera in avian species. Why
chopneumonia or fbrinous pleuropneumonia seen when
these strains and not others in the family Pasteurel-
cattle, especially recently weaned calves, are transported,
laceae are able to cause bacteremia and septicemia
assembled, and handled under stressful conditions. The
is not understood. However, characteristics of their
onset, 1-2 weeks after shipment, is marked by fever, inap-
capsules and iron scavenging mechanism may be
petence, and listlessness. Respiratory signs (nasal discharge
relevant. Outer membrane proteins on avian strains
and cough) are few and variable. At more advanced stages,
of P. multocida appear to play some role by decreas-
the fever may drop but respiratory distress will be obvious.
ing phagocytosis. Signs and outcomes of these dis-
Abnormal lung sounds can be detected, especially over the
eases are attributable to severe systemic inflamma-
apical lobes, which are first and most severely affected.
 tory response and multiorgan infection.
P. multocida ssp. multocida is commonly isolated from
Trauma-related conditions are those in which
young dairy calves with pneumonia, which can occur
"mouth" microorganisms (Pasteurella is the most
either in an endemic pattern (enzootic calf pneumonia)
common) are inoculated into the site of infection.
0r in epidemics (epizootics). It is likely that other insults,
Examples include canine or feline bite wounds and
infections caused by dogs and cats licking compro-
factors such as poor air quality and crowding, and inade-
mised sites (e.g., surgical wounds).
quate host immunity all enhance the ability of P. multocida
to advance into the lung and cause disease. Serogroup A
Pathology
isolates of P. multocida are most commonly associated with
ruminant respiratory disease in North America and Europe.
Lesions vary with site of infection, virulence of strains
and host resistance. In septicemias, vascular damage results
Hemorrhagic Septicemia. Hemorrhagic septicemia is an
in hemorrhage and fluid loss but little cellular inflamma-
acute systemic infection with P. multocida ssp. multocida,
tory response. Focal necrosis in parenchymatous organs 0r
serotype B (southern and Southeast Asia) or E (Africa),
ulcerations of mucous membranes may occur. Mammals
occurring in tropical areas as seasonal epidemics with high
develop generalized hemorrhagic lymphadenopathy. In
morbidity and mortality. Signs include high fever, depres-
chronic fowl cholera, caseopurulent inflammation occurs
sion, subcutaneous edema, hypersalivation and diarrhea,
in joints, middle ear, ovaries, or wattles.
01 sudden death. All excretions and secretions are highly
In ruminant pneumonias, due to Mannheimia, Biber-
infectious.
steinia, and Pasteurella, gross lesions are those of bronchop-
neumonia or pleuropneumonia. M. haemolytica infection
Sheep and Goats
of cattle can induce a severe fibrin ous necrotizing pleurop-
neumonia, with much fibrin deposition and exudation of
Septicemia. Septicemic pasteurellosis, usually due to B.
proteinaceous fluid in the pleural space. Gross lesions due
trehalosi in feeder lambs and M. haemolytica in nurs-
to B. trehalosi or P. multocida are more commonly limited to
ing lambs, resembles bovine hemorrhagic septicemia,
bronchopneumonia without pleural reaction. Microscopi-
although intestinal involvement is often absent and the
cally, the inflammatory response mirrors the gross lesions,
 morbidity rate is much lower.
with massive neutrophil infltration and necrosis, hem-
orrhage, fibrin deposition, and thrombosis seen in acute
Pneumonia. As is the case in cattle, pneumonia in sheep
M. haemolytica infection. In contrast, infiltration of neu
and goats can occur following shipment, or in groups
trophils in airways and alveoli (purulent bronchopneumo-
of animals in either enzootic or epizootic patterns. M.
106
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
haemolytica, B. frehalosi, and P. multocida are most com-
affects birds of practically all ages. Signs include nasal dis-
monly involved. As described earlier for calves, other fac-
charge, swelling of sinuses, facial edema, and conjunctivi-
tors including coinfection with viral pathogens, en viron-
 tis. Air sac and lung in volvement may occur in severe cases.
mental stressors, and inadequate host immunity enhance
When disease is uncomplicated, mortality is low, and loss
the ability of P. multocida to cause bronchopneumonia in
of production is the most important consequence. Super-
small ruminants.
imposed infections with mycoplasmas and helminth par-
 asites exacerbate and prolong outbreaks. Of other species,
Mastitis. Mastitis in small ruminants can be caused by
only Japanese quail are highly susceptible.
various Mannheimia species or P. frehalosi. Disease often
occurs late in lactation, when large lambs bruise the udder
Avian Cholera. Avian cholera, a systemic infection due to
and provide the inoculum from their oropharyngeal flora.
P. multocida ssp. multocida (most commonly serogroup A),
Acute systemic reactions accompany disease of the udder,
parts of which undergo necrosis ("blue bag") and may
turkeys, waterfowl, and chickens. The peracute form kills
slough.
about 60% of infected birds without preceding signs of
illness. The acute type, marked by listlessness, anorexia,
diarrhea, and nasal and ocular discharges, may last several
Swine
days and be about 30% lethal. The subacute form is mostly
Atrophic Rhinitis. Atrophic rhinitis of young pigs (3
ndon p s a ps si pn Ads
weeks to 7 months) leading to turbinate destruction and
nasal discharges. In chronic fowl cholera, there is localiza-
secondary complications results from synergistic nasal
tion of caseous lesions. Inapparently infected carrier birds
infection by P. multocida (usually serogroup D or A) and
appear to be importantin the epidemiology of fowl cholera.
B. bronchiseptica. In addition, ammonia (in concentrations
Avibacterium gallinarum is sometimes isolated from chronic
sometimes found in swine-rearing houses) acts synergisti-
cases.
cally with Pmt.
 Signs include sneezing, epistaxis, and staining of the
face due to tear duct obstruction. Skeletal abnormalities
Dogs and Cats
produce lateral deviation of the snout or wrinkling due to
rostrocaudal compression. Secondary pneumonia is due in
Mouth-Related Conditions. P. multocida (cats) and P.
 part to the elimination of the turbinates as defenses of the
-n d is p an (so) s
respiratory tract.
bic flora in oral cavity infections, bite wound infections,
serositides (e.g., feline pyothorax), and oral cavity-related
Pneumonia. As is the case for ruminants, bronchopneu-
foreign body lesions.
 monia can occur in swine following shipment, or in groups
of swine in enzootic or epizootic patterns. P. multocida ssp.
multocida is commonly isolated from such cases. As for
Equine
 ruminants, it is likely that other insults such as primary
Respiratory Tract Conditions. Pasteurella caballi occurs in
viral respiratory infection, en vironmental factors such as
equine respiratory disease, usually in association with Strep-
 crowding and poor air quality, and inadequate host immu-
tococcus equi ssp. zooepidemicus.
 nity enhance the ability of P. multocida to cause bronchop-
neumonia.
Laboratory Rodents. P. pneumotropica, a common com-
mensal, may contribute to opportunistic infections such
Rabbits
as pneumonia. Phenotypically similar organisms in other
hosts probably belong to different species (e.g., P. dagmatis).
Respiratory Tract Conditions. "Snuffles," a mucopuru-
lent rhinosinusitis of rabbits due to P. multocida ssp. mul.
 tocida, develops when bacteria normally residing in the
 nasopharynx cause disease following stress of pregnancy,
Immunity
lactation, or mismanagement. Coinfection with other
 pathogens, particularly B. bronchiseptica, may exacerbate
Basis of Immunity
disease. Complications include bronchopneumonia, mid-
Circulating antibody is significant in protection against
dle and inner ear infection, conjunctivitis, and septicemia.
hemorrhagic septicemia and fowl cholera. The type-
specific capsular antigens are essential immunogens in
Genital Tract Disease. In the genital tract, P. multocida
hemorrhagic septicemia. In birds recovering from in fection 
may cause orchitis, balanoposthitis, and pyometra.
with A. paragallinarum, immunity provides heterologous
protection across various capsular types. With other forms
of disease associated with Pasteurella and Mannheimia, the
Avian Species
picture is less clear. Both antitoxic and antibacterial anti-
Infectious Coryza. Infectious coryza (caused by A para-
bodies are important in protection; for example, antileuko-
gallinarum) is an acute contagious infection of chickens,
toxin antibodies are an important requirement for immu
  s rd a n p A s a
nity to severe disease induced by M. haemolytica challenge.
Chapter I1  Pasteurellaceae: Avibacterium, Bibersteinia, Marnheimia, and Pasteurella
107
Vaccination
Vaccination is used to control disease associated with
in fection by M. haemolytica in cattle, P. multocida in swine,
able and can protect chickens from disease following exper-
cattle, and avian species, and A. paragallinarum in chick-
ens. While vaccines against these agents are effective in
imentalexposure to the bacteria, but vaccines must contain
preventing disease following experimental infection, effi-
the challenge serotype to be most effective.
Vaccines to prevent bronchopneumonia associated
cacy in the field is more variable and likely depends on a
variety of factors related to relative severity of challenge,
with P. multocida in swineand cattle, and bronchopneumo-
ability of vaccinated animals to respond appropriately to
cattle, are commercially available. These vaccines can pre-
vaccination, and the severity of environmental stressors
that exacerbate host susceptibility to disease.
vent disease associated with experimental challenge, but
their efficacy in the field is less consistent. Vaccines man-
ufactured for use in cattle are sometimes administered to
O. rhinotracheale
sheep and goats, but in general these are unlikely to provide
much benefit because different serotypes of Mannheimia
O. rhinofracheale is a gram-negative rod that resembles some
and Pasteurella not included in bovine vaccines are most
members of the family Pasteurellaceae. It is a facultative
commonly associated with disease in small ruminants.
anaerobe whose growth is enhanced by carbon dioxide;
In countries where bovine hemorrhagic septicemia
it is oxidase-positive and attacks carbohydrates fermenta-
occurs, vaccines are used to prevent disease and can be
tively. It requires neither hemin (factor X) nor 3-NAD (fac-
effective for up to 2 years. Antiserum is useful for short-
tor V). It is important to note, however, that it is not a
term protection.
member of the family Pasteurellaceae, and in fact is not a
The essential attributes of an effective avian cholera
member of any recognized group of microorganisms. Based
vaccine are not known. Field performance of bacterins
upon the sequence of the DNAencoding,the 16S ribosomal
has been inconsistent. Most promising have been live
RNA, it is more closely related to Riemerella and Capnocy-
vaccines containing attenuated organisms. Attenuation
tophaga. There are 12 serotypes (A-L), with A being the most
appears inversely related to immun ogenicity.
common.
 P. multocida and B. bronchiseptica bacterins with toxoid
O. rhinofracheale causes (by unknown mechanisms)
are commercially available and are useful in the control of
respiratory tract disease (sinusitis,
， airsacculitis, and
atrophic rhinitis.
 pneumonia) in birds (domestic and wild). In turkeys and
chickens, respiratory tract disease may be relatively mild,
Laboratory Diagnosis
resulting in poor performance, or severe with increased
mortality. Transmission  is horizontal (aerosols
6and
Isolation and Identification
contaminated fomites) or vertical; it is unclear whether
vertical  transmission  is  transovarian o1  through cecal
Bacteria in the genera Avibacterium, l
Bibersteinia,
contamination of eggs.
Mannheimia, and Pasteurella overnight (35-37 *C) on
 media containing blood or serum and are identified using
paragallinarum (see Section “Growth Characteristics"), dif-
 differential tests. Capsule and somatic typing can be done,
ferentiation of A. paragallinarum from O. rhinotracheale can
but these tests are more often used in research applications
be difficult by classical culture techniques. A PCR-based test 
and may not be available at regional veterinary diagnostic
quickly and easily differentiates the two organisms.
laboratories. DNA probes and primers designed to amplify
Most isolates ofO. rhinofracheale are susceptible to ampi-
specific regions of the bacterial chromosome by PCR can be
cillin, erythromycin, penicillin, tetracycline, and tylosin.
used to identify specific species. Definitive identification
Vaccination with autogenous bacterins may reduce mor-
of members of the family Pasteurellaceae is typically
bidity.
completed through sequencing 16S ribosomal RNA gene
sequences and, if necessary, the rpoB (β-subunit of the
RNA polymerase) gene sequence, but this is beyond the
Further Reading
scope of most diagnostic laboratories.
Dabo SM, Taylor JD, and Confer AW (2007) Pasteurella multo-
Treatment and Control
cida and bovine respiratory disease. Anim Health Res Rev, 8,
129-150.
 Dousse F, Thomann A, Brodard I et al. (2008) Routine pheno-
Bacteria
ain the genera Avibacterium,
Bibersteinia,
typic identification of bacterial species of the family Pas-
Mannheimia, and Pasteurella are susceptible to a vari-
teurellaceae isolated from animals. / Vet Diagn Invest, 20,
ety of antimicrobials effective against gram-negative
716-724.
bacteria. Strains from carnivores are generally susceptible
Harper M, Boyce JD, and Adler B (2006) Pasteurella multocida
to almost all antimicrobials; strains from ruminants and
pathogenesis: 125 years after Pasteur. FEMS Microbiol Left,
swine can be more variable in susceptibility. Metaphylac-
265,1-10.
tic administration of the antimicrobials oxytetracycline,
Rice JA, Carrasco-Medina L, Hodgins DC, and Shewen PE
tilmicosin, or florfenicol is used to prevent shipping fever
(2007) Mannheimia haemolytica and bovine respiratory dis-
associated with M. haemolyfica in fection in cattle.
ease. Anim Health Res Rev, 8, 117-128.
Pasteurellaceae:
Actinobacillus
BRADLEY W. FENWICK AND AMELIA R. WOOLUMS
The family Pasteurellaceae contains the genera Actinobacil-
which is an equine pathogen and occurs mainly in respira-
lus, Gallibacterium, Haemophilus, Histophilus, Lonepinella,
tory tract disease of horses), A. lignieresi (the agent of pyo-
Mannheimia, Pasteurella, and Phocoenobacter. Most if not
granulomatous inflammatory processes, primarily of rumi-
all of these genera contain species of medical importance
nants), A. suis (associated with respiratory, septicemia, and
localized infectious in swine), and A. pleuropneumoniae (the
ticemia and associated sequelae.
agent of porcine pleuropneumonia).
Although they are genetically distinct, the genera Acti-
All the members of the family Pasteurellaceae are gram-
nobacillus, Gallibacterium, and Pasteurella overlap pheno-
 negative coccobacilli. They are facultative anaerobes, and
typically. As is the case with the genus Pasteurella, the
typically oxidase-positive (setting them apart from mem-
genus Actinobacillus is undergoing considerable taxonomic
bers of the family Enterobacteriaceae). Most are commen-
change. As of this writing, there are 17 species and 2 sub-
sal parasites of the respiratory tract and oral cavity of ani-
species in the genus Actinobacillus, many of which are asso-
mals that sporadically cause disease in individuals. The
ciated with disease in animals (Table 12.1). The relatively
most notable exception being A. pleuropneumoniae, which
newly defined genus Gallibacterium includes avian isolates
like other actinobacilli can be asymptomatically carried,
previously classified as Pasteurella haemolytica-like, “Acti-
is viewed as a primary pathogen because of its ability in
nobacillus salpingitidis,” or Pasteurella anatis. These bacteria
a dose-dependent fashion to cause significant disease out-
can be isolated from a variety of birds with salpingitis, peri-
 breaks in healthy pigs characterized by high morbidity and
tonitis, bacteremia/septicemia, and other infections. The
mortality.
recently characterized genus Volucribacter includes bacteria
isolated mainly from psittacines and chickens with signs of
Descriptive Features
respiratory disease or bacteremia/septicemia.
While phenotype-based and molecular methods have
Morphology and Staining
been developed to identify and differentiate some of the
 Members of the genus Actinobacillus are nonmotile, gram-
most common taxa, the restricted host range and char-
acteristic disease conditions associated with each species
negative pleomorphic coccobacilli, approximately 0.5 μm
allow for a reliable presumptive etiological diagnosis. Like
wide and variable in length, that produce a "Morse code"-
may others, the genus Actinobacillus has and likely will con-
like series of dots and dashes. In older cultures the degree
tinue to undergo taxonomic reclassification. Depending on
of pleomorphism increases.
the level of evaluation, the genus Actinobacillus contains 21
Structure and Composition
species or species-like taxa, many of which are associated
with disease in several animal species (Table 13.1). A case
Capsules and Polysaccharide. The cell wall is typical
can be made that about half of these are sufficiently unre-
of gram-negative microorganisms consisting mainly of
lated to Actinobacillus sensu stricto and should be regrouped
lipopolysaccharides (LSP)and proteins. Considerableeffort
into different genera. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans
has been applied to the detailed chemical-structural char-
is now classified as Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans.
acterization of the LPS and capsule of various actinobacilli
particularly between different serotypes of A. pleuropneu-
equuli (previously A. equuli, the case of neonatal septicemia
moniae. The genetic basis behind these structural differ-
of foals), A. equuli ssp. haemolytica (previously A. suis-like,
ences has been determined. Variations in the structures
of the LPs and capsule to a greater degree are respon-
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
sible for serotype differentiation, to some degree viru-
Ernst L. Biberstein.
lence differences between serotypes, and are the basis
 of serotype-specific serological tests and vaccine-induced
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
108
Chapter 12
Pasteurellaceae: Actinobacillus
109
Table 12.1.
Some Members of the Genera Actinobacillus, Gallibacterium, and Volucribacter that are of Importance in Animal
Disease
Genus and Species
Associated Disorder or Site
Actinobacillus arthritidis
 Bacteremia and septicemia in foals
Actinobacillus capsutatus
Arthritis in rabbits
Actinobacitus delphinicola
Bacteremia and septicemia in sea mammals 
Actinobacillus equuli ssp. equli?
aewy saew ui suooge 'sasou ui spienad sasioy ui aseasip hoteidsan 'siea ui ewadasyeiwaianeg
reproductive loss syndrome), bacteremia/septicemia in swine
 Actinobacilus equuli ssp. haemolyticus
Respiratory disease in horses, pericarditis in horses, abortions in mares (mare reproductive loss syndrome)
(formerly A. suis-like) ?
Actinobacillus indolicus
Respiratory disease in swine
Actinobacius fignieresi?
Chronic pyogranulomatous glossitis in catle ( "wooden tongue"l, pyogranulomas of the proximal
 gastrointestinal tract in cattle
 Actinobacillus minor
Respiratory disease in swine
 Actinobacilltus muris
Respiratory disease in rodents 
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae?
Respiratory disease in swine
Actinobacilus porcinus
Respiratory disease in swine
Actinobaciltus rossif
 Reproductive tractinfections in sows
Actinobacillus scotiae
Bacteremia and septicemia in harbor porpoises
Actinobacitus seminis
Epididymitis in rams
Actinobacillus sucinogenes
Normal rumen flora
Actinobacilus suis
 Respiratory disease and bacteremia/septicemia in swine
Gallibacterium anatis
Salpingitis, peritonitis, bacteremia/septicemia, and other infections in birds 
Gallibacterium melopsittaci
 Salpingitis, bacteremia/septicemia in psittacines
Gallibacterium salpingitidis
Salpingitis in ducks 
 Gallibacterium trehalosifermentans
 Bacteremia/septicemia in budgerigars 
Volucribacter psittacicida
Volucribacter amazonae
Organisms that cause disease of particular impotance as defined by relatively frequent identification of infection and relative severity of disease assotiated with infection.
immunity. Sequence similarities and antigenic cross-
 Except of A. pleuropneumoniae, little is known about the
reactions between the LPS of different actinobacilli species
adhesins of the other actinobacilli associated with diseases
have been demonstrated. Growth condition-dependent
of animals. A. pleuropneumoniae adheres to different cell
types, the epithelium of the nasal cavity and tonsillar crypts
the amount of surface polysaccharide have been described
(as in the case with carrier animals), and to a greater degree
in vitro with indirect evidence of their expression in vivo.
the cells of the terminal bronchiole and alveoli (antecedent
 Actinobacilus has a polysaccharide capsule; whether
 members of the genus Gallibacterium express a capsule has
tract is required for lower respiratory tract disease is not
 not been defined. The cell wall of members of these gen-
known, but the 48 h delay in the development ofacute clin-
ical disease following experimental nasal or aerosol chal-
mainly of LSP and proteins. Some of the latter are iron regu-
lenge suggests that it is.
lated (i.e., they are expressed under iron-poor conditions).
A. pleuropneumoniae produces at least two structures that
function as adhesins. The first is an adhesion in the classic
sense, that is, a structure composed of protein subunits
Cell Products of Medical Interest
whose main function is to bind to the surface of host
Adhesins. Colonization is often the first step toward the
 cells. These adhesins are type 4 fimbriae that in the case
occurrence of disease. The role of adhesins, as in other
of A. pleuropneumoniae adhere to cultured primary lung
microorganisms, is to allow the bacterium expressing them
epithelial cells but are only expressed under nicotinamide
to adhere to cells lining a particular niche, as well as to the
adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-restricted growth conditions
surface of the so-called target cells prior to the initiation
in some but not all strains. A 55 kDa and a 60 kDa
of disease (in some cases, niche and target cells may be the
outer membrane protein as well as an autotransporter pro-
same). The expression of adhesins depends upon various
tease has also been described to be associated with culture
environmental cues and dictates both the location of colo-
condition-dependent adhesion. In addition, A pleuropneu-
nization (carrier vs. disease) and the transmission potential.
moniae is reported to bind to or interact with respiratory
Probably all members of the family Pasteurellaceae that col-
tract mucus, collagen, fbronectin, and double-stranded
onize animals express a number of adhesins. This is likely
DNA. The other, cell wall LSP, is not usually considered
to be particularly true for the actinobacilli given the natu-
an adhesion. Nevertheless, the LSP (in particular the core
ral habitat of most is the oral cavity and respiratory tract
portion) of A. pleuropneumoniae is likely involved in the
(particularly the tonsils).
adherence of this microorganism to cells of the lower
110
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
respiratory tract of swine by interacting with specific sur-
 Pasteurella/Mannheimia leukotoxin in Chapter 12,
face glycoproteins. Gene expression following contact with
adenylyl cyclase toxin of Bordetella in Chapter 15,
porcine lung cells and involving the tad locus-specific genes
and Moraxella cytotoxin in Chapter 18) is produced
suggest the mechanism for the occurrence of rough pheno-
by A. pleuropneumoniae, A. suis, and A. rossii. The
types (waxy) that are common on primary culture but lost
toxin is termed Apx (for A pleuropneumoniae toxin).
after laboratory passage (mucoid).
A. equuli ssp. haemolytica produces a similar toxin,
Aqx (for A. equuli toxin). Even though A. lignieresii
Capsules.
The capsule plays many roles, t
the most
contains the genes encoding Apx, it does not express
important of which are interference with phagocytosis
them (lacks a functioning promoter). The central
(antiphagocytic) and protection of the outer membrane
importance of Apx toxins in the development of
from the deposition of membrane attack complexes gener-
clinical disease is well established in that they are
ated by activation of the complement system (serum resis-
necessary for full virulence but are not in themselves
tance). In addition, capsules (perhaps in association with
fully sufficient. As with other RTX-type toxins, there
LPS) provide sufficient space between surface-activated
is a dose effect. At low concentrations these toxins
membrane attack complexes induced by antipolysaccha-
interfere with macrophage and neutrophil function
ride antibodies and the cell wall such that the microor-
by triggering degranulation, and at higher concen-
ganism survives. In the case of A. pleuropneumoniae, the
trations they are cytolytic for macrophages, neu-
capsule is the primary basis of resistant to the complement-
trophils, and alveolar epithelial cells. In addition,
mediated killing of normal and immune serum as well as
the RTX-type toxins lyse erythrocytes (explaining
opsonophagocytosis. The amount of capsules produced is
the hemolytic phenotype of actinobacilli express-
regulated by growth conditions and inversely proportional
ing them when grown on blood agar), and they are
to the amount of available iron. In vivo, where the amount
responsible for CAMP reaction when cross-streaked
of available iron is low, the amount of capsules formed
with a β-toxin-producing strain of Staphylococcus
 is less (but suffcient to protect the microorganism from
(see Chapter 26). The effect on erythrocytes prob-
 phagocytosis and complement-mediated lysis).
ably plays little if any role in disease production,
except perhaps increasing the availability of iron.
Biofilm.
 Biofilms are structured bacterial communities
There are four types of Apx toxins (Apxl, Apxll,
surrounded by a polymer matrix that they produce to sup-
Apxlll, and ApxIV), each with a different degree of
 port attachment and provide protection from hostile envi-
cytotoxicity (Apxl is the most potent of the four,
ronments, including host immune responses and antibi
followed by Apxlll, and then Apxll—the potency of
otics. Odds are good that most, if not all, actinobacilli
ApxIV is unknown because it is not produced in vitro
can under the right conditions form bioflms. The con-
under standard laboratory conditions). Actinobacilli
ditions necessary to induce the expression of biofilms
may contain the genes encoding any combination
is not well understood, and the phenotype can be eas-
of the four toxins.In the case ofA. pleuropneumoniae
ily repressed under standard laboratory growth condi-
(see Section “Variability"), serotypes 1, 5, 9, 10, 11,
tions. In the case of A pleuropneumoniae and likely other
 and 14 produce Apx1, and all the serotypes (except
species, bioflm production is enhanced under anaero-
serotypes 10 and 14) produce Apxll; serotypes 2, 3,
bic conditions. The biofilm produced by A. pleuropneu
4, 6, 8, and 15 produce Apxlll, and all the serotypes
moniae when grown on polystyrene is highly hydrated
produce ApxIV in vitro. Actinobacillus rossi produces
polyglucosamine.
Apxll and ApxIll, whereas A. suis produces ApxI and
Apxll.
Cell Wall. LSP elicits an inflammatory response follow-
 2. Urease: However, urease produced by A. pleuropneu-
ing associated with LSP-binding protein (serum protein),
 moniae has been shown to be a virulence factor (it
which in turn transfers it to the blood phase of CD14. The
is unknown whether this enzyme plays a role in
CD14-LPS complex binds to Toll-like receptor proteins (see
the diseases produced by the other urease-positive
Chapter 2) on the surface of macrophage cells, triggering
species of actinobacilli). Urease is responsible for the
the release of proinflammatory cytokines. The outer LPS
liberation of ammonia from urea (the association
core can interact with RTX-type toxins in a Ca2+-dependent
constant of A. pleuropneumoniae urease is extremely
fashion that enhances hemolytic and cytotoxic potential.
high, allowing effective association with the very
In addition, the LPS plays a role in antiphagocytosis, serum
low concentration of urea found in blood and tis-
resistance, and serotyping.
sue fluids). In addition to attracting and activating
neutrophils and macrophages, ammonia inhibits
Toxins. Members of the genus Actinobacillus produce
phagolysosome fusion and increases the pH within
a least two products that have toxic activity. The most
phagolysosomes, thereby reducing the effectiveness
important is an RTX-type toxin, and the other is the
of various acid hydrolase. These effects not only
enzyme urease:
result in a decrease in the host's ability to clear the
microorganisms from the lung but also support col-
1. RTX-type toxin: The RTX-type toxin (repeats in
toxin, so called because of the common feature of
moting the carrier state (mutan ts unable to produce
repeats in glycine-rich sequences within the pro
urease are cleared more rapidly from the respiratory
tein; see also Escherichia coli hemolysin in Chapter 7,
tract).
Chapter12
Pasteurellaceae: Actinobacillus
111
Iron Acquisition. Because iron is an absolute growth
Resistance
requirement, microorganisms have developed multiple
high-affnity systems to obtain it from their environment
A. pleuropneumoniae contains R plasmids encoding resis-
tance to sulfonamides, tetracycline, and penicillin G.
0r hosts. For several reasons free iron is maintained at
extremely low concentrations (10-18 M) by the host via a
numberofiron-bindingproteins. Actinobacilli acquire iron
Variability
via a number of mechanisms including from transferrin-
A. lignieresii and A. equuli are antigenically diverse. The six
somatic types of A. lignieresii have some relation to geo-
proteins expressed under iron-poor conditions (so-called
 graphic and host species predilection, but autoagglutinat-
transferrin-binding proteins or Tbps). Iron is acquired from
ing strains are common. There are 15 somatic serotypes of
the transferrin-iron complexes that bind to the surface of
A. pleuropneumoniae (1-15), and two biotypes (biotype 1
the microorganism via a 60 kDa lipoprotein. Interestingly,
requires NAD for growth, but biotype 2 does not). A. suis
in the case of A pleuropneumoniae only porcine transferrin
binds, which could contribute to the basis for only pigs
has at least two somatic serotypes (1 and 2).
being susceptible. In addition to acquiring iron by way of
Tbps, A. pleuropneumoniae binds to hemin and hemoglobin
Ecology
and utilizes siderophores (hydroxamates, catechols, and
possibly others) produced by other species of bacteria even 
Reservoir
though it does not produce them itself.
commensal parasites on mucous membranes, perhaps
Miscellaneous Products. Other products produced by
added by the formation of bioflms, and toxins and pro-
actinobacilli (specifically A. pleuropneumoniae) that may
teases that interfere with host defenses. Actinobacillus pleu-
ropneumoniae colonizes the tonsils of healthy pigs but is
proteases (prevent adherence and opsonization, respec.
more closely associated with the respiratory tracts of sick
tively) and periplasmic superoxide dismutase (suggested
01 recovered animals and is viewed as an obligate parasite
as a strategy to prevent digestion within the phagolyso-
of pigs as no other host has been identified and is envi-
some by inactivating superoxide molecules). In addition,
ronmentally fragile. A. equuli ssp. hemolyticus is a pathogen
high-molecular-weight surface carbohydrates associated
restricted to horses.
with the capsule and LPs may play a role in scavenging
free toxic oxygen radicals. Like iron, nickel is held as low
concentrations by the host but is required for urease acti-
Transmission
vation. To account for this, A. pleuropneumoniae has a high-
Except in neonates where infections likely originate from
affinity nickel uptake system. Finally, while the most com
their mothers or the environment, most actinobacilloses
mon locations of the actinobacilli are oxygen rich, within
are probably endogenous infections. Neonatal foals acquire
lesions oxygen concentrations can be low. In the case
A. equuli ssp. equuli before, at, or short after birth from their
of A. pleuropneumoniae, alternate terminal electron accep-
dams, commonly via the umbilicus. For A. pleuropneumo-
 tors have been identified and it appears that oxygen-poor
niae, transmission is both via direct contact and aerosol
environments induce the expression of some virulence
exposure with clinical disease as opposed to colonization
factors.
Growth Characteristics
Pathogenesis
Actinobacillus grows on blood and serum-containing media
Mechanisms
at 20-42 *C as facultative anaerobes. Colony sizes at 24 h
reach 1-2 mm and may be very sticky, particularly primary
Most diseases produced by members of the genus Acti-
cultures. Some actinobacilli (A indolicus, A. minor, A. pleu-
nobacillus result from "contamination" (infection) of a nor-
ropneumoniae biotype 1, and A. porcinus) require NAD fo1 
mally sterile, compromised site by microorganisms living
growth, while A. pleuropneumoniae biotype 2 does not. They
on a contiguous site (niche). Common compromises are
viral infections, trauma, or stress. At times it is difficult to
expression of Apxl, Apxll, or Apx (toxins with hemolytic
determine the nature of the antecedent event. In neonates
activity). Expression of hemolytic toxins may change fol-
with septicemia, failure of passive transfer is suspected and
lowing in vitro passage, and erythrocytes from some species
maternal immunity is often protective. Deposition of acti-
 are more sensitive than others.
nobacilli into a normal sterile site results in initiation of
Carbohydrates are fermented without gas produc-
an inflammatory response due to the LsP of the cell wall,
tion. Urease, orthonitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranosides
and urease if the infecting strain produces this enzyme.
Aid are au pe '(asisnee-g, 'asNo)
The capsule interferes with phagocytosis (antiphagocytic)
 present; no indole is produced and some strains grow on
and protects the outer membrane from the deposition
MacConkey agar (but poorly as very small colonies). Cul-
e   s   g
tures die within a week and may be difficult to recover after
of the complement system. Transferrin-binding proteins
as few as 3 days. They are typically oxidase-positive.
participate in iron acquisition. The RTX-type toxins (Apx
112
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
   i  n  
FIGURE 12.1.
Consolidated fung lesion of a 3-month-old
infectious process involves the lungs, alveolar epithelial
 pig infected with A. pleuropneumoniae.
cells are also damaged. Urease-producing actinobacilli that
nia, and perhaps superoxide dismutase. Opsonization is
reduced by the production of IgG protease.
In the case of neonatal septicemia (A. equuli spp. equuli,
 in particular), actinobacilli gain access to thesystemic circu-
lation. Capsules and Tbps permit multiplication within the
bloodstream resulting in an endotoxemia (see Figure 8.1).
Pathology
A. pleuropneumoniae, and A. suis) are suppurative. Inflam-
 matory cells are prominent, with erythrocytes, neutrophils,
and mononuclear cells appearing and predominating suc
cessively. The tissue appearance changes accordingly from
reddish-black to red, pink, and gray. Localized to more gen-
eralized pleuritis is common, especially in pigs. The lung
serotype 2 is more common in Europe) and causes a
lesions may nearly fully resolve over several months so that,
primary pneumonia of swine (Figure 12.1). Clinical
depending on the age of the pig, prior disease may not be
disease in its most aggressive form is remarkable among
apparent at the time of slaughter. Making slaughter checks
bacterial diseases in its speed, severity, and host specificity.
Disease can occur at any age in susceptible animals, but
an unreliable means of determining the health status of a
significant “outbreaks" are particularly common in 2- to
herd.
A soft tissue process, mainly produced by A. ligniere-
6-month-old pigs. Transmission is favored by crowding
sii, is a chronic granuloma in the ruminant tongue and
and poor ventilation that under the right conditions
occasionally other tissues. At its center is a colony of A.
may result in exposure levels suffcient to cause clinical
lignieresii, ringed by eosinophilic, club-like processes form-
disease. Early signs include lameness, fever, and reduced
ing a “rosette.” The complex is surrounded by neutrophils
appetite, followed within a day or less by acute respiratory
and granulation tissue containing macrophages, plasma
distress. In the paracute form of the disease, animals may
cells, lymphocytes, giant cells, and fibroblasts. Plant fbers
die within 24 h or sooner. Morbidity may reach 40%,
are often present. Through coalescence, larger granulomas
with mortality up to 24%. Survivors show intermittent
(1 cm or more in diameter) may be found . Infection spreads
nonproductive cough and unsatisfactory weight gains,
to lymph nodes, producing granulomas along the way. The
regardless of antimicrobial treatment. Chronic in fections,
proliferative tissue reaction causes the tongue to protrude
often without preceding acute episodes, are the source
from the mouth. Other tissues in the vicinity, and occa-
of persistent herd problems. Lesions consist of fibrinous
sionally among the gastrointestinal tract, may be involved,
 pneumonia and pleuritis. Arthritis, meningitis, and abor-
along with adjacent lymph nodes. Superficial lesions often
tion occur as complications. Pneumonia in older animals
ulcerate. In sheep, suppurative in fectious occur around the
may be caused by A. suis that is difficult to differentiate
head and neck and in the skin and mammary gland. Tongue
from acute A. pleuropneumoniae infection.
involvement is not typical.
Septicemia. Septicemia of young pigs, as well as arthri-
tis, petechial hemorrhage, and endocarditis, is sometimes
Disease Patterns
associated with A. suis and A. pleuropneumoniae. Clinically
Ruminants.
Actinobacillosis or "wooden tongue" involv-
this can be confused with erysipelas.
ing A. lignieresii occurs in ruminants and, rarely, dogs,
horses, and rats. In ruminants, the agent (normally inhab-
Horses
itant of the nasopharynx and can be recovered from the
Pneumonia.
 Bacterial pneumonia in horses (of any age) is
 rumen) is probably inoculated by trauma (plant fibers), ini-
usually associated with a mixture of beta hemolytic strepto.
tiating the process described. As such, course poor-quality
hay has been implicated as the basis for increased disease
aesau-s pue (snpidaooz dss gba s Aensn) so
frequency in some herds. The course is protracted and heal-
microorganisms (commonly A. equuli spp. haemolytica).
ing is slow. Interference with feed intake causes weight loss
and dehydration. On occasion it may cause mastitis.
Septicemia. Foal septicemia due to A. equuli ssp. equuli
("sleepy foal disease") occurs within a few days of birth and 
 is marked by fever, inappetence, prostration, and diarrhea
Swine
(see Figure 74.1). Animals surviving the first day typically
Pneumonia. A.f
pleuropneumoniae occurs
6worldwide
develop lameness due to (poly)arthritis. Some foals develop
(serotypes 1 and 5 are more common in North America;
umbilical infections with this microorganism ("navel ill").
Chapter 12
 Pasteurellaceae: Actinobacillus
113
It can also be isolated from verminous aneurysms asso-
accomplished by cultural and biochemical tests, which are
ciated with Strongylus vulgaris. Sporadically, A. equuli ssp.
haemolyficus is associated with metritis, abortion, endo-
ticularly valuable in the identification of A. pleuropneumo-
carditis, meningitis, and other sequelae of septicemia.
nia. Because of a high degree of variability, biochemical
methods alone may not be adequate to reliably determine
Other Species. Rare actinobacilli infections (except A.
the species. Increasingly, 16S rDNA sequence is used to
pleuropneumoniae, which is restricted to pigs) occur in other
 confirm species identity, particularly when isolated from
species, including humans, and are often associated with
unusual tissues and hosts. While 16S rDNA is viewed as a
contact with horses and pigs.
reliable means to determine species, there are recognized
differences in virulence between strains of the same 16S
Avian Species.  Members of the genus Gallibacterium have
rDNA-determined species.
been isolated from birds with salpingitis, peritonitis, and
Serological testing has become the primary tool in
bacteremia/septicemia. Gallibacterium anatis has been asso-
control of disease and in preventing transmission of
 ciated with these infections in a variety of avian species,
A. pleuropneumoniae within and between herds. Enzyme
while to date Gallibacterium melopsittaci has been iso-
immunoassay-based methods focused on a number of
lated mostly from psittacines, and Gallibacterium salpin-
species and serotype-specific antigens are more reliable
gitidis has been isolated from a duck with salpingitis.
than complement fixation tests. Apx toxins are good anti-
The pathogenesis of these conditions has not yet been
gens, and toxin neutralization tests provide a means to
characterized.
differentiate vaccinated and infected pigs because vac-
cines generally fail to produce strong toxin-neutralizing
titers.
Epidemiology
 Actinobacilli are opportunistic pathogens producing dis-
Treatment and Control
ease when their host's integrity is compromised, as by
trauma, immaturity, or other stress. Trauma to mucous
membranes of ruminants by rough feed may cause herd
Good management and environmental practices are the
outbreaks of A. ligieresi suggestions of transmissible dis-
key to controlling the transmission and disease caused
ease.
by actinobacilli. Porcine pleuropneumonia is controlled
In the case of porcine pleuropneumonia, chronic
and treated by a combination of management practices,
immunoprophylaxis, and antimicrobial therapy. Manage-
asymptomatic carriers are the reservoir and the basis for
ment practices including minimizing contact of piglets
with mature (carier) animals (e.g., "all in, all out," “age
herds. Disease occurs when nonimmune animals are
segregation," and "early weaning" rearing practices; and
exposed to subclinically infected individuals that sporad-
the identification and elimination of carriers by serologi-
ically shed at sufficient levels to cause infection and at
cal testing, culture, and/or by polymerase chain reaction
highest in the colder months is due probably more to
using primers) are the most useful. Vaccination strategies
management (i.e., the mixing of individuals with differ-
include bacterins (do not prevent carrier states) and mod-
ent exposure histories) than climate factors.
ified live vaccines (A. pleuropneumoniae with Apx and ure-
ase deletion mutants). Apx toxins are not stable, and the
ability to induce neutralizing antibodies in the absence of
Immunologic Aspects
a vaccine reaction has been challenging. While vaccines
help to reduce the occurrence and severity of clinically
The pathology of "wooden tongue" suggests cell-mediated
apparent disease, they do not prevent colonization and
hypersensitivity. Antibodies of no known protective func-
shedding. Interestingly, while infection with one serotype
tion appear during infection. The benefits of bacterins have
confers strong immunity from disease caused by the other
not been established. Antibody to A. pleuropneumoniae is
serotype, vaccine-provided protection is serotype specific.
opsonizing and colostrum protects piglets. Antibody to
Potentially useful antimicrobial agents include penicillin
RTX-type toxin and a host of other antigens are protective
G, tetracycline, gentamicin, kanamycin, cephalosporins,
from clinical disease, but do not reliably prevent coloniza-
tilmicosin, tiamulin, florphenicol, ceftiofur, enrofloxacin,
tion or transmission.
and trimethoprim-sulfas.
Autogenous bacterins are used but have not been crit-
ically evaluated for the prevention or control of A. suis-
Laboratory Diagnosis
related disease in neonatal pigs.
In “wooden tongue" iodides given orally or intra-
The generally restricted host range and characteristic dis-
venously promptly reduce the inflammatory swelling.
ease conditions caused by the various Actinobacillus species
which is the main clinical problem. Avoidance of harsh,
are of considerable aid in arriving at reliable presumptive
dry feed reduces the likelihood of developing this
etiological diagnosis. Actinobacilli can often be demon-
condition.
strated in gram-stained exudates. They grow best on blood
Good foaling hygiene, including naval disinfection,
agar under increased amounts ofcarbon dioxide (35-37*C).
reduces the likelihood of foal septicemia. Prophylactic use
Colonies are often sticky. In most cases, speciation is
of antimicrobials is occasionally warranted. Potentially
114
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
 effective antimicrobial treatment of septicemia produced
Christensen H and Bisgaard M (2004) Revised definition of
by A. equuli ssp. equuli include penicillin G, ceftiofur, and
Actinobacillus sensu strict isolated from animals. A review
gentamicin.
with special emphasis on diagnosis. Vet Microbiol, 99,
Actinobacillus equuli spp. haemolytica responds to most
13-30.
antibiotics.
 Dousse F, Thomann A, Brodard I et al. (2008) Routine pheno-
typic identification of bacterial species of the family Pas-
teurellaceae isolated from animals. / Vet Diagn Invest, 20,
716-724.
Further Reading
 Ramjeete M, Deslandes V, Goure J, and Jacques M (2008) Acti-
 nobacillus pleuropneumoniae vaccines: from bacterins to new
Chiers K, De Waele T, Pasmans F et al. (2010) Virulence factors
insights into vaccination strategies. Anim Health Res Rev, 9,
of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae involved in colonization,
25-45.
 persistence and induction of lesions in its porcine host. Vet
 Rycroft AN and Garside LH (20o0) Actinobacillus species and
Res,41,65-81.
their role in animal disease. Vet J, 159, 18-36.
13
Pasteurellaceae:
Haemophilusand
Histophilus
AMELIA R. WOOLUMS
The family Pasteurellaceae contains many organisms that
Discussed in this chapter are Haemophilus parasuis, the
contribute to animal disease. Many are normal inhabi-
cause of a septicemic disease of swine characterized by pol-
tants of the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts
yserositis, polyarthritis, and sometimes meningitis (also
and cause disease opportunistically when other factors
known as Glasser's disease), and Histophilus somni, the cause
enhance their ability to ad vance to deeper levels of these
 of septicemic, respiratory, and genital tract disease in cat-
systems. Others are infrequently isolated from normal
tle and sheep. H. somni is the name now given to those
individuals and cause severe disease when animals are
microorganisms formerly named “Haemophilus somnus,"
exposed to these agents.
“Haemophilus agni,”and “Histophilus ovis.”
There have been many changes in the taxonomy of
the family Pasteurellaceae since the second edition of
Descriptive Features
this textbook was written, and more changes will likely
occur in the future. At the time of this writing, there are
16 genera included in the family: Actinobacillus, Aggre-
Morphology and Staining
gatibacter, Avibacterium, Basfia, Bibersteinia, Chelonobac-
Members of the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus are
ter, Gallibacterium, Haemophilus, Histophilus, Lonepinella,
gram-negative rods, <1 μm wide and usually 1-3 μm long,
Mannheimia, Necropsobacter, Nicoletella, Pasteurella, Pho-
but sometimes forming longer filaments.
coenobacter, and Volucribacter. Bacteria from genera that
contribute to important diseases of animals are described
Structure and Composition
here and in Chapters 12 and 13. Discussed in this chapter
are the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus, whose mem-
Some members of the genus Haemophilus, including some
bers play an important role in diseases of several animal
isolates of H. parasuis, can produce capsules. H. somni has
species (Table 13.1).
not been shown to produce a capsule. The cell wall of bac.
All the members of the family Pasteurellaceae are gram-
teria in the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus is similar
negative coccobacilli. They are facultative anaerobes, and
to other gram-negative microorganisms in that it contains
typically oxidase-positive (which sets them apart from
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or, in Histophilus, lipooligosac-
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae). Members of the
charide (LOS). Other proteins are also contained in the
genus Haemophilus, beyond sharing the traits of the family
cell wall, some of which are iron-regulated (i.e., they are
Pasteurellaceae, require for propagation one or both of two
expressed under iron-poor conditions).
growth factors: porphyrins (hemin) or β-nicotinamide ade-
nine dinucleotide (β-NAD), originally called X(heat-stable)
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
and V (heat-labile) factors, respectively. Some other mem-
Adhesins. The role of adhesins, as in other microorgan-
bers of the family Pasteurellaceae also show these needs
isms, is to allow the bacterium expressing them to ad here
 i n  a a   
to cells lining a particular niche, as well as to the surface
the genus Haemophilus.
of the so-called target cells prior to the initiation of disease
(in some cases, niche and target cells may be the same).
The expression of adhesins depends upon various en viron-
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
mental cues. Some and probably all members of the family
Pasteurellaceae express adhesins (and possibly more than
Ernst L. Biberstein.
one kind).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
115
116
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 13.1.
 Some Members of the Genera Haemophilus
major component of the innate immune response). As a
and Histophifus of Importance in Animal Disease
result, isolates that undergo phase variation are more viru-
lent. Clinical isolates from animals with disease have been
Genus and Species
Associated Disorder or Site
shown to undergo phase variation, while isolates from the
normal flora of the upper respiratory tract or distal urogen-
 Haemophilus aegyptius
Meningoencephalitis in sheep
 ital tract do not undergo phase variation.
 Haemophilus felis
Respiratory disease and conjunctivitis in
cats
Haemophius
Cystitis and (possibly vaginitis and
Immunoglobulin-Binding Proteins. There are two differ-
haemoglobinophius
 balanoposthitis in dogs, neonatal
ent IgBPs expressed on the surface of H. somni, a 41 kDa pro-
 infection of puppies
tein and a high-molecular-weight protein of 100-350 kDa.
Haemophilus
 Mucoid enteritis in rabbits
Both IgBPs bind immunoglobulin, but the high-molecular-
paracunicutus
Haemophilus
Respiratory disease in swine
molecules bind to IgBPs by way of the Fc portion, render-
parahaemolyticus
 ing the antibody ineffective for opsonization or triggering
Haemophilus
 Respiratory disease in rabbits and guinea 
parainfluenzae
complement activation; this helps H. somni evade the host
pigs
 immune response. In addition, the high-molecular-weight
Haemophius parasuis?
 Fibrinous polyserositis, polyarthritis, and
meningitis (Glasser's disease) in swine.
IgBP serves as an adhesin (see above “Adhesins").
 respiratory disease in swine
Histophiius somni?
 Respiratory disease in ruminants.
Capsule. Some strains of H. parasuis can produce capsules;
 bacteremia/septicemia in cattle, septic
H. somni has not been shown to produce a capsule. Bacte-
 polyarthritis in cattle, thromboembolic
rial capsules play many roles, the most important of which
meningoencephalitis in catte.
are interference with phagocytosis and the protection of
reproductive infection and abortion in 
 the bacterial outer membrane from the deposition of mem-
ruminants, myocardial abscesses or 
 brane attack complexes generated by activation ofthe com-
pericarditis in cattle
plement system.
?Organisms that cause disease of particular impotance as defined by relatively
frequent identification of infection and relative severity of disease associated with
Iron Acquisition. Because iron is an absolute growth
infection.
requirement, microorganisms must acquire this substance
if they are to exist within the host. Members of the
genera Haemophilus and Histophilus bind transferrin-iron
complexes by virtue of iron-regulated outer membrane
H. somni produces a particular surface protein, which
 proteins expressed under iron-poor conditions (so-called
 appears as fibrils when the agent is viewed with an electron
transferrin-bindingproteins, orTbps). Iron is acquired from
microscope. These structures are responsible for the bind-
the transferrin-iron complexes that bind to the surface of
ing of the microorganism to endothelial cells, in which
the microorganism.
apoptosis is triggered with subsequent vascular leakage,
fibrin deposition, and thrombosis (see Section “Mech-
anisms"). The protein comprising this fibrillar network
Growth Characteristics
 is one of two immunoglobulin-binding proteins (IgBPs)
Members of the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus are fac.
-uu paen-os au 'ened u-uos h Aq panond
ultative anaerobes, typically oxidase-positive, and attack
molecular-weight IgBP (see Section “Immunoglobulin-
carbohydrates fermentatively. H. somni may produce a
Binding Proteins"). Little else is known about specific
yellowish pigment. Carbon dioxide at 5-10% enhances
adhesins expressed by Haemophilus suis or H. somni.
growth of some species of Haemophilus and is essential
for isolation of Histophilus. Within 24-48 h at 35-37 C
Cell Wall. The cell wall of H. parasuis contains LPS, which
and on adequate media, members of these genera pro-
can elicit a host inflammatory response following its bind.
duce turbidity in broth media o1 colonies on solid medium
i m '(uaod ws e) uod s-sii on s
that are 1 mm in diameter. While members of the genus
turn transfers it to CD14 on the surface of leukocytes. The
Haemophilus generally require hemin (X factor) or β-NAD
CD14-LPS complex then binds to Toll-like receptor 4 on
(V factor), H. somni requires neither. H. parasuis requires
the surface of macrophages and other leukocytes, trigger-
β-NAD but not hemin. A medium, which provides both
ing the release of proinflammatory cytokines and inducing
hemin and β-NAD, is “chocolate agar,” a blood agar pre-
local or systemic inflammatory responses. In Histophilus,
e si iee panau au uaum pooia jo uope Aq paied
the cell wall LPS is termed LOS. LOS, under the direction of
80 °C(rather than 50 *C as is the case when making regular
the gene lob (for LOs biosynthesis), undergoes phase vari-
blood agar). This procedure liberates β-NAD from cells and
 ation resulting in periodic changes in epitope expression
inactivates enzymes destructive to 3-NAD.
due to periodic changes in the carbohydrate portions of
An alternate way of providing hemin and β-NAD when
the LOS. This phase variation of LOS helps H. somni evade
attempting to identify bacteria that require these factors
the adaptive arm of the host immune response; it also ren-
is to inoculate a “feeder” bacterium (e.g., Staphylococcus)
ders the bacteria resistant to complement-mediated lysis (a
across plates where Haemophilus has been streaked. The
Chapter 13
 Pasteurellaceae: Haemophilus and Histophilus
117
feeder bacterium will produce through metabolism the
Pathogenesis
hemin and 3-NAD required by the Haemophilus. On oth-
erwise inadequate media, growth of small Haemophilus
Mechanisms
colonies can be seen only near the feeder streak, a phe-
 a ,  ,  
Disease is induced when H. parasuis or H. somni invades nor-
A pe x padad aao a pndnp aa 
mally sterile sites. Whether an invasive phenotype is trig-
factor-impregnated fiter papers placed on the inoculated
 gered by some as yet undefined event, or whether it is hap-
area.
penstance “contamination" of a previously sterile site due
-  d n e s nsn d aos o
tion, or immunocompromise associated with the stress of
Resistance
transport or other environmental factor, is currently not
known.
 In septicemic disease produced by H. somni, the microor-
die rapidly in culture and storage unless freeze-dried or
ganism is resistant to complement-mediated lysis and the
stored at -70 *C.
adaptive immune response due to LOs phase variation.
Both H. parasuis and H. somni can resist killinginside phago-
cytic cells, although the mechanisms by which they do so
Variability
are not defined. Iron is acquired by removal of iron from
There are at least 15 serovars of H. parasuis, with differ-
 transferrins in host plasma. In addition, antibody (espe-
ent serovars demonstrating different levels of virulence.
cially belonging to the IgG2 isotype) binds to IgBPs on H.
Although isolates of H. somni have been shown to be vari-
somni by the Fc region of the antibody molecule. Antibody
able based on assessment of genetic or antigenic character-
bound in such fashion does not trigger complement acti-
istics, serotypes of H. somni have not been defined at the
vation, nor does it serve as an opsonin. By all of these
time of this writing.
mechanisms, these bacteria are able to proliferate within
the bloodstream and spread throughout the body, partic-
ularly affecting joints and the central nervous system. H.
Ecology
somni also adheres to endothelial cells by way of the high-
molecular-weight IgBPs, and triggers apoptosis of these
Reservoirs
cells. Endothelial cell death through apoptosis induces
thrombosis, which likely contributes to tissue necrosis and
Like many members of the family Pasteurellaceae, mem
inflammation through local hypoxia due to interrupted
bers of the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus are normal
blood flow through small blood vessels. Intravascular mul-
inhabitants of the upper respiratory tract; in addition, they
tiplication of bacteria and cellular injury induces a local or
may be found among the normal flora of the distal urogen-
systemic inflammatory response.
ital tract. From these sites they may extend inward to the
Extension of H. somni or H. parasuis into the lower respi-
normally sterile regions of these organ systems and cause
ratory tract likely stimulates an inflammatory response by
disease,Alternately, they may cross the epithelium of these
virtue of their cell wall LOS or LPs. Iron is acquired from
sites and move through the host via the vascular system. H.
transferrin, aiding bacterial survival. In H. somni, immune 
parasuis lives in the nasopharynx of normal swine, while
evasion occurs because of LOs phase variation, as well as
H. somni is found in normal cattle and sheep both in the
IgBPs sidetracking antibody-mediated opsonization and
 lower genital tract (prepuce and vagina) as well as in the
complement activation. Both bacteria can survive intra-
upper respiratory tract.
cellularly within phagocytic cells. While the pathogene-
sis of reproductive infection due to H. somni is not well
characterized, the mechanisms described earlier are likely
Transmission
operative.
Mechanisms of transmission of H. parasuis and H. somni
 Disease caused by members of the genera Haemophilus
have not been well characterized. It may be that infection
 occurs when endogenous bacteria on the upper respira-
tory or distal urogenital mucosa convert by some mech-
anism to an invasive phenotype, cross the epithelium of
Pathology
the mucosal surface of these sites, and move through the
All infections have suppurative components broughtabout
bloodstream to other sites in the body. Alternately, these
by the gram-negative cell wall, which triggers the release of
 agents may extend on the mucosal surface to the deeper and
proinflammatory cytokines from macrophages with resul-
normally sterile sites in these organ systems when other
tant influx of neutrophils. Infection of lungs, body cavi-
insults disrupt the physical and functional barriers pro-
ties, and joints tends to be serofibrinous to fibrinopuru-
vided by the normal mucosa. Transmission may also occur
lent. Because of the ability of H. somni to induce apoptotic
through close contact or short distance aerosol from other
death of endothelial cells, which leads to platelet aggrega-
infected animals. Indirect transmission (through fomites)
tion and thrombus formation, thrombosis is a characteris-
may be important during outbreaks of H. parasuis in fection
 '  q p snsn  g idos 
in swine.
example, colonization of H. somni in the microvasculature
118
PART II
Bacteria an d Fungi
of the central nervous system produces thrombotic vasculi
 an acute inflammatory response with fibrinous polyserosi
tis leading to encephalitis and meningitis. Thrombosis also
tis, which can affect the pleura, peritoneum, mediastinum,
leads to vascular leakage and decreased blood flow to tissues
pericardium, joints, and meninges. Weaning, transport,
downstream of the thrombus; thus, hemorrhagic, necro.
and management stress are predisposing causes. The dis-
tizing lesions are often a feature of pathology caused by
H. somni.
event. Morbidity and mortality are often low because of
 previously unexposed herds (e.g., specific pathogen-free
Disease Patterns
herds). Disease manifestations include fever and general
Ruminants
 malaise, respiratory distress and abdominal discomfort,
lameness, and paralytic or convulsive signs. Disease can be
Bovine  Thronbotic
Meningoencephalitis. Thrombotic
fatal, or recovery can follow, typically in 1-2 weeks. Similar 
meningoencephalitis (also known as "infectious throm-
syndromes can be caused by Mycoplasma hyorhinis.
boembolic meningoencephalitis"—an inaccurate des-
ignation as embolus formation does not appear to be
a component of the pathogenesis of the disease) is a
Respiratory Disease. H. parasuis can cause bronchopneu-
consequence of septicemia produced by H. somni lead.
 monia in swine; this may be secondary to virus infections
ing to endothelial cell injury and then thrombosis in
(e.g., due to swine influenza). Other bacteria (e.g., Pas-
the microvasculature of the cerebrum and cerebellum.
teurella spp. and Mycoplasma spp.) may also participate.
Thrombus formation leads to infarcts, interrupted blood
flow, and necrosis, which leads to inflammation and
Dogs. Haemophilus haemoglobinophilus, a commensal of
thus meningoencephalitis. Affected animals show clinical
the canine lower genital tract, sometimes causes cystitis
abnormalities referable to the inflammatory process in the
and neonatal infections. Its role in canine balano-posthitis
affected regions of the central nervous system, with depres
and vaginitis, where it is frequently found, is uncertain.
is marked by high fever.
Cats.
Haemophilus felis can be associated with conjunc-
tivitis and respiratory disease in cats.
 Pneumonia and Pleuropneumonia. H. somni can cause sup
purative bronchopneumonia or fibrinous pleuropneumo-
nia in ruminants, mostcommonly in cattle. The agentcom-
Immunity
monly con tributes to the development of "shipping fever"
in recently transported cattle, along with viral agents,
Basis of Immunity
mycoplasmas, and Mannheimia haemolytica and Pasteurella
Circulating antibody develops in infected individuals and
 multocida ssp. multocida. Cattle with pneumonia due to H.
has a protective function. Immunity to H. parasuis occurs
   n s     
 after experimental or natural infection; however, immu-
joints, which is also due H. somni.
nity to the infecting serotype is more consistent than is
Cross-protective immunity to other serotypes.
Bacteremia/Septicemia. H. somni can cause bacteremia
Infection or vaccination of cattle with H. somni can
and septicemia in ruminants, resulting in signs of a sys-
induce production of IgE directed against the agent, which 
 temic inflammatory response and sometimes leading to
has been associated with disease of increased severity. This
arthritis, myocarditis, or abortion.
is probably due to IgE-mediated degranulation of mast
cells and eosinophils and resultant release of inflamma-
Myocarditis and Pericarditis.
H. somni can cause myocardi-
tory mediators. In cattle, coinfection with bovine respira-
tis, myocardial abscesses, and /or pericarditis in cattle; these
tory syncytial virus (a common respiratory virus of cattle)
conditions can be common in feedlot cattle, particularly
and H. somni has been shown to increase production of H.
in the Northwestern United States and Western Canada.
somni-specific IgE more than that which occurs in cattle
Affected cattle often die acutely with no previous signs of
infected with H. somni alone.
disease.
Abortion, Reproductive Infections, and Mastitis.
Abortion
Vaccination
due to H. somni sometimes occurs in ruminants. Whether
Vaccines are commercially available for use to prevent and
this is most often secondary to bacteremia or to ascend-
control respiratory disease due to H. somni in cattle. While
ing infection from the urogenital tract has not been deter-
vaccination can decrease the incidence of respiratory dis-
mined. Reproductive infections (such as metritis or epi-
ease in at-risk animals (such as feedlot cattle), protection is
didymitis) or mastitis in ruminants can also be caused by
not inevitable. The efficacy of these vaccines in preventing
H. somni.
meningoencephalitis, polyarthritis, reproductive, or car-
diac disease in cattle is not well characterized.
Swine
 In the United States, a modified live vaccine is commer-
Bacteremia/Septicemia. In young weaned pigs, H. parasuis
 cially available for control of disease due to H. parasuis in
causes polyserositis, polyarthritis, and sometimes menin-
 swine. Autogenous vaccines have also been used to prevent
gitis (also known as Glasser's disease). Infection leads to
disease due to H. parasuis. It is important for isolates used
Chapter 13
Pasteurellaceae: Haemophilus and Histophilus
119
in autogenous vaccines to represent the virulent serotype
crobials not usually chosen for treatment of gram-negative
causing disease; nonvirulentserotypes of H. parasuis, which
Organisms, such as penicillin. Resistance to antimicrobials
may not induce protective immunity, can be concurrently
isolated from diseased animals.
Effective treatment of infection by these organisms is thus
 possible, and some antibiotics are specifically labeled fo1
treatment of respiratory disease due to H. somni in cattle.
Laboratory Diagnosis
However, effective treatment of some conditions caused
Recovery of members of the genera Haemophilus and
nature of the pathologic lesion is such that a long course of
Histophilus from infected tissues or fluids is usually required
therapy is required (e.g., septic arthritis in a feedlot steer).
to establish a diagnosis. However, theseagents can be fastid-
In such cases, it may not be practically feasible to treat the
ious relative to other commensal or contaminating organ-
   n    
isms that may also be present in samples; thus, it is impor-
straints.
tant for veterinarians submitting samples to diagnostic lab-
Control of disease due to these agents can be aided
oratories to specifically request that the laboratory attempt
in some cases by vaccination (see Section “Vaccination").
to isolate Haemophilus or Histophilus if disease due to these
 Management to prevent or limit primary insults that may
agents is suspected. Identification of genus and species-
increase susceptibility to infection, such as primary viral
specific DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be
respiratory infection, may also help to limit disease due to
easier than culture of these agents if the laboratory offers
these agents.
this test; however, diagnosis made in this manner will not
result in an isolate that can be used to identify serotype (in
the case of H. parasuis) or antimicrobial susceptibility pro-
Further Reading
file. Also, some studies have shown PCR to be less sensitive
than culture for isolation of H. parasuis.
Dousse F, Thomann A, Brodard I et al. (2008) Routine pheno-
Organisms requiring X factor cannot convert delta-
typic identification of bacterial species of the family Pas-
aminolevulinic acid to urobilinogen and porphyrin. The
teurellaceae isolated from animals. / Vet Diagn Invest, 20,
porphyrin test determines this ability and X factor require.
716-724.
ment most reliably. Definitive assignment to a species usu-
 Nedbalcova K, Satran P, Jaglic Z et al. (2006) Haemophilus para-
ally requires additional tests.
 suis and Glasser's disease in pigs: a review. Vet Med (Praha),
51, 168-179.
Oliveira S and Pijoan C (2004) Haemophilus parasuis: new
Treatment and Control
trends on diagnosis, epidemiology, and control. Vet Micro-
biol, 99, 1-12.
Bacteria in the genera Haemophilus and Histophilus are gen-
Siddaramppa S and Inzana TJ (2004) Haemophilus somnus viru-
erally susceptible to antimicrobials effective against gram-
lence factors and resistance to host immunity. Anim Health
Res Rev, 5, 79-93.
Bordetella
BRADLEY W. FENWICK
Members of the gerus Bordetella are gram-negative coc-
Descriptive Features
cobacilli belonging to the family Alcaligenaceae and related
to Alcaligenes and Achromobacter. Currently there are nine
Morphology and Staining
species described, most of which are important pathogens
of humans and other animals (Table 14.1), and numerous
Bordetellae are pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli,
isolates with uncertain phylogeny that are most closely
about 0.5 μm × up to 2 μm in size.
related to the Bordetella. Bordetella perhussis is the type strain,
which with B. paraperhussis, B. bronchiseptica, and B. avium
Structure and Composition
are referred to as the “classic" Bordetella species. B. per-
The cell wall is typical of gram-negative bacteria being
tussis and B. parapertussis are genetically closely related
 composed of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and protein. B. bron-
to and evolved from a historical lineage of B. bronchisep-
chiseptica produces a capsule. All members of the genus
fica. B. avium is genetically distinct. Associated with the
that have been evaluated produce fimbrial adhesins (pili)
adaption to being a human-specific pathogen, B. perhus-
and biofilms. B. bronchiseptica and B. avium are motile by
sis has a genome that is reduced in size while main-
peritrichous flagella.
taining the virulence factors of associated with the other
Bordetella species. Based on 16S rDNA sequence, B. perhus-
sis and B. holmesii are closed related. Interestingly, while
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
the genes may be present the expression of key viru-
With few exceptions, B. perhussis, B. paraperhussis, B. bron-
lence factors varies between the classic Bordetella species.
chiseptica, and B. avium produce (or at least have the genes
For example, only B. perhussis expresses pertussis toxin
 to produce) many of the same products important in the
but is transcriptionally silenced in B. paraperhussis and
pathogenesis of disease (Table 14.2).
B. bronchiseptica.
All but one (Bordetella petrii) are aerobic bacteria that are
Adhesins. The role of adhesins, as in other microorgan-
highly adapted to be parasites of ciliated respiratory epithe-
 isms, is to allow the bacterium expressing them to adhere
lium. B. petrii is a facultative anaerobe that lives in the envi-
to cells lining a particular niche, as well as to the surface
ronment and is occasionally associated with human in fec.
of so-called target cells prior to the initiation of disease
tion and disease in compromised individuals. B. perussis
(in some cases, niche and target cells may be the same).
(and, rarely, B. parapertussis and B. hinzii) causes whooping
The expression of adhesins depends upon various environ-
cough or whooping cough like disease in humans. On rare
 mental cues. Binding followed by adherence appears to be
Occasions B. hinzii, B. ansorpi, and B. avium cause oppor-
 at least a two-step process involving sequential involve-
tunistic infections in humans. Of veterinary importance,
ment of different adhesins.
and the main topic of discussion in this chapter are B. bron-
Bordetellae produce a number of structures that are
chiseptica, which has been implicated in porcine atrophic
responsible for adherence to host cells. These adhesins
rhinitis, canine and feline kennel cough, and bronchop-
include fimbriae (or pili), filamentous hemagglutinin
neumonia in other species and B. avium, the cause of rhino-
(FHA), pertactin, cell wall LPS, tracheal colonization fac-
tracheitis of birds (mainly turkeys). To be complete,B. para-
 perfussis infection in sheep and B. hinzii in fection of poultry
the BvgAS regulon (see Section “Regulation of the Cellular
are briefly reviewed.
Products of Medical Interest").
1. Fimbriae: Fimbriae are protein structures composed,
in part, of subunits (pilins) responsible for adher-
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
ence to receptors on host cells. While not required
Ernst L. Biberstein.
for colonization, Bordetella fimbriae adhere to cil-
iated epithelial cells and mucus of the respiratory
Veterinary Microbiology,Tird Editin. ditdbyD Scott MVey, Melisa Keedy ad MM Chgap
@ 2013 Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
120
Chapter 14 Bordetella
121
Table 14.1.
 Members of the Genus Bordetella and There
haps enhanced survive in the face of a host immune
Usual Source or Associated Condition
response. Binding is via sulfated glycoconjugates on
epithelial cells that can increase the expression of
Species
Usual Source or Associated Condition
CR3 integrin to which FHA binds.
2.1
Filamentous hemagglutinin: FHA is a generally highly
 Bordetella pertussis
 Whooping cough in humans, chimpanzees
conserved very large complex protein adhesin that
B. parapertussis
Whooping cough-like disease in humans:
has a number of activities associated with various
 chronic nonprogressive pneumonia in 
domains within the protein. The FHA of B. holmesii
 sheep (human and sheep strains are
different!
is distinct. FHA undergoes significant posttransla-
B. bronchiseptica
 Atrophic rhinitis in swine, respiratory tract
tional modification that results in a 220 kDa mature
 disease in many animals
protein from a 370 kDa precursor forming a 50-nm
B. avium
Rhinotracheitis in poultry (especially turkeys.
long filamentous molecule that includes a hairpin
 coryza) and wild birds
fold. It crosses the outer membrane via a two-partner
B.hinzii
 Commensal in poultry, rare respiratory
secretion system. The N-proximal region is similar to
 disease in turkeys, septicemia in humans
various other adhesins and toxins produced by other
B. hoimesif
Whooping cough-like disease and septicemia
gram-negative pathogens. Minor variations in crit-
 in humans 
ical binding domains may, in part, explain species-
B. trematum
 Opportunistic infections in humans 
and strain-dependent differences in host specificity,
B. petrif
 Opportunistic infections in humans 
B. ansorpii
 Opportunistic infections in humans 
virulence, and persistence. There is clear evidence
that FHA is required but not sufficient for adherence
to ciliated epithelial cells of the respiratory tract and
for binding to macrophages. This is accomplished
tract and are necessary for persistence. They are in
by way of heparin-binding, carbohydrate-binding,
the same family as the type 1 fimbriae produced
-n se aanbas (a) ds-i-r, e ropue
by enterobacteria and are encoded by four struc-
gets CR3 integrin. The heparin-binding domain is
tural genes fim2, fim3, fimX, and fimA that are
responsible for hemagglutinin, except in B. avium.
distributed in the genome. Fimbrial proteins 
are
FHA is also in volved in biofilm formation. It induces
a strong protective antibody response.
immune sera, and are the basis of different serotypes
3.
Pertactin: Prn (for pertactin, so names because of
(see Section “Variability"). Expression of fimbrial
 being a protective antigen) is an outer membrane
proteins is regulated by the BvgAS system as well
protein that functions as an adhesion and is a
as can undergo phase variation caused by slipped-
member of a family of proteins know as “auto-
strand mispairing during replication. The indepen-
 transporter" which are virulence factors in many
 dent location of fimbrial genes allows of protein-
gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Neisseria IgA protease).
specific phase variants, serotype switching, and per-
Numerous other autotransport proteins have been
Table 14.2.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest within Members of the Genus Bordeteffa
 Product
B. pertussis
B. parapertussis
B. bronchiseptica
B. aviurm
 Adhesins and others
 Fimbria
+
+
 Filamentous hemagglutinin 
X
+
+
+
+
 Pertactin 
+ (69 kDa)
+ (70 kDa)
+ (68 kDa)
 Tracheal colonization factor 
+
ND
Pertussis toxin
+
Biofilm 
十
+
ND
Toxins
 Tracheal cytotoxin 
+
+
+
Dermonecrotic toxin 
+
+
+
 Adenylate cyclase toxin
+
十
+
Pertussis toxin
+
-3
-a
Osteotoxin
十
+
+
Other
Capsule
十
Iron Scavenging
+
十
十
Type Ill secretion system 
+
+
十
Brk
+
+
十
BatB
+
Genes encoded but protein is not produced.
ND, not determined.
122
PART lIl Bacteria and Fungi
identified among the bordetellae (including BatB),
1. Lipopolysaccharide: Cell wall LPS of B. avium, and by
but their role in the ecology of Bordetella infec.
inference B. perhussis, B. paraperhussis, and B. bron-
tion and pathogenesis of disease is not known.
chiseptica, serves as an adhesin by binding to cil-
Like FHA, pertactin contains an “Arg-Gly-Asp" or
iated epithelium of the respiratory tract, and as a
RGD sequence involved in the binding to host cell
"shield" to cover the outer membrane protecting it
integrins. Though a particular host targetcell has not
from the action of membrane attack complexes gen-
been identified for Prn, itis likely that ciliated epithe-
erated by the complement system. The LPs in the
lial cells of the respiratory tract, as well as phagocytic
outer membrane is an important virulence deter-
cells are the targets. It also has two areas of repet-
minant, interacting with the innate and adaptive
itive amino acids (GGXXP and PQP) that vary in
 immune responses, and likely acting in association 
number and responsible for the difference in size of
with other toxins. Not only is the lipid A component
the mature protein (68-70 kDa) between different
toxic (endotoxin), but the length of the side chain
species and strains, and are protective epitopes
in the O-repeat unit hinders the attachment of the
4.
Tracheal colonization factor: Tef is a protein adhesin
membrane attack complex of the complement sys-
this is similar to pertactin (e.g., autotransporter,
tem to the outer membrane and imparts resistance
contains Arg-Gly-Asp sequences, and proline-rich
to antimicrobial proteins (defensins) found in res-
regions) that binds to ciliated epithelial cells of the
piratory tract secretions and within phagocytic cell
respiratory tract. It appears to target the trachea and
 granules. LPS binds to LPs-binding protein, which
-laduind 'g rauia Aq iou pue sissnad g Aq paonpoid
transfers it to the blood-phase of CD14. The CD14-
fussis or B. bronchiseptica.
LPS complex binds to Toll-like receptor proteins
 5. Perhussis toxin: Ptx (for pertussis toxin) is composed
(see Chapter 2) on the surface of macrophage cells
of five unique subunits and functions as both an
triggering the release of proinflammatory cytokines
ADP-ribosylating toxin (see Section “Exotoxins")
including tumor necrosis factor. The composition of
and as an adhesin. Synthesized only by B. perhus-
the LPS (presence or absence of the O-repeat portion,
sis, a portion of Ptx is excreted from the bacterial
its length, charge, and fatty acid substitutions) influ-
cell, and a portion remains attached to its surface.
ences the extent of protection against the comple-
 It is the surface-associated portion that serves as the
adhesin. The host cell types to which Ptx adheres
involved in differences in virulence between strains.
are ciliated epithelial cells of the respiratory tract,
B. perhussis has two types of LPS, LPSI and LPSI1. LPS
and phagocytic cells. While the genes for Ptx are
composition is regulated by the BvgAS regulon (see
present in both B. paraperhussis and B. bronchiseptica,
Section “Regulation of the Cellular Products of Med-
they are not expressed because of a number of point
ical Interest').
mutations, particularly in the promoter.
 2. Outer membrane protein: Brk (for Bordetella resistance
6.
Bioflm: Biofilms are produced by a majority of
to killing) is an outer membrane protein and pro-
pathogenic bacteria, providing a degree of protec-
vides resistance against serum-mediated killing. Brk
tion against environmental and host factors, as well
imparts resistance to damage by the complement
as provide resistance to a number of antimicro-
system and may also function as an adhesion (con-
bial agents. While poly-glucosamine (PGA) is not
tains twoArg-Gly-Asp regions as well as bindingloca-
required for the formation of biofilms by Bordetella,
tions for sulfated glycoconjugates). Brk is regulated
it contributes to bioflm stability. A xylose poly-
by the BvgAS regulon (see Section "Regulation of the
mer is also produced as part of the biofim. As with
Cellular Products of Medical Interest").
Other virulence factors, bioflm production is regu-
lated by BvgAS system, and there is evidence that
Exotoxins. There are five described exotoxins produced
fimbria, FHA, and pertactin could be involved in
the formation and/or stabilization of bioflms. In
by the bordetellae thatplay important roles in diseases asso-
ciated with members of this genus: tracheal cytotoxin, der-
vivo evaluation demonstrates that biofilm contribut-
 monecrotic toxin (DNT), adenylyl cyclase toxin, pertussis
ing to the attachment of B. bronchiseptica to nasal
toxin, and osteotoxin. All, except and osteotoxin and tra-
epithelium.
cheal cytotoxin (a portion of the cell wall, are regulated by
the BvgAS regulon (see Section “Regulation of the Cellular
Capsule. The capsule plays many roles, the most
Products of Medical Interest'").
important of which are interference with phagocytosis
(antiphagocytic) and protection of the outer membrane
1. Tracheal cytotoxin: Produced by the "Classic" Borde-
from the deposition of membrane attack complexes gener-
tella species plus B. avium, tracheal cytotoxin is a
ated by activation of the complement system.
fragment of the Bordetella peptidoglycan cell wall 
that is identical to Neisseria gonorhoeae ciliostatic
Cell Wall. The cell wall of the members of this genus is
an hydropeptidoglycan that in other gram-negative
one typical of gram-negative bacteria being composed of
bacteria is recycled is released instead released. Act-
carbohydrates, lipids, and protein. Bordeteliae possess LPS
 ing in association with LPS, tracheal cytotoxin dam-
 and outer membrane proteins that are important virulence
ages ciliated epithelial cells by interfering with DNA
determinants:
synthesis (LPS). Tracheal cytotoxin also induces the
Chapter 14 Bordetella
123
production of interleukin-1 (IL-1) and excessive
earlier. Ptx induces a significant and fully protective
amounts of nitric oxide from macrophages.
immune response.
2.
Dermonecrotic foxin: DNT is a member of a fam-
5.
Osteotoxin: Osteotoxin is produced by B. avium, B.
ily of toxins with similar structures and biological
pertussis, and B. bronchiseptica but not by B. paraper-
activity. The other “dermonecrotic" toxins include
fussis. It is lethal to tracheal and bone cells via the
Pmt produced by Pasteurella multocida (see Chap-
reactive products of cleaved extracellular cysteine.
ter 11), and CNF1 and CNF2 produced by E. coli
(see Chapter 7). These toxins are so named because
Iron Acquisition. Because iron is an absolute growth
dermonecrosis follows their injection into the skin,
requirement, microorganisms must acquire this substance
an occurrence that does not occur naturally (DNT
if they are to exist within the host. Bordetellae acquire iron 
is not secreted). DNT deaminates and transglu-
by secreting a siderophore and utilizing siderophores made
tamates (preferred) the small GTP-binding pro-
by other species of microorganism. In addition,they utilize
the iron found in heme and hemoproteins.
tein Rho blocking its GTPase activity (i.e., GTPase
activating proteins are unable to correctly bind
Under conditions of iron starvation (as would occur
to modified Rho). These modifications result in
in the host), bordetellae secrete a hydroxamate-type
changes in the actin cytoskeleton of affected cells
siderophore called alcaligin. Bordetellae also have the
ability to utilize enterobactin, a siderophore produced
(actin stress fibers) and inhibition of differentia-
tion of osteoblasts in bone tissue. DNT expression
by members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, as well as
is required for B. bronchiseptica to cause turbinate
xenosiderophores. These siderophores (alcaligin and enter-
atrophy in pigs and pneumonia in mice, and for B.
obactin) remove iron from the iron-binding proteins of the
avium to be pathogenic.
host (transferrin and lactoferrin), making it available to the
3.
Aderylyl cyclase foxin: Adenylyl cyclase toxin is a
bacterium.
bifunctional protein with independent adenylyl
 Heme and hemoproteins (albumin and hemopexin) are
cyclase as well as hemolytic activity that is pro-
additional sources of iron. The outer membrane protein
duced by classic Bordetella species but not B. avium.
that binds these substances, BhuR (for Bordetella heme
Adenylyl cyclase toxin is the only known Borde-
uptake receptor), is regulated by levels of available iron by
tella exotoxin that is secreted without proteolytic
means of the extracytoplasmic sigma factor Rhu (for reg-
cleavage. It enters the host cell and following “acti-
ulation of heme uptake) and the Fur regulon (see E. coli,
vation" by calmodulin, increases the intracellular
Chapter 7).
concentration of cAMP. Affected cells lose con-
Type Ill Secretion System. A type IlI secretion system has
trol of intracellular levels of cAMP, resulting in an
been identified in the B. bronchiseptica and B. paraperhussis
inability to regulate ion and fluid flow into and
(under the control of the BvgAS regulon, see Section "Regu-
out of the “target" cell (respiratory tract epithe-
lation of the Cellular Products of Medical Interest'"). While
lium). Loss of control of cAMP levels in phago-
the genes are present in B. perhussis and human strains of
cytic cells results in reduction of this cell's ability
B. paraperhussis, evidence of production is lacking, B. avium
to phagocytose and kill. The hemolytic activity is
appears to lack the required genes. The type IlI secretion
associated with an RTX motif (repeats in toxin, s0-
system consists of an assemblage of proteins (more than
called because of the common feature of repeats in
20) that form a hollow tube-like structure through which
glycine-rich sequences within the protein, see also E.
coli hemolysin in Chapter 7, Pasteurella/Mannheimia
As yet, Bordetella effector proteins have not been identi-
leukotoxin in Chapter 11, Actinobacillus hemolysin
in Chapter 12, Moraxella cytotoxin in Chapter 18).
cytic cells) undergo apoptosis as a result of effector protein
 By virtue of the RTX-type toxin activity, adenylyl
“injection,” resulting in loss ofepithelial integrity, and eva-
cyclase toxin is also a pore-forming protein that tar-
sion of the immune system of the host (decreased phago-
gets neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes.
cytosis, and decreased antigen processing which leads to
Taken together, adenylyl cyclase production is nec-
reduced immune responses).
essary for infection and plays a central role in
virulence.
Regulation of the Cellular Products of Medical Inter-
4.
Perhussis toxin: Pertussis toxin (Ptx) is an ADP-
est.
 Bordetellae transcriptionally regulated by a two-
ribosylating toxin that ribosylates “activated" het-
component system, the genes encoding products involved
erotrimeric G proteins (GTP-bound), rendering
in theproduction of disease. These includethe genes encod-
them incapable of returning to the inactive state
ingall of the adhesins (fimbriae, FHA, pertactin, the charac-
(GDP-bound). “Activated" G proteins stimulate
ter of the cell wall LPs, Tef, and pertussis toxin), pertactin,
adenylyl cyclase leading to increased levels of intra-
Brk, toxins (adenylyl cyclase, DNT, pertussis toxin), alcali-
cellular cAMP. Abnormally high concentration of
gin, biofilm, and the type IlI secretion system. All are regu-
cAMP results in loss of fluid and ion flow into and out
of the cell, and if the cell has phagocytic function,
(for Bordetella virulence genes) and are referred to as the
 interference with uptake and intracellular killing.
BvgAS regulon. BvgS is a histidine kinase that acts as a "sen-
While Ptx causes considerable d ysfunction in a num-
sor" of en vironmental cues, resulting in autophosphoryla-
ber of metabolic pathways, the host cell typically is
tion of one of its histidine residues. This phosphate is then
not killed. The role of Ptx as an adhesin is discussed
serially transferred to an aspartate residue, then to another
124
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
histidine before being used to phosphorylate BvgA. Phos-
 strains from dogs and horses (which are also different from
phorylated BvgA is a transcriptional activator of the genes
each other). Other strain-specific disease, phenotype, and
encoding the products mentioned above and is responsi-
molecular differences have been identified and hypothe-
ble for phenotype modulation and phase variation. Not
sized to be the basis for vaccine failures.
all virulence factor expression is regulated to the same
Three serotypes, based on surface agglutinins, are recog-
degree under different environmental conditions, thus
nized in B. avium.
producing a continuum of phenotypes. It is unclear exactly
B. paraperhussis strains that infect and cause disease in
what the environmental cues are that are “sensed" by Bor-
humans are distinct from those strains that cause chronic
detella. Growth at 37 *C in low concentrations of MgSO4
nonprogressive pneumonia in sheep.
and nicotinic acid activates the regulon. Though growth at
37 *C is compatible with a parasitic state, it is unclear what
Ecology
role MgsO4 and nicotinic acid concentrations play in vivo.
Reservoir
Growth Characteristics
Bordetella spp. are mainly parasites of ciliated respiratory
All but one of the species of Bordetella is strict aerobes,
tract tissue. Bordetellae are found in the nasopharynx of
 deriving energy from oxidation of amino acids. B. petrii
healthy animals. B. bronchiseptica associated disease (either
(the exception) is a facultative anaerobe. They are fastidi-
as a primary or secondary infection) occurs in wild and
ous and can be difficult to culture, particularly on primary
domestic carnivores, wild and laboratory rodents, swine,
isolation, forming mature colonies in 1-3 days. Growth
rabbits, and occasionally horses, koalas, seals, other herbi-
can be inhibited by fatty acids, particularly in the case of
vores, primates, and turkeys.
B. perhussis, which requires the use of specialized media.
 B. avium inhabits the respiratory tract of infected wild
B. bronchiseptica and B. avium grow on ordinary laboratory
and domestic fowl, resulting in disease principally in
media (35-37*C),including MacConkey agar, under atmo-
turkeys (coryza).
spheric conditions; the former is inconsistently hemolytic
on blood agar. B. bronchiseptica, B. avium, and B. hinzii are
motile.
Transmission
Mammalian infections are primarily airborne, but en viron-
Biochemical Activities
mental contamination is a significant factor in some cases,
while in turkeys (B. avium) indirect spread via contami-
B. avium and B. bronchiseptica are catalase and oxidase-
nated water and litter is common. Experimentally, as few
positive, ferment no carbohydrates, and utilize citrate as
as 10 organisms can establish an infection. Transmission
an organic carbon source. B. bronchiseptica, B. avium, and B.
hinzi are oxidase-positive. Only B. bronchiseptica reduces
can occur rapidly resulting in significant acute disease out-
breaks. Environmental conditions (temperature, humid-
nitrate and produces urease, B. paraperhussis is weakly
ity) and host density influence the frequency and severity
urease-positive.
of clinical disease. The hypothesis is that phenotype shifts
 (loss of adhesins) associated with the BvgAS system pro-
Resistance
mote transmission and that once deposited in a new host
Bordetella spp. are killed by heat or disinfectants. They are
the appropriate environmental are recognized thus reacti-
susceptible to broad-spectrum antibiotics and polymyxin,
vating the BvgAS system resulting in adhesion and toxin
but not to penicillin. Their environmental survival is epi-
expression.
demiologically significant.
Pathogenesis
Variability
Mechanisms
An assortment of typing schemes has been developed,
mainly forepidemiological purposes. Atleast four serotypes
 Bordetellae “sense" various environmental cues, leading
have been described for bordetellae based upon the Fim
to activation of the BvgAS regulon and upregulation of
protein (see Section “Adhesins"). Except for fimA, the fim-
the various genes encoding the products discussed ear-
brial genes of B. avium are not shared with the Bordetella.
lier (see Section “Cellular Products of Medical Interest").
 Related to differences in the number of proline-rich repeats,
Attachment of bordetellae to ciliated epithelial cells fol-
pertactin varies both in size and in antigenic character
lows expression of adhesins (fimbriae, FHA, pertactin, cell
between Bordetella species and also within strains of the
wall LPs, Tcf, and biofilms—see Table 14.2 for listing of
same species.
which adhesins are produced by which bordetellae). Multi-
 B. bronchiseptica dissociates into four phases varying in
plication occurs (iron is scavenged from host iron-binding
colonial characteristics, hemolytic activity, suspension sta-
proteins—lactoferrin and transferrin—and from heme and
bility in saline, ease of colonization, and toxicity. Some
hemoproteins; bordetellae outer membrane is protected
strains appear to be host specific. Some 20 heat-labile (K)
from complement-generated membrane attack complexes
by capsule, LPS, Brk) and inflammation is initiated (LPS;
death of epithelial cells due to “injection" of effector pro-
cific. B. bronchiseptica from pigs appear different from the
teins; tracheal cytotoxin). Inflammation and loss of the
Chapter 14 Bordetella
125
ability to control fluid and ion flow into and out of tra-
acterized by coughing, dyspnea, and at times high morbid-
cheal epithelial cells (increased production of cAMP from
ity and mortality. Disease outbreaks are likely associated
effects of increased activity of adenylyl cyclase) leads to
with failure of passive transfer or low material immunity.
 increased mucus and fluid accumulation in the upper res-
piratory tract. Ciliated epithelial cells become ineffectual in
Dogs and Cats
clearing secretions (cilial paralysis due to increased levels of
cAMP and cytoskeletal changes broughtabout by the action
Canine Infectious Tracheobronchitis (Kennel Cough). Ken-
of DNT; death of ciliated cell due to tracheal cytotoxin,
nel cough is associated with B. bronchiseptica; with clinical
disease being most common in young dogs, mature vacci-
the type Ill secretion system). Unencapsulated bordetel-
nated dogs are susceptible under the right circumstances.
lae adhere to inflammatory cells (by way of FHA, pertactin,
The natural disease may be accompanied by canine parain-
fluenza virus, canine adenoviruses 1 and 2, and canine
and pertussis toxin), and release adenylyl cyclase (interferes
 herpesvirus. Rapidly progressing disease outbreaks occur
with phagocytosis and killing), pertussis toxin (interferes
with phagocytosis and killing), and “injection" of an effec.
in kennels and animal hospitals. The incubation period
tor protein (interferes with phagocytosis). If phagocytosis
is around a week followed by acute coughing, in the most
occurs, bordetellae survive within phagolysosomes (nature
of their LPS) and also escape into endocytic compartments
within a few weeks without treatment, the bacterium can
that do not lead to lysosomal fusion.
persist for months and relapses are possible. Transfer of the
The consequences of Bordetella-induced changes in the
same strain to susceptible cats has been demonstrated.
ciliated portions of the respiratory tract are varied: depres-
sion of respiratory clearance mechanisms, facilitating sec
Pneumonia. B. bronchiseptica is sometimes isolated from
ondary complications (e.g., pneumonia); in pigs, B. bron-
samples collected from pneumonic lungs, often from dogs
chiseptica provides nasal irritation, rendering the turbinates
with canine distemper.
susceptible to the action of the DNT (Pmt) of P. multocida,
which has emerged as the primary agent of atrophic rhini-
Cats. B. bronchiseptica produces a mild upper respiratory
tis (progressive atrophic rhinitis," see Chapter 11). If P.
tract infection in cats (tracheobronchitis, conjunctivitis)
multocida does not become involved, DNT as well as all of
that spontaneously resolves in less than 10 days. Clinical
the products described above, produces a mild, reversible
disease is most notably in cat colonies (upper respiratory
turbinate hypoplasia ("nonprogressive atrophic rhinitis").
tract infections in cats are also associated with herpesvirus,
Pneumonia,if this occurs, isdue toinflammatoryresponses
calicivirus, Mycoplasma, Chlamydophila). Coughing is not
and the inability of host phagocytic cells and complement
common. Cats, like dogs, carry the organism asymptomat-
system to easily clear bordetellae.
ically (up to 19 weeks) following recovery. Secondary bron-
chiopneumonia in kittens and immunocompromised cats
Pathology
has been reported . Transfer of the same strain to susceptible
dogs has been demonstrated.
The attachment and destruction of ciliated respiratory
epithelium is the hallmark of Bordetella-initiated disease.
Poultry
The process is a suppurative one affecting various portions
of the tract (rhinitis, sinusitis, tracheitis). Compromise of
Turkey Coryza. Turkey poults infected with B. avium
the clearance mechanisms of the upper respiratory tract
develop tracheobronchitis, sinusitis, and airsacculitis.
may lead to a suppurative pneumonia and airsacculitis
Signs include nasal exudate, conjunctivitis, sneezing, tra-
with Bordetella itself and often secondary superinfections
cheal rales, and dyspnea. Morbidity can be very high, but
with other bacteria that can significantly enhance disease
mortality, except by secondary infection, is generally low
severity.
(<5%). Recovery may begin after 2 weeks, although some
illnesses may last 6 weeks and is associated with stunted
Disease Patterns
growth and tracheal collapse. Chickens and other birds
may be in fected with B. avium and opportunistically causes
Swine
disease. B. hinzii is generally viewed as a commensal but
under the right environmental conditions is capable of
Atrophic rhinitis.
 The progressive form of atrophic rhini-
causing mild respiratory disease in turkeys. There have been
tis is due to combined infection with P. multocida and B.
a number of cases of B. hinzii in humans whooping cough-
bronchiseptica, and was discussed in Chapter 11. The non-
 like disease and septicemia in human, particularly when
progressive form of this disease follows infection with B.
bronchiseptica alone and is transient and self-limiting, most
asplenic.
frequently causing disease (sneezing and nasal discharge)
in pigs 3-4 weeks old.
Laboratory and Wild Animals
Rabbit bordetellosis. B. bronchiseptica infections in rab-
Pneumonia.
 Compromise of the host defenses of the
 bits are usually asymptomatic but may cause mild upper
upper respiratory tract sometimes leads to secondary pneu-
respiratory disease (snuffles). However, in association with
monia associated with B. bronchiseptica or some other
other infectious agents (e.g., P. multocida) can be involved
    d  
with bronchopneumonia. In guinea pigs, B. bronchiseptica
outbreaks can be clinically significant, resulting in acute
126
PART lIl  Bacteria and Fungi
development of respiratory disease associated with high
Laboratory Diagnosis
 mortality. Wild birds commonly asymptomatically carry
B. avium and B. henzii.
Nasalswabs (atrophic rhinitis and kennelcough), sediment
of transtracheal washes (canine tracheobronchitis), and
Epidemiology
tracheal swabs (coryza of turkeys) are cultured on blood
Atrophic rhinitis affects pigs under6 weeks old, when osteo-
and MacConkey agars. Selective media are helpful in lim-
iting overgrowth by faster growing bacteria. As in the case
genesis and bone remodeling are most active. Affected pigs
spread B. bronchiseptica. The ultimate sources are carier
with the primary isolation of B. perfussis, the use of Bordet-
 sows, in which carrier rates decline with age.
Gengou and charcoal blood agar can be helpful in the initial
recovery of B. bronchiseptica. Colonies of B. bronchiseptica
Canine kennel cough usually affects young, nonim-
and B. avium can easily be overlooked on primary isolation,
mune dogs or adults following introduction of new strains
as they are often less than 1 mm in size after 48-h incubation
from recovered healthy carriers. Environmental contami-
nation can be a significant factor.
and variably hemolytic. Routine laboratory tests are used
for identification with differential agglutination of sheep
B. avium causes disease mainly in young turkey poults
and guinea pig red blood cells being helpful for differen-
and causes opportunistic disease in chickens and perhaps
other birds. A contaminated en vironment is important in
tiating B. avium and B. bronchiseptica. A polymerase chain
reaction-based assay utilizing primers designed to amplify
perpetuating and transferring infection between flocks.
various species-specific segments of DNA is available for
determining the presence of bordetellae as well as for iden-
Immunologic Aspects
tification purposes.
B. avium reacts like Alcaligenes faecalis in routine
Pathogenic Factors
laboratory tests and can be differentiated by cellular fatty
Many of the virulence factors produced by the Borde-
acid analysis. In addition, B. avium must be differentiated
tella function to either directly or indirectly overcome
from B. hinzii. A microagglutination test is used for ser0-
the host's innate immune response resulting in persis-
diagnosis.
tent infection, disease, and transmission. Depressed cell-
 mediated responses have been observed in experimental B.
Treatment and Control
qvium infections. B. bronchisepfica can alter the response of
dendritic cells, which results in a decrease production of
 IL-10 and interferon.
The basis of Bordetella disease control is basic infectious dis-
ease control focused on preventing transmission between
healthy carriers and fully susceptible new hosts, either
Protective Role
directly by aerosol or indirectly by mechanical transfer. Sig-
Local antibody is believed to prevent B. bronchiseptica col-
nificant disease outbreaks, in contrast to subclinical infec-
onization in dogs, but evidence is lacking and questioned
tion, are often associated with less than optimal environ-
because of the protection provided via injected vaccines.
mental conditions. Vaccination reduces the likelihood of
The significant degree of common antigens as well as Borde
 clinical disease but appear to have marginal impact on the
tella species and strain-specific differenices make it difficult
 potential of infection.
The progressive form of atrophic rhinitis is not treat-
to assess the degree of immunity to infection or disease.
B. avium antiserum is ineffective in protecting turkeys,
 able. Preventive measures include maintenance of an aged
but maternal immunization reduces losses in challenged 
sow herd with a low carrier rate; preventing transmission
progeny. Antibody to adhesins prevents adherence to tra-
a pas re p ea aid o mos 
cheal epithelia.
farrowing houses and nurseries after each use (all-in/all-
Immunization Procedures
out production); vaccination (see Section “Immunization 
Procedures"); prophylactic use of sulfonamides in feed
Or water; and elimination of carrier sows based on nasal
but often to not prevent colonization. Bacterins used on
swabs.
pregnant sows provide some colostral immunity to piglets,
Canine tracheobronchitis responds inconsistently to
especially when including toxigenic P. multocida strains.
antibiotics. Vaccination (see Section “Immunization Proce-
Bacterin-toxoid preparations protect piglets.
dures"), fumigation of kennels, adequate ventilation, and
 Parenteral administered killed and antigen extracts as
isolation of affected dogs are useful preventive practices.
well as intratracheal live attenuated vaccine have been 
Prior infection, with or without clinical disease, does not
beneficial but provide unreliable protection against kennel
provide durable protection against reinfection. Tetracy-
cough in dogs and cats. As in the case with vaccine failures
cline remains the drug of choice and there is widespread
against B. perhussis in humans, this is likely related to critical
resistance to cephalosporins.
antigenic differences, particularly with pertactin, between
B. avium is susceptible to tetracycline, erythromycin,
vaccine and wild-type strains of B. bronchiseptica. Localized
and nitrofurantoin, but resistant to penicillin G, strep to
mycin, and sulfonamides. Medication during the early
occur with paren teral vaccines. Of B. avium vaccines, those
 stages of a disease outbreak can be economically beneficial.
using attenuated live organisms intratracheally have been
 Mass medication and vaccination may prevent outbreaks
most effective.
without eliminating the infection.
15
STEVEN OLSEN AND BRIAN BELLAIRE
The genus Brucella encompasses a group of gram-negative
Morphology and Staining
bacteria that survive almost exclusively in infected hosts
Brucellae are gram-negative coccobacilli that are usually
with preference for localization in intracellular compart-
ments of phagocytic, reticuloendothelial, and specialized
single but can be in pairs or small groups. Coccobacilli are
usually 0.6-1.5 μm in length and 0.5-0.7 μm I width. Pleo-
epithelial cells. The genus has traditionally been divided
morphic forms are rare except in old cultures. Brucellae
into species based on microbial characteristics and host
are nonmotile and do not have capsules or form spores.
preference, but most Brucella species are capable of in fect
True bipolar staining is not observed. Although not truly
ing many hosts. Clinical disease caused by infection with
acid-fast, they are resistant to decolorization with weak
bacteria in this genus, brucellosis, is generally associated
acids and therefore stain red with a modified Zehl-Nielsen 
with chronic infections and pathologic effects in repro-
ductive tissues.
stain.
B.abortus,B.suis,B.melitensis,and B.neotomae are con-
One of the most important characteristics of brucel-
      
lae is the number of species in the genus that are capa-
 istic associated with expression of the lipopolysaccharide
ble of causing zoonotic infections. Human brucellosis is
(LPS) O-side-chain. In comparison, B. ovis and B. canis have 
a significant, resurging, worldwide zoonosis with partic-
rough colony morphologies and do not express the LPS
ularly high prevalence in Middle East, central Asia, and
O-side-chain. Smooth colonies appear round, glistening,
Mediterranean countries. Because clinical symptoms are
and blue-green in color and do not take up crystal violet
not pathognomonic, human brucellosis is frequently mis.
stain. In comparison, rough colonies have a dry, granular
diagnosed. Addressing the disease in animal reservoirs
appearance, yellowish-white color and stain with crystal
is the most economic approach for preventing human
violet.
brucellosis.
Cellular Structure and Composition
The cell wall of Brucella is typical for gram-negative bacteria.
Descriptive Features
is composed of asymmetric layers of LPS and phospholipids
The Brucella genus has traditionally been characterized as
-opndadjo iaae uu g-e suapun ue Aq pajoddns si pue
having six species: B. aborhus, B. melitensis, B. suis, B. canis,
glycan. Some proteins, such as OmpA, are covalently bound 
B. ovis, and B. neotomae. The high degree of homology at the
to the peptidoglycan layer and stabilize the outer mem-
genomic level has led to it being proposed that the genus is
brane. The hydrophobic region of the membrane provides
actually composed of only one species, B. melitensis, with
an anchor for proteins and forms a functional and struc-
the other classical species proposed as strains of B. meliten-
tural barrier between the periplasm and the exterior of the
sis. Recent isolations of new Brucella species from sea mam-
cell. The periplasmic space varies from 3 to 30 nm. Porins
mals, voles, a prosthetic breast implant, and Austrian foxes
in the outer membrane function as channels to the interior
 may expand the number of species included in the Brucella
of the cell. Other proteins, such as lipoproteins, are also
genus. Some of the classical species (B. melitensis, B. abor-
embedded in the outer membrane.
fus, and B. suis) are divided into biovars based on biochem-
The LPS of Brucella is composed of lipid A, core oligosac-
ical, phenotype, and antigenic properties. Although divi-
charides, and O-poly-saccharides. The structure of LPS
sion into biovars has been used for epidemiologic purposes,
in Brucella differs from gram-negative enteric bacteria in
biotypingcan besomewhatsubjective becauseitis based on
that the backbone sugar of the lipid A is different and the
subtle differences such as requirements for higher CO2 ten-
LPS has a low phosphate content. The LPS protects the
sions for growth, production of hydrogensulfide, growth
bacteria from cationic peptides, oxygen metabolites, and
 on media containing dyes (thionin or basic fuchsin), and
complement-mediated lysis. The O-polysaccharide on the
agglutination with monospecific A and M antisera.
LPS, expressed by smooth strains, is very immunogenic
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
127
128
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
and can express A and/or M antigens dependent upon
Diversity
the species of Brucella. The Brucella cell envelope, LPS,
Most brucellae have two circular chromosomes encoding
-uoed panai e Aeds use pe 'suanrdodl
 approximately 2.1 and 1.2 Mbp. The genome of B. suis bio-
associated molecular pattern (PAMP) for recognition by
var 3 is the exception in that it has a single chromosome
innate immunity, most likely due to hydrophobic moieties
of 3.1 Mbp. The origin of replication of the large chromo-
of the outer membrane including ornithine lipids. The
some is typical of bacterial chromosomes while that of the
altered PAMP of Brucella fails to induce a robust innate
small chromosome is plasmid like. The G+C content of
immune response that contributes to the pathogen's in
the two chromosomes is nearly identical with an average
vivo stealth.
GC content of approximately 58-59%. The genus is highly
homogeneous with DNA-DNA pairing studies demonstrat-
Ao 'soads 1e ssoe Asonou %06 uen 1as su
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
7000 single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified in
The lipid A of B. aborhus LPS has been demonstrated to
the 3.1 Mb of genomic sequences shared across Brucella
 haveimmunostimulatory properties with reduced toxic-
spp. Differences in genomic structure were primarily due
ity as compared to LPs from other gram-negative bacte-
to occurrence of genomic islands and deletions related to
nia. A 14-kDA protein present in all traditional Brucella
these genomic islands were found in B. abortus and B. ovis.
species can function as a lectin by binding IgGs from sev-
Though many bacterial genetic islands encode pathogenic-
eral animal species and also has hemagglutination prop-
ity factors, most of the Brucella genomic islands encode
erties. Brucella bacteria and LPS are also very poor activa-
hypothetical proteins and enzymes commonly found asso.
tors of complement. The potent ability of heat-killed B.
ciated with horizontally acquired DNA such transposases
aborhus, its LPS, and/or lipoproteins to elicit β-chemokines,
and integrases. The genomes of the Brucella species display
Th-1 cytokines and stimulate expression of stimulatory
an average of >94% identity at the nucleotide levels with
and adhesion molecules on antigen-presenting cells has
B. aborfus and B. melitensis being the most closely related.
led to its proposed use as an adjuvant for human HIV
A close relationship has also been detected between B.
vaccines
canis and B. suis, while B. neotomae and B. ovis demonstrate
 In phagocytic cells, virulent Brucella spp. inhibit
 greater divergence levels from other Brucella species. With
phagolysosome fusion and may express proteins that bind
the exception of biovar 5, B. suis isolates cluster together.
to human Rab GTPase molecules and influence intracel-
Brucellae have multiple mechanisms to protect against
lular trafficking, and/or maturation of phagosome-derived
DNA mutations and the genome is very stable. This trait
vacuoles into replicative vacuoles. Bnucella can also pro-
prevents the use of restriction fragment length polymor-
 duce guanosine monophosphate, adenine and other com-
phism techniques to characterize strain lineages within
pounds that interact with neutrophils to reduce myeloper-
biovars. No mechanisms of genetic exchange have been
oxidase activity, prevent primary granule release, and
found in the genus.
 inhibit production of reactive oxygen compounds.
Ecology
Growth Characteristics
Zoologic and Geographic Reservoirs
Brucellae are aerobic and many strains require carbon diox-
ide for growth. Thiamine, nicotinamide, and biotin are also
Members of the genus Brucella exist as intracellular
required for growth. Addition of 5-10% serum to media
pathogens in mammalian hosts. Most species of Brucella
may stimulate growth, but bile salts, tellurite, and selen-
are obligate pathogens in that they do not exist as com-
ite inhibit growth. Growth in liquid media is usually slow
mensals nor are they found free living in the environment.
unless vigorous aeration is provided. Colonies generally
However, more recently identified species, that is, Brucella
 microti, may have genetic differences that support a free-
become visible on solid media in 3-5 days but samples
should be incubated for at least 7-10 days before considered
living as compared to a host-associated life style. Although
 negative. Typical colonies of virulent strains are round with 
traditional species of Brucella may temporarily be recovered
from en vironmental samples associated with infected ani-
white in color.
 mals, environmental persistence is generally not believed
to be of epidemiologic importance. Because direct or close
contact is generally believed to be required for transmis-
sion, maintenance of brucellosis in an animal or human
Resistance
population generally requires continual infection of sus-
Although brucellae can survive freezing and thawing.
ceptible hosts.
freeze/thaw cycles are associated with reductions in viabil-
The preferred host of B. aborhus is cattle, but it can
ity. Long-term survival under environmental conditions is
 also naturally infect numerous other species including
highest under cool, moist conditions with minimal expo-
bison (Bison bison), elk (Cervus elaphus), camels (Camelus
sure to ultraviolet light. Brucella is susceptible to most disin-
dromedaries and Camelus bactrianus), yaks (Bos gnunniens),
fectants for gram-negative bacteria. Lysis by bacteriophages
African buffalo (Syncerus caffer), and swine. Biovars 1 and 2
have widespread worldwide distribution although biovar 3
cella. Pasteurization of milk is effective for killing Brucella.
is predominantly found in India, Egypt, and Africa. Several
Chapter 15
 Brucella
129
countries in Northern and Central Europe, Canada, Aus-
tralia, Japan, and New Zealand are considered to be free of
se s   oi se  se s i
this pathogen.
infected with B. suis and B. canis effectively transmit Bru-
Sheep and goats are the preferred hosts of B. meliten-
cella for longer periods of time than animals infected with
sis, but this species of Brucella is also known to infect cat-
B. aborus or B. melitensis through shedding from mucosal
tle, camels, and other species. B. melitensis is considered to
surfaces or within urine.
be endemic in parts of Central and South America, Africa,
The mechanisms for transmission of Brucella in marine
Asia, the Middle East, and countries in the Mediterranean
 no  n  q   s
region. Areas considered to be free of B. melitensis include
cellae. The demonstration that marine Brucella are almost
Canada, the United States, Southeast Asia, northern and
exclusively localized within gut and uterine tissues of lung-
central Europe, Australia, and New Zealand.
worms (Parafilaroides and Phocoena) in an infected Pacific
Domestic and feral swine are the preferred hosts for bio-
vars 1, 2, and 3 of B. suis. Biovars 1 and 3 of B. suis can also
sibility that parasites may play a role in transmission.
infect cattle and horses. Biovar 2 can establish infection in
hares (Lepus capensis) and has a geographical distribution
in a broad range between Scandinavia and the Balkans. Bio-
Pathogenesis
var 4 is predominantly associated with infection in caribou
(Rangifer tarandus) but has also been found in moose, arc-
Brucellae generally enter across mucosal membranes, and
tic foxes, and wolves in subarctic areas. Biovar 5 has been
initially localize in lymphatic tissues draining the site of
exclusively isolated from wild rodents in the former UssR.
entry. If bacteria do not become localized and are not killed
Porcine brucellosis (biovars 1, 2, and 3) has widespread dis-
in regional lymph nodes draining the site of infection, bac-
tribution in domestic and feral swine globally, but preva.
teria may replicate and spread to other lymphoreticular
lence is higher in some areas such as Southeast Asia and
tissues and organs via lymph and blood. Distribution to
South America. It should be noted that unlike biovars 1, 3,
reproductive and mammary tissues occurs during the bac-
and 4, biovar 2 of B. suis is not considered to be important
teremic phase. Once localized in the immunoprivileged
for causing human brucellosis.
environment of the pregnancy uterus, or lumens of ducts
Dogs and sheep are the preferred hosts of B. canis and
within the mammary gland, immunologic mechanisms to
B. ovis, respectively, and both species of Brucella have
eliminate brucellae are severely impaired.
widespread geographic distribution. B. neotomae was iso-
The internalization of Brucella into phagocytic cells dif-
lated from desert wood rats in the Great Salt Lake Desert
fers between rough and smooth organisms. The LPs O-side-
of Utah and appears to have a restricted host range and
chain of nonopsonized smooth Brucella interact with lipid
limited geographic distribution.
rafts, which contain glycosphingolipids, cholesterol, and
Marine strains of Brucella have been identified in both
glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchored proteins, on the
Atlantic and Pacific oceans although current knowledge is
surface of phagocytes. Internalized Brucella initially local-
not sufficient to characterize geographic and host popu-
ize within phagocytes in an acidified membrane-bound
lation distributions. Information on other new species of
Brucella (i.e., B. microti and B. inopinata) is insufficient to
 oxygen radicals generated by the respiratory burst. Cyclic
determine distribution.
3-1,2-glucans may help target Brucella to their replicative
niche in the endoplasmic reticulum. Exposure to an acid-
ified en vironment induces a type IV secretion system that
Transmission
interferes with phagosomal maturation and interacts with
Transmission of brucellae in preferred hosts primarily
the endoplasmic reticulum to neutralize the pH of the
occurs through aerosol, oral, and/or venereal mechanisms
phagosome. The modified phagosome ("brucellosome")
across mucosal surfaces. Tranismission can be best described
resists phagosome maturation and fusion with lysosomes.
by dividing the species into highly virulent (B. abortus
 Although most brucellae (approximately 70-85%) are elim-
and B. melitensis) and low virulence (B. ovis and B. canis)
inated by phagolysosome fusion, creation of the brucella-
groups, with B. suis differing by sharing characteristics of
some allows intracellular survival of some. Brucellae use
both groups. For B. aborhus and B. melitensis, transmission
stationary-phase physiology and siderophores to scavenge
primarily occurs laterally through fluids or tissues associ
iron as a mechanism for long-term survival within the
ated with the birth or abortion of infected feti, or verti-
nutrient-poor environment of the modified phagosome.
cally to offspring through the milk. Abortion events are the
Brucellae have multiple molecular mechanisms to detoxify
most important route for transmission of B. aborfus and B.
free radicals since oxidative killing is the primary mecha-
melitensis with fetal fluids and placenta tissues having col-
nism employed by host phagocytes to control replication
onization as high as 109 to 10io CFU/gm. Venereal trans-
of intracellular pathogens. The O-side-chain on the LPS
mission is not considered to be of importance for B. aborfus
appears to be a key molecular for invasion, protection from 
Or B. melitensis.
oxidative killing, cationic peptides, and complemented
Venereal transmission is an important route for infec-
mediated lysis. The capacity of Brucella to maintain long-
tion by B. suis, B. ovis, and B. canis in preferred hosts. B. suis
term residence within macrophages serves as the basis for
and B. canis can also be shed by excretion in urine, milk,
their ability to establish and maintain chronic infection.
01 from mucosal surfaces, and B. canis has also been recov-
 In contrast to entry via lipid rafts, opsonization of Bru-
ered from feces. Bitches can shed B. canis for 4-6 weeks
cella strains increases entry 10-fold with entry targeted
130
PART ll  Bacteria and Fungi
to phagosomes that mature and fuse with lysosomes to
the prolonged bacteremia in pigs, the observed infections
form phagolysosomes. Localization within phagolysosome
in abattoirs may also be related to the fact that B. suis can be
compartments increases intracellular killing of brucellae by
readily isolated from urine within the bladder of infected
phagocytic cells.
swine. Processing of infected swine may be associated with
 During persistent infection some brucellae reside in a
aerosolization of B. suis from urine or other body fluids.
dormant, nonreplicative state in phagocytic cells. Calves
The incubation period associated with human in fection
infected with B. aborus at young ages often do not
is variable and can range from less than a week to several
demonstrate seroconversion until after reaching puberty.
months. The pathophysiology of brucellosis in humans dif-
Recrudescence of clinical brucellosis is a significant prob-
fers from the characteristics of brucellosis in animal mod-
lem in human patients. Molecular mechanisms controlling
els. Clinical symptoms in humans are not pathognomonic
recrud escence, or host physiology influencing in vivo repli-
and can include recurrent pyrexia (undulant fever), cepha-
cation of brucellae have not been identified at this time.
lalgia, malaise, joint and muscle pain, night sweats, and
The erythritol genes are highly conserved in B. abor-
even neurologic manifestations. Brucella can distribute to
fus, B. suis, and B. melitensis, and erythritol is preferentially
almost any tissue or in vivo site with clinical symptoms
metabolized and can promote the growth of some Brucella
related to inflammatory lesions associated with bacterial
strains. Although it has been hypothesized that the pref-
localization. Osteoarticular disease is the most common
erential localization of B. aborhus within the reproductive
complication and can include peripheral arthritis, sacroili-
tract is related to the high concentration of erythritol in
itis, and spondylitis. Although human brucellosis is gener-
fetal placenta, data suggest that erythritol is not an essen-
ally associated with low mortality, endocarditis associated 
tial carbon source for B. suis in intracellular en vironments.
primarily with B. melitensis infection is the principal cause
 of human mortality. Although reports are rare, human-to-
human transmission of brucellosis through venereal trans-
Epidemiology
da      n is
Human brucellosis, caused by B. melitensis, B. suis, and B.
 abortus infection, occurs woridwide, but prevalence tends
 Characterization of Infection in Animal Populations
to be higher in parts of the Mediterranean basin, Central
and South America, the Middle East, sub-Saharan Africa,
As mentioned previously, most Brucella spp. have
and central Asia. Human brucellosis caused by B. canis o1
widespread worldwide distribution in domestic livestock
marine Brucella strains have also been reported in South
 populations. Susceptibility toinfection, clinicaleffects, and
America and New Zealand. Brucellosis is estimated to infect
disease prevalence are influenced by vaccination status,
more than 500 000 people yearly in nonindustrialized
sexual maturity, and pregnancy status. Localization in the
countries of the world with estimates of disease prevalence
reproductive tract or mammary gland is associated with the
ranging from <1 per 100 000 people in the United King-
 most severe pathology and capability to transmit infection.
 dom, United States, and Australia to >70per 100 000 people
 In general, preferred hosts are more susceptible to infec-
in some countries in the Middle East and central Asia. Of
tion with brucellae during pregnancy although host mech-
to represent a high proportion of human brucellosis cases.
characterized at this time. In the absence of vaccination,
Economic instability, socioeconomic factors, and insuffi-
infected herds frequently demonstrate seroprevalence rates
cient regulatory programs in domestic livestock over the
 0f 40-60%. Vertical transmission of brucellosis to offspring
last 10-15 years are likely contributing factors to the re-
can occur through in fected milk. With B. abortus it has been 
emergence of brucellosis in both livestock and humans in
 shown that infection in young animals may remain latent
a number of countries.
until the initiation of puberty.
 Brucellosis in humans is most frequently a disease of
The most common clinical manifestation of B. meliten-
farm workers, veterinarians, and laboratory or abattoir
sis, B. suis, and B. aborhus in natural hosts is reproductive
workers but can also occur through consumption of non
losses. With the exception of third trimester abortions,
pasteurized dairy products. Direct contact with infected
birth of weak offspring, and infertility in males and females,
animals, or materials associated with abortion, can lead to
clinical symptoms of brucellosis in natural hosts are rela-
 human infection through aerosolization into respiratory
tively rare. In uniparous species, abortions are generally
tissues, oral consumption, or opportunistic penetration 
fresh with minimal autolysis. In multiparous animals, abor-
through breaks in the skin. Veterinarians can also develop
tion may not be as common due to physiologic mecha-
brucellosis from infection with vaccine strains of B. abor-
nisms that maintain pregnancy while viable fetuses remain
tus or B. melitensis with inadvertent needle sticks being a
 in utero. Brucellae also frequently infect mammary glands
frequent cause of infection. As prevention of human bru-
causing mastitis and reduced milk production. Occasion-
cellosis is primarily related to the control of the disease in
ally, Brucella can localize in joints, bones, or other aberrant
animals, human brucellosis has a low incidence in coun-
locations in natural hosts leading to inflammation and
tries in which livestock brucellosis has been controlled.
associated pathology. Osteomyelitis/spinal meningitis in
It should be noted that B. suis has unique zoonotic fea-
swine infected with B. suis can lead to hind limb paralysis.
tures due to the long bacteremia and prolonged shedding
Transmission of B. ovis infection in sheep generally
from infected swine. Processing of infected swine in an
occurs during the breeding seasons. The ewe acts as
abattoirsetting has frequently resulted in large numbers of
a mechanical vector for transmitting infection between
workers becoming infected with brucellosis. In addition to
infected and noninfected rams. Homosexual activity of
Chapter 15
 Brucella
131
rams may be another mechanism for transmitting infec
receptors that function in vivo as immunologic sensors
tion. The most common clinical manifestation of B. ovis
for detection of pathogens. When pathogen-recognition
infection is infertility in rams with scrotal palpation being
receptors are triggered, the dendritic cells integrate the sig-
a mechanism for identification of in fected rams.
nals and migrate to the T cell areas of secondary lymphoid
Because of the capability to be transmitted venereally,
Organs to stimulate naive T cells. The observation that Bru-
husbandry practices and management practices can con-
cella display reduced PAMP signals to dendritic cells may
tribute to the introduction of B. suis and B. canis into non-
 be a mechanism the bacteria use to elude innate immune
infected herds or kennels. Entry of infection can occur by
responses.
the purchase of in fected animals, male or female, or by the
communal use of a male, who may transmit the disease
mechanically or who may be excreting Brucella in semen.
Mechanisms of Resistance and Recovery
Use of B. suis infected semen for artificial insemination is
Long-term protection against brucellosis is associated with 
also a potential route for introduction of infection into
stimulation of cellular immunity, whereas antibodies are
swine herds.
considered to play a minor role in protection. Although
specific correlates of protective immunity are currently not
know, it is believed that protection is mediated by the Th1
Immunologic Aspects
subset of CD4+ lymphocytes and is associated with produc-
tion of IFN-y and other cytokines associated with cellular
Immune Mechanisms in Pathogenesis
immunity. The ability of preferred hosts to clear infection,
with or without treatment, remains controversial because
Cellular immune responses are generally felt to play the
of the intracellular location of the pathogen, and observa-
critical role in protection against intracellular pathogens
tions of recrudescence of infection under field conditions.
such as Brucella. Development of adaptive immunity,
ing cells, production of TH-i type cytokines (interferon-
Yaccination
, tumor necrosis factor, interleukins 2, 12, and 18), and
Vaccination is a critical tool for control or eradication of
clonal expansion of antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T
brucellosis that primarily prevents clinical effects of disease
(i.e., abortions or infected offspring) that lead to transmis-
generally, it is felt that antigens derived from outside and
which enter the antigen-processing cell through phagocy.
sion. Approved vaccines are available to prevent B. abortus
in cattle and B. melitensis in sheep and goats. Approved vac-
tosis for degradation in the phagolysosome are presented
cines are notavailable for other hosts or brucellae, although 
through the Class II MHC (major histocompatibility com-
the B. melitensis Revl vaccine has been recommended for
plex) or exogenous pathway. In comparison, antigens syn-
use in preventing B. ovis infections. In regards to B. meliten-
thesized within the antigen-presenting cell cytoplasm and
transported to the endoplasmic reticulum are presented
sis and B. aborhus preferred hosts, vaccination programs
with class I MHC and processed through endogenous path-
have not included males, as males are not considered to
have a significant role in disease transmission. The most
ways. The intracellular location or entry of antigen into the
cell is important as processing via the endogenous pathway
efficacious vaccines are live attenuated strains that are fre-
quently administered to prepubescent animals. Rough vac-
tend to evoke a Th1 response associated with cell-mediated
cine strains of B. aborhus (i.e., RB51 or killed 45/20) that
immune responses. However, antigens processed via the
do not express the O-side-chain on the LPS that function
exogenous pathway are typically associated with a non-
as differential (differentiation of infected from vaccinated
protective Th2 response. This may explain why efficacious
animals) vaccines for diagnostic purposes have been uti-
brucellosis vaccines are composed of live bacteria, whereas
lized. Conjunctival administration of vaccine strains has
vaccination with killed bacteria generally fails to induce
also been used, particularly in adult animals, in an effort to
adequate protection.
 In general, antibodies are considered to play a minor
reduce positive responses on brucellosis serologic tests. Bru-
cellosis vaccine strains have disadvantages in that they may
role in long-term protection against brucellosis, although
induce abortions in pregnant animals, be shed in milk of
they may opsonize bacteria and facilitate phagocytosis
lactating animals, and are themselves potential zoonoses.
and may lead to processing/presentation of Brucella epi-
topes on antigen-presenting cells. Cytotoxic T lympho-
cytes may play an important role in in vivo protection by
Laboratory Diagnosis
killing infected cells, and releasing intracellular bacteria
within the cells for uptake and destruction by activated
 macrophages. As some smooth Brucella strains downreg-
Specimens
ulate genes associated with apoptosis, prevention of host
As brucellosis is one of the most common laboratory-
cell apoptosis may also be a mechanism used by Brucella to
acquired infections, manipulations of live cultures of
facilitate intracellular survival and persistence.
The roles of Toll-like receptors that facilitate interactions
 between bacteria and phagocytic cells have been of inter-
work should be conducted in biologic safety cabinets and
est for their role in induction of innate and adaptive immu-
avoid procedures that produce aerosols. Biosafety level 2
nity. Dendritic cells are ofparticular interest as they express
conditions are recommended for processing of routine
132
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
clinical specimens of human or animal origin. In the United
tests. However, as microbial isolation can be slow and
States, B. abortus, B. melitensis, and B. suis (vaccine strains
tedious, other more rapid methods have been developed
are exempt) are classified as potential bioweapons and must
for identification. Classifying Brucella isolates into biovars
be handled in accordance with Select Agent regulations.
 has been used for epidemiologic purposes, but is somewhat
Optimal microbiologic samples for diagnosis would
 subjective because it is based on subtle differences includ-
include milk or vaginal swabs from live animals; lung
ing requirements for higher CO2 tensions for growth, pro-
and/or gastric contents from aborted fetuses; or tissues such
duction of hydrogen sulfide, growth on media contain-
as uterus, mammary gland, male reproductive tissues, lym-
ing dyes (thionin or basic fuchsin), and agglutination with
 phatic tissues associated with the mammary gland or repro-
monospecific A and M antisera.
ductive tract obtained at necropsy, or bursitis/hygroma
fluid. Although blood collected in anticoagulant may be
Serologic Tests
beneficial for isolation of B. canis or B. suis, it is generally a
poor sample for bacteriologic evaluation for other brucellae
For serologic detection of B. suis, B. aborhus, and B. melitensis
due to the fact that bacteremias associated with infection
 in preferred hosts, the immunodominant antigen in volved
are generally of very short duration.
 in the serologic responses is the O-side-chain of the LPS.
Most standard brucellosis serologic tests (agglutination,
complement fixation, fluorescence polarization assay, and
Direct Examination
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) use the
Gross lesions caused by Brucella spp. are not pathog
polysaccharide O-side-chain from B. aborfus as antigen and
nomonic, but can include variable necrosis of cotyle-
were initially developed for detection of B. aborrus infec-
 dons across the placenta, thickening of intercotyledonary
tions in cattle. Although considered adequate for use in
areas, and retained placenta. Common histologic lesions
detection of B. melitensis infection in small ruminants and
of maternal tissues include necrotic placentitis and lym-
cattle, they are generally felt to have reduced sensitivity and
phosuppurative or lymphohistiocytic interstitial masti-
specificity in detection of B. suis infections in swine. Sensi-
tis. In males, orchitis with multiple abscess, epididymitis,
tivity and specificity of standard brucellosis serologic tests
vesicular adenitis, and testicular degeneration have been
 may differ by host species and the Bnucella spp. causing
reported. The most frequent fetal lesion is a multifocal, his-
infection. The structural component of the O-side-chain
tiocytic bronchopneumonia with, or without, suppurative
(repeated residues of 4-formamindo-4, 6-dideoxymanose
infiltrates. Fetal lesions may also include variable foci of
linked in α-1,2 or α-1,3 conformation) is also similar to
necrotizing arteritis, necrosis, and granulomas in the lung
epitopes on the LPS of other bacteria such as Yersinia entero-
and other tissues.
colitica O:9, Escherichia coliO:157,and others, and can lead
Additional lesions caused by B. suis infection in pigs
to reductions in specificity under some conditions.
include fibrinopurulent arthritis in compound or large
 For detection of B. ovis in sheep, complement fixation,
joints, osteomyelitis in lumbar vertebralepiphysis, and mil-
 ELISA, and agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID) tests have
itary uterine nodules B. aborfus is known to cause bursitis
been utilized. For detection of B. canis infection in kennels,
and hygromas in cattle. Horses are an aberrant host of B.
tubeagglutination, AGID, ELISA, indirect fluorescence, and
 aborhus and can have suppurative and granulomatous bursi-
rapid slide agglutination (B. ovis as antigen) tests have been 
tis lesions at the supraspinous (fistulous withers) or atlantal
recommended.
(poll evil) bursae.
The delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction (allergic skin
test) based on the use of S-LPs free Brucella cytoplasmic
proteins (widely known as brucellin) extracted from rough
Isolation
B. melitensis strain B115 has been used as a diagnostic in
Because brucellae are slow growing in relation to other
 many countries. The brucellin test has been proposed to be
bacteria, contaminants may overgrow and severely impair
the ability to isolate Brucella spp. For that reason samples
by infection with Y. enterocolitica O:9.
obtained for culture should preferentially be obtained asep-
tically. Alternatively, selective media (i.e., Farrell's media or 
Molecular-Based Tests
Kuzdas and Morse media) have been developed to inhibit
the growth of contaminants and facilitate the isolate of
Multiple polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques are
Brucella spp. Regardless, Brucella spp. will at minimum take
currentlyavailable for differentiating Brucella species. How-
72 h for colonies to be visible on media, and samples should
ever, current PCR techniques have not been able to fully
be incubated a minimum of 7-10 days before determined
differentiate all biovars within all Brucella spp.
to be negative.
Because of the stability of Brucella genomes, molecu-
lar assays designed to assess genetic relationships between
Identification
isolates (i.e., restriction fragment length polymorphism)
are ineffective for epidemiologic investigations or strain
Traditionally, after isolation of gram-negative coccobacilli
comparisons. A new molecular technique, variable nuclear
with culture and biochemical characteristics consistent
tandem repeats, which evaluates strings of nucleotide
with identification as Brucella, species differentiation has
repeats in noncoding areas of the chromosome, has been
been based on phage and dye sensitivity, CO2 dependence
used to compare genetic and epidemiological relation-
for growth, production of H2S, and serum agglutination
ships between strains. However, molecular biotyping is
Chapter 15 Brucella
133
more complicated than that of standard PCR methods and
effective tools in both control and eradication programs.
 Although vaccination is highly effective in reducing pro-
nostic laboratories.
duction losses (i.e., abortions or weak offspring) caused by
brucellosis, it is less effective at preventing infection after
Treatment
exposure to field strains or seroconversion after exposure.
Although vaccination is an effective toolin controlling bru-
cellosis, vaccination alone has never been effective in erad-
In general, no treatment strategies are recommended for
icating brucellosis. With the exception of depopulation,
preferred hosts for B. abortus, B. suis, and B. melitensis due
the most effective brucellosis programs incorporate com-
to the requirement for long-term treatment and the inabil-
binations of sanitation, vaccination, and test and removal
ity to adequately insure total clearance of Bnucella from
procedures.
its intracellular niche, and prevent re-emgergence in reg-
For control of B. suis in swine, regulatory efforts, includ-
ulatory programs. In some countries, antibiotic treatment
ing serologic surveillance, to control or eradicate B. suis in
(oxytetracycline), alone or in combination with test-and-
swine should be directed toward herds, rather than indi-
slaughter, has been used to minimizeclinical and economic
vidual animals. Owing to the present lack of effective tools
 impact of disease in infected swine or sheep farms
to manage brucellosis in swine, whole-herd depopulation
Treatment of humans usually involves a prolonged
appears to be the only viable option to eradicate B. suis
course of antibiotic therapy and relapse ofin fection of treat-
from domestic swine herds. If feral swine or other wildlife
ment is not uncommon. Relapses are usually not associated
reservoirs were the source of infection, management prac-
with the emergency of antibiotic resistant strains.
brucellosis.
Control and Prevention
Control Methods for 8. ovis
Control Methods for B. abortus, B. melitensis, and B. suis
 Use of a test and slaughter approach based on scrotal palpa-
Many countries have programs to control or eradicate
tion and/or serologic testing (complement fixation, ELISA,
zoonotic brucellae (B. aborhus, B. melitensis, and B. suis)
0r gel diffusion test) has been successfully used to eradicate
from domestic livestock. Although brucellosis can cause
B. ovis. As shedding in semen can be intermittent, a single 
severe economic losses to livestock producers, most regu-
negative sample is not accurate. Antibody responses are also
latory programs for brucellosis were developed to reduce
unreliable as only 35% of infected rams develop detectable
brucellosis in animal reservoirs as a mechanism to pre-
lesions. Vaccination is considered the most viable method
vent human infections. Multiple studies have demon-
of control with the B. melitensis Rev-1 strain the current
strated that the most cost-efficient mechanism for control-
recommended vaccine. As mentioned previously, antibi-
ling human brucellosis is to control brucellosis in animal
otic therapy for 7-21 days resulted in cessation of shedding
reservoirs
and improvement in sperm motility in 80-100% of rams.
 As brucellae are intracellular pathogens, most test and
In some instances, culling of the entire ram flock may be
removal programs are based on removal of animals which
the most economical approach for eradication of B. ovis.
are positive on serologic tests that detect antibodies against
the immunodominant O-side-chain of the Brucella LPS.
Control Methods for B. canis
Although antibodies indicate that the individual's immune
response has responded to infection with brucellae, it
Best control in infected kennels is removal of seropositive
should be emphasized that seropositive responses do not
dogs and desexing of in fected animals. Disinfection of the
necessarily indicate theanimalis currently infected orcapa-
kennel after removal of infected dogs is recommended.
ble of transmitting brucellosis.
Treatment of infected dogs is not encouraging due to fre-
The full depopulation of all animals on infected
quent failure of antibiotic regimens or relapse of infection.
premises is the strategy of choice for controlling brucel-
Best results have occurred using long-term treatment (90
losis. However, because this strategy may be too expensive
days) with a combination of antibiotics combined with
01 not acceptable to the owner, other approaches may need
monitoring for reversion to negative status on serologic
to be utilized.
tests (AGID). Repeat testing 3-6 months after negative tests 
Regulatory programs for cattle and small ruminants
is required to check for relapse of infection. Relapse of
 can include sanitation programs to prevent disease trans-
infection is possible. Owners should be warned of possi-
mission, vaccination programs to reduce herd suscepti-
 ble zoonotic infections with B. canis. Prevention of reentry
bility, and test and removal programs to eliminate ani-
of brucellosis into kennels is prevented by isolation of new
mals infected with brucellosis. Efficacious vaccines are
additions and serologic testing.
Burkholderiamallei
and Burkholderia
pseudomallei
SANJEEV NARAYANAN
Members of the genus Burkholderia are gram-negative, aero-
Descriptive Features
bic rods belonging to phylum Proteobacteria, class Betapro-
Morphology and Staining. B. mallei organisms are gram-
teobacteria, order Burkholderiales, and family Burkholde-
negative rods 0.5 pmwide and variablein length. The bacilli
riaceae. As of this writing, there are more than 60 species
may be arranged singly, in pairs end to end, in parallel
belonging to this genus, most of which live in soil and/or
bundles, or palisades.
produce disease in plants. Members of the Burkholderia cepa-
cia and B. gladioli species groups produce disease in com-
promised human patients (e.g., those with cystic fibrosis,
Structure and Composition. B. mallei produces a carbo-
ch ronic granulomatous disease, immunosuppression, and
 hydrate capsule. The cell wall is typical of gram-negative
nosocomial infections). Two members of Burkhotderia pseu-
bacteria composed of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and protein.
 Being nonmotile, flagella are not produced (differentiating
domallei species group, B. mallei (the cause of "glanders" pri-
marily in equids) and B. pseudomallei (the cause of "melioi-
it from B. pseudomallei, which is motile).
 dosis" in a variety of species) are important in veterinary
medicine, and are the topics of discussion in this chapter.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Both produce pyogranulomatous disease and have gained
Capsule. The only demonstrable function the capsule
notoriety as category B bioterrorism agents by Centers for
plays in disease produced by B. mallei is to protect the outer
Disease Control and Prevention, USA, and are considered
membrane from membrane attack complexes generated
following activation of the complement system (which
National Institutes of Health, USA.
is manifest as a serum-resistant phenotype). Capsule-
 negative mutants show significant reduction in virulence.
B. mallei
Cell Wall. The cell wall of B. mallei is typical of gram-
B. mallei is a facultative intracellular bacterium that causes
negative bacteria. The LPs in the outer membrane is an
a systemic pyogranulomatous disease called “glanders,"
important virulence determinant. LPS consists of lipid A, a
once a worldwide disease of Equidae, and remains endemic
core region, and cell wall (O) antigens. Not only is the lipid
in parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. Focal outbreaks
A component toxic (endotoxin), but the length of the side
were also reported in the former UsSR in 2007. No nat-
chain in the O-repeat unit hinders the attachment of the
urally occurring cases of glanders have been reported in
membrane attack complex of the complement system to
North America since the 1940s. Natural infections have
the outer membrane. LPs binds to LPs-binding protein in
been reported in dogs, camels, horses, goats, and sheep, but
serum, which transfers it to the blood phase of CD14. The
felids are particularly susceptible. Guineapigs and hamsters
are highly susceptible to glanders and are, therefore, used in
(see Chapter 2) on the surface of antigen-presenting cells,
diagnostic testing or experimental studies. Glanders varies
triggering the release of proinflammatory cytokines and
in severity and can be an acute, chronic, or latent disease.
chemokines.
At one time or other, this bacterium was called Pseu
domonas mallei, Bacillus mallei, Actinobacillus mallei, Acine-
Miscellaneous Products. B. mallei possesses type IV pili,
tobacter mallei, Malleomyces mallei, Pfeiferella mallei, and
Loefferella mallei.
tems. Although many effector proteins injected into the
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
134
Chapter 16 Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia pseudomallei
135
  s s l a a a s 
identified, their exact function is not known. Many effec-
FIGURE 16.1.
Section from the nasal cavity of a horse
tors have been hypothesized to play an integral role in bac-
with B. mallei infection (H&E). There is leukocytoclastic
terial survival in intracellular (including cytosolic) envi-
vasculitis in many vessels and their lumens contain thrombi.
ronments in the host cells (predominantly macrophages).
Proteases, lipases, and a phospholipase C have been
demonstrated in the culture fluids of B. mallei. None of
these products have been shown to play a significant role
in disease.
Growth Characteristics. The organism grows in routine
bacteriological media, but media containing glycerol or
blood are the best. Non hemolyticcolonies develop in ≥48 h 
at 20-41 *C (optimal 37 *C). They range from mucoid to
rough forms. Confluent growth is common. B. mallei does
not grow on MacConkey agar or at 42 *C. B. mallei grows 
on MacConkey agar.
Biochemical Characteristics. B. mallei is aerobic, non-
motile and oxidase variable, catalase-positive, indole-
negative, and resistant to colistin and polymyxin B; it
reduces nitrates (without gas) and hydrolyzes urea. Glu-
 cose is catabolized oxidatively.
on the way to lymph nodes and the bloodstream, which
Resistance. Resistance is unremarkable, although in dark,
disseminates the agent. Monocytes and macrophages are
suspected to carry the bacterium to draining lymph nodes
damp, and cool environments the agent can survive
for months. Aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, fluo-
because B. mallei is facultative intracellular bacterium
1oquinolones, macrolides, sulfonamides, trimethoprim,
capable of surviving and replicating in the cytosol of
imipenem, ceftazidime, piperacillin, and tetracyclines
macrophages. Metastatic lesions form in the lungs or other
inhibit B. mallei in vitro.
organs, such as spleen, liver, and skin, producing cutaneous
glanders ("farcy"). Lesions in the nasal septum may be pri-
Ecology
Reservoir. Infected Equidae are the reservoir.
Disease Patterns
Transmission. Exposure occurs via contaminated feed,
Glanders. The disease predominates in the upper and
water, and fomites, and sometimes through inhalation
lower respiratory tracts and in the skin. Multiple nodules
and wounds. Skin exudates and respiratory secretions are
 ss pe s sdn a  doa sa 
the most common source of infection in equids, especially
which rupture to release thick mucopurulent nasal dis-
in crowded and unsanitary conditions. Carnivores can be
charge. Lung lesions are multifocal coalescing pyogranulo-
infected by ingesting meat from infected animals.
mas with caseous or calcified centers. Cutaneous glanders
(farcy) is characterized by subcutaneous abscesses. Local,
regional, or generalized lymphadenopathy is typical in all
Pathogenesis
types of glanders.
Pathology. B. mallei produces typical pyogranulomas
Acute infections are characterized by fever, nasal dis-
characterized by a central core of necrotic debris admixed
charge, and lymphadenitis of head and neck, with swelling
with fibrin and intact and degenerate neutrophils (Fig-
along the upper respiratory tract. They tend to end fatally
ure 16.1). This core is surrounded by a layer of histiocytes,
in about 2 weeks and predominate in donkeys and felids,
epithelioid macrophages, and multinucleated giant cells.
less so in mules.
The entire nodule is surrounded by an outer rim of collage-
In horses, protracted chronic and subclinical infections
nous capsule embedded with small to large infiltrates of
are typical; signs, if present, include occasional fever, per-
lymphocytes and few plasma cells. A multifocal and coa-
sistent respiratory problems, skin abscesses ("farcy buds"),
lescing distribution is common in systemic infections, and
and nodular induration of cranial lymph nodes.
in lesions near epithelial surfaces, ulceration is common.
Natural infections in humans are traced to acutely ill
Strain variations determine the suppurative versus granu-
horses and may lead to acute or chronic infections.
lomatous predominance in lesions.
Epidemiology
Mechanisms. Although toxins are suspected in pathogen.
esis, the mechanisms are uncertain. Primary lesions form
The persistence of glanders depends on an infected horse
at the point of entry—the pharynx, for example. Infec-
population. Movement of animals contributes to the
tion spreads along lymphatics, producing nodular lesions
spread of disease in facilities and in geographic regions.
136
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Susceptible nonequids acquire glanders from infected
affects a wide host range and (2) the agent is a saprophyte
horses or horsemeat, and appear to be dead-end hosts.
(an endosymbiont of amoebae living in the environment),
whose prevalence is unaffected by elimination of infected
animals.
Immunologic Aspects
Previous synonyms for this bacterium include Pseu-
 Humoral and cell-mediated responses occur.
domonas pseudomallei, Bacillus pseudomallei, Bacterium whit
Apparent recovery from glanders, including loss of der-
 mori, Malleomyces pseudomallei, and L. mallei.
mal hypersensitivity, has been observed under natural con-
ditions, but without increased resistance to reinfection.
Descriptive Features
Killed whole-cell preparations, polysaccharide-based
preparations, and live-attenuated bacteria have all been
Morphology and Staining. B. pseudomallei organisms are
tested as vaccine candidates and have shown to provide
gram-negative rods 0.5 μm wide and variable in length.
some protection. However, no vaccines are commercially
They frequently appear as long bundles of densely packed
available.
organisms. The bacterium in clinical samples may occa-
Laboratory Diagnosis
Structure and Composition. B. pseudomallei produces a
Nodular contents are cultured on blood or glycerol agar.
carbohydrate capsule. The cell wall is typical of gram-
They may be examined for gram-negative rods and by
negative bacteria composed of LPS and protein. Being
immunofluorescence.
motile, flagella are produced (differentiating it from B.
 Guinea pigs and hamsters are highly susceptible to fatal
mallei, which is nonmotile).
infection with virulent strains.
Any suspect isolates should be submitted to a qualified
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
reference laboratory. Differentiation from B. pseudomallei
is important.
Adhesin. B. pseudomallei adheres to amoebic trophozoites
Serologically, glanders is diagnosed by complement
of Acanthamoeba species prior to uptake (and by inference
fixation tests employing aqueous bacterial extracts as
 adherence to phagocytic cells). Adherence is by means of
antigens. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs),
 the flagellar protein Fli (for flagellin). Surface proteins of B.
indirect hemagglutination, counterimmunoelectrophore-
 pseudomallei (BoaA and BoaB) that affect its adherence to
sis, immunoblotting, and indirect fluorescent testing are
respiratory epithelium have been characterized.
used for diagnostic purposes in some areas. However, com-
plement fixation tests and ELISAs are approved for interna-
Capsule. The only demonstrable function the capsule has
tional trade. The intradermo-palpebral mallein test detects
been shown to play in B. pseudomallei is to protect the outer
cell-mediated hypersensitivity, which indicates infection
membrane from membrane attack complexes generated
and has served as a basis for glanders eradication. Mallein
following activation of the complement system (which is
is a heat extract of old B. mallei broth cultures.
manifest as a serum-resistant phenotype). Capsules may
Polymerase chain reaction-based assays have high sen
sitivities of detection; however, due to high genetic vari-
terium, and mutants that lack functional genes encoding
ability of B. pseudomallei, differentiation between B. mallei
the capsule are avirulent.
and B. pseudomallei using DNA-based techniques is compli-
cated.
Cell Wall.The cell wall of B. pseudomallei is typical of gram-
 Differential diagnoses for equine glan ders include stran-
negative bacteria. The LPS in the outer membrane is an
gles (Streptococcus equi), epizootic lymphangitis (Histo-
important virulence determinant. Not only is the lipid A
plasma farciminosum), sporotrichosis(Sporothrix schencki),
component toxic (endotoxin), but the length of the side
ulcerative lymphangitis (Corynebacterium pseudotuberculo-
chain in the O-repeat unit hinders the attachment of the
sis), and melioidosis (B. pseudomallei).
membrane attack complex of the complement system to
the outer membrane. LPS binds to LPS-binding protein (a
Treatment and Control
serum protein), which transfers it to the blood phase of
CD14. The CD14-LPS complex binds to Toll-like receptor
Although glanders is treatable by many antimicrobials (see
proteins on the surface of macrophage cells, triggering the
the section on resistance above), treatment is inappropri-
release of proinflammatory cytokines.
ate in countries committed to glanders eradication. Equine
imports from endemic areas are mallein-tested, and reac.
Miscellaneous Products. The chromosome of B. pseudoma-
tors are destroyed.
llei possesses at least one pathogenicity island (a cluster
of genes encoding virulence determinant(s), an integrase
B. pseudomallei
protein, a specific insertion site, and mobility) encoding a
type IlI secretion system. Studies have shown that the type
B. pseudomallei organisms are aerobic gram-negative, facul.
III secretory system of B. pseudomallei is extensive and the
tative intracellular rods that cause a pyogranulomatous dis-
genome contains at least three separate gene clusters. A Bsa
type II secretion system has been shown to be vital for the
glanders. Important distinctions are that (1) melioidosis
escape of this bacterium from the primary endosomes into
Chapter 16
Burkholderia mallei and Burkholderia pseudomalei
137
the cytoplasm of host cells, thereby playing a critical role
tant to lysosomal contents (e.g., defensins), and by escap-
in replication and persistence in the host cell. A type VI
ing phagosomes and phagolysosomes. Actin-based motil-
secretory system is also present.
Proteases, lipases, and a phospholipase C have been
11 and 33), and actin-associated “budding" occurs from
demonstrated in the culture fluids of M. pseudomallei grown
affected to unaffected cells. Host cells infected with B. pseu-
in viro. None of these products have been shown to play a
domallei release proinflammatory cytokines and undergo
significant role in disease production.
apoptosis.
Growth Characteristics. B. pseudomallei can grow in rou-
Disease Patterns
tine bacteriological media, especially those containing
blood. In sheep blood agar, the organism reveals small,
Melioidosis. Also called Whitmore's disease is typically
smooth colonies, which after a few days will appear dry
systemic, although it can be localized to specific systems
and wrinkled. Unlike B. mallei, B. pseudomallei grows on
(as in pulmonary melioidosis). They can be acute, chronic,
 MacConkey agar, in the presence of 2% sodium chloride,
subclinical, latent, or fulminant disease. Manifestations
and at 42 *C.
depend on the extent and distribution of lesions. Strain
differences and overall innate and adaptive immune status
Biochemical Characteristics. B. pseudomallei is aerobic,
of the host have been demonstrated to play a role in dis-
motile and oxidase-positive, catalase-positive, indole-
ease presentation and manifestation. The equine disease
negative, and resistant to colistin and polymyxin B; it
may mimic glanders. In cattle, acute and chronic infec-
o o sanrd o si ro o a sn
tions can localize in lung, joints, and uterus. Arthritis and
small bubble of gas) and hydrolyzes urea.
lymphadenitis occur in sheep. Goats suffer loss of condi-
tion, respiratory and central nervous system disturbances,
Resistance. B. pseudomallei is killed by disinfectants and
arthritis, and mastitis. Similar signs are seen in swine, along
with abortions and diarrhea. Dogs develop a febrile disease
with localizing suppurative foci.
and minocycline. Most clinical strains have been shown to
be resistant to amoxicillin, ticarcillin, cefoxitin, cefopera-
Epidemiology
zone, cefsulodin, and aztreonam. Resistance to ceftazidime
(drug of choice) is on a rise. Majority of the clinical iso-
Clinical disease is usually sporadic. The host range is
lates are also resistant to fluoroquinolones, aminoglyco-
virtually unlimited. Melioidosis has been reported in
sides, and macrolides.
sheep, goats, pigs, cattle, horses, deer, camels, alpaca, dogs,
cats, dolphins, wallabies, kangaroo, koala, and primates.
Nonmammal cases have been documented in birds,
Ecology
tropical fish, and reptiles. Human infections range from
Reservoir. B. pseudomallei is considered a soil and water
the rapidly fatal to the subclinical. A wet environment,
dweller (most likely an endosymbiont of amoebae).
such as a swampy terrain or rice paddies, is related to expo-
Although most prevalent between 20* northern and south-
sure. Many recent studies have shown that persons with
ern latitude, extratropical foci do exist, for example, in
uncontrolled diabetes are highly prone for melioidosis.
France, Iran, China, and North America.
Immunologic Aspects
Transmission. Direct contact with contaminated soil and
- r   r
surface waters is the most likely source of initial infec-
bodies are produced during infections. Cell-mediated
tion. Inhalation, ingestion, wound infection, transplacen-
hypersensitivity has been demonstrated in infected goats.
tal (in goats), and possibly arthropod bites in troduce in fec-
Successful vaccination of horses and zoo animals is
tion. Animal to animal and sexual transmission are rare. In
reported.
humans, inhalation and consumption of infected animal
products may be significant.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Pathogenesis
The methods for isolating and identifying B. mallei apply to
B. pseudomallei. Chilling and freezing of specimens should
Pathology.
 The lesions are primarily pyogranulomatous.
be avoided. Motility, growth on citrate, growth at 42 *C,
Single to multiple suppurative or caseous nodules may be
and reduction of nitrates to gaseous nitrogen distinguish
a predominant feature in affected organs. Lungs, spleen,
B. pseudomallei from B. mallei. Polymerase chain reaction-
liver, and associated lymph nodes are commonly affected.
based assays are available for detection and identification.
Small abscesses tend to coalesce, developing into larger sup-
They are however not as effective in differentiating B. pseu-
purative foci or granulomas.
domallei from B. mallei.
Mechanisms. Being an endosymbiont of amoebae, B.
Treatment and Control
pseudomallei is adapted to survive within phagocytic cells of
the host. Microorganisms are taken up by a process of "coil-
Treatment in animals is expensive, prolonged, and often
ing" phagocytosis and survive within the cell by being resis-
unsuccessful. Companion and zoo animals may be treated
138
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
after antimicrobial susceptibilities are verified by labora-
NCB1. Bacterial Taxonomy, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
tory tests. Vaccines are not commercially available.
Taxonomy/ (accessed January 8, 2013).
Quinn PJ, Carter ME, Markey B, and Carter GR (1999) Clinical
Veterinary Microbiology,Mosby,pp. 237-242.
Further Reading
Snyder JW (2008) Sentinel Laboratory Guidelines for Suspected
Agents of Bioterrorism—Burkholderia mallei and B. pseudoma-
Maxie GM (ed.) (2007) Pathology of Domestic Animals, vol. 2,
llei, American Society for Microbiology.
Sth edn, Saunders-Elsevier, pp. 623-624, 633-634.
Francisella tularensis
PETER C. IWEN
Introduction
 genotypes, type A.I and type A.1I (Kugeler et al. 2009). These
-d  aa on rde sans pe ss
Francisella fularensis is a facultative intracellular bacterium
cal characteristics and geographical distributions. The type
that causes an acute zoonosis known as tularemia (rabbit
strains for each subspecies are described in Table 17.1
fever, deerfly fever, or lemming fever). The disease is gener-
ally characterized by systemic symptoms frequently with
the formation of a localized cutaneous ulcer. Although
Epidemiology
the disease has been reported throughout the United
States, most cases occur in the southern and south-central
F. hularensis is endemic in Europe, Asia, and in North Amer-
states including Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Oklahoma,
ica. The type A strains are found mostly in North Amer-
and Texas with an average of 123 human cases reported
ica, while the type B strains are found more widespread in
annually since 2000 in the United States (CDC 2012).
Europe and Asia as well as in North America. F. hularensis
Tularemia is a nationally notifiable disease through the
spp. mediasiatica on the other hand has been isolated only
National Public Health Surveillance System. A case defi-
in Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan. For the type A subtypes,
nition for reporting is considered a clinically compatible
the A.I strains appear to be more common in the eastern
case with confirmatory laboratory results.
part of the United States while the A.lI strains are more
commonly observed in the western United States (Farlow
Classification
with sporadic outbreaks of tularensis in the United States.
F. ularensis has been seen in a variety of environments to
F. tularensis is a species that belongs to a large group
include more than 100 species of wild mammals, domestic
of intracellular bacteria that includes the myco-
animals, blood-sucking arthropods, water, and soil. Ani-
bacteria, Listeria, Legionella, Brucella, Coxiella, and Rick-
mals associated with acute disease after exposure include
ettsia. The genus Francisella, named after Edward
rodents such as the muskrat, water vole, domestic mouse,
Francis, an American bacteriologist who extensively
prairie dog, rat, and beaver; lagomorphs such as the cot-
studied the etiological agent and pathogenesis
of
ton tail rabbit, hare, and jackrabbit; and insectivores such 
tularemia, is comprised of seven valid species and eight
as red-toothed shrew. Domestic animals include the sheep
subspecies (http://www.bacterio.cict.fr/f/francisella.html,
and cat. Outbreaks of disease in humans frequently follow
accessed February 19, 2013). Of these species, only
an increase of tularemia in animals.
F. ularensis is considered a true pathogen to humans and
 Due to this widespread association with animals and the
animals. The species epithet fularensis pertains to Tulare
environment, there are numerous diverse modes of trans-
County, California, where the disease was first described in
mission for F. fularensis. These include direct contact with
rodents. F. fularensis has three widely accepted subspecies
infected mammals (e.g., skinning of rabbits), bites of infec-
known to cause infections. These include F. tularensis ssp.
tious arthropods(e.g., deer flies and ticks), ingestion ofcon-
tularensis (also referred to as type A), F. tularensis ssp.holarc-
taminated water or food (e.g., raw milk and undercooked
fica (also referred to as type B), and F. fularensis ssp. mediasi-
meat), inhalation of contaminated aerosols o1 dusts, and
atica. A fourth ssp. F. fularensis ssp. novicida has also been
bites from infected animals (e.g., cats) (WHO 2007). There
 proposed but has not been widely acknowledged and cur-
is, however, no evidence for person-to-person transmis-
rently has been elevated to valid species status (F. novi-
sion. Transmission from infected animals to humans can
cida) (Johansson et al. 2010). Most cases of tularemia are
occur in a variety of ways. Arthropods are frequent vec-
caused by the type A and type B strains. These strains have
tors for disease transmission with ticks considered a com-
been typed using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, with the
mon means of transmission east of the Rocky Mountains
type A strain identified as containing two distinct type A
and flies common vectors in Utah, Nevada, and Califoinia
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
139
140
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 17.1.
 Description of F tularensis Subspecies
tial lethal infectious disease characterized by seven dif-
ferent clinical syndromes (WHO 2007). Ulceroglandu-
PFGE  Strain
Type
lsolate
lar is the most common condition recognized, which
Subspecies
Type
 Designation Strainsd
 Information
occurs after exposure to in fected animal tissue (direct con-
tact) or by the bite of an insect vector, which has fed
tularensis
A.I
SCHU S4
FSC 237
Human ulcer, 1941,
on an infected animal. This condition is characterized by
Ohio
the formation of a primary ulcer (painful, maculopapular
tularensis
A.ll
B-38
ATCC 6223
Human lymph
lesion) that develops at the site of bacterial exposure with
FSC 230
node, 1920, Utah
ATCC 29684 Live vaccine strain.
the presence of acutely inflamed regional lymph nodes.
holarctica
B
LVS
FSC 155
Russia, 1936
Glandular disease is characterized by a regional lym-
mediasiatica NA
FSC 147
Miday gerbil, 1965.
phadenopathy with no ulcer present. This disease may
GIEM 543
Kazakhstan
have originated with a primary ulcer, but at presentation,
the ulcer may not be detected. The oropharyngeal form
PFGE, pulse-field gel electrophoresis; FSc, Fancisea strain collction, Swedish
occurs in individuals who ingest F. ularensis-contaminated
Defense Research Agenty, Umea, Sweden; ATCC, American Type Culture Collec-
water or food. The patient with this form presents with
tion, Manassas, Virginia, USA; GEM, Gamaleya Scientific Research Institute of
an ulcerative-exudative stomatitis and pharyngitis with o1
 Epidemiology and Mitrobiology, Moscow, Russia; NA, not applicable.
 Prepared from the List of Procaryotic Names With Standing in Nomenclature
without tonsillar involvement. The disease is also associ-
J.P. Euzeby curator, Societe de Bacteriologie 5ystamatique et Veterinaire, Frante
ated with an excessive regional neck lymphadenitis (cervi-
http://www.batterio.cict.fr (atcessed October 19, 2012).
cal lymphadenopathy), which may mimic streptococcal
disease. This condition may also occur in patients who
may have been exposed to an infected insect or tick bite
 to the head and neck region without the detection of an
(Petersen et al. 2009). Cases of tularemia from occupational
 ulceroglandular lesion. The pneumonic or respiratory
and recreational exposure to an F. fularensis-contaminated
form of tularemia is contacted by inhalation of aerosolized
tick tend to be seasonal and occur in late spring and sum-
F. tularensis. This form occurs after exposure to the car-
mer. Overall, tularemia is considered one of the major tick-
casses of rodents or lagomorphs found in the en vironment
borne illnesses in the United States (Graham et al. 2011).
after death from tularemia (Matyas et al. 2007). Respira-
The tick vectors most commonly associated with trans-
tory tularemia may present with symptoms of pneumonia,
mission are Amblyomma americanum (lone star tick, South
including cough, chest pain, and an increased respiratory
Central and Eastern United States), Dermacentor andersoni
rate. An intentional aerosol release of F. ularensis type A
(Rocky Mountain wood tick, Western North America), and
would be expected to result in clinical manifestations sim-
Demacentor variabilis (American dog tick, Eastern, Central,
ilar to those recognized in natural respiratory tularemia
and Southern North America). A differential diagnosis of
(fever, dry cough, chest pain, and hilar adenopathy). Other
tularemia from other tick-borne diseases is necessary fol-
rare forms of tularemia include oculoglandular disease
lowing initial presentation of a patient. Tularemia is char-
characterized by severe conjunctivitis and preauricular
acterized by a high fever, headache, normal WBC count,
lymphad enopathy, typhoidal tularemia characterized by
and elevated liver transaminases without a rash (the rash
 high fever, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly, and intesti-
is typical of Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted
nal disease characterized by intestinal pain, vomiting, and
fever) or anemia (this sign is typical of ehrlichiosis and
diarrhea.
babesiosis).
Pathogenesis
Clinical Manifestations
F. ularensis is an intracellular pathogen, and the patho-
F. fularensis ssp. hularensis is one of the most infectious
 genesis of this organism is the ability of the organism to
pathogens to humans. An infectious dose of as little as
replicate and survive within macrophage cells (Foley and
10 organisms are known to cause an acute infection. Type
Nieto 2010). Although the course of infection in volves the
A-caused tularemia is generally associated with the more
 spread of the organism to multiple systems to include the
severe disease, with the type A.I subtype causing more
lungs, liver, spleen, and lymphatic system, the ultimate
 serious disease than the type A.1I serotype. Type B-caused
course of disease differs depending on the route of infec-
tularemia is generally associated with milder symptoms
tion. The cell surface of F. hularensis contains a carbohydrate
    adxa  so n 
 that is a unique version of lipopolysaccharide (LPs), which
contaminated stream, pond, lake, or river, or to an infected
leads to phagocytosis via the formation of asymmetrical
semiaquatic animal such as a muskrat or beaver. There-
 pseudopod loops. Once inside the cell, F. tularensis avoids
fore, this disease is sometimes considered to be a water-
phagolysosomal fusion, exits the phagosome, and isable to
borne disease. F. hularensis ssp. mediasiatica has rarely been
replicate within the cytosol of the cells (Cowley and Elkins
reported as a cause of human disease, and F. novicida is
2011). Following a period of replication, the bacteria are
considered of low virulence and only occasionally causes
released from the cell and quickly infect another phago-
 disease in immunocompromised patients. The incubation
cytic cell. The ability to cause disease is related to a large set
period following exposure to the type A and B strains is
of virulence genes, including mglA and mg/B (macrophage
usually 3-5 days, range 1-21 days. Tularemia is a poten-
growth locus) and the Francisella pathogenicity island (FPI)
Chapter 17 Francisella tularensis
141
(Backer and Klose 2007). The FPI contains 19 genes that
that is recognized by the human immune system with a
encode for essential qualities of intracellular growth and
virulence (Foley and Nieto 2010). Both the type A and type
hope in the development of a subunit vaccine is in the
B strains are noted for causing disease; however, differences
availability of new adjuvants,such as immune-stimulating
in virulence have been noted among the subtypes of type A
complexes. However, use of this adjuvant system has not
and between type A and type B strains. The type A.I tends to
been evaluated in humans. Thus, the attenuated strain of
produce a severe form of tularemia with a higher mortality
F. fularensis type B (LVS) continues to be the only vac-
rate, while type A.ll and type B strains produce less severe
cine available for protection in humans. Although this vac-
and rarely fatal infections in humans. Evidence suggests
cine has been utilized successfully for decades to immunize
that this difference in virulence is related to genomic prop-
large groups of people, the vaccine has not been licensed
erties of the strains, potentially leading to a broader range
by the regulatory agencies. There are many reasons for this;
 of immunosuppression that likely contributes to increased
however, the lack of understanding of the basis of attenua-
virulence.
tion and the inability to do clinical studies due to the infec-
tious nature of the organism are some key reasons why a
universal vaccine is not available. Recently, the FDA issued
Immunology
a new regulation in 2002 as an alternative licensing path-
The bulk of data on immune responses to F. fhularensis infec-
pathogens (Crawford 2002). This regulation called by some
tion has been generated using mammalian animal mod
the “animal rule" has been used in the development of
els of infection and by studying responses in humans fol-
biodefense vaccines. This allows for approval based on ani-
lowing vaccination (Elkins et al. 2003; Cowley and Elkins
mal efficacy data conducted under Good Laboratory Prac-
2011). Additional information has been compiled follow.
tice controls and human safety and immunogenicity data
ing studies on individuals who have had natural infection.
conducted under Good Clinical Practice controls, which
Studies following the administration of the attenuated vac-
support the correlation of protection defined in the animal
cine strain derived from type B F. tularensis, designated LVS
model (Sullivan et al. 2009). The animal rule is intended to
for “"live vaccine strain," have been a model for intracel-
lular pathogens although this information should not be
are no other ways to license a vaccine. However, utiliza-
assumed to apply directly to fully virulent Francisella. This
tion of this regulation still requires an understanding of the
vaccine has not been licensed by the Us Food and Drug
mechanism of pathogenesis, which is not available. Addi-
Administration (FDA) because ofa lack of understanding of
tionally, the immunological responses in animals differ sig-
the basis of attenuation and the mechanism of pathogene-
nificantly from those in humans. This makes itunlikely ani-
sis. This attenuated vaccine was derived by repeated passage
of a Russian vaccine strain on peptone cysteine agar and
Currently, the LVS strain continues to be the lead candidate
subsequent manipulations including lyophilization and
to protect individuals in the event of a deliberate release,
serial passage through mice. The LVS strain is administered
 based on its long history of use in humans.
 by the dermal route using a scarification method to pro-
duce an ulceroglandular lesion at the site of inoculation.
Following immunization, a robust specific anti-Francisella
Laboratory Diagnosis
antibody response occurs; however, the contribution of
B cells toward protective immunity has been found to
 The laboratory diagnosis of tularemia is based on recovery
offer little advantage in intracellular infections (Elkins et al.
of the causative agent or detection of specific antigen or
2003). On the other hand, activation of the specific T cells
DNA in a clinical specimen or recognition of a serological
response involving memory cells is known to have a pro-
response to F. ularensis in serum. The Council of State and
tective response following both vaccination and natural
Territorial Epidemiologists has described, based on labora-
disease. Similar to other intracellular pathogens, long-term
tory criteria, a presumptive case of tularemia as an elevated
protective immunity to Francisella infection relies primar-
serum antibody titer to F. hularensis antigen (without doc-
ily upon T cells. T cells use a variety of both soluble and
umented fourfold or greater change) in a patient with no
contact-dependent mechanisms to ultimately control and
history of tularemia vaccination or detection of F. fhularensis
eliminate Francisella infection. Multiple research groups are
in a clinical specimen by a fluorescent assay. A confirma-
studying the essential role for the various T cells subsets
tory case of tularemia is isolation ofF. fularensis in a clinical
 to characterize the mechanisms for providing protection
specimen or a fourfold or greater change in serum antibody
against tularemia.
titer to F. fularensis-specific antigen (when testing acute and
convalescent sera).
Vaccination
Laboratory Response Network
p donaaap on paroida uaaq aae sauerde sniann
 Special precautions are necessary when working with cul-
tularemia vaccine ranging from crude culture extracts to
tures or specimens suspected to contain F. hularensis since
subunit vaccines (Oyston 2009; Conlan 2011). So far, these
a Aq suase e dnois ysu e paiapisuo s wsuesio s
approaches have failed to achieve good levels of protection
US National Institutes of Health and a select agent by the
against virulent strains. LPS appears to be a key component
federal government (CDC 2005; DHHS 2009). As a part
142
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
of the bioterrorism preparedness program in the United
States for the evaluation of specimens and isolates poten-
FIGURE 17.2.
Culture of F. tularensis on cysteine heart
tially containing F. fularensis, the CDC has developed a
agar after 72 h incubation showing colonies that are 2-4 mm,
network of sentinel level clinical microbiology laborato-
smooth, entire, greenish-white with an opalescent sheen.
(Courtesy of Larry Stauffer, CDC Public Healith image Library.)
ries, which comprise part of the US Laboratory Response
Network (LRN). The CDC and the Association of Pub-
lic Health Laboratories in coordination with the Amer-
ican Society for Microbiology have developed protocols
designed to assist these sentinel laboratories with informa-
tion and techniques to rule out microorganisms that might
be suspected as agents of bioterrorism (such as F. fularen-
sis), or to refer suspect isolates to LRN reference laboratories
(e.g., public health laboratories) for confirmation testing.
Serological Methods
 Serology is the most common method used for the con-
firmation of tularemia. Antibody responses against F.
fularemia are detected in patients about 10-20 days after
infection. Agglutination protocols using antigens such as
Francisella-specific LPs, an outer membrane carboh ydrate-
protein fraction, or whole killed cells are used as antigens to
measure the immune response. Testing of both acute and
convalescent sera is necessary to demonstrate a fourfold
Culture Isolation
rise in specific antibody titer for confirmatory diagnosis of
F. fularensis can be isolated from specimens of blood, skin,
tularemia.
ulcers, lymph node drainage, gastric washings, or respi-
ratory tract in cases of tularemia. Isolation of F. fularen-
sis in culture provides a confirmed diagnosis of tularemia
Morphology and Staining
 and also provides an isolate for molecular, epidemiolog-
ical, and susceptibility testing (Splettstoesser et al. 2005).
F. hularensis is a tiny, pleomorphic, nonmotile, gram-
As a fastidious aerobe, this organism has preference to
negative, facultative intracellular coccobacillus“(0.2-
grow on medium supplemented with cysteine (e.g., cys-
0.5 μm by 0.7-1.0 μm) (see Figure 17.1). From culture, the
teine hemoglobin agar), but this organism will also grow
organism stains poorly and may be difficult to interpret
on other enriched media such as chocolate agar and modi-
because of this small size and poor staining (Figure 17.1).
fied Thayer-Martin agar. However, growth on sheep blood 
agar is generally poor. Adequate growth generally takes
≥48 h at 35-37 *Cin 5% CO2 after which time the colonies
 'anbedo Aans on am 'iaap un w tiz inoqe ane
FIGURE 17.1.
Gram stain of F. tularensis showing poor
with an entire edge, smooth, and have a shiny surface (see
staining tiny gram-negative coccobacillus mostly seen as single
Figure 17.2). F. fularensis will not grow on gram-negative
cells, original magnification x 1000. (Courtesy of Larry
selective/differential media such as MacConkey or eosin
Stauffer, CDC Public Heaith image Library.)
methylene blue agars, but will grow in commercial blood
culture media (Figure 17.2).
-.
Preliminary Biochemical Reactions
F. fularensis is oxidase-negative, weakly catalase-positive
(3% hydrogen peroxide), β-lactamase-positive (e.g., Cefi-
nase test reagent), urease-negative (e.g., Christensen agar),
negative for satelliting, and shows no requirement for fac-
tor X (hemin) and factor V (nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide) for growth. Sentinel laboratories, which cannot
rule out a potential F. fularensis at this point, are requested
to consult with their LRN reference laboratory to determine
the next step for submission of confirmation testing.
Limitations of Culture
Commercial identification systems should not be used to
identify F. fularensis since they have a high probability
Chapter 17 Francisella tularensis
143
of misidentification with the potential for generating
for up to 14 days. In cases where exposure may have
aerosols during set up. The most common misidentifica-
occurred without verification, the potentially exposed per-
tion of F. tularensis is Haemophilus influenzae (which gen-
son should be instructed to be alert to the development
erally satellite or have a growth requirement for X and V
of fever within 14 days of exposure and a readiness to
factors) and Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans (which
treat is warranted. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is
generally are β-lactamase-negative).
not routinely done for F. fularensis since no natural resis-
 tance to antibiotics used for clinical therapy has been doc-
umented. However, the potential for F. fularensis to be
Antigen Detection Methods
used for bioterrorism makes resistance an area of con-
Antigen detection methods are most useful for the direct
cern. Thus, standardized methods for antimicrobial sus-
detection of F. fularensis in clinical specimens. Direct flu-
ceptibility testing are available to test F. hularensis to var-
 Orescent antibody staining, using a fluorescein isothio-
ious antibiotics to include aminoglycosides (gentamicin
cyanate (FITC)-labeled rabbit antibody directed toward
and streptomycin), tetracyclines (doxycycline and tetra-
whole-cell killed F. fularensis, is commonly used. Addition-
cycline), quinolones (ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin), and
ally, immunohistochemical staining, using a monoclonal
chloramphenicol (CLSI 2010).
antibody directed against the LPS, can be used to visualize
F. ularensis in formalin-fixed tissues.
Safety Measures
Molecular Methods
Both the general public and laboratorians are at high risk
Numerous polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods have
of infection when exposed to infected arthropods, infected
been described for the molecular detection of F. fularensis
animals, or when handling cultures in the laboratory. To
from clinical specimens and for confirmation identifica-
prevent exposure in the environment, individuals should
tion from culture isolates (Larson et al. 2011). The majority
of PCR tests have been either conventional or real-time
tive clothing and by using insect repellents with frequent
PCR methods targeted at the genes fopA or hul4 encoding
inspection for and removal of ticks from the skin and scalp.
the outer membrane proteins (Backer and Klose 2007). The
Children should be instructed not to handle dead or sick
increased sensitivity and specificity along with the rapid-
animals. Landscape workers should be aware of the poten-
ity over other diagnostic methods makes molecular testing
tial for inhalation infection when creating aerosols (e.g,
attractive for future diagnostics. However, the lack of stan-
lawn mowing) where infected carcasses might be present
dardization ofassays and validation testing protocols limits
(Matyas et al. 2007). Hunters, trappers, and food preparers
the use of molecular methods for confirmation testing at
should be instructed to wear rubber gloves or other pro-
the present time. Genomic methods using sequence analy-
tection when handling the carcasses of wild rabbits and
sis comparison have also been used for the accurate identi-
 other potentially infected animals. Game meats should also
fication of isolates recovered in culture. Targets within the
be cooked thoroughly. For laboratorians and researchers
rDNA complex (e.g., 16S rDNA) have been shown to be use-
handling specimens and cultures in the laboratory, spe-
ful for identification purposes. Additional targets are being
cial precautions must be considered. Tularemia has been
evaluated now that complete genomes for the F. hularen-
reported as the fourth most commonly reported laboratory.
sis ssp. are publically available (ssp. holarctica, GenBank
associated infection worldwide caused by bacteria behind
Accession no. CP000803 and no. CP000437; ssp. mediasi-
brucellosis, Q fever, and typhoid fever (Singh 2009). The
atica, n0. CP000915; and ssp. hularensis, n0. CP001633 and
US Department of Health and Human Services provides
no. NC006570).
a document for guidance in the laboratory when han-
dling F. hularensis (DHHS 2007). Additionally, the CDC has
published a guideline for managing potential laboratory
Treatment
exposures to F. tularensis (http://www.cdc.gov/tularemia/,
accessed October 26, 2011). This guideline provides guid-
Parenteral administration of an aminoglycoside is the first
ance on how to determine if the exposed individual should
choice for treatment of tularemia in adults and children
be managed by fever watch and who would benefit from
(WHO 2007). The drug of choice is gentamicin at 5 mg/kg
immediate prophylaxis.
divided into two or three doses and monitored by assay of
serum concentrations of the drug. This drug, when avail-
able, is a viable alternative, which can be given by intra-
F. tufarensis as a Biological Weapon
However, streptomycin is not widely used because of
The high virulence of the pathogen in humans, the low
its potential to cause vestibular toxicity and a frequent
infectious dose (10-50 organisms), and the ease of dissemi-
d  s   
nation by aerosol have led to the concerns ofF. hularensis for
nel involved in its administration. For postexposure pro-
utilization as a bioweapon. Therefore, the US government
phylaxis where an accidental exposure has been known
has classified F. fularensis as a select agent that requires the
to occur to laboratory personnel, a recommended ther-
handlingand possession ofthis agent to be highly regulated
apy is either ciprofloxacin (1000 mg daily, divided in two
(CDC 2005). Any laboratory (human or veterinary) where
doses) or doxycycline (200 mg daily, divided in two doses)
diagnostic testingis performed must documen tdestruction
144
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
of confirmed cultures of F. fhularensis or be registered by the
Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain. Microbes Infect, 5,
national Select Agent Program to have viable cultures in
135-142.
their possession.
Farlow J, Wagner DM, Dukerich M et al. (200s) Francisella
tularensis in the United States. Emerg Infect Dis, 11, 1835-
1841.
 Foley JE and Nieto NC (2010) Tularemia. Vet Microbiol, 140,
References
332-338.
Graham J, Stockley K, and Goldman RD (2011) Tick-borne ill-
Backer J and Klose K (2007) Molecular and genetic basis of
nesses, a CME update. Pediatr Emerg Care, 27, 141-150.
pathogenesis in Francisella tularensis. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1105,
 Johansson A, Celli J, Conlan W et al. (2010) Objections to the
138-159.
transfer of Francisella novicida to the subspecies rank of Fran-
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (200s) Possession,
cisella tularensis. Int / Syst Evol Microbiol, 60, 1717-1718.
Use, and transfer of select agents and toxins, final rule. Fed
 Kugeler KJ, Mead PS, Janusz AM et al. (2009) Molecular epi-
Regist, 70, 13293-13325.
demiology of Francisella tularensis in the United States. Clin
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2012) Summary
Infect Dis, 48, 863-870.
of notifiable diseases—United States, 2010. Morbidity and
Larson MA, Fey PD, Bartling AM et al. (201 1) Francisella tularen-
Mortality Weekly Reports,59,97-99.
sis molecular typing using differential insertion sequence
Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (2010) Methods
amplification. / Clin Microbiol, 48, 2786-2797.
for Antimicrobial Dilution and Disk Susceptibility Testing of
Matyas BT, Nieder HS, and Telford SR, III (2007) Pneumonic
Infrequently Isolated or Fastidious Bacteria; Approved Guide-
tularemia on Martha's Vineyard: clinical, epidemiologic,
line, M45-A2, Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute,
and ecological characteristics. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1105, 351-
Wayne, PA.
377.
Conlan JW (20ll) Tularemia vaccines: recent developments
Oyston PCF (2009) Francisella tularensis vaccines. Vaccine, 27,
and remaining hurdles. Future Microbiol, 6, 391-405.
D48-D51.
Cowley SC and Elkins KL (2011) Immunity to Francisella. Front
Petersen JM, Mead PS, and Schriefer ME (2009) Francisella
Microbiol, 2, 1-21.
tularensis: an arthropod-borne pathogen. Vet Res, 40, 1-9.
Crawford LM (2002) New drug and biological drug products:
 Singh K (2009) Laboratory-acquired infections. Clin Infect Dis,
 evidence needed to demonstrate effectiveness of new drugs
49,142-147.
when human efficacy studies are not ethical or feasible. Fed
 Splettstoesser WD, Tomaso H, Al Dahouk S et al. (200s) Diag-
Regist, 67, 37988-37998.
 nostic procedures in tularemia with special focus on molec-
 Department of Health and Human Services (2007) Biosafety in
ular and immunological techniques. / Vet Med, 52, 249-
Microbiology and Biomedical Laboratories, Sth edn, US Gov-
261.
 ernment Printing Office, Washington, DC.
 Sullivan JJ, Martin JE, Graham BS, and Nabel GJ (2009) Cor-
Department of Health and Human Services (2009) NH Guide-
relates of protective immunity for Ebola vaccines: implica-
lines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules,
tions for regulatory approval by the animal rule. Nat Rev
September 2009, US Government Printing Office, Washing-
Microbiol, 7, 393-401.
ton, DC.
World Health Organization (2007) WHO Guidelines on
Elkins KL, Cowley SC, and Bosio CM (2003) Innate and
Tularemia, WHO Press, World Health Organization,Geneva,
adaptive immune responses to an intracellular bacterium,
Switzerland.
Moraxel
HUCHAPPA IAYAPPA AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
Members of the genus Moraxella are gram-negative rods
Vibrio cholerae. Mutan ts unable to produce this adhesin are
and cocci belonging to the family Moraxellaceae (or
avirulent.
 Gammaproteobacteria). The genus Moraxella had been pre.
viously subdivided into two subgenera, Moraxella (contain-
Capsule.
The capsule plays many roles, the most
ing the rod-shaped members of the genus) and subgenus
important of which are interference with phagocytosis
Branhamella (the coccoid members). Some of the coccoid
(antiphagocytic), and protection of the outer membrane
species were also formerly classified as Neisseria. There are
from the deposition of membrane attack complexes gener-
several members of this genus (see Table 18.1), some of
ated by activation of the complement system.
which are associated with diseases of human patients. From
a veterinary perspective, Moraxella bovis is the most impor-
Cell Wall. The cell wall ofthe members of this genus is one
tant member of the group. M. bovis is the cause of infectious
bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK), the most common ocu-
typical of gram-negative bacteria (except for the absence
of the O-repeat unit). The LPS in the outer membrane is
lar disease of cattle.
an important virulence determinant. LPs binds to LPS-
binding protein (a serum protein), which transfers it to
Descriptive Features
the blood phase of CD14. The CD14-LPS complex binds
to Toll-like receptor proteins (see Chapter 2) on the surface
 Morphology and Staining
of macrophage cells, triggering the release of proinflamma-
Moraxellae are short,plump gram-negative rods, 11.5 μm x
tory cytokines.
1.5-2.5 μm, and are often arranged in pairs ("diplo bacilli")
0r short chains (Figure 18.1).
Exotoxins. The most noteworthy toxin produced by M.
bovis is an RTX (repeats in toxin, so called because of the
structural repeats of glycine-rich sequences within the pro-
Structure and Composition
tein) type of cytotoxin (see also Escherichia coli hemolysin,
The cell wall is typical of gram-negative bacteria being com-
Chapter 7; Pasteurella/Mannheimia leukotoxin, Chapter 11;
Actinobacillus hemolysin, Chapter 12; and adenylylcyclase
posed of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and protein. The LPS of
moraxellae does not contain O-repeat units, in contrast to
toxin of Bordetella, Chapter 14). This cytotoxin, sometimes
referred to as "hemolysin" due to its behavior on blood agar
of the family Enterobacteriaceae).
plates, has been termed Mbx (for M. bovis toxin). Mbx is a
The fimbrial adhesins (pili) of M. bovis are virulence
pore-forming toxin with specificity for conjunctival and
determinants and can be lost in subculture (see Section
corneal epithelial cells, and neutrophils. Mutants unable
"Variability"). Capsules may be present on fresh isolates.
to produce Mbx are avirulent.
Iron Acquisition. Because iron is an absolute growth
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
requirement, microorganisms must acquire this substance
Adhesins. The role of adhesins, as in other microorgan-
if they are to exist within the host. Moraxellae acquire iron
isms, is to allow the bacterium expressing them to adhere
from the iron-binding proteins of the host (transferin and
to cells lining a particular niche, as well as to the surface
lactoferrin) by expressing Tbp and Lbp (for transferrin- and
of the so-called target cells prior to the initiation of disease
lactoferrin-binding proteins, respectively) on their surface.
(in some cases, niche and target cells may be the same).
Tbp and Lbp bind their respective proteins giving moraxel-
M. bovis produces a type 4 pilus (fimbria) that adheres
lae access to iron.
to conjunctival and corneal epithelial cells. This pilus is
similar to those of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Neisseria gon-
Miscellaneous Products. A number of proteins with toxic
orrhoeae, Dichelobacter nodosus, Pasteurella multocida, and
activities are produced in vitro by M. bovis. These include
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
145
146
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 18.1.
Members of the Genus Moraxelfa and Their
complement-degrading proteases, lipases, phosphoami
Usual Source or Associated Condition
dases, peptidases, and proteases. There is little evidence 
 showing that any of these play a role in vivo.
Species
Usual Source or Associated Condition
Moraxella atlantae
 Septicemia in human patients
Growth Characteristics
(CDC group M-3)
M. bovis grows best at 35 *C in the presence of serum and
M. boevrei
 Respiratory tract of normal goats 
 1   o S m 0 'o
M. bovis
IBK in cattle
Respiratory tract and ocular surfaces of
cally. In 48 h, fresh isolates produce flat, hemolytic, friable
M. bovoculi
cattle
colonies, about 1 mm in size, that corrode the agar and
M. cuniculi
 Respiratory tract of rabbits 
 autoagglutinate when suspended in saline.
M. canis
 Respiratory tracts of normal dogs and cats
M. caprae
 Respiratory tracts of normal goats and
 sheep 
Biochemical Activities
M. catarrhalis
Middle ear infections in children; upper 
M. bovis is oxidase-positive, asaccharolytic, nonferment-
respiratory tract infections in human
ing, and catalase-variable. Nitrates and urea are not
patients
digested, but proteins are digested. Most other species of
M. caviae
 Respiratory tract of guinea pigs
M. tacunata
 Conjunctivitis and keratitis in human 
 Moraxella do reduce nitrate and nitrite.
 patients
M. lincoinii
 Respiratory tract of human patients 
Resistance
M nontiquefaciens 
Respiratory trace of normal human 
 patients; blood, cerebral spinal fluid, and
 Resistance to physical and chemical agents is not remark-
lungs of compromised patients 
able. It is usually susceptible to commonly used antibiotics
M. ovis and M. oblonga 
 Keratoconjunctivitis in sheep
including penicillin. Some isolates of M. bovis are resistant
M. 0sloensis
 Nematodes; various conditions in human 
to tetracyclines and tylosin. Moraxella catarhalis is the only
 patients 
species that commonly produces a β-lactamase.
 M. phenylpyruvica
 Respiratory tract of normal human patients;
 bloodstream of compromised human
 patients 
Variability
In culture, M. bovis undergoes colonial dissociation (phase
variation) producing smooth butyrous colonies composed
of cells, which lack pili (due to inversion of the pilin-
encoding gene) and infectivity, and are less autoagglu-
FIGURE 18.1.
M. bovis in the cornea of an
tinable. Pili are immunogenically diverse, and this trait is
experimentally infected calf. There is evidence of digestion of
responsible for a classification scheme based on serological
corneal substance around the bacterial celis. Scanning electron
similarities. Nonhemolytic variants are nonpathogenic.
micrograph, 22 000x. (Courtesy of Dr Doug Rogers, University
of Nebraska Veterinary Diagnostic Center.)
Ecology
The Moraxellaceae are generally normal flora of the upper
respiratory mucosal surface and ocular surface. Most of
 these bacteria are not pathogens.
Reservoir
M. bovis occurs worldwide on the bovine conjunctiva and
upper respiratory mucosa, often without clinical manifes
tations.
Transmission
Dissemination is by direct and indirect contact, including
flying insects and possibly other airborne transmission .
Pathogenesis
Mechanisms
Disease produced by M. bovis is closely linked to cyto-
toxin (Mbx) and pili. Attachment (pili) to conjunctival
Chapter 18  Moraxella
147
FIGURE 18.2.
(A and B) Calves with infectious IBK.
(A)
(B)
epithelium is followed by destruction (Mbx) of conjuncti-
tance to reinfection follows recovery. The relative roles in
val and corneal cells. Growth ofM. bovis in the conjunctival
immunity and recovery of general versus local responses
and corneal lesions leads to inflammation (gram-negative
and humoral versus cell-mediated responses are unsettled.
cell wall). Mbx-mediated lysis of neutrophils amplifies
Experimental bacterins and fimbrial antigens stimu-
inflammation and tissue destruction.
Environmental factors implicated include ultraviolet
ently, fimbrial proteins, Mbx, and proteolytic enzymes
irradiation, flies, dust, and woody pasture plants, all of
have protection-inducing activity. Fimbrial vaccines are
which contribute to irritation of the target tissues. Con-
commercially available.
current infections with viruses, such as bovine herpesvirus
1 (in fectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus) and adenovirus,
mycoplasma (Mycoplasma bovoculi),bacteria(Listeria mono-
Laboratory Diagnosis
cytogenes), and nematodes (Thelazia), may complicate the
disease.
The agent may be demonstrated in smears of exudate, most
convincingly by immunofluorescence (by using the anti-
body specific to M. bovis antigens). Exudate is cultured on
Disease Pattern and Pathology
blood agar, and Moraxella is identified by colonial charac-
Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis.  IBK begins with
teristics, oxidase activity, hemolysis, proteolysis, and fail.
invasion of conjunctiva and cornea by M. bovis, resulting
ure to ferment carboh ydrates. Specific fluorescent antibody
in edema and a predominantly neutrophilic inflammatory
conjugates can be applied directly to suspect colonies on
response. It may progress from mild epiphora and corneal
plates for identification even of dissociant colonies (epiflu-
clouding to production of severe edema, corneal opacities,
orescenice). Polymerase chain reaction-based assays utiliz-
vascularization, ulceration, and rupture, leading to uveal
ing M. bovis-specific primers are available for detection and
prolapse and panophthalmitis (Figure 18.2 and Chapter
identification.
74). Healing of the ulcers proceeds from the periphery
and requires several weeks. Central scarring may persist for
months. Although it is a self-limiting disease, losses occur
Treatment and Control
 because vision-impaired animals do not forage and lose
condition.
Affected animals should be placed in a dark stall, free
from dust and flies. Topical corticosteroids may relieve the
inflammation, while antimicrobial drugs, given topically
Epidemiology
or systemically, may be beneficial. Long-acting tetracycline
IBK is a highly infectious disease, mostly of beef cattle.
0r florfenicol is considered the drug of choice.
Young animals are preferentially affected, probably due to
Fimbrial vaccines are the most promising specific
lack of acquired immunity. Lack of eyelid pigmentation
prophylactics. However, immunity is serotype specific
and broad-spectrum antigenic coverage is generally not
ing factors, as is vitamin A deficiency.
available.
Prevalence is greatest during summer and early fall,
when en vironmental stresses are maximal.
Further Reading
Immunologic Aspects
Alexander D (2010) Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis: a
Antibodies of all isotypes are produced during infection,
review of cases in clinical practice. Vet Clin North Am Food
with secretory IgA predominating locally. Temporary resis-
Anim Pract, 26 (3), 487-503.
Pseudomonas
SANJEEV NARAYANAN
 Members of the genus Pseudomonas are gram-negative aer-
Cell wall. The cell wall of the members of this genus
obic rods. Although there are more than 200 character-
is one typical of gram-negative bacteria. The LPs in the
ized and uncharacterized species and subspecies of Pseu-
outer membrane is an important virulence determinant.
domonas, most veterinary diseases are caused by Pseu-
Not only is the lipid A component toxic (endotoxin), but
domonas aeruginosa.  Previously named pseudomonads
the length of the side chain in the O-repeat unit hinders
of veterinary importance, Pseudomonas mallei and Pseu-
the attachment of the membrane attack complex of the
domonas pseudomallei, have been moved to the genus
complement system to the outer membrane. LPs binds
Burkholderia (see Chapter 16).
to LPs-binding protein, which transfers it to the blood
P. aeruginosa is very rarely involved with primary disease,
phase of CD14. The CD14-LPS complex binds to Toll-like
receptor proteins, triggering the release of proinflamma-
Most strains are resistant to the commonly used antimicro-
tory cytokines.
bial agents and are, therefore, sometimes difficult to elimi-
nate when they contaminate a compromised site.
Iron-Acquiring Systems. lIron is an absolute growth
requirement for all living things. P. aeruginosa produces
Descriptive Features
 as well as using the siderophores produced by other bac-
teria living in its en vironment (e.g., enterobactin and aer-
Morphology and Staining
obactin). These products are used to remove iron from host
 The organisms are gram-negative rods, 1.5-5.0 μm by 0.5-
iron-binding proteins.
1.0 μm.
Exotoxins. P. aeruginosa produces a number of protein
exotoxins: exotoxins A, S, T, U, and Y, elastase, and a num-
Cellular Anatomy and Composition
ber of other proteins with biological activity (proteases and
 Pseudomonads produce a typical gram-negative cell wall,
phospholipases). Exotoxins S, T, U, and Y are "injected"
into host cells by way of a type IlI secretion apparatus (an
 d no s       s
assemblage of proteins—more than 20—that form a hol-
ella. Pili (fimbrial adhesins) are produced.
low tube-like structure through which effector proteins are
"injected" into host “target" cells):
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
1. Exotoxin A: Exotoxin A inhibits protein synthe-
Adhesins. P. aeruginosa produces several products that
sis by ribosylation of elongation factor-2 following
serve as adhesins. These include a fimbrial adhesin that
receptor-mediated endocytosis.
has affinity for certain glycoproteins on epithelial cells. In
Exotoxins S and T: Exotoxins S and T ribosylate host
addition, there are nonfimbrial adhesins, an outer mem-
cell GTP-binding proteins, interrupting cell func-
brane protein with affinity for mucin, and another, the
tions relying on the actin cytoskeleton (e.g., phago-
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of the cell wall that has affinity
cytosis).
for chloride channel proteins. Fimbrial adhesins induce
3. Exotoxin U: Exotoxin U is cytotoxic, but the mecha-
proinflammatory cytokines via the Toll-like receptors (see
nism is undefined.
Chapter 2) on the surface of macrophages.
Exotoxin Y: Exotoxin Y is an adenylate cyclase that
raises the amount of intracellular cAMP (cyclic AMP)
Capsule. The capsule protects the outer membrane from
to damaging levels.
the membrane attack complex of the complement cascade.
The capsule also inhibits attachment to, and ingestion by,
Miscellaneous Products.  P. aeruginosa produces bacteri-
phagocytic host cells.
ocins (pyocins) and pigments (pyocyanins). Pyocins are
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
148
Chapter 19 Pseudomonas
149
useful for tracing epidemics within the hospital en viron-
used antimicrobial agents, it will replace the normal flora.
    n    s  s
If the site colonized is compromised or contiguous to a
in the laboratory identification of P. aeruginosa. Pyocyanin
compromised site, there is risk of infection of the site.
reacts with oxygen to form reactive oxygen radicals that are
Tissue destruction is due to liberation of exotoxins and
toxic to eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms. Pyocyanin
pyocyanin from the bacterium and release of proinflam-
has been shown to inhibit lymphocyte proliferation in the
matory cytokines and reactive oxygen intermediates from
the host.
P. aeruginosa is also isolated from certain sites of animals
ide dismutase.
that have no history of antimicrobial therapy.
Product Regulation. Regulation of the expression and
excretion of cellular products involved in the pathogen-
Disease Patterns
esis of disease produced by P. aeruginosa is complex. Secre-
tion of products that are secreted by way of the type IIl
Dogs and Cats
secretion apparatus (exotoxins S, T, U, and Y) is initiated
P. aeruginosa infection is associated with otitis externa,
following bacteria-host cell interaction. The remaining
lower urinary tract infection, pyoderma, and occasional
bacterial cell products are under the control of the
ocular infections.
“quorum-sensing" system of P. aeruginosa. The genes that
encode these products are expressed when concentra-
tions of bacterially produced homoserine lactones reach a
Horse
threshold level (a “quorum"). All P. aeruginosa cells excrete
P. aeruginosa is associated with metritis (vaginitis) sec-
homoserine lactones, but the concentration is too low to
trigger virulence gene expression until a critical number of
keratitis, and conjunctivitis following treatment of corneal
bacterial cells is reached. Finally, exotoxin A and an endo-
protease are also regulated by levels of pyoverdin. When
ulcers with topical steroid-antibiotic mixtures.
free iron concentrations are low (as would be the case in
vivo), these two proteins are expressed and excreted.
Bovine
P. aenuginosa is associated with mastitis (uncommon).
Growth Characteristics
P. aeruginosa is an obligate aerobe, deriving energy from
the oxidation of organic materials and using oxygen as a
Miscellaneous
terminal electron acceptor. It grows on all common media
P. aeruginosa is an uncommon cause of septicemia in
over a wide range of temperatures, 4-41 *C.
immunocompromised animals, but a frequent cause of bac-
teremia in human beings with burns, leukemia, or cystic
fibrosis.
Ecology
Epidemiology
Reservoir
Most members of the genus Pseudomonas live in soil and
 The organism is ubiquitous in the en vironment, and there-
water. P. aeruginosa may also be found in the feces of normal
fore, it is impossible to prevent exposure. Disease deter-
animals, but not as a member of the normal flora (i.e., they
minants, therefore, lie largely with the hosts and their
are transients).
immediate en vironment. The organism is nonfastidious,
and in a veterinary hospital a number of situations favor
Transmission
selection of this organism. P. aeruginosa thrives in wet,
 poorly aerated environments within the hospital, espe-
Environmental or endogenous exposure is constant, and
o 1  se hodns 1m s As 1i A
most infections are secondary to compromised host
been properly dried, in hoses on anesthetic machines
defenses.
that have not been cleaned and dried properly, or in
disinfectant solutions that have not been changed fre-
Pathogenesis
quently. These situations result in an increase in the num-
 ber of pseudomonads in the environment of the compro-
Mechanisms
mised animal (site), thereby increasing the risk of infection
(contamination).
P. aeruginosa can cause infection of almost any location in
the host, although it does not cause clinical illness in a
healthy host. P. aeruginosa contaminates areas of the body
Immunologic Aspects
that possess reduced numbers of normal flora. Disruption
of the normal flora is almost always due to antimicrobial
Specific immune responses do not seem to play much
agents. Since P. aeruginosa is resistant to most commonly
of a role in pathogenesis or resistance, though artificial
150
PART ll  Bacteria and Fungi
protection has been shown to occur in animals vaccinated
Treatment and Control
with extracts of the organism or exotoxin A. The most
important consideration is to decrease the risk of in fection
Treatment in volves correction of compromise and, if nec-
by reducing the concentration of the organism in the envi-
essary, the use of an antimicrobial agent. P. aeruginosa is
ronment of the patient, in addition to reducing the extent
usually susceptible to gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin,
 of compromise, for example, by cleaning and drying an
carbenicillin, ciprofloxacin, and ticarcillin-clavulanicacid,
infected ear.
and these agents are used for the treatment of soft tissue
infections. In the canine urinary tract, tetracycline achieves
concentrations sufficient to kill most isolates. Most pseu-
domonads are susceptible to levels achieved by antimicro-
Laboratory Diagnosis
 bial agents in otic preparations: enrofloxacin, neomycin,
polymyxin, chloramphenicol, and gentamicin. It should
P. aeruginosa grows well on blood agar medium. The
be noted that there are no in viro tests that predict suscep-
 colonies are somewhat large, >1 mm in diameter, gray
tibility/resistance of an isolate from infectious processes
(gunmetal), rough, usually with a zone of hemolysis. Aplate
that will be treated topically (e.g., the ear).
containing P. aeruginosa has a characteristic odor, remi-
niscent of con tortillas. Besides being oxidase-positive, a
trait that sets it apart from members of the family Enter-
Further Reading
obacteriaceae, it turns triple sugar iron agar slightly alka-
line (without gas), utilizes glucose oxidatively, grows at
Greene CE (ed.) (2006) Infectious Diseases of Dog and Cat,
42 °C, and forms a blue-green, chloroform-soluble pig-
Saunders-Elsevier, Pp. 320-321, 815-817, and 884-885.
ment, pyocyanin. Resistance to some antimicrobials is due
NCB1. Bacterial Taxonomy, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
to permeability barrier of the Pseudomonas cell wall, and to
Taxonomy/ (accessed January 8, 2013).
others because of inactivation due to products encoded by
Quinn PJ, Carter ME, Markey B, and Carter GR (1999) Clinical
plasmid-based genes (R plasmids).
Veterinary Microbiology, Mosby, pp. 237-242.
20
MEGAN E. JACOB
Members of the genus Taylorella are gram-negative, non-
Growth Characteristics. T. equigenitalis is a fastidious
motile, rods or coccobacilli. Equid species appear to be the
organism that grows optimally between 35 *C and 37 *C
natural host of Taylorella organisms. The genus contains
under microaerophilic conditions. The organism gener-
two known species: Taylorella equigenitalis, the causative
ally grows well on a rich base medium with 5% choco-
agent of contagious equine metritis (CEM), and Taylorella
late sheep blood, and antimicrobials can be added to
asinigenitalis, which has been associated with the genital
the medium to improve the selectivity of the assay. Vis-
tract of stallions or jacks. While T. equigenitalis has signifi-
ible colonies can be seen after 48-72 h of incubation,
cant clinical and economic importance, T. asinigenitalis has
although growth may take up to 14 days. Current pro-
rarely been associated with natural infection.
tocols recommend an incubation period of 7 days before
confirming samples are negative. Overgrowth of other
T. equigenitalis
urogenital tract organisms may interfere with the cul-
ture and identification of T. equigenitalis; however, sup-
T. equigenitalis is the causative agent of an acute, suppura-
plemental antimicrobials may improve reco very. Colonies
tive, self-limiting disease of the uterus of mares called CEM.
of T. equigenitalis are variable in size (2-3 mm in diame-
The disease was first described in Europe in 1977; in 1978,
ter) and are shiny, smooth, and grayish-yellow. The organ-
CEM was classified as a reportable disease in the United
 ism is oxidase, catalase, and phosphatase-positive and oth-
States. CEM can resultin temporary infertility or rarely early
erwise biochemically unreactive, producing no acid from
abortion in mares. The organism is highly contagious, and
carbohydrates.
long-term asymptomatic carriage of T. equigenitalis can fol-
low initial infection. Stallions develop no clinical signs of
Resistance.
Although there are two biotypes of T.
disease, but are important long-term carriers. Because of
equigenitalis—one is susceptible to streptomycin and
the costs associated with outbreak investigations, testing,
another is resistant—T. equigenitalis isolates are generally
and loss of reproductive efficiency, CEM has significant
susceptible to a broad range ofantimicrobials with no obvi-
economic implications for the equine industry.
ous resistance patterns and are susceptible to various disin-
fectants.
Descriptive Features
Variability.
 Molecular methods such as random ampli-
Morphology and Staining. T. equigenitalis is a gram
fication of polymorphic DNA and pulse-field gel elec-
trophoresis of restriction endonuclease-digested DNA have
by 5-6 μm in size (Figure 20.1). The organism may exhibit
identified different strains of T. equigenitalis. Some reports
bipolar staining and is nonmotile.
have suggested that differing strains vary in their ability
Structure and Composition.  The cell wall structure of T.
to cause clinical disease in exposed mares; however, this
equigenitalis is typical of gram-negative bacteria, composed
association is not fully understood. In addition, strains can
of lipopolysaccharide and protein. It is inconsistently fim-
differ in their susceptibility to streptomycin; the clinical
 briated (typically in culture), and the outer membrane is
significance of this observation is un known.
covered by a capsule. The immunodominant outer mem-
 brane protein appears to resemble porin proteins from Bor-
Ecology
detella pertussis and several Neisseria species.
Reservoir. The equine genital tract is the only known nat-
ural host of T. equigenitalis. Mares and stallions that carry
Original chapter written by Drs. Ernst L. Biberstein
the organism asymptomatically are the most important
 and Dwight C. Hirsh and illustrations by Dr. Peter Tim-
reservoirs. The foci of carriage in mares are the clitoral fossa
oney.
and sinuses; in stallions, the organism is typically a sur-
face contaminant of the external genitalia or urogenital
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
151
152
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 20.1.
A Gram stain ofT. equigenitalis. (Courtesy
FIGURE 20.2.
A mare with vaginal discharge associated
of Peter Timoney and Mike Donahue.)
with T. equigenitalis infection. (Courtesy of Peter Timoney and 
Donald Simpson.)
membranes including the urethra, urethral fossa, urethral
sinus, and penile sheath. Stallions in particular can carry T.
equigenitalis for an extended length of time, up to several
years. Although antibodies to the agent have been found in 
 species other than horses, no natural infections have been 
reported.
Transmission.
 T. equigenitalis is communicable, with an
uterus. Carrier mares and stallions remain asymptomatic,
extremely high transmission rate. The organism is most
but are still highly in fectious.
commonly transmitted sexually, often through an asymp-
tomatic carrier stallion. Foals born to infected mares can
 also be infected and become chronic carriers of T. equigen-
Epidemiology.
 The carrier state of stallions and mares has
italis. Indirect transmission can occur by contaminated
been described as the single most important factor in the
fomites and hands, or through artificial insemination.
dissemination and persistence of T. equigenitalis in horse
There is noevidence to suggest that the organism can persist
populations.Dissemination ofinfection is mostcommonly
in the en vironment for an extended time and be transmit-
tied to breeding operations and the movement and use of
 infected animals. CEM has been reported in horse pop-
ted independent of the horse.
ulations throughout the world including Europe, Africa,
Japan, Australia, and North and South America. Some
Pathogenesis
countries have successfully eradicated the organism. As
Infection of mares with T. equigenitalis can result in variable
recently as 2011, the United States Department of Agri-
clinical disease, ranging from asymptomatic to acute and
culture's (USDA) National Veterinary Services Laboratories
overt. The incubation period for infection is generally 2-14
confirmed a positive stallion in the United States. Prior
days. In acute clinical cases, a mucopurulent endometritis
cases were identified in 2008 and 2010, with the 2008
develops with variable amounts of discharge within days
source stallion being linked to 27 other T. equigenitalis-
(2-12) of infection (Figure 20.2). The main damage is to
positive horses.
uterine epithelium (exclusive of glands), which becomes
covered by neutrophilic exudate. The cellular infltrate in
Immunologic Aspects
the endometrial stroma is predominantly mononuclear.
The epithelium can be eroded or undergo severe degenera-
Immunity to T. equigenitalis is weak and animals may
tive changes. The uterine infection usually subsides spon-
become reinfected; however, recovered animals show
taneously within several weeks. Endometrial repair is com-
increased resistance for several months, manifested by
plete and there is no lasting impairment of breeding per-
milder signs and a lower concentration of bacteria. The
formance. Infection has been demonstrated in placentas
mechanism of resistance is not fully understood.
and newborn foals, but abortions are rare. There is no fever
Serum antibodies can persist in mares for 3-7 weeks
or other sign of illness. The only apparent effect may be
postacute infection; however, they may not be detectable
failure of conception. In chronic cases, there is often less
until 15-21 days after recovery. Titers are unrelated to the
obvious discharge and a more mild inflammation of the
carrier status. Antibody is present in vaginal mucus, but its
Chapter 20  Taylorella
153
relation to infection is unknown. Stallions will not mount
sinus, prepuce, and penis with a 2% chlorhexidine solu-
an antibody response to colonization with T. equigenitalis.
tion and 0.2% nitrofurazone ointment for 5 continuous
days has been proposed. Surgery or ablation of the clitoral
sinuses has been suggested in female carrier animals. Uter-
Diagnosis
ine infusions of disinfectants or antimicrobials and sys-
temic antibiotic treatment have been used in attempts
Several diagnostic tests are available for T. equigenitalis;
to reduce the severity and duration of illness and per-
however, federal regulations require approved laboratories
haps abort the carrier state. Currently, there is no effective
provide the testing service for routine import and export
purposes. Confirmative diagnosis of CEM and T. equigeni-
vaccine available for controlling this organism; control is
achieved through preventing transmission from infected
talis carriers requires demonstration of the organism in the
genital tract. In clinical cases, the agent can be demon-
animals.
 In CEM-endemic countries, attempts to control CEM
strated in the uterine exudate by Gram stain; however,
have included mandatory veterinary examinations, neg-
ative cultures of all animals intended for breeding, and
ease. Most commonly, T. equigenitalis is diagnosed based
supervision of the movement of horses. Because of sub-
on a positive bacterial culture on a selective medium. In
clinical infection or asymptomatic carriage by stallions,
mares, the most appropriate culture sites include the uterus,
cervix, clitoral sinuses and fossa, or vaginal exudate, if
detection of the disease can be challenging. Biosecurity
present. Appropriate samples from stallions include ure-
measures are very important in preventing the introduc-
tion and transmission of T. equigenitalis. The USDA has
thral fossa and sinus, distal urethra, and the external surface
established import and export regulations for the United
of the penis. Samples sent for T. equigenitalis testing should
be transported in appropriate medium (i.e., Amies trans-
 States, which include CEM treatment and testing require-
 ments on mares and stallions imported from CEM-affected
port media with charcoal). Isolates exhibiting Taylorella
characteristics (slow-growing, gram-negative coccobacilli
countries.
that are oxidase-positive) should be evaluated for reactiv-
ity with antiserum.
Other available testing strategies include serology (e.g,
T. asinigenitalis
complement fixation test). These tests are often of lim-
ited value because they may only detect acutely infected
T. asinigenitalis is a gram-negative rod that is phenotypi-
mares; carrier mares and stallions will not demonstrate
cally similar to T. equigenitalis. The two organisms can be
an antibody response. Serologic testing has not been reli-
distinguished by PCR and differ after sequence analysis of
able as a stand-alone test for diagnosis and control of
16S rRNA. T. asinigenitalis can cross-react with some of the
T. equigenitalis.
identification tests for T. equigenitalis; however, it tends to
Test breeding is a strategy to evaluate stallions for car-
grow more slowly in culture and may exhibit a slightly dif-
riage of T. equigenitalis. Test breeding involves breeding
ferent colony appearance.
a stallion to two pretested T. equigenitalis-negative mares.
T. asinigenitalis has been reported in the genital tract of
The mares would be sampled and evaluated for T. equigen-
donkey jacks and a naturally infected stallion. It can be
italis for up to 35 days postbreeding to declare the stallion
transmitted to mares by natural service. Depending upon
negative.
the strain of T. asinigenitalis that is used, some affected
Finally, several molecular tests have been reported
mares develop clinical disease that is similar to CEM. How-
that can identify and differentiate T. equigenitalis from
ever, mares do test positive when the complement fixation
other Taylorella species (T. asinigenitalis). A polymerase
test is used to identify animals infected with T. equigenitalis.
chain reaction (PCR)-based assay has been developed
This, coupled with the fact that isolates of T. asinigenitalis
and found to be more sensitive than traditional culture
and T. equigenitalis are similar phenotypically, makes iden-
techniques used to identify T. equigenitalis-affected ani-
tification of horses with T. equigenitalis (an economically
mals and isolates; however, it is not routinely used by
devastating disease) difficult. At this time, the significance
CEM-approved laboratories. More recently, a real-time
(other than making control of CEM more difficult) of T.
PCR assay was developed in Europe. These are promising
asinigenitalis is not known.
new tests that should improve diagnosis of T. equigeni-
falis; however, further validation is required before thei1
routine use.
Further Reading
Treatment and Control
Bleumink-Pluym NMC and Van Der Zeijst BAM (200s) Genus
Treatment with antibiotics and disin fectants has been suc-
IX. Taylorella, in The Proteobacteria, Parts A-C, Bergey's Man-
cessful in eliminating T. equigenitalis. Topical treatment
ual ofSystematic Bacteriology, Vol. 2 (eds GM Garrity, DJ Bren-
of affected carrier mares consists of a cleansing of the cli-
ner, NR Krieg, and JT Staley), Springer, Verlag.
toral fossa with 4% chlorhexidine followed by liberal appli-
Heath P and Timoney P (2008) Contagious equine metritis,
cation of nitrofurazone ointment (0.2%) for 5 days. In
in OIE Terrestrial Manual, World Animal Health Information
stallions, a thorough cleansing of the urethral fossa and
Database, pp.838-844.
154
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant
tious Diseases (eds DC Sellon and MT Long), Saunders-
Health Inspection Service (2009) Veterinary Services Fact-
Elsevier, St. Louis, MO, pp. 351-353.
sheet. Questions and Answers: Contagious Equine Metritis,
Timoney PJ (1996) Contagious equine metritis. Comp Immun 
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/publications/animal_health/
Microbiol Infect Dis, 19, 199-204.
content/printable_version/faq_CEM09.pdf (accessed Jan-
Timoney PJ (201l) Contagious equine metritis: an insidious
uary 9, 2013).
threat to the horse breeding industry in the United States.
/ Anim Sci, 89, 1552-1560.
21
ganisms I: Borrelia
RANCE B. LEFEBVRE
Borreliae are spirochetes transmitted and maintained pri-
The organisms are slow-growing microaerophiles (dou-
marily by ticks. The infections they cause have blood-borne
bling times: 12-18 h). They ferment glucose and possibly
 phases accompanied or followed by general and localizing
 other carbohydrates.
manifestations.
Survival of borreliae is about a week at room temperature
Animal pathogens include Borrelia anserina, the fowl
in blood clots, several months at 4 *C, and indefinite at
spirochetosis agent; Borrelia theileri, a mild pathogen
<20 °℃.
mainly of cattle; and Borelia burgdorferi sensu lato, com-
prised of three genospecies, the cause of Lyme disease in
Variability
dogs, humans, horses, and possibly other mammals. Tick-
borne relapsing fever borreliae of humans occurs asymp-
A number of genes encoding outer surface proteins have
tomatically in feral mammals, birds, and reptiles.
been identified in several Borrelia species. The spirochetes
control the expression of these genes at the transcriptional
level. The antigenic variability available to the spirochetes
Descriptive Features
is utilized for immune evasion in the relapsing fever borre-
liae. Lyme disease spirochetes are also equipped to express
Morphology and Staining
a wide range of outer surface proteins both at the intragenic
Borreliae measure 0.2-0.5 μm by 8-30 μm and are gram-
and intergenic levels. Although not utilized like the relaps-
ing fever borreliae, an immune evasion function may still
chrome strains (Giemsa and Wright's) are best. Dark-field
be involved in their maintenance and expression in these
examination reveals spirals and motility.
spirochetes.
Ecology
Cellular Anatomy and Composition
Borreliae have a structure like other spirochetes consisting
Reservoir and Transmission
of an outer sheath encasing the axial fibrils consisting of
15-20 endoflagella (depending on species).
 Pathogenic borreliae of animals are vectored by ticks. Ticks
Borrelia spp. are unique among prokaryotes in that they
become infected at some stage in their life cycle by feeding
have a linear double-stranded chromosome of approxi-
on infected animals. Other arthropods may serve as short-
  r n  e p d  a
term vectors. Infection occurs by wound contamination,
plasmids, which may in fact constitute components of the
usually during feeding by infected ticks. Passage via pla-
genome. Genes expressing major outer surface proteins
centa, milk, and urine has been documented. During an
outbreak in birds, infection may occur by coprophagia and
 may be found on any of the genetic elements.
cannibalism.
Growth Characteristics
Animal Borrelioses
Of the Borrelia spp. pathogenic for animals, B. anse-
rina is propagated in embryonated hen's eggs, and B.
B. anserina
burgdorferi sensu lato is cultivated at 33 *C on modified
Barbour-Stoenner-Kelly (BSK) medium, an enriched serum
B. anserina causes fowl spirochetosis in chickens, turkeys,
broth made selective by inclusion of kanamycin and 5-
geese, ducks, pheasants, pigeons, canaries, and some
fluorouracil.
species of wild birds. Onset of disease is marked by fever,
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
155
156
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
depression, and anorexia. Affected birds are cyanotic and
life cycle comprised of a larval, nymph, and adult stage,
develop a greenish diarrhea. Later signs may include paral-
 requiring a blood meal at each molt. Deer and white-footed
 ysis and anemia. Mortality ranges from 10% to almost
mice, and other small rodents serve as reservoirs for the
100%. Necropsy reveals splenomegaly and widespread
 spirochete. B. burgdorferi has been isolated from the urine
hemorrhages. The enlarged liver may contain necrotic foci.
of dogs and cows as well as milk from infected cows, poten-
Peripheral blood is often sterile.
tially serving as alternate routes for exposure and infection.
Avian spirochetosis occurs on all continents and in all
Human Lyme borreliosis, caused by B. burgdorferi, typ-
ages of birds. The young suffer high mortality rates and die
ically begins with a skin lesion (erythema migrans), often 
at earlier septicemic stages of infection. Following an out-
followed weeks or months later by neural, cardiac, and
break the agent generally disappears from the flock within
arthritic complications. Endotoxin, hemolysin, immune
30 days.
complexes, and immunosuppression may be involved in 
 The leading vector, Argas persicus, can remain infected
pathogenesis
 for over a year and can pass the agent transovarially.
 In animals, dogs are most often affected, with manifes-
    
tations of polyarthritis, fever, and anorexia the most com-
follows recovery. Antisera confer protection for several
mon ailment. Malaise, lymphadenopathy, carditis, and
weeks. Inactivated vaccines made from infected blood or
renal disease have also been noted in dogs.
 egg-propagated B. anserina are beneficial.
Spirochetes are demonstrable in blood by dark-field
horses, polyarthritis, ocular and neural in volvement, and
microscopy, stained smear, or immunofluorescence. Sus-
foal mortality have been reported.
pect material (i.e., blood, spleen, or liver suspension) may
be inoculated into the yolk sac of 5- to 6-day embryonated
eggs. Spirochetes will appear within 2 or 3 days. Antigen or
Diagnosis
antibody may be demonstrated in agar gel diffusion tests.
Diagnosis involves demonstration of the agent in tissues
B. anserina is susceptible to penicillin, tetracycline,
 and fluids (dark-field immunofluorescence microscopy),
chloramphenicol, streptomycin, kanamycin, and tylosin.
antibody in serum or other fluids (indirect immunofluo-
 Immune serum has protective potential, and bacterins pro-
rescent test and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays), or
duce long-lasting immunity
 DNA amplification of tissue or fluid samples using genus-
 Control of ectoparasites is essential.
specific DNA primers and the polymerase chain reaction.
Culture is laborious and often unrewarding. However,
B. theileri
culturing ear punch biopsies from infected dogs and mice
has proven to be reliable. Culture of synovial fluid from
B. theileri causes a mild febrile anemia, most often in African
affected joints is also possible. BsKll is a good isolation
and Australian cattle, and occasionally in sheep and horses.
medium. The spirochetes grow best at 33 *C.
The disease is associated with several species of ixodid
ticks. The pathogenic mechanism is not understood. Most
information comes from field cases, which may be com-
Treatment and Control
plicated by other tick-borne infections. Although not rou-
Tetracycline, doxycycline, enrofloxacin, erythromycin,
tinely treated, animals respond to tetracycline. Tick con trol
and penicillin are generally effective, though not invari-
is advisable.
ably so. Tick control is vital. Evidence of antibiotic resis-
tance may be due to biofilm formation and could explain
Lyme Borreliosis
ch ronic, persistent infections.
Lyme disease is caused by B. burgdorferi sensu lato, a
Immunologic Factors
pathogenic spirochete. Genetic analysis now defines three
genospecies: B. burgdorferi sensu stricto, B. garinii, and
 A humoral immune response appears essential for protec-
B. afzeli. B. burgdorferi sensu stricto is the predominant
tion against B. burgdorferi as in all spirochetal infections.
 pathogen of North America.
 Most animals appear to self-immunize with little or no
apparent clinical manifestations subsequent to exposure
to the spirochete.
Distribution and Transmission
Endemic areas include the Atlantic states, Minnesota and
Wisconsin, parts of the American South and far West, most
Prevention
of continental Europe and Britain, Russia, Asia, Japan, and
Antibodies produced in response to vaccination with B.
parts of New South Wales in Australia. May through Octo-
burgdorferi have proven effective in preventing infection
ber is the time of peak prevalence Increasing spread of the
of laboratory animals. These observations have led to the
 disease is attributed to increased deer populations, increas-
development of a commercially available whole-cell bac-
ing human movement into rural areas, and the dissemi-
terin for use in canines. However, protective immunity
nation of infected ticks by migratory birds. The agent is
appears to be of short duration and limited in range. More-
harbored by several ixodid ticks (primarily Ixodes scapularis
over, the potential for the induction of an autoimmune
and Ixodes pacificus in North America). The tick has a 2-year
response has shifted the focus from a whole-cell vaccine to
Chapter 21 Spiral-Curved Organisms I: Borrelia
157
a subunit vaccine approach. Subunit vaccines are commer-
Madigan JE and Teitler J (1988) Borrelia burgdorferi borreliosis.
cially available.
I Am Vet Med Assoc, 192, 892.
Magnarelli LA, Anderson JF, Schreier AB, and Ficke CM (1987)
Clinical and serologic studies of canine borreliosis. / Am Vet
 Further Reading
Med Assoc, 191, 1089.
Schmid GR (1985) The global distribution of Lyme disease. Rev
Inf Dis, 7, 41.
 BarbourA and Hayes SF (1986) Biologyof Borrelia species. Micro-
Schwann TG (1996) Ticks and Borrelia: model systems of inves-
biol Rev, 50, 381.
tigating pathogen-arthropod interactions. Infect Agents Dis,
Burgess E, Gendron-Fitzpatrick A, and Wright WQ (1987)
5, 167-181.
Arthritis and systemic disease caused by Borrelia burgdorferi
Smibert RM (1975) Spirochetosis, in Isolation and Identification
in a cow. JAm Vet Med Assoc, 191, 1468.
of Avian Pathogens (eds SB Hitchner, CH Domermuth, HG
Cohen ND (1996) Borreliosis (Lyme disease) in horses. Eq Vet
Purchase, and JE Williams.), American Association of Avian
Educ, 4, 213-215.
Pathologists, College Station, Texas, pp. 66-69.
Gross WB (1984) Spirochetosis, in Diseases of Poultry, 8th edn
Smith RD, Miranpuri GS, Adams JH, Ahrens EH (1985) Borrelia
(eds MS Hofstad et al.), Ames, Iowa.
theileri: isolation from ticks (Boophilus microplus) and tick-
Johnson RC, Hyde FW, Schmid GP, and Brenner DJ (1984)
borne transmission between splenectimized calves. Am / Vet
Borrelia burgdorferi sp. nov.: etiologic agent of Lyme disease.
Res,46, 1396.
Int /Syst Bacteriol, 34, 496.
Tunev SS, Hastey CJ, Hodzic E et al. (2011) Lymphadenopathy
 Johnson SE, Klein GC, Schmid GP et al. (1984) Lyme disease:
during Lyme borreliosis is caused by spirochete migration-
a selective medium for isolation of the suspected etiological
induced specific B cell activation. PLoS Pathog, 7 (S),
agent, a spirochete. / Clin Microbiol, 19, 81.
e1002066. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002066.
Kiptoon JC, Maribel JM, Kamau LJ et al. (1979) Bovine borre-
Von Stedingk LV, Olsson I, Hanson HS et al. (1995) Polymerase 
liosis in Kenya. Kenya Vet, 3, 11.
chain reaction for detection of Borrelia burgdorferi DNA in
Levy SA (1992) Lyme borreliosis in dogs. Canine Pract, 17,
skin lesions of early and late Lyme borreliosis. Eur ∫ Clin
5-14.
Microbiol, 14, 1-5.
22
Spiral-Curved Organisms
HI:Brachyspira
Serpulina
and Lawsonia
JEROME C. NIETFELD
Members of the genera Brachyspira and Lawsonia are
rhea in pigs, and diarrhea, decreased egg production, and
gram-negative, curved, or spiral-shaped bacilli associated
increased mortality in mature laying hens and occasion
with enteritis in multiple species. Brachyspira are oxygen-
ally in turkeys and game birds. Brachyspira intermedia and
tolerant, obligate anaerobic bacteria belonging to the fam-
Brachyspira alvinipulli also cause avian intestinal spiro
ily Spirochaetaceae. Lawsonia intracellularis, the only mem-
chetosis. B. pilosicoli has been isolated from nonhuman pri-
ber of the genus, is an obligate intracellular bacterium in
mates, dogs, horses, mice, and opossums, with and without
the family Desulfovibrionaceae and does not appear to be
diarrhea. In humans the bacterium is recognized as a cause
phylogenetically related to any other species of pathogenic
of mild, watery, or mucoid diarrhea referred to as intestinal
bacteria.
spirochetosis or human intestinal spirochetosis. B. pilosicoli
bacteremia is rarely reported in people, and affected indi-
viduals are usually immunocompromised. The organism
Brachyspira
is also commonly isolated from healthy people, especially
those in economically underdeveloped and rural areas. B.
All members of the genus colonize the large intestine and
qalborgiis another cause of human intestinal spirochetosis,
are able to move through fluid media by rotation of their
but B. pilosicoli is more common. Animals are considered
flagella, which is a characteristic of all spirochetes. Seven
potential reservoirs of B. pilosicoli for human infection.
species are recognized and three are proposed (see Table
 In addition to being associated with avian spirocheto-
22.1). Of the 10 Brachyspira species, only B. aalborgi and “B.
sis, B. pilosicoli, B. intermedia, and B. alvinipulli are all com-
canis" have not been found in birds, and only B. aalborgi,
monly isolated from healthy chickens. Brachyspira inno-
'ssid ul paunuapi uaag jou aaeu and d, pue 'sus d,
cens, B. murdochii, and “B. pulli" are considered part of the
B. aalborgi has been found only in humans and nonhuman
normal large intestinal flora of chickens. Reports suggest
primates, whereas B. pilosicoli has been identified in many
that B. intermedia and B. murdochii might rarely cause mild
 mammalian and avian species.
typhlocolitis in swine, but neither species is considered
The most important and by far the best-characterized
pathogenic for pigs, nor is B. innocens.
species is Brachyspira hyodysenteriae (previously named Tre-
" B. canis" is the most common Brachyspira species iden-
ponema hyodysenteriae, Serpula hyodysenteriae, and Serpulina
tifed in stools of dogs with and without diarrhea. Most
hyodysenteriae), which causes swine dysentery, a world-
surveys do not find a significant association between it and
wide, mucohemorrhagic colitis of weaned, growing pigs.
diarrhea. Diarrhea and isolation of B. pilosicoli from canine
 B. hyodysenteriae is also recognized as a cause of necrotizing
feces are associated in some surveys.
typhlocolitis of the common rhea.
" Brachyspira suanatina" has been isolated from pigs with
Brachyspira pilosicoli (Anguillina coli) is the cause of
swine dysentery-like disease and from healthy mallard
 porcine intestinal spirochetosis and avian intestinal spir0-
ducks in Sweden and Denmark. Based on growth and bio-
chetosis, which are characterized by mild, chronic diar-
chemical characteristics, “B. suanatina" cannot be differ-
entiated from B. hyodysenteriae, but the two organisms are
genetically distinct. Experimentally, the organism causes
diarrhea in weaned pigs, but not in mallards.
Original chapter written by Dr. Dwight C. Hirsh. Contri-
bution no. 12-193-B from the Kansas Agricultural Exper-
 Researchers in several countries, including the United
iment Station.
States, have isolated Brachyspira species from pigs with
swine dysen tery-like disease that have phenotypic features
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
158
Chapter 22
Spiral- Curved Organisms II: Brachyspira (Serpulina) and Lawsonia
159
Table 22.1.
Species of Brachyspira, Their Primary Hosts,
by a periplasmic space that contains periplasmic flagella
 and the Major Diseases with which They Are Associated
that vary in number with the species. The axial filament
of B. hyodysenteriae is made up of 8-12 flagella inserted at
Species
Primary Host(s)
Major Disease
either end that overlap in the center of the bacterial cell. B.
Swine
innocens has 10-13 flagella, and B. pilosicoli has 4-6 flagella.
B. hyodysenteriae
Swine dysentery
B. pilosicoli
 Swine, birds, humans
Porcine, avian, and
human spirochetosis
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
8. intermedia
Swine, birds
Avian spirochetosis
Cell wall.  The brachyspiras possess a gram-negative cell
B. innocens
 Swine, birds
 None recognized 
wall that differs somewhat from many gram-negative bac-
B. murdochii
 Swine, birds
 None recognized
 Avian spirochetosis
teria. The lipopolysaccharide (LPs) does not possess an
B. alvinipulli
Birds
B. aalborgi
Humans
Human spirochetosis 
outer layer of repeating polysaccharide side chains (O-
" B. canis"
Dogs
None recognized 
antigens), or it only has an irregularly spaced, partial layer
" B. suanatina"
 Svine, mallards
 Diarrhea in pigs 
of polysaccharide side chains. The LPS is often referred to
" B. pullr"*
Birds
 None recognized
as lipooligosaccharide (LOS) and is a rough or semirough
form of LPs. The LOS of different species varies in that LOS
Proposed species names are in quotation marks.
of B. pilosicoli has more complete O-antigen side chains and
is thus smoother than LOS from B. hyodysenteriae. LOS has
 many of the same biological activities as LPS and is likely
a virulence determinant. The lipid A component (endo-
of B. hyodysenteriae but are genetically different from B. hyo-
toxin) is toxic and binds to the plasma protein LPs-binding
dtysenteriae and “B. suantina." Some of these isolates likely
protein (LBP), which then binds to CD14. The CD14-
represent new species.
LPS complex binds to Toll-like receptors on the surface of
macrophages and dendritic cells, triggering the release of
proinflammatory cytokines. The length of O-antigen side
Descriptive Features
chains is important in hindering the attachment of the
Morphology and Staining.
 Brachyspiras are helical spiro-
attack complex of the complement system to the outer
chetes that range from 3 to 19 μm in length and 0.25 to
membrane. LOS of Brachyspira species is strongly immuno-
 genic and is the basis for serotyping.
0.6 μm in width. They stain weakly gram-negative, but
this characteristic is not used to identify or detect them.
Romanovsky's stains (e.g., Wright's and Giemsa), Victo-
Hemolysin/Cytotoxin. An important virulence factor of B.
ria blue 4R, silver impregnation stains, or crystal violet
hyodysenteriae is its hemolytic and cytotoxic activity. B. hyo-
are more useful in demonstrating these organisms (see Fig-
tysenteriaeisstronglyb-hemolytic,whereasothermembers
ure 22.1).
of the genus are weakly β-hemolytic, except the newly pro-
posed “B. suanatina," which is also strongly β-hemolytic.
Cellular Anatomy and Composition. Cells are typical
B. hyodysenteriae produces a β-hemolysin encoded by the
of spirochetes. They consist of a protoplasmic cylinder
hlyA gene that is cytotoxic for multiple continuous cell
bounded by an inner cell membrane loosely attached to
lines, primary cultures of porcine cells, and epithelial cells
an outer cell membrane. The two membranes are separated
in ligated porcine intestinal loops. The bacterium also has
three hemolysin regulatory genes: flyA, tlyB, and tlyC. Iso-
lates with mutations in either the hlyA or tly genes are not
hemolytic and are significantly less virulent for pigs.
FIGURE 22.1.
B. hyodysenteriae in colonic crypts of a pig
with swine dysentery. Warthin-Starry silver stain.
Flagella. Flagella are necessary for virulence. Motility is
necessary to penetrate the intestinal mucus to gain access
to target cells in the large intestine. Induced mutations to
the flagella genes (flaA and flaB) of B. hyodysenteriae sig-
nificantly reduce motility and virulence. Virulent, but not
avirulent, strains of B. hyodysenteriae are attracted by pig
intestinal mucin, and both motility and chemotaxis for
mucin are necessary for full virulence. Strains of B. pilosi-
colisolated from pigs, dogs, chickens, and humans possess
varying attraction forpig intestinal mucin, but theeffect of
chemotaxis on virulence has not been studied.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADH) Oxi-
dase. Although Brachyspira species are obligate anaer-
obes, they tolerate short exposure to oxygen, and when
cultivated in broth, growth is enhanced by addition of 1%
 Oxygen to the otherwise anaerobic environment. This resis-
 HaN 0  A  Ax x 0 
160
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
and is an important in vivo virulence factor. NADH defec.
of Brachyspira occasionally isolated from pigs with swine
tive mutants are significantlyless virulent in pigsthan their
d ysentery-like disease are also strongly β-hemolytic.
parents. Oxygen tolerance likely assists colonization of the
 oxygenated mucosal surface of the large intestine and sur-
 of severalantibiotics, a characteristic used in isolating them
vival in the en vironment after being shed in feces.
from feces. B. hyodysenteriae and B. pilosicoli remain infec-
tive for long periods if enclosed within organic material,
Gene Transfer Agent of B. hyodysenteriae, VSH-1. The
especially feces, at temperatures of 5-25 *C. They do not
genome of B. hyodysenteriae codes for a mitomycin C
withstand drying or direct sunlight and are sensitive to
induced bacteriophage-like gene transfer agent named
most disin fectants.
VSH-1. Induced VSH-1 particles transfer random 7.5 kb
 genomic fragments between B. hyodysenteriae cells. Car-
Variability.
At least 12 LOS serotypes of B. hyodysente-
badox, an antimicrobial agent commonly used to treat
riae exist. However, strains of the same serotype often vary
 and prevent enteric diseases in pigs, and metronidazole,
 greatly in virulence, and two strains of the same serotype
 a compound commonly used to treat anaerobic infections
 can be quite different genetically. Consequently, serotyp-
in humans and small animals, recently have been shown
ing is seldom used. Fingerprinting isolates by means of
to induce VSH-1. The induced VSH-1 particles transmit-
restriction length polymorphisms of whole-cell DNA, com-
ted tylosin and chloramphenicol resistance to susceptible
 parison of DNA sequences of ribosomal RNA genes, multi-
strains of B. hyodysenteriae. VSH-1 is likely important in the
locus enzyme electrophoresis, multilocus sequence typing,
continuing development of antibiotic resistance of B. hyo-
and multiple-locus variable-number tandem-repeat anal-
dysenteriae. The gene for VSH-1 has also been identified in
ysis has demonstrated marked heterogeneity of B. hyo-
several other Brachyspira species.
dysenteriae and other members of this genus. For exam-
ple, 111 isolates of B. hyodysenteriae were divided into 67
Plasmid of B. hyodysenteriae.
Virulent strains of B. hyo-
so aq s p o g  sa ans
dysenteriae possess a 36 kb plasmid. Strains that lack the
sequence typing. Using the same technique, 77 isolates of
plasmid are significantly less virulent in pigs, suggest-
 B. intermedia were divided into 71 sequence types and 64
ing that the plasmid carries genes important in disease
expression.
repeat analysis divided 172 isolates of B. hyodysenteriae into
 44 types. In addition to demonstrating a high degree of
Growth  Characteristics.
Brachyspira species are slow-
genetic variability, fingerprinting allows isolates ofapartic-
 growing obligate anaerobes. After 2-5 days of incuba-
ular Brachyspira species to be aligned into clonal complexes
with each complex containing multiple sequence types.
tion on blood agar at 37-42 *C, they can be seen as a
Over time isolates of B. hyodysenteriae from individual pig
flat haze on the agar's surface surrounded by a zone of
hemolysis (see Figure 22.2). B. hyodysenteriae is strongly β-
farms tend to remain confined to a single clonal complex,
hemolytic, a trait that is used to differentiate it from other
but isolates of B. pilosicoli from chickens on a single farm
Brachyspira species isolated from pigs (B. innocens, B. inter-
often fall into multiple complexes.
media, B. murdochii, and B. pilosicoli), which are weakly β-
hemolytic. However, "B. suanafina"and unclassified strains
Ecology
Reservoir and Transmission.
 The reservoir for B. hyo-
dysenteriae is the gastrointestinal tract of pigs, especially
FIGURE 22.2.
Strong 6-hemolysis by B. hyodysenteriae
asymptomatic carriers that have recovered from swine
and weak β-hemolysis by B. murdochii after 4 days of
dysentery. The organism can survive in soil, lagoons, and
incubation. Note the ring of enhanced hemolysis (ring
pig feces for weeks to months depending on the tempera-
phenomenon) surrounding the cut in the agar with the B.
ture and environmental conditions. Transfer of the organ-
hyodysenteriae isolate (arrow). (Curtesy of Joann M. Kinyon
ism between pens and buildings on the footwear of workers
and Dr Kent Schwartz, lowa State University, Ames, IA.)
and farm equipment is an important means of spread. B.
hyodysenteriae has been isolated from the feces of dogs, rats,
 and mice living on farms where the disease exists. Mice
probably constitute a real concern because experimentally
they have been shown to shed B. hyodysenteriae for up to 6
months, whereas rats shed for only 2 days. B. hyodysenteriae
has also been isolated from wild mallard ducks, rheas, and
 ss  s  d ao n n 's
unknown. Asymptomatic carrier pigs are by far the most
important reservoir. Many farms have eliminated swine
dysentery, and as long as they do not reintroduce infected
 pigs into the herd, reacquiring the disease is rare.
 B. pilosicoli has been isolated from many species, includ-
ing dogs, birds, pigs, horses, mice, opossums, nonhu-
Brao
 man primates, and humans. The concern is that humans
can acquire B. pilosicoli from infected animals or animal
Chapter 22
Spiral- Curved Organisms II: Brachyspira (Serpulina) and Lawsonia
161
products. Species normally associated with chickens, such 
as B. alvinipulli, B. intermedia, and “B. pulli,”" are occasion-
FIGURE 22.3.
B. pilosicoli forming a false brush border
ally isolated from dogs, and dogs are possibly infected by
(arrows) on the apical border of the colonic epithelium of a
ingestion of uncooked or undercooked poultry products.
 monkey Hematoxylin and eosin stain.
Brachyspira species that have been isolated from wild mal-
lard ducks include B. hyodysenteriae, "B. suanatina,”" B. pilosi-
coli, B. intermedia, B. alvinipulli, and “B. pulli." Whether
infection is associated with diarrhea or whether mallards
serve as a reservoir of Brachyspira species for domestic ani-
mals is unknown. Transmission of all Brachyspira species is
by the fecal-oral route.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
Swine dysentery can be reproduced by orally inoculating
con ventional pigs with pure cultures of B. hyodysenteriae,
but germ-free pigs do not develop disease. Anaerobic
 bacteria that are part of the normal large intestinal flora,
especially Fusobacterium and Bacteroides species, are nec-
essary along with B. hyodysenteriae for development of
clinical disease. Diet plays a role in development of swine
dysentery because diets low in fiber and high in highly
fermentable carbohydrates increase the severity of disease.
weight gain or weight loss, and low mortality. Clinical dis-
B. hyodysenteriae multiplies and produces disease only in
ease has not been reported in broiler chickens, but broilers
the large intestine. Flagella and chemotaxis to mucin allow
hatched from flocks with clinical intestinal spirochetosis
the bacteria to penetrate the mucus layer that coats the
often grow slower than normal. Biopsies of the affected
mucosa and to closely associate with epithelial cells that
colon often contain a layer of spirochetes adhered by one
cover the luminal surface and line colonic crypts. This
end to the apical surface of the luminal epithelium form-
results in superficial coagulative necrosis and loss (likely
ing a false brush border (see Figure 22.3). This “end-on"
due to hemolysin/cytotoxin) of epithelial cells, edema,
attachment is known to occur only with B. pilosicoli and B.
hyperemia, hemorrhage, and influx of neutrophils into the
aalborgi. Diarrhea is believed to result from malabsorption
mucosa and submucosa. Hyperplasia of goblet cells occurs,
due to disruption of the microvilli of the apical surface of
followed by increased mucus production. Spirochetes are
colonic epithelium. In cases of avian spirochetosis due to
present in large numbers in the lumen of crypts (see Fig-
B. intermedia and B. alvinipulli, the bacteria do not attach
 ure 22.1) and can be found in the lamina propria and within
to epithelium but are free in the lumen and the colonic
epithelial cells, especially goblet cells. Cellular attachment
Crypts. Very little is known about the pathogenesis of dis-
and invasion are not required for disease production. The
ease caused by the latter two organisms.
diarrhea is due to decreased colonic absorption. Evidence
of increased fluid secretion due to an enterotoxin or
Immunologic Aspects
secondary to the inflammation has not been found.
Swine dysentery is most common in weaned pigs 2-4
The immunologic aspects of these diseases are poorly
months old, but can occur in pigs as young as 2-3 weeks. It
understood. Some pigs that have recovered from swine
is rare in nursing piglets and adults. The incubation period
is usually about 10-14 days. Although pigs can die acutely
imately 4 months, but many pigs remain susceptible.
without evidence of diarrhea, the most consistent sign is
 Infection induces B. hyodysenteriae specific serum IgG and
chronic diarrhea. Pigs are febrile and partially anorexic and
colonic IgA, but neither is highly protective. Bacterins have
initially pass semisolid, yellow-to-gray feces that do not
limited efficacy, and the immunity that does develop is
contain blood. After a few days feces become more liq-
aas a n  a a os 'ads a
uid and contain large amounts of mucus and increasing
to which the pigs are exposed. Cell-mediated immune
amounts of blood. Affected pigs become dehydrated and
responses and changes in populations of CD4+ and CD8+
lose weight. Morbidity rates in susceptible pigs can be close
lymphocytes occur, but their role in immunity and/or dis-
to 90%, and mortality in untreated herds can be 20-40%.
ease production is unknown. Poultry and mammals with
Duration of illness ranges from a few days to several weeks.
intestinal spirochetosis remain persistently infected, and
Except for emaciation and dehydration, postmortem
if infection is eliminated by antimicrobial treatment, they
lesions are confined to the large intestine. The wall of the
are susceptible to reinfection.
large intestine is thickened, eroded, and covered by fibrin
and mucus containing flecks of blood. Survivors may be
Laboratory Diagnosis
 permanently stunted and remain asymptomatic shedders.
 Intestinal spirochetosis of weaned pigs, chickens, non-
Sample Collection. Lengths of colon or colon con-
human primates, and dogs associated with B. pilosicoli
tents from several freshly necropsied animals are opti-
is characterized by mild, persistent diarrhea, decreased
mal, but fecal samples from clinically affected animals are
162
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
pure culture by cloning the isolate is important. This is diffi.
FIGURE 22.4.
Brachyspira sop. (arrows) in a smear
cult, especially with heavily contaminated plates, requires
prepared by scraping the large intestinal mucosa of a pig
considerable experience, and can take 2 weeks or longer. For 
without diarrhea. Crystal violet stain.
 antigen detection and nucleic acid-based methods such as
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), cloning the isolate is not
as critical.
PCR assays for most Brachyspira species and multiplex
PCR assays that simultaneously identify different combina-
tions of B. hyodysenteriae, B. pilosicoli, L. intracellularis, and
Salmonella species have been developed. In some instances,
the PCR assays are performed directly on feces and test
results are obtained within 1-2 days. In other instances,
the PCR assays are used to identify organisms isolated on
blood agar, which still greatly reduces the time required
for identification of Brachyspira species. The best results are
obtained when culture and PCR are used together. Unclassi-
fied Brachyspira isolates from pigs and poultry are not rare,
and if only PCR tests are used for diagnosis, unclassified
strains are not detected.
Identification.
 After isolation, Brachyspira species must be
identified to differentiate pathogenic and nonpathogenic
species. This is often done by observation of the strength 
satisfactory. Samples should be chilled, but not frozen, and
of β-hemolysis and biochemical reactions. The tests com-
transported to the laboratory as soon as possible. Prevent-
monly used are indole production, hippurate hydrolysis,
ing samples from drying out en route is important.
α-galactosidase, α-glucosidase, and β-glucosidase tests (see
Table 22.2), but there is some variability in biochemical
Direct Examination. Smears of fecal material or scrap-
results between strains of a given species and misidentifi-
cation using phenotypic criteria is possible. For instance,
ings of colonic mucosa can be examined by phase-contrast
01 dark-field microscopy or stained with a Romanovsky's
strongly β-hemolytic, indole-positive isolates from pigs
stain (e.g., Wright's and Giemsa), carbol fuchsin, Victoria
are identified as B. hyodysenteriae and weakly β-hemolytic,
blue 4R, or crystal violet and examined by conventional
indole-positive isolates as B. intermedia. However, a few
light microscopy (see Figure 22.4). Observation of loosely
strains of B. hyodysenteriae are indole-negative. In addition,
" B. suanatina" is indole-positive and strongly β-hemolytic.
coiled spirochetes is presumptive evidence of infection
with Brachyspira species, but additional tests are necessary
Similarly, weakly hemolytic, hippurate-positive isolates
to differentiate pathogenic from nonpathogenic species.
from pigs are identified as B. pilosicoli, but occasional
strains of B. pilosicoli are hippurate-negative. Therefore,
Isolation.  Isolation of Brachyspira species from fecal sam-
Table 22.2.
Phenotypic Characteristics of Brachyspira
ples is accomplished by inoculation onto blood agar plates
Species
containing antibiotics to prevent overgrowth by faster-
 growing enteric bacteria. Agar plates for isolation of B.
Species
Hemolysis Inda Hipb α-Galc α-Glucd βB-Gluce
hyodysenteriae typically contain 400 μg/ml spectinomycin
or some combination of spectinomycin, rifampin, spi-
 B. hyodysenteriae Strong
+
十
+
ramycin, vancomycin, polymixin, or colistin. Because
B. intermedia
Weak
十
十
Brachyspira species differ in antibiotic sensitivity, blood
B. innocens
Weak
+
干
+
agar with 400 μg/ml spectinomycin and 25 μg/ml each
B. murdochif
Weak
十
of colistin and vancomycin are recommended as an all-
 B. pilosicoli
Weak
_
+9
士
士
around medium for Brachyspira species. The plates are incu-
B. alvinipulli
Weak
+
+
B. aalborgi
bated in an anaerobic environment containing 10% car-
Weak
+
" B. canis"
Weak
X
X
bon dioxide. After 2-5 days of incubation, B. hyodysenteriae
"B. suanatina"
Strong
+
can be seen as a zone of strong 3-hemolysis containing a
×
" B. pulli"
Weak
+
surface film in which colonies are very small and difficult
to identify. Other species will be surrounded by a zone of
?lndole production.
weak hemolysis. Making cuts in the agar helps with iden-
bHippurate hydrolysis.
tification of B. hyodysenteriae because a zone of enhanced
Cα-Galatosidase activity.
hemolysis (referred to as ring phenomenon) develops along
dα-Glucosidase attivity.
the cuts on plates with strongly hemolytic isolates, but not
 β-Glucosidase activity.
with weakly hemolytic ones (see Figure 22.2). Plates with-
(ndole-negative strains of 3. hyodysenteriae and indole-positive strains of 3.
 pifosicofi have been identified.
out growth should be reincubated and reexamined every 2
9Hippurate-negative strains of B. pilosicofihave been identified.
days for 10 days. For phenotypic identification, obtaining a
Chapter 22
Spiral- Curved Organisms II: Brachyspira (Serpulina) and Lawsonia
163
laboratories increasingly identify Brachyspira isolates by
species-specific PCR, sequencing the 16S rRNA gene, or
FIGURE 22.5.
L. intracellularis (arrow) in the apical
      
cytoplasm of enterocytes in the ileum of a weaned foal with
 species-specific PCR are the 23S rDNA and NADH oxidase
equine proliferative enteropathy. Warthin-Starry silver stain.
genes.
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
Through the years many drugs have been used to treat
swine dysentery, but several have been withdrawn from
the market and others have limited effectiveness because
of development of antimicrobial resistance. The most
commonly used drugs are tiamulin, valnemulin, tylosin,
and lincomycin. Because of resistance to tylosin and lin-
comycin, the pleuromutilins (tiamulin and valnemulin)
are currently the most effective antimicrobials, but resis-
tance to tiamulin and valnemulin is being reported from a
few countries. Carbadox is used in the United States and it
is usually effective, but it is approved for use only in pigs less
than 34 kg (75 1b) and is not approved in Canada or Europe.
Severely affected pigs sometimes require initial treatment
with injectable antibiotics, but the preferred route of
administration is usually through the drinking water. Pre-
possible causes. In 1991, L. intracellutaris was isolated in
sumably the same medications can be used to treatpigs with
cell culture and used to reproduce the disease.
B. pilosicoli infection. Metronidazole is the recommended
treatment for dogs with intestinal spirochetosis. No drugs
are approved for treatment of avian intestinal spirocheto-
Descriptive Features
sis. Recently, 30 of 30 Brachyspira isolates from chickens
Morphology and Cellular Anatomy.  L. intracelluiaris cells
were reported to be sensitive to tylosin, valnemulin, tia-
are straight to curved bacilli 1.25-1.75 μm long by 0.25-
mulin, and doxycycline. Two isolates showed decreased
0.45 μm wide. They have a single polar flagellum, do
sensitivity to lincomycin. A problem in treating chickens
not possess fimbriae, or form spores. Extracellular bacte-
is that the disease occurs in mature laying hens and long
ria grown in cell culture have darting motility.
withdrawal times would be required before the eggs could
be used for human consumption. In addition, chickens are
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
likely to be reinfected when drug treatment is stopped.
The best prevention for swine d ysentery is strict biosecu-
Cell Wall. The cell wall of L. iniracellularis is typical of
rity so that only pigs from dysentery-free herds are brought
gram-negative bacteria. Little is known specifically about
onto the farm. To date, vaccines have met with limited suc-
the biological effects of LPS from L. intracellularis, but typi-
cess and are not commonly used. Vaccines for B. pilosicoli
cally LPS is an important virulence determinant. The lipid
have so far proven ineffective.
A component is toxic, and the length of the repeating
polysaccharide side chains (O-antigens) hinders bacterial
killing by complement. LPSalso binds LPS-binding protein,
Lawsonia
which initiates a series of events that trigger the release of
proinflammatory cytokines.
L. intracellularis is the only member of the genus Lawso-
nia and causes proliferative enteropathy, a diarrheal dis-
Type ll Secretion System. Type III secretion systems are
ease characterized by thickening of the intestinal mucosa
responsible for translocation of bacterial proteins into host
because of hyperplasia of enterocytes. The bacterium is an
cells. Protein components of a type Il secretion system
obligate intracellular microorganism that grows in the api-
(IscN, IscO, and IscQ for L. iniracellularis secretion com-
ponent) were recently identified in multiple strains of L.
liferative enteropathy is a worldwide disease of pigs first
iniracellularis. The role of the Isc proteins is unknown, but
recognized in the 1930s. Proliferative ileitis or prolifera-
they are expressed during natural infection and pigs react
tive bowel disease is a common disease of Syrian ham-
immunologically to the proteins.
sters, and equine proliferative enteropathy is an important
emerging disease of weaned foals. Sporadic cases of prolif-
Lawsonia Surface Antigen A.
. Lawsonia surface antigen
erative enteropathy due to Lawsonia infection have been
A (LsaA) is a protein expressed in vitro and in vivo. The
reported in ferrets, foxes, dogs, rats, rabbits, sheep, deer,
exact role of the protein is unknown, but it is involved in
emus, ostriches, guinea pigs, and nonhuman primates, but
adherence to and invasion of epithelial cells. Pigs respond
not in humans. In the 1970s, Campylobacter-like bacteria
  se   s t  '
were first observed in the apical cytoplasm of enterocytes,
develop enzyme-linked immunoassays to identify infected
and a variety of Campylobacter species were proposed as
pigs and rabbits.
164
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Growth Characteristics. L. intracellularis has only been
isolated in actively dividing eukaryotic cells maintained in
FIGURE 22.6.
Small intestine from a pig with
amicroaerobicatmosphere of82.2% nitrogen, 8.8% carbon
proliferative enteropathy. Note the diffuse rugose appearance
dioxide, and 8% oxygen.
of the serosa and the thickened and rugose appearance of the
mucosa, which are characteristic of intestinal adenomatosis
(single arrow). Aiso, note the replacement of the mucosa with
Ecology
a necrotic membrane, which is characteristic of necrotic
enteritis (double arrows).
Reservoir.T
The reservoirs of L. intracellularis are the
intestinal tracts and the environment of infected animals
where it remains viable in feces for several weeks at 5-15 *C.
 Rodents trapped on pig and horse farms are commonly
infected and are possible reservoirs.
Transmission.
Infection occurs following ingestion of
 material contaminated with in fected feces.
Pathogenesis
 Proliferative enteropathy has been reproduced in conven-
tional pigs, hamsters, and horses by oral inoculation with
pure cultures of L. intracellularis. However, disease does not
develop following oral inoculation of germ-free pigs. Inter-
 action between L. intracellularis and unidentified normal
intestinal flora is necessary for development of prolifera-
tive enteropathy.
 Following oral inoculation of pigs and hamsters and in
(see Figure 22.6); (3) regional ileitis, a chronic form with
vitro inoculation of cultured epithelial cells, L. infracellu-
thickening of the smooth muscle wall resulting in a con-
laris cells attach to the apical border of target epithelial
cells and are internalized into phagocytic vacuoles. Spe-
tracted, smooth segment of distal small intestine (some-
cific adhesions or attachment factors have not been iden-
times referred to as “garden-hose gut"); and (4) proliferative
tified. The bacteria do not have to be viable to invade cells,
hemorrhagic enteropathy, an acute form characterized by
but treatments that inhibit cellular metabolism inhibit bac-
thickening of the small intestinal mucosa and acute hem-
terial invasion. After internalization, the microorganisms
orrhage into the intestinal lumen. The most consistent
escape from the vacuole into the cytoplasm where they
location of gross lesions is the distal jejunum and ileum,
followed by the cecum, and spiral colon. Gross lesions in 
multiply and inhibit cell maturation by an unknown mech-
anism. Cellular division continues and postmitotic daugh.
horses and hamsters also consist of mucosal hyperplasia
ter cells contain bacteria, which contributes to spread of
and thickeningof the distal smallintestine(see Figure 22.7).
bacteria throughout the length of the crypts. L intracellu-
Proliferative hemorrhagic enteropathy usually affects
laris also invades and spreads within the intestinal lamina
pigs 4-12 months old, while the other forms usually affect
younger pigs between 6 weeks and 5 months of age. Equine
propria, which likely contributes to in fection of enterocytes
throughout the length of the crypts. Immature secretory
proliferative enteropathy primarily affects weaned foals.
Hamsters are usually affected soon after weaning and are
enterocytes, normally present in the crypts, replace goblet
cells and absorptive villous enterocytes. This results in elon-
gation of crypts, shortening of villi, increased fluid loss,
decreased absorption, and loss of protein into the feces.
FIGURE 22.7.
Small intestine from a foal with equine
Inflammation is variable and can be absent or consist of
 proliferative enteropathy.
neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes.
 Following experimental infection, most bacterial inva-
sion and multiplication initially occurs in the distal
jejunum and ileum. Lesions in the large intestine are
believed to be secondary infections caused by bacteria
escaping from infected en terocytes in the small intestine.
Clinical  Features and Lesions. Swine proliferative
enteropathy (often referred to as proliferative enteritis 01
proliferative ileitis) is a disease complex that can occur in 
four forms: (1) intestinal adenomatosis, a chronic form
characterized by thickening of the mucosa due to hyper-
plasia of the crypt epithelium (see Figure 22.6); (2) necrotic
enteritis, a chronic form in which there is extensive necro-
sis and replacement of the mucosa by a necrotic membrane
Chapter 22
Spiral- Curved Organisms II: Brachyspira (Serpulina) and Lawsonia
165
experimentally resistant by 10-12 weeks of age. Clini
cally affected pigs, horses, and hamsters develop diarrhea,
FIGURE 22.8.
L. intracellularis in the apical cytoplasm of
become dehydrated, and lose weight. Hypoproteinemia
smalfl intestinal enterocytes (arrows) of a pig with proliferative
and edema of the ventral neck, trunk, and/or limbs are
enteropathy. immunohistochemical stain with a hematoxylin
common in foals. Poor weight gain is often the only man-
counter stain.
ifestation of subclinical infection in pigs and possibly in
other species.
Epidemiology.
.L intracelularis occurs worldwide in pigs
and probably in horses. Clinical disease in horses has been
reported from the United States, Canada, Europe, South
Africa, and Australia. Serologic surveys indicate that in fec-
tion is widespread in horses in the United States, Canada,
and Europe. The majority ofpig herds in swine-raising areas
are infected. Isolates from pigs, horses, hamsters, and deer
have greater than 98% DNA homology, but there is no
 evidence that transmission between species is important.
Experimentally, pig isolates were infective for hamsters and
horses, and a horse isolate was infective for hamsters. How-
ever, the target species had to be immunosuppressed and
infection was mild or subclinical.
Immunologic Aspects
 Systemic humoral and cell-mediated immune responses
are generated following infection of pigs and horses. Pigs,
and most likely other species, develop specific IgA and
cell-mediated responses in the intestinal mucosa. Pigs
recovered from proliferative enteropathy are resistant to
reinfection. An attenuated live L. intracellularis vaccine is
available for pigs, and it is effective and widely used. Prelim-
inary experiments with vaccines for foals show promising
results.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Treatment
Sample Collection. Fresh and formalin-fixed intestines,
intestinal scrapings, and /or feces from affected animals are
Antimicrobials most commonly used to treat porcine pro-
used for diagnosis.
liferative enteropathy are tetracyclines, tylosin, tiamulin,
lincomycin, and, where available, carbadox. There is little
Direct Examination. Modified acid-fast and Giminez
evidence of development of antibiotic resistance. Treat-
stains of intestinal mucosal smears will demonstrate small
ment in horses is by use of macrolide antibiotics alone
curved bacilli in enterocytes of animals with proliferative
or in combination with chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, 01
enteropathy. The histologic intestinal changes are charac-
rifampin.
teristic and can be used for a presumptive diagnosis. Silver
Excluding the organism from swine herds is very diff-
and immunohistochemical stains are used to detect the
bacteria in fixed tissue (see Figures 22.5 and 22.8).
herds. The most common method of control is oral vacci-
nation with an attenuated, live vaccine. If vaccination is
Isolation. L. intracellulariscan only begrown in livingcells
not possible, prevention is often by feeding antibiotics for
and has been isolated by only a few researchers. Isolation is
2-3 weeks beginning just before the expected onset of clin-
not feasible for diagnosis.
ical disease. Experimental trials in horses with inactivated
and attenuated vaccines have shown promise but require
Identification. The combination of macroscopic and
further evaluation.
microscopic lesions and identification of intracellular bac-
teria in enterocytes are considered diagnostic of L. inira
cellularis infection. Specific identification can be made
by fluorescent antibody or immunochistochemical (see
Further Reading
Figure 22.8). PCR assays that detect L. intracellularis alone
or in combination with one or more common bacterial
Bellgard Ml, Wanchanthuek P, La T et al. (2009) Genome
causes of diarrhea in pigs (B. hyodysenteriae, B. pilosicoli,
sequence of the pathogenic intestinal spirochete Brachyspira
    s ae (sads r 
hyodysenteriae reveals adaptations to its lifestyle in the
ratories.
porcine large intestine. PLoS One, 4 (3), e4641.
166
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
Boutrup TS, Boesen HT, Boye M et al. (2010) Early pathogene
Lawsonia intracellularis. Anim Health Res Rev, 6 (2), 173-
 sis in porcine proliferative enteropathy caused by Lawsonia
197.
intracellularis. / Comp Pathol, 143, 101-109.
 Primus A, Oliveira S, and Gebhart C (2011) Identification of a
 Hampson DJ and Swayne DE (2008) Avian intestinal spiro-
new potentially virulent Brachyspira species affecting swine.
chetosis, in Diseases of Pouitry, 12th edn (eds YM Saif
American Association of Swine Veterinarians 42nd Annual
et al.), Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Ames, Iowa, pp. 922-
 Meeting Proceedings, March 5-8, 2011, Phoenix, Arizona,
940.
pp.109-110.
Hidalgo A, Rubio P, Osorio J, and Carvajal A (2010) Preva-
 Pusteria N and Gebhart C (2009) Equine proliferative enteropa-
lence ofBrachyspira pilosicoli and“Brachyspira canis" indogs
thy caused by Lawsonia intracellularis. Equine VetEduc, 21(8),
and their association with diarrhea. Vet Microbiol, 146, 356-
415-419.
360.
Rasback T, Jansson DS, Johansson K-E, and Fellstrom C (2007)
 Jacobson M, Fellstrom C, and Jensen-Waern M (2010) Porcine
A novel enteropathogenic, strongly haemolytic spirochaete
 proliferative enteropathy: an important disease with ques-
isolated from pig and mallard, provisionally designated
tions remaining to be solved. Vet J, 184, 264-268.
“"Brachyspira suanatina" sp. nov. Environm Microbiol, 9 (4),
 Jansson DS, Fellstrom C, Rasback T etal. (2008) Phenotypic and 
983-991.
molecular characterization of Brachyspira spp. isolated from
 Stanton TB, Humphrey SB, Sharma VK, and Zuerner RL (2008)
laying hens in different housing systems. Vet Microbiol, 130,
Collateral effects of antibiotics: carbadox and metron-
348-362.
idazole induce VSH-1 and facilitate gene transfer among
Kroll, JJ, Roof MB, Hoffman LJ et al. (200s) Proliferative
Brachyspira hyodysenteriae strains. Appl Environ Microb, 74
 enteropathy: a global enteric disease of pigs caused by
(10),2950-2956.
23
Spiral-Curved Organisms
I: Campylobacter and
Arcobacter
JEROME C. NIETFELD
Members of the genera Campylobacter and Arcobacter (previ-
vibriosis because C. fehus was originally classified in the
ously classified within the genus Campylobacter) are small,
genus Vibrio. C. fehus ssp. venerealis is host adapted to cat-
gram-negative, curved rods associated with diseases of the
tle and causes bovine venereal or genital campylobacte-
reproductive and intestinal tracts. Both genera are mem-
riosis, which is a venereal disease characterized by early
bers of the family Campylobacteraceae.
embryonic death and infertility. The organism is of major
importance because there are regulations to prevent trans-
mission by international trade. C. fetus ssp. venerealis also
Descriptive Features
causes sporadic bovine abortions. C. fetus ssp. fehus and C.
jejuni ssp. jejuni are worldwide causes of abortion outbreaks
Morphology and Staining
in sheep and sporadic abortions in goats and cattle. C. fetus
Members of the genera Campylobacter and Arcobacter are
 ssp. fetus has been isolated from aborted alpaca fetuses. C.
gram-negative, nonspore-forming, curved rods that are
coli also causes abortions in sheep, but much less commonly
0.2-0.9 μm wide by 0.5-5 μm long. They have capsules
than either C. fehus or C. jejuni. Gastrointestinal coloniza-
and are motile by means of a polar flagellum at one or both
tion by C. jejuni occurs in many animal species. Infection
ends. When two or more bacterial cells are placed together,
is often accompanied by self-limiting diarrhea in young
they can form S or gull-winged shapes that can appear as
ruminants,puppies, and kittens, but in older animals infec.
"spirals" (see Figure 23.1).
tion is usually asymptomatic. The incidence of persistent,
C. jejuni is not known to cause clinical disease in poultry.
Campylobacter
C. coli is most commonly isolated from the intestines of
healthy pigs and poultry.
The genus contains 23 recognized species, several of which
Campylobacters are a leading cause of food-borne, bac-
cause reproductive and gastrointestinal disease in animals
terial gastroen teritis of humans. More than 90% of human
and humans. Other species are commensal bacteria of the
cases are caused by C. jejuni and C. coli, with C. jejuni being
gastrointestinal tract of humans, domestic and wild mam
by far the more important cause. Other less common causes
mals, birds, and shellfish. The species of veterinary impor
of gastroenteritis in people include C. fetus ssp. fetus, C.
tance are Campylobacter fehus, C. jejuni ssp. jejuni, C. coli, C.
upsaliensis, C. lari, C. hyointestinalis, and C. sputorum (see
lari, C. hyointestinalis, C. sputorum, C. helveticus, C. mucos-
Table 23.1). Most human infections result from ingestion
alis, and C. upsaliensis (see Table 23.1). C. fetus and C. jejuni
 of contaminated uncooked or undercooked food, unpas-
are important causes of reproductive failure in ruminants.
teurized milk, or contaminated water. Ingestion of poul-
Several species, especially C. jejuni and C. coli, are impor-
try and poultry products is the most important risk factor
tant causes of gastroenteritis in humans and minor causes
fo1 campylobacter enteritis in humans. Although human
in animals.
infection is uncommon, C. fehus ssp. fehus is the Campy-
C. fehus has two subspecies: venerealis and fehus. Dis-
lobacter most likely to cause bacteremia and extraintestinal
ease caused by the two organisms is often referred to as
 in fection in people.
C. helveticus is most commonly isolated from feces of
normal dogs and cats, but in some studies isolation is more
Original chapter written by Dr. Dwight C. Hirsh.
frequent from pets with diarrhea. The bacterium is not
known to cause disease in humans.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
167
168
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
the organism has been isolated from poultry. The bac-
FIGURE 23.1.
C. jejuni from a blood agar plate. Gram
terium is associated with diarrhea in puppies, but adult
stain.
 dogs and cats are usually asymptomatic. This microorgan-
ism has been reported to cause enteric disease, bacteremia,
and abortion in humans.
Descriptive Features
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Cell Wall.  Campylobacters have a gram-negative cell wall.
 Although the lipid A component of lipopolysaccharide
 (LPS) is capable of binding LPs-binding protein in serum
and triggering the host's immune system, the LPs of C.
fehus has very low biological activity when compared to
 members of the Enterobacteriaceae. This is likely impor-
tant in allowing the organism to establish persistent in fec.
79.
tion. The length of the repeating polysaccharide side chains
(O-antigens) of LPs is important in resistance to killing in
serum by complement, and serum resistant strains of C.
fehus have long O-antigens. The LPS of C. jejuni lacks repeat-
C. hyointestinalis and C. mucosalis were proposed as
ing polysaccharide side chains and is a rough form of LPS
causes ofporcine proliferative enteropathy, which was later 
referred to as lipooligosaccharide (LOS). Most isolates of
proven to be caused by Lawsonia intracelluiaris. C. hyointesti-
C. jejuni are from the intestines and are serum sensitive.
nalis is a rare cause of gastroenteritis in people, but C. mucos-
Isolates from blood or other extraintestinal sites are often
alis is not known to cause disease in animals or humans.
C. lari was originally isolated from feces of asymptomatic
not the LOs. The LOS of C. jejuni is important in resis-
gulls (from which it gets its name). Since then the organism
tance to killing by cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAPs)
has been isolated from the feces of dogs, wild birds, and
01 defensins, which are produced by host cells as part of
horses. C. lari is considered to be a sporadic cause of diarrhea
the innate immune response. Intestinal isolates of C. jejuni
and a rare cause of bacteremia in humans, but is not known
have truncated LOs and are more sensitive to killing by
to cause disease in animals.
CAPs in comparison to isolates from the meninges and
C. sputorum has three biovars sputorum, faecalis, and
 blood. Mutations in the LOS genes also decrease adherence
paraureolyticus that are commensals of the oral cavity of
to and invasion of epithelial cells. Different forms of LOS
humans, the gastrointestinal tract of ruminants, and the
are expressed by C. jejuni at 37 *C than at 42 *C, which likely
reproductive tract of cattle. The biovars are not specific
helps it adapt to the different temperatures of mammalian
as to location. It is important to differentiate C. sputorum
and avian intestines.
from C. fetus. Strains from the reproductive tract of cattle
that were previously classified as C. sputorum biovar bubu-
Capsule.
 Peripheral to the outer membrane is a highly
lus have been reclassified as biovar sputorum. C. sputorum is
variable polysaccharide capsule. Mutations in the capsule
 associated with gastroenteritis in people.
genes of serum resistantstrains of C. jejuni increase suscepti-
C. upsaliensis is the most common Campylobacter iso-
bility to the bactericidal effects of serum. The capsule helps
 lated from dog feces. Cats are also commonly infected and
shield the LOs from host cell receptors, such as Toll-like
Table 23.1.
Campylobacter Species of Veterinary Importance
Species
Animal Host(s)
Disease in Animalsa
Disease in Humansd
C. fetus ssp. fetus
 Sheep, goats, catte
 Abortion 
 Bacteremia, diarrhea 
C. fetus ssp. venerealis
Cattle
Infertility, Abortion
None reported 
C. jejuni ssp. jejuni
 Poultry, ruminants, dogs, cats, humans
Abortion, diarrhea, asympb
 Diarrhea, bacteremia
C. coli
Pigs. poultry, sheep
Asymp, abortion 
Diarrhea, bacteremia 
C. upsaliensis
Dogs, cats, poultry
Asymp, diarrhea
 Diarrhea, bacteremia
C. lari
Wild birds, dogs
None reported 
Diarrhea, bacteremia 
C. hyointestinalis
Cattle, pigs, sheep, poultry, pets, birds
None reported
Diarrhea
C. helveticus
Cats, dogs
Asymp, diarrhea 
None reported 
C. sputorum
Cattle, sheep
 None reported 
Diarrhea
C. mucosalis
Pigs
None reported 
None reported 
The first entry is the most common.
bAsymp, asymptomatic.
Chapter 23 Spiral-Curved Organisms IHl: Campylobacter and Arcobacter
169
receptors, which helps prevent stimulation of the innate
plasmid, it can replicate freely. The ability to acquire DNA
immune response. The capsule plays a role in ad herenice of
from the environment is known as natural competence.
C. jejuni to epithelial cells, and isolates without a capsule do
not efficiently colonize chick intestines. There is variation
Type IV Secretion System (T45s). The genome of C. fetus
in expression of capsular antigens because of phase vari-
ssp. venerealis contains aunique segment of DNA (known as
ation in expression of the responsible genes, which helps
a genomic island) that contains genes believed to be respon-
the organism to temporarily avoid the immune system. The
sible for adaption of C. fehus ssp. venerealis to the bovine
capsular antigens are also used for serotyping.
reproductive tract. Within the genomic island are genes
for a T4ss, which is an apparatus that mediates transfer of
Microcapsule or 5-Layer of C. fetus ssp. fetus. A protein
DNA and/or proteins between bacteria and/or eukaryotic
microcapsule called the S-layer (for surface layer) surrounds
host cells. Mutations to the T4SS genes reduce virulence of
C. fehus ssp. fehus and is an important virulence factor. The
C. fetus ssp. venerealis.
S-layer resists phagocytosis and the bactericidal effects of
serum by inhibiting binding by complement factor C3b. In
Growth
Characteristics.  Campylobacter  species  are
sheep, the S-layer is necessary to cause systemic infection
microaerobic, requiring an atmosphere containing 3-10%
and abortion. Protective antibodies are produced to S-layer
oxygen and 3-15% carbon dioxide. All species grow at
antigens, but phase variation in expression of S-layer pro-
37 *C, but some, such as C. jejuni, C. coli, and C. lari, are
teins helps the organism temporarily avoid the immune
thermotolerant and grow well at 42 *C, a characteristic
system.
often used in isolation from feces. Most species do not mul-
tiply below 30 *C and their numbers are greatly reduced
Adhesins. CadF is an outer membrane protein highly con-
by freezing and thawing. However, they can remain viable
served in C. jejuni and C. coli that binds the cell matrix
for days to weeks in organic material such as feces, meat,
protein fibronectin and mediates adherence to host cells.
 Or milk, especially if chiled. Unlike members of the family
Mutations in the CadF gene reduce bacterial adhesion and
Enterobacteriaceae, campylobacters are oxidase-positive.
virulence in animal models. Peb 1 (also known as CBF1)
They do not ferment or oxidize carbohydrates, but gener-
is an adhesin of C. jejuni located in the periplasmic space
ate energy from oxidation of amino acids or tricarboxylic
that binds to aspartate and glutamate. Peb 1 deficient
acid intermediates through the respiratory pathway.
 mutants do not effciently colonize mice intestines. CapA
is a lipoprotein that contributes to adherence of C. jejuni to
Variability.  Campylobacters were originally classified on
epithelial cells and is important in colonization and estab-
the basis of heat-stable LPS antigens A, B, and C. C. fetus
lishment of persistent infection in chick intestines.
ssp. fetus has serovars A-2 and B, and C. fetus ssp. venere-
alis has serovars A-1 and A-sub 1. Strains that express anti-
Flagella. The flagella of C. jejuni are essential for motility
gen C grow at 42 *C and are classifed as C. jejuni and C.
and for chemotaxis to mucin and to amino acids present
coli. The Penner serotyping system is based on extractable,
in high levels in chicken intestines, which are important
heat-stable capsular antigens, and C. jejuni has 42 serotypes
in intestinal colonization. C. jejuni has a flagellar export
and C. coli has 18. More than 100 serotypes of C. jejuni, C.
B q pasodod iss e Aq paguapi are jri  pue 'o
tem (an assemblage of proteins that form a hollow tube-like
based on heat-labile surface and flagellar antigens. Sero-
structure through which proteins are “injected" into host
logic typing is performed by only a few reference laborato.
"target" cells). Mutations in the flagellin (fla) genes, which
ries, because of the large number of typing sera required.
code for the major proteins that comprise the flagella, abol-
Most typing is done by molecular methods such as ribo-
ish motility and secretion of Cia (Campylobacter invasion
typing, restriction endonuclease analysis, pulse-field gel
antigens) proteins, which are necessary for cell invasion.
electrophoresis, amplified fragmentlength polymorphism,
and PCR with genomic sequence analysis. Genetic analy-
Cytolethal Distending Toxin. Cytolethal distending toxin
sis also indicates that there is marked genetic variability in
(CDT) is produced by C. jejuni, C. coli, C. lari, C. fehus, and
individual enteric Campylobacter species, such as C. jejuni.
C. upsaliensis and is the only toxin proven to be produced
However, a 2008 study ofC. jejuni isolates from sheep abor-
by Campylobacter species. The toxin causes apoptosis by
tions from different parts of the Unites States found that 66
arresting cells at the transition between the G2/M phases
 of 71 isolates were derived from a single clone.
of the cell cycle. Its role in disease production is uncertain.
In humans, CDT stimulates production of interleukin-8
that recruits dendritic cells, macrophages, and neutrophils,
Ecology
thus increasing inflammation. However, clinical disease in
Reservoir
humans caused by non-CDT-producing strains of C. jejuni
was indistinguishable from disease caused by CDT produc-
C. fetus ssp. venerealis. The primary reservoir is the
ing strains.
preputial crypts of persistently infected, carrier bulls.
Approximately 1-2% of cows become persistent vaginal
Type ll secretion system.
C. jejuni possesses a type I secre-
carriers and are also reservoirs.
tion system that binds free DNA from the en vironment and
transports it into the cytoplasm. Once in the cytoplasm, the
C. fetus ssp. fetus. The reservoir is the intestinal tract and
DNA is incorporated into the genome or, in the case of a
gall bladder of infected ruminants.
170
PART II
Bacteria an d Fungi
C. jejuni and Enteric Campylobacters. The reservoir of C.
 jejuni for sheep is primarily the intestinal tract and gall blad-
FIGURE 23.2.
Placentitis in the placenta of a sheep fetus
 der of carrier sheep. Poultry, various birds, cattle, sheep,
in fected by Campylobacter fetus ssp. fetus.
 dogs, cats, and swine are also carriers of C. jejuni, and pigs
and poultry are the primary reservoir for C. coli. The reser-
voir for other campylobacters is presumed to be the intesti-
nal tract of infected animals (see Table 23.1).
Transmission
Reproductive Disease.
Infection by C. fehus ssp. venere-
alis is predominately by coitus, but transmission by artifi-
cial insemination with contaminated semen and/or equip-
ment is possible. Infection by C. fehus ssp. fehus and C. jejuni
is by ingestion of organisms in food or water contaminated
by feces of carrier ruminants or by fetal fluids and mem-
branes from aborted fetuses.
Enteric Disease.
 Infection by campylobacters associated
with enteric disease (C. jejuni, C. coli, etc.) occurs by the
oral route by ingestion of contaminated food and water.
lobacter in fection but issuggestive of bacterial infection (see
 most important risk factor for gastroenteritis caused by C.
Figure 23.2). Occasionally, the fetal liver contains tan-to-
red foci of necrosis that often have a target- or donut-like
jejuni, and ingestion of other meats, unpasteurized milk,
appearance (see Figure 23.3). Abortions in cattle and goats
and contaminated water are also important. Human-to-
infected with C. fehus ssp. fetus and C. jejuni typically occur
human transmission rarely occurs.
as single, sporadic cases.
Pathogenesis and Clinical Signs
Enteric Disease.
 C. jejuni adheres to and invades epithe-
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). C. fehus ssp. venerealis is
lial cells of the distal small intestine and colon. Bacteria are
introduced into a susceptible female by an infected bull
translocated across the epithelium into the lamina propria.
 o      s  ' 
Invasive C. jejuni damage the epithelium and induce hem-
 enter the uterus until the end of estrus, possibly because
 orrhage and inflammation with recruitment of neutrophils
 of increased numbers of neutrophils in the uterus during
and production of interleukins and prostaglandins. Clini-
estrus. In the uterus, there is further multiplication and pos-
cal signs include fever, abdominal cramps, and watery to
sibly active invasion that results in endometritis. In fection
bloody diarrhea that usually resolve on their own in a few
does not affect fertilization, but it creates an en vironment
days to a week in both animals and humans. The bacteri-
unsuitable for survival of the embryo. The female returns to
cidal effects of serum inactivate most campylobacters that
estrus, usually at an intervalof more than 25 days (21 days is
reach the lymphatics and the systemic circulation. Only
normal). The process repeats itself until the female mounts
a small number of strains are serum resistant and cause
an immune response sufficient to eliminate the agent from
systemic infection with extraintestinal localization. The
the uterus. Subsequently, the endometritis subsides and the
 animal conceives and pregnancy goes to term. On average,
infected cattle go through about five estrus cycles before
carrying a fetus to term.
FIGURE 23.3.
Necrotic target- or donut-like lesions in
Clinically, the signs are repeat breeding, irregular estrus
the fiver of an ovine fetus infected by C. jejuni. Campylobacter
cycles, increased calving intervals, and increased nonpreg-
fetus ssp. fetus causes identical fesions.
nant cows. If the herd remains closed, it develops immunity
and fertility and calving intervals gradually return toward
normal, but do not become normal without intervention.
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Following ingestion, C.
fetus ssp. fehus and C. jejuni invade the bloodstream and
in pregnant sheep localize in the placenta. This results in
placentitis, fetal infection, and abortion, usually 3-4 weeks 
after infection, but it can be as long as 2 months. The pla-
centa, uterine fluids, and fetus contain large numbers of
Organisms. Abortions are usually in the second half of preg-
nancy and often occur in “storms" affecting up to 50% of
pregnant animals, although approximately 25% is more
typical. In the majority of cases,the macroscopic pathology
Q79%DATE9/
consists only ofplacentitis, which is not specific for Campy-
Chapter 23 Spiral-Curved Organisms IHl: Campylobacter and Arcobacter
171
exception is C. fehus ssp. fehus in which almost all strains
nal infection that does not spread to the uterus in 30-70%
are resistant to killing in serum and to phagocytosis. Con-
of animals that eliminated the organism.
sequently, C. fetus is more important as a cause of systemic
Bulls less than 4 years old rarely remain infected for
disease.
longer than a few days, but older bulls can be infected for
life, unless treated. The mostcommonly held explanation is
Epidemiology
that preputial crypts of older bulls are deeper and more hos-
pitable than crypts of younger bulls. The immune response
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). Venereal campylobacterio-
elicited by natural infection is ineffective in eliminating
sis occurs worldwide, but primarily occurs in beef cattle
the bacteria from bulls. However, vaccination elicits spe-
bred by a bull. The use of artificial insemination has almost
cifc IgG antibodies in serum and mucosal secretions that
eliminated the agent from dairy cattle, because it is easily
can prevent or eliminate infection from males and females.
inactivated in semen and on insemination equipment.
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Sheep are immune fol-
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Abortions caused by
lowing abortion or vaccination, primarily because of IgM 
Campylobacter species occur wherever sheep are raised. His-
and IgG antibodies in the bloodstream and tissues. This
torically, C. fetus ssp. fetus was the more important cause,
results in removal by phagocytic cells and initiation of the
but since the late 1980s, C. jejuni abortions have become
complement cascade leading to bacterial lysis.
more common and in some parts of the world outnumber
those caused by C. fehus. C. coli causes sporadic abortions
Enteric Disease. Circulating and mucosal antibodies
in sheep, but is not common in most parts of the world.
develop following adherence to and invasion of the intesti-
However, in a few areas C. coli is isolated from up to 20% of
nal mucosa. This results in clearance of campylobacters
Campylobacter abortions.
from the intestinal mucosa but not from the intestinal
lumen. The immune response does not prevent recoloniza-
Enteric Disease. Feces from infected animals are a source
tion of the intestine, but it does help prevent clinical signs.
of infection for other animals. Uncooked, undercooked
and improperly handled contaminated poultry and other
Laboratory Diagnosis
meats, raw milk and contaminated water are sources for
 Sample Collection
human infection. The ceca of approximately 50% of chick-
ens contain C. jejuni. At slaughter, the organism contam-
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). Samples from males are
inates the environment, and as a consequence, almost
much more likely to be positive than samples from females.
all chicken carcasses in stores are contaminated. Infected
ds  a ar sids pdrd r e
pets and farm animals are potential sources of infection.
into the tip of an insemination pipette. Samples from
Campylobacters are found in feces from healthy pets, but
females are collected using a tampon placed in the ante-
at lower prevalence and numbers than those with diarrhea.
rior vagina. Samples should be chilled, but not frozen,
Dogs and cats from shelters and dogs fed homemade diets
and if they cannot be delivered to the laboratory within
are more likely to carry C. jejuni. C. jejuni is commonly iso-
6-8 h they should be placed into transport medium, such
lated from bovine feces and occasionally from cases of mas-
as Clark's o1 Lander's media, or thioglycollate broth. All
titis, which may help explain human outbreaks following
bulls or 20 females or 10% of the herd, whichever is greater,
ingestion of unpasteurized milk.
should be sampled.
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Abomasal fluid, lung and,
Immunologic Aspects
liver from aborted fetuses are the best samples. Contamina-
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). Protective immunity to
tion makes it much more difficult to isolate the organisms
C. fetus sp. venerealis develops in the uterus and, although
from the placenta.
IgM is first produced, is primarily IgG based. Antibod-
ies coat the bacteria and initiate the complement cas-
Enteric Disease.
 Fecal samples are used for the diagnosis
cade resulting in bacterial lysis. IgG antibodies also act as
of Campylobacter infections.
opsonizing agents and bind capsular antigens that result in
phagocytosis and destruction of the agent. Secretory IgA,
Direct Examination
IgG, and IgM bind surface antigens and prevent adherence
of the organisms to epithelial cells. All isotypes of anti-
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). Direct visualization of C.
bodies specific for flagellar antigens prevent movement of
fehus ssp. venerealis in stained smears from infected bulls
bacteria from the vagina to the uterus. The response in the
and/or cows is very unlikely, because of the low numbers
vagina is primarily nonopsonizing IgA and it is less effec-
of bacteria. Fluorescent antibody-stained preparations are
tive in clearing the organisms than the IgG response in
useful and sometimes used in combination with culture to
the uterus. Most cattle clear C. fehus ssp. venerealis from the
increase test sensitivity.
uterus in 2-3 months, but often require 6 months or more
to clear the vagina. Vaginalclearance rarely takes more than
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Gram or Romanovsky-
10 months, but 1-2% of cattle become persistent vaginal
stained preparations of stomach contents from aborted
carriers. Reexposure to C. fetus ssp. venerealis results in vagi-
fetuses often contain small curved rods. Campylobacters
172
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
have a characteristic rapid “corkscrew or tumbling" motil-
Enteric Disease. Enteric campylobacters are best isolated
ity that can be seen in wet-mount preparations of abo-
from intestinal samples on selective media containing
masal contents viewed with phase-contrast or dark-field
antimicrobial agents (e.g., Campy-CVA medium contain-
 microscopy. Finding round or target-shaped necrotic foci
 ing cefoperazone, vancomycin, and amphotericin B or Skir.
on the liver (see Figure 23.3) also supports a presumptive
row medium). Media that contain cephalothin (such as
diagnosis of Campylobacter in fection.
Butzler's and Campy-BAP media) are suitable for isolation
of C. jejuni, C. coli, and C. lari, but not C. fehus or C. upsalien-
Enteric Disease. Numerous slender, curved, gram-
sis. Because of the small size of Campylobacter species, an
negative rods, blood, mucus, neutrophils, and cell debris
alternate method is to filter samples with 0.45 μm or 0.65
are seen in stained fecal smears.
μm pore-size filters to reduce contamination and plate onto
blood agar without antibiotics. The plates are incubated at
37 *C or 42 *C or both, in an atmosphere of 6% oxygen and
lsolation
5-10% carbon dioxide.
Reproductive Disease (Cattle).
 Smegma, preputial scrap-
Identification.S
 Small, gram-negative, oxidase-positive,
ings, vaginal fluid, or stomach contents are plated
curved rods that grow at 37 *C o1 42 *C in a microaerobic
 onto selective media that contain antimicrobial agents
environment can be presumptively identified as Campy-
to decrease the growth of contaminants. Vancomycin,
 lobacter or Arcobacter species. The two genera are difficult to
polymyxin B or C, and trimethoprim are commonly used
differentiate based on phenotypic differences, but isolates
to decrease the growth of bacteria, and amphotericin B is
that grow in an aerobic atmosphere at less than 30 *C can be
sometimes included to inhibit fungal growth. It is impor-
 presumptively identified as Arcobacter. The ability to grow
tant not to use selective media designed for isolation of C.
 microaerobically on MacConkey agar at 37 *C is further
jejuni and C. coli that contain cephalothin, such as Butzler's
evidence that an isolate is an Arcobacter species, but failure
and Campy-BAP media, because both subspecies of C. fetus
to grow on MacConkey agar does rule out the possibility
are sensitive to cephalothin. The plates are incubated at
that it is an Arcobacter. Campylobacter isolates that grow at
 37 *C in an atmosphere containing 6% oxygen and 5-10%
42 *C and are hippurate-positive are identified as C. jejuni; 
carbon dioxide and examined in 48 h.
however, hippurate-negative strains have been reported.
 Isolates can be identified as to species based on pheno-
Reproductive Disease (Sheep). Abomasal contents, lung,
typic characteristics (see Table 23.2), but there is variability
 and/or liver from fetuses are plated onto blood agar plates
between isolates of the same species and mistakes can be
(with or without antimicrobials, depending upon the
 made. Because of the difficulty in differentiating Campy-
degree of contamination) and incubated at 37 *C in an
lobacter species, molecular methods such as species-specific
atmosphere containing 6% oxygen and 5-10% carbon
PCR, genomic fingerprinting, and sequencing of the ribo-
dioxide. Plates are examined in 48 h.
somal RNA genies are also used.
Table 23.2.
Phenotypic Properties of Important Campylobacter and Arcobacter Species
Growth
Indoxyl
HS
Growth
Growth  Growth  Growth Aerobic
in 1%
Hippurate
Acetate
in
 Selenite
in 4%
Cephalothin
25 °℃
37*℃
42°℃
Growth Catalase Urease Glycine Hydrolysis Hydrolysis 
TSI   Reduction 
NaCl 
Sensitivity
C. fetus ssp. fetus
X
X
(-)a
+
S
C. fetus ssp. venerealis
(-)a
+
S
C. jejuni ssp. jejuni
+
+
+
十
+
+
V
R
C. coli
+
+
+
R
C. upsaliensis
(+)
+
+
+
C. hyointestinalis sp. hyointestinalis
十
+
十
C. hyointestinalis ssp. lawsonin
+
+
+
C. sputorum biovar sputorum
+
+
+
5
C. sputorum biovar faecalis
X
+
 C. spu torum biovar paraureohyticus
十
+
C. lari
R
C. helveticus
十
5
C. mucosalis
+
A. butzleri
（一
+
A. cryaerophius
A. skirowii
+
+
LN
+
5
A. hereius
+
+
NT
(), most strains do not grow at this temperature.
bApproximately 5-10% of C. jejunisolates are hippurate-negative.
V, variable results; NT, not tested; R, resistant 5, susceptible; TSl, triple sugar iron.
Chapter 23 Spiral-Curved Organisms II: Campylobacter and Arcobacter
173
Serodiagnosis. C. fetus ssp. venerealis does not induce
Arcobacter
detectable serum antibodies, but antibodies in vaginal flu-
Members of the genus Arcobacter are associated with diar-
tion test identifies approximately 50% of infected cows,
rhea in livestock, mastitis in cattle, abortions in livestock,
which is useful for herd but not individual cow diagno-
especially swine, and gastroenteritis in humans. The genus 
sis. Agglutinating titers are highest on 30-70 days after
was created in 1991 to accommodate two species of Campy-
infection and persist for approximately 7 months. Sam-
lobacter that grew in air and it now contains 12 species.
ples should be collected 1-2 days before 0r 4-5 days after
The six species that have been isolated from animals are
estrus to prevent excessive dilution of antibodies by the
Arcobacter butzleri, A. cryaerophilus, A. skirrowii, A. thereius,
increased secretions during estrus. The presence of blood
A. cibarius, and A. frophiarium. The remaining species are
invalidates test results and the test cannot differentiate
from shellfish, saltwater, plants, and sewage.
between infected and vaccinated animals. Antibodies in
A. butzleri, A. cryaerophilus, and A. skirrowii are the only
vaginal mucus can also be detected by an enzyme-linked
species isolated from both livestock feces and feces from
    r  
humans with diarrhea, and are the species most likely to
and specificity. The ELISA test can be designed to detect IgA
be animal pathogens. These species have been isolated
and differentiate between infected and vaccinated cattle.
from feces of pigs, cattle, sheep, and horses with and with-
out diarrhea, and from dogs without diarrhea. In humans,
Treatment
A. butzleri is an emerging cause of food- and water-borne
gastroenteritis and has been isolated from the blood. A.
Reproductive Disease (Cattle). Two vaccinations, 3
cryaerophilus and A. butzleri have been isolated from cases
weeks apart with a double dose of vaccine, will clear per-
 of bovine mastitis, and experimentally an Arcobacter iso-
sistently infected bulls of C. fehus ssp. venerealis. Systemic
late from milk caused clinical mastitis. Both species have
streptomycin, topical streptomycin, and topical neomycin
also been isolated from milk from cows without mastitis.
and erythromycin can effectively treat bulls, but if not vac-
All three species are isolated from aborted calves, lambs,
cinated, they are susceptible to reinfection. Yearly vaccina-
and piglets, with isolation of A cryaerophilus from aborted
tion is effective in treatment and prevention of disease in
piglets especially common. However, the organisms are
females.
not associated with pathologic changes, and the bacteria
Bovine venerealcampylobacteriosis is bestcontrolled by
are also isolated from healthy piglets infected in utero and
 prevention. Use of virgin bulls from known negative herds,
from amniotic fluid from normal litters.
avoiding replacement females from herds with unknown
A. fhereius has been isolated from aborted piglets and
histories, and not sharing pastures are good preventative
cloacae of healthy ducks. Its role as a cause of pig abortions
methods. Artificial insemination is a very effective method
is unproven. A. cibarius was isolated from the carcasses of
to control and eliminate the disease.
broilers at slaughter and A. fropharium from feces of healthy
pigs. Neither organism has been associated with disease.
Reproductive Disease (Sheep and Goats). Traditionally,
Arcobacters are commonly isolated from feces of healthy
treatment of Campylobacter abortion storms has consisted
poultry and are not associated with disease. The role of all
of parenteral tetracycline followed by tetracycline in the
Arcobacter species as a cause of animal disease is uncertain.
feed. However, resistance of C. jejuni to tetracycline has
become increasingly common. The 2008 study in which a
large majority of ovine abortion isolates of C. jejuni were
Descriptive Features
from a single clone found that 100% were resistant to
Cellular Products of Medical Interest.
Arcobacters have a
tetracycline. Potential alternatives include tilmicosin, ery-
 gram-negative cell walland polar flagella. TheLPs, LOS, and
thromycin, tylosin, and florfenicol. Vaccination with C.
flagella of many gram-negative bacteria, such as Campy-
fetus ssp. fetus and C. jejuni bacterins in the face of an abor-
lobacter species, play an important role in bacterial patho-
tion storm helps reduce the number of abortions. Vaccina-
genesis. However, the role of LPs, LOS, and flagella of
tion prior to breeding helps prevent the disease.
Arcobacter are unstudied and unknown. Positive evidence
Enteric Disease. Enteritis caused by C. jejuni and other
of toxin production has not been found and virtually noth-
ing is known about which genes are involved in virulence.
campylobacters is usually self-limiting, but occasionally
requires treatment. Macrolide antibiotics are the drugs of
choice. Tetracyclines are often effective when macrolides
Growth Characteristics. Arcobacter species grow under
cannot be used, but tetracycline resistance is becoming
both aerobic and microaerobic conditions and at tempera-
more common. Most campylobacters from animals are sus-
tures as low as 15 *C. Except for a few strains of A. butzleri,
ceptible to fluoroquinolone antibiotics. However, because
they do not grow at 42 *C.
of the high rate of mutational resistance, fluoroquinolones
are not the drugs of choice.
Ecology
Control in the veterinary hospital and kennel requires
meticulous ad herence to hygienic measures, such as hand
Reservoir.
 The reservoirs of Arcobacter are presumably the
washing, cleaning, and disin fection protocols.
intestinal tracts and the environment of infected animals.
There are no vaccines effective in preventing enteritis or
Asymptomatic swine, cattle, poultry, and possibly other
colonization by C. jejuni.
animals may serve as an important reservoir for humans.
174
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Transmission. Most animals are likely infected by inges-
Growth on MacConkey agar at 37 *C is further evidence
tion or entry through other mucosal surfaces. Some are
that an isolate is an Arcobacter species. Fermentation reac-
infected in utero.
tions are used to speciate Arcobacter isolates, but the results
are often not definitive (see Table 23.2). Molecular meth-
Pathogenesis
ods such as PCR and sequencing of the 16SrRNA gene are
more reliable
Very little is known regarding the interactions of Arcobacter
with the host.
Treatment
Epidemiology.
 Asymptomatic infection of the intestinal
Most Arcobacter infections in humans are self-limiting, but
tract of domestic livestock and poultry is common. Asymp-
in cases of prolonged or severe disease, fluoroquinolones
tomatic infection of dogs and horses also occurs, probably
 n     n 
at lower prevalences. The bacteria are also isolated from the
However, resistance to nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin has
animals' environment, raw milk, and water, all of which
 been reported. Treatment of Arcobacter-associated condi-
serve as a reservoir for other animals and humans.
tions in animals is poorly documented.
Immunologic Aspects
Further Reading
Arcobacter specific antibodies were present in colostrum of
naturally infected sows that farrowed piglets congenitally
Blaser MJ, Newell DG, Thompson SA, and Zechner EL (2008)
infected by A. cryaerophilus. Two weeks after birth, most
Chapter 23: Pathogenesis of Campylobacter fetus, in Campy-
congenitally infected piglets were no longer shedding A.
lobacter, 3rd edn (eds Nachamkin I, Szymanski CM, and
cryaerophilus in their feces, but the role of colostral anti-
 Blaser MJ), American Society for Microbiology Press, Wash-
bodies is un known.
ington, DC, pp. 401-428.
Chaban B, Ngeleka M, and Hill JE (2010) Detection and quan-
Laboratory Diagnosis
increase in species richness in feces of diarrheic animals.
Arcobacters have been isolated from
BMC Microbiol, 10, 73.
Sample Collection. A
 Collado L and Figueras MJ (2011) Taxonomy, epidemiology,
stomach contents, kidney, liver, and placenta of aborted
and clinical relevance of the genus Arcobacter. Clin Microbiol
fetuses and milk from cattle. Fecalsamples are used for diag-
Rev, 24(1), 174-192.
nosis of Arcobacter-associated diarrhea and identification of
Dasti J1, Tareen AM, Lugert Ret al. (2010) Campylobacter jejuni:
carrier animals.
A brief overview on pathogenicity-associated factors and
disease-mediating mechanisms. Int / Med Microbiol, 300,
Direct Examination. In studies of swine abortion where
205-211.
fetal samples were directly examined for Arcobacter species,
GorkiewiczG, KienesbergerS,SchoberC etal. (2010)Agenomic
bacteria were not seen. It is impossible to differentiate
island defines subspecies-specific virulence features of the
Arcobacter from Campylobacter without some type of spe-
host-adapted pathogenCampylobacterfetus subsp. venerealis.
cific test, such as fluorescent antibody staining.
/Bacteriol, 192(2), 502-517.
Ho TKH, Lipman LJA, van der Graaf-van Bloois L et al. (2006)
lsolation.
 The same media used to isolate campylobac
 Potential routes of acquisition of Arcobacter species by
ters will support growth of Arcobacter species. Isolation
piglets. Vet Microbiol, 114, 123-133.
from feces is enhanced by the use of commercial Arcobac-
Merga JY, Leatherbarrow AJH, Winstanley C et al. (2011) Com-
ter enrichment broth and agar supplemented with antimi-
parison of Arcobacter isolation methods, and diversity of
Arcobacter spp. in Cheshire, United Kingdom. Appl Environ
 a o    on s o
fungi. One combination contains cefoperazone, ampho-
Microbiol, 77(5), 1646-1650.
tericin B, and teicoplanin and another procedure includes
Mshelia GD, Amin JD, Woldehiwet Z et al. (2010) Epidemi-
ology of bovine venereal campylobacteriosis: Geographic
5-fluorouracil, amphotericin B, cefoperazone, novobiocin,
distribution and recent advances in molecular diagnostic
 and trimethoprim. Culture plates are incubated at 25-30*C
techniques. Reprod Domes Anim, 45, e221-e230.
and at 37 *C and examined daily for 3-5 days. Whether
it is better to incubate aerobically or microaerobically is
Oporto B and Hutado A (20ll) Emerging thermotolerant
Campylobacterspeciesin healthyruminantsand swine.Food-
unproven. Common practices are to incubate all plates
borne Pathog Dis,8(7), 807-813.
microaerobically or to incubate aerobically at 25-30*Cand
Sahin O, Plummer PJ, Jordan DM et al. (2008) Emergence of a
microaerobically at 37 *C.
tetracycline-resistant Campylobacter jejuni clone associated
with outbreaks of ovine abortion in the United States. / Clin
Identification. Small gram-negative, curved rods that are
Microbiol, 46(5), 1663-1671.
positive for oxidase, catalase, and indoxyl acetate hydrol-
Young KT, Davis LM, and DiRita VJ (2007) Campylobacter jejuni:
molecular biology and pathogenesis. Nat Rev Microbiol, 5(9),
 25-30 *C are presumptively identified as Arcobacter species.
665-679.
24
Spiral-Curved Organisms
IV: Helicobacter
MEGAN E. JACOB
Spiral-shaped microorganisms have been noted through-
them motile; the number (range between 4 and 23) and
out the gastrointestinal tract of animals for more than a cen
the location (biopolar, monopolar, etc.) of flagella differ
tury. After Helicobacter pylori was isolated from human gas-
between species.
tric tissue in the 1980s, Helicobacter species were identified
in animals including ferrets, birds, nonhuman primates,
Virulence Factors
dogs, cats, and pigs (Table 24.1). These organisms have
generated a great deal of interest because of their causal
Helicobacter species possess several cellular products of
role in gastric disease. In humans, H. pylori can cause per-
importance; however, not all species produce all products.
sistent gastritis and peptic ulcer disease, and also has been
Some of the virulence factors represented by the genus
linked to the development of gastric adenocarcinoma and
include the following.
gastric mucosal-associated lymphoma. Other Helicobacter
species, identified throughout the oral and gastrointestinal
Flagella. Motility via multiple flagella is characteristic of 
tract and/or liver of most animals, are associated with clin-
Helicobacter species and vital for the organisms’ ability to
ical signs ranging from cancer to gastritis to asymptomatic
penetrate mucus and adhere to gastric epithelial cells. The
carriage.
number and location differ by species; however, all species
The taxonomy of Helicobacter species is complicated, at
possess flagella and most are sheathed.
least partially because of the rapidly expanding list of mem-
bers and improved identification methods. Members of the
Periplamic Fibrils. These fibers (present singly or in
genus are taxonomically distinct from the genus Campy-
groups) wrap helically around the body of some Helicobac.
lobacter, where they were originally classified and which
ter species (e.g., H. felis and H. bilis), but are not present
they resemble morphologically. There appear to be two
on all members. Although associated with motility of the
broad groups of Helicobacter, those that are associated with
organisms, periplasmic fibrils are distinct from flagella and
gastric tissue and those associated with the lower intestine
are located under the outer membrane.
and hepatic regions. Helicobacter species from both groups
are generally considered direct or opportunistic pathogens,
and there is increasing recognition of the group as impor-
Urease. Urease hydrolyzes urea to ammonium and car-
bon. Ammonium ions neutralize stomach acid, thereby
tant zoonotic pathogens.
allowing the bacterium to live in the gastric environment.
Urease is also associated with inflammation. Most Heli-
Descriptive Features
cobacter strains produce urease; however, it seems to be
variably produced by some enterohepatic species.
Morphology and Staining
Adhesins.  Adhesins are proteins that mediate adherence
Helicobacter species are gram-negative bacteria with mor
to target cells in the gastrointestinal tract comprising the
phologies ranging from tightly coiled spirals (e.g., H. pylori,
niche for the strain. H. pylori express at least two adhesins
H. felis, and H. suis) to slightly bent rods (e.g., H. Muste-
with specificity for gastric epithelia, sialic acid-binding
lae and H. baculiformis). Species vary in size with a length
between 1.5 and 10 μm and a width between 0.3 and 1.2
(BabA). Similar adhesins have not been identified in all
 μm. All known Helicobacter species express flagella, making
Helicobacter species.
Original chapter written by Dr. James G. Fox
Lipopolysaccharide. The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the
outer membrane is an important virulence determinant.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
175
176
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 24.1.
Examples of Selected Helicobacter Species Reported from Animal Hosts
Animal Species
Canine
Feline
Swine
Ovine
Bovine
Human
Other
H. pylori
+
+
 Nonhuman primates 
H. felis
1
+
+
Rabbit
Candidatus
 Nonhuman primates 
H. surs
H. canis
+
+
+
H. salomonis
Rabbit 
"Flexispira rappint" or H. rappini
+
H. bizzozeronif
+
+
 Nonhuman primates
H. mustelae
Ferret
H. bilis
Mice
H. hepaticus
Mice
Candidatus
H. bovis
H. pullorum
Birds, Mice
H. cetorum
 Dolphins, wwhales
Notonly is the lipid A component toxic (endotoxin) butthe
Growth Characteristics
length of the side chain in the O-repeat unit also hinders
Helicobacter organisms grow under microaerophilic condi-
the attachment of the membrane attack complex of the
'r ' s rd r e   i s
 complement system to the outer membrane. Helicobacter
LPS is important in the immune response as it is ultimately
grayish white and nonhemolytic colonies, approximately
1-2 mm in size; however, some species do not form distinct
responsible for a release of proinflammatory cytokines and
 also has been associated with the adhesion process in gastric
Pg pamai aq e (am auo on dn) spod onan!
tissues.
visible growth of Helicobacter colonies. Growth will not be
cag Pathogenicity Island and CagA. The cag (for
observed under aerobic conditions; however, the growth
cytotoxin-associated gene) pathogenicity island (PAl) is
of some species may be enhanced with atmospheric hydro-
associated with the pathogenesis of H. pylori strains. Specif-
gen, varying pH, or an enrichment step. The ability for
 ically, the cag PAl encodes a type IV secretion system that
Helicobacter species to grow at 42 *C is also variable, and
may aide in identification.
 mediates translocation of the CagA protein into host cells.
Once inside the cell, CagA is phosphorylated, resulting in
actin rearrangement. The PAl is heterogeneous between
Variability
H. pylori strains, differing on the number of insertion
sequences and related virulence. Various pieces of the cag
A large degree of variability exists between and within Heli-
cobacter species. Related to a high genomic heterogenic-
 PAI and type IV secretion systems have been found in other
ity, variability in phenotypic and growth characteristics,
members of the genus.
as well as virulence factors and sensitivity to antimicro-
Vacuolating Cytotoxin (Vac). The vacuolating cytotoxin,
bials is common. Urease production, nitrate reduction, and
well described in H. pylori, has been associated with the
 indoxyl acetate hydrolysis all can vary between and within
colonization and persistence of the organism in the gas-
Helicobacter species; this variability is often but not always
tric epithelial cell barrier and stimulating an inflamma-
differentiated between species common to the gastroin-
tory response. Previous studies have shown the association 
testinal tract verse en terohepatic species. In addition, some
Helicobacter species can grow at 42 *C, and some require the
between VacA activity in vitro and disease status. The vacA
 gene encodes the cytotoxin that ensures urea availability
presence of hydrogen for growth. The most recognizable
among other functions. VacA has been the subject of vac-
difference between Helicobacter species is the number and
cine intervention research.
placement of flagella, and the presence of periplasmic fib-
rils. Genomically, the G+C moles percent con tent can vary
Cytolethal Distending Toxin. The cytolethal distending
 between 30% and 48% in different Helicobacter species.
toxin (CDT) observed in H. hepaticus and H. pullorum is
highly homologous to the CDT toxin produced by Campy-
Ecology
lobacter jejuni, which is associated with cell cycle arrest in
eukaryotic cells.
Reservoirs
Other miscellaneous cellular products including superox-
Helicobacter species have been identified from numerous
ide dismutase and catalase have also been described in Heli-
sites within animals including the stomach, liver, bile
cobacter species.
duct, and small and large intestine. The degree to which
Chapter 24 Spiral-Curved Organisms IV: Helicobacter
177
       
within animals has not been well described with the
theme to clinical infection is the induction of a chronic
possible exception of enterohepatic species of mice. In gen-
inflammatory response. Previous work with experimen-
eral, gastric Helicobacter species occupy the mucus layer or
tally H. felis-infected dogs reported no correlation between
adhere to the gastric epithelium tissue. While some Heli-
the number of organisms colonizing and the degree of
cobacter species can infect a number of different animal
gastric inflammation. Gastric Helicobacter-like organisms
species, others are more specific, infecting only one known
in cats have demonstrated good correlation between the
host. Multiple Helicobacter species have been shown to
degree of colonization and the lymphoid follicles; how.
infect an individual animal.
ever, the correlation was not obvious in dogs. The lack of
It is estimated that a large proportion (>50%) of the
stan dard criteria for evaluating histological changes makes
human population carries H. pylori and potentially addi-
interpretation of these results difficult; however, it seems
tional species within their gastrointestinal tract. Helicobac-
likely that individual host factors are large contributors to
ter organisms also appear to be highly prevalent in dogs and
the degree and type of pathogenesis, with some individuals
cats with studies finding 80-100% of subjects infected with
may remaining asymptomatic. Genes related to motility,
at least one species. A number of non-H. pylori species have
acid neutralization/acclimation, chemotaxis, and adher-
been identified in dogs including Helicobacter bizzozeronii,
ence have been identified in numerous Helicobacter species.
felis, heilmannii, and bilis among others. Studies evaluating
These, in addition to virulence factors like LPs, VacA, ure-
Helicobacter suis prevalence in slaughter pigs found at least
ase, and the cag PAl all likely contribute to the immune
60% of the population colonized. The enterohepatic Heli-
response, and subsequently, clinical manifestation.
cobacter species (H. hepaticus and H. bilis) are particularly
prevalent and important in the mice population (includ-
Immunologic Aspects
ing laboratory animals), and reports of >60% prevalence
 Of H. pullorum have been reported in poultry populations.
Helicobacter species have been found in virtually every ani-
The immune system is an important mediator for
mal examined including sheep, monkeys, ferrets, whales,
Helicobacter-induced pathogenesis. A chronic inflamma-
dolphins, geese, and numerous others, although the preva.
tory response is typically associated with infection; how-
lence of Helicobacter and the distribution of specific species
ever, the regulation of the immune response can also
in these populations is less well established.
breakdown. The immune response mechanism leading to
pathology has been most commonly studied in mice; how-
ever, likely differs between Helicobacter species and hostani-
Transmission
mals. As an example, work with H. felis in mice revealed that
Both oral-oral and fecal-oral are hypothesized transmis-
cellular infiltrate was composed of neutrophils, B cells, and
sion routes for Helicobacter species. There is some evidence
CD4 T cells. Of these, T cells were shown to be the most criti-
 to support spread by both routes. The ability of organisms
to survive outside of the gastrointestinal en vironment and
mice, was shown to be related to a Th1-mediated immune
be spread through other means is controversial and has
response. The precise response from infection with differ-
not been resolved. Although additional vehicles may exist,
ent species of Helicobacter in different animal species is not
they are not considered the primary mode of transmission.
fully understood.
Animals infected with Helicobacter generally produce a
significant IgG response against the organisms, and spe-
Zoonotic Potential
cifc serum IgG antibodies to gastric Helicobacters in ani-
There are strong indications that Helicobacter species can
mals have been used to diagnose both naturally and experi-
be zoonotically transferred between humans and animals.
mentally in fected animals. Analyses of serum and mucosal
secretions by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in H.
Humans have been infected by numerous different Heli-
cobacter species, and contact with different animal species
pylori naturally infected cats reveal an H. pylori-specific IgG
response, and elevated IgA anti-H. pylori antibody levels in
has been associated with infection. There is some evi-
salivary and local gastric secretions. Like humans, though
dence that similar strains are present in humans and their
helpful in diagnosis, neither secretory nor serum antibody
pets. Helicobacter species also have been isolated from milk
products on several occasions. Zoonotic transmission is
most commonly considered in non-H. pylori species, where
human prevalence (estimated at 6%) is typically lower than 
Laboratory Diagnosis
H. pylori prevalence (estimated at 50%); however, cats har-
 boring H. pylori have been reported as a zoonotic risk
Direct Examination
Diagnosis of Helicobacter-associated chronic gastritis can-
Pathogenesis
not be made with gross visual endoscopic examination.
Other means of diagnosis vary in their degree of sensitivity.
Numerous studies have shown that gastric Helicobacter
Spiral bacteria can be observed with cytologic examination
species alter the gastric physiology. There also appear to be
of impression smears or with a Gram stain on homoge-
nized gastric tissue. Gastric brushing cytology can be per-
the degree of pathology, the site of infection and the Heli
formed during routine endoscopy. Cells and mucus that
178
PART I  Bacteria and Fungi
adhere to the brush are applied to a glass slide, air-dried
protocols are increasingly used for detection of “Helicobac-
and stained with a Giemsa stain. For visualization of gastric
ter DNA" from gut contents in various animal species.
Helicobacter organisms, oil immersion magnification
 In addition, the complete genome of several Helicobacter
(100x) is used. The urease activity of these gastric bacte-
 species including H. pylori, H. suis and H. felis have been 
ria is frequently utilized as a diagnostic test, particularly for
sequenced and annotated, aiding in the rapid expansion of
H. pylori. The urease test is commercially available, detect-
 molecular identification techniques. New meth ods includ-
 ing urease activity in gastric tissue within 15 min to 3 h.
ing FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) and Western
Additionally, a gastric biopsy can be minced and placed
blot analysis have recently been described as diagnostic
directly into urea broth and a positive reaction obtained in
techniques for human samples.
1 h gives a presumptive diagnosis.
Treatment and Control
Isolation and Identification
Samples from gastric or intestinal biopsies are ideal sub-
Treatment for Helicobacter infection is controversial and
missions for Helicobacter detection by culture or molecu-
most commonly infection is thought to be subclinical. In
 lar methods (see Section “Molecular Methods"). Gastric 01
addition, these organisms have been shown to quickly
intestinal contents or feces can be submitted, although
develop resistance to antimicrobials; therefore, treating
recovery is less predictable. Liver biopsies may also be
Helicobacter infections should be based on lesions causing
submitted for detection in appropriate suspect patients.
clinical illness. A combination of amoxicillin and metron-
Helicobacter species are fastidious, microaerophilic, and
idzole or clarithromycin with omeprazole or famotidine
biochemically unreactive. Higher hydrogen levels gener-
 have been most commonly reported for treatment of dogs
ally enhance recovery of the enterohepatic Helicobacters
and cats with gastric Helicobacterinfections; however, triple
in culture; however, they can be isolated on the same
therapy may not result in long-term eradication of the
medium as gastric Helicobacters. The organisms are typi-
 Organism from the host.
cally isolated using a rich medium like brucella blood agar
with antibiotics including trimethoprim, vancomycin, and
polymyxin B. Some species remain diffcult to isolate
Further Reading
requiring specific pH or enrichment techniques and some
may even be uncultivable. Because Helicobacter species
Mobley HLT, Mendz GL, and Hazell SL (eds) (2001)
may have different antibiotic susceptibilities, selection of
Helicobacter pylori: Physiology and Genetics, ASM Press,
antibiotics in culture media may aide in successful isola-
Washington, DC
tion. Finally, the use of 0.45 or 0.65 micron filters to selec-
Haesebrouck F, Pasmans F, Flahou B et al. (2009) Gastric Heli-
tively filter feces has been recommended to help minimize
 cobacters in domestic animals and nonhuman primates and
contamination from other enteric organisms during pri-
their significance for human health. Clin Microbiol Rev, 22,
mary culture on selective agar.
202-223.
Harbour S and Sutton P (2008) Immunogenicity and
Molecular Methods
pathogenicity of Helicobacter infections of veterinary ani-
mals. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 122, 191-203.
Neiger R and Simpson KW (20o0) Helicobacter infection in dogs
ulence proteins, as well as primers specific for segments
 and cats: facts and fiction. / Vet Intern Med, 14, 125-133.
of DNA encoding the 16S rRNA, have been described
 Smet A, Flahou B, Mukhopadhya I et al. (20ll) The other Heli-
in the literature. Specialized polymerase chain reaction
cobacters. Helicobacter, 16 (Suppl. 1), 70-75.
25
Spiral-Ccurvec
rganisms V: Leptospira
RANCE B. LEFEBVRE
Leptospirae are spirochetes, morphologically and physio-
Descriptive Features
logically uniform, but serologically and epidemiologically
diverse. Domestic animals most commonly affected are
Morphology and Staining
 dogs, cattle, swine, and horses. Late-term abortion is the
hallmark manifestation in any pregnant animal, includ-
Leptospirae are thin (Greek leptos = thin) spiral organisms
ing humans, exposed to leptospirosis for the first time. The
most common manifestations in canine leptospirosis are
01 phase-contrast microscopy for visualization. The spirals
septicemic, hepatic, and renal. In cattle and swine, septic
illness is largely confined to the young, while abortion is
have a hook at each end making them S- or C-shaped. Wet
the principal manifestation in adults. Abortion and equine
mounts reveal them to be highly motile.
recurrent uveitis, or moon blindness, are the most common
Leptospirae are gram-negative, but unrecognizable in
manifestations in horses. California sea lions are suscepti
    ss  x 
ble to acute, septicemic leptospiral infections. Other host
by fluorescent antibody or silver impregnation (Figure
species, though susceptible to infection, develop clinical
32.1).
signs less frequently. Leptospirosis in humans is typically
an acute febrile disease.
Cellular Anatomy and Composition
Taxonomy studies, based on DNA analyses, have led to
the description of eight pathogenic species: Leptospira borg-
Leptospiral cells consist of an outer sheath, axial fibrils
peterseni, L. inadai, L. interrogans sensu stricto, L. kirschneri,
("endoflagella"), and a cytoplasmic cylinder. The outer
L. meyeri, L. noguchii, L. santarosai, and L. weili. Leptospires
sheath combines features ofa capsule and outer membrane.
have historically been classified by antigenic composition,
The cytoplasmiccylinder is covered by a cell membrane and
which are divided into 23 serogroups and greater than 200
the peptidoglycan layer of the cell wall.
serovars. Reference to serovars is more common in clini-
A relatively feeble endotoxin is present in the cell wall.
cal settings. Serovars important in North America and their
A hemolysin, sphingomyelinase C, is associated with some
principal hosts and clinical hosts (in parentheses) are as
serovars, and cytotoxicity has been demonstrated in vivo.
follows:
Growth Characteristics
Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae: rodents (dogs, horses, cat-
tle, and swine)
Leptospirae are obligate aerobes, which grow optimally at
Leptospira grippotyphosa: rodents (dogs, cattle, and
29-30 *C. Generation time averages about 12 h. No growth
swine)
occurs on blood aga1 0r other routine media. Traditional
Leptospira canicola: dogs (swine and cattle)
media are essentially rabbit serum (<10%) in solutions
Leptospira pomona: cattle and swine (horses, sheep, and
ranging from normal saline to mixtures of peptones, vita-
sea lions)
mins, electrolytes, and buffers. Some newer media have
Leptospira hardjo: cattle
substituted polysorbates and bovine albumin for rabbit
Leptospira bratislava: swine (horses and sea lions).
serum. Protein is not required. Unlike most prokaryotes,
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
179
180
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
leptospirae are not able to synthesize their own pyrim-
infected animals contain cytotoxic factors producing vas-
idines; thus, 5-fluorouracil is added to the media to in hibit
cular lesions.
other bacterial growth.
The spirochetes enter the bloodstream subsequent to
 Most media are fluid or semisolid (0.1% agar). In fluid
mucous membrane or reproductive inoculation, coloniz-
media, little turbidity develops. In semisolid media, growth 
ing particularly liver and kidney, where they produce
is concentrated in a disk about 0.5 cm below the surface
degenerative changes. Other affected organs may be mus-
referred to as a dinger zone.
 cles, eyes, and meninges, where a nonsuppurative menin-
gitis may develop. Leptospirae damage vascular endothe-
lium, resulting in hemorrhages. All serovars produce these
Biochemical Reactions
changes to varying degrees. L. pomona in cattle causes
Leptospirae are oxidase- and catalase-positive; many have
intravascular hemolysis due to a hemolytic exotoxin.
lipase activity. Some produce urease. Identification beyond 
Autoimmune phenomena may also contribute to this con-
 genus is based on serology. However, the development of
dition. Secondary changes include icterus due to liver dam-
species-specific DNA primers in conjunction with the poly-
age and blood destruction, and acute, subacute, or sub-
merase chain reaction (PCR) is a promising new develop-
chronic nephritis due to renal tubular injury. The cellular
ment for a more accurate characterization of pathogenic
exudates predominantly contain lymphocytes and plasma
leptospirae.
cells. In surviving animals, leptospirae disappear from cir-
 in the kidneys for many weeks (Figure 32.1).
Resistance
        
Disease Patterns
freezing, heat (50 *C/10 min), soap, bile salts, detergents,
 acidic environments, and putrefaction. They persist in a
 Most leptospiralinfections run an inapparentcourse proba-
moist, temperate environment at neutral to slightly alka-
bly due to in fection of the animal by a host-adapted serovar.
 Clinicalin fections manifesting overt symptoms are primar-
ily due to non-host-adapted serovar in fections. These occur
mainly in dogs, cattle, and swine; increasingly in sea lions; 
Yariability
occasionally in horses, goats, and sheep; exceptionally in
Greater than 200 serovars of pathogenic leptospirae exist.
cats.
They vary in host, geographic distribution, and in virulence
factors and thus, pathogenicity.
Dogs.
 Leading serovars involved are L. icterohaemorha
giae and L. canicola, with the latter the more common.
Increasing numbers of acute renal failure due to grippoty.
Ecology
 phosa infections are being reported.
The most acute form affects young pups preferentially,.
Reservoir
produces fever without localizing signs, and is commonly
Leptospira spp. inhabit the tubules of mammalian kidneys.
fatal within days. Hemorrhages are often apparent ante.
Although leptospirae have been isolated from birds, rep-
mortem on mucous membranes and skin, or manifested
tiles, amphibians, and invertebrates, theepidemiologic sig-
by epistaxis or by blood-stained feces and vomitus. Jaun-
nificance of such associations is not established.
dice is absent.
 Rodents are the most frequent leptospiral carriers, with 
The icteric type runs a slower course, and hemorrhages
wild carnivores ranking second. No mammal can be
 are less conspicuous. Icterus is prominent. Renal localiza-
excluded as a possible host. Typically reservoir hosts show
tion causes nitrogen retention, while renal casts and leuko-
minimal, if any, signs of disease. Abortion is always a prob-
 cytes appear in the urine.
The uremic type, centered in the kidneys, results subse-
lem in pregnant animals exposed for the first time. Lep-
tospirae and serovars L. icterohaemorhagiae, L. canicola, L.
quent to either of the type of infections described earlier or
pomona, L. hardjo, and L. grippotyphosa occur on all conti-
 may develop in their absence. It may be acute and rapidly
fatal with signs of gastrointestinal upsets, uremic breath,
nents.
and ulcerations in the anterior alimentary tract; or it may
run a slow course with delayed onset.
Transmission
Exposure is through contact of mucous membranes or skin
Cattle.
. The predominant manifestation of bovine lep-
with urine-contaminated water, fomites, or feed. Other
tospirosis is abortion, usually late term, but may occur at
sources are milk from acutely infected cows and genital
any time following infection. Abortion is due to primary
excretions from cattle and swine of either sex.
fetal death rather than placental infection. Fetal reten-
tion with progressive autolysis is common. Abortion due
to L. hardjo, the host adapted serogroup for cattle, is pri-
Pathogenesis
 marily a problem of heifers in dairies due to manage.
ment practices that differ between beef cattle and dairy
Clinical and pathological manifestations suggest toxic
operations. L. hardjo infections affect calves in utero lead-
mechanisms. Filtrates of tissue fluids from experimentally
ing to either abortion or “weak-calf syndrome." These
Chapter 25
Spiral-Curved Organisms V: Leptospira
181
infections are often subclinical or may be marked by
ated with the presence of cold hemagglutinins, sug-
“milk-drop syndrome,” reproductive failure, and infertil-
gesting an autoimmune process. The relative roles of
ity. Chronic infection of the kidneys and the shedding of
this and the bacterial hemolysin are uncertain.
leptospirae in urine are common .
2.
 Canine chronic interstitial nephritis is common and
Acute leptospirosis due to L. pomona mostly affects
may be a postleptospiral lesion. Evidence of biofilm
calves and sometimes adult cattle. It is marked by fever,
formation could explain chronic degradation of kid -
hemoglobinuria, icterus, anemia, and a fatality rate of
ney tissue and the intermittent shedding ofleptospi-
5-15%.
rae in otherwise healthy animals. A leptospiral etiol-
In some parts of the world, Leptospira grippotyphosa,
L. icterohaemorrhagiae, and L. canicola cause bovine lep-
and the presence of leptospiral antibody, particu-
tospirosis.
larly in urine.
3.
 Strong evidence of a leptospiral basis for equine
Swine. The serovars implicated in porcine leptospirosis
recurrent iridocyclitis (uveitis, periodic ophthalmia,
include L. pomona, L. icterohaemorrhagiae, L. canicola, L.
and moon blindness) rests in part on the actual cul-
tarassovi, L. bratislava, and L. muenchen. As in bovine lep-
ture of leptospirae from the eyes of affected horses,
PCR-positive results of aqueous humor samples, and
especially in piglets, while abortion and infertility are the
leptospiral titers in the serum of affected horses.
manifestations in sows.
Horses. Equine leptospirosis is due most often to serovars
Mechanisms of Resistance and Recovery
L. pomona, L. grippotyphosa, and L. icterohaemorrhagiae.
Recovery from acute leptospirosis coincides with the cessa-
Signs in natural infections have been fever, mild icterus,
tion of septicemia and the appearance of circulating anti-
and abortion. Leptospirosis is probably involved in equine
body, usually during the second week of infection. P10-
recurrent iridocyclitis (periodic ophthalmia).
tective antibody is of IgM and IgG isotype and is directed
mainly at the outer sheath antigens.
Other Animals. In small ruminants, leptospirosis, usually
Agglutinating antibody (mostly IgM), which may per-
due to L. pomona, resembles that seen in cattle. Infections
with L hardjoand L. grippotyphosa also occur. Epidemics due
sist for years after recovery, is no indication of immunity,
nor of the shedder state, which may exist in the absence
to L. pomona have caused high mortality among California
of antibody or have terminated before its disappearance.
sea lions periodically since the 1940s.
Evidence of leptospiral biofilm formation may explain the
Humans. Humans are susceptible to all serovars with
cause of refractile, protracted infections.
no host-adapted strains identified. Infections cause fever,
Immunity following recovery is generally solid and
icterus, muscular pains, rashes, and nonsuppurative
serovar specific, but repeated abortions due to L. hardjohave
meningitis, manifestations varying somewhat with the
been seen in cows.
serovars involved. A malignant form, most often associated
with L. icterohaemorhagiae, can cause fatal liver or renal dis-
Artificial Immunization
ease.
Vaccination by bacterins is used on dogs (bivalent contain-
Epidemiology
ing icterohaemorrhagiae and canicola, or multivalent con-
taining pomona and grippotyphosa added to the bivalent).
Leptospirosis is perpetuated by the many tolerant hosts and
Cattle swine use at least a pentavalent bacterin containing
the protracted shedder state. Indirect exposure depends on
hardjo,pomona,canicola,iterohaemorrhagiae,and grippoty
mild and wet conditions, which favor environmental sur-
phosa with the addition of serovar bratislava and a second
vival of leptospirae. More direct transfer occurs by urine
aerosols in milking barns, cattle sheds, or canine courting
cinated depending on their occupation, for example, sewer
habits, which may explain the male bias of canine lep-
workers and slaughterhouse workers. Protection is serovar
tospirosis.
specific and temporary, requiring at least annual boost-
Contaminated bodies of water are important sources of
ers. Vaccination prevents overt disease but not necessarily
infection to livestock, aquatic mammals, and humans. Ani-
infection.
mal handlers, sewer workers, field hands, miners, and vet-
erinarians are at increased risk of exposure.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Immunologic Factors
Diagnosis ofleptospirosis must be established by laboratory
Immune Mechanisms of Disease
confirmation.
Immunologic mechanisms may relate to some features of
Sample Collection
leptospiral disease:
From living subjects, blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, uter-
1.
The hemolytic anemia characteristic of septicemic
ine fluids, and placental cotyledons are examined. Blood
leptospirosis due to L. pomona in ruminants is associ
is usually negative after the first febrile phase. Milk is
182
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
destructive to leptospirae and not a promising source of
tests, complement fixation tests, and enzyme-linked anti-
cultures. Urine should always be tested.
body assays. Paired samples are preferred: one collected at
 From cadavers, including aborted fetuses, kidneys are
first presentation and the other 2 weeks later. If leptospiro-
 most likely to harbor leptospirae. In septic fatalities (includ.
sis was the problem, a fourfold or greater rise in titer should
ing abortions), many organs, especially the liver, spleen,
have occurred in the interval. In bovine abortion, these
lung, brain, and eye, may contain the agent.
 relations may not hold. This is because hardjo infections of
Culturing is done promptly after sample collection,
cattle elicit a very poor immune response, which is proba-
although leptospirae can survive in oxalated human blood
bly due to their adaptation to this animal species.
for 11 days.
 Antibody persists for extended periods postinfection.
 Postvaccination titers are lower and decline well before the
vaccination immunity. Agglutination titers are type spe-
Direct Examination
cific. Diagnostic laboratories generally maintain all com-
mon serovars for serologic testing.
Methods of direct visual demonstration are wet mounts,
examined by dark-field (or phase) microscopy; immunoflu-
 orescent stains, and silver impregnation of fixed tissue.
Treatment and Control
 Routine dark-field microscopy should be limited to
urine. Other body fluids contain artifacts similar to lep-
Leptospirae are susceptible to penicillin, tetracycline,
tospirae. Brief, low-speed centrifugation clears the speci-
 chloramphenicol, streptomycin, and erythromycin. Treat-
men ofinterfering particles, but will not sediment leptospi-
ment, to be of benefit, has to be instituted early, pos-
rae. Methods using formalinized urine have been described,
sibly even prophylactically in cases of known exposure.
but they destroy motility, and motility aids in the identifi-
Doxycycline is used to treat humans prophylactically.
cation ofleptospira. Negative results of directexaminations
Streptomycin or dihydrostreptomycin is routinely used to
do not rule out leptospirosis.
eliminate the carrier state in animals. However, sustained
 Fluorescent antibody has been used on fluids, tissue sec-
leptospiral infection in the kidneys and reproductive tracts
tions, homogenates, organ impressions, and, most effec-
of cattle subsequent to antibiotic treatment is not uncom-
tively, on aborted bovine fetuses, where examination of
mon, again suggesting the presence of leptospiral biofilm
kidney was most rewarding. Silver-impregnated sections
formation.
 must be interpreted with caution, since argyrophilic tissue
Vaccination generally prevents disease. It prevents nei-
fibrils can mimic leptospirae.
ther infection nor shedding.
 DNA amplification using PCR and specific DNA primers
has become an excellent diagnostic tool for detecting the
 presence of leptospirae in animal tissues and fluids.
For More Information
CFSPH Technical Fact Sheets. Leptospirosis at http://
Isolation and Identification
www.cfsph.iastate.edu/Diseaselnfo/CDC website. Lepto-
Ellinghausen-McCullough-Johnson-Harris
medium
spirosis at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/diseaseinfo/
(EMJH) is a good isolation medium, especially for L. hardjo,
leptospirosis_g_pet.htm.
the slowest growing of the common serovars. Replicate
inoculations are made into liquid media with and with-
out selective inhibitors (5-fluorouracil, neomycin, and
Further Reading
cycloheximide). Media are examined microscopically at
intervals during incubation for up to several months.
Acierno MJ (2011) Continuous renal replacement therapy in
 Animal inoculation (hamsters or guinea pigs) eliminates
 dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 41, 135-
minor contaminants from the primary inoculum, which
146.
is injected intraperitoneally. Blood is drawn periodically
 Adler B and de la Pena Moctezuma A (2010) Leptospira and
for culture starting a few days after inoculation. After 3-4
leptospirosis. Vet Microbiol, 140, 287-296.
weeks, the animals are killed and their kidneys are exam-
 Burke RL, Kronmann KC and Daniels CC (2012) A review of
ined and cultured for leptospirae. If infected with leptospi-
zoonotic disease surveillance supported by the Armed Forces
rae, they will have developed antibody. Any isolate recov-
Health Surveillance Center. Zoonoses Public Heaith, 59, 164--
rd i   s   p
175.
as Leptospira sp. Definitive identification is carried out by
 Ellis WA (2010) Control of canine leptospirosis in Europe: time
reference laboratories (Center for Disease Control, Atlanta,
for a change? Vet Rec, 167, 602-605.
GA, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA).
Ellis WA and Little TWA (eds) (1986) The present state of lep-
 tospirosis diagnosis and control. Proceedings of the Seminar of
the EEC Programme of Coordination of Research on Animal
Serology.
 Since direct examination is often unreliable
Pathology, 10-11 October 1984, Belfast, Northern Ireland.
and culture laborious, expensive, and slow, serology is the
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster,
 most common diagnostic method. The microscopic agglu-
for the Commission of the European Communities, pp. 247.
tination test employing live antigen is most widely used.
Goldstein RE (2010) Canine leptospirosis. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract, 40, 1091-1101.
Chapter 25
Spiral-Curved Organisms V: Leptospira
183
Hartskeerl RA, Collares-Pereira M and Ellis WA (20ll) Emer-
Marr JS and Cathey JT (2010) New hypothesis for cause of
 gence, control and re-emerging leptospirosis: dynamics of
epidemic among native Americans, New England, 1616-
infection in the changing world. Clin Microbiol Infect, 17,
1619. Emerg Infect Dis, 16, 281-286.
494-501.
Revich B, Tokarevich N and Parkinson AJ (2012) Climate
 Koizumi N and Yasutomi 1 (2012) Prevalence of leptospirosis 
change and zoonotic infections in the Russian Arctic. Int
 in farm animals. Ipn / Vet Res, 60 (Suppl), S55-S58.
ICircumpolar Health,23,18792.
Leshem E, Meltzer E and Schwartz E (2011) Travel-associated
Tulsiani SM, Graham GC, Moore PR et al. (2011) Emerging
zoonotic bacterial diseases. Curr Opin Infect Dis, 24,
 tropical diseases in Australia. Part 5. Hendra virus. Ann Trop
457-463.
Med Parasitol, 105, 1-11.
26
Staphylococcus
MARK S. SMELTZER AND KAREN E. BEENKEN
The staphylococci are spherical gram-positive bacteria that
Staphylococcal Species
divide in multiple planes to form irregular clusters. Other
defining characteristics include the production of catalase,
The number of staphylococcal species continues to grow,
a unique peptidoglycan composition, and a G+C con-
largely owing to the development of detailed molecular
tent below 40%. The staphylococci are present on the skin
typing techniques. A 1999 paper listed 39 species and sub-
and epithelial surfaces of all warm-blooded animals. Based
species and proposed guidelines for the identification of
on modern era molecular typing schemes, the number of
 new staphylococcal species based on both phenotypic and
genotypic criteria. Since that time, new species have been
tinction remains the production of coagulase. Coagulase
identified, one prominent example of particular impor-
is an enzyme capable of activating prothrombin, thereby
tance in veterinary medicine being the SIG species Staphylo-
promoting the coagulation of plasma. This distinction is
coccus pseudintermedius. While species distinctions include
important in that Staphylococcus aureus is without ques-
consideration of phenotypic characteristics, the hallmark
tion the most prominent cause of disease in both man
has become DNA sequence divergence as reflected either in
and animals, and unlike most other staphylococcal species,
 DNA-DNA hybridization studies or more targeted compar-
it is coagulase positive. In fact, given the predominance
isons between highly conserved genes, the most notable
 Of S. aureus, it is often underappreciated that there are
of these being those encoding ribosomal RNA. There is
      
mounting evidence to suggest that these species distinc-
tions also play an important role in defining host range,
One example is species of the Staphylococcus intermedius
 (    s 
group (SIG), which are a prominent if not predominant
delphini (dolphins), S. equorum (horses), S. felis (cats), S.
cause of canine pyodermas. It is also important to recog.
gallinarum (chicken), S. lentus (goats), S. hyicus (pigs),
nize that essentially all coagulase-negative species (CNS)
S. intermedius and S. pseudintermedius (dogs), and S. simiae
are capable of causing infection in man and animals, one
(monkeys). However, none of these host associations are
important example in veterinary medicine being bovine
absolute. Indeed, even a cursory search of the literature
mastitis. Molecular characterization has also led to iden-
will reveal reports describing the isolation of each of these
tification of clonal lineages within each species, and in
species from other hosts including humans, often in asso-
some cases, these also appear to have general associations
ciation with disease. As an example, S. hyicus is most com-
with infections in animals. For example, S. aureus iso-
monly associated with exudative dermatitis in pigs, but it is
lates of the ST398 clonal lineage are a prominent cause
also a prominent cause of bovine mastitis, and was recently
of infections in pigs, and there is some evidence to suggest
described as a cause of bacteremia in a farmer that arose as
that this may reflect adaptations that favor colonization
a zoonotic infection.
of the porcine host. Thus, it is important to consider the
Recent years have also seen the recognition of poten-
staphylococci in the specificcon textof veterinary medicine
tially important clonal lineages within a single staphylo.
at the level of both species and clonal distinctions. Our
coccal species. As might be expected, this is particularly true
goal here is not to be comprehensive in this regard but
with respect to S. aureus. Methods commonly used to make
rather to provide the reader with a sufficient understand-
such distinctions include pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
ing of such differences to provide both the background
(PFGE), sequence typing of the genes encoding protein
necessary for practicing veterinarians to effectively diag-
 '(i) s as so pe '(s rds) 
nose and treat staphylococcal infections and the impetus
method based on sequence divergence among seven highly
for further research to explore and clinically exploit such
conserved housekeeping genes. Related MLST (ST) types are
differences.
sometimes included within the same clonal complex (CC).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Kermedy ard M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
184
Chapter 26 Staphylococcus
185
Among methicillin-resistant strains, particularly those of S.
aureus, the SIG species, and the CNS Staphylococcus epider-
FIGURE 26.1.
Hemolytic colonies of Staphylococcus
midis, typing methods have also been developed on the
aureus on blood agar.
basis of sequence variation in the staphylococcal chro-
mosome cassette that contains the mecA gene (SCCmec),
which encodes the alternative penicillin-binding protein
that is the primary determinant of methicillin resistance
in all staphylococcal species. Just as there is evidence to
suggest that certain staphylococcal species exhibit distinct
patterns of host colonization and consequently infection,
there is also evidence that this is true of clonal lineages,
particularly those ofS. aureus. However, as with the species
themselves, none of these are absolute, perhaps owing
to widespread horizontal transfer of critical virulence fac-
tor genes between staphylococcal species. For example, S.
aureus isolates of the ST398 lineage were first recognized as
an important cause of infections in pigs, but it has since
been demonstrated that livestock veterinarians are also at
increased risk of infection with methicillin-resistant iso-
lates of the ST398 clonal lineage.
Descriptive Features
Morphology and Staining
Staphylococci are 0.5-1.5 μm in diameter and stain
strongly gram-positive. In exudates, they form clusters,
pairs, or short chains. They do not form spores but are
cause of similar types of infection in both man and animals,
extremely resilient and can survive in harsh environments
it is important to distinguish these hemolytic reactions
and on inanimate objects for long periods. While often
from those of the streptococci. Specifically, among strep-
underappreciated, this resiliency is no doubt a major con-
tributing factor to the pathogenesis of all staphylococcal
erythrocytes, which among the staphylococci is character-
infections because it allows the bacteria to persist in the
istic of α-toxin. The incomplete lysis that is characteristic
immediate environment of their hosts, thus providing the
of staphylococcal β-toxin has also been used to diagnostic
opportunity for infection should conditions in the host
advantage. For example, Streptococcus agalactiae, which is
allow. The staphylococci do not produce flagella and are
a Lancefield Group B species that, like S. aureus, is a com-
not motile. On blood agar, colonies are round and rela-
mon cause of bovine mastitis, produces an extracellular
factor that is also synergistic with staphylococcal β-toxin,
S. aureus produces carotenoid pigments that confer a golden
thus yielding a characteristic CAMP pattern of increased
color, particularly on certain types of media, while colonies
hemolytic activity when the two speciesare grown on blood
of other species are generally white. This is not a trivial dif-
agar in close proximity to each other (Figure 26.2). Interest-
ference in that the production of these pigments has been
ingly, most S. aureus isolates associated with infections in
directly associated with the increased vinulence ofS. aureus.
cattle produce β-toxin, while most human isolates do not
Unlike CNS, most strains of S. aureus, and to a some-
owing to the presence of a lysogenic prophage within the
whatlesser extent, other coagulase-positive species, are tox-
corresponding hlb gene.
igenic. One manifestation of this is that they are hemolytic
When considering colony morphology and hemolytic
on blood agar (Figure 26.1). Toxins detectable on blood agar
reactions, it is important to recognize that many primary
include α-, β-, and &-toxin, each of which exhibits unique
isolates from both animals and humans grow as small-
properties. α-Toxin is a pore-forming toxin that causes the
colony variants (SCVs). These are metabolically inactive
complete lysis of appropriate erythrocytes, most notably
variants that yield much smaller colonies (<1 mm), are typ-
those of rabbits. In contrast, β-toxin is an sphingomyeli-
ically nonhemolytic irrespective of species, and, perhaps
most importantly, exhibit reduced antibiotic susceptibil-
3-Toxin also generates a form of incomplete lysis that is
ity even in the absence of issues of acquired antibiotic resis-
enhanced by incubation at 4 *C, thus accounting for ref-
tance. The latter attribute greatly complicates treatment of
erences to β-toxin as a “hot-cold" hemolysin. &-Toxin is
staphylococcal infections in both man and animals, and
a phenol-soluble modulin closely associated with the agr
 is almost certainly why SCVs are responsible for persistent
infections including bovine mastitis. In the diagnostic lab-
"Regulation of Pathogenesis"). The activity of α- and β-
oratory, this is a reversible phenotype in that subculture
toxin is antagonistic, while that of β- and &-toxin is syner-
of SCVs on rich medium will result in the more typical
gistic. Because the staphylococci and streptococci are the
186
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
Biochemical Characterization
FIGURE 26.2.
Hemolytic CAMP test reaction on blood
agar, demonstrating zone of enhanced hemolysis at the
Most staphylococcal species are facultative anaerobes, but
intersection of Staphylococcus aureus and 6-hemolytic
at least two species and/or subspecies (S. aureus ssp. anaer-
streptococci.
obius and S. saccharolyticus) include strains that cannot
grow aerobically. These are also the only staphylococcal
species that do not produce catalase, an enzyme that con-
verts hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen. The produc-
tion of catalase by all other staphylococcal species allows
fo1 their easy discrimination from other medically relevant
gram-positive cocci including streptococcaland enterococ-
cal species, all of which are catalase-negative. All staphylo-
coccal species are able to grow in high concentrations of
salt and over a relatively wide temperature range.
At the species level, distinguishing characteristics
include carbohydrate fermentation/oxidation patterns
and other biochemical tests including those for nitrate
reductase, alkaline phosphatase, arginine dihydrolase,
ornithine decarboxylase, urease, and cytochrome oxidase.
However, species classification based on such methods has
largely been supplanted by the use of molecular tech-
niques. Exceptions to this include the aforementioned
production of coagulase and hemolytic activity, both of
which remain mainstay diagnostic tests. Once again, while
catalase-positive, coagulase-positive, hemolytic staphylo-
coccal isolates are often identified as S. aureus, other species
also exhibit all of these characteristics and are capable of
causing infections in both man and animals. The most
prominent example is the SIG species, primary members
of which include S. intermedius, S. pseudintermedius, and S.
 delphini. These species have been isolated from dogs, cats,
but it remains an important consideration that can impact
critical issues including the failure to diagnose infection in
horses and birds, and they are difficult to distinguish from
each other and from S. aureus without the use of molec-
a timely manner.
Most strains of S. aureus are encapsulated, with some
ular techniques because, in addition to being coagulase-
reports suggesting the existence of as many as 11 capsu-
positive, all produce similar extracellular proteins includ-
lar serotypes. However, four of these (serotypes 1, 2, 5,
ing hemolysins and a thermostable nuclease. However,
  d g sd an r  a  
est. Isolates of serotypes 1 and 2 are heavily encapsulated
consequently are generally negative in commercially avail-
able rapid identification kits for S. aureus. Other coagulase-
to the point of appearing mucoid an agar medium, but they
positive or at least "coagulase-variable" species that are also
are rarely isolated by comparison to microencapsulated
sometimes confused with S. aureus include S. schteiferissp.
isolates of serotypes 5 and 8 irrespective of host species.
coagulans, S. lutrae, S. agnetis, and S. hyicus. As an example of
Capsular polysaccharides contribute to pathogenesis by
limiting neutrophil-mediated phagocytosis, which is a pri-
both this confusion and the possibility of zoonotic infec-
mary defense against all forms of staphylococcal in fection.
tion, a recent report described a clinical case of S. hyicus
 Coagulase-negative staphylococcal species are also encap-
bacteremia in a farmer that was likely to have arisen from
his close contact with pigs and was originally diagnosed as
sulated, but the capsules produced by these species have
 an S. aureus infection owing primarily to positive tests for
not been well characterized. In contrast, strains of both S.
catalase and coagulase.
aureus and several CNS, most notably S. epidermidis, may
produce a second exopolysaccharide that plays an impor-
tant role in biofilm formation. This is referred to as either
Structure and Composition
the polysaccharide intercellular adhesin (PIA), a designa-
tion that directly reflects its role in biofilm formation, 01
The cell en velope of the staphylococci is highly complex.
PNAG, a designation that reflects its structural identity as a
At its core, it consists of a thick, highly cross-linked pepti-
β-1,6 poly-N-acetylglucosamine. Congo red agar (CRA) has
doglycan layer, with the cross-links themselves consisting
been used as an indicator of PlA production and the rela-
 of a unique pentaglycine bridge. These cross-links render
tive capacity to form a biofilm, with biofilm-positive strains
staphylococcal species resistant to lysozyme but sensitive to
appearing black on this medium. There is also a report sug-
lysostaphin, an enzyme currently being explored for ther-
gesting that both S. epidermidis and S. aureus produce a β-1,6
apeutic purposes. Other integral components include tei-
poly-N-succinylglucosamine (PNSG), particularly under in
choicacids, which may be covalently linked to peptidogly.
vivo conditions.
can (wall teichoic acids) or embedded in the cell membrane
Chapter 26 Staphylococcus
187
(lipoteichoic acids). Both of these forms contribute to the
tant role in defining the host specificity of staphylococcal
resistance of S. aureus and perhaps other staphylococcal
infection.
species to cationic antimicrobial peptides, and in S. aureus
Although best characterized in S. aureus, functionally
at least they serve as adhesins to promote colonization.
similar surface-exposed adhesins are present in the SIG
These components also act synergistically to cause septic
 group and CNs. In fact, an immunoglobulin-binding pro-
shock, thus qualifying them within the strict definition of
 ae q sr  d se  on rs 
endotoxins.
the SIG species S. pseudintermedius and in S. hyicus. Primary
Exposed on the surface of the peptidoglycan layer is a
host proteins bound by these adhesins include fibronectin
and fibrinogen, although as noted above there are poten-
diverse alray of host proteins. As with the teichoic acids,
tially important differences across host species with respect
some of these are covalently linked to peptidoglycan, while
to this binding specificity. There are also reports that cap-
others are embedded in the cell membrane and/or excreted
sular polysaccharides can mask these adhesins at least in
into the extracellular environment. Covalent anchoring
S. aureus, but only when present in copious amounts.
occurs via an LPXTG motif and is mediated by the enzyme
Although unproven, this could account for the prominence
sortase A. Surface proteins anchored to peptidoglycan
of serotype 5 and 8 strains by comparison to heavily encap-
via this mechanism have been designated “microbial sur-
sulated serotypes 1 and 2.
face components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules"
(MSCRAMM). The prototype example in S. aureus is pro-
suxol
tein A, but this species produces at least 19 such proteins,
several of which have been shown to be highly immuno-
The production of toxins is generally limited to coagulase-
genic and are being pursued as vaccine candidates. The
 positive staphylococcal species, and this no doubt con-
 membrane anchored and secreted proteins, the latter being
tributes to their predominance as a cause of serious
collectively referred to as "secretable expanded repertoire
infections. Strains of all of these species also typically
adhesive molecules" (SERAM), are far fewer in number but
produce multiple extracellular enzymes including pro-
 nevertheless potentially important.
teases, lipases, and a thermostable nuclease. The list of
When taken together, these surface proteins play defin-
toxins is extensive, particularly in S. aureus, but generally
ing roles in the colonization of host tissues. Most are
speaking they fall into one of five functional but over-
highly conserved among different strains of S. aureus,
lappingcategories: hemolysins/cytotoxins, phenol-soluble
but some are not, and this may play an important role
modulins (PSMs), enterotoxins, exfoliative toxins, and
in defining host specificity. For example, the cna gene,
superantigens. The prototype example of a superantigen is
which encodes a collagen-binding MSCRAMM, is relatively
toxic shock syndrome toxin-1, but several of the enterotox-
rare among S. aureus isolates, but a recent report found
ins are also superantigenic. Like the number of staph ylococ-
that all ST398 isolates from poultry were cna-positive.
cal species, the number of toxins continues to grow due to
Another potentially important MSCRAMM is bbp, which
 the availability of more precise methods of distinguishing
was first described based on the ability of the correspond-
between variants. However, perhaps the more important
ing adhesin (Bbp) to bind bone sialoprotein. However, a
pointis thatessentially all strains ofS. aureus, as well as most
SIG species, produce some combination of these exotoxins,
fibrinogen and, more importantly, that it does not bind
presumably to a point that makes a primary contribution
the fibrinogen of cats, dogs, cattle, sheep, pigs, or mice. At
to their increased virulence.
the same time, another report examined “high-virulence"
There is also evidence to suggest that the production of
specific toxins may influence both host range and the rel-
bits and found that bbp was conserved among the high-
ative capacity to cause disease. For example, the S. aureus
vinulence strains. Similarly, bap (bioflm-associated pro-
exfoliative toxins are serine proteases that exhibit exquisite
tein) is present in a subset of S. aureus strains and several
specificity for the desmosomal glycoprotein desmogein-
CNS, but to date it has been observed almost exclusively in 
1, thus accounting for the characteristic dermal lesions
animal isolates, most notably those associated with bovine
associated with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome in
mastitis. Finally, coagulase production is typically assessed 
humans. S. hyicus is a prominent cause of skin infections
using rabbit plasma, but a recent report described S. aureus
in pigs, and this species produces a form of exfoliative
variants that preferentially coagulate plasma from other
toxin that, by comparison to human desmoglein, selec-
host species. This was attributed to novel variants of a von
tively degrades porcine desmoglein-1. Similarly, examined
Willebrand factor-binding protein, with the genes encod-
178 SIG isolates and found that only one harbored the
ing these variants being located on a mobile pathogenic-
human enterotoxin C gene (sec) while essentially all car-
 i  s hn ( i 
 lied a canine variant. These isolates also had the gene for a
ficity to warrant species-dependent designations (e.g.,
unique exfoliative toxin designated the S. intermedius exfo-
SaPIbov4 vs. SaPleq1). Whether any of these are cause-and -
liative toxin, and it is likely that this toxin contributes to
effect relationships that contribute to host range and/or
the prominent role of SIG species as a cause of canine pyo-
the propensity to cause infection in different host species
dermas. The SIG species also characteristically produce a
remains to be determined, but such reports nevertheless
hemolysin similar S. aureus β-toxin. This is potentially sig-
suggest that divergence among strains ofS. aureus,as well as
nificant in that almost all S. aureus isolates associated with
across different staphylococcal species, may play an impor-
human infection are lysogenized with an hlb-converting
188
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
FIGURE 26.3.
(B) Histopathology of skin demonstrating inflammation and presences of many bacteria (Giemsa stain, 400x). (Courtesy of Dr Alan
Doster, University of Nebraska Lincoin, Veterinary Diagnostic Center.)
(A)
(B)
phage and consequently do not produce β-toxin, while
This toxin is encoded by the cotranscribed genes lukS and
this is rarely true of S. aureus isolates associated with several
lukF,and while such toxins also occur in a strain-dependent
forms of animal in fection including canine pyodermas and
 manner, found that these genes were present in all canine
bovine mastitis (Figure 26.3). Based on this, it seems reason-
isolates of S. pseudintermedius.
able to suggest that the production of β-toxin may some-
how contribute to host range in staphylococcal infection.
Regulation of Pathogenesis
Having said that, these phage also positively convert other
virulence factors, several of which are known to modulate
To adapt to changing conditions in the host, whatever that
the host immune response, thus raising the possibility that
host may be, it is also important for a bacterial pathogen to
this potentially important distinction is not directly related
control the production of critical virulence factors. These
to the production of β-toxin itself.
regulatory circuits involved in mediating this control are
Until recently, the important role of PsMs in the patho-
remarkably complex, at least as defined for S. aureus. For
genesis of staphylococcal in fection was almost completely
example, in their analysis of genome sequence data from
overlooked. This was due in part to the fact that these are
the S. aureus human isolates N315 and Mu50, identified
very small molecules, the genes for which were not rec-
124 genes encoding what they considered “transcription
 ognized in early genome annotation attempts. However,
regulators." This included 17 two-component signal trans-
recent studies have confirmed that PsMs play a critical role
duction systems and 63 regulators presumed to be DNA-
in many forms of human infection owing to their capac-
binding proteins based on the presence of helix-turn-helix
ity to lyse neutrophils. In fact, the production of PSMs
motifs. Most of these are conserved among different S.
in large quantities, together with the high-level produc-
aureus strains, including those associated with infections
tion of α-hemolysin, appears to play a defining role in the
 in animals, but some are not. Many also have homologs
hypervinulence of certain clonal lineages of S. aureus, most
in CNS species, although in most cases this remains an
notably those of the PFGE-defined USA300 clonal lineage.
understudied area. Expression levels also vary dramatically
Although the specific role of PsMs in animal infection
 between strains, and recent data strongly suggest that this
has not been investigated, a recent report demonstrated
is clinically relevant in both man and animals. Such vari-
that many S. aureus isolates associated with bovine mas-
ation, together with the use of different animal models of
titis, including the sequenced strain RF122, produce very
disease, also contributes to the many contrasting reports in
high levels of v-toxin. This was associated with a single-
the literature, and this makes it difficult to make definitive
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter region of
statements about the con tribution of these regulatory ele-
the corresponding gene (hla), so it remains unclear if this
ments to different forms of human and animal infection.
extends to include the high-level production of PsMs. How-
However, it is becoming clear that, as with the vinulence
ever, these same bovine mastitis isolates exhibited higher
factors themselves, the regulatory circuits that modulate
 transcription levels of specifc positive regulators of hta
these processes exhibit important similarities and differ-
transcription including AgrA (see Section “Regulation of
ences among the staphylococcal species that cause animal
Pathogenesis"), which also positively regulates PSM pro-
and human disease.
duction. Thus, it seems likely that PSMs may also play a
Mutations have been generated in just over 30 of S.
critical role in at least some forms of animal infection.
aureus regulatory elements, and a complete discussion even
S. pseudintermedius also produces a biocomponent leuko-
of this subset is beyond the scope of this chapter. For this,
toxin (Lukl) similar to the Panton-Valentine leukocidin.
we would refer the reader to previously published review,
Chapter 26 Staphylococcus
189
the caveat being the almost exclusive focus of this review
 stem-loop structure. The translation of hia is thus upreg-
on S. aureus and human infections. What we have cho-
ulated in the presence of RNAlll via a direct interaction
sen to do here is focus on the two regulatory systems that
between RNAIlI and hla mRNA. In other cases, the regula-
we consider the most central and the most highly con-
tory functions are mediated indirectly via the interaction
served among diverse staphylococcal species. These are
between RNAlll and the rot transcript. Specifically, the regu-
the agr and the staphylococcal accessory regulator (sarA),
latory functions ofrot(repressorof toxins) and agrare antag-
both of which have been shown to have a significant
onistic, with RNAllI limiting the production of Rot by bind-
ing to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence of the rot transcript
vant phenotypes including the ability to form a biofilm.
and, as with the spa transcript, both inhibiting transla-
 u ps q s is aa  a
tion and targeting the existing transcript for degradation by
staphylococcal species including S. aureus, the SIG group,
RNase III.
and the CNS S. epidermidis and S. lugdunensis. Induction
The agr regulatory system is also defined by the existence
of agr results in the increased production of extracellular
of subtypes even within a single species. For instance, in S.
proteins, including toxins, and decreased production of
aureus, the agr system has four subtypes (I-IV), and these
surface-associated virulence factors. The agr regulatory sys-
define agr interference groups. Specifically, variations in
tem includes two divergent promoters (P2 and P3) that
the AgrC sensor and the AgrD pheromone define groups
drive the production of transcripts designated RNAll and
that activate agr when matched with each other but inhibit
RNAIll, respectively. RNAlI spans an operon (agrACDB)
agr expression when mismatched. A recent report exam-
that encodes the elements of a two-component quorum-
ined mixed populations ofS. aureus in an insect model and
sensing system. Specifically, agrC encodes a membrane-
found that this interference occurs in vivo. At present, it
bound sensor that is responsive to the accumulation of
is unclear whether this has an impact on host range, but
an agrD-encoded autoinducing peptide (AIP), production
cross-species interference does occur. For example, Lina
of which requires processing and export by the membrane.
et al. (2003) demonstrated that, in humans, colonization
embedded AgrB. AIP binding to the AgrC sensor initiates
with S. epidermidis generally precluded concomitant col-
a phosphorylation cascade that results in activation of the
onization with S. aureus, and it seems reasonable to sug-
AgrA response regulator and increased transcription from
 gest that such cross-species interference could impact the
both the P2 and P3 promoters. The functional result of agr
host range of different staphylococcal species. One in trigu-
activation is increased expression from the P3 promoter
ing possibility in this regard is the SIG species, which
resulting in increased production of RNAIll. The RNAIII
produce a novel AIP by comparison to S. aureus that has
transcript spans the hld gene, which encodes &-toxin, but
 been shown to be inhibitory to all four of the S. aureus agr
it has been conclusively demonstrated that the regulatory
subtypes.
effects of agr are mediated by RNAlll irrespective of the
Many reports have demonstrated that mutation of
production of &-toxin. Interestingly, &-toxin is a PSM, and 
agr attenuates virulence in animal models of staphylo-
phosphorylated AgrA was recently shown to also bind to cis
coccal infection. Moreover, it is increasingly clear that
elements upstream of the psm gene clusters and induce the
the increased vinulence of certain S. aureus isolates, most
production ofPSMs. It has been suggested on this basis that
notably those of the USA300 clonal lineage, is a function of
the evolutionary basis of agr-mediated regulation revolved
around AgrA-mediated control of PSM production, with
 of critical extracellular virulence factors including α-toxin
the regulatory effects of RNAlll evolving later as a means of
and PSMs. As noted above, some S. aureus isolates from
 achieving more global regulatory control.
cases of bovine mastitis also exhibit agr expression levels
The phenotype of an RNAll mutant is characterized by
that exceed even those of USA300 isolates, thus suggesting
major changes at the transcriptionallevel. However, RNAIII
that this is a critical determinant of vinulence in animal as
itself functions primarily at a posttranscriptional level,
well as human infections. However, this does not mean that
with transcriptional changes associated with its production
agr expression plays a defining role in all forms of staphy.
being the result ofits impact on the production ofaccessory
lococcal infection. Indeed, biofilm formation is a critical
transcription factors. For instance, transcription of the gene
component of many forms of infection, and expression of
encoding staphylococcal protein A (spa) is increased in the
agr at high levels has been associated with a reduced capac-
absence of RNAIl1, but this is due to the fact that RNAIII nor-
ity to form a biofilm in both S. aureus and S. epidemidis.
mally represses production of other transcription factors
There is even evidence to suggest that activation of agr may
(e.g., SarT, Rot, and ultimately SarS) that would otherwise
 constitute a specific means of dispersal from a biofilm. In
promote spa transcription. Thus, in the absence of RNAIlI,
fact, Yarwood et al. (2004) demonstrated that agr-negative
this repression does not occur, which results in the contin-
variants arise spontaneously in S. aureus biofilms and that,
ued high-levelexpression ofspa.Additionally, RNAIlI binds
Over time, these variants become the dominant subpop-
spa mRNA in a manner that both limits translation and pro.
ulation. In humans, there are also multiple reports of
motes RNase IHl-mediated degradation. This mechanism
the isolation of agr mutants from infected patients. Thus,
also plays a primary role in the RNAllI-mediated induction
while high-level expression of agr is clearly associated with
of toxin production via both direct and indirect pathways.
vinulence in both man and animals, it may also come
For instance, the hla transcript forms a stem-loop structure
at some cost to the pathogen with respect to both the
that sequesters the Shine-Delgarno sequence, thus limit-
metabolic burden placed on the bacterial cell and the abil-
ing translation and the production ofo -toxin. RNAlllI over-
ity to pursue alternative forms of avoiding host defenses,
 comes this by binding the hla transcript and relieving this
one potentially important example being the ability to
190
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
 tion to other staphylococcal regulatory elements including
devices.
sarA.
 A second regulatory locus that plays an important role in
the specific context of such bioflm-associated infections is
Iron Acquisition
the sarA. Like agr, sarA has a global impact on S. aureus
vinulence phenotypes and is conserved in both diverse
The wealth of data regarding the staphylococci and thei1
staphylococcal species. The sarA locus encodes three over-
role in human and animal disease is almost overwhelming.
lapping transcripts, all of which share a common termi-
We have attempted to focus in this chapter on the most crit-
nus and include the sarA gene. This gene encodes a DNA-
ical issues that distinguish between staphylococcal species
binding protein that impacts gene transcription, at least
and may in fact contribute to host range and the develop-
in S. aureus, via both agr-dependent and agr-independent
ment of infection in species other than humans. Based on
pathways. More directly, Sa1A has been shown to bind cis
this focus, we have also chosen to give specific considera.
elements associated with agr in a manner that increases
tion to mechanisms of iron acquisition. One reason for this
agr expression, an observation that suggests agr and sarA
is a recent report demonstrating that the surface-associated
mutants would exhibit similar phenotypes. To some extent
hemoglobin receptor IsdA of S. aureus preferentially binds
this is true, one example being that both agr and sarA
human hemoglobin by comparison to the murine form, an
mutants characteristically produce reduced amounts of
observation that is likely to account for the need to employ
critical extracellular toxins including α-toxin and PSMs.
a high infective dose in murine models of infection. This
However, a recent report demonstrates that the mechanis-
suggests that similar differences may also contribute to the
tic basis for these toxin-deficientphenotypes differs. Specif-
relative propensity of different staphylococcal species to
ically, agr impacts the production of these exotoxins at the
cause infection in different hosts, but once again this is
transcriptional and/or translational levels as described ear-
an understudied area in the specific context of veterinary
lier, while the impact of sarA appears to be related to its
medicine. S. aureus has also at least two systems capable
impact on the production of extracellular proteases, with
of acquiring iron from heme proteins. One of these was
the increased production of proteases observed in sarA
designated Isd (for iron-responsive surface determinants)
mutants resulting in reduced accumulation, rather than
and includes five transcriptional units (isdA, isdB, isdCDEF-
reduced production, of these exotoxins. In fact, this is a
srtBisdG, isdH, and isdI). The second (HtsABC for heme
direct example of the importance of the agr-independent
(ransport system) was identified in a genome search for pro-
pathway in that mutation of agr characteristically results in
teins similar to ABC-type iron transporters (see below). The
reduced production of these proteases, while mutation of
sarA has the opposite effect.
to find sortase A (srtA) homologs in the S. aureus genome.
The impact of this is even more apparent in the clini-
This led to identification of the gene (srtB) encoding sortase
 cally and therapeutically relevant context of biofilm for-
    is e o  si a 
mation in that mutation of agr enhances biofilm forma-
srtBisdG. One of these genes (isdC) encodes a protein with
tion, while mutation of sarA has the opposite effect, an
a unique NPQTN anchoring motif that is the only recog-
observation that in both cases as been correlated with the
nized substrate of sortase B, It has been demonstrated in a
impact of these mutations on the production of extracellu-
murine renal abscess model that mutation of srtB had little
lar proteases. Given the important role of biofilms in lim-
effect on virulence during the early stages of infection but
iting the therapeutic efficacy of con ventional antibiotics,
 did significantly attenuate virulence as the infection pro-
either of these observations could potentially be exploited
gressed, and based on this it was suggested that IsdC makes
to therapeutic advantage. For instance, introduction of
an important contribution to maintaining infection in the
the agr AIP would result in increased expression of agr,
face of ongoing changes in the host. Two additional genes
the increased production of extracellular proteases, and a
(isdA and isdB) are located upstream of the isdCDEFsrtBisdG
decreased capacity to form a biofilm, and when adminis-
operon and are divergently transcribed as monocistronic
tered with an antibiotic this could significantly enhance
messages. Each of these genes, as well as the isdCDEFsrt-
the therapeutic outcome in infections in both man and
BisdG operon itself, was subsequently shown to contain a
animals. However, this would have the potentially adverse
Fur box and to be tightly regulated by the availability of
consequence of enhancing toxin production. In contrast,
iron. IsdA binds hemoglobin, transferrin, and the extra-
inhibitors of sarA expression and/or function could be
cellular matrix proteins fibronectin and fibrinogen. This
used to enhance protease production and thereby limit
osme uoi u yoq uonny ae ypsi e sisasans
both biofilm formation and toxin production. Given the
and as an adhesin. However, Torres et al. (2007) found
importance of staphylococci as a cause of infection in both
that mutation of isdA has little impact on the ability to
man and animals, and the persistent emergence of antibi-
acquire iron from heme-containing proteins by compar-
otic resistance in essentially all staphylococcal species (see
ison to IsdB.Kuklin et al. (2006) also demonstrated that
Section “Resistance and Antibiotic Treatment'"), these are
immunization with IsdB protects against staphylococcal
important observations thatshould be considered by inves-
sepsis in both a murine model and in rhesus macaques.
tigators who focus on staphylococcal infections irrespec-
IsdB and IsdH are immunologically similar in that anti-
tive of the host species in volved. In this respect, it should be
bodies raised against IsdB are cross-reactive with IsdH, and
noted that, while there are reports describing the role of agr
immunization with purified IsdH also resulted in reduced
in the context of veterinary medicine, there are essentially
nasal colonization in the cotton rat model. Other Isd pro-
none we are aware of that have extended this considera-
teins are responsible for transporting heme iron across the
Chapter 26 Staphylococcus
191
cytoplasmic membrane or for removing iron from heme
This is similar to the GAPDH of group A streptococci (sub-
once inside the cell.
sequently renamed the streptococcal surface dehydroge-
Reniere et al. (2007) proposed three possible fates of
nase), which is also capable of binding the extracellular
heme iron once it is inside staphylococcal cells. First, intra-
 matrix protein fbronectin while maintaining its enzy-
cellular heme is degraded by the monooxygenases IsdG and
matic activity. Taylor and Heinrichs generated a GAPDH
Isdl, thus releasing free iron which would likely be bound
(gap) mutant in S. aureus and demonstrated that cell wall
by staphylococcal ferritin (FtnA), a protein that stores iron
fractions from the mutant were indeed devoid of GAPDH
in a nontoxic form for use when iron becomes restricted.
enzymatic activity. However, the same cell wall fractions
Second, intact heme can be complexed with a membrane-
retained the capacity to bind transferrin. This led to identi-
associated heme-binding factor and used as a cofactor for
fication ofan additional transferin-binding protein (SbtA)
specific S. aureus enzymes involved in energy production
that is produced only when S. aureus is grown under iron-
and/or protection against reactive oxygen species, one spe-
limited conditions. Mutation of the corresponding gene
cific example of the latter being catalase. Third, given the
(stbA, staphylococcal fransferrin-binding protein A) sug-
toxicity of heme at high concentration, excess intracellular
gested that SbtA rather than Tpn (GAPDH) is responsible
heme can be transported out of the cell via the ABC-type
fo1 transferrin binding in S. aureus.
Because S. aureus can acquire iron from different host
defective in this transportsystem have a reduced capacity to
 proteins, Skaar et al. (2004) caried out directed studies
grow in media with heme as the sole iron source but some-
to determine whether one iron source was preferred over
what paradoxically exhibit increased virulence in a murine
an other. Results from this analysis indicated that heme was
model of infection. This effect has been correlated with
the preferred source, although the ratio of heme to trans-
a reduction in the number of phagocytes recruited to the
ferrin uptake decreased with samples taken later in growth.
site of infection. Additionally, hrtA mutants produce ele-
This led to the suggestion that S. aureus preferentially uti-
vated amounts of extracellular immunomodulatory pro-
lizes heme uptake via the HtsABC transport system during
teins that inhibit phagocyte recruitment/activation and
the early stages of infection and at sites rich in heme pro-
opsonophagocytosis. Based on this, it has been hypoth-
teins but then shifts to siderophore-mediated iron uptake
esized that, once S. aureus encounters a heme-rich environ-
once the availability of heme proteins becomes limited.
ment, the likelihood of which is increased by high levels of
As with other aspects of this review, there are a number
hemolytic activity; itavoids heme toxicity by activating the
of other components to these iron acquisition systems,
HrtAB system to promote efflux of heme iron while simul-
 and it remains unknown whether the relative impact of
taneously reducing the prod uction of specific virulence fac-
these components differs among staphylococcal species in 
tors that would otherwise promote host tissue damage and
a manner that impacts their ability to cause infections in
further release of heme. Other components of this system
different mammalian hosts. Having said this, given the
include hssRs, which encode the response regulator (HssR)
universal need for iron, the likely role of hemolysins in
and sensor components (HssS) of bacterial two-component
promoting heme-mediated iron uptake, and differences in
signal transduction system that modulates expression of
hemolytic activity among staphylococcal species, it seems
likely that important differences exist that remain to be
in that expression hrtAB is not affected by other environ-
explored.
mental cues including the global regulators agr and sarA.
S. aureus also has at its disposal siderophore-based iron
acquisition systems. Four siderophores have been identi-
fied to date including staphyloferrin A, staphyloferrin B,
Resistance and Antibiotic Treatment
aureochelin, and staphylobactin. The enzymes required
for production of staphylobactin are encoded within the
As gram-positive cocci, the primary types of antimi-
nine-gene sbnABCDEFGHl operon, and mutation of one of
crobial agents used to combat staphylococcal infection
these genes (sbnE) was shown to result in reduced growth
are inhibitors of cell wall biosynthesis. Primary examples
in iron-limited media and reduced virulence in a murine
include the β-lactams, most notably methicillin derivatives
kidney abscess model. Once siderophores bind extracellu
and early generation cephalosporins, and vancomycin.
lar iron, they are moved back into the cell by a number of
However, many classes of antibiotic have activity against
iron-regulated ABC transporter systems that include iron-
staphylococci, the problem being that it is extremely
binding lipoproteins, an ATPase, and integral membrane
difficult to predict which of these may be useful in the
proteins. Park et al. (2005) concluded that siderophore.
treatment of an infection caused by any given isolate. This
 a pssa  s, e sd a p
reflects the widespread occurrence of antibiotic resistance
acquiring iron from transferrin, although as noted above
among the staphylococci, and it emphasizes the need
certain of the Isd proteins also promote iron uptake from
for rapid diagnostic methods that can be used not only
transferrin. Modun et al. (1999) has also identified a 42
to identify the offending pathogen but also to obtain
kDa, cell wall-associated protein (Tpn) that binds human
information that can be used as a guide for determinative
transferrin and is produced by both S. aureus and S. epi-
antimicrobial therapy. The polymerase chain reaction has
dermidis. Further characterization confirmed that this pro-
been widely used to tremendous advantage in this regard,
tein is actually the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-
although once again this has been exploited primarily
phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and that it can bind
in the context of S. aureus and primarily in the specific
transferrin without compromising its enzymatic activity.
context of methicillin resistance.
192
PART II
 Bacteria and Fumgi
Absent issues of acquired resistance, penicillin remains
and genetic exchange between staphylococcal species, cre
the antibiotic of choice, but it has largely been rendered
ates a very dynamic environment that impacts all aspects
ineffective in all its forms owing to the widespread pro-
 of staphylococcal pathogenesis not only now but also pre.
duction of β-lactamases among all staphylococcal species.
dictably into the foreseeable future. This makes it impera-
The semisynthetic penicillins represented by methicillin
tive to remain diligent, and part of that diligence is recog-
are the preferred alternative, but their use has also been
nizing that issues impacting humans will inevitably impact
increasingly compromised by the persistent emergence of
infections in animals and vice versa. Indeed, this is arguably
resistance. This is true in all staphylococcal species includ -
the most important issue of all in that it emphasizes the fact
ing S. aureus and the SIG species, with the incidence of
that the control of staphylococcal infections will take an
methicillin-resistant strains increasingly steadily in recent
 integrated and concerted effort among all practicing clini-
years is isolates causing both human and animal infections.
cians irrespective of whether they focus on human health,
Methicillin resistance is impacted by multiple factors, but
the world's food supply, or the remarkable role of compan-
the primary determinant is the mecA gene, which encodes
ion animals in improving both our lives and theirs. This
an alternative penicillin-bindingprotein designated PBP2A
chapter was written in the hope of both making that point
01 PBP2. The mecA gene is associated with some variant
and providing information that can be used to further this
of a larger chromosomal insertion designated the SCCmec
indispensable objective.
element. The SCCmec element occurs in various forms,
and at least in humans these can be generally divided
into larger elements typically associated with isolates caus-
References
ing healthcare-associated infections and somewhat smaller
elements found in isolates causing community-associated
Lina G, Boutite F, Tristan A et al. (2003) Bacterial competition
infection. Not surprisingly given the economy of prokary-
otic genomes, these size differences reflect the presence of
for human nasal cavity colonization: role of Staphylococcal
agr alleles. Appl Environ Microbiol, 69, 18-23.
absence of other genes, and in many cases, these include
other antibiotic resistance genes. Thus, isolates carrying the
Modun B and Williams P (1999) The staphylococcal
transferrin-binding protein is a cell wall glyceraldehyde-3-
larger SCCmec elements are more likely to be resistant to
phosphate dehydrogenase. Infect Immun, 67, 1086-1092.
other classes of antibiotic, thus further limiting alternative
therapeutic options.
At present, vancomycin is still considered the “last
resort" antibiotic for the treatment of infections caused
Further Reading
by methicillin-resistant staphylococci, but even this is
 being threatened by the appearance of both vancomycin-
Atalla H, Gyles C, and Mallard B (20ll) Staphylococcus aureus
resistant S. aureus (VRSA) and vancomycin-intermediate S.
small colony variants (SCVs) and their role in disease. Anim
aureus (VISA). Fortunately, VRSA remains remarkably rare
Health Res Rev, 12, 33-45.
among human isolates, and it has not been reported in
Atalla H, Wilkie B, Gyles C et al. (2010) Antibody and cell-
any animal isolates we are aware of. VIsA is much more
mediated immune responses to Staphylococcus aureus small
common, particularly in patients undergoing long-term
colony variants and their parental strains associated with
therapy, but at present, this too appears to be a significant
bovine mastitis. Dev Comp Immunol, 34, 1283-1290.
 problem primarily in humans. Nevertheless, the increas-
Beenken KE, Mrak LN, Griffin LM etal. (2010) Epistatic relation-
ing prevalence of methicillin resistance among all staphy-
ships between sarA and agr in Staphylococcus aureus biofilm
lococcal species, including SIG, makes it imperative that
formation.PLoS One,5,e10790.
veterinarians recognize the existence of VisA and the need
Boerlin P, Kuhnert P, Hissy D, and Schaellibaum M (2003)
to consider other alternatives when possible. There are also
Methods for identification of Staphylococcus aureus iso-
a number of newer alternatives includingdaptomycin, tela-
lates in cases of bovine mastitis. / Clin Microbiol, 41, 767-
vancin, linezolid, tigecycline, and the newest generation of
771.
cephalosporins (e.g., ceftobiprole), all of which are active
Casanova C, Iselin L, von Steiger N et al. (2011) Staphylococcus
even against methicillin-resistant strains.
hyicus bacteremia in a farmer. / Clin Microbiol, 49, 4377-
4378.
Deurenberg RH, Vink C, Kalenic S et al. (2007) The molecular
evolution of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Clin
Summary
Microbiol Infect, 13, 222-235.
Devriese LA, Vancanneyt M, Baele Metal. (2005) Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius sp. Nov., a coagulase-positive species from
Despite decades of intensive research, the staphylo-
animals. Int / Syst Evol Microbiol, 55, 1569-1573.
cocci remain among the most important of all bacterial
Futagawa-Saito K, Sugiyama T, Karube S et al. (2004) Preva-
pathogens in both man and animals. Given the remark-
lence and characterization of leukotoxin-producing Staphy-
able number of staphylococcal species, the diversity of vir-
lococcus intermedius in isolates from dogs and pigeons. ∫ Clin
ulence factors produced by these different species, and the
Micorbiol, 42,5324-5326.
fact that essentially all species are capable of causing disease
Kelesidis T and Tsiodras S (2010) Staphylococcus intermedius
in multiple mammalian hosts, it is impossible to be compre-
is not only a zoonotic pathogen, but may also cause skin
hensive in any discussion of their importance. It is also very
abscesses in humans after exposure to saliva. Int / Infect Dis,
important to recognize that spread between host species,
14,e838-e841.
Chapter 26 Staphylococcus
193
Kuklin NA, Clark DJ, Secore S et al. (2006) A novel Staphylo-
Smetlzer MS, Gillaspy AF, Pratt FL et al. (1997) Prevalence and
coccus aureus vaccine: iron surface determinant B induces
chromosomal map location of Staphylococcus aureus adhe-
rapid antibody responses in rhesus macaques and specific
sion genes. Gene, 196, 249-259.
increased survival in a murine S. aureus sepsis model. Infect
Stranger-Jones YK, Bae T, and Schneewind O (2006) Vaccine
Immun, 74, 2215-2223.
assembly from surface proteins of Staphylococcus aureus. Proc
Park RY, Sun HY, Choi MH, Bai YH, and Shin SH (2O05) Staphy-
Natl Acad Sci USA, 103, 16942-16947.
 lococcus aureus siderophore-mediated iron-acquisition sys-
Torres VJ, Stauff DL, PishchanyG etal. (2007) AStaphylococcus
tem plays a dominant and essential role in the utilization of
aureus regulatory system that responds to host heme and
transferrin-bound iron. / Microbiol, 43, 183-190.
modulates virulence. Cell Host Microbe, 1, 109-119.
 Nickerson SC (2009) Control of heifer mastitis: antimicrobial
Vuong C, Kocianova S, Yao Y et al. (2004) Increased colo-
treatment-an overview. Vet Microbiol, 134, 128-135.
 nization of indwelling medical devices by quorum-sensing
Reniere ML, Torres VJ, Skaar EP (2007) Intracellular metallo-
mutants ofStaphylococcus epidermidis in vivo. JInfectDis, 190,
porphyrin metabolism in Staphylococcus aureus. Biometals,
133-139.
20,333-345.
Werckenthin C, Cardoso M, Martel JL, and Schwarz S (2001)
Skaar EP, Humayun M, Bae T, DeBord KL, and Schneewind
Antimicrobial resistance in staphylococci from animals
O (2004) Iron-source preference of Staphylococcus aureus
with particular reference to bovine Staphylococcus aureus,
infections. Science, 305, 1626-1628.
porcine Staphylococcus hyicus, and canine Staphylococcus
Smeltzer MS, Lee CY, Harik N, and Hart ME (2009) Molecu-
intermedius. Vet Res, 32, 341-362.
lar basis of pathology, in Staphylococci in Human Disease,
Yarwood JM, Bartels DJ, Volper EM, and Greenberg EP (2004)
2nd edn (eds KB Crossley, KK Jefferson, GL Archer, and VG
Quorum sensing in Staphylococcus aureus biofilms. / Bacte-
Fowler), West Sussex, UK, pp. 65-108.
riol, 186, 1838-1850.
2.7
reptococcus and
Enterococcus
GEORGE C. STEWART
Streptococcus
Lancefield Grouping Scheme
 Streptococci are divided into 20 groups (designated A
Streptococci are gram-positive and catalase-negative cocci
through V, but with no I or J) using a precipitin test based
occurring in pairs and chains; they show considerable eco-
on extractable group-specific carbohydrate antigens. The
logic, physiologic, serologic, and genetic diversity. Cur
Lancefield groups are further subdivided into types based
rently there are 98 recognized species within the genus,
on protein antigens. The type-specific antigens are the M,
but only a few are significant pathogens. These are listed in
R, and T proteins. Whereas antibodies to the Lancefield
Table 27.1
 group antigens are not protective, the M, R, and T proteins
On blood agar, the species exhibit various degrees of
are protective, albeit type-specific, antigens. Streptococcus
hemolysis, which can be used as an early step in identi-
 pyogenes has over 100 serotypes, based on M and other pro-
fying clinical isolates. Hemolysis produced by colonies on
teins, while Streptococcus pneumoniae has over 90 capsular
blood agar and Lancefield serological grouping are impor-
polysaccharide types.
tant factors in presumptive identification.
α-Hemolytic streptococci do not lyse erythrocytes but
produce a zone of green discoloration around the colonies
Descriptive Features
(hydrogen peroxide oxidation of the hemoglobin to methe-
 moglobin). Most commensal streptococci of animals are v-
Morphology and Staining. S
 Streptococci vary from spher-
hemolytic. Streptococci that do this are sometimes referred
ical to ovoid cells, about 1 μm in diameter. Division occurs
to as "viridans streptococci. "
 in one plane, producing pairs and chains, which is evident
β-Hemolytic streptococci lyse erythrocytes and pro-
 in liquid media or clinical samples. Some species, such as S.
duce a complete zone of hemolysis around the colonies.
 pneumoniae, are predominantly in pairs.
 Pathogenic streptococci tend to be β-hemolytic.
Young cultures stain gram-positive. In exudates and
y-Streptococci are nonhemolytic. Most are non-
older cultures (>18 h), organisms often stain gram-
pathogenic.
negative, likely from effects of autolysins weakening the
 Older classification schemes grouped the streptococcal
cell wall.
species based on biological properties. These included the
following:
Structure and Composition. Streptococci have a typical
 gram-positive cell wall structure. Capsules are produced
by some species. Cell wall-deficient forms (L forms) also
tions in humans and animals; usually 3-hemolytic.
Oral group: Primarily commensals on skin and mucous
occur.
membranes; α- 0r non hemolytic.
Lactic group: Associated with milk and dairy products.
Growth Characteristics. Streptococcihave fairly exacting
Now placed in the genus Lactococcus.
growth needs best satisfied by media containing blood or
Enterococci group: Normal flora intestinal streptococci,
serum. After overnight incubation at 37 *C, streptococci
opportunistically pathogenic. Most now belong to
produce clear colonies, usually <1 mm in diameter. Encap-
the genus Enterococcus.
sulated forms, such as Streptococcus equi ssp. equi, produce
Anaerobic group: Include anaerobic species of Streptococ-
 larger mucoid colonies. Pathogenic species grow best at
cus not related to the anaerobic general Peptococcus
37 *C in the presence of elevated CO2 levels, such as with a
and Peptostreptococcus. Most of these species have
 candle jar or CO2 incubator.
been moved to other genera.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
194
Chapter 27  Streptococcus and Enterococcus
195
Table 27.1.
Clinically Important Streptococcus Species
Lancefield
Type of
Group
 Species Name
Hemolysis
 Most Important Hosts
Diseases
A
S. pyogenes
6
Humans
Respiratory infections, rheumatic fever.
 glomerulonephritis
B
5. agalactiae
α, b.y
Humans, cattle
 Neonatal sepsis, mastitis 
None
S. pneumonia
 Humans, horses, NH primates.
 Pneumonia
laboratory animals
C
S. equi ssp. equi
horses
 Strangles 
C
5. equ ssp. zooepidemicus
horses, swine, cattle, and humans
 Pyogenic infections
S dysgalactiae ssp. equisimilis
6
horses, swine, cattle, and humans
 Pyogenic infections
S. dysgalactiae ssp.
α, b.y
horses, swine, cattle, and humans 
 Pyogenic infections, mastitis
dysgalactiae
 Streptococcus porcinus
Swine
Cervical lymphadenitis 
G
5. canis
B
s600
 Metritis, mastitis, neonatal infections 
L
Group L Streptococcus
Dogs
Urogenital infections 
D, R, S, T
5. 5uis
0
Swine
 Meningitis, pneumonia, septicemia
5. uberis
x,y
Cattle
Mastitis
5. parauberis
α, y
Cattle
Mastitis
7, unknown Lancefield group; NH, nonhuman.
Biochemical Activities. Streptococci are catalase-negative
similis, and the Szp protein is the M protein equivalent of
S. equi ssp. zooepidemicus.
 Oxygen but do not respire, deriving energy solely from fer-
The hyaluronic acid capsule of S. pyogenes is an adhesin
mentation).
(as well as imparting antiphagocytic effects, see Section
"Capsule"), with affinity for human epithelial cells via
CD44, a hyaluronic acid-binding glycoprotein. Whether
Cellular Products and Activities of Medical Interest.
The
the hyaluronic acid capsules of streptococci of veterinary
relation of specific streptococcal products to pathogenesis
importance also act as adhesins is unclear.
is largely speculative, with the following exceptions. The
The BibA protein of S. agalactiae specifically binds to
capsule of S. pneumoniae is a proven virulence factor. M
human C4-binding protein, a regulator of the classic com-
protein is an important virulence determinant, and anti-
plement pathway, and its deletion severely reduces the
body to it is protective.
capacity of group B streptococci to resist opsonophagocytic
killing by neutrophils.
Adhesins. Streptococci produce a number of surface pro-
Other adhesins are responsible for binding of strepto-
teins that bind to a variety of extracellular matrix proteins
cocci to host cells. F protein and other proteins, such as Fnb
of the host (fibronectin, fibrinogen, collagen, vitronectin,
and SFS, bind fibronectin and have been associated with
laminin, decorin, and heparin sulfate-containing proteo-
bacterialadherence and internalization. PsaA (for pneumo-
glycans). These adhesins have been termed MSCRAMMs
coccal surface adhesin) is a lipoprotein found on S. pneu-
(microbial  surface  components  recognizing  adhesive
pu snpidoz dss ba s pue 'nba dss inba s 'anuou
matrix molecules). Some MSCRAMMs, specifically the
is responsible for adherence to cells lining the upper and
fibrinogen-binding M protein, impart an antiphagocytic
lower airways. E-cad herin, the cell junction protein in res.
property to the streptococcal cell. Coating of streptococcal
piratory epithelial cells, has been shown to be a receptor for
cells with host proteins is thought to result in the mask-
PsaA.
ing of sites for complement activation (and thus decrease
-od s a pazoi asou s hm s (oiosdo
Capsule. Some species of streptococci produce a capsule.
teins (collectins/ficollins) that opsonize foreign particles.
Group A and C streptococcal capsules are composed of
The SeM protein of S. equi ssp. equi is a fibrinogen- and
hyaluronic acid. Hyaluronic acid, also a constituent of
immunoglobulin-binding cell surface protein that is a
mammalian connective tissue, is poorly antigenic and does
 major virulence factor of this bacterium.
not readily bind complement components (and is, there-
 M protein is an important virulence factor of S. pyogenes
fore, antiphagocytic). The capsules described for group B,
E, and G organisms are polysaccharide in nature, but not
cytic properties, enhances adherence to epithelia cells of
hyaluronic acid.
the nasal mucosa, and may be associated with the postin-
 fection immune disease in the horse (purpura hemorrhag-
ica). The FbsA protein is the fibrinogen-binding protein of
Cell Wall.
 The gram-positive cell wall contains proteins
Streptococcus agalactiae. The FOG protein is the analogous
and polysaccharides that are of medical in terest. The lipote-
protein in the group G Streptococcus dysgalactiae ssp. equi-
ichoic acids and peptidoglycan of the gram-positive cell
196
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
wall interact with macrophage cells, resulting in the release
of proinflammatory cytokines.
 matically cleaving the complement component C5a
 Enzymes with potential roles in virulence produced by
streptococci include hyaluronidase, DNases (e.g., SPEF)
Streptococcal Pyrogenic Toxin Superantigens. Superanti
NADases, and proteases.
gens simultaneously bind to major histocompatibility
complex class II molecules and T cell receptor molecules
Regulation of the Cellular Products of Medical Interest.
bearing a particular V-β region. This binding results in the
 Expression of virulence-related genes in S. pyogenes is reg-
 activation of a large proportion of antigen-presenting cells
ulated by at least three global systems (whether these sys-
and T cells, with subsequent release of high systemic lev-
tems occur in other streptococci is unknown). The first is
els of cytokines. Part of the systemic symptoms seen with
a “growth phase-related signal" that is undefined, but cer-
streptococcal infections may be related to the cytokine
tain genes (including those encoding streptolysin S and
storm that results from the large-scale T cell stimulation
DNases) are upregulated during stationary phase, while
effected by these toxins. The streptococcal pyrogenic toxin 
dn a) suaid s aq pand (sas suauadns
others (including those encoding capsule, streptokinase,
streptolysin O, and a protein called multigene regulator in
A streptococci) are the best studied. S. pyogenes produces
ael sunp pateinsardn aie (es 1o lnonodans y dnois
several SPEs: SPEA, SPEC, SPEG, SPEH, SPEI, SPEJ, SPEK,
exponential phase of growth.
SPEL, SPEM, SSA, and SMEZ (streptococcal mitogenic ex0-
Regulation occurs by both activation and repression
toxin Z). All known SPEs (with the exception of SMEZ,
 of gene expression by transcriptional regulator proteins
SPEG, and SPEJ) are localized on mobile DNA elements. As
and by two-component regulatory systems. Major regula-
a consequence, each S. pyogenes isolate usually carries the
 genes for SMEZ, SPEG, and SPEJ, plus a variable combina-
tor proteins include Mga, responsible for the activation of
expression during exponential growth of genes involved in
tion of other SPE genes. S. equi ssp. equi has been shown to
 adhesion, internalization, and immune evasion, the RofA-
produce SPEs including Seel, SeeL, and SeeM. These have
like proteins including RofA and Nra, which regulate genes
been shown to stimulate proliferation of equine periph-
eral blood mononucleated cells. These SPEs are prophage
involved in persistence, FasA, which is in volved in growth
encoded. Three SPEs have been identifed in S. equi ssp.
phase regulation of virulence gene expression, and Rgg
zooepidemicus. These are SzeF, SzeN, and SzeP and have been
(RopB), which activates expression of extracellular proteins
shown to stimulate the proliferation of equine peripheral
such as the SpeB cysteine protease. Mga itself is regulated
 by growth phase as well as other undefined environmental
blood mononuclear cells, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-
α) and y interferon (IFN-y) production.
cues.
The CovRs (control of virulence) two-component reg-
ulatory system regulates directly or indirectly 15% of the
Miscellaneous Toxins and Enzymes.
.The streptococci pro-
genome. Expression of several important virulence genes
duce a number of proteins that potentially act as virulence
is directly regulated by the CovR response regulator pro-
factors:
tein, including those encoding the hyaluronic acid capsule
 operon, streptolysin S, streptokinase, speB, and sda (encod-
ing the streptodornase DNase).
Streptolysins O and S: Oxygen-labile (O) and stable (S)
hemolysins are additionally cytolysins that cause
Resistance. β-Hemolytic streptococci can survive in dried
lysis of neutrophils, macrophages, and platelets.
pus fo1 weeks. They are killed at 55-60 *C in 30 min, and
Streptolysin S is responsible for the large zone of
inhibited by 6.5% sodium chloride and 40% bile (except S.
β-hemolysis observed on sheep blood agar plates.
The cytolytic spectrum of streptolysin S is broad,
agalactiae), 0.1% methylene blue, and low (10 *C) and high
(45 *C) temperatures. Members of the genus Enterococcus
including the membranes of erythrocytes, leuko-
tolerate these conditions. Viridans streptococci vary with
cytes, platelets, tissue culture cells, and subcellular
respectto heatand bile resistance. Only $. pneumoniae is bile
organelles such as lysosomes and mitochondria. The
 Oxygen-labile and thiol-activated hemolysins, strep-
soluble. Streptococci tolerate 0.02% sodium azide, which
tolysin O and the S. suis suilysin O, bind cholesterolin
is used in streptococcal isolation media.
 membranes. The toxin oligomerizes at or in the target
Pathogenic streptococci are usually susceptible to peni-
cillins, cephalosporins, macrolides, chloramphenicol, and 
membrane to form a hydrophobic protein complex
trimethoprim-sulfonamides; they are often resistant to
integrated in the membrane with a hydrophilic chan-
aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and tetracycline.
nel forming center. The resulting pores are relatively
large (up to 30 nm).
Streptokinase: It is encoded on a prophage and acts to
Ecology
activate plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin is a pro-
Reservoir. Most streptococci of veterinary interest live
tease that acts on host proteins, including fibrin, and
thus degrades clots.
      
lower genital tracts.
The streptococcal C5a peptidase ScpB of S. agalactiae is a
Transmission.
 Streptococci are transmitted by inhalation
    n  d 
and ingestion, sexually, congenitally, or indirectly via
clinical isolates and is required for mucosal colonization.
hands and fomites.
Chapter 27 Streptococcus and Enterococcus
197
Pathogenesis
(Actinobacillus is the most common) is frequently found
along with Sez. The infectious process is endogenous. The
Streptococci cause pyogenic infections primarily of
microorganisms involved are part of the normal flora of the
the skin, respiratory tract, reproductive tract, umbilical
upper respiratory tract, which then contaminate a compro-
 stump, and mammary gland. Septicemia may result from
hematogenous spread of the primary infection. Clini-
mised lung (e.g., following viral pneumonia). Sez and the
others are deposited in the lung and initiate or amplify a
cally, the streptococcal diseases are usually characterized
at some stage by febrile symptoms, alone or associated
preexisting inflammatory process (cell wall constituents,
pyrogenic exotoxins). The intensity of the inflammatory
with symptoms of septicemia. The local areas exhibit pus
response is not as extreme as with the response initiated by
formation that can be observed draining from the lesion.
See, nor are the constitutional signs as severe. However, the
Abscesses form where this drainage is prevented. Toxemia
mechanisms in volved in the pathogenesis are likely simi-
and immune-mediated lesions are common sequela of the
lar. Pyothorax is probably an extension of the pneumonic
disease.
process just described. Like pneumonia, Sez is the most
Pathology.
common isolate, combined with a gram-negative species.
 The basic pathologic process resembles that
Unlike pneumonia, an obligate anaerobe (Bacteroides and
of staphylococcal infection; that is, the typical lesion is an
Fusobacterium are the most common) is frequently found
abscess, an inflammatory focus in which participating cells
as well.
have been destroyed by the combined effects of bacterial
Genital tract diseases in horses are associated with Sez,
and inflammatory cell activity. This confrontation between
which is frequently associated with cervicitis and metri-
leukocytes and microorganisms produces pus, a mixture of
tis. Infections in newborn foals, which are often umbili-
host cell debris and bacteria, living and dead. In an abscess,
pus is surrounded by intact leukocytes and fibrin strands.
yarthritis), disseminate via the bloodstream to joints and
Unless the pus is drained, a fibrous capsule will gradually
the renal cortex. The microorganisms originate from the
be formed.
genital tract of the dam (part of her normal flora).
β-Hemolytic streptococci (Sez is the most common)
Disease Patterns.
are associated with a variety of miscellaneous conditions
Equine.:
 Strangles is a highly contagious rhinopharyngi-
in horses including osteomyelitis, arthritis, abscesses, and
 uoiodp rv (os ba dss inba s Aa pas s
wounds. All are endogenous, with the infecting strain aris-
the mucous membranes of the upper respiratory tract, See
ing from the normal flora.
tein, fibronectin-binding protein, fbrinogen-binding pro-
Swine. Cervical lymphadenitis of swine (jowl abscess)
tein, Psa) and hyaluronic acid capsule. Adherence trig-
is a contagious disease affecting swine. This condition is
 gers internalization and subsequent localization in the
subepithelial spaces. Cell wall constituents as well as pyro-
"group E Streptococcus"). The disease is analogous to stran-
genic exotoxins (SPEH and SPEI) initiate an acute inflam-
- o    s   s
 matory response. Capsule, M protein, and Scp protect S.
nosed until slaughter. Its most damaging aspect is carcass
equi from opsonization and phagocytosis. Streptolysins
condemnation.
- 1 s  s iso o on i e
Secondary pneumonias in swine are sometimes associ-
branes. Systemic clinical signs may be due to the super-
ated with S. dysgalactiae ssp. equisimilis.
antigen effects of pyrogenic exotoxins (SPEH and SPEI).
Streptococcus suis, S. dysgalactiae ssp. equisimilis, and
Other enzymes and toxins may contribute to the pro-
streptococci belonging to groups L and U cause neona-
cess by digesting DNA (DNases), fibrin (streptokinase), and
tal septicemia, suppurative bronchopneumonia, arthritis,
hyaluronic acid (hyaluronidase). The disease is marked by
meningitis, polyserositis, endocarditis, reproductive prob-
a serous or purulent nasal discharge, diphasic temperature
lems, and abscesses. A “fading pig syndrome" has been
rise, local pain, cough, and anorexia. In regional lymph
- aae an s sid jo sn pu ul paoa
nodes, abscesses develop, which typically ruptureand drain
cal signs and gross lesions referable to either the respiratory
within 2 weeks. Recovery follows. The overall mortality rate
system or CNs, but not both. Transmission is from carrier
is under 2%. Complications include bastard (malignant)
pigs (upper respiratory tract and tonsils) with entry proba-
strangles, which results from metastasis of See to bronchial,
bly through the palatine tonsils. Disease is usually seen at
mediastinal, or mesenteric lymph nodes where they can
 3-12 weeks of age, but all ages can be affected. Suilysin pro-
drain internally. Pyemic dissemination to meninges, lungs,
duced by S. suis may account for some of the tissue damage
pericardium, and abdominal viscera, or extension to the
associated with this disease.
S. suis capsular type 2 has zoonotic potential. It causes
I1I hypersensitivity manifested by subcutaneous swellings,
serious infections in humans that may result in severe dis-
mucosal hemorrhages, and fever—may follow the acute
ability (deafness and ataxia). Association with swine is a
disease by about 3 weeks and is associated with significant
predisposing factor.
(50%) mortality.
 Bacterial pneumonia/pyothorax in horses is almost
Ruminants.
 The leading agent of streptococcal mastitis is
always associated with a β-hemolytic Streptococcus with
S. agalactiae. Less frequent causes are S. dysgalactiae ssp.
S. equi ssp. zooepidemicus (Sez) being the most commonly
dysgalactiae and S. uberis. They produce a chronic subacute
isolated. In addition, a gram-negative microorganism
mastitis with periodic acute exacerbations.
198
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
S. agalactiae (group B streptococci) is a leading cause of
 anisms. Similarly, equine purpura hemorrhagica following
sepsis and meningitis in human neonates and pregnant
 strangles is probably immune complex mediated 
women. However, the strains that cause disease in cattle do
not cause disease in humans.
Recovery and Resistance. The main defenses against
streptococcalin fections are phagocytic, and the antiphago-
Dogs and Cats. Secondary pneumonias affecting dogs are
cytic Mprotein elicits protective antibodies. Animals recov.
sometimes associated with Streptococcus canis. S. canis is
ered from strangles and cervical lymphadenitis are at least
 associated with septicemia in newborn puppies and a toxic
temporarily immune to reinfection.
shock-like syndrome (streptococcal toxic shock syndrome,
Polysaccharide capsules of S. agalactiae and S. pneu-
STSS) and necrotizing fascitis (NF) in dogs. STSS is char-
moniae evoke the formation of opsonizing antibody. In
acterized by septic shock with multiple organ failure. NF
streptococcal pneumonia, their appearance determines
recovery from infection. In bovine mastitis, no useful
the soft tissues and fascia, usually in one limb, and char-
immunity develops; cows, unless treated, remain infected.
 acterized by necrosis of soft tissue. It is often followed by
    a 
STSS.
type antibody is protective.
Cats tend to be more resistant to streptococcal infec-
 All immunity is serotype specific.
tions, and when they do occur, they are most common
in young kittens or immunocompromised cats. The infec-
Artificial Immunization. A whole-cell bacterin and an M
 tions seen are the same as those seen in dogs.
protein vaccine are available for vaccination against stran-
gles. Neither is uniformly effective, and often elicits local
 Primates. S. pneumoniae is a leading cause of pneumo-
reactions at the injection site. An intranasal avirulent live
nia, septicemia, and meningitis in primates. Pneumococ-
vaccine that stimulates essential local antibody responses
   n n s so n d 
is available. Feeding live avirulent cultures has produced
mortality rates. The lesions are those of a fibrinous pleurop-
immunity to porcine jowl abscesses.
neumonia. Recent shipment and viral infection are com-
mon antecedents.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Miscellaneous Species.
Cervical lymphadenitis in guinea
Sample Collection. Aspirates from unopened lesions, in
pigs is caused by Streptococcus zooepidemicus ssp. zooepidemi
 sterile syringes or sterile containers, are preferred. Swabs
cus.
in transport media are acceptable. Milk is collected into
 Septicemic disease in fish from freshwater aquaculture
containers under sterile precautions.
farms and saltwater environments has been associated
with Streptococcus iniae, a β-hemolytic Streptococcus with-
Direct Examination.
Smears of exudates or sediments of
 out a Lansfeld designation. Handling (cleaning/necropsy)-
suspect fluids are fixed and Gram stained. Streptococci
affected fish is a risk factor for developing cellulitis, endo-
appear as gram-positive cocci in pairs, short chains, and
carditis, or arthritis presumably following self-inoculation.
in some instances very long chains (typically seen in pus
 Septicemic disease in seals is associated with Streptococ-
aspirated from cervical lymph nodes of horses infected
cus phocae, a β-hemolytic Streptococcus that reacts to Lans-
with S. equi). Streptococci have a tendency to lose thei1
field group antisera C and F.
gram-positivity and sometimes stain weakly gram-positive
 Septicemic disease and dermatitis in opossums are asso-
Or gram-negative.
ciated with Streptococcus didelphis, a β-hemolytic Streptococ-
 Cus without affiliation with known Lansfield groups.
Culture. Exudates, milk, tissue, urine, transtracheal aspi-
rates, and cerebrospinal fluid are cultured directly on cow
Epidemiology. Healthy individuals may cary all the
0r sheep blood agar. Incubation at 37 *C in 3-5% CO2 is
streptococci discussed, and many infections are proba-
preferable. Streptococcal colonies, smooth or mucoid, will 
bly endogenous and stress-related. Neonatal infections are
appear in 18-48 h.
commonly maternal in origin.
 Identification relies on a combination of classical tech-
 Strangles and porcine lymphadenitis are contagious dis-
niques (e.g., determination of Lansfield grouping and bio-
chemical tests), and molecular techniques (e.g., determina-
equi and S. porcinus are spread bycontaminated food, drink-
tion of the sequence of DNA encoding the 16S ribosomal
ing water, or utensils and by recovered animals, which
 DNA, or via PCR using species-specific primers). Commer-
may remain clinically healthy shedders for months. Milk-
cial kits are available for both purposes. Other useful diag-
ing equipment, unskilled attempts at intramammary med-
nostic tests include the following:
ication, and unsanitary milking practices often spread S.
agalactiae among dairy cows.
1.
The CAMP phenomenon (named after Christie,Atkins,
and Munch-Petersen): It reflects hemolytic synergism
Immunologic Aspects
between staphylococcal β-toxin (a sphingomyeli-
nase) and an S. agalactiae toxin (CAMP protein
Immune Mechanisms of Disease. Human poststrepto-
sometimes referred to as cocytolysin). A β-toxin-
coccal diseases (rheumatic fever and acute glomeru-
producing staphylococcus is inoculated across a
sheep or bovine blood agar plate. At right angles to
Chapter27
 Streptococcus and Enterococcus
199
this line, and approximately 0.5 cm from it, a suspect
Treatment and Control
S. agalactiae is inoculated. After incubation, hemol-
 Localized suppurative conditions are drained of pus.
ysis by CAMP-positive bacteria will be enhanced in
 For systemic treatment, penicillin G and ampicillin are
the β-toxin zone (Figure 27.1). The combined action
effective on most β-hemolytic and viridans streptococci.
of these two toxins on sheep or bovine blood agar
produces larger and clearer zones of hemolysis than
Cephalosporins, chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim-
sulfas are alternatives. Streptococcal endocarditis is treated
either agent alone.
with combined penicillin and gentamicin. Susceptibility
2.
Bacitracin sensitivity: Bacitracin disks (0.04 units)
inhibit growth ofS. pyogenes on blood agar. This reac-
to fluoroquinolones is unpredictable. Streptococcal toxic
shock and NF are treated with penicillin G and clindamycin
tion is not entirely consistent or specific.
(clindamycin decreases toxin production, and penicillin G
3.
Bile esculin agar test: It tests the ability of 40% bile
is bactericidal).
salt-tolerant bacteria to hyd rolyze esculin, a charac-
teristic of those belonging to Lansfield group D.
Penicillins (intramammary) are effective for treating
Optochin sensitivity: Growth of S. pneumoniae, but
mastitis due to S. agalactiae and most other streptococci.
4.
For the many available alternatives, a specialty text should
not other α-hemolytic streptococci, is inhibited
be consulted. Important aspects of mastitis control lie in
around disks impregnated with optochin (ethyl
the area of sanitation and herd management.
hydrocuprein hydrochloride).
For strangles, it is most beneficial to treat exposed and
affected animals prior to abscess formation and to continue
treatment past the febrile stage. Inappropriate or inade-
quate therapy of strangles is blamed for prolonging the
illness and causing "bastard strangles" (widespread abscess
FIGURE 27.1.
(A) S. equi ssp. zooepidemicus on sheep
formation with systemic manifestations). Populations at
blood agar plate showing β-hemolysis. (B) Gram stain of s.
risk may be vaccinated. Affected or suspected horses should
equi ssp. zooepidemicus. (C) E. faecalis showing typical
be rigorously isolated.
α-hemolysis on sheep blood agar piate. (D) CAMP reaction on
sheep blood agar. The vertical streak is growth of s. aureus
flanked by a zone of β-toxin activity. Perpendicular to the 5.
aureus is a streak of S. agalactiae. Secretion of CAMP factor by
Enterococcus
the streptococci results in completion of the lysis of the
β-hemolysin damaged erythrocytes, producing the
Enterococci were once classifed as group D streptococci.
characteristic arrowhead zone of lysis within the β-hemolysis
 Unlike most true members of the genus Streptococcus, these
zone of the S. aureus streak.
microorganisms possess phenotypic traits (resistance to
salt, bile, methylene blue, and growth at increased tem-
[A]
(B)
peratures) that set them apart. Molecular genetic analysis
showed that they are unique, and prompted the establish-
ment of a new genus, Enterococcus.
There are 41 species in the genus, most of which live in 
the intestinal tracts of mammals and birds. They are mainly
 opportunists that infect compromised sites to produce dis-
ease. There are some (Enterococcus durans, E. hirae, and E.
villorum) that have been associated with intestinal disease
in neonatal animals (piglets, foals, calves, puppies, and kit-
tens) as well as adult dogs and cats. Enterococci are either α-
01 y-hemolytic on sheep or cattle red blood cell-containing
 blood agar plates.
Descriptive Features
D!
Morphology and Staining.
 Enterococci vary from spheri-
cal to short bacillary cells, about 1 μm in diameter. Division
occurs in one plane, producing pairs and chains.
Structure and Composition. Enterococci have a typical
gram-positive cell wall structure. Polysaccharide capsules
are made by some species. Most en terococci possess Lanice-
field group D carbohydrate.
Cellular Products and Activities of Medical Interest.
Much of what is known regarding cellular products and
activities of medical interest comes from study of Entero-
coccus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium, the most common
200
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
enterococci producing disease in human patients. Presum-
island in the genome of both E. faecalis and E. faecium. It
ably, some of what is known about these two species also
is important for biofilm formation, colonization of the uri-
applies to the other members of the genus.
nary tract, and pathogenesis of endocarditis and urinary
tract infections.
Aggregation Substance. Aggregation substance is a sur-
face protein that promotes adherence of enterococci to
Growth Characteristics. Enterococci produce clear to
- p       
 gray colonies 1-2 mm in diameter (either α- or y -hemolytic)
n no  odi  si  (sae ) s
after overnight incubation at 37 *C, though they will
pheromone-inducible transfer of conjugative plasmids.
grow between 10 *C and 45 *C. Enterococci will grow in
6.5% sodium chloride, 40% bile, and in 0.1% methylene
Capsule.
blue.
sule. The capsule discourages association with phago-
cytic cells by interfering with complement deposition and
Biochemical Activities. Enterococci are catalase-negative
impartinga relative hydrophilicity to the microbe's surface.
facultative anaerobes, deriving energy from fermentation.
Cell Wall.  Cell wall peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acids
Resistance. Enterococci are hardy microorganisms able
initiate an inflammatory response following their interac-
to survive in the environment for extended periods of time.
tion with macrophages.
They areable to grow in 6.5% sodium chlorideand 40% bile,
0.1% methylene blue, and low (10 *C) and high (45 *C) tem-
Pili. Pili of gram-positive bacteria have been implicated in
peratures. They are intrinsically resistant to the β-lactam
adhesion to multiple types of human cells and in biofilm
antibiotics (including cephalosporins and penicillinase-
formation, two processes critical in the pathogenesis of
resistant penicillins), aminoglycosides, clindamycin, flu-
many bacterial diseases. E. faecalis and E. faecium harbor
oroquinolones, and trimethoprim-sulfonamides. (They
pilin gene clusters.
are effective scavengers of thymidine found in exu-
dates, thereby bypassing the effect of trimethoprim-
Enterococcal MScRAMMs. The publicly available genome
sulfonamides.) They are able to acquire resistance to high
sequences of E. faecalis V583 and E faecium Tx0016
 levels of β-lactams, high levels of aminoglycosides, gly-
revealed the presence of 17 and 15 MSCRAMMs, respec-
copeptides (vancomycin), tetracycline, erythromycin, flu-
tively. So far, 7 enterococcal MSCRAMMs have been char-
 oroquinolones, rifampin, and chloramphenicol.
acterized in detail: Ace (adhesion of collagen of E. fae-
calis), Fss1, Fss2, and Fss3 (E. faecalis surface protein), Acm
(adhesin of collagen of E. faecium), Scm (second colla-
Ecology
gen adhesin of E. faecium), and EcbA (E. faecium collagen-
Reservoir.  Enterococci live in the intestinal tract of mam-
binding protein A). Ace was shown to bind to collagen
 mals and birds as part of the normal flora of these species.
types I and IV, laminin, and dentin and was shown to be
Whether the enterococci associated with "primary" dis-
involved in the pathogenesis of experimental endocarditis.
ease, E. durans, E. hirae, and E. villorum, as opposed to
Fss1, Fss2, and Fss3 bind to fibrinogen.
opportunistic-type disease, are members of the normal
flora, is unknown.
Cytolysin. Cytolysin is a cytotoxin whose mechanism of
cell destruction is not understood. It is also a hemolytic
Transmission.
: Enterococci thatareassociated with oppor-
toxin, lysing human and horse red blood cells (but not
tunistic disease are part of the normal flora of the host.
sheep or bovine red blood cells, red blood cells most often
used in blood agar plates). Cytolysin production is under
the control of a quorum-sensing system.
Pathogenesis
Except for E. durans, E hirae, and E villorum-associated
Extracellular Superoxide.
Some enterococci secrete
a
disease, endogenous enterococci infect a compromised
 superoxide that appears to afford some protection against
site (e.g., urinary bladder, moist external ear canal,
killing by phagocytic cells.
and catheter). The cell wall peptidoglycan and lipotei-
choic acids initiate an inflammatory response. Capsule,
Gelatinase. Some enterococci produce a gelatinase that
cytolysin, and superoxide potentate the inflammatory
is expressed under the control of the fsr two-component
processes.
E. durans, E. hirae, and E. villorum associate with the villi
and for virulence. Gelatinase specifically reduces Ace cell
(from tip to crypt) of the small intestine of affected ani-
surface display and thus may affect cell adhesion properties.
mals. Associated diarrhea does not appear to be due to an
 enterotoxin or epithelial cell damage.
Iron Acquisition. Enterococciproduce a hydroxamate type
of siderophore in response to low levels of iron.
Disease Patterns
Enterococcal Surface Protein. The enterococcal surface
Dogs and Cats. Otitis externa is usually the result of infec.
protein (esp) determinant is encoded on a pathogenicity
 tion (bacteria and a yeast, Malassezia) of a compromised
Chapter 27
 Streptococcus and Enterococcus
201
external ear canal. The bacteria involved are usually an
 onization by vancomycin-resistant enterococci (especially
environmental species (e.g., Pseudomonas and Proteus) or a
in hospitals).
member of the patient's normal flora (e.g., Enterococcus and 
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius).
Enterococcus is a common isolate from dogs with lower
Laboratory Diagnosis
urinary tractin fections. Enterococcus spp. (E. durans, E. hirae,
and E vilorum) are associated with diarrhea in puppies,
Sample Collection.
Aspirates from unopened lesions, in
sterile syringes or sterile containers, are preferred. Swabs in
kittens, and adult dogs and cats. Almost any compromised
transport media are acceptable. Urine samples are obtained
site may be contaminated with an Enterococcus.
by antepubic cystocentesis (bladder tap), catherization, 01
midstream catch.
Horse. Enterococcus spp. (E. durans, E hirae, and E villo-
rum) are associated with diarrhea in foals. Enterococcus spp.
should be expected in any condition that results from con-
Direct Examination.:
 Stained (Gram's or Romanovsky-
tamination of a compromised site with fecal material (e.g.,
type such as Wright's or Giemsa) smears of exudates are
street nail/sole abscess and wound).
examined. Urine can be examined unstained or stained
(Gram's or Romanovsky-type). Histopathologic sections of
smallintestine obtained from animals with associated ente-
Cattle. Enterococcus spp. (E. durans, E. hirae, and E. villo-
rococcal enteritis are needed to demonstrate characteristic
rum) are associated with diarrhea in calves. Enterococcus spp.
adherence of coccal forms to villi.
should be expected in any condition that results from con-
tamination of a compromised site with fecal material (e.g.,
wound).
Culture. Samples are streaked onto the surface of blood
agar plates and incubated at 37 *C overnight. Enterococci
produceclear to gray colonies 1-2 mm in diameter (either α -
Swine. Enterococcus spp. (E. durans, E. hirae, and E. villo
01 y-hemolytic). Preliminary identification entails testing
rum) are associated with diarrhea in piglets. Enterococcus
for the production of catalase (negative), and ability to grow
spp. should be expected in any condition that results from
 in 6.5% sodium chloride and 40% bile. Most isolates can be
contamination of a compromised site with fecal material
speciated using commercially available kits, sequencing the
(e.g., wound).
gene encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA, or a combination
of both.
Miscellaneous Species. Enterococcus spp. (E. durans, E.
hirae, and E villorum) are associated with diarrhea in infant
rats.
Treatment and Control
Correction of the underlying condition is the most impor-
Epidemiology. Most of the infectious processes from
    n    
which enterococci are isolated are due to contamination
enterococci are isolated. In some instances, removal of the 
with members of the normal flora. In hospital settings,
compromise is enough to initiate host elimination of ente-
nosocomial spread (e.g., fomites, hands of care givers, and
rococci (because they do not have potent virulence deter-
soles of shoes) to compromised sites is an important issue.
minants). This is an important concept because enterococci
The epidemiology of the diarrhea-associated enterococci
tend to be quite resistant to antimicrobials. In those infec.
(E. durans, E. hirae, and E. villorum) is unknown.
tious processes that have a polymicrobic etiology (along
      
with the compromise), success can be achieved by correc-
ous problem in human medicine because members of
tion of the compromise and antimicrobic therapy aimed at
this genus (especially E. faecalis and E. faecium) are
major contributors to nosocomially acquired disease. The
Enterococci isolated from the lower urinary tract of
vancomycin-resistance genes are encoded on a transpos-
dogs are usually susceptible to urine concentrations
able element (Tn1546). Enterococci are very resistant to
of amoxicillin-clavulanate, chloramphenicol, and tetra-
 antimicrobial agents. Vancomycin (a glycopeptide antibi-
cycline. Even though most urinary strains of entero-
otic) is one of the few effective drugs for treatment of
cocci test susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfonamides, care
such infectious processes. Vancomycin-resistant strains of
should be taken in interpreting in viro test results
enterococci arose in Europe after the initiation of feed-
because of the thymidine-savaging ability of this group of
ing of another glycopeptide avoparcin (a growth pro-
microorganisms.
 s n o s d-o m (o
Enterococci associated with otitis externa in dogs are
vancomycin-resistant strains were limited to the intestinal
dealt with by correcting the underlying compromise and
tract of animals that fed this antibiotic, they soon spread,
use of any of the otic preparations that contain an antimi-
as did the genes encoding vancomycin resistance (vanA),
crobial. (Topical concentrations of most incorporated
to the human intestinal tract. In the United States (where
antimicrobics usually far exceed the minimal inhibitory
avoparcin was not allowed), injudicious use of vancomycin
concentration needed to inhibit growth of enterococci.)
in human hospitals resulted in the same effect, that is, an
Treatment options of diarrheal disease associated with
increase in selective pressure resulting in an increase in col-
E. durans, E. hirae, or E. villorum are undefined.
202
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
Abiotrophia and Granulicatelfa (Nutritionally
A fibronectin-binding protein, Cha, has been identified 
Variant Streptococci)
 and characterized from Granulicatella adiacens.
Members of the genera Abiotrophia and Granulicatella were
discovered as small colonies growing as satellites around
Further Reading
other bacterial colonies when samples obtained from nor-
mal human mucosal surfaces (eyes, genital tract, mouth,
Cole JN, Barnett TC, Nizet V, and Walker MJ (2011) Molecular
and respiratory tract) were inoculated onto blood agar
insight into invasive group A streptococcal disease. Nat Rev
plates. The bacteria comprising these colonies were gram-
Microbiol, 9, 724-736.
positive, catalase-negative cocci requiring vitamin Bg for
Feng Y, Zhang H, Ma Y, and Gao GF (2010) Uncovering
growth (satisfied by the addition of 0.002% pyridoxal
newly emerging variants of Streptococcus suis, an important
hydrochloride to media). These microorganisms were pro-
Zoonotic agent. Trends Microbiol, 18, 124-131.
visionally termed “nutritionally variant streptococci,”" but
Moschioni M, Pansegrau W,and Barocchi MA (2010) Adhesion
later placed into the genera Abiotrophia and Granulicatella
determinants of the Streptococcus species. Microb Biotechnol,
based upon the sequence of the gene encoding the 16S
3,370-388
ribosomal RNA.
 Priestnall S and Erles K (20ll) Streptococcus zooepidemicus: an
emerging canine pathogen. Vet J, 188, 142-148.
 Clinically, members of these genera have been isolated
Sava IG, Heikens E, and Huebner J (2010) Pathogenesis and
from the bloodstream, abscesses, dental plaque, joints,
immunity in enterococcal infections. Clin Microbiol Infect,
corneal ulcers, acute-onset postoperative endophthalmi-
 tis, and cardiac valve vegetations of human patients. They
16, 533-540.
Waller AS, Paillot R, and Timoney JF (201l) Streptococcus equi:
have been isolated from the genital tracts, respiratory tracts,
a pathogen restricted to one host. / Med Microbiol, 60, 1231-
abscesses, and eyes of horses and ruminants.
1240.
28
Arcanobacterium
T.G. NAGARAJA
Species of the genus Arcanobacterium (which means “secre-
capsules and metachromatic granules. Cells from older cul-
tive bacteria") are gram-positive rods, often pleomorphic,
tures (> 24 h) may be gram variable.
non-spore-forming and nonmotile. In shape, members of
this genus are "diphtheroids," not filamentous, and many
Structure and Composition. Its cell wall peptidoglycan
species were at one time included in the genus Corynebac-
contains lysine, rhamnose, and glucose. Unlike members
terium (e.g., Corynebacterium pyogenes), and later in the
of the genera Corynebacterium and Rhodococcus, it does not
genus Actinomyces (e.g., Actinomyces pyogenes). Sequence
contain mycolic acids.
analyses of the gene encoding the i6S ribosomal RNA
 of several species in Actinomyces suggested placing of the
species in a genus called Arcanobacterium.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
The species of the genus Arcanobacterium include A.
Cell Wall. The lipoteichoic acids and peptidoglycan of
bernardiae, A. bialowiezense, A. bonsai, A. haemolyticum, A.
the gram-positive cell wall interact with macrophage cells,
hippocoleae, A. phocae, A. pluranimalium, and A. pyogenes*.
resulting in the release of proinflammatory cytokines.
Arcanobacterium bialowiezense and Arcanobacterium bon-
A. pyogenes produces a number of extracellular products
sai have been isolated from the prepuce of European
and sur face-exposed proteins that contribute to adherence,
bison bulls suffering from balanoposthitis. Arcanobacterium
colonization, and host damage:
haemolyticum and Arcanobacterium bemardiae are human
pathogens, and involvement of A. bernardiae in infections
1.1
Pyolysin O: A hemolytic exotoxin, designated as
is rare. A. haemolyticum is involved in pharyngitis, tonsil-
pyolysin O (PLO), produced by all strains of A. pyo-
litis, and skin rash, most often in adolescents and young
genes is the primary virulence factor. The hemolysin
adults.Arcanobacterium phocae,A.pluranimalium, and A.
is active against sheep, horse, human, rabbit, and
hippocoleae have been isolated from the respiratory tract of
guinea pig erythrocytes and is cytotoxic to poly-
seals, the spleen of a harbor porpoise and the lung of a deer,
morphonuclear neutrophils also, and in laboratory
and from an equine vaginal exudate, respectively. A recent
animals, it exerts dermonecrotic and lethal activ-
study suggests that sheep are most frequently affected by
ities. It is a pore-forming toxin belonging to the
infection with A. pluranimalium, and most isolates were
thiol-activated family of cytolysins found in many
from aborted tissues. Arcanobacterium pyogenes is the main
gram-positive bacteria, such as streptococcal strep-
species of veterinary importance, being involved in suppu-
tolysin O, listerial listeriolysin O, and clostridial per-
rative processes in all animals, but more common in cattle,
fringolysin O. The family is named for the sensitivity
 sheep, and swine.
of their activity to oxygen and restoration of their
activity by reducing compounds (thiol activation).
A. pyogenes
The PLO is considered to be the major virulence fac-
tor in A. pyogenes infection.
2.
Neuraminidases: Also called sialidases they cleave ter-
Descriptive Features
 minal sialic acid from carbohydrates or glycopro-
Morphology and Staining. A. pyogenes is coccobacillary
teins. A. pyogenes produces two neuraminidases. One
10 A1suis 1no 1eu (um 7 04 dn Aq wm s'0) spo1 1ous 04
is a cell wall-associated 107 kDa protein (NanH)
in pairs. Short diphtheroid forms with small clubs are also
encoded by the nanH gene. The nanH is produced
seen, particularly in young cultures. The organism lacks
in all strains of A. pyogenes that have been tested.
 The protein is similar to a number of other bacterial
neuraminidases. The second neuraminidase (NanP)
*It is riow proposed that species bernardiae, bialowiezense, bonasi,
is a 186.8 kDa protein, encoded by nanP, is prefer-
arid pyogenes shiould be reclassifed as members of a riew gerius,
entially associated with bovine strains, and is not
Trueperella.
present in all the strains tested.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
203
204
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
3. Exiracellular matrix-binding proteins: These are pro
may be the supply of energy substrate (lactic acid by A.
teins on the surface of A. pyogenes that bind to host
extracellular matrix composed of structural glyco-
F. necrophorum), and creation of anaerobiosis (oxygen use
proteins, such as fibronectin, collagen, fibrinogen,
by A. pyogenes). Pyolysin is a major virulence determinant
laminin, and elastin. A protein, CbpA, which binds
 as evidenced by mutants deficient in production of the
to fibrinogen and fibrinonectin, has been described.
toxin have reduced virulence, and antibodies raised against
This protein has 50.4% similarity to Cna, a protein
the inactivated protein are host protective. The precise role
that binds to collagen, of Staphylococcus aureus. A
of pyolysin in the pathogenesis of A. pyogenes infection is
20 kDa cell wall-associated, fbrinonectin-binding
not known, but the membrane-damaging effect on host
protein has been described.
cells is probably a key mechanism. Neuraminidases play a
4.
A. pyogenes secretes at least four distinct proteases,
role in bacterial adhesion to epithelial cells. The enzyme
possibly serine proteases, and a DNase. Although
can also decrease viscosity of mucus, thus facilitating col-
some aspects of these enzymes have been studied,
onization. Neuraminidases can also impair host immune
 there is no evidence to support a role for any these
response by desialylation of IgA and increasing their sus-
enzymes in the pathogenesis of A. pyogenes infec-
ceptibilities to proteolysis. The ability of A. pyogenes to bind
tions.
to extracellular matrix proteins, mediated by surface pro-
teins, may promote adherence and subsequent coloniza-
Growth Characteristics. A. pyogenes is a facultative
tion. The proteases may play a role in tissue invasion and
anaerobe with a fermentative metabolism. They require
destruction, evasion of host defenses, and modulation of
increased CO2 for optimal growth. On blood agar, the
the host immune system during infection and inflamma-
organisms form pinpoint colonies with distinct zone of β-
tion. DNAse may depolymerize viscous DNA released from
 hemolysis. The zone of hemolysis is typically two to three
lysed or disintegrating host cells in suppurative lesions.
times the diameter of the colony.
The exudate (pus) consists of bacteria, neutrophils (live or
dead), and host cell debris.
Biochemical Activities. A. pyogenes is catalase-negative,
ferments lactose, and digests protein (gelatin, casein, and
 Pathology. The lesions are abscesses, empyemas, or pyo-
coagulated serum).
granulomas. Abscesses are often heavily encapsulated. Any
 putrid odors are contributions of anaerobic bacteria.
Resistance.
A. pyogenes is susceptible to drying, heat
(60 *C), disinfectants, and β-lactam antibiotics. It is resis-
Disease Patterns. A. pyogenes is involved in purulent
tant to sulfonamides, and increasingly so to tetracycline.
infections, singly or in combination with other organisms,
of traumatic or opportunistic origins, which may be local,
Ecology
regional, or metastatic. It is frequently isolated from a vari-
ety of pyogenic infections of the lung, pericardium, endo-
Reservoir.  A. pyogenes is a normal inhabitant of the upper 
cardium, pleura, peritoneum, liver, joints, uterus, renal cor-
respiratory, urogenital, and gastrointestinal tracts of cattle,
swine, and other domestic animals. In cattle, it has been
tex, brain, bones, and subcutaneous tissues of all animals,
but most frequently in ruminants and swine.
isolated from the ruminal epithelium. The organism does
The more common and economically significant infec-
not appear to be part of the normal flora in humans.
tions are as follows:
Transmission. Because A. pyogenes is a commensal on skin
 and mucous membrane, most infections are endogenous.
Liver abscesses in catle: A. pyogenes is the second most
In “summer mastitis,” cow-to-cow spread, mediated by
commonly isolated bacterium (next to F. necropho-
flies, has been reported.
rum) from abscesses of the liver in feedlot cattle.
The organism originates from the ruminal wall and
reaches the liver via the portal vein. Generally, the
Pathogenesis
occurrence of A. pyogenes ranges from 2% to 25% of
Mechanisms.
 Entry of A. pyogenes into the deeper tissues
liver abscesses, but in certain situations (cattle fed all-
 requires an insult or a stress of some kind such as a wound
         
Summer mastitis in cows and heifers: A. pyogenes causes
get disseminated and even cause abortion, but more often
severe mastitis characterized by thick, purulent secre.
it results in suppurative infections involving joints, skin,
tions, frequently in dry cows and heifers before or at
and visceral organs, usually complicated by other poten-
the timeof calving, and occasionally in lactatingcows
tially pathogenic commensals, especially gram-negative,
generally following teator udder injury. The source of
non-spore-forming anaerobes (Bacteroides, Dichelobacter,
infection includes wound, abscesses, and the genital
Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas,Prevotella, and Peptostrepto-
tract, and infection spreads in a herd because of con-
coccus). The observation that A. pyogenes is almost always
tact of teats with a contaminated environment, such
associated with Fusobacterium necrophorum has led to the
as calving area. In Europe, the disease is common in
suggestion of pathogenic synergy between the two species
dry cows and heifers maintained on pasture, hence
Such synergistic interaction has been demonstrated in lab-
the name “summer mastitis." The seasonal preva-
oratory mice. The mechanisms involved in this synergism
lence is also associated with fly season because biting
Chapter 28 Arcanobacterium
205
flies are involved in the en try of the organism into the
methods are used to identify this microorganism. Primers
designed to amplify A. pyogenes-specific DNA by the poly-
Septic arthrifis in swine: Arthritis appears after farrowing,
merase chain reaction have been described.
 suggesting that the source of infection may be the
uterus.
Treatment and Control
The other infections from which A. pyogenes is fre-
Incision and drainage of abscesses are essential. A. pyogenes
quently isolated are umbilical infections in calves, trau-
is susceptible to penicillin, ampicillin, chloramphenicol,
matic reticulitis in cows, foot rot in cattle.
erythromycin, sulfamethazine, tylosin, and tetracyclines.
The in vivo response to antimicrobials is poor because of
Epidemiology. Because A. pyogenes is part of the normal
thecapsulation of the abscesses and antibiotic-binding pro-
flora of susceptible species, disease prevalence is sporadic
teins in pus.
and governed by precipitating stress or trauma. Summer
mastitis is most prevalent in northern Europe.
Further Reading
Immunologic Aspects
Billington SJ and Jost BH (20o0) Thiol-activated cytolysins:
Immune responses to A. pyogenes are not well understood.
structure, function and role in pathogenesis. FEMS Microbiol
There have been attempts to vaccinate mice, cattle, and
Left, 182, 197-205.
sheep with bacterins or formalin-inactivated crude A. pyo-
Billington SJ, Songer JG, and Jost BH (2001) Molecular charac-
genes supernatant. Results of such studies have not been
very convincing. In mice, vaccination with purified recom-
ulence determinant of Arcanobacterium pyogenes. Vet Micro-
binant PLO resulted in neutralizing antibodies, which pro-
biol, 82, 261-274.
tected mice against challenge with A. pyogenes. Because A.
 molecular pathogenesis of animal opportunist. Ant Van
 pyogenes infections are sporadic, vaccination is not a viable
Leeuwenhock,88,87-102.
approach.
Ramos CP, Foster G, and Collins MD (1997) Phylogenetic
analysis of the genus Actinomyces based on 16S rRNA gene
Laboratory Diagnosis
sequences: description of Arcanobacterium phocae sp. nov.,
Arcanobacterium bernardiae com. nov., and Arcanobacterium
Gram-stained smears from tissues or exudates reveal gram-
pyogenes comb. Nov Int / Syst Bacteriol, 47, 46-53.
positive short to pleomorphic rods, often mixed with
Yassin AF, Hupfer H, Siering C, and Schumann P (2011) Com-
other bacteria. Material suspected of containing A. pyo-
 parative chemotaxonomic and phylogenetic studies on the
genes should be cultured on blood agar in 5% CO2 incu-
genus Arcanobacterium Collins et al. 1982 emend. Lehnen
bator. Generally, minute colonies on blood agar with dis-
et al. 2006: proposal for Trueperella gen. nov. and emended
tinct but narrow zone of hemolysis from a sample of pus are
description of the genus Arcanobacterium. Int / Syst Evol
indicative of A. pyogenes in volvement. Routine biochemical
Microbiol, 61, 1265-1274.
29
GEORGE C.STEWART AND BRIAN M. THOMPSON
Members of the genus Bacillus are gram-positive,
Cellular Composition. B. anthracis hasa gram-positive cell
endospore-forming, facultatively anaerobic rods that typi-
wall structure. Covering the cell wall is a proteinaceous
cally inhabit soil and water. They are ubiquitous in nature,
and are commonly isolated from a wide variety of surfaces,
 the S-layer has not been shown to be essential for virulence,
 soils, and animal byproducts. Average numbers of Bacil-
 S-layer deficient mutant strains were reported to be more
lus spp. present in soil are between 10° and 10? per gram
sensitive to binding of the C3 component of the comple-
of soil. During periods of nutrient deprivation, a Bacillus
ment.
cell undergoes a process known as sporulation by which it
Spores are the infectious form of B. anthracis. Spores are
forms a dense, resistantendospore. Endospores are resistant
immunogenic and the addition of inactivated spores has
to heat, desiccation, ultraviolet and ionizing irradiation,
been shown to increase the degree of immunity against
disinfectants, and a variety of other en vironmentalstresses.
highly virulent strains of B. anthracis in animal models
They can remain viable in soil and water for decades, await-
of infection. The spores consist of multiple layers (Fig-
 ing nutrients, or in the case ofpathogenic members of Bacil.
ure 29.2). The core is the inert bacterial cell. Itis surrounded
lus, entry of spores into their respective hosts.
by the cortex, a layer of modified peptidoglycan. This is sur-
Three species are considered pathogenic. Bacillus
rounded by the inner and outer coat layers, protein layers
anthracis is a zoonotic pathogen and the causative agent of
that confer most of the resistance properties on the spore.
anthrax. Bacillus cereus is a causal agent of food poisoning.
The outermost layer of the spore is the exosporium layer
and Bacillus thuringiensis is a lepidopteran insect pathogen.
that is separated from the coat by the interspace layer. The
Genomic studies, including DNA-DNA hybridization, 16S
exosporium consists of a paracrystalline basal layer and
and 23S rRNA sequence comparisons, multilocus sequence
its outer surface covered by filaments of the hair-like nap
typing, multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, and amplified
composed of the BclA collagen-like glycoprotein. Because
fragment length polymorphism analysis, have revealed a
the exosporium is the outermost structure of the spore, it
 s   se n  
is probable that it plays a major role in interactions with
ing to the proposal that B. anthracis, B. cereus, and B.
the environment and with the host immune system. The
thuringiensis may be viewed as a single species. Their vif-
B. anthracis exosporium was reported to play a role in lim-
ulence and host range are determined by their virulence
iting access to inducers of cytokine responses in viro in
gene-encoding plasmid content. For example, virulence of
macrophages. The uptake of spores by macrophages has
B. anthracis requires the presence of the pxO1 and pXO2
been shown to involve interactions between BclA and the
plasmids, required for production of the anthrax toxins and
integrin Mac-1 (CR3). Spores lacking the BclA glycopro-
capsule, respectively.
tein do not specifically target these cells, but bind more
generally to epithelial cells. Spores lacking BclA have been
shown to bind to extracellular matrix components such as
Bacillus anthracis
laminin and fibronectin. The spore-surface BclA fibers may
act to promote uptake by professional phagocytes and to
Descriptive Features
inhibit nonspecific interactions between B. anthracis spores
Morphology and Staining.
Cells of B.anthracis are gram-
with nonprofessional phagocytic cells in the early stages of
infection.
positive, nonmotile, roughly rectangula1 rods with square
ends (about 1 μm by 3-5 μm) (Figure 29.1). Chains of 1ods
are common. Chain formation is thought to contribute to
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
the bacterium's ability to resist opsono-phagocytic killing.
Spores are produced within the cells during conditions of
1. Lethal foxin (LeTx): Two virulence-associated, pXO1-
nutrient deprivation and cause no cell swelling. A capsule
encoded toxins are made by B. anthracis. LeTx is
is formed in vivo, or in bicarbonate-supplemented culture
a binary toxin composed of “protective antigen"
media and an elevated CO2 atmosphere in viro.
    (  s,  ())
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
206
Chapter 29
Bacillus
207
tosis of affected cells. Macrophages from numerous
FIGURE 29.1.
(A) B. anthracis colonies on a sheep blood
agar plate; (B) Gram stain of B. anthracis; (C) B. cereus on a
undergoing apoptosis. LeTx derives its name for its
sheep blood agar plate with hemolysis evident; (D) string of
lethal effects in animal models of infection includ-
pearis positive test with B. anthracis; and (E) spore stain of B.
ing guinea pigs, rats, and mice. LeTx induces vascu-
anthracis.
lar collapse (pleural edema and rapid shock) and yet
[A
B}
exposure to purified LeTx often results in no observ-
able histopathology. Activity of the toxin on heart
tissue is thought to lead to the pulmonary edema. In
certain mouse strains, LeTx exposure results in rapid
lysis of macrophages and production of inflamma-
tory cytokines. However, other strains do not show
(E
this property. Macrophage lysis is not a common
feature in other animal models. LeTx exposure does
result in apoptosis in a variety of cell types and a
cell-death independent loss of barrier function in 
epithelial and endothelialcells invitro. Production of
LeTx is under controlofthe regulatory gene product,
AtxA (for anthrax toxin activator), which responds
binding of LeTx to "target cells," while LF is respon-
to as yet un known en vironmental cues AtxA is also
encoded on pXO1. LeTx production by cells cultured
sible for its toxic activity. PA and LF associate only
-d raun pue roidai shi on pnoq si vd r
in vitro is upregulated by the presence of bicarbonate 
in the medium and an elevated CO2 atmosphere in
olytically processed by endopeptidases of the furin
family. Processed PA forms a homoheptameric (or
an AtxA-dependent manner, suggesting this may be
the cue recognized by AtxA. Lethal toxin is produced
homooctomeric) ring on the target cell surface. The
PA can then serve as the binding component for the
at levels five times greater than that of edema toxin.
2.1
Edema toxin: Edema factor (EF), the enzymatically
LF protein or the edema toxin. The toxin is endo-
active component of edema toxin (EdTx), is also
cytosed and when the reduction of pH in the endo-
encoded on pXO1. EdTx is a binary toxin com-
some occurs, con formational changes ensue and the
posed of the PA receptor binding subunit and EF.
PA forms a transmembrane channel to deliver LF
PA delivers EF to the target cells cytoplasm by the
into the cytosol. LF is a zinc metalloprotease that
same mechanism as lethal toxin. EF is a calmodulin-
inactivates mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases
dependent adenylyl cyclase that increases levels of
(MAPK kinases), by cleaving off their N-terminal
CAMP within the affected cell. This disrupts cell-
sequences resulting in the disruption of signaling
 signaling pathways, resulting in cell type-specific
pathways within the affected cell and leads to inhi-
bition of cell proliferation and ultimately to apop-
physiologic changes. In animal models of infec-
tion, purifed EdTx produces hemorrhagic lesions in
multiple organs accompanied by hypotension and
bradycardia. EdTx has not been shown to be cyto-
toxic for multiple cell types. EdTx has been reported
FIGURE 29.2.
Transmission electron micrograph of a
ruthenium red stained spore of B. anthracis. Ruthenium red
to suppress thrombin-induced platelet aggregation
enhances visualization of the BciA exosporium glycoprotein
and clotting function. Production of EdTx is also
nap layer. Outer spore structures are labeled.
under AtxA control.
3.
Capsule: The vegetative form of B. anthracis pro-
duces a capsule composed of a polymer of poly-
y-D-glutamic acid. The genes encoding this struc-
Exosporium
ture are on the pXO2 plasmid. The expression of
nap (BcIA)
the genes encoding the capsule are under control of
two regulatory gene products, AtxA and AcpA (for
Exosporium
anthrax toxin activator and anthrax capsule acti-
basal layer
vator, respectively) that respond to environmen-
Spore coat
tal cues. The capsule enables the vegetative form
to avoid phagocytosis. The Sterne vaccine strain is
Cortex
attenuated for virulence because it lacks the capsule.
encoding pXO2 plasmid.
4.
Miscellaneous virulence-associated products: Several
homologs of proteins shown to be important in
Interspace
virulence of other microorganisms have been dis-
covered in the DNA sequence of the genome of
B. anthracis. These include genes encoding pro-
teins important in survival within phagolysosomes
208
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
 '  ) ss ho o p
Growth Characteristics. B. anthracis isa facultative anaer-
escape from phagolysosomes and phagocytic cells
obe and grows on common media between 15 *Cand 40*C.
(anthrolysins).
            s
a. InhA: Immune inhibitor A (InhA) is a metallopro-
37 *C (Figure 29.1). Colonies grown in air have a dull sur-
tease similar to that produced by B. cereus. It con-
face and wavy margin formed by strands of bacterial chains
tributes to pathogenicity through several mech-
("medusa-head"). Cells are nonencapsulated unless grown
 anisms, including the cleavage of antibacterial
in greater than 5% carbon dioxide on media containing
proteins, escape of bacteria from macrophages,
0.7% bicarbonate, in which case the colonies are mucoid.
control of blood coagulation, and degradation
No hemolytic zone is produced.
of matrix-associated proteins. InhA recently has
Sporulation occurs under conditions of nutrient depri-
been postulated to play a role in increasing blood-
vation in vitro. The process is oxygen requiring, and does
brain barrier permeability and contributing to
not occur while inside a living animal host. Organisms in
cerebral hemorhages.
 infected tissue or fluids exposed to air (i.e., rupturing of the
b. MprF: The genome of B. anthracis contains the
carcass) sporulate after several hours.
gene encoding the homolog of MprF (for mul-
tiple peptide resistance factor) of Staphylococcus
Resistance. Although generally antibiotic sensitive, all
aureus. It has been shown to confer resistance to
sequenced strains of B. anthracis possess a latent β-
defensins (found within the phagolysosome, and
lactamase gene, which is transcriptionally silent. Strains
in secretions bathing mucosal surfaces) by lysiny
have been identified in which this gene is activated and
lation of phospholipids in the bacterial cell mem-
inducible penicillin resistance is observed.
brane.
Vegetative cells in unopened carcasses may survive for
C. Anthrolysins: The genome of B. anthracis contains
up to 1-2 weeks, but spores can persist for decades in a
 genes encoding anthrolysins (also referred to as
 stable, dry environment. Spores are killed by autoclaving
anthralysins), three of which are phospholipase
(121 *C/15 min) and dry heat (150 *C/60 min), but not by
C homologs and anthrolysin O is a cholesterol-
boiling (100 *C) for less than 10 min. They are not highly
binding pore-forming cytolysin. Although each
susceptible to phenolic, alcoholic, and quaternary ammo.
is dispensable for virulence, loss of all four
nium disinfectants. Aldehydes, oxidizing and chlorinat-
results in attenuation. It is hypothesized that
ing disin fectants, β-propiolactone, and ethylene oxide are
these are important in escape of the organ.
 more useful. Spores are efficiently inactivated by exposure
ism from the phagolysosome following germina-
to 10% bleach. Heat fixation of smears does not kill spores.
tion of spores in macrophages. Anthrolysin O is
poorly expressed by B. anthracis (which is why B.
Variability. The peracute nature of the infectious process
anthracis is nonhemolytic). The reason is that its
and spore-based life cycle mean that B. anthracis under-
regulator, PlcR, is inactive owing to a truncation
 goes a limited number of divisions in infected hosts and
of its coding sequence. Recombinant anthrolysin 
do not replicate while dormant in the soil. Thus, these
O is lethal to human monocytes, neutrophils,
organisms have undergone far fewer replication cycles than
macrophages, and lymphocytes.
other forms of pathogenic bacteria. This results in much
d. Nitric oxide synthase: B. anthracis bacilli and
less mutational alteration of their genomic sequences and
endospores exhibit nitric oxide synthase activity
very limited strain-to-strain variation. The genome is more
 that may protect germinating spores from nitric
 homogeneous than is the case with other pathogens.
 oxide production by host macrophages by using
up available substrate pools of arginine.
Ecology
 5. Regulation of the Cellular Products of Medical Inter-
Reservoir. The soil is the source of anthrax infection for
est.
 herbivores. Other species, including humans, are exposed
via infected animals and animal products.
There are two proteins AtxA and AcpA (for anthrax toxin
activator and anthrax capsule activator, respectively) that
Transmission. The spore is the infectious form. Infection
usually takes place by ingestion of contaminated feed or
these cues are in vivo is unknown. Under the appropri-
water. Exposure via wound infection and arthropod bites
ate conditions, however, AtxA increases the production of
can occur.
LeTx, EdTx, and proteins involved in the “escape" from
Human infections occur following exposure to spores
phagolysosomes and macrophages. AcpA production is
on infected hides or other animal products, from soil, o1
amplified under increased amoun ts of CO2 (5% or greater).
 exposure to infected animal blood or tissue.
AtxA acts synergistically with AcpA in this regard. The genes
encoding AtxA and AcpA are on the plasmids, pXOi and
Pathogenesis
pXO2, respectively. The B. anthracis transcriptional regu-
lator CodY activates toxin gene expression by posttransla-
Mechanisms.
Spores are acquired from the environment
tionally regulating the accumulation of the AtxA virulence
(e.g, soil and animal products). They are phagocytosed by
gene regulator. CodY is also required for heme utilization
macrophages or dendritic cells (polymorphonuclear neu-
as an iron source.
Chapter 29
Bacillus
209
disease process). The spores germinate within the
that constitutes 95% of naturally occurring human infec-
phagolysosome compartment. Vegetative bacteria escape
tions. The hallmark lesion is the malignant pustule, a
from the phagolysosome and later from the phagocytic cell.
local ulcerative inflammatory lesion covered by a black
During the intracellular replication process, the phagocytic
scab (eschar). Possible complications are subcutaneous
cells traffic to the regional lymph nodes. Release of the bac-
edema and septicemia. The case fatality rate for cutaneous
teria permits access of the organisms to the bloodstream.
anthrax is 10-20%. Inhalation of spores leads to pulmonary
anthrax or “wool-sorter's disease" which is highly fatal if
Pathology.  In tissue, spores germinate and the vegetative
untreated and 50% to >90% lethal even with antibiotic
form proliferates, producing gelatinous edema. Inflamma-
therapy. The poorprognosis is due tothe initial nondescript
tory reactions are minimal. Infection disseminates to retic-
uloendothelial sites. When these are saturated, a terminal
the rapid time-course of the infection. Radiographic evi-
bacteremia occurs, with enormous numbers of organisms
dence of mediastinal widening is characteristic. Pulmonary
in circulation. There are no consistent pathognomonic
edema, hemorrhagic pneumonia, and meningitis have
lesions and considerable similarities are seen to other in fec-
been described in affected patients. Pulmonary anthrax is
tious and toxic causes of acute death. Postmortem find-
the form of human disease of concern from a bioterrorism
ings are widespread hemorrhages; a black, engorged, fri-
standpoint.
able spleen; tarry, nonclotting blood; and absence of rigor
mortis. Bleeding at body orifices is common.
Epidemiology. A soil rich in calcium and nitrate, with a
Experimental transmission of B. anthracis has revealed
pH range of 5.0-8.0, favors sporulation and bacterial pro-
that cattle are resistant to spores introduced parenterally,
liferation at temperatures above 15.5 *C (60 *F), especially
but sensitive to spores introduced by the oral route. The
after flooding. The geography and seasonality of outbreaks
LDso is likely to be <10? spores. With sheep, the LDso
reflect such circumstances. In cattle, sheep, and possibly
is between 50 and 250 spores by the subcutaneous inoc-
horses, outbreaks begin with a few cases contracted from
ulation route. Swine are resistant to lethal infections by
the soil. After excretions and postmortem discharges seed
B. anthracis spores. Other species including dogs, rabbits,
the area, secondary cases occur. Floods and industrial efflu-
ents from rendering works, tanneries, carpet mills, brush
as well.
factories, or wherever else carcasses are salvaged may con-
taminate areas. Bone meal, an animal feed supplement, is a
Disease Pattern
common vehicle in nonendemic areas. Carnivores (mink)
are usually exposed via infected meat.
Ruminants. The process described in the preceding text is
Human exposures are contracted in occupations dealing
typical for the most susceptible species—-cattle and sheep.
with animals and animal-derived material such as imported
The course, following an incubation period of 1-5 days,
hides, wool, and bone. Anthrax occurring under industrial
ranges from a few hours to 2 days. Some animals die with-
conditions is often the lethal airborne version. Nonindus-
out overt clinical signs. Others develop high fever, agalac-
trial exposures have recently been associated with products
tia, and they may abort. There is congestion of mucous
such as decorative drums. Cutaneous anthrax infections are
membranes, hematuria, hemorrhagic diarrhea, and often-
the usual form of nonindustrial exposure.
regional edema. These forms are regularly fatal. Occasional
animals show just localized edema or an ulcerative skin
lesion and recover.
Immunologic Aspects
Hyperimmune sera can prevent and alleviate disease.
Horses. Horses develop colic and diarrhea; edema also
Antibacterial and antitoxic factors are thought to be
occurs, particularly of dependent parts and at the point
involved. In most species, immunity is directed against the
of infection (e.g., the intestine or the throat) where it may
 PA. Capsular polypeptide fails to stimulate protective anti-
cause death by asphyxiation. Alternatively, the course may
body.
be septicemic, as in ruminants.
 Immunization of livestock has utilized mostly modified
live spore vaccines. Currently, these are derived from avir-
Swine. In swine, localization in pharyngeal tissues is typ
ulent (noncapsulated) mutants. The most widely used is
ical. An ulcerative lesion at the portal of entry is associ-
the Sterne vaccine (a strain of B. anthracis that lacks the
ated with regional lymphadenitis. Obstructive edema may
pXO2 plasmid). A cell-free vaccine consisting of concen-
cause death. Ulcerative hemorrhagic enteritis and mesen-
trated culture filtrate has been used on humans exposed to
teric lymphadenitis sometimes occur.
industrial anthrax, researchers working with B. anthracis,
or victims of suspected bioterrorism events involving B.
Carnivores.
Carnivores (including mink)
arerarely
anthracis. Five intramuscular injections over an 18-month
affected; when they are, the disease pattern is similar to
schedule are recommended. Recombinant PA-based vac-
that in swine, although massive exposure through tainted
cines show promise.
meat may trigger septicemia.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Humans. Three distinct disease forms arise depending the
route of spore entry into the patient. Exposure through
Sample Collection. During sample collection, precau-
skin wounds or abrasions results in cutaneous anthrax
tions against contamination of the environment are
210
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
important. Blood may be aspirated from a superficial ves-
When an outbreak or a case of anthrax has occurred,
sel. Aqueous humor has the added advantage of remote.
animal health authorities are notified to supervise con-
ness from sources of early postmortem contamination. For
trol measures. Carcass disposal involves incineration (pre-
direct examination, bloody discharges from orifices are
ferred) or deep burial (>6.5 ft) under a layer of quicklime
sampled.
(anhydrous calcium oxide). Surviving sick animals are iso-
 If the carcass has been opened, spleen material may be
lated and treated. Susceptible livestock are vaccinated. The
collected.
premises are quarantined for 3 weeks subsequent to the last
 B. anthracis is categorized as a SelectAgent and once iden-
established case. Milk from infected animals is discarded
tified is subject to strict regulations for possession or trans-
under appropriate precautions. Barns and fences are disin-
port. Only registered facilities and individuals can possess
fected with lye (10% sodium hydroxide). Boiling for 30 min
or work with Select Agent pathogens or toxins. The regu-
will kill spores on utensils. Surface soil is cleared of spores
lations are available on the Center for Disease Control and
by treatment with 3% peracetic acid solution at the rate
 Prevention web site (http://www.cdc.gov/phpr/dsat.htm,
of 8 1 (2 gal) per square meter. Some other material can be
accessed January 11, 2013).
gas-sterilized with ethylene oxide.
Prevention of anthrax exposure through animal prod-
Direct Examination. Blood and organ smears are stained
ucts imported from endemic areas requires disin fection of
by Gram stain and a capsule stain such as McFadyean's
such material as hair and wool by formaldehyde. Bone
methylene blue. Chains of encapsulated, gram-positive,
meal is sterilized by dry heat (150 *C/3 h) or steam
nonspore-forming rods suggest B. anthracis. Contaminant
(115 *C/15 min).
Bacillus species are usually not encapsulated and lack the
clipped, squared -off appearance of anthrax bacilli. Fluores-
cent antibody helps in the differentiation.
Bacillus cereus
Isolation and Identification. B. anthracis grows on com-
B. cereus is a spore-former commonly found in soil and pro-
mon laboratory media. No hemolytic zones are evident
duces cells and colonies similar to that of B. anthracis. B.
around the colonies, although this feature is true of cer-
cereus cells tend to be motile and produce colonies with
tain other Bacillus contaminants, and the “string of pearls"
zones of complete hemolysis on sheep blood agar plates.
test (the characteristic cell rounding that occurs when B.
Capsule formation is a variable trait in this species. Resis-
anthracis contacts penicillin producing a chain of spherical
tance to β-lactam antibiotics occurs frequently.
cells (Figure 29.1). Definitive identification is by sensitivity
B. cereus can cause opportunistic infections, most
to the y-bacteriophage.
notably abortions and bovine mastitis. This is often acutely
Experimental animals (mice, guinea pigs) are injected
gangrenous and rapidly fatal or destructive to entire quar-
subcutaneously with suspect material. Death from anthrax
ters. Frequent initiators are udder surgery and intramam-
occurs after 24 h. Lesions include hemorrhages, gelatinous
mary medications.
exudate near the inoculation site, and an engorged spleen.
B. cereus is also responsible for several forms of human
The encapsulated agent is demonstrable in blood and
food poisoning manifested by diarrhea or vomiting, the for-
tissue.
mer being associated with various foods, the latter mostly
with rice. Toxins are involved: an emetic toxin (cereulide)
Immunodiagnosis. B. anthracis antigens can be demon-
and three secretory enterotoxins (HBL, NHE, T). Spores sur-
-did e a snid pao yo sxa u paes
vive cooking and are kept at temperatures that permit bac.
itation test using antiserum prepared in rabbits by subcu-
terial replication and toxin production
taneous immunization with the Sterne strain (Ascoli test).
 B. cereus is responsible for endophthalmitis usually fol-
The testlacks high specificity, in thatthe thermostable anti-
lowing traumatic eye injury. Spores introduced into the
gens of B. anthracis are shared by other Bacillus spp., and is
vitreous germinate and replicate. Severe pain accompanies
dependent on the probability that only B. anthracis would
a rapid decline in visual acuity, exacerbated by corneal
 proliferate throughout the animal and deposit sufficient
ring abscess formation, periorbital edema, and proptosis.
 antigen to give a positive reaction. Nowadays, it appears to
Systemic symptoms include fever, leukocytosis, and gen-
be only used in Eastern Europe.
eral malaise. Several clinical outcomes include the loss
of all light perception and the need for enucleation or
Molecular Techniques. PCR assays targeting pXO1,
evisceration.
 pXO2, and chromosome-specific gene targets have been 
Anthrax-like disease (severe hemorrhage in the lungs,
developed.
intestines and other internal organs, and characteristic
 n g s (si a o   
B. cereus strains harboring B. anthracis-like plasmid-bone
Treatment, Prevention, and Control
virulence factors. Strains were isolated from a deceased
B. anthracis does not normally exhibit antibiotic resistance.
chimpanzees and a gorilla between 2001 and 2004 in the
Treatment should continue for at least 5 days. In some
Tai National Park in Cote d'Ivoire and the Dja Reserve
areas, antiserum is given simultaneously. Antiserum is not
in Cameroon. Sequence analysis revealed a B. cereus that
 available in the United States. In acute anthrax, antimicro-
 harbored pxO1 and pxO2 type plasmids. The isolate pro-
bial treatment is often unsuccessful.
duced a capsule that was carbohydrate, rather than poly-y-
 Populations at risk are vaccinated annually.
D-glutamic acid in composition.
Chapter 29
Bacillus
211
Bacillus subtilis
 Further Reading
Prior to the 1950s, aerobic spore-forming bacilli were fre-
Beierlein JM and Anderson AC (20ll) New developments in
quently identified as Bacillus subtilis. As such, many of
vaccines, inhibitors of anthrax toxins, and antibiotic thera-
the early infections associated with B. subtilis were most
peutics for Bacillus anthracis. Curr Med Chem, 18(33), 5083-
likely the result of other members of the pathogenic
5094. PMID: 22050756.
Bacillus members. B. subtilis is a common contaminate of
Beyer W and Turnbull PC (2009) Anthrax in animals. Mol
soil, water, animal byproducts, surgical instruments, and
Aspects Med, 30(6), 481-489.
its occasional identification in human and animal wounds
Driks A (2009) The Bacillus anthracis spore. Mol Aspects Med,
is not surprising. Rare cases of B. subrilis isolation from
30(6),368-373.
cases of bovine and ovine abortions as well as in mas-
Ndiva Mongoh M, Dyer NW, Stoltenow CL et al. (2008) A
titis have been reported, but B. subtilis has never been
review of management practices for the control of anthrax
determined to be the actual causative agent. In humans,
in animals: the 200s anthrax epizootic in North Dakota-
case study. Zoonoses Public Health, 55(6), 279-290.
rare infections with B. subrilis have led to bacteremia,
Schwartz M (2009) Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: a short history of 
endocarditis, pneumonia, and septicemia, but each
anthrax. Mol Aspects Med, 30(6), 347-355.
infection was associated with an immunocompromised
 Twenhafel NA (2010) Pathology of inhalational anthrax ani-
individual.
mal models. Vet Pathol, 47(5), 819-830.
30
Corynebacterium
T.G. NAGARAJA
Species of the genus Corynebacterium (from the Greek
 0.5 μm to >3.0 μm in length. They are nonencapsulated,
word koryne, meaning "club") are pleomorphic,non-spore-
nonmotile, often contain granules, and have fimbriae.
forming, nonmotile gram-positive rods. Microscopically,
they appear coccoid to rods, with some appearing club
Structure and Composition. The cell wall is typical
shaped. Corynebacteria have characteristic cell arrange-
of gram-positive bacteria, with the addition of meso-
d r sd   , e s  s
diaminopimelic acid, arabinogalactan, and mycolic acids.
The cell wall contains a high concentration of lipids.
like “Chinese letters." The pattern (morphology and
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. Interestingly,
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, a human pathogen that causes
no avirulent strains of C. pseudohuberculosis have been
diphtheria in children and young adults. Cells also contain
reported. Also, no plasmids have been identified in iso-
inclusion bodies, called metachromatic granules, which are
lates of C. pseudohuberculosis. The two major virulence fac-
composed of inorganic polyphosphates that can be visual.
tors are phospholipase D (PLD) and cell wall lipids. PLD
ized by staining with methylene blue.
 is a sphingomyelinase that hydrolyses sphingomyelins of
Corynebacteria have some similarity with the genera
host cell membranes, possibly contributing to spread of
Mycobacterium and Nocardia in that they have a high gua-
infection. The toxin has activity on endothelial cells, lyses
nine and cytosine content and have specific cell wall orga-
erythrocytes of sheep and cattle, exhibits cytotoxicity to
nization composed of peptidoglycan, arabinogalactan, and
macrophages of goats, produces dermal necrosis, and is
mycolic acids. The chain lengths of mycolic acids are con-
lethal to a number of laboratory animals. The gene, pld,
siderably shorter (28-40 carbons) than those of Mycobac-
has been cloned and sequenced. A mutant that lacks the
terium (60-90 carbons) and Nocardia (40-56 carbons), and
pld gene does not induce the classic lymph node abscesses
are usually saturated or have a single double bond.
in sheep. Also, antitoxin to PLD limits the spread of infec-
Species of the genus Corynebacterium can be isolated
tion. The PLD inhibits β-toxin ofStaphylococcus aureus (Fig-
from a variety of habitats, such as soil, water, plants, and
ure 30.2) andα-toxin of Clostridium perfringens, and its activ-
animal surfaces. There are a number of species and only
ity on erythrocytes is enhanced in the presence of extracel-
few are pathogenic. There are two species that are associ-
lular factor of Rhodococcus equi.
ated with diseases in animals: Corynebacterium pseudohuber
culosis, a facultatively intracellular pathogen, which causes
Cell Wall Lipids. The waxy mycolic acid coat on the cell
abscesses in ruminants and horses, and Corynebacterium
wall surface has well-established cytotoxic activities and
renale that causes urinary tract infections in ruminants.
is a major factor contributing to pathogenesis. The toxic-
Also, included in this chapter are Actinobaculum suis (pre-
ity of extracted lipid material has been demonstrated by
viously called Eubacterium suis and Corynebacterium suis),
the induction of hemorrhagic necrosis by subcutaneous
the cause of urinary tract infection of sows, and Corynebac-
injection in mice and guinea pigs. The waxy coat provides
terium auriscanis, associated with otitis externa and der-
the organism with mechanical, and possibly biochemical
matitis in dogs.
protection against lysosomal enzymes within phagocytic
cells. The protection allows the organism to survive as a
 facultative intracellular pathogen and to facilitate spread
C. pseudotuberculosis
of the organism from the site of entry to the eventual site
of abscess formation. In fact, the toxicity of mycolic acid is
a contributing factor in the formation of abscesses. There
Descriptive Features
is direct relationship between the amount of mycolic acid
Morphology and Staining. C. pseudohuberculosis (Fig-
in isolates and their ability to induce abscesses in mice.
ure 30.1) is a typical diphtheroid that exhibits pleomor-
Another factor contributing virulence may be the iron
phic forms, ranging from coccoid to filamentous, and from
acquisition system.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
212
Chapter 30 Corynebacterium
213
e '(nd Aaou, e ssnd se paasap) sa
FIGURE 30.1.
C. pseudotuberculosis in pus from an
Jetter" patterns, pleomorphism (Gram stain, 1000x).
Biochemical Activities. The agent is catalase-positive. All 
strains produce acid but not gas from glucose, fructose,
maltose, mannose, and sucrose.
Resistance. Disinfectants and heat (60 *C) kill C. pseu-
donuberculosis, but organisms survive well where moisture
and organic matter abound. Penicillins (including ceftio-
fur), erythromycin, chloramphenicol, lincomycin, tetra-
cycline, enrofloxacin, and trimethoprim-sulfonamide are
cosides.
Variability. It is
Ssuggested that there maybe
“ovine/caprine" and “
“equine/bovine" biotypes of C.
pseudohuberculosis, which are in other aspects (antigenic
structure and virulence factors) are similar. Isolates
from equine and most bovine sources reduce nitrates to
C. pseudofuberculosis possesses a cluster of four genes-
from ovine, caprine, and some bovine sources do not
fagA,fagB, fagC,and fagD (for Fe acquisition gene)—located
(nitrate-negative).
downstream from the pld gene, which encode proteins
involved with iron uptake. The uptake system is simi-
Ecology
lar to the one used by enterobactin (a catechol-type of
siderophore found in members of the family Enterobac-
Reservoir. The ovine biotype (see Section “Variability")
teriaceae). Deletion of the fagA-fagD genes attenuates viru-
C. pseudohuberculosis is found in lesions, the gastrointesti-
lence. A secreted serine protease of 40 kDa (CP40) has been
nal tract of normal sheep, and the soil of sheep pens. The
shown to be a protective antigen.
reservoir of the equine type is not known.
Growth Characteristics. C. pseudohuberculosis is a facul-
Transmission. Sheep become infected through breaks in
tative anaerobe. It grows best on media containing blood
the skin (e.g., wounds acquired during shearing, castration,
0r serum. At 48 h on blood agar (35-37 *C), colonies are
ear tagging, and docking), goats probably following trauma
off-white, dull, faintly β-hemolytic, and about 1 mm in
related to butting, and horses following breaks in the skin 
diameter. They can be pushed across the agar without dis-
(e.g., biting flies). The organism has the ability to survive
for several weeks in the environment, which contributes to
the spread within a herd or flock. In cattle, house flies have
 been shown to mechanically transmit the organism.
FIGURE 30.2.
Inhibition of staphylococcal β-toxin
(phospholipase C) activity on bovine blood agar by C.
Pathogenesis
pseudotuberculosis exotoxin (phosphofipase D).
Mechanisms.  C. pseudouberculosis is a facultatively intra-
cellular pathogen, and its survival within phagocytes is
because of the protection afforded by surface lipids. The
action of PLD includes increasing the permeability of vascu-
lar endothelial cells, activation of complementary pathway
of the innate immune system, and impairment of chemo-
taxis of neutrophils. Following infection, abscesses form
but remain localized when exotoxin and/or protease are
absent or neutralized.
Pathology.
 Neutrophilic  infltration  and endothelial
damage characterize early changes. The lesions are
abscesses. Distribution, progress, and appearance differ
with species and routes of inoculation, but lymphatic
involvement is consistent feature. The nature of the
pus varies largely with the age of the lesion, which
,) A  Ap n A sde iss
Old abscesses consist of dead macrophages with peripheral
neutrophils, giant cells, and fibrous tissue. Lesions almost
always contain just C. pseudohuberculosis.
214
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Disease Patterns
abscesses, debilitation, and death. The superficial lesions
resolve slowly after drainage.
Sheep and Goats.
C. pseudohuberculosis causes caseous lym-
phadenitis, a chronic and contagious disease of sheep
Cattle.
 Cattle occasionally develop skin infections with
and goats in North America, Europe, Australia, and New
lymph node involvement. Such episodes are often acute
Zealand. The disease causes significant economic losses to
 and can be epidemic. The most common site is the lateral
sheep and goat producers because of the reduction in wool,
 body wall, suggesting that trauma initiates the disease by
 meat, and milk productions, decreased reproductive effi-
 producing breaks in the skin.
ciencies of affected animals, and condemnation of skins
in abattoirs. The disease is characterized by abscess forma-
Human Beings. Human in fections with C. pseudotuberculo-
tion in the skin, internal and external lymph nodes, and 
 sis occur rarely, and many of the reported cases are related
internal organs. The organism most commonly enters the
to occupational exposure (e.g., sheep shearers). Infected
body through breaks in the skin or mucous membranes.
humans generally have lymphadenitis and abscesses.
After entry, the organism elicits a diffuse inflammation,
followed by the formation of an abscess that coalesces and
Epidemiology. The current view is that C. pseudohubercu
undergoes encapsulation. Inflammatory cells traverse the
losis is an animal parasite and only an accidental soil inhab-
capsule peripherally, adding a layer of suppuration and a
is n   o 's 'das  '
new capsule Several such cycles give the lesions, especially
cant factors in the spread of infection. In goats, direct con-
an suisai pio 'auedde su noo, ue 'ds 
tact, ingestion, and arthropod vectors must be considered.
thick, fibrous capsules. There are two forms of the disease:
The prevalence of infection increases with age. Caseous
an “external form" characterized by infection, at the site of
lymphadenitis is one of the important bacterial infections
entry, of the subcutaneous tissue and the regional lymph
of small ruminants.
nodes (parotid, mandibular, superficial cervical, subiliac,
 The hypothesis concerning equine exposure has been
- n pu, u pe '(e pe ‘jdod
considered. No age predilection has been noted. Ulcerative
acterized by abscess development in internal organs such
lymphangitis is thought to reflect poor management and is
as lung, liver, kidneys, uterus, spleen, and internal organs
uncommon nowadays. “Pigeon fever" is limited to the far 
(mediastinal, bronchial, and lumbar). Both forms can occur
western United States. Annual prevalence varies, seemingly
in the same animal. The internal form is subclinical and is
highest after a wet winter.
commonly associated with progressive weight loss and ill
thrift, a condition called, thin ewe syndrome. Most forms
of infection are chronic.
Immunologic Aspects
The roles of antibody and cell-mediated responses that
occur during the infectious process are undefined. Anti-
Equine. C. pseudohuberculosis infections in horses can
 toxin against PLD limits dissemination of abscesses.
occur in three forms: ulcerative lymphangitis, external,
 Bacterins, culture supernatants, orcombinations of both
and internal abscesses. In case of ulcerative lymphangi-
provide some protection from the disease. The efficacy
tis, which is not very common, infection is cellulitis that
of the culture supernatant is attributed to the protective
ascends the lymphatics, usually of the hind limbs, start-
effects of antibodies generated against the PLD exotoxin.
ing at the fetlock. Its progress toward the inguinal region is
Vaccination does not eliminate an established infection
marked by swelling and abscesses, which rupture to leave
but prevents the establishment of infection and lessens
ulcers along its course. Hematogenous dissemination is
the dissemination of an established infection. A vaccine
rare. These horses are usually febrile, and exhibit pain and
composed of inactivated whole cell wall antigen and PLD
lameness of the affected limb. In the external abscess form,
toxoid is commercially available for use in sheep. The vac-
generally a single, often large abscess occurs underneath 
cine is given subcutaneously in sheep after 3 months of
the abdomen or the pectoral region. The abscess tends to
 age followed by a booster dose in 4 weeks. Adult sheep
have a thick (few centimeters) capsule filled with a thick
are vaccinated annually. Most of the vaccines are generally
yellow to tan pus. The terms “pigeon fever" and "breast
combined with vaccines for other pathogens, particularly
bone fever" are often used for the pectoral abscess because
Clostridium. Experimental DNA vaccines have been evalu-
of pigeon breast appearance. The infective mechanism is
ated and results have shown some promise.
not understood, but the seasonal peak (autumn) and geo-
 graphic restriction (mainly California) suggest an arthro-
Laboratory Diagnosis
 pod vector. The lesions of cutaneous ventral habronemia-
sis and a mid ventral dermatitis due to horn fly (Haematobia
Although the presence of external abscesses in sheep and
 inritans) activity are possible portals of entry. Contagious
goats is highly suggestive of caseous lymphadenitis, a bacte-
 acne (Canadian horse pox) is an uncommon equine folli-
riologic culture is needed to confirm and rule out Arcanobac-
culitis due to C. pseudonuberculosis infection. The internal
terium pyogenes, another abscess-causing pathogen. Intra-
 abscesses are difficult to recognize, and the most common
cellular or extracellular diphtheroid-shaped organisms
symptoms are weight loss, fever, depression, and colic. The
may be demonstrable in stained direct smears of mate-
most common organ to have an internal abscess is the liver,
rial from lesions (see Figure 30.1). Blood agar plates inocu-
butabscess can also occur on the kidneys, lungs, and spleen.
lated with abscess material and incubated for 24-48 h (35-
37 *C) produce small, off-white, faintly hemolytic colonies
Chapter 30  Corynebacterium
215
is used to prevent or treat ulcerative lymphangitis or the
FIGURE 30.3.
Synergistic hemolysis by C.
form with internal abscesses.
pseudotuberculosis (center) and R. equi (periphery). Hemolysis
is maximal where the diffusion zones of the twvo organisms
overiap.
C. renale Group
The group consists of three species, renale, pilosum, and cys-
titidis, which were originally classified as serological types
of C. renale, 1, 1I, and Il1. All three species colonize the lower 
urogenital tract of cattle and sometimes sheep. They all
cause bovine cystitis and pyelonephritis, but C. renale is
the most common of the three species and causes the more
severe infection. In sheep, C. renale can occasionally cause
cystitis and pyelonephritis and osteomyelitis in goats. More
often, C. renale causes ulcerative balanoposthitis ("pizzle
rot'") in sheep and goats.
Descriptive Features
Morphology and Staining. Members of the C. renale
group are typical diphtheroids. The cells range from coc-
coid to filamentous, are non-acid-fast, nonencapsulated,
and often contain granules.
Structure and Composition. The cell wall is typical
of gram-positive bacteria, with the addition of meso-
diaminopimelic acid, arabinogalactan, and mycolic acids
that can be pushed intact ("hockey puck effect") over the
(branched-chain fatty acids with a chain length for mem-
agar surface. Inhibition of staphylococcal β-toxin (see Fig-
bers of the genus Corynebacterium of C22-C38).
ure 30.2) and synergistic hemolysis with R. equi (see Fig-
ure 30.3) confim identification of C. pseudohuberculosis.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Genus- and species-specific primers have been developed
to amplify DNA by using the polymerase chain reaction.
Pill. All three species of the C. renale group have pili.
Animals with internalabscesses are difficult to diagnose,
although animals with lung abscesses can be diagnosed by
 Urease. All three species of the C. renale group produce
radiography and transtracheal aspiration and abscesses in
      si a 
other organs can be visualized by ultrasonography. The
factor. In a rat model, the enzyme has been shown to play
synergistic hemolysin inhibition test to detect antibodies
a crucial role in establishment of pyelonephritis.
directed against the PLD exotoxin can be useful. High titers
are highly correlated with internal abscesses. Several tests
Cell Wall. The gram-positive cell wall contains polysac-
have been developed to detect anti-PLD antibodies, but
charides, and lipids that are of medical in terest. The lipote-
most lack either sensitivity or specificity. The usefulness of
ichoic acids and peptidoglycan of the gram-positive cell
many of those tests as diagnostic or culling tools is debat-
wall interact with macrophage cells, resulting in the release
able. Some ELISA tests have been reported to be effective in 
of proinflammatory cytokines.
control and eradication programs.
Growth Characteristics. Members of the C. renale group
are facultative anaerobes capable of growing on most com-
Treatment and Control
mon laboratory media as nonhemolytic, opaque, off-white
colonies that develop within 48 h at 37 *C on blood agar.
Generally, the caseous lymphadenitis abscesses are refrac-
 tory to antibiotic therapy because of thick encapsulation.
However, in sheep and goats, long-term (4-6 weeks) sys-
Biochemical Activities. Members of the C. renale group
temicantibiotic (penicillins or erythromycin, often in com-
have potent urease activity, which is demonstrable in
bination with lipid-soluble rifampin) treatment can be
most strains within minutes of contact with urea. Glucose
effective in treating internal abscesses and lessening the
is slowly fermented, other carbohydrates variably so. All
chance of recurrence of external abscesses. Control is aimed
strains are catalase-positive. Members of the C. renale group
at limiting exposure by segregation or culling of affected
produce an extracellular protein, renalin, which lyses ery-
animals and at scrupulous sanitary care during activities
throcytes in synergy with β-hemolysin ofS. aureus (positive
such as shearing, dipping, and surgical procedures.
CAMP test; see Streptococcus agalactiae, Chapter 27).
Equine abscesses, if external, are handled surgically.
Once the abscess is lanced and allowed to drain, the horse
Resistance. The agents are not particularly resistant to
 heals without complications. Prolonged penicillin therapy
heat, disinfectants, or antimicrobial agents.
216
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Ecology
FIGURE 30.4.
C. renale in urinary sediment of a cow
Reservoir. Members of the C. renale group inhabit the
with pyelonephritis. Note "diphtheroid" configurations,
lower genital tract, particularly of the vulval region, of
(xoooe vieis weid) ,sanai asauu,. pue sapesied buipnouy
 apparently healthy cows and prepuce of steers and bulls,
and sometimes other ruminants. Occasionally they are
implicated in urinary tractinfections of sheep, horses, dogs,
and nonhuman primates. No human infections have been
reported.
Transmission. Organisms pass between animals by direct
and indirect contact. Many clinical cases are probably
endogenous. They can survive in soil for a long time, and
it is possible that pasture could be a source of infection or
reinfection.
Pathogenesis
Infection begins with attachment of the bacteria to the
epithelium of the lower urinary tract. Pili-mediated attach-
 ments to epithelium of the urinary bladder and ammonia
 production from urea hydrolysis are considered critical in
the pathogenesis.
Pathology. A chronic inflammatory process successively
involves the bladder, ureter(s), renal pelvis, and renal
parenchyma in pyelonephritis in cattle. A similar inflam-
 animals on high-protein diets or grazing legume-rich pas.
matory response occurs in small ruminants, but is usually
ture that is high in proteins, which increase urea excretion,
localized to the distal urethra.
which when hydrolyzed by the bacterial urease produces
ammonia and causes irritation, inflammation, and ulcera-
Disease Patterns
tion of the skin. Preputial swelling and urine retention in
Cattle. Bovine pyelonephritis is an ascending urinary
the sheath may be seen. Pooled urine and purulent exu-
tract infection, beginning with hemorrhagic cystitis, pro-
dates inside the prepuce may lead to necrosis. In ewes, the
disease is ulcerative vulvovaginitis.
 ceeding to ureteritis and pyelonephritis. Rectal palpation
reveals thickened bladder and ureteral walls, distended
ureters, and enlarged kidneys with obscured lobulations.
Immunologic Aspects
Clinical signs include fever, anorexia, with arched back.
Urine is voided in small amounts at frequent intervals and
 No useful immunity develops in the course of the infection.
contains large amounts of albumin, leukocytes, fibrin, and
Serum antibody is present and antibody coating (mostly
usually small blood clots. Chronic infections progress to
IgG) of bacteria in urine occurs in bovine pyelonephritis
debilitation and death due to uremia. Corynebacterium cys-
(not cystitis).
fifidis causes severe hemorrhagic cystitis with ulceration of
 No immunizing agents exist.
the bladder, also progressing to ureteritis and pyelonephri-
tis. Corynebacterium pilosum is less pathogenic, and infec-
tion results in mild cystitis and rarely ascends to cause
Laboratory Diagnosis
pyelonephritis.
Gross examination of urine may reveal the presence of red
blood cells and high alkalinity (pH 9.0). Microscopically,
Sheep and Goats. Ovine posthitis ("pizzle rot" or "sheath
packets of pleomorphic gram-positive diphtheroid rods are
rot"), the more common form of infection in sheep, is
seen (Figure 30.4). The agent is readily cultured from sedi-
a necrotizing inflammation of the prepuce and adjacent
 ment. A generous inoculum of colonial growth planted in
tissues in wethers or rams. Disease develops in the pres-
ence of the urease-producing bacteria in an area constantly
alkaline shift, indicating urea hydrolysis, within minutes
irrigated with urine. Ammonia is thought to initiate the
 inflammatory process. A similar condition occurs in goats.
of inoculation. A diphtheroid isolate from urine capable of
 producing this reaction and fermenting glucose probably
Only C. renale and C. pilosum have been found in ovine
belongs to the C. renale group.
posthitis.
Epidemiology.
 Bovine pyelonephritis is found mostly in
 cows near parturition, appearing as an opportunistic infec-
Treatment and Control
tion by a commensalorganism. Bulls are rarely affected, but
Members of the C. renale group are susceptible to penicillin,
are commensal hosts of all three species and the sole com-
 but antibiotic therapy is successful only in the early stage
mensal source ofC. cystitidis. Pizzle rot" occurs typically in
of the infection.
Chapter 30 Corynebacterium
217
Ovine posthitis is treated by surgical care of lesions,
Transmission
local antiseptic applications, dietary restriction,and testos
 The organism is a normal inhabitant of the preputial sac of
terone administration.
the male pig. A high percentage of boars can be carriers.
Corynebacterium ufcerans
Pathogenesis
The organism attaches to the epithelium of the urinary tract
This is the causative agent of several infections in a variety
via pili. The ammonia production from ureolytic activity
of animals, including mastitis in dairy cows and in other
 and subsequent elevation of urine pH may promote bacte-
animals, respiratory infection in macaques, lymphadenitis
rial growth.
in sheep and goats, and nasal discharge in cats and dogs.
In humans, it is most often involved in pharyngitis, which
in some cases has been reported in association with cow's
Disease Patterns
milk. The organism produces exotoxin, PLD, similar to C.
A. suis is a swine pathogen and causes cystitis and
 pseudonuberculosis. Some strains isolated from cases of diph-
pyelonephritis in sows, producing acute or chronic renal
theria in humans have been shown to carry the prophage
failure (see Figure 74.3). The disease occurs worldwide and
with the tox gene that encodes for diphtheria-like toxin.
is recognized primarily not only in Britain and other Euro-
Other potential virulence factors include urease and iron-
pean countries but also in North America, Australia, and
scavenging systems.
Hong Kong. The disease is more prevalent in older sows
housed in gestation stalls possibly because of increased
chance for fecal contamination of the perineal region, lack
C. auriscanis
ofexercise, reduced water intake, and infrequent urination.
C. auriscanis is a typical diphtheroid isolated from vari-
terial growth. Like bovine pyelonephritis, the disease is an
ous disease processes in dogs, mainly otitis externa and
apparently ascending infection. In the acute phase of the
 pyoderma. It has been isolated from the vagina of normal
in fection, the animal is anorexic and unwilling to rise. Pus
canines.
o1 blood may be present in the urine. The urine is usually
red-brown and has a foul odor. Mortality associated with
Actinobacufum suis
untreated infections can be high, up to 100%. If the animal
survives the infection, it can suffer weight loss and dis-
Actinobacutum suis,formerly Corynebacterium suis,Actino-
play polyuria and polydipsia. Typically, the sow becomes a
myces suis, and Eubacterium suis, is a diphtheroid that is
 repeat breeder with subsequent poor reproductive perfor-
mance and is culled from the herd.
anaerobic. The new genus was warranted because A. suis
displayed 10-14% 16S rRNA sequence divergence with the
Diagnosis is generally based on clinical signs. Micro-
Actinomyces bovis cluster of species and 8-11% sequence
scopic examination of purulent material from the urine
divergence from species of Arcanobacterium.
01 from bladder wall, ureter, and kidney pelvis will show
a large number of organisms. The urine or other samples
should be cultured under anaerobic conditions, and incu-
Descriptive Features
bation should be for 48-72 h to see colonies.
The organism is susceptible to gram-positive or broad-
Morphology and Staining. The organism is slender, pleo-
spectrum antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, ery-
morphic rods (1-3 x 0.5 μm), arranged singly, in pairs
thromycin, clindamycin, and tetracyclines). However,
(often at an angle to each other or in palisades), or in small
clusters. The cells stain gram-positive, but old cultures are
treatment is rarely successful.
easily decolorized. It is not acid-fast, does not form spores,
or has capsules.
Further Reading
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. The organism is
Baird GJ and Fontaine MC (2007) Corynebacterium pseudotuber
piliated and produces urease.
culosis and its role in ovine caseous lymphadenitis. / Comp
Path, 137, 179-220.
Growth Characteristics. Colonies on blood agar plates
Coyle MB and Lipsky BA (1990) Coryneform bacteria in infec-
are 0.5-3 mm in diameter after 48 h, and often show
tious diseases: clinical and laboratory aspects. Clin Microbiol
slightly raised centers (fried-egg appearance) and are non-
Rev,3,227-246.
hemolytic. After 1 week, colonies are slightly larger (3-
Dorellaa FA, Pachecoa LGC, Oliveirab SC et al. (2006)
5 mm) and flatter. The organism grows best at pH 7-8,
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis: microbiology, biochem-
but does not grow at pH 5 or below.
ical properties, pathogenesis and molecular studies of viru-
lence. Vet Res, 37, 201-218.
Biochemical Activities. The organism has a strictly fer-
Williamson LH (20ol) Caseous lymphadenitis in small rumi-
mentative metabolism. Of the carbohydrates, only mal-
nants. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 17, 359-371.
tose, starch, and glycogen are fermented. The organism is
Yanagawa R (1986) Causative agents of bovine pyelonephritis:
urease-positive but is negative for other common biochem-
Corynebacterium renale, C. pilosum, and C. cystitidis. Prog Vet
ical tests.
Microbiol Immun, 2, 158-174.
31
ipelothrix
TIMOTHY FRANA
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae causes erysipelas, an impor-
tant disease of swine and poultry and a sporadic disease
the latter protein has protective activity.
 of sheep and lambs. Clinical presentations include sep-
ticemia, arthritis, vegetative endocarditis, and generalized
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
skin lesions. The organism is commonly isolated from ali
mentary and lymphoid tissues of healthy animals as well as
Adhesion. Two ad hesive surface proteins (RspAand RspB)
the exterior slime layer on fish. E. rhusiopathiae can survive
have been identified and shown a high degree of binding to
for long periods without replication in soil and marine envi
 fibronectin and type I and IV collagens. It is believed that
ronments. In humans E rhusiopathiae causes erysipeloid, an
these proteins participate in initiation of biofilm formation
occupational disease of fish handlers, butchers, and veteri-
and therefore enhance virulence.
narians and generally results in a self-limiting in fection of
the hands.
Capsule. E. rhusiopathiae produces a heat-labile polysac-
A second species, Erysipelothrix fonsillarum, has been
charide capsule, which provides resistance to phagocytosis.
described for some strains previously designated as
serotypes of E. rhusiopathiae. E. tonsillarum is biochemi-
leukocytes and did not cause disease in mice.
genetically distinct by DNA-DNA homology. E. tonsillarum
is only occasionally involved in clinical disease and is non-
Cell Wall.
1.The cell wall of the members ofthis genus is one
pathogenic for swine. An additional species, E. inopinata,
typical ofgram-positive bacteria. The lipoteichoicacids and
and minor Erysipelothrix groups have been described.
peptidoglycan of the gram-positive cell wall interact with
macrophage cells, resulting in the release of proinflamma-
tory cytokines.
Descriptive Features
Neuraminidase. Neuraminidases are enzymes that cleave
Morphology and Staining
the terminal sialic acids from sialo-glycoconjugates on host
cells, leading to a disruption in many functions as well as
E. rhusiopathiae produces is a gram-positive, nonmotile,
facilitating biofilm formation. Neuraminidase production
non-acid-fast, non-spore-forming bacillus, which mea-
varies between strains of E rhusiopathiae, and virulence cor-
sures 0.2-0.4 μm by 0.8-2.5 μm in size. On subculture,
relates directly with the amount of enzymes produced.
 d  d  s 
forms ≥60 μm in length.
Hyaluronidase. It is thought that hyaluronidase destroys
the polysaccharide matrix holding animal cells together,
Structure and Composition
which allows spreading of a pathogen into tissues. Most
strains of E. rhusiopathiae will produce hyaluronidase, but
E. rhusiopathiae exhibits a cell wall typical of gram-positive
there does not appear to be a relationship between viru-
organisms. It contains murein of the B1 delta type. The
 lence and this enzyme.
diamino acid of cell wall peptidoglycan is lysine. The DNA
base composition is 35-40 mol% G+C. A polysaccharide
Growth Characteristics
capsule has been described and related to virulence. A pro-
tective protein, SpaA, shares similarities in the C-terminal
E. rhusiopathiae grows readily on most standard media.
region with choline-binding proteins of Streptococcus pneu
However, growth is enhanced in slightly alkaline media
(pH of 7.2-7.6) with the addition of serum and glucose. E.
tified in Erysipelothrix spp. (spaA, spaB1, spaB2, and spaC).
rhusiopathiae is a facultative anaerobe preferring a reduced
Other surface proteins include a 16 kDa hemolysin and
 oxygen environment containing 5-io% CO2. Optimal
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
218
Chapter 31 Erysipelothrix
219
to result in acute septicemic infections versus strains that
of growing over a temperature range of 5-42 *C and a pH
do not. Neuraminidase cleaves sialic acid present on cell
range of 6.7-9.2.
surfaces, leading to vascular damage and hyaline throm-
bus formation. Neuraminidase also plays a role in bacte-
Resistance
rial attachment and invasion into cells. Antibodies to neu-
raminidase are protective against experimental infections
E. rhusiopathiae is resistant to drying and withstands salt-
in mice. In addition, the presence of capsules has been
ing, pickling, and smoking. It survives for up to 6 months in
swine feces and fish slime at cool temperatures. It is killed
cytosis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Survival inside
by moist heat (55 *C) in 15 min, but grows in the pres-
(1)   '0)    
the presence of normal serum, acapsular mutants do not
phenol (0.2%), and sodium azide (0.1%). E. rhusiopathiae is
survive inside phagocytes, whereas encapsulated organ-
susceptible to penicillin, cephalosporin, clindamycin, and
isms survive and multiply. In the presence of immune sera,
fluoroquinolones, but is resistant to novobiocin, sulfon-
  a    
amides, and aminoglycosides. Resistance to erythromycin,
and polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
 oleandomycin, oxytetracycline, and dihydrostreptomycin
Cutaneous lesions may be seen in animals during the
has been observed. Resistance is apparently not plasmid
acute septicemia phase or following recovery. These are
mediated.
due to swelling of the endothelium leading to vasculitis,
thrombosis, diapedesis, and fibrin deposition. Skin lesions
Variability
immunity of the host and attack from low-virulencestrains.
Common heat-labile antigens account for cross-reactions
Localization of E. rhusiopathiae in joints of swine leads
between strains. Heat-stable somatic antigens account for
to fibrinous exudation and pannus formation. Subsequent
the existence of at least 25 serotypes. No relationship
proliferative changes are primarily due to an immunolog-
between host species and serotype has been recognized.
ical response from the formation of immune complexes,
Serotypes 3, 7, 10, 14, 20, 22, and 23 exhibit a higher degree
activation of complement, and presence of neutrophils,
of DNA-DNA homology with the type strain of E. tonsil-
which damages the auricular cartilage and synovial tis-
larum than with the type strain of E rhusiopathiae. Cul-
sues. Joint deterioration becomes chronic and progresses
tures dissociate on passage from convex, circular, smooth
for years. Although E. rhusiopathiae can no longer be cul-
colonies with entire edges to rough colonies with undulate
tured from joint fluid, the organism or bacterial antigens
edges. L-forms have been reported.
may persist. Valvular endocarditis is less common than
joint involvement and is believed to be initiated by bacte-
rial emboli and vascular inflammation, resulting in chronic
Ecology
changes and damage to the heart valves. Vegetative lesions
can lead to valvular insufficiency and congestive heart fail-
Reservoir
ure or release emboli that may cause sudden death.
E. rhusiopathiae is widely distributed in nature and is often
recovered from sewage effluent, abattoirs, surface slime of
Pathology
fresh and saltwater fish, and soil. It has been recovered from
Pigs dying from acute erysipelas infections exhibit hem-
Over 50 species of mammals including swine, sheep, lambs,
orrhages of the gastric serosa, skeletal and cardiac mus-
cattle, horses, dogs, mice, and rabbits and 30 species of
cles, and renal cortex. Congestion of lungs, liver, spleen,
wild birds such as turkeys, chickens, geese, pheasants, and
skin, and urinary bladder is frequent. Vascular damage with
pigeons. E. rhusiopathiae can be isolated from the tonsils
and gastrointestinal tracts of apparently healthy pigs, con-
microthrombi is observed microscopically. A mononuclear
infiltrate predominates in most cases. Raised, pink to pur-
sidered the most prominent reservoir.
ple cutaneous lesions result from vasculitis, thrombosis,
and ischemia.
Transmission
In joints, acute synovitis often proceeds to more chronic
articular changes. Synovial membranes become hyperplas-
Transmission amonganimalsis mostly by ingestion of con-
tic and villous and are infltrated with mononuclear cells.
taminated material (food, soil, water, and feces). Wound
Spreading of granulation tissue over articular surfaces and
infections and arthropod bites are other possible routes.
erosion of articular cartilage may occur. Ankylosis of the
joint may be the ultimate outcome. Localization to inter-
Pathogenesis
vertebral disks leads to a destructive diskospondylitis.
In valvular endocarditis, the mitral valve is most
Mechanisms
commonly involved with development of large, valvular
vegetations due to fibrin deposition and connective tissue
Strains of E. rhusiopathiae vary in virulence for reasons not
 proliferation. Emboli may produce infarcts in the spleen,
fully understood. Neuraminidase is considered an impor-
kidney, and other internal organs.
tant virulent factor, and strains that produce high levels of
In turkeys, the pathology associated with erysipelas
this factor in the logarithmic growth phase are more likely
infections is generally marked by congestion and
220
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 31.1.
Valvular endocarditis lesions sometimes
FIGURE 31.2.
Rhomboid, diamond-shaped skin lesions
seen with Erysipelothrix infection in pigs. (Courtesy of fowa
of erysipelas as seen in pigs. (Courtesy of fowa State University
State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory.)
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory.)
 intramuscular and subpleural hemorrhages, particularly
affecting breast and leg muscles (Figure 31.1). Hemorrhages
snood, if present, is considered almost pathognomonic.
are also found in the mucosa of the gizzard and small intes-
Mortality rates range from 2% to 25%. Chronic manifesta-
tine as well as serosal surfaces of the heart. The liver and
tions include vegetative endocarditis and arthritis. Turkeys
spleen are often swollen and the abdominal fat is petechi-
with endocarditis appear weak and emaciated or die sud-
ated. A swollen, cyanotic snood and diffuse reddening of
denly without prior signs. Other affected avian species
the skin are frequent.
 include chickens, chukars, ducks, emus, geese, parrots, pea-
 In lambs with polyarthritis, affected joints are swollen
cocks, pheasants, and pigeons.
and thickened with granulation tissue present on the inner
surface of the joint capsule. A clear to cloudy fluid is present
Sheep. Polyarthritis is the most common presentation of
with variable numbers of infltrating polymorphonuclear
E. rhusiopathiae infection in sheep. Entry is thought to be
leukocytes.
through the umbilicus or wounds associated with castra-
tion, docking, or shearing. Affected animals have a stiff gait
and, often, swollen joints. Any joint may be affected, but
Disease Patterns
most commonly the knee, elbow, hock, and stifle joints are
Swine. Swine with the septicemic form present with
involved. They may have trouble getting up and down.
fever, anorexia, depression, vomition, stiff gait, and reluc-
A cutaneous infection following dipping also occurs in
tance to walk. Urticarial lesions in the skin may be palpable
sheep. Septicemia, pneumonia, and abortion have also
before becoming visible. They may be pink or, in severe
been described in sheep.
cases, purplish, especially on the abdomen, thighs, ears,
and tail. In severe cases, the skin becomes necrotic and is
Miscellaneous Species. E. rhusiopathiae causes arthritis
sloughed. If untreated, this form has a high mortality rate.
and endocarditis in dogs. E. tonsillarum can also be a canine
 In a less severe form of erysipelas in swine, lesions are
 pathogen and has been isolated from dogs with endocardi-
limited to the skin but may be accompanied by a mild fever.
tis. Septicemia and urticaria due to E. rhusiopathiae have
Skin lesions are red to purple rhomboids ("diamond skin
been reported in dolphins. Human infections of skin and
disease") (Figure 31.2). Lesions may progress to necrosis 0r
subcutis are called erysipeloid and are seen mostly in ani-
resolve, leaving a mild scruffiness to the skin. Mortality is
mal and fish handlers. Septicemia, endocarditis, and pol-
seldom associated with this form.
   ,    s
 Localization to certain tissues leads to chronic forms,
infection.
which may occur as sequelae to the acute stages or without
previous illness. A vegetative endocarditis is manifested by
Epidemiology
signs of cardiac insuffciency or sudden death. Arthritis is
the other chronic form seen in swine. Signs include limp-
Pigs less than 3 months and over 3 years of age are least
ing, stiff gait, and enlargement of the affected joints. Infre-
susceptible. Variable passive and active immunity probably
quently, sows abort due to Erysipelothrix infection.
accoun ts for age-related susceptibility. Predisposing factors
 include environmental stress, dietary change, fatigue, and
Birds. Erysipelas in birds, especially turkeys, is usually
subclinical aflatoxicosis.
a septicemia. Turkeys develop a cyanotic skin, become
In turkeys, the male is most frequently infected, pos-
 droopy, and may subsequently die. A swollen cyanotic
sibly through fight wounds. Insemination of hens with
Chapter 31 Erysipelothrix
221
   n    
Outbreaks have been reported after contact with sheep or
liver, spleen, kidney, heart, and synovial tissue. Recovery
sheep ranges.
of the organisms from skin lesions is also possible. In the
In sheep, lambs between 2 and 6 months of age are most
more chronic forms, cultures from joints or heart valves are
commonly affected. The condition is usually associated
less successful.
with poor hygiene at lambing, castration, or docking. A
particular form of erysipelas associated with fecal contam-
ination tank fluids used to dip sheep has been described.
Direct Examination
Specimens are examined by Gram stain for the presence
Immunologic Aspects
of gram-positive rods. A negative result does not preclude
infection.
Immune Mechanisms in Pathogenesis
Persistence of antigen in the joint tissue acts as a chronic
Culture and Isolation
stimulus for immune reaction and development of arthri-
tis. In addition, an autoimmune process secondary to the
Culture methods for the isolation of E. rhusiopathiae have
erysipelas infection may be responsible for some of the
traditionally involved the use of selective and enrich-
chronic joint changes.
ment media. One commonly used enrichment broth is
Erysipelothrix selective broth (EsB), which contains horse
serum, kanamycin, neomycin, and vancomycin. Other
Mechanisms of Resistance and Recovery
enrichment broths described include Bohm's medium con -
Cell-mediated and humoral responses occur, directed at
taining sodium azide, kanamycin, phenol, and water blue
neuraminidase, protective surface protein, and other cell
and Shimoji's enrichment broth containing tryptic soy
broth, Tween 80, Tris-aminomethane, crystal violet, and
sive role. Phagocytosis is carried out primarily by mononu
sodium azide. In addition, selective agar media including
clear phagocytes.
sodium azide crystal violet, nalidixic acid medium, and
a modified blood azide agar have been described. These
media take advantage of the organism's resistance to vari-
Artificial Immunization
ous antimicrobials and chemicals. EsB is perhaps the most
Attenuated live vaccines and bacterins have been used for
commonly used enrichment broth in conjunction with
vaccination in swine and turkeys. The duration of immu-
selective media. One study found that ESB combined with
nity varies from 6 to 12 months for these vaccines and
selective agar medium (colistin nalidixic acid or sodium
efficacy is variable. While effective against the acute forms,
azide crystal violet) markedly increased detection of E. rhu-
neither type appears to be highly protective against chronic
siopathiae from tissues versus direct culture. On blood agar
incubated at 37 *Cin 10% CO2, colonies often appear non-
erysipelas. Attenuated vaccines are given orally, parenter-
ally, or, in some countries, by aerosol. Whole-cell bac-
         
terins and soluble antigen are given subcutaneously 0r
a greenish hemolysis may be apparent. E. rhusiopathiae is
intramuscularly. Most commercial vaccines are prepared
catalase- and oxidase-negative and nonmotile. Inoculation
from serotype2. Cross-protection to acute disease caused by
of triple sugar iron agar slants will show an acid reaction
serotypes 1 and 2 has been demonstrated. However, certain
and H2S production along the stab line (Figure 31.3). A
strains have been refractory to vaccine-induced immunity.
"pipe cleaner" type of growth occurs in gelatin stab cul-
Formalin-inactivated, aluminum hydroxide-absorbed bac-
tures of rough colonies held at room temperature for 3-5
 terins are available for turkeys and appear to be effective.
days. E rhusiopathiae does not hydrolyze esculin or urea,
 Recent studies have focused on the surface protection
reduce nitrates, or produce indole. Fermentative activity
is weak. Fermentable carbohydrates include glucose, lac-
no commercial products are available.
tose, levulose, and dextrin. E. fonsillarum usually ferments
saccharose while E. rhusiopathiae does not.
Passive Immunity
Serology
Temporary protection (<2 weeks) with administration of
specific immune serum has been utilized in the past. How-
Serological tests to diagnose erysipelas have been devel-
ever, treatment must be initiated early in the course of the
oped. These include plate, tube, and microtitration agglu-
disease, and antibodies may affect vaccine efficacy if given
tination, hemagglutination inhibition, complement fixa-
 concurrently. This approach is seldom used any longer.
tion, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and indirect
immunofluorescence assay. However, none are conclusive
Laboratory Diagnosis
in acute infections and may only be of value as herd tests
in chronic infection cases. Serotyping is useful as a research
Specimens
tool and most commonly utilizes a double agar gel precipi-
tation test. In swine, 76-80% ofisolates either serotype 1 o1
 Specimens are collected from appropriate sites according to
2 and serotype 1a has been associated with acute infections
signs. Blood cultures from several affected animals are use-
while serotype 2a more prevalent in chronic forms.
222
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
fachlorpyridazine, and sulfathiazole appears very high.
FIGURE 31.3.
Hydrogen sulfide production by E.
Antiserum (equine origin) is sometimes used in conjunc-
rhusiopathiae along stab line in Kligler's iron agar slant.
tion with antibiotic therapy. Treatment of chronic forms is
(Courtesy of lowa State University Veterinary Diagnostic
much less successful.
Laboratory.)
Good sanitation and nutrition are beneficial in prevent-
ing outbreaks. Infected carcasses should be disposed of in
 a proper manner and replacement animals isolated for at
least 30 days before introduction into the herd. A number
of single or combination E. rhusiopathiae products are avail-
able. Immunization with live attenuated vaccines or killed
bacterins is recommended in areas with previous history of
erysipelas.
In turkeys, penicillin is the drug of choice. Subcutaneous
injection of penicillin and vaccination with erysipelas bac-
terin are recommended, if practicable. Penicillin in the
drinking water for 4-5 days has been effective in control-
ling some outbreaks. Injectable erythromycin is a recom-
men ded alternative treatment.
Good management practices including preventing
fighting among toms, ensuring proper insemination prac.
tices of turkey hens, rotating turkey ranges away from
contaminated areas, and using vaccination in areas with
a history of erysipelas are useful preventive and control
measures.
Molecular Identification
Various molecular methods have been described for detect-
Further Reading
ing E. rhusiopathiae. Of these polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) has the most utility in a diagnostic setting. Con-
Bender JS, Irwin CK, Shen HG et al. (2011) Erysipelothrix spp.
ventional PCR assays and real-time PCR assays have been
developed. A genus-specific PCR targeting a region in the
associated with abattoir condemnations. / Vet Diagn Invest,
16S rRNA gene is quite sensitive in that it can detect
23,139-142.
less than 20 bacteria from mouse spleen tissue. How-
Bender JS, Kinyon JM, Kariyawasam S et al. (2009) Compar-
ever, the test cannot differentiate E. rhusiopathiae from
ison of conventional direct and enrichment culture meth-
E. tonsillarum. An E. rhusiopathiae-specific PCR has been
described, but the level of detection is about 1000 bacte-
infected swine. / Vet Diagn Invest, 21, 863-868.
ria per reaction even with enrichment. Two conventional
 Bender JS, Shen HG, Irwin CK et al. (2010) Characterization
multiplex PCR assays, which can distinguish Erysipelothrix
of Erysipelothrix species isolates from clinically affected pigs,
species and some serotypes, are described. These assays
environmental samples, and vaccine strains from six recent
have multiple targets for identification but are not quan-
swine erysipelas outbreaks in the United States. Clin Vaccine
titative and require post-PCR processing. Recent multiplex
Immunol, 17, 1605-1611.
Nagai S, To H, and Kanda A (2008) Differentiation of
real-time PCR assays with enrichment and without enrich-
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae strains by nucleotide sequence
ment have been described with high sensitivity and speci-
analysis of a hypervariable region in the spaA gene: discrim-
ficity. Other molecular methods such as pulse-field gel elec-
ination ofa livevaccine strain from field isolates./Vet Diagn
trophoresis, restriction fragment length polymorphism,
Invest, 20, 336-342.
randomly amplified polymorphic DNA, and spaA typing
Opriessnig T, Hoffman LJ, Harris DL et al. (2004) Erysipelothrix
are described, but are mostly used for epidemiological stud-
rhusiopathiae: genetic characterization of midwest US iso-
ies or differentiating field and vaccine strains.
lates and live commercial vaccines using pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis. / Vet Diagn Invest, 16, 101-107.
 Pal N, Bender JS, and Opriessnig T (2010) Rapid detection and
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
differentiation of Erysipelothrix spp. by a novel multiplex
real-time PCR assay. /Appl Microbiol, 108, 1083-1093.
Treatment with penicillin for at least 5 days is effective
Riley TV, Brooke CJ, and Wang Q (2002) Erysipelothrix rhu-
against the acute forms of erysipelas in swine and usu-
siopathiae, in Molecular Medical Microbiology, vols 1-3 (ed. M
ally results in dramatic improvement with 24-36 h. Other
Sussman), Academic Press, London, pp. 1057-1064.
 antimicrobials that E. rhusiopathiae appears highly sensitive
Takahashi T, Fujisawa T, Umeno A et al. (2008) A taxonomic
include ampicillin, ceftiofur, clindamycin, enrofloxacin,
study on Erysipelothrix by DNA-DNA hybridization experi-
erythromycin, tiamulin, tilmicosin, and tylosin. Interme-
ments with numerous strains isolated from extensive ori-
diate sensitivity is seen with chlortetracycline, florfeni-
gins. Microbiol Immunol, 52, 469-478.
col, gentamicin, oxytetracycline, and trimethoprim. Resis.
Wang Q, Chang BJ, and Riley TV (2010) Erysipelothrix rhu-
tance to apramycin, neomycin, sulfadimethoxine, sul-
siopathiae. Vet Microbiol, 140, 405-417.
32
SANJEEV NARAYANAN
Listeriosis is a sporadic disease affecting many species
Cell Wall. The cell wall of the members of this genus is
of animals and birds, and is of zoonotic importance. Of
 One typicalof gram-positive bacteria. The lipoteichoic acids
eight recognized species of Listeria—L. grayi, L. innocua, L.
ivanovii, L. marthii, L. monocytogenes, L. recourtiae, L. seel-
with macrophage cells, resulting in the release of proin-
igeri, and L. welshimeri—L. monocytogenes and L. ivanovii
flammatory cytokines. The peptidoglycan layer acts as an
are pathogens of veterinary importance. Two subspecies of
anchor for an array of surface-expressed proteins that have
Listeria ivanovii are recognized—ssp. ivanovii and ssp. lon-
a conserved LPxTG motif in their C-terminus. A transpep-
doniensis.
tidase called sortase is essential for covalent immobiliza-
Ruminants are the most frequently affected domestic
tion of such proteins. Some surface adhesins including LAP
 species. Principal forms of listeriosis include septicemia,
(see under section on adhesins above) are anchored by this
encephalitis, and abortion. In sheep and cattle, abortion is
enzyme.
the usual manifestation of L. ivanovi infections. Listeriosis
occurs worldwide, especially in temperate climates.
Hemolysin. See Section “Listeriolysin O."
Listeriolysin O. LLO (for listeriolysin O) is a pH-
Descriptive Features
dependent pore-forming, cholesterol-dependent cytolysin
that is a major virulence determinant for this species
Morphology and Staining
(mutants deficient in this protein have reduced virulence;
antibodies to it are protective). The major role of LLO is in
Listeria is gram-positive, non-acid-fast, non-spore-forming.
the release of Listeria monocytogenes from the phagosome
facultatively intracellular, acapsular rod-shaped bacteria,
into the cytosol following phagosome acidification, under
which measure 0.5-2 μm by 0.4-0.5 μm.
which conditions LLO is most active. Other roles include
lysis of ferritin vacuoles and its effect on secondary vesi-
cles formed during L. monocytogenes movement from cell to
Structure and Composition
cell. LLO induces apoptosis by modulating mitochondrial 
Listeria has a typical gram-positive cell wall. Meso-
dynamics, and release of host cell granzymes. Ivanolysin,
diaminopimelic acid is the major diamino acid. Cell wall
another cholesterol-dependent cytolysin, is the counter-
polysaccharides determine O-antigen. Peritrichous flagella
part in L. ivanovii. (See also streptococcal streptolysin O, in
Chapter 27; clostridial perfringolysin O, in Chapter 35; and 
arcanobacterial pyolysin, in Chapter 28.)
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Phospholipases C. Phosphatidylinositol-specific phos-
pholipase C and a lecithinase are important in mediating
Adhesins. Many adhesins including Listeria adhesion
protein (LAP) have been suggested to serve an important
membrane lysis.
role in attachment and invasion. However, two protein
Miscellaneous Products.  A bile salt hydrolase may pro-
adhesins are considered critical.
mote survival and persistence of Listeria in the intestinal
lumen. A protein, termed p60, may play a role in adher-
ActA. ActA protein is important in intracellular move-
ence to target cells.
ment by actin polymerization and is also thought to play a
role in cell trophism (adhesion) and invasion.
Growth Characteristics
Internalins. Internalins A and B are surface proteins
Listeria is facultative anaerobes that grow best under
 responsible for adhesion and entry into target cells.
reduced oxygen and increased carbon dioxide concen-
tration. Growth occurs at 4-45 *C, with an optimum at
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
223
224
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
30-37 *C. Simple laboratory media support growth, prefer-
Pathogenesis
ably at an alkaline or neutral pH. On sheep blood agar,
most strains of L. monocyfogenes produce a narrow zone of
Mechanisms
hemolysis. Colonies are usually 1-2 mm in diameter and
appear blue-green in obliquely transmitted light on solid
Exposure to Listeria occurs via the oral or less commonly
media such as tryptose agar. Colonies of L. ivanovii typically
the nasal route. Most Listeria pathogens are destroyed by
 produce alarger and more intense zone of hemolysis. Many
gastric acids. Use of antacids and Hz blockers increases
commercial Listeria selective media are available. Most con-
survival rate and are considered risk factors for devel-
tain inhibitory compounds for nonlisterial organisms. The
oping listeriosis. Intestinal translocation appears to be a
compounds include cycloheximide, colistin, acriflavine,
passive process that can involve both intestinal epithe-
amphotericin B, and cefotetan.
lial cells and M cells overlying Peyer's patches. Inter-
Listeria tolerates 0.04% potassium tellurite, 0.025% thal-
nalins A and B, two surface proteins, interact with host
lium acetate, 3.75% potassium thiocyanate, 10% NaCl, and
cell receptors to mediate entry. Internalin A interacts
40% bile in media. Most strains grow over a pH range of
with cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, and internalin
5.5-9.6. It has greater heat tolerance than other non-spore-
B interacts with hepatocyte growth factor receptor Met.
forming bacteria; however, short-time high-temperature
After passage through the intestinal barrier, Listeria can be
pasteurization is effective at killing Listeria.
observed in phagocytic cells within the lamina propria.
Further dissemination occurs via the bloodstream. Vari-
ous bacterial ligands have been identified for adherence
Variability
and include internalin family, ActA and p60. Nonphago-
There are 13 recognized serovars in the L. monocytogenes
cytic cells can internalize listeriae through a zipper-type
based on somatic (O) and flagellar (H) antigens. Most clini-
mechanism. After internalization, listeriae escape from the
cal isolates belong to serovars 1/2a, 1/2b, and 4b; and most
phagosome, become associated with actin filaments in
food strains belong to serovar 1/2c. Although there is no
the cytoplasm, and propel themselves to the cell's plasma
correlation between serovars and species, strains of serovar
membrane via polar assembly of actin filaments (ActA).
5 are L. ivanovii. No relationship between serovars and host
In this way, they are able to pass to neighboring cells in
 specificity has been recognized. Various nucleic acid-based
plasma membrane protrusions and thus avoid host defense
methods have been used to further discriminate between
mechanisms
Listeria strains for epidemiologic analysis and strain track-
An alternative route of entry into the host has been pro-
ing purposes. Whole genome sequencing of species within
posed for CNS infections through damaged oral, nasal, 01
the genus has recently identified numerous genes found in
ocular mucosal surfaces via the neural sheath of periph-
virulent species but absent in avirulent species.
 eral nerve endings, particularly the trigeminal nerve. It is
Smooth and rough colonial variants occur. In rough
postulated that centripetal migration along cranial nerves
colonies, filaments of ≥20 μm in length may be observed.
leads to infection of the central nervous system. Organ-
 L-forms develop on media containing penicillin and have
isms have been demonstrated in the myelinated axons of
 been isolated from clinical cases in humans.
the trigeminal nerve and cytoplasm of medullary neurons.
The lack of visceral involvement supports a route other
than hematogenous, although a primary hematogenous
Ecology
route cannot be discounted.
Reservoir
Pathology
Listeria has a worldwide distribution, but more frequently
in temperate and colder climates, and has been isolated
The brain stem is the most commonly involved area in the
from soil, silage, sewage efluent, stream water, and over
encephalitic form of the infection. The cerebrospinal fluid 
 50 species of animals, including ruminants, swine, horses,
may be cloudy and the meningeal vessels are congested.
 dogs, cats, and various species of birds. In some areas, up
Occasionally, areas of softening (malacia) in the medulla
to 70% of humans are reported to be asymptomatic fecal
 are seen. Histologically, multifocal perivascular cuffing pre-
carriers. Many isolates from environmental samples, previ-
dominated by lymphocytes and histiocytes is commonly
ously called L. monocytogenes, would now be identified as
observed (Figure 32.1). Focal necrosis and microglial and
one of the nonpathogenic species based on current taxo-
neutrophilic infiltrates are seen in parenchymal tissue.
nomic criteria.
Resulting microabscesses are characterized by liquefac-
tion of the neuropil. Lesions may be present distributed
Transmission
throughout the brain stem or more frequently are present
unilaterally, further supporting the neural migration to the
Ingestion of contaminated feed and inhalation are the pri-
brain.
mary modes of transmission of Listeria. Poor-quality silage,
 In the septicemic form, multifocal to diffuse necrosis in
with a pH greater than 5.5, is commonly implicated and
the liver (Figure 32.2) and, less frequently, in the spleen
accounts for listeriosis, often being referred to as “silage
may be noted.
disease." An asymptomatic carrier can be a source for fur-
 In the aborted fetus of ruminants, grosslesions are mini-
ther contamination of the environment and, therefore, an
 mal. Autolysis is usually present as a result of the dead fetus
indirect source of infection.
Chapter 32   Listeria
225
be macerated o1 delivered weak and moribund. Retained
FIGURE 32.1.
Section from the brain of a cow with the
placenta and metritis may also be resulted. Systemic signs
encephalitic form of listeriosis. Perivascular cuffing is present
are rare in the cow unless the fetus is retained and triggers
(H & E). L. monocytogenes was isolated.
a fatal septicemia. Although abortion is usually sporadic,
abortion rates of up to 10% have been noted. It is uncom-
 mon to find the encephalitic form and abortions occurring
in a single outbreak.
Conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis in ruminants withoutasso-
 ciated abortions has been related to feeding on contami-
nated silage in elevated feed bunkers.
Localized infections such as acute or chronic mastitis
are frequently subclinical, and their incidence may there-
fore be underestimated. Early diagnosis and treatment of
listerial mastitis is an important measure to prevent trans-
mission through milk.
Monogastrics and Neonates
 The septicemic form marked by depression, inappetence,
Disease Patterns
fever, and death is the most common in monogastric
animals, preruminants, and neonates. Multifocal hepatic
Clinical outcome depends on the number of organisms
necrosis is the most common lesion in this form of the
ingested, pathogenic properties of the strain of Listeria, and
disease.
the immune status of the host. Septicemia, encephalitis,
and abortion are the major disease forms.
Chinchillas
Chinchillas are particularly susceptible to listerial sep-
Ruminants
ticemia.
Meningoencephalitis. The encephalitic form, sometimes
called “circling disease", is the most common form in rumi-
Horses
nants. In cattle, it is subacute to chronic. Signs include
 Septicemia in neonates is the most common presentation
depression, anorexia, and tendency to circle in one direc-
in horses.
tion, head pressing or turning of the head to one side, uni-
 lateral facial and trigeminal nerve paralysis, and bilateral
keratoconjunctivitis. Similar signs are seen in sheep and
Humans
goats, but the course is more acute and frequently fatal.
 In humans, meningitis (or meningoencephalitis) is the
most common form of listeriosis. Reproductive manifes-
Abortion. Abortion is common in ruminants, but also
tations include abortion, stillbirth, premature birth, 0r
occurs in other species. Abortion is usually late term—-after
septicemia in the newborn. Hydrocephalus is a frequent
7 months in cattle and 12 weeks in sheep. The fetus may
sequela of meningitis in newborns. Other clinical condi-
tions include infective endocarditis, oculoglandular dis-
ease, and dermatitis.
FIGURE 32.2.
Section of liver from a 5-week-old foal
that died of L. monocytogenes septicemia. A severe, diffuse
Epidemiology
necrotizing hepatitis was present.
The widespread distribution ofen vironmental and animal-
associated occurrence of Listeria makes localizing the source
 of a particular outbreak difficult.
Contaminated silage is a classic source of infection.
Other sources include particularly organic refuse (e.g.,
poultry litter). Stress factors predisposing to clinical disease 
include nutritional deficiencies, environmental conditions
(including elevated iron concentrations), underlying dis-
ease, and pregnancy. Cases are usually sporadic and may
involve up to 5% of cattle herds or 10% of sheep flocks over
a 2-month duration. Listeriosis in animals usually occurs
in the winter and spring.
Most human cases occur in urban environments in
the summer. There are occasional reports of listerial der-
matitis in veterinarians and others after handling tissues
226
PART II
Bacteria an d Fungi
from listerial abortions. Otherwise, animals are unlikely
direct sources of human infections. Human epidemics have
FIGURE 32.3.
Gram-stained impression smear from the
been traced to food sources of animal origin, including
brain stem of a goat with listeriosis. Rare to smafl numbers of
 milk, Latin-style cheeses, hot dogs, and liver pate. Coleslaw
gram-positive, regular rods are present (arrows).
made from cabbage originating on a farm with recent his-
tory of ovine listeriosis was the source in one outbreak.
Another recent outbreak was linked to consumption of
whole cantaloupes. In many instances, postprocessing con-
tamination is found to be the source of Listeria contami-
nation. Frequently there is also opportunity for selective
 growth of L. monocytogenes to occur during long periods of
refrigeration.
Immunologic Aspects
The majority of human cases of listeriosis are associ-
 ated with immunosuppressed individuals, the elderly, the
neonates, and pregnant women. Likewise in animals,
enrichment broth, Fraser broth, and modified Oxford agar
are essential components for USDA recommended isola-
not apparent.
tion methods from food products. Various DNA-based and
As a facultatively intracellular parasite, Listeria is primar-
antigen-capture methods for detection of Listeria have been
ily contained by cell-mediated responses. Humoral factors
described, especially in food products.
 may play some limited role in host defense.
 No immunizing preparations have met with significant
success. Killed preparations have been ineffective, while
Identification
live attenuated vaccines afforded some protection in sheep.
Typical colonies consisting of gram-positive, regular rods
The sporadic nature of the disease has not warranted vac-
 are suggestive. Listeria is catalase-positive, motile at 25 °℃,
and hydrolyzes esculin. L. monocytogenes is CAMP-positive
when cross-streaked with a β-toxin-producing Staphylo-
Laboratory Diagnosis
coccus aureus on 5% washed sheep blood agar. A similar
phenomenon is observed when L. ivanovii is cross-streaked
Specimens
with Rhodococcus equi. A weak CAMP-like reaction is some-
times observed between L. monocytogenes and R. equi
 Laboratory diagnosis is based upon isolation of the organ-
(Figure 32.4). In semisolid motility media incubated at
ism. Spinal fluid, blood, brain tissue, spleen, liver, abomasal
fluid, and/or meconium are cultured, depending on signs,
lesions, and tissues available.
FIGURE 32.4.
Positive CAMP reactions of L.
monocytogenes (LM) with S. aureus (SA) and L. ivanovii (LIV)
Direct Examination
with R. equi (RE). A weak reaction is seen betwveen L.
monocytogenes and RE. No reaction is detected with Listeria
A direct smear of infected tissue may reveal numerous
innocua (LiN). The variation in the degree of intensity of
gram-positive rods in septicemias and abortions; how-
hemolysis of L. monocytogenes compared to L. ivanovii is
ever, fewer numbers of organisms are typically observed in
apparent. L. innocua is not hemolytic.
the encephalitic form (Figure 32.3). Negative findings are
inconclusive. Immunohistochemicalstaining with specific
antisera is also useful in diagnosing encephalitic listeriosis.
RE
Isolation
35 *Cin 10% CO2 . Isolation of L. monocytogenes from brain
tissue may be enhanced by pour plate methods. After the
initial isolation attempts, remaining tissue is stored at 4 *C
for "cold enrichment." Such tissue is subcultured weekly
for up to 12 weeks. Cold enrichment is not necessary for
 isolation from listerial abortions or septicemias.
For samples where contamination is likely, enrich-
 ment and the use of selective media (lithium chloride.
phenylethanol-moxalactam medium, Oxford medium, 0r
PALCAM Listeria selective medium) are advisable. Modi-
SA
fied University of Vermont broth, MOPs-buffered Listeria
Chapter 32
Listeria
227
of Listeria; however, it is rarely necessary for definitive
FIGURE 32.5.
Umbrella-type motility of
identification.
L. monocytogenes in semisolid motility media incubated at
room temperature.
Immunodiagnosis
Serology has not been useful for diagnosis due to the preva-
Cross-reactions with S. aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, and
Arcanobacterium pyogenes.
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
L. monocytogenes is susceptible in viro to penicillin, ampi-
cillin, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, enrofloxacin, lin-
comycin, nosiheptide, rifampin, salinomycin, tetracy-
cline, vancomycin, and virginiamycin. Recent studies
 report that some isolates are resistant to tetracyclines and
fluoroquinolones, and penicillin. Minimum inhibitory
concentrations are on a rise. Chlortetracycline and peni-
cillin may be effective in timely treatment of cattle with
meningoencephalitis. Treatment of sheep has been less suc-
cessful.
Control measures include reduction or elimination of
feeding of silage, particularly poor-quality silage. All forms
of stress should be minimized. Affected animals should be
isolated and infected material disposed of properly.
Vaccination has not proven to be highly successful and
may not be warranted due to the sporadic nature of the
disease.
room temperature, a characteristic umbrella pattern of
motility develops 3-4 mm below the surface, due to
the microaerophilic nature of Listeria (Figure 32.5). An
end-over-end tumbling type of motility with intermittent
Further Reading
periods of quiescence is seen in hanging drop preparations.
Acid is produced from glucose and L-rhamnose but not D-
Maxie GM (ed.) (2007) Pathology of Domestic Animais, Sth edn,
mannitol or D-xylose by L. monocytogenes.L. ivanovii differs
Saunders-Elsevier, vol. 1, pp. 40s-408, vol. 3, pp. 492-493.
by fermenting D-xylose but not L-rhamnose. Fluorescent
NCBI. Bacterial Taxonomy, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Taxonomy/ (accessed January 8, 2013).
is helpful.
Quinn PJ, Carter ME, Markey B, and Carter GR (1999) Clinical
Mouse inoculation causes death within 5 days, with
Veterinary Microbiology, Mosby, pp. 170-174.
necrotic foci present in the liver. This procedure dif-
Summers BA, CummingsJF, and de Lahunta A(1995) Veterinary
ferentiates L. monocytogenes from nonpathogenic species
Neuropathology, Mosby, pp. 133-135.
33
Rhodococcus
SETH P. HARRIS AND JOSHUA B. DANIELS
Rhodococcus is a genus of facultative intracellular bacte-
to anchor within the cell envelope. VapA can be isolated in
ria that are classified within the Nocardiaceae family. Of
con junction with other surface antigens with sonication.
the many species of bacteria within the genus Rhodococcus,
Rhodococcus equi is the only one that is typically considered
to be a pathogen. Clinical disease presents as pyogranulo-
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
 matous pneumonia or enteritis in foals less than 6 months
Virulence-Associated Proteins. Pathogenic strains of R.
of age. Occasionally immunosuppressed adult horses and
equi contain an approximately 85-90 kb virulence plasmid.
other animal species including humans can develop dis-
Bacteria lacking this virulence plasmid are considered non-
ease. The bacteria are found within the environment and
infectious to foals, even when experimentally infected with
foals are exposed within the first few days of life. Infection
 a high bacterial dose. Avirulent R. equi is effectively cleared
is seasonal and typically occurs during the dry summer
by the immune system of adult horses and foals. Loss of the
months.
virulence plasmid can be induced by serial passage of the
bacterium within culture.
R.equi
The virulence plasmid contains genes for virulence
associated proteins (Vaps), of which VapA is immunodom-
Descriptive Features
inant in virulent equine isolates. VapA is a 15-17 kDa
lipoprotein, which is anchored to the cell wall, and func-
Morphology and Staining. R. equi are strongly gram-
tions to allow survival of the bacteria within macrophages.
positive pleomorphic coccobacilli (Figure 33.1). From solid
 growth media, cellular forms appear predominantly coc-
somes. The vapA gene requires expression of other viru-
coid measuring approximately 1-5 μm. R. equi may stain
lence factors from the plasmid, such as the positive regula-
weakly acid-fast with both the Ziehl-Neelsen and Kinyoun
tors virR and orf8. VapA is a ligand for Toll-like receptor 2
techniques, and the degree of acid-fast staining varies with
(TLR2) in macrophages and dendritic cells. Purified VapA
the age of culture and growth medium. Direct visualiza-
has been shown to induce production of the proinflamma-
tion of the organism in tracheal aspirates and bronchoalve-
tory cytokine tumor necrosis factor, IL-12p40, and nitric
olar lavage specimens may be accomplished with Gram
oxide in macrophages. Purified VapA in dendritic cells
stain, Fite's acid-fast stain, and Grocott's methenamine sil-
upregulates CD40 and CD86, which are surface-expressed
ver stain. Colonies of R. equi have a characteristic salmon
costimulatory molecules.
color.
       1  
Structure and Composition. The lipid-rich cell envelope
lated from pig strains instead of equine strains of R. equi.
of Rhodococcus is relatively resistant to drying, allows the
The vapA and vapB genes are never coexpressed in the same
bacterium to survive for months within soil, and con-
isolates of R equi indicating that they represent distinct
fers the acid-fast staining characteristic. The basic cell wall
plasmid subpopulations.
structure is similar to other members of the suprageneric
 Bovine isolates of R. equi were historically considered to
taxon Mycolata and consists of fatty acids and mycolic
lack a virulence plasmid as they express neither the vapA
acids, which are perpendicularly linked to an arabinogalac-
nor the vapB genes. However, recently it was discovered
tan polysaccharide. The outer part of the wall contains a
that the bovine isolates do in fact harbor a virulence plas-
variety of lipids including mycolic acids, lipoarabinoman-
 mid, which lacks both the vapA and vapB genes, a finding
nans, trehalose monomycolate, trehalose dimycolate, and
consistent with a third unique plasmid subpopulation.
cardiolipin. The R. equi mycolic acids are covalently bound
Additional vapA homologs, which have been discov.
to the cell wall. The VapA lipoprotein, which is associated
ered, include the functional vapC, vapD, vapE, vapG, and
with virulence in equine isolates, is located along the sur-
face of the outer membrane. The structure of VapA allows it
vapX. The proteins VapC, VapD, and VapE are secreted
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
228
Chapter 33
 Rhodococcus
229
FlGURE 33.1.
Histopathology of pneumonia in a foal.
FIGURE 33.2.
"Miflk-drop" appearance of R. equi
Note the cytoplasm of this macrophage is distended by
colonies on cuiture plate.
gram-positive coccobacilli (Gram stain, 600x).
proteins, and similar to VapA have significantly elevated
expression at a temperature of 38 *C and a pH <8. These
conditions favoring expression ofthe Vap proteins are asso-
ciated with the environment encountered inside a host
environmental Rhodococcus species, which may affect ori-
phagosome.
entation of lipids within CD1 molecules and subsequent
recognition by the immune system.
Lipoarabinomannan.
 Lipoarabinomannan (LAM) is a cell 
envelope lipid that functions as a virulence factor. The LAM
in R equi is structurally unique compared to other Nocar-
In-Vitro
diaceae such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis due to its smaller
Growth Characteristics.
An obligate aerobe,R. equi grows
size and reduced arabinose content. While the exact in
readily on many types of nonselective growth media (e.g.
vivo function of R. equi LAM has not been determined, it
  a sdaus s m e aos asa
is speculated that it influences the route of phagocytosis
in ambient air. At 35-37 *C, pinpoint colonies will typi-
by macrophages and the subsequent production of early
cally be visible at 24 h, but after 48 h develop a charac-
macrophage cytokines. With the related bacteria M. fuber.
teristic mucoid “milk-drop" appearance (Figure 33.2) with 
culosis, LAM is needed for bacterial growth and viability and
colonies that typically range 3-10 mm in diameter and fre-
is recognized by the host innate immune system through
quently coalesce in areas of dense growth. Colonial growth
TLRs. A similar function may occur with R. equi.
3-4 days due to the production of y-carotene pigment. In
Cell Wall Lipids.
 Major extractable cell wall lipids of R.
animal feces and soil, the organism may replicate at tem-
equi using a chloroform-methanol technique include tre-
peratures as low as 10 *C.
halose monomycolate, trehalose dimycolate, and cardi-
olipin. Trehalose monomycolate has a chemical structure
Biochemical Activities.
 The organism is catalase and urea-
of CagHg2O13, trehalose dimycolate has a structure
positive and typically reduces nitrate. R. equi does not
of Cs4Hi62Ois, and cardiolipin has a structure
of
ferment carbohydrates (asaccharolytic) and is oxidase-
C7gHis4Oi7P2. Of these cell wall lipids, cytotoxic 
T-
negative. An additional phenotypic characteristic that is
lymphocytes have been shown to recognize and lyse blood-
helpful forlaboratory identification is the activity of R. equi
on a CAMP (Christie Atkins Munch-Petersen) test. R. equi
colate and cardiolipin, but not trehalose dimycolate. The
produces phospholipases ("equi factors") that enhance the
presentation of these lipid antigens is not restricted by
hemolytic activities of Staphylococcus aureus β-toxin and
equine leukocyte antigen (equine major histocompatibil-
Corynebacterium pseudohuberculosis phospholipase C (Figure
ity complex molecules) and is thought to occur through
33.3).
CD1 molecules. All three of these lipid fractions can induce
upregulation of IFN-y production in lymphocytes. This
Resistance. R. equi is remarkably resistant to acid. This
is consistent with the organism's ability to persist in
 e  sn     s  s s
phagolysosomes of alveolar macrophages—an environ-
aforementioned cytotoxic T cells. The length of the carbon
ment with low pH and considerable oxidative stress. Its
chains in cell wall lipids varies between R. equi and other
resistance to acid may be exploited when attempting to
230
PART II
Bacteria an d Fungi
FIGURE 33.3.
Phospholipases from R. equi enhance the
following ingestion of manure within the first few days of
hemolytic activities of S. aureus β-toxin and C.
life. However, ingested strains can encompass either vir-
pseudotuberculosis phospholipase C(CAMP plate).
ulent or avirulent bacteria, and the bacteria can become
part of the normal enteric flora. Ingested R. equi from
the environment can colonize the gastrointestinal tract
rapidly and has been detected in foal feces during the
C. pseudotuberculosis
first week of life. Inhalation is considered to be the major
 route of infection in foals, which leads to respiratory dis-
ease. Infection via inhalation normally occurs during the
 summer months when manure contaminated with viru-
lent R. equi becomes desiccated, leading to aerosolization
R.equi 
and subsequent inhalation. The route of infection (inges-
tion vs. inhalation) coupled with the infectious dose and
immunological factors may help influence whether a foal
will develop disease.
Pathogenesis
Mechanisms. R equi is a facultative intracellular
S. aureus
pathogen, which can survive within macrophages after
phagocytosis. Phagocytosis is mediated by complement o1
 antibody opsonization, and this plays a role in intracel-
lular survival of the bacteria. Bacteria that are opsonized
with antibody enter macrophages via the Fcy-receptor
isolate the organism from a heavily contaminated sub-
and are killed as the phagolysosome matures. However,
strate, such as soil or feces. R. equi also tolerates ultravio-
bacteria that are opsonized with the complement com-
let light exposure from direct sunlight and is resistant to
ponent C3b enter the cell through the Mac-1 receptor
 desiccation, characteristics that help it to persist in equine
(CD11b/CD18) and are able to survive intracellularly by
impeding phagosomal maturation and acidification. The
environments.
In vitro, R equi is susceptible to most antimi-
ence of the virulence-associated plasmid expressing the
crobial agents with gram-positive spectra, with the
exception of the β-lactams and tetracycline. In vivo,
VapA surface lipoprotein. Thus, R. equi pathogens that lack
lipophilic antimicrobial agents are most effective par-
the virulence plasmid are avirulent in horses, and infec.
 tions are cleared without pathology, even in foals. How-
ticularly rifampin and the macrolides—erythromycin,
clarithromycin, and azithromycin. Synergistic killing is
ever, immunosuppressed animals can become infected
 achieved when rifampin is combined with a macrolide.
with avirulent plasmid-cured bacterial strains.
Pathology. R. equi is a parasite of macrophages, which
Variability. Over 27 antigenically distinct capsular types
 leads to the development of pyogranulomatous pneumo-
of R. equi have been described.
nia (Figure 33.4). The severity of the disease can be highly
variable with some naturally in fected foals developing sub-
Ecology
clinical infections and others succumbing to disease. The
abscesses and granulomas are characterized by centers of
Reservoir. R. equi is found within the soil wherever horses
neutrophils and necrotic debris, which are surrounded by
 are present, and can become endemic in high-density horse
macrophages, multinucleate giant cells, lymphocytes, and
farms. Infected foals are the major source of environmental
a fibrous capsule. The more acute lesions are less orga-
contamination and can shed 106-108 bacteria per gram of
nized, tend to have higher numbers of neutrophils, and
feces. While adult horses can also shed the bacteria within 
lack a well-developed fibrous capsule. The chronic lesions
their feces, it tends to occur sporadically and with a far
are grossly visible and form well-defined granulomas with
lower quantity of bacteria. Adult shedding ofless than 2000
caseating centers. Abscesses that rupture can result in
 colony-forming units per gram of feces is common. Bacte-
severe fibrinous pleuritis or peritonitis, septicemia, shock,
ria shed by horses may be environmental strains, which
and death.
 lack a virulence plasmid encoding for the vapA gene. Pneu-
monic foals can exhale the bacteria, but it is question-
 able whether that is a significant route of environmental
Disease Patterns
contamination.
Equine. Infected horses are almost always foals less
than 6 months of age, with a majority of cases occur-
Transmission. Acquisition of bacteria from the en viron-
ring in foals between 1 and 4 months. Affected foals
ment typically occurs via either ingestion or inhalation.
 develop pyogranulomatous bronchopneumonia as the
As R. equi can survive within soil and foals are naturally
most common lesion. The percentage of the lung affected
Chapter 3  Rhodococcus
231
FIGURE 33.4.
Pyogranulomatous pneumonia froma
is lacking. Cattle isolates were thought to not contain a
foal. The lesions vary from caseating to solid. (Courtesy of
virulence plasmid, although now are known to contain a
Duncan Rusself, Ohio State University.)
plasmid that does not code for either VapA or VapB. This is
in contrast to isolates from horses and pigs.
Goats. Infections in goats are rare. Multiple hepatic
abscesses are the most common presentation. Other
affected sites include the lung, lymph nodes, and rarely ver-
tebral bodies. The pattern of abscesses in the liver and lung
suggests that the bacterial pathogenesis in this species may
involve accessing the en terohepatic circulation. This access
may be due to damage within thegastrointestinal tract(e.g..
compromised ruminal mucosal barrier due to ruminal aci-
dosis). This has yet to be confirmed. Once within the blood
supply, the bacteria can then disseminate to other organ
systems. C. pseudonuberculosis is the main differential diag-
nosis as it is a common cause of abscesses in goats. Cul-
ture should be used for confirmation in suspected cases. No
association with a virulence plasmid has been reported.
Humans. The incidence ofR. equiin humans has increased
is highly variable. The reported survival rate for rhodococ
with the growing numbers of immunosuppressed people.
cal pneumonia can vary based on the age of the foal,
The AIDS epidemic, organ transplant recipients, and peo-
interval between infection and diagnosis, and treatment
ple undergoing chemotherapy are particularly at risk. Very
protocol. Extrapulmonary infections are estimated to occur
rare reports of R. equi infections in immunocompetent peo-
in approximately 74% of foals with rhodococcal infec-
ple exist. However, immunocompetent individuals tend to
tions. These can develop complementary to or indepen-
have more localized infections and have a far lower mor-
dent of a respiratory infection. Many of the extrapul-
tality rate than the immunocompromised population. Pul-
monary infections are subclinical and are only diagnosed
monary infections in humans can mimic tuberculosis. Cul-
at necropsy in foals, which succumb to respiratory dis-
ture can be used for differentiation of the organisms. Unlike
ease. The most common extrapulmonary manifestations
some of the other animal species previously described,
include diarrhea, immune-mediated polysynovitis, ulcer-
there is no required association of a virulence plasmid with
ative enterotyphlocolitis, intra-abdominal abscesses, and
human isolates of R equi. Some human isolates contain a
abdominal lymphadenitis. Other extrapulmonary disease
virulence plasmid coding for either VapA or VapB, while
such as uveitis, hepatitis, and osteomyelitis can rarely
other isolates are plasmid free.
occur. Immunocompetent adult horses are nearly univer
sally considered to be protected from disease and mount an
effective immune response when experimentally infected,
Others. R. equi infections are reported sporadically in a
even when exposed to high bacterial challenges. Adult
number of animal species including cat, dog, sheep, deer,
horses with no known immunological impairment rarely
llama, buffalo, koala, seal, marmoset, alligator, crocodile,
develop pneumonia. However, these horses may have an
and dromedary camels. R. equi may be an emerging disease
in adult dromedary camels as all of their isolates have an
underlying undiagnosed immunodeficiency. Foal isolates
from pneumonic animals contain a virulence plasmid
association with the VapA-containing virulence plasmid.
R. equi has been found in the feces of many clinically nor-
encoding for VapA.
mal animal species and may represent part of their normal
Swine. R. equi has been recovered from lymph nodes col-
enteric flora or pass through of ingested environmental
lected from wild and domestic swine. The submaxillary
bacteria.
lymph node is the most common site. Swine isolates are
considered to be of intermediate virulence and contain a
Epidemiology
virulence plasmid encoding for VapB.
R. equi is present in the environment wherever herbivore
Cattle. Bovine isolates of R. equi are rare and are asso-
manure is present. High-concentration equine breeding
ciated with a low degree of pathogenicity. Cattle isolates
farms have elevated bacterial concentrations within the
typically cause granulomas in a single lymph node, which
soil. The disease is seasonally dependent, and dry, dusty
grossly resemble the lesion of bovine tuberculosis and
condition during the late spring to summer predisposes
should be distinguished with additional diagnostic testing.
to aerosolization of desiccated manure and soil leading to
The retropharyngeal, bronchial, and mediastinal nodes are
increased exposure to foals. Young foals are particularly
the most common lymph nodes affected. Cows have a
lower incidence of infection than either steers or heifers,
tive type I immune response.
232
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Immunological Aspects
with complement that utilize the Mac-1 receptor. Based on
this knowledge, hyperimmune plasma has been commer-
 Most of the features of a protective immune response to
cially marketed as a preventative for foals in high-risk areas.
R. equi have been elucidated through studies in mice, as
Hyperimmune plasma contains a variety of antibody types
well as comparing the immune responses of adult horses to
and other components that can function to enhance the
foals. These studies demonstrate that the type of immune
humoral immune system. However, the efficacy of hyper-
response developed directly affects the course of infec-
immune plasma can be highly variable. The variability may
tion. A type I immune response (leads to cell mediated
immunity) is protective, while a type II immune response
be attributed to product differences among the manufac-
turers as well as a lack of uniformity in product use by the
(leads to humoral immunity) is detrimental. The protec-
consumers. Companies producing hyperimmune plasma
tive type I immune response encompasses both CD4+ and
use undisclosed proprietary techniques that impede inde-
CD8+ T-lymphocytes. The CD4+ T-lymphocytes function
pendent evaluation of the quality of their product. There.
as the predominant producers of IFN-y, while CD8+ T-
fore, factors such as bacterial strain, adjuvant type and
lymphocytes function as cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. Pro-
duction of IFN-y by CD4+ T-lymphocytes enhances phago-
route of vaccination that could influence the effectiveness
of hyperimmune plasma remain an un known variable
somal maturation and acidification, which kills intracellu-
To date no effective commercial vaccine for R equi in
lar bacteria without lysing the host macrophage. Cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes kill intracellular bacteria by directly lysing
foals has been produced. It is possible that the immature
R. equi-infected macrophages.
neonatal immune system in conjunction with early expo-
sure to en vironmental bacteria may be an obstacle that can-
 Rhodococcal pneumonia is considered to be an immune
not be overcome with traditional vaccination techniques.
biased disease of which foals are uniquely susceptible. Foals
Alternative means of vaccination have been attempted
and neonates, in general, are considered to have func-
 including the use of DNA vaccines, vaccination of mares to
tionally impaired immune response during the neonatal
elevate antibody levels in colostrum consumed by neona-
 period. This impairment is likely due to a combination of
tal foals, and oral vaccination. While DNA vaccinations
lack of previous pathogen exposure and subsequent mem-
 show promise in inducing a type I immune response dur-
ory response as well as quantitative and qualitative differ-
 ing the perinatal period in mice, they do not appear to be
ences in theability of their immune system to recognize and
effective in foals. Likewise, utilization of triton X-extracted
antigen to vaccinate mares results in elevation of opsoniz-
ple, under most circumstances neonates (as opposed to
adult horses) develop a type II rather than a type I immune
ing IgG antibody titers, but does not confer protection
against R equi pneumonia in foals that have consumed
response, which is detrimental to R. equi infections. The
the colostrum. One technique that is currently showing
difference in the neonatal immune system spans both
the most promise is vaccination through the oral route.
antigen-presenting cells (macrophages and dendritic cells)
Oral vaccinations have been successfully utilized to pro-
and lymphocytes. Antigen-presenting cells lack expression
tect against pathogens in other animal species such polio in
of cytokines and costimulatory molecules, and are unable
humans. As foals are often initially exposed to environmen.
Therefore, higher levels of surface molecules or differing
tal R. equi through ingestion, an oral vaccine could mimic
antigen doses may be necessary to prime an early immune
response when compared to parenteral vaccination. Foals
response. Likewise, neonatal CD4+ T-lymphocytes tend
experimentally vaccinated orally during the first 2 weeks
to produce lower levels of IFN-y than adults, and R. equi-
of life with live virulent R equi were shown to not be sus-
specific CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocytes are lacking early in
ceptible to disease from a subsequent airborne challenge.
life. The level of IFN-y produced by CD4+ T-lymphocytes
graduallyincreases as a foal ages, while R. equi-specificcyto-
Further safety studies will need to be performed, includ.
ing specifically monitoring for extrapulmonary infections
sn ne e reade ue iuasae are sanouii aio
such as enteritis and lymphadenitis. At this point the oral
when foals reach 6-8 weeks of age. Despite these impair-
vaccination strategy is not suitable for widespread use due
ments under select experimental conditions, foals are able
to the potential risk of seeding the environment with viru-
to overcome some of their immune deficiencies. Foals intra-
lent bacteria through the feces.
bronchially challenged with virulent R equi are able to pro-
duce IFN-y at near adult levels. Foals orally inoculated with
virulent R. equi during the first 2 weeks of life can develop
Laboratory Diagnosis
R. equi-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes by the time they
Thereis no gold standard for laboratory diagnosis. Transtra-
reach 3 weeks of life. Therefore, a number of environmen-
 cheal washes are considered the best means of diagnosis.
tal factors (e.g., age when exposed, route of exposure, and
 Fluid from the wash may beexamined with cytology, be cul-
bacterial dose) may influence the course of disease in indi-
 tured, or undergo PCR using R. equi-specific primers. With
vidual animals.
cytology the bacteria can be found predominately intracel-
While antibody is thought to play a role in protection,
lularly within foamy macrophages and have a watermelon
it alone is not considered to be sufficient to protect against
 disease. Antibody can function by altering the route of
seed shape. In some instances, the shape of the bacteria
can be difficult to differentiate from true cocci. Culture can
 phagocytosis due to utilization of the Fc receptor. Phago-
have false-negative results depending on the quality of the
cytosis via the Fc receptor is associated with poor bacte-
specimen and results can be complicated if contaminating
rial survival in comparison to bacteria that are opsonized
bacteria are present. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a
Chapter 3 Rhodococus
233
more sensitive means of detection than culture, although
Flynn O, QuigleyF, Costello E et al. (2001) Virulence-associated 
it carries a risk of false-positive results and needs to be eval-
protein characterisation of Rhodococcus equi isolated from
uated in conjunction with the clinical history. In cases
bovine lymph nodes. Vet Microbiol, 78, 221-228.
where transtracheal washes are negative, thoracic radio-
Garton NJ, Gilleron M, Brando T et al. (2002) A novel lipoara-
 binomannan from the equine pathogen Rhodococcus equi.
graphs can be used to help make a diagnosis. Initial infec-
tions demonstrate an alveolar pattern with poorly defined
Structure and effect on macrophage cytokine production. /
regions of consolidation. Chronic infections may display
Biol Chem, 277, 31722-31733.
nodular masses within the lungs and lymphadenopathy.
Giguere S, Jacks S, Roberts GD et al. (2004) Retrospective com-
Serological tests such as ELISA or AGID do not adequately
 parison of azithromycin, clarithromycin, and erythromycin
for the treatment of foals with Rhodococcus equi pneumonia.
 differentiate between diseased and healthy foals.
I Vet Intern Med, 18, 568-573.
Harris SP, Hines MT, Mealey RH et al. (2011) Early develop-
Treatment and Control
ment of cytotoxic T lymphocytes in neonatal foals follow.
ing oral inoculation with Rhodococcus equi. Vet Immunol
The prognosis of R equi pneumonia in foals is guarded.
Immunopathol,141,312-316.
Harris SP, Fujiwara N, Mealey RH et al. (2010) Identification
endemic farms will recover without antimicrobial therapy.
of Rhodococcus equi lipids recognized by host cytotoxic T
Foals with clinical disease are treated with a combination
lymphocytes. Microbiology, 156, 1836-1847.
of a macrolide antibiotic and rifampin. Clarithromycin
Hooper-McGrevy KE, Wilkie BN, Prescott JF (200s) Virulence-
is a more effective macrolide than azithromycin or ery-
associated protein-specific  serum  immunoglobulin  G-
thromycin, when combined with rifampin. Rare isolates
isotype expression in young foals protected against
of R. equi can be resistant to macrolides or rifampin, and
 Rhodococcus equi pneumonia by oral immunization with vir-
foals infected with these isolates have a higher mortality
ulent R. equi. Vaccine, 23, 5760-5767.
rate. While there are reports that enrofloxacin has resulted
Kinne J, Madarame H, Takai S et al. (201l) Disseminated
in successful treatment, it carries a risk of articular carti-
Rhodococcus equi infection in dromedary camels (Camelus
lage toxicity and should not be used in young animals. In
dromedarius). Vet Microbiol, 149, 269-272.
endemic farms attempts should be made at early detection
Meijer WG and Prescott JF (2004) Rhodococcus equi. Vet Res, 35,
and treatment of infection. Early signs of infection include
383-396.
pyrexia and hyperfibrinogenemia, which can be monitored
Ocampo-Sosa AA, Lewis DA, Navas J et al. (2007) Molecular
with rectal temperate and a complete blood count with fib-
epidemiology of Rhodococcus equi based on traA, vapA, and
rinogen. Some foals display nonspecific clinical signs such
vapB virulence plasmid markers. / Infect Dis, 196, 763-769.
as diarrhea and weight loss. Early cases can go undetected
Patton KM, McGuire TC, Hines MT et al. (200s) Rhodococcus
for weeks or longer.
equi-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes in immune horses
and development in asymptomatic foals. Infect Immun, 73,
2083-2093.
 Reuss SM, Chaffin MK, and Cohen ND (2009) Extrapulmonary
Further Reading
disorders associated with Rhodococcus equi infection in foals:
150 cases (1987-2007). / Am Vet Med Assoc, 235,855-863.
Byrne BA, Prescott JF, PalmerGH etal. (2001) Virulence plasmid
Sutcliffe IC (1997) Macroamphiphilic cell envelope compo-
 of Rhodococcus equi contains inducible gene family encoding
nents of Rhodococcus equi and closely related bacteria. Vet 
secreted proteins. Infect Immun, 69, 650-656.
Microbiol, 56, 287-299.
Dawson TR, Horohov DW, Meijer WG, and Muscatello G
Venner M, RodigerA, Laemmer M, and Giguere S (2012) Failure
(2010) Current understanding of the equine immune
of antimicrobial therapy to accelerate spontaneous healing
response to Rhodococcus equi. An immunological review of
of subclinical pulmonary abscesses on a farm with endemic
R. equi pneumonia. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 135, 1-11.
infections caused by Rhodococcus equi. Vet J, 192, 293-298.
34
Non-spore-Forming
Anaerobes
T.G. NAGARAJA
Gram-negative, non-spore-forming anaerobes are com-
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
monly encountered in a variety of clinical samples of ani-
The ability of pathogenic anaerobes to create an anaero-
mals. Most of these species are part of the normal flora
 of the mucosa lining the mouth, intestine, and upper
bic microenvironment (low redox potential) or to tolerate
Oxygen exposure is a prerequisite to their ability to estab-
respiratory, urinary, and genital tracts of animals. There-
lish infection. Anaerobic microenvironment may be cre-
fore, these organisms are opportunistic pathogens and
generally cause infections following the breakdown in
ated by the action of certain virulence factors (e.g., endo-
toxic lipopolysaccharide (LPS), hemolysin, and platelet
mucosal barriers and the entry of the bacteria into nor-
 aggregation factor) or because of synergy with facultative
mally sterile sites of the body. For example, breakdown
bacteria. Oxygen tolerance allows anaerobes to survive in
in the barrier of the ruminal epithelium allows Fusobac-
infected tissues until conditions become more conducive
terium necrophorum, a member of the ruminal flora, to reach
 for multiplication and invasion. Many pathogenic gram-
liver via portal circulation to set up abscesses. In recent
negative anaerobes are aerotolerant. Bacteroides fragilis and
years, gram-negative, non-spore-forming anaerobes have
F. necrophorum, for example, not only survive but can grow
undergone pronounced reorganization in the taxonomy
 at low oxygen tensions. Superoxide dismutase, and in some
and nomenclature because of phylogeny-oriented taxon-
 omy approaches, primarily based on 16S rRNA nucleotide
instances catalase, protects against the toxic effects of oxy.
 gen. Variable amounts of superoxide dismutase are present
sequences. Clinically important gram-negative, non-
spore-forming anaerobic bacilli, other than those under
in gram-negative anaerobes.
Fusobacterium, were once grouped primarily in the genus
The virulence factors of gram-negative, non-spore
forming anaerobes are poorly understood. Although var-
Bacteroides, and the genus was regarded as phenotypically
ious virulence factors have been identified, the precise
heterogeneous. In fact, the taxonomy of gram-negative
 mechanisms by which gram-negative anaerobes cause dis-
anaerobes is in a state of constant revision with new genera
ease are not well defined. However, similar to facultative
and species being described. Existing taxa have been reclas-
bacteria, gram-negative anaerobes contain cell structures
sifed and old species have been renamed. Presently, gram-
negative, non-spore-forming bacilli of clinical importance
(e.g., capsule, fimbriae, flagella, agglutinins, adhesins, LPS,
in animals belong primarily to the genera Bacteroides, Dich-
and outer membrane proteins) and produce exotoxins (e.g.,
enterotoxin, hemolysin, and leukotoxin) and extracellu-
elobacter, Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, and Prevotella.
lar enzymes (e.g., neuraminidase, proteases, DNases, and
lipases) that facilitate adherence, colonization, invasion,
Descriptive Features
and tissue destruction. In addition, some fermentation
products of anaerobic bacteria (e.g., lactic acid, butyric acid,
Morphology and Staining
toxic effects and contribute to pathogenesis.
Gram-negative, non-spore-forming anaerobes include
The hallmark of infection caused by gram-negative,
rods, cocci, filaments, and spiral organisms. The rods are
 non-spore-forming anaerobes is abscesses, although sep-
the most common.
ticemic conditions can occasionally be observed. Gener-
Cellular Anatomy and Composition
ally, abscesses are formed closer to the mucosal surfaces
Or at sites of direct contact, although distant abscesses can
The cell wall structure and composition are similar to fac-
 be formed because of hematogenous spread. Suppurative
ultative and aerobic gram-negative bacteria.
   e   s
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
234
Chapter 34
Gram-Negative, Non-spore- Forming Anaerobes
235
often polymicrobial, including both anaerobic and faculta
Growth Characteristics
tive bacteria, suggesting that anaerobic gram-negative bac-
Anaerobes do not use oxygen as a final electron acceptor
teria may be of low virulence and that the virulence factors
and are able to generate adenosine triphosphate without
may be of low potency. For example, gram-negative anaer-
aaq saqoiaee aeo, are aos uasxo jo asn a
obes possess “con ventional" LPS based on chemical struc-
molecular oxygen may be toxic and the degree of sensi-
ture and biological activity. However, several studies have
tivity varies with species and even strains. When exposed
to molecular oxygen, obligate anaerobes form powerful
logically less potent than LPS of Salmonella or Escherichia
oxidants, such as hydrogen peroxide, superoxide anions,
coli. Association of certain organisms may contribute to
singlet oxygen, and other oxygen radicals. These oxygen
synergy, resulting in some cases enhanced infectivity of
radicals interact with cell macromolecules, proteins, and
anaerobes. The mechanisms involved in this synergism
nucleic acids to cause lethal damage to the cells. Obligate
may be the supply of energy substrate and essential growth
anaerobes lack mechanisms and enzyme systems, such as
factors, or in the case of facultative bacteria, creation of low
superoxide dismutase, and catalase, to neutralize the toxic
redox potential. The frequent association of F. necropho-
products. Gram-negative anaerobes of clinical importance
rum or Dichelobacter nodosus with Arcanobacterium pyogenes
are generally aerotolerant because many of them do con-
provides a classic example of synergistic interaction.
tain superoxide dismutase and can resist exposure to oxy-
gen and the duration of resistance varies with species. Gen-
Capsule.
 Capsular substances protect the outer mem-
erally, clinical anaerobes can grow in medium that is not
brane from the membrane attack complex of the com-
 prereduced and are able to grow on agar surfaces as long as
plement cascade (in the case of gram-negative anaerobes)
incubation is carried out under oxygen-free atmosphere.
and inhibit the bacterium from attachment to, and inges-
tion by, phagocytic host cells. The capsules of B. fragilis,
pigmented Prevotella, and Porphyromonas incite an intense
Ecology
inflammatory response. Capsular polysaccharide of B. frag-
ilis can produce abscesses even in the absence of live cells.
Reservoir and Transmission
The non-spore-forming, gram-negative anaerobes impli-
Cell Wall. Gram-negative anaerobes contain a typical wall
cated in pyonecrotic lesions are usually part of the normal
composed of lipoteichoic acids, peptidoglycan, LPs, and
flora, but they are sometimes transmitted by bites or other
protein. The LPs in the outer membraneis an important vir-
trauma involving contaminated fomites.
ulence determinant. The LPS of gram-negative anaerobes
has always been considered to be biologically less potent
than typical LPS of Enterobacteriaceae. Several conflicting
Pathogenesis
explanations have been suggested, including differences
in lipid A composition. However, the LPS of Fusobacterium
Disease results from the extension of the normal flora (both
sp. has been reported to be as potent as that of E. coli LPS.
obligate and facultative anaerobic bacteria) into a compro-
 The interactions of lipoteichoic acids and peptidoglycan
mised site, either by contamination ofa wound with nearby
with macrophage cells have been shown to release proin-
normal flora or from inoculation into tissue with biting or
flammatory cytokines. The composition of inner and outer
contaminated instruments. The kinds of anaerobes found
membrane proteins of certain gram-negative anaerobes
in samples of such material reflect the site of injury or the
(B. fragilis) has been described.
bacterial population of the source of inoculation. Initia-
tion of in fection requires proliferation of anaerobes, which
Fimbriae. The fimbriae, if present on anaerobes, play an
would be facilitated by the establishment of anaerobic
conditions by trauma, vascular breakdown, or coinfection
important role in adhesion, an initial event in the bacteria-
host interaction.An example ofa fimbriated gram-negative
with facultative oraerobic bacteria. Synergistic interactions
anaerobe is D nodosus, a primary causative agent of foot rot
occur between facultative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.
The facultative species scavenge oxygen, curtail phagocy-
in sheep.
tosis of the anaerobic component, provide nutrients (e.g.,
lactic acid), and may produce enzymes (e.g., β-lactamase)
Extracellular
Products. Exotoxins, enzymes, and
that might protect a penicillin-susceptible facultative 01
metabolic fermentation products with  toxic activity
obligate anaerobic partner (and vice versa). Also, in com-
have been demonstrated. The two well-characterized
exotoxins are leukotoxin produced by F. necrophorum
ultative bacteria lower the redox potential (Eh) sufficiently
and an enterotoxin secreted by B. fragilis. Many produce
for anaerobes to grow. Some anaerobes produce capsules
proteolytic and other enzymes that may play a role in
that, due to their chemistry, are potent inducers of abscess
their pathogenic activities. IgA proteases, which have
formation.
been shown to be produced by highly pathogenic species
 of facultative gram-negative bacteria, are also produced
by Porphyromonas levi. Short-chain fatty acids, which are
Laboratory Diagnosis
at the infected site (contribute to putrid smell), have been
Clinical conditions that are indicative of anaerobic infec-
shown to impair host phagocytic functions.
tions include putrid-smelling lesions and discharges, gas
236
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
in the tissue, deep infections of mucosal or skin surfaces,
obic jar or in a glove box. A major advantage of an
and necrotic or gangrenous tissues. Specimens that exhibit
anaerobic glove box with a built-in incubator is that
bacteria on direct examination but are culture-negative by
inoculated plates can be examined at any time with-
routine cultivation and infections that do not respond to
out being exposed to oxygen.
aminoglycoside therapy are also suggestive of anaerobic
bacterial involvement.
It is always prudent to process samples intended for
anaerobic culture with minimal delay. If the sample is not
Sample Collection
processed immediately after collection, it should be held
 in a container free from oxygen, usually a container into
Anaerobic culture is time-consuming, expensive, and
which oxygen-free gas (e.g., O2-free CO2) is flowing. The
would require some degree of expertise in handling sam-
sample is plated onto a blood agar (usually with a BHl or
ples and in isolation and identification. Samples obtained
Brucella agar base) that has been stored in an anaerobic envi-
from sites that possess a normal anaerobic flora (feces, 0ral
ronment. After the plate has been inoculated, it is placed
cavity, and vagina) are not usually cultured anaerobically.
into an anaerobic en vironment and incubated at 37 *C.
Routine anaerobic culture of urine specimens or ear, con-
Most obligate anaerobes grow slowly, especially during
junctival, or nasal swabs is rarely justified. Suppurative and
the early stages, and plates are not examined for the first
necrotic processes are the most promising sources of clini-
48 h unless they can be examined in an O2-free en viron-
cally significant anaerobic bacteria.
ment (e.g., in a glove box). Because facultative species can
 Samples of fluids for anaerobic culture are collected in
grow anaerobically, colonies growing in an anaerobic envi-
containers containing little if any air space or oxygen. The
ronment must be tested for aerotolerance.
        i  
and expel all the air. Materials collected onto swabs o1
bronchial brushes must be placed in culture immediately
Identification
or into an anaerobic environment (anaerobic transport
After an isolate has been shown to be an obligate anaerobe,
 medium). A number of commercial sample collection 01 
the genus to which it belongs is determined by shape, gram-
transport systems for anaerobic bacteria are available.
staining characteristics, growth in the presence of various
antibiotics, and metabolic by-products formed from an
Direct Examination
assortment of substrates, as determined by liquid-gas chro.
matography. Reactions in prereduced, anaerobically steril.
 Examination of stained smears prepared directly from the
ized media containing different substrates help determine
 collected material may give valuable clues regarding the
the species. Rapid and miniaturized systems are commer-
 presence of anaerobic bacteria, particularly if aerobic cul-
cially available for identification of anaerobes of clinical
ture comes out negative. Many obligate anaerobes have
importance.
typical, unique morphologies: rods are usually narrow and
thread-like in appearance; some having pointed ends or
bulges. Most of the gram-negative species stain poorly with
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
the safranine used in the Gram stain (thus will be pale stain-
ing in gram-stained smears). The material may have a putrid
Treatment of infectious processes caused by anaerobes typ-
odor if anaerobes are present.
ically involves drainage of abscesses and the use of antimi
crobial agents. Susceptibility data are usually not available
for at least 48-72 h after the sample is collected . Prior to this
lsolation
time, if the presence of anaerobes is suggested by the clinical
Generally, anaerobic tech niques for bacteriological analy.
presentation, direct smear, and other circumstances (odor),
 sis are based on the following principles:
one of the following can be used: penicillin (ampicillin and
amoxicillin), chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, metronida-
1. Specimens and samples should be shielded from
zole, and clindamycin. Although most anaerobes will test
 Oxygen (exposure to air should be minimized) prior
"susceptible" to trimethoprim-sulfonamides in viro, this
to bacteriological analysis.
combination has unpredictable activity in vivo due to the
2. Culture media used should have low redox poten-
presence of thymidine in necrotic material. The obligate
tial. The media generally used include cooked meat
anaerobes are resistant to all of the aminoglycoside antimi-
broth, sodium thioglycollate medium, and brain-
crobial agents as well as to most of the fluoroquinolones
heart infusion (BHl) or Brucella medium contain-
(trovafloxacin is the exception). Approximately 10-20%
ing reducing agents (prereduced, anaerobically ster-
of the isolates, usually members of the B. fragilis group,
ilized medium).
will be resistant to the penicillins (penicillin G, ampi-
 3. Cultures should be incubated in oxygen-free atmo-
cillin, and amoxicillin) and first- and second-generation
sphere. The two most commonly used incubation
cephalosporins due to the production of a cephalospori-
 methods are anaerobic jar and anaerobic glove box.
 nase, and often to tetracycline as well. Resistant isolates are
The anaerobic environment is established by the
susceptible to clavulanic acid-amoxicillin, clindamycin,
interaction of a hydrogen-containing gas with the
metronidazole, and chloramphenicol. Antimicrobial ther-
oxygen found in air in the presence of a palladium
 apy should be aimed at both the facultative and obligate
catalyst in a closed container, such as in an anaer-
anaerobic bacteria.
Chapter 34
 Gram-Negative, Non-spore-Forming Anaerobes
237
D. nodosus
motility, called twitching motility. The fimbrial proteins
are highly immunogenic and are the basis of serotyping of
The organism, formerly Bacteroides nodosus, is the primary
D.nodosus.
etiologic agent of foot rot in sheep and goats. Foot rot is
a contagious and debilitating hoof disease that begins as
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
an interdigital dermatitis, which progresses into formation
Fimbriae. The fimbriae are involved with ad herence of D.
 of lesions on the interdigital wall of the hoof, leading to
nodosus to epithelial cells of interdigital epidermis. The role
separation of the keratinous hoof from the underlying tis-
of fimbriae in causing foot rot involves initially the promo-
sue. The obvious clinical signs are lameness and loss of
tion of close contact between D. nodosus and host cells. The
body condition because of reduced feed intake and in some
twitching motility then enables translocation of the organ-
cases death from a combination of starvation, thirst, and
ism into a more anaerobic microenvironment, which is
systemic bacterial infections in sheep that are recumbent
required for the bacterial growth and extracellular protease
for prolonged periods. In addition to D. nodosus, another
production, ultimately leading to lesion formation. There-
gram-negative anaerobe, F. necrophorum (described later),
fore, the twitching motility and production ofextracellular
and a gram-positive, facultative bacterium, A. pyogenes, are
proteases are key processes for virulence.
implicated. In pen trials, F. necrophorum has been shown to
be required for in fection of foot to be initiated by D. nodosus
Cell Wall. The physicochemical and biological character-
and astrongassociation of the two bacteria has been shown
istics of LPS of D. nodosus are similar to LPS of other gram-
in field cases of foot rot in New Zealand. There is indica-
negative bacteria.
tion that F. necrophorum associated with sheep foot rot may
be a distinct variant of F. necrophorum involved in bovine
Outer Membrane Proteins.
. These are not known to play a
foot rot.
direct role in the pathogenesis but are thought to interfere
with the host's immune response. The outer membrane
Descriptive Features
proteins are highly antigenic and phase variant asa result of
site-specific inversions within the outer membrane protein 
Structure. D. nodosus is a straight or slightly curved rod
 genes. The phase variance allows D. nodosus to undergo
measuring 1-1.7 to 3-10 μm. In smears from lesions, the
antigenic shifts to evade the immune system during the
rods exhibit terminal swellings giving the appearance of
course of infection.
"dumbbell" (Figure 34.1); however, the feature is less dis-
cernible when clinicalisolates are subcultured in broth. The
Serine Proteases. :
 Strains ofD. nodosus secrete three closely
organism is not flagellated but possesses long filamentous
related serine proteases that have been postulated to be
 appendages, called type IV fimbriae, because of their polar
responsible for the tissue damage in foot rot infections.
location and the conserved structure of the major fimbrial
 All proteases have a similar structure, and are synthesized
subunit protein (similar to type IV of Moraxella bovis, Neis-
with a preproregion at the N-terminus of the mature pro-
seria gonorrhoeae,Pasteurella multocida, and Pseudomonas
tease and a C-terminal extension. The cleavage of both of
these regions results in the active proteases. Highly virulent
strains produce two acidic proteases, AprV2 and AprV5, and
one basic protease, BprV. The AprV2 has been shown to be
essential for virulence because a mutant lacking the aprV2
FIGURE 34.1.
Exudate from ovine foot rot. Mixture of
does not cause the disease. Strains that cause benign lesions
bacteriai species, with D. nodosus recognizable as farge rods
produce simila1 proteases designated as AprB2, AprB5, and
with swolfen ends: "dumbbelis" (arrows) (Gram stain, 1000x).
BprB, which only show minor differences in amino acid
sequences compared to the proteases of the virulentstrains.
The protease genes are located on pathogenicity islands (a
cluster of genes encoding virulence determinant(s), an inte-
grase protein, a specific insertion site, and mobility), which 
 suggests that they may have originated from extrachromo-
somal sources.
The strains of D. nodosus have a wide range of virulence
and are categorized as virulent, benign, and intermedi-
ate. The virulence can be tested in viro for the presence
and activity of certain virulence factors (e.g., proteases and
twitching motility). Certain genes, such as intA (formerly
vap) and vrl (virulence-related locus), have been associated
with virulence. These genes do not encode any known vi1-
ulence factors. Possibly, they may play a regulatory role in
gene expressions.
Growth Characteristics. D. nodosus requires carbon diox-
ide and a rich medium, preferably containing protein for 
238
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
growth. Although colonies may be visible on plates after
1. The interdigital epidermis is softened and easily
2 days, at least 4-5 days of incubation are required to see
damaged because of persistent soaking.
smooth colonies of about 1-2 mm in diameter.
2.1
 F. necrophorum, a soil organism, infects the damaged
skin and produces superficial inflammation, hyper-
Resistance. Although described asa “strict" anaerobe, the
keratosis, parakeratosis, and necrosis.
organism is highly aerotolerant and can survive on plates
3. D. nodosus colonizes (with the aid of fimbriae) and
exposed to air for up to 10 days. D. nodosus survives in the
proliferates in the lesion initiated by F. necrophorum,
environment for 2-3 days and is killed by disinfectants and
producing interdigital swelling. Invasion of epider
many antibiotics. The organism can survive in and trans-
mal structures begins at the medial aspect of the claw
mitted via soil and can also persist for months as a sub-
and, probably with the help of secreted proteases,
clinical infection in the interdigital skin or in small cryptic
ad vances to the epidermal matrix of the hoof, even-
lesions within the hoof.
tually separating it from the underlying dermal tis-
sues ("underrunning").
Variability. Colony morphological variation and viru-
Secondary invaders help maintain or aggravate the pro-
lence are related to abundance of fimbriae. Virulence also
cess. The result is extreme lameness, which becomes immo-
varies with proteolytic activities of strains. Ten major
bilizing when two or more feet are involved.
serogroups (A-I and M) are recognized, and are based upon
differences in the antigenic constitution of the fimbrial
Epidemiology. Although D. nodosus is specific to sheep
adhesins. Based on the structural variation within the fim-
and goats, the organism is reported in foot lesions of other
brial protein FimA and the genetic organization of the fimA
 animals, including cattle, horses,pigs, deer, and so on. The
gene, the isolates of D. nodosus from the 10 serogroups are
disease occurs on all continents. It is most serious in regions
divided into two major classes. The isolates in serogroups
with a mild climate and periods of abundant rainfall(>20
A-C, E-G, I, and M that have the fimB gene (downstream
inches (500 mm)). Dissemination of D. nodosus essentially
to fimA gene), which is not required for fimbrial synthe-
ceases at ambient mean temperatures of less than 50 *F
sis, belong to class I. The isolates in serogroups D and H
(10 *C), and foot rot does not occur in arid regions and
that contain three genes adjacent to fimA, fimC, fimD, and
improves during dry periods in endemic areas. All ages of
fimZ of unknown functions belong to class I1. The fimbrial
 animals beyond nursing stages are susceptible, but genetic
subunits of class II isolates have more in common with P.
differences in susceptibility exist.Fine wool breeds are most
aeruginosa and M. bovis.
severely affected. The agent is eliminated from contami-
nated pastures within 2 weeks.
Ecology
Immunologic Aspects. Resistance is related to circulating
Reservoir.
The significant reservoir is the in fected foot of
 antifimbrial antibody; itis serogroup specifc. Naturalin fec-
sheep or goats. Cattle and swine strains are oflow virulence.
tion produces no immunity. Even sheep that have recently
recovered from foot rot are susceptible to rein fection .
 Transmission. Transmission is by direct or indirect con-
tact. The brief environmental survival time of the agent
Laboratory Diagnosis
requires prompt colonization of new hosts.
Diagnosis is usually based on obvious clinical signs. Direct
smears from the foot lesion may reveal stout rods with ter-
Pathogenesis. Pathogenic mechanisms include the
 minal swellings (see Figure 34.1). Culture-based diagnosis
fimbriae-mediated attachment to host cells, proteolytic
is not routinely done because of fastidious growth require-
activity, and synergy with F. necrophorum, to which D.
ments and slow growth of the organism. A test that deter-
nodosus supplies growth factors.
mines digestion of elastin (elastase activity) has shown a
 good correlation with virulence. A rapid alternative to the
Disease Patterns.
 Foot rot is characterized by an exuda
elastase testis the gelatin gel test, which is based on the ther.
tive inflammation, followed by necrosis, of the epidermal
mostability of the secreted proteases. Molecular techniques
tissues of the hoof. Three different forms of the disease have
utilizing the gene probes, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
been recognized: virulent, intermediate, and benign. The
(genes encoding the fimbrial adhesins or intA gene), and
virulence of a specific outbreak is governed by the popula-
tion type of D. nodosus and the various factors that affect
diagnosis and determination of the association of virulent
the infections, including environmental factors. The viru-
strains.
 lent form of foot rot is characterized by destruction of the
horn, erosion of the skin-horn junction that penetrates the
Treatment and Control
underlying tissues causing delamination. The virulent form
is also highly contagious and has significant impact on pro-
Treatment begins with removal and exposure of diseased
ductivity. The benign form has inflammation of the inter-
tissue by hoof trimming (foot paring), followed by topical
digitalskin with dermatitis but no destruction of the under-
application of disinfectants orantibiotics, such as repeated
lying tissues and delamination. The sequence of events is
treatment with 5-10% formalin, 5% copper sulfate, 10-
typically as follows:
20% zinc sulfate, or 5% tetracycline tincture. Formalin,
Chapter 34
Gram-Negative, Non-spore- Forming Anaerobes
239
copper sulfate, and zinc sulfate are used in footbaths. Three
from the normal oral cavity and oral-associated diseases of
1 h 2o% zinc sulfate soaks at weekly intervals have proven
horses.
effective without foot paring. Systemic treatment with
F. necrophorum is a major human and animal pathogen
large doses of penicillin and streptomycin has been suc-
and is part of the bacterial flora of the oral cavities, gas-
cessful in the absence of topical therapy.
trointestinal tracts, and genitourinary tracts of animals and
Vaccines have been shown to be effective in treating
humans. The species name is derived from the organism's
and preventing foot rot. Vaccination is extensively used
frequent association with necrotic lesions in humans and
in sheep-producing countries, particularly Australia and
animals. In humans, F. necrophorum is an important cause
New Zealand, and is an integral part of the eradication
of pharyngitis, especially in young adults, being second 
programs. Vaccination also has some therapeutic benefit
only to group A streptococci. Occasionally, it is associ-
in accelerating healing. The effective vaccines are based on 
ated with a condition called Lemierre's syndrome that pri-
fimbrial proteins as the protective antigen. There is rea-
marily affects young and healthy persons. The infection
sonable correlation between serum antifimbrial agglutinin
starts out as an acute sore throat with purulent exudate,
titers and resistance of vaccinated sheep to homologous
high fever, cervical, and submandibular lymphadenopa-
infection. The limitation of the vaccine is the need to pro-
thy that rapidly leads to disseminated metastatic abscesses,
tect multistrain infections, and inclusion of multistrains in
frequently involving septic thrombophlebitis of the inter-
a vaccine reduces the effectiveness because of antigenic
nal jugular vein. In animals, F. necrophorum is considered as
competition. Commercially available vaccines contain
a major bovine pathogen because of its involvement in cer-
8-10 strains of the common serogroups. Use of monovalent
tain economically important diseases. It is one of the most
vaccine is useful, but requires isolation and identification
common anaerobes isolated from abscesses in the abdom-
of the serogroup.
inal area and respiratory tract infections in animals.
Control is achieved by a combination of repeated exam-
ination, vaccination, treatment of active cases, and segre-
Descriptive Features
gation of active cases from the healthy flock. Care must be
taken to avoid adding infected animals to the flock. Con-
F. necrophorum is classified into three biotypes or biovars:
taminated lots should not be restocked fo1 2 weeks. Con trol
A, B, and AB. Biotype AB has been isolated from sheep foot
 programs should be instituted during dry weather.
abscesses and has characteristics, including 16s ribosomal
RNA sequence, of both biotypes A and B. Currently, the
taxonomic status of biotype AB is unresolved. The bio-
F. necrophorum
ssp. necrophorum and biotype B is ssp. funduliforme. These
The name, Fusobacterium, comes from the Latin word fusus
two subspecies differ in cell morphology, colony charac-
meaning “spindle." However, not all fusobacterial species
teristics, growth patterns in broth, extracellular enzymes,
have the characteristic spindle-shaped cells. A common
hemagglutination properties, hemolytic activities, leuko-
biochemical feature of members of the genus is the pro-
toxin activities, chemical composition of LPs, and viru-
duction of butyric acid as a major fermentation product.
lence in laboratory mice (Table 34.1). Strains of F. necropho-
Although fusobacteria stain gram-negative, the organisms
rum causing human infections appear to be distinct from
are related more to the gram-positive phylum. For exam-
the ssp. necrophorum of animal infections and seem to
ple, fusobacterial species are susceptible to typically gram-
resemble ssp. funduliforme more closely.
positive antibacterial spectrum antibiotics such as peni-
cillins, tylosin, and virginiamycin. Currently, the genus
Morphology and Staining. F. necrophorum is a gram-
Fusobacterium includes the following species: F. canifelinum,
negative, nonmotile, nonsporulating, rod-shaped (pleo-
F.equinum, F. gonidiaformans, F. mortiferum, F. naviforme,
morphic) bacterium. Microscopically, the two subspecies
F. necrogenes, F. necrophorum, F. nucleatum, F. perfoetans,
F. periodonticum, F. plautii, F. potysaccharolyticum, F. russi,
pleomorphic and many of the rods are filamentous (2-
F. simae, F. ulcerans, and F. varium. Of these F. nucleatum
100 μm), whereas ssp. funduliforme is typically more uni-
and F. necrophorum are the two most prevalent species of
form and short rods. The presence of a mucopolysac-
Fusobacterium in clinical samples. Both species are further
charide wall in F. necrophorum, as visualized by electron
categorized into two or more subspecies.
microscopy, has been described.
Fusobacterium canifelinum, F. mortiferum, F. naviforme,
F. nucleatum, F. periodonficum, F. ulcerans, and F. varium
Growth Characteristics. The organism is anaerobic but
have been isolated mainly from human clinical samples.
aerotolerant. Clinical isolates grow well on blood agar or
F. canifelinum and F. russi are members of the canine and
Brucella agar, as long as incubation is under anaerobic con-
feline flora and have been isolated from infected dog and
ditions. Colony morphologies of the two subspecies are
cat bite wounds in humans. Fusobacterium nucleafum is
different. The colonies of ssp. necrophorum are smooth,
one of the predominant organisms involved in gingivi-
opaque, umbonate with irregular edges, and grayish to
tis and periodontal diseases, particularly in children and
white in color, and those of ssp. funduliforme are small,
young adults. Fusobacterium equinum, F. necrogenes, and
waxy, raised, and yellow in color. Although the organism
F. simiae are isolated mainly from animal infections. F.
secretes a hemolysin, a zone of hemolysis is usually not
n        
broth that is prereduced and anaerobically sterilized), cells
240
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 34.1.
Growth and Biochemical, Biological, and
significant sequence similarity to any other bacterial toxin.
Molecular Characteristics of Subspecies of F. necrophorum ssp.
The leukotoxin operon consists of three genes-lktB, lktA,
 necrophorum and ssp. funduliforme of Liver Abscess Origin of
and lktC—of which IktA is the structural gene. The LktB
Cattle
protein is probably involved in secretion, and the func-
tion of LktC is not known. The importance of leukotoxin
Ssp.
Ssp.
as a virulence factor is indicated by a correlation between
Characteristics
necrophorum
funduliforme
toxin production and ability to in duce abscesses in labora-
 Growth in broth, sedimentation
tory animals, an inability of leukotoxin-negative strains to
+
 Biochemical characteristics
induce foot abscesses in cattle following intradermal inoc-
 Indole production
+
+
ulation, and a relationship between antileukotoxin anti-
Phosphatase
body titers and protection against infection in experimen-
Proteases
++
十
tal challenge studies. F. necrophorum ssp. necrophorum pro-
DNAse
+
duces more leukotoxin than ssp. fiunduliforme, which may
Lipase
+
explain why ssp. necrophorum is frequently associated with
Virulence in mice, % mortality 
92-97
8-10
infections, particularly in liver abscesses of cattle, than the
Biological activities
ssp. funduliforme. The role of leukotoxin in the pathogene-
 Leukotoxin production
+++
一十
 Hemaglutinin titer
sis includes thwarting attempts to contain the infection,
+++
十一
Lipid A, % of LPS
modulation of the host immune system by its toxicity,
15
4
Molecular characteristics?
including cellular activation of polymorphonuclear neu-
RpoB gene
+
+
trophils and apoptosis-mediated killing of phagocytes and
Hemagglutinin (hem) gene 
immune effector cells. The release of inflammatory medi-
+
Ikt operon promoter length (bp)
548
337
 ators and the activated immune effector cells end up play.
ing the central role in the pathophysiology of fusobacterial
PCR amplification methods.
infections.
Ecology
of ssp. necrophorum sediment to the bottom of the tube.
Reservoir.
F. necrophorum is a normal inhabitant of the
The growth of ssp. funduliforme is uniformly turbid in a
 gastrointestinal tract of animals and humans. The bac-
broth. The organism generally does not ferment any carbo-
terium is frequently isolated from healthy hosts, although 
hydrates, although some strains ferment glucose weakly.
at a relatively low concentration. Normal human feces
The majorenergy substrateis lactic acid, which is fermented
contain relatively high concentrations of Fusobacterium, of
mainly to acetate, butyrate, and small amounts of propi-
which F. necrophorum is the most predominant species. The
onate. An important biochemical characteristic that is use-
organism is also a member of the normal flora of the oral
ful in the identification is the production of indole from
cavity and female genital tract of animals and humans. In
tryptophan.
cattle, F. necrophorum is a normal inhabitant of the rumen 
and has been isolated from ruminal contents of cattle fed
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. Cellular products
a variety of diets. The concentration in the rumen ranges
(virulence factors) implicated in the pathogenesis of F.
from 10 to 107/g ofruminal contents, with concentrations
necrophorum include leukotoxin (or leukocidin), endotoxic
higher in grain-fed cattle compared to forage-based diet.
LPS, hemolysin, hemagglutinin, capsule, adhesins, platelet
Because F. necrophorum uses lactate as its major substrate
 aggregation factor, dermonecrotic toxin, and several extra-
and not sugars, the increased population in cattle fed high-
cellular enzymes, including proteases and deoxyribonucle-
grain diet is probably due to increased lactate availability.
ases. These factors contribute to entry, colonization, pro-
Both subspecies of F. necrophorum have been isolated from
liferation, and establishment of the organism, and to the
rminal contents.
development of pyonecrotic lesions. Similar to other gram-
In the rumen, fusobacteria are either present as free-
negative bacteria, the outer membrane of F. necrophorum
floating organisms or attached to the ruminal epithelial
contains endotoxic LPs. The chemical composition of F.
wall. Fusobacteria are ideally suited to the ruminal wall
necrophorum LPS varies depending on the subspecies. Also,
niche because of their aerotolerance and ability to grow best
  r  s  ds  
at physiological pH (7.4). Possibly, the attachment is medi-
 more potent than that from ssp. funduliforme. Leukotoxin 
ated via cell surface proteins, called hemagglutinins, which
is considered to be the major virulence factor involved in
are responsible for agglutinating erythrocytes from various
fusobacterial infections in animals.
species. Reports on isolations of F. necrophorum from the
ruminal wall are limited and are always in association with
Leukotoxin.
 F. necrophorum leukotoxin is a secreted pro-
ruminal lesions
tein that has been shown to exert cytotoxic activity to
neutrophils, macrophages, hepatocytes, and possibly to
Transmission. Fusobacterial infections in animals are
ruminal epithelial cells. The toxin is a high-molecular-
endogenous, generally initiated by entry into compro-
weight (336 kDa) and heat-labile protein and is somewhat
mised tissues, such as oral mucosa or ruminal wall. In case
unique in lacking the amino acid cysteine, being consid-
of foot rot, the source of infection could be soil, which
erably larger than leukotoxins of other bacteria with no
probably got contaminated from feces.
Chapter 34
Gram-Negative, Non-spore-Forming Anaerobes
241
Pathogenesis
ruminal wall abscesses, which subsequently shed bacterial
emboli into the portal circulation. Bacteria from the por-
Disease Patterns in Animals. F. necrophorum is commonly
tal circulation are filtered by the liver, resulting in infec-
associated with numerous clinically significant anaero-
bic infections. However, the prevalence of F. necrophorum
tion and abscess formation (Figure 34.2). Abscesses found
in the liver at the time of slaughter are often well encap-
infection is still believed to be underestimated. F. necropho-
sulated, possessing thick fibrotic walls (Figure 34.3). His-
rum is associated with numerous necrotic disease condi-
tions, generally termed “necrobacillosis,”" and most often
necrotic center, encapsulated, and often surrounded by an
the infection is common in the liver (hepatic abscesses), feet
inflammatory zone. Of the two subspecies of F. necropho-
(interdigital necrobacillosis or foot rot), mammary gland
(mastitis), uterus (metritis and pyometra), and oropha-
rum, the ssp. necrophorum is more frequently encountered in 
ryngeal mucosa (necrotic laryngitis or calf diphtheria in
liver abscesses than the ssp. funduliforme. The difference in 
prevalence is reflective of the difference in virulence, partic-
cattle and mandibular abscesses in antelopes, marsupials,
ularly with regard to leukotoxin production. In most liver
and wild animals). Most often fusobacterial infections are
abscesses, A. pyogenes is the second most frequent pathogen
polymicrobial, with multitude of facultative and anaero-
isolated. The origin of A. pyogenes is also the rumen, and
bic species involved, but the most common ones are A.
there is evidence of pathogenic synergy between A. pyo-
pyogenes, D. nodosus, and P. levii.
genes and F. necrophorum.
F. necrophorum is considered to be a major pathogen
 of cattle. It causes three economically important diseases
Necrotic Laryngitis (Calf Diphtheria). The infection occurs 
in cattle: liver abscesses, interdigital necrobacillosis, and
in cattle up to 3 years of age and is characterized by necro-
necrotic laryngitis.
sis of the mucous membrane of the larynx, particularly
in the lateral arytenoid cartilage, and adjacent structures.
Liver Abscesses (Hepatic Necrobacillosis). Liver abscesses
 The lesions appear as erosions progressing to ulcers and
occur in all ages and in all types of cattle and in different
abscesses. Because F. necrophorum is a normal inhabitant
parts of the world, but are most common in intensively
of the respiratory tract of cattle, the source of infection is
fed beef cattle in the United States, Canada, Japan, and
endogenous. The infection can be acute or chronic and is
South Africa. Abscesses in the liver are secondary to the pri-
noncontagious. Clinically, an initial fever is followed by
mary foci of infection on the ruminal wall. Because of the
dyspnea that causes a roaring noise on inspiration ("hard
close correlation between the incidence of ruminal pathol-
breathers") and, in severe cases, painful swallowing and
 ogy and liver abscesses in cattle, the term “rumenitis-liver
cough. Necropsy lesions include necrosis of the larynx and
vocal cords and a mucous membrane covered by inflam-
genesis is not proven, it is accepted that rapid fermentation
matory exudate. Occasionally, bronchopneumonia may be
of grain by ruminal microbes and the consequent accu-
evident.
mulation of organic acids result in ruminal acidosis. Acid-
induced rumenitis and damage of the protective surface,
Interdigital Necrobacillosis (Interdigital Phlegmon or Foot
often aggravated by foreign objects (e.g., sharp feed par-
Rot). This form of necrobacillosis (foot rot or foot
ticles and hair), predispose the ruminal wall to invasion
abscesses) is characterized by acute or subacute necrotiz-
and colonization by F. necrophorum. The organism causes
ing infection, involving the skin and adjacent underlying
FIGURE 34.2.
Pathogenesis of liver abscesses in cattle fed high-grain diet.
High-grain
Rumen
Ruminal wall
feeding
Liver
Portal blood
Acidosis
Rumenitis
"Bacterial
emboli'
Abscesses
MRH
Fusobacterium
necrophorum
Ruminal
abscesses
242
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
giniamycin. The organism is insensitive to aminoglyco-
FIGURE 34.3.
An abscessed fiver at the time of slaughter.
sides (gentamicin, kanamycin, neomycin, and strepto-
mycin, which are less active against anaerobes in general),
ionophore antibiotics (monensin). The in viro activity of
penicillins and cephalosporins against F. necrophorum iso-
lates is interesting considering that the organism is gram-
negative, even based on the cell wall architecture. The sus-
ceptibility of F necrophorum to virginiamycin and tylosin
 does not conform to the generality because both are prin-
cipally active against gram-positive bacteria.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Necrobacillosis, particularly foot rot and necrotic laryngi-
tis, can be diagnosed based on clinical signs. However, liver
abscesses are detected only at the time of slaughter because
cattle, even those that carry multitude of small abscesses
O1 several large abscesses, seldom show any clinical signs.
 Moreover, hematology and liver function tests have not
proved to be good indicators of liver abscesses. The useful-
soft tissues of the feet. The infection is the major cause of
ness of serum enzymes as indicators of liver dysfunction
lameness in dairy and beef cattle. The economic impact
in cattle with naturally developed abscesses is minimal,
is from loss in productivity (milk production and weight
because of lack of specificity as well as large variation in
gain). Predisposing factors in volved in the pathogenesis of
serum activity in clinically normal cattle. Ultrasonography
foot rot are damp soil and injury to the skin of the inter-
digital area. Fecal excretion of F. necrophorum is believed
cation because the scanning cannot visualize the whole
to provide the primary source of infection in foot rot and
liver, particularly of the visceral side, and parts of lobes
abscesses. In addition to F. necrophorum, P. levi, Porphy-
that are covered by lungs and kidneys. The involvement
romonas asaccharolytica, Prevotella melaninogenica, and Pre-
of F. necrophorum requires isolation and identification. F.
votella intermedia are commonly isolated foot rot lesions.
necrophorum is one of the gram-negative anaerobes that can
The lesions are characterized initially by mild cellulitis and
easily be isolated and identified from clinical samples. The
swelling between the digits. Within a few days, fissuring
 presumptive identification can be made based on the sam-
with scabby exudate that eventually becomes pus in the
ple source and colony morphology on blood agar. Com-
margin of the fissure is observed. Fever and lameness are
mercial rapid identification kits (e.g., RapID ANA 11, Inno-
common clinical signs. Usually, healing is rapid once the
vative Diagnostic Systems, Atlanta, GA) have proven to be
abscess has discharged. Diagnosis is based on recognition of
useful in identification of the species and even of the sub-
 the characteristic interdigital necrotic lesion accompanied
species of F. necrophorum.
by foul-smelling discharge.
Immunologic Aspects
Treatment and Control
 sd     o 
Treatment of necrotic  laryngitis and  interdigital
both healthy and infected animals and humans, which
necrobacillosis is generally based on systemic admin-
raises doubts about the importance of anti-F. necropho-
istration of antibiotics. Sulfonamides and tetracyclines
rum immunity against infection. Antibodies may
be
alone or in combination are commonly used to treat
induced by the normal presence of F. necrophorum. Another
necrotic laryngitis. In the case of interdigital necrobacillo-
concern is whether persistent exposure to F. necropho-
sis, systemic administration of penicillin or tetracyclines
num will lead to immunosuppression. Many investigators
is effective, particularly in the early stages of infection.
 have attempted to induce protective immunity against F.
 Treatment of liver abscesses is not an option because of the
necrophorum by using bacterins, toxoids, 0r other cellular
insidious nature of the infection. Prevention is generally
components.
based on the use of antimicrobial feed additives. An antibi-
otic that is most commonly used in the feedlot industry is
tylosin, administered at 10 g/ton of feed (90-100 mg/head 
Antimicrobial Susceptibility
 per day). The extent of reduction in prevalence of liver
F. necrophorum is susceptible to β-lactam antibiotics (peni-
 abscesses varies from 30% to 70%. Because leukotoxin is a
cillins and cephalosporins); tetracyclines (chlortetracy-
 major virulence factor, a leukotoxoid-based (inactivated
cline and oxytetracycline); macrolides (erythromycin,
 leukotoxin) vaccine has been developed for the prevention
tylosin, and tilmicosin); lincomycins (clindamycin and
of liver abscesses. In addition to the inclusion of antimi-
lincomycin); and chloramphenicol, novobiocin, and vir-
crobial compounds in the feed, proper bunk management
Chapter 34
 Gram-Negative, Non-spore-Forming Anaerobes
243
to minimize ruminal imbalance is well accepted as a key
species, previously included in the genus Bacteroides. Mem-
factor for effective control of liver abscesses
bers of both genera are part of the normal flora of the oral
 cavity and gastrointestinal tract of animals and humans.
The genus Prevotella currently includes about 50 species,
F. equinum
and the species associated with human or animalinfections
 an  n  a   i a
F. equinum is indistinguishable from F. necrophorum (both
respiratory and urogenital tracts. A majority of Prevotella
spp. have been isolated from the human oral cavity. About
acteristics. A PCR-based assay has been developed to distin-
6 species found in animals have been isolated from the
guish between F. equinum and F. necrophorum. F. equinum
rumen or oral cavity.
is a normal inhabitant of the gastrointestinal, respiratory,
The genus Porphyrormonas includes 17 species, many
and genitourinary tracts of horses. It is an opportunis-
of them are of animal origin. The strains isolated from
tic pathogen and is generally associated with abscesses
the gingival sulcus of various animals, which are distinct
 and various necrotic infections in horses, particularly oral,
from related human strains of Porphyromonas gingivalis, are
paraoral, and lower respiratory tract infections. Very lit-
now included under a new species Porphyromonas gulae.
tle is known about the virulence factors associated with F.
The organism is asaccharolytic and forms black-pigmented
equinum infections in horses, but the species does contain
colonies and, similar to P. gingivalis, contains a 41 kDa fim-
leukotoxin genes and exhibit leukotoxic activity.
brialprotein, which is an importantcolonizing factor in the
periodontal disease. In addition to P. gulae, other Porphy-
romonas species that have been identified include P. canoris,
Bacteroides
P. cangingivalis, P. canis, P. cansulci, P. gingivicanis, and P.
crevioricanis.
The genus Bacteroides includes several species, but only one
the normal colonic flora of humans and animals and is the
Diseases
most common anaerobe isolated from human clinical sam-
Because Prevotella and Porphyromonas species are members
ples. It is associated with abscesses, generally intraabdomi
of the oral flora of all animals, they have a prominent role
nal, soft tissue in fections in animals. The capsular polysac-
in oral and bite wound infections. Periodontal disease is the
charide is a major virulence factor in the cause of abscesses.
most common oral disease of adult animals, and includes
An abscess can be induced in laboratory animals by inject-
gingivitis, periodontitis, and periodontal abscesses initi-
ing purified capsular polysaccharide in the absence of bac.
ated by bacteria in the dental plaque. Periodontal diseases
teria. Some strains of B. fragilis produce an enterotoxin that
affect a wide range of animals, such as dogs, cats, sheep,
have been shown to cause diarrhea in lambs, calves, piglets,
foals, and infant rabbits. The strains have also been associ-
cattle, and captive and free-roaming wild animals. It is esti-
 ated with diarrhea in humans, particularly in children.
mated that approximately 80% of dogs and cats have some
degree of periodontal disease by 4 years of age. Periodon-
titis in dogs and cats can be a serious infection that could
Enterotoxigenic B. fragilis
lead to anorexia, weight loss, swollen gums, tooth decay,
loose teeth, breakage, or loss of teeth and even breakage of
Strains of B. fagilis that are enterotoxigenic (stimulate
the mandibular bone. If left untreated, periodontal bacte-
secretion in ligated ileal loops of lamb) were first identi-
ria may spread to other sites in the body and lead to renal,
fied in a diarrheic disease of newborn lambs. Subsequently
coronary, or hepatic in fections. Not surprisingly, Prevotella
enterotoxigenic B. fagilis (ETBF) has been isolated from
and Porphyromonas are frequently isolated anaerobes from
cases of enteritis in calves, foals, and piglets. The entero-
in fected dog and cat bite wounds in humans.
toxin, called B. fragilis toxin or fragilysin, is a heat-labile,
P. levii is often the predominant organism associated
approximately 20kDa, protein thatcauses fluid secretion in
with cases of bovine foot rot. However, whether isolated
intestinal loops, increases bacterial internalization in ente-
strains fulfill Koch's postulates has not been determined.
rocytes, and modulates epithelial permeability. The toxin
Not much is known about the source of the organism and
is in fact a zinc metalloprotease, suggesting that the toxic
virulence factors involved. It is believed that the organism
properties are due to the proteolytic activity. The entero-
works in synergy with F. necrophorum to produce the in fec-
toxigenic strains can be identified by amplifying the bff
tion.
 gene (by PCR), and diagnosis of ETBF infections can also be
made by direct detection of the bff gene in DNA extracted
from feces.
Further Reading
Prevoteffa and Porphyromonas
Bennett GN and Hickford JGH (20ll) Ovine foot: New
approaches to an old disease. Vet Microbiol, 148, 1-7.
These two genera of gram-negative, non-spore-forming
Botta G, Arzese A, Minisini R, and Train G (1994) Role of struc-
anaerobes include saccharolytic (Prevotella) and asaccha-
tural and extracellular virulence factors in gram-negative
rolytic (Porphyromonas), pigmented and nonpigmented
anaerobic bacteria. Clin Infect Dis, 18, S260-S264.
244
PART ll  Bacteria and Fungi
Duerden B1 (1994) Virulence factors in anaerobes. Clin Infect
Pathogenesis and pathogenic mechanisms. Anaerobe, 11,
Dis, 18, S253-S259.
239-246.
 Kennan RM, Han X, Porter CJ, and Rood JI (201l) The
Tadepalli S, Narayanan SK, Stewart GC et al. (2009) Fusobac-
pathogenesis of ovine footrot. Vet Microbiol, 153, 59-
terium necrophorum: A ruminal bacterium that invades liver
66.
to cause abscesses in cattle. Anaerobe, 15, 36-43.
 Nagaraja TG and Chengappa MM (1998) Liver abscesses in
Tan ZL, Nagaraja TG, and Chengappa MM (1996) Fusobac-
feedlot cattle: a review. J Anim Sci, 76, 287-298.
terium necrophorum infections: virulence factors, pathogenic
 Nagaraja TG, Narayanan SK, Stewart GC, and Chengappa MM 
mechanism and control measures. Vet Res Comm, 20, 113-
(2005) Fusobacterium necrophorum infections in animals:
140.
35
Clostridium
JOHN F. PRESCOTT
Members of the genus Clostridium are gram-positive, spore-
crobial peptides in the intestine. Some clostridia produce
forming, anaerobic rods characterized also by production
pili (Closridium perfringens and C. difficile) and others
of powerful extracellular toxins. In this chapter, the dis-
produce adhesive structures, presumably cell wall proteins,
eases produced by members of this genus (Table 35.1) are
but their role in disease is not well defined. Considerable
discussed under three categories: enterotoxic, including
cellular intraspecific antigenic diversity and interspecific
the enterotoxemias and diarrheas, produced by C. perfrin-
cross-reactivity exist but are of less interest than the anti-
gens, C. colinum, C. difficile, C. piliforme, C. septicum, C. spiro-
genic properties of toxins because these latter are crucial in
forme, and C. sordeli; histotoxic, produced by C. perfrin-
immunity. Those that are motile have peritrichous flagella
gens, C. chauvoei, C. haemotyticum, C. novyi, C. septicum, and
C. sordeli; and neurotoxic, produced by C. bohulinum and
species, C. perfringens and C. diffcile may form capsules.
C. tetani.
Clostridial infections are serious infections because of
the powerful toxins produced by these organisms. Many
Growth Characteristics
have been controlled successfully by immunization almost
Clostridia are anaerobes, but the strictness of anaerobic
since the dawn of bacteriology. However, other clostridial
requirements varies among species. For example, C. diff-
infections are emerging as ever more common and impor-
cile is far more readily killed by exposure to air than is C.
tant, perhaps partly because their ability to form resis-
tant spores gives them selective advantage in growing in
perfringens. In general, clostridia are characterized by sim-
plicity of their growth requirements, though some require
the intestinal tract whenever antibiotics are administered.
relatively rich and complex media; blood is beneficial. A
Much remains to be discovered.
temperature of 37 *C is optimal. Growth is visible within 1
 01 2 days. Colonies are often irregular in shape and contour.
Descriptive Features of the Genus
Several clostridia swarm across moist agar media without
Clostridium
forming colonies. Most clostridia produce hemolysis on
 blood agar. In liquid media, clostridia often grow in air pro-
vided a reducing agent is present (cooked meat pieces and
Morphology and Staining
thioglycolate), though growth occurs only in the anaerobic
Members of the genus Clostridium are gram-positive rods
portions of the medium.
measuring 0.2-4 μm by 2-20 μm. Location and shape of
endospores are consistent within a species. Their ability to
form spores is crucial to persistence in the intestine and
Biochemical Activities
the environment, and contributes to diffculties in their
Most clostridia are metabolically highly active and mas-
con trol.
ters at attacking carboh ydrates, proteins, lipids, and nucleic
acids. Clostridial cultures typically emit putrid odors due
Structure and Composition
to production of volatile fatty acids and hydrogen sulfide
during the fermentative degradation of carbohydrates and
Little of medical relevance is known of the ultrastruc-
proteins. Biochemical reactions and their end products fur-
ture and composition of clostridia. A surface-associated
nish a basis for species identification.
alrays (S-layer) in the celi wall of Clostridium difficile may
contribute to the ability of this bacterium to resist antimi-
Resistance
The vegetative form is as susceptible to environmental
stresses and disinfectants as other bacteria. Endospores
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight Hirsh and Enie
impart resistance to drying, heat, irradiation, and disin-
Biberstein.
fectants (Figure 35.1).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
245
246
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 35.1.
Selected Members of the Genus Clostridium
Table 35.2.
Major Toxinotypes of Clostridium perfringens
and Their Usual Source or Associated Condition
in Animal Disease
Ciostridium
Major Toxin
Species
 Usual Source or Associated Condition 
 Produced
C. botulinum
 Botulism 
Type
B
 Diseases Produced
C. chauvoei
 Blackleg in ruminants; iatrogenic myositis of
horses
A
十
Gas gangrene; gangrenous mastitis in
C. colinum
 Ulcerative enteritis and hepatitis in birds
 cows; sporadic hemorrhagic and 
C. diffcile
Antibiotic-associated typhlocolitis in guinea
necrotizing gastroenteritis in numerous
pigs, hamsters, horses, humans, pigs.
 species; hemorrhagic abomasitis in
rabbits, and other species
calves; avian necrotic enteritis (NetB
C. haemolyticum
 Bacillary hemoglobinuria in ruminants 
toxin-associated);
C. novyi
Gas gangrene and "pseudoblackleg." "big
enterotoxin-associated food-borne
head" in rams, "black disease" in
infection (humans, possibly other
ruminants; iatrogenic myositis of horses 
species). The full range of enteric disease
C. perfringens
 Enteric disease and enterotoxemias including
associated with type A infections, and 
necrotic enteritis of chickens, lamb
their toxin-associated basis, remains to
dysentery, hemorrhagic and necrotizing
be characterized.
Lamb dysentery
gastroenteritis in neonatal and sometimes 
older farm animals and other species, "pulpy
 Neonatal hemorrhagic and necrotizing 
C
kidney" disease of ruminants, food 
 enteritis of farm animals (calves, foals.
 poisoning in humans and possibly dogs; gas
lambs, and piglets), "struck" adult sheep
 gangrene; gangrenous mastitis of cows
D
 Ovine enterotoxemia (rarely calves);
C. piliforme
Tyzzer's disease
 enterotoxemia and enterocolitis in adult 
C. septicum
Gas gangrene in ruminants and pigs:
goats
"pseudoblackleg": gangrenous dermatitis of
+ Bovine hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
poultry; severe abomasitis ("braxy" of
 lambs; iatrogenic myositis of horses
C. sordellir
Gas gangrene and "pseudoblackleg": severe
 abomasitis of lambs; equine atypical myositis
rod thatproduces a variety of toxins. Four of these toxins are
C. spiroforme
 Antibiotic-induced and spontaneous 
used to type members of this species. There are five toxino-
 typhlocolitis of rabbits 
types, designated A through E (Table 35.2), although the
C. tetani
Tetanus 
toxinotyping scheme is now widely recognized as inade-
quate to describe the range of enteric diseases caused by
this organism.
Enterotoxic Clostridia
C. perfringens is associated with enterotoxic and other
 enteric disease including diarrhea in a variety of species,
as well as histotoxic infections such as wound infections
C. perfringens
(gas gangrene) and serious mastitis. Understanding of the
Descriptive Features. C. perfringens is a gram-positive,
role of C. perfringens in enteric disease in animals, partic-
usually spore-forming, nonmotile, encapsulated anaerobic
ularly in serious hemorrhagic or necrotizing enteric dis-
ease,resembles that of understanding of Escherichia coli in
enteric disease 50 years ago, when it was thought to be
FIGURE 35.1.
Gram stain of Clostridium species,
exclusively normal microflora. C. perfringens is as dynamic
showing the spores that are a characteristic of the genus.
a bacterium as E. coli, increasingly recognized as having,
like E. coli, the ability to adapt to cause disease in differ-
 ent host species. One important base of its adaptability is
its possession of different conjugative plasmids that can
move readily between C. perfringens in the intestine and
that can also acquire mobile genetic elements carrying virf-
ulence determinants, and likely to change these through
DNA recombination.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Adhesins. C.
perfringens
possesses
 genes encoding
fibronectin-binding
and
collagen-adhesion
1 proteins.
These proteins are thought to be involved in binding to
the extracellular matrix during infection.
Capsule. The capsule probably acts as a deterrent to
phagocytosis. Encapsulation is an important virulence
Chapter 35
Clostridium
247
determinant in wounds (e.g., gas gangrene), but probably
of human food-related gastrointestinal disease), or con-
not in the intestinal tract.
jugative plasmid-based (isolates from dogs with diarhea,
o1 from human patients with non-food-related and some-
Toxins. C. perfringens produces a large variety of protein
times antibiotic-associated diarrhea). Enterotoxin is pro-
toxins and tissue-degradative enzymes consistent with its
duced during sporulation of cpe-containing C. perfingens
adaptation to break down tissue quickly and efficiently. It is
(<5% of type A strains, the strains in which cpe is most
auxotrophic for 15 amino acids, which it requires to obtain
commonly found). When the endospore is released, entero-
intact rather than being able to synthesize. Under optimal
toxin is also released into the surrounding milieu. Entero-
conditions, it divides every 10 min, the fastest known mul-
toxin is a bifunctional toxin, first forming a pore in the
tiplication rate of any bacterium. It has been aptly described
apical portion of small intestinal epithelial cells resulting
in fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, as well as provid-
ing access to tight junction proteins (specifically claudins
"Regulation of Toxin Genes"), which is itself under the
and occludins). Interactions of Cpe with tight junction
proteins result in further losses in control of fluid and
are the mouse-lethal α-, β-, e-, and -toxins. The others are
electrolytes.
 s a a  r, s a a
Necrotic Enteritis Toxin B. Necrotic enteritis toxin
α-Toxin. α-Toxin (Cpa) also sometimes called Plc (for
B (NetB) is a recently described VirR/VirS-regulated pore-
 si hl 'suuod  he Aa panord si ( asedoudsoud
forming toxin related to the C. perfringens Cpb toxin that is
mouse-lethal phospholipase C (a lecithinase) that hydrol-
essential for the production of necrotic enteritis in chick-
yses host cell membranes as part of its action in breaking
ens. Like almost all the major toxins (Cpb, Etx, and Itx) of
down tissues to extract nutrients.
C. perfringens, it is found on a conjugative plasmid.
β-Toxin. The genes encoding β-toxin (Cpb) are located
Examples of Minor Toxins. k-Toxin (Col for colla-
on a conjugative plasmid. 3-Toxin is a mouse-lethal pore-
genase) is a collagenase. Col is thought to aid spread
forming toxin, which damages host target cells (intestinal
of clostridial cells through the tissue. u-Toxin (Nag for
epithelial cells and endothelial cells). In addition, β-toxin
N-acetylgalactosaminidase) is a hyaluronidase. Nag aids
affects nervous tissue by influencing the distribution of cal-
spread of clostridial cells through the tissue. Perfringolysin
cium ions across their membranes, thereby disrupting nor-
O (Pfo, θ-toxin) is a cholesterol-binding cytolysin (like
 mal nerve conduction. It is susceptible to the proteolytic
novyilysin and chauveolysin, described later; and strep-
activity of trypsin.
tolysin O, Chapter 28; listerial listeriolysin O, and Chapte1
 32). Perfringolysin binds to cholesterol-containing rafts in
ε-Toxin.
 The gene encoding the mouse-lethal e-toxin
the eukaryotic cell membrane, and forms a pore, which
(Etx) is also located on a conjugative plasmid. e-Toxin tar-
results in the death of the cell. Sialidase (neuraminidase,
or Nan) removes sialic acid residues from glycoconju-
eukaryotic cell membranes, though the toxin concentrates
gates on cell walls of eukaryotic cells, resulting in disrup-
in brain and kidney. It is a permease that acts by affect-
tions of the intercellular matrix. The β-2 toxin (Cpb2) is
ing the cellular cytoskeleton resulting in an increase in the
newly described weakly mouse-lethal pore-forming toxin
permeability of epithelial and endothelial cells (both in
that occurs in two variants, but its role in disease is
the intestine but especially in the microvasculature of the
not well characterized. The gene encoding this toxin is
brain, leading toleakage of toxin into that organ). The toxin
also on a plasmid, and is controlled by the VirR/Virs
seems to target neuronal granule cells in the cerebellum
system.
and elsewhere in the brain to release the neurotransmitter
glutamate. Etx is secreted as a protoxin that is activated in
Regulation of Toxin Genes. C. perfingens globally syn-
the intestine by proteolytic enzymes. The toxin may delay
chronously regulates its toxin production and production
intestinal transit time in affected animals.
of major metabolic enzymes by the two-component regu-
latory system, VirR/Virs. VirS is a histidine kinase that acts
-Toxin. t-Toxin (Itx)isa binary mouse-lethaltoxin com-
as a “sensor" of en vironmental cues resulting in autophos-
posed of a binding portion (Ib) that binds the toxin to tar-
phorylation of one of its histidine residues. This phosphate
getepithelial cells, and an enzymatically active portion (la).
is then transferred to an aspartate residue, then to another
After the toxin binds to specificreceptors on the cell surface,
histidine before being used to phosphorylate VirR, the “reg-
ulator." Phosphorylated VirR is a transcriptional activato1
precisely how entry occurs, it seems that a pore (composed
of the genes encoding the proteins mentioned earlier. The
of Ib) is formed in the cell membrane through which Ia tra
environmental cues sensed by C. perfringens include micro-
verses. Ia is an adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylating
colony formation ("quorum sensing") in vivo.
toxin that ribosylates actin within the host cell, resulting
in disorganization of the cellular cytoskeleton and death of
Reservoir and Transmission. Type A C. perfringens occurs
the affected cell.
in intestinal tracts of humans and other animals and in
most soils. Types B, C, D, and E are found mostly in the
Enterotoxin.  The genes encoding C. perfringens entero-
intestinal tracts of animals, and their survival in soil is vari-
toxin (Cpe) are either chromosomal (isolates from cases
able. Transmission is by ingestion and wound infection.
248
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
 Pathogenesis and Disease Patterns. C. perfringens causes 
both serious enteric diseases, including important entero-
FIGURE 35.3.
 Necrotizing and emphysematous
toxemias, and histotoxic infections.
abomasitis in a young calf caused by type A C. perfringens.
(Courtesy of Department of Pathobiology, University of
Enterotoxemias and Enteric Disease. Most animal diseases
Guelph.)
due to C. perfringens are intestinal and involve all toxino-
types.
Type A.
 Type A C. perfringens has been implicated in
enteritis, notably hemorrhagic or necrotizing forms, in 
numerous species, but understanding of the molecular
basis of these infections (and hence of optimal microbiolog-
ical diagnosis) is in some cases poor. For example, type A C.
 perfringens causes necrotic enteritis of chickens and other
birds (Figure 35.2). It has only recently been recognized
that strains that cause this infection are characterized by
production of the NetB toxin, the gene for which is on one
of th ree pathogenicity loci that are characteristic of chicken 
necrotic enteritis strains. This unexpected discovery illus-
trates the largely unrecognized likely ability of this bacte-
rial pathogen to adapt to cause distinct diseases in different
animal species. Type A C. perfringens is important causes
of necrotizing and emphysematous abomasitis in young
is a suspicion that type A C. perfringens encoding the Cpe
calves (Figure 35.3), as well as sporadic hemorrhagic gas-
enterotoxin may be involved in watery diarrheal illness in
troenteritis in numerous species including dogs and foals,
 dogs and cats, but this is not proven. There is also a sus-
although the basis of these diseases is still unclear. Tissue
    s     
destruction is usually attributed to the virulence determi-
diarrheal illness and growth setback in neonatal swine, but
 nants important in gas gangrene, but this assumption is
again this is unproven.
probably incorrect. Cpb2-producing C. perfringens may be
associated with fatal typhlocolitis in adult horses follow.
 m o,  si s  a a a
 ing gentamicin treatment. Extraordinarily, the cpb2 toxin
tion usually causing “lamb dysentery" in newborn lambs.
gene is usually out-of-frame and therefore unread in horse
isolates, but treatment with gentamicin may cause ribo-
enteritis, affecting the entire small intestine. Its trypsin
somal distortion such that the mRNA transcript is read in
frame, and the toxin produced. Type A isolates are also
ease for the newborn, since colostrum contains antitrypsin
involved in nonenterotoxemic food poisoning in humans
 substances. The signs are depression, anorexia, abdominal
(strains of which possess the chromosomally encoded Cpe
pain, and diarrhea. The course is rapid, with mortality rates
enterotoxin as well as being more resistant to heat) and
approaching 100%. A chronic form occurs in older ani-
antibiotic-associated diarrhea in humans (associated with
mals. Extraintestinal lesions include congestion, edema,
plasmid-borne carriage of the cpe and cpb2 genes). There
serosal effusions, and hemorrhages in various organs. The
signs and pathology associated with this disease are due
to the action of the membrane-active toxins (β and e). e-
Toxin, being a permease, increases intestinal permeability,
FIGURE 35.2.
Necrotic enteritis caused by type A C.
ensuring its absorption into the circulation where it affects
perfringens in a chicken. (Courtesy of Department of
vascular endothelium, leading to fluid loss and edema, as
Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
well as damage to kidney function. β-toxin and e-toxin also
affect the nervous system, and the severe depression, lack
of response to corrective therapy, and high mortality may
be due in part to this activity. Since z-toxin requires acti-
vation by proteolytic enzymes, its role in disease caused
pd 1n n s ssn si ss i ad aq
by β-toxin.
Type C.
 Type C C. perfringens causes hemorrhagic enteri-
tis in neonatal calves, foals, piglets, and lambs worldwide
(Figure 35.4). In some other species, including humans and
rarely chickens, the organism can also produce a necrotic
enteritis. An often rapidly fatal intestinal toxemia of older
sheep is called “struck" (as in “struck dead," because the
associated sudden death might suggest lightning strike).
β-Toxin is the principal factor producing hemorrhagic
Chapter 35
 Clostridium
249
FIGURE 35.4.
Hemorrhagic enteritis in a piglet caused
FIGURE 35.5.
"Pulpy kidney" changes in kidney at
by type C C. perfringens.
necropsy associated with autolysis of e-toxin-damaged kidney
tissue. Kidney on left is affected, and on right is a normal
kidney. (Courtesy of Department of Pathobiology, University of
Gueiph.)
42738
enteritis, affecting the small intestine. Its trypsin suscepti-
bility explains in part the predilection of the disease for the
newborn, since colostrum contains antitrypsin substances.
The signs are depression, anorexia, abdominal pain, and
out premonitory signs, but convulsions may occur in ago-
diarrhea. The course is rapid, with mortality rates near
nal stages and diarrhea in protracted cases. Cattle and
100%. The signs and pathology associated with this dis-
older sheep show neurological manifestations. In adult
ease are due to the action of the membrane-active β-toxin.
goats, local necrotizing enteritis with diarrhea is common.
In humans in New Guinea, type C enteritis ("pig bel") has
In calves and goats, nonfatal subacute and chronic cases
been associated with feasting on undercooked and con-
occur.
taminated pork as well as on cassava; the trypsin-inhibiting
properties of cassava preventhe breakdown of β-toxin pro-
Type E. Type E C. perfringens produces a relatively
duced by type C organisms in the small intestine.
uncommon form of hemorrhagic enteritis in calves, and
sometimes of lambs. The membrane-active t-toxin pro-
Type D.
 Type DC. perfringens produces an enterotoxemia
duces this disease. Hemorrhagic enteritis and ulcerative
("overeating disease" or "pulpy kidney disease") in older
abomasitis are the pathologic lesions. Type E disease was
lambs (<1 year), in goats of all ages, and occasionally in
erroneously described in rabbits since the Clostridium spiro-
calves. e-Toxin is secreted as protoxin activated by intesti-
forme toxin is neutralized by t-toxin antiserum.
nal proteases, explaining the predilection of this disease fo1
 older animals since colostrum contains antitrypsin activ-
Nonenterotoxemic Diarrhea. The role of C. perfrin-
ity. e-Toxin increases intestinal permeability, ensuring its
gens in nonenterotoxemic and mild diarrhea in animals
absorption into the circulation where it damages vascu-
remainstobe confirmed.Forexample, neonatalpiglets may
lar endothelium, leading to fluid loss and edema. When
have a syndrome of weight loss, failure to thrive, and diar-
toxin levels are high, affected capillary endothelial cells in
rhea associated with 32-toxin-producing type A strains. It
the brain are damaged, and the resultant edema greatly
is possible that nonenterotoxemic diarrhea occurs in other
increases the intracranial pressure. When the amount of
species subsequent to the interaction of the Cpe entero-
toxin is lower, however, as might be the case in a partially
toxin (with epithelial cells of the small intestine following
immune animal or when the amount of toxin produced in
sporulation of the microorganism in that environment).
the intestinal tract is less, it damages the capillary endothe-
Although any type of C. perfingens can harbor the genes
lial cells in the brain so that toxin levels are increased in
encoding Cpe, type A is the most common. This disease is
that organ. This results in a focal symmetrical encephalo-
one of the most commonly occurring food-related diseases
malacia. In addition to these changes (which are toxin dose
in human patients. In addition to altering fluid and elec-
related), e-toxin triggers catecholamine release, resulting in
 trolyte flow of the epithelium, Cpe damages epithelial cells
adenylyl cyclase activation, cAMP-related hyperglycemia,
and tight junctions leading to sloughing with accompany-
and glycosuria, a frequent finding in enterotoxemia.
ing inflammatory changes.
Gross lesions may be absent and death rates may be
high in lambs. Postmortem autolysis is rapid because of
vascular endothelial damage (Figure 35.5). Subserous and
Histotoxic Infections.
C. perfringens type A, alone or with
subendocardial hemorrhages and excess fluid in the body
other bacteria, causes wound infections (gas gangrene,
 cavities are sometimes seen in lambs. Cerebral hemorrhage
sometimes called malignant edema in animals), a gan-
and degenerative lesions are common in less acute cases.
grenous anaerobic cellulitis following inoculation into a
 Histopathology may reveal enteritis. Lambs may die with-
normally sterile site. C. perfringens is also an occasional
250
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
cause of severe and fatal necrotizing mastitis in newly
immunization is important in the control of the diseases
calved cows.
(see Section "Treatment and Control").
The membrane-active toxins (o- and perfringolysin
O) account for the major tissue destruction. Spread of
Laboratory Diagnosis. C. perfringens is relatively aerotol-
the infection is aided by collagenases, sialidases, and
erant, and is easy to isolate and to identify in the diagnos-
hyaluronidases. The numerous powerful degradative pro-
tic laboratory. Spores are rarely demonstrable in exudates
teases, glycosidases, lipases, and other enzymes upregu-
obtained from normally sterile sites.
lated by the VirR/VirS system assist in the tissue destruc-
 Isolation follows inoculation of blood-containing agar
tion and nutrient assimilation, while encapsulation helps
 media, and incubation in an anaerobic environment. If
the organism resist phagocytosis. The disease is a necro-
C. perfringens is to be isolated from a contaminated envi-
tizing cellulitis and myonecrosis with edema, hemorrhage,
ronment (e.g., intestinal contents), the sample can first be
gas production, and an often fatal toxemia. This type of C.
heated to 80 *C for 15 min since endospores will resist this
perfringens infection in animals is rare, and follows intro-
treatment, whereas vegetative forms will not, and then
duction of clostridia from the environment into usually
placed into or onto isolation media. Diagnostic features
severely traumatized tissue, where trauma assists in pro-
include the characteristic double zone of hemolysis on
duction of an anoxic environment suitable for the estab-
blood agar (Cpa, Pfo toxins) and the clotting of milk fol-
lishment of clostridia.
lowed by gaseous disruption (*stormy fermentation"). In
cases of enterotoxemia, stained (e.g., Gram's, Wright's, and
Giemsa) contents of the small intestine often contain large
Epidemiology.
Many healthy animals commonly carry C.
numbers of fat gram-positive rods typical of C. perfringens.
perfringens in their intestinal tracts, probably as frequently
However, this test is of limited value due to rapid post-
as they carry E. coli. During outbreaks of diarrheal disease,
mortem bacterial overgrowth in all parts of the gut. DNA
pathogenic strains survive in soil long enough to infect
primers specific for the various genes encoding the toxins
other animals.
have been developed for detection in feces or cultures by
The determinant of enterotoxemic (type D) disease is
the polymerase chain reaction (multiplex PCR).
the intestinalenvironment, which is influenced by dietand
Demonstration of toxin in the contents of the small
age. Overeating, especially on protein and energy-rich food
intestine is definitive and involves injecting small amounts
(milk, legume forage, and grain), is almost a prerequisite.
of clarified intestinal contents into the tail vein of mice.
In young animals, the excess feed is often passed, inade.
 Death after more than a few minutes postinjection con-
quately digested, into the intestine, where it provides a rich
 stitutes presumptive evidence of enterotoxemia, and the
medium for proliferation and toxinogenesis by ingested
toxin can be neutralized using specifc antitoxins. Such a
O1 resident bacteria. Overloading slows intestinal motility,
thereby favoring retention of bacteria and absorption of
procedure, or guinea pig intradermal toxin testing, is now
 generally regarded as barbaric, and therefore most diag-
their toxins. In addition, there are likely to be bacterial fac-
nostic laboratories rely on PCR testing. Lambs with type D
tors promoting intestinal colonization, but these are not
enterotoxemia usually test positively for glycosuria
well described. In broiler chickens, necrotic enteritis is pre-
disposed by concurrent coccidiosis, as well as by wheat-
Cpe is detected immunologically in feces of affected
sse suaqosoun pu-azua q sin io son
based diets, and diets containing trypsin inhibitors (such
Although sporulation and Cpe production are coregulated,
as unheated soybean meal).
there is disagreement regarding the usefulness of determin-
The age predilection of many of these enteric diseases
ing the presence of spores in stained smears of feces as a
is due to the diet and the infantile digestive tract, which
method of diagnosis.
often lacks enzymes to inactivate the toxins. In particu-
lar, colostral antitrypsin activity exacerbates this aspect.
Type D proliferation, for which the e-toxin requires trypsin
Treatment and Control.
 Most cases of enterotoxemia are
too acute for successful treatment. The best method of
 Aa p  on sd si no n '
 preventing enterotoxemia is active immunization of dams
carbohydrate intake.
with two injections of bacterin-toxoid combinations prior
 Seasonal prevalence relates to the seasonal abundance
to parturition. Commercial immunizing products usually
of susceptible populations and rich forage, with warm tem-
cover types C and D. This ensures nurslings passive protec-
peratures favoring proliferation of bacteria in the en viron-
tion for the first weeks of life. During outbreaks, antitoxin 
ment.
 Type A-associated conditions occur worldwide. Type B
and toxoid are sometimes given and a second dose of tox-
oid is administered some weeks later. Protection of lambs
lamb dysentery occurs in Europe and South Africa, while
type B enteritis of sheep or goats is reported from Iran. Type
against type D enterotoxemia requires two vaccinations ata
C occurs worldwide, and type Dis prevalent wherever sheep
monthly interval. The course should be completed 2 weeks
before the lambs are placed on full feed. Milking goats
 are raised. Type E is found in Britain, the United States, and
Australia. A toxin similar to its t-toxin is also produced by
respond poorly to immunization with pulpy kidney (type
 D) vaccines, and therefore, vaccination is often repeated
C. difficile and C. spiroforme.
several times a year.
Immunologic Aspects. Immunity is antibody-mediated
mals and to those at risk. Protection lasts 2-3 weeks. Pro-
and correlates with antitoxin levels. Immunizing prepara-
phylactic dosages, given subcutaneously, can be doubled
tions often include bacterial components as well. Active
and given intravenously for therapy. However, antibiotics
Chapter 35
Clostridium
251
now usually replace antitoxins because of the cost and
cell wall protein of 66 kDa in size) with affinity for intestinal
unavailability of antiserum.
epithelial cells.
Ensuring against overeating is a worthwhile preventive
measure where practicable. Feeding broad-spectrum antibi-
Capsule.  C. difficileproduces a carbohydrate capsule that
otics reduces the prevalence ofenterotoxemia of lambs, but
protects it from phagocytic cells.
creates other problems (see Chapter 4). Feeding antibiotics
to poultry prevents mortality and illness in chickens due to
Toxins.  C. difficile produces three toxins that are respon-
necroticenteritis caused by type A C. perfringens. Diarrhea in
sible for enteritis observed with this microorganism:
dogs and cats associated with type A Cpe-producing C. per-
toxin A ("enterotoxin"), toxin B ("cytolysin"), and ADP-
fringens responds to metronidazole, macrolides (tylosin), 0r
ribosyltransferase.
ampicillin.
C. diffcile toxin A(TcdA) is a glycosyltransferase thatglu-
cosylates Rho GTPases, rendering them ineffectual in inter-
acting with their substrates (i.e., they become biologically
Clostridium colinum
inactive). In addition, glycosylation blocks interaction of 
C. colinum causes quail disease, an ulcerative enteritis and
Rho GDP with guanine exchange factor, and the interac-
necrotizing hepatitis of severalspecies of poultry. The agent
tion of Rho GTP with GTPase-activating factor, thereby
is fastidious nutritionally and forms spores sparingly. Its life
preventing membrane cycling. Several signaling pathways
cycle is un known, and a toxin has not been identified. The
are disrupted, resulting in a breakdown of the cytoskele-
untreated disease is usually fatal.
tal components of the affected cell including disruption
of the tight junctions between intestinal epithelial cells.
These changes result in death of the cell. The enterotoxic
C. difficile
 property of TedA, in addition to the cytotoxic effects just
described, is due to its ability to stimulate influx of poly-
C. diffcile is a gram-positive, motile, encapsulated, spore-
 morphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) by way of the enteric
forming anaerobic rod. This species produces adhesins (pili
nervous system (through the release of substance P and
 or fimbria), and its cell wall contains paracrystalline arays
mast cell degranulation). Prostaglandin synthesis by the
(S-layer) visible with the electron microscope.
recruited PMNs (and perhaps by affected host cells), as well 
C. diffcile is an important cause of serious diarrheal dis-
as activation of various inositol-signaling pathways within
ease in humans, commonly associated with antibiotic use
affected host cells, results in the secretion of chloride ions
that may progress to fatal pseudomembranous colitis. It
and water (diarrhea).
has become a scourge in human hospitals, particularly in
C. difficile toxin B (TcdB), like TcdA, is a glycosyltrans-
older patients (>65 years of age), associated with the dif-
ferase that glucosylates Rho GTPases. However, TcdB has
ficulty of controlling spores by disinfection in the hos-
little enterotoxic activity but far more cytotoxic activity
pital environment and with other features that include
than TcdA.
use of certain antibiotics and of gastric antacids. It may
C. difficile also produces an ADP-ribosyltransferase (Cdt,
also cause non-antibiotic-associated diarrheal disease in
for C. diffcile transferase). Cdt is a binary toxin (see C.
people. C. difficile is increasingly recognized as an impo1
perfingens t-toxin, described earlier, and C. spiroforme,
tant cause of fatal diarrheal disease in animals, notably
described later), composed of a binding portion (Cdtb) that
horses, hamsters, guinea pigs, and piglets, but its signif-
binds to the target intestinal epithelial cells and an enzy-
icance in other animals is only now being established.
matically active portion (Cdta). After the toxin binds to
Other species in which C. difficile diarrheal disease has
specific receptors on the cell surface, Cdta gains entry into
been described include dogs, cats, rabbits, and ratites. The
the cytoplasm. Although it is not clear precisely how entry
microorganism has been isolated from symptomatic diar-
occurs, it seems that a pore (composed of Cdtb) is formed
rheic as well as asymptomatic dogs and cats. Disease com-
in the cell membrane through which Cdta traverses. Cdta
monly follows broad-spectrum antibiotic use (e.g., third-
is an ADP-ribosylating toxin that ribosylates actin within
generation cephalosporin and clindamycin). Pathological
the host cell, resulting in disorganization of the cellular
findings in horses, hamsters, and guinea pigs include hem-
cytoskeleton and death of the affected cell.
orrhagic necrotizing enterocolitis, typhlocolitis, and pseu-
domembranous colitis, and in piglets necrotizing typhlo-
Reservoir and Transmission. C. difficile is found in the
colitis and mesocolonic edema. There is usually a history of
large intestine of normal as well as clinically affected
association with antimicrobial agents, though C. difficile-
animals. The spores are resistant to most environmental
associated disease has been reported in previously normal,
stresses, which results in their widespread distribution in
unmedicated foals.
locations where animals are housed. There is some over-
lap between those strains that produce disease in human
Descriptive Features
 patients and those that are associated with animals.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Pathogenesis. C. diffcile adheres to mucus or epithelial
cells of the large intestine by pili as well as the surface pro-
Adlhesins.  C. difficile produces pilus adhesins that prob-
tein Cwp66. Disease most often follows a “"trigger" event
ably play a role in adhesion to target cells in the large intes-
(e.g., antibiotics, nonsteroidal drugs, and chemotherapeu-
tine. C. difficile also produces a cell wall protein (Cwp66, for
tic agents) that results in relaxation of the control the
252
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 35.6.
Fatal necrotizing colitis in a horse caused
FIGURE 35.7.
Gram stain of C. difficile. Like many
by C. difficile. The large colon and cecum of the horse can
clostridia, some organisms appear gram-negative; spores are
result in severe and often fatal disease caused by this
not readily visible in this smear.
bacterium. (Courtesy of Department of Pathobiology
University of Guelph.)
 normal intestinal flora has on the numbers of C. diffcile.
Laboratory Diagnosis. The genes encoding the toxin(s)
 In some cases these antibiotics may temporarily control C.
can be detected in feces by assays based on PCR. Immuno-
diffcile, but once they are removed, the organisms, which 
logically based tests are available for the detection of the
have survived the antibiotic as spores, can rapidly prolif-
toxin (TcdA and TcdB) in fecal specimens. C. difficile can
erate to produce disease. In addition, the reduced activ-
also be isolated from feces by using a selective medium,
ity or quantity of antimicrobial peptides found as part of
CCFA (cycloserine, cefoxitin, and fructose agar), and the
the innate defenses of the large intestine of elderly human
presence of toxigenic types confirmed by PCR (Figure
patients also predisposes to infection. Toxins are produced
35.7). Perhaps surprisingly, an optimal approach to labora-
(TcdA, TcdB, and Cdt), resulting in death of the epithelial
tory diagnosis is still being developed in human medicine
cells, which follows disruption of their actin cytoskeleton
because enzyme immunoassays (EIA) for toxin A and toxin
and tight junctions. Prostaglandin along with the prod-
 B are notas sensitive as direct toxicity assays and in addition
ucts of the inositol pathway stemming from the intense
inflammatory response (TcdA) results in fluid and elec-
sis in human medicine involves ElA for glutamate deh ydro-
trolyte secretion (Figure 35.6). Diarrhea, with or without
genase (GDH) and toxins. If both are negative the diagnosis
blood, results.
is reported as negative, and if both are positive the diagno-
sis is regarded as positive. However, if the more sensitive
Epidemiology. C. diffcile-associated diarrhea is often
GDH assay is positive while the toxin assay is negative, a cell 
linked to administration of antibiotics, stress, chemothera-
cytotoxicity assay or real-time PCR for toxin genies is recom-
peuticagents, or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. For
mended as the second stage of testing. Enzyme assays are
currently preferred over alternates because of speed of diag-
this reason, disease appears to be more frequent and worse
in those species with expanded large intestines (colon and
nosis, although real-time PCR is increasingly used because
cecum) such as horses, rabbits, and swine. Newborn foals
it is fast, though expensive. Ideal algorithms for diagnosis
have been shown to develop disease without a recogniz-
of disease in animals have not been developed, although
able “trigger" event, but the diagnosis is complicated by the
toxin testing remains a method of choice. Culture is slow
 and sometimes also hampered by the death of the organism
presence of toxin in the intestine of some healthy neona-
tal foals, presumably protected against disease by maternal
in air during transport to the laboratory.
antibodies. Spread occurs through contamination of the
environment by spores; the numbers shed in the feces of
Treatment and Control. Diarrhea-associated C. diff-
animals treated with antibiotics can be massive, and there-
 fore, spores can commonly be found in hospital environ-
cile responds rapidly to metronidazole. Unfortunately,
metronidazole-resistant strains exist. The alternative
ments. The spore form is resistant to usual disinfection and
cleaning procedures.
antibiotic used in humans is vancomycin. There are no
vaccines available. However, the use of orally administered
C. diffcile isolated from dogs and cats with diarrhea does
yeast, Saccharomyces boulardi,has been shown to be useful
not commonly contain the genes encoding Cdt.
 in preventing the disease in human patients. In pigs, col-
onization with a nontoxigenic strain has prevented infec-
Immunologic Aspects.
 Immunity is probably antitoxic,
tion by toxigenic bacteria. Probiotics administered at the
although the role of antibodies to C. diffcile is unknown.
time of antibiotic use appear to reduce the incidence of
 Orally administered antitoxin (made in bovines) is protec-
C. difficile infection. In human hospitals, hand washing
tive for human patients.
by health care personnel is an efficient mechanism for
Chapter 35
Clostridium
253
curtailing spread. Disinfectants are not effective against the
spores.
FIGURE 35.9.
Tissue Gram stain of Tyzzer's disease,
showing accumulations of C piliforme. (Courtesy of
Department of Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
Clostridium piliforme ("Bacilflus piliformis ")
An acute fatal diarrheal disease of laboratory mice with
focal liver necrosis (Tyzzer's disease) is associated with a
spore-forming organism, C. piliforme, which occurs in bun-
dles within hepatocytes. It is unable to grow on cell-free
media. C. piliforme is linked to identical diseases in rabbits,
hares, gerbils, rats, hamsters, muskrats, dogs, cats, snow
leopards, foals, and rhesus monkeys. Tyzzer's disease has
 been reported in a human patient infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus, but not in immunocompetent
persons.
Descriptive Features. C. piliforme is a large, gram-
variable, spore-forming rod that is motile by peritric-
hous flagella. Giemsa and silver stains are preferable to
hematoxylin-eosin and Gram stains. Growth has been
obtained in embryonated hen's eggs and on cultured mouse
nodes, is seen in foals. The course of disease is usually under
hepatocytes.
3 days.
Vegetative cells die even when deep-frozen or freeze-
dried. Spores survive moderate heating, freezing, and
Epidemiology. Outbreaks are often stress related (crowd-
thawing. Litter remains infective for months. Strains are
ing, irradiation, steroid administration). Morbidity is high 
 pathogenically and morphologically uniform.
in laboratory animal colonies. Case fatality rates reach 50-
100%, especially among young stock. In many colonies,
Reservoir and Transmission. The source of the agent is
subclinically infected individuals are evidently present;
the infected animal. The agent spreads by the fecal-oral
these are often identifiable serologically.
route and transplacentally. Many infections are believed
to be end ogenous and stress triggered.
Laboratory Diagnosis. Laboratory diagnosis rests on the
demonstration of typical bundles of intracellular bacilli
Pathogenesis. I
 Lesions suggest hepatic invasion from the
ing lesions (Figure 35.9). Fluorescent antibody aids diagn0-
intestine via lymphatics and blood vessels. Foci of coag-
sis.
ulation necrosis are periportal (Figure 35.8). There may be
A complement fixation test that utilizes an infected
dissemination to the myocardium. Parasitized cells include
hepatocytes, myocardial cells, smooth muscle, and epithe-
mouse liver extract as antigen has been used to determine 
lial cells of the intestine, in which a dysentery-like con-
the degree of infection in mouse colonies.
dition may develop. Lymphadenitis, especially of hepatic
Treatment and Control. Treatmentof clinical cases is usu-
ally unsuccessful. Prophylactically effective antimicrobial
drugs include erythromycin and tetracycline.
FIGURE 35.8.
Tyzzer's disease in a foal, showing
extensive focal hepatic necrosis. (Courtesy of Department of
C. spiroforme
Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
C. spiroforme is isolated frequently from rabbits with typhlo-
colitis. Like C. difficile infection, it may also be predisposed
by antibiotic use. Its exotoxin is identical to the -toxin of
C. perfringens type E and the ADP-ribosyltransferase of C.
difficile. It acts by ADP-ribosylating cellular actin.
Other Clostridia Causing Enteric Disease
Enteric disease caused by Clostridium septicum and Clostrid-
ium sordellii is described in Section “Histotoxic Clostridia."
Histotoxic Clostridia.
 Histotoxic clostridia are character-
ized by their ability to cause serious soft tissue includ-
ing muscle infections, associated with the presence of
anaerobic environments including those caused by severe
254
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
traumatic events. Histotoxicity associated with C. perfrin-
gens has been briefly described earlier. Some of the histo-
FIGURE 35.10.
"Blackleg" in a cow, showing the
toxic clostridia also cause enterotoxic in fections.
characteristic blackened color of the affected muscle, with
emphysema due to gas production by C. chauvoei in the center
of the necrotic muscle. (Courtesy of Department of
Clostridium chauvoei
Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
C. chauvoei is a gram-positive, motile, obligately anaero-
bic rod that produces subterminal or subcentral spores. C.
chauvoei produces an endogenous, emphysematous, necro-
tizing myositis ("blackleg") in cattle.
Descriptive Features
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. Like other clostridia,
C. chauvoei produces a number of powerful protein exotox-
ins that are responsible for the diseases it causes. α-Toxin
is an oxygen-stable hemolysin similar to the pore-forming,
lethal α -toxin of C. septicum. Other extracellular products
thought to be important in the pathogenesis if the infec.
tion include a DNAase ("3-toxin") and a neuraminidase
875-78
(sialidase) that removes sialic acid residues from glycocon-
jugates on cell walls of eukaryotic cells, resulting in disrup-
tion of the intercellular matrix. Chauveolysin (*&-toxin") is
disrupted by edema, emphysema, and hemorrhage. Leuko-
a cholesterol-bin ding cytolysin similar to perfringolysin O,
cytic infiltration is minor.
described earlier, that binds to cholesterol-containing rafts
Clinically, there are high fever, anorexia, and depres-
in the eukaryotic cell membrane to form a pore that results
sion. Rapidly developing lameness is common. Superficial
in the death of the cell.
lesions cause visible swellings, which crepitate on being
handled. Although blackleg characteristically affects the
Reservoir and Transmission. C. chauvoei inhabits the
focus in one of the major limb muscles, the site of infection
intestine, liver, and other tissues of susceptible and resistant
sometimes involves more minor muscles such as those of
species. Blackleg occurs in endemic regions of the world,
the diaphragm, myocardium, or tongue. Some animals die
where the infection is thought to be acquired from soil
suddenly, others within 1 or 2 days.
including soil contaminated with the feces of carrier ani-
Activation of endogenous spores by injection of irritant
mals. Infection of the intestinal tract is followed by seeding
chemicals has sometimes produced iatrogenic fatal myosi-
of the organism into tissues via the liver, with survival of
tis in horses.
the bacterium in the form of spores in muscle throughout
the body. The organism can also be introduced into trau-
Epidemiology.
“Blackleg" occurs worldwide at rates that
matic wounds from soil, in which case it may cause gas
 differ between and within geographic areas, which sug-
gangrene.
 gests a soil reservoir or climatic or seasonal factors yet to
be defined. Young, well-fed cattle (<3 years) are preferen-
Pathogenesis. Seeding of tissues, especially skeletal mus.
tially attacked. As noted, exertion or bruising is suspected
cle, with spores from the intestine precedes disease in cattle.
triggering events.
Conditions favoring spore germination, with subsequent
 In sheep and some other species, C. chauvoei typically
bacterial growth and toxin production, cause formation of
causes wound infections resembling malignant edema or
local lesions marked by edema, hemorrhage, and myofib-
gas gangrene. Other clostridia (Clostridium novyi, C. sep-
rillar necrosis, and toxemia systemically. It is usually not
ficum, and C. sordellii) may be present.
clear what factor triggers the spores to germinate, but any
local anoxic condition including bruising or injection with
Immunologic Aspects. Circulating antibody to toxins
irritating products will cause germination. It is suspected
that the flight ("gadding") of groups of well-fed and prob-
to C. chauvoei. Commercial formalinized adjuvant vaccines
ably physically slightly unfit young cattle to escape the
include components from up to six other clostridial species
vicious biting flies common in the summer is the major
(Clostridium haemolyticum, C. novyi, type C and type D C.
stimulus that causes local muscle anoxia and activates the
perfringens, C. septicum, and C. sordelli).
spores. The necrotizingv-toxin, together the other exotox-
ins mentioned, is responsible for the initial lesions. Bac-
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Sporulated gram-positive rods can
terial metabolism producing gas from fermentation may
be demonstrated in smears of infected tissues and identified 
be contributory. The centers of lesions become strikingly
with immunofluorescent reagents.
dry, dark, and emphysematous because of the necrotizing
C. chauvoei requires strict anaerobic conditions and
infection, while the periphery is edematous and hemor-
media rich in cysteine and water-soluble vitamins. The
agent resembles C. septicum and is frequently recovered
scopically, there are degenerative changes in muscle fibers
with it. Unlike C. septicum it ferments sucrose but not salicin
Chapter 35
Clostridium
255
and will not grow at 44 *C. The use of DNA primers to
amplify the 16S-23S DNA spacer regions (by PCR) will dif-
FIGURE 35.11.
Histological section of liver of a cow with
ferentiate C. septicum from C. chauwvoei. This assay can also
bacillary hemoglobinuria, showing coagulation necrosis at the
be used to detect the microorganism in tissue.
top of the figure, bordered by a zone of intense inflammation.
(Courtesy of Department of Pathobiology, University of
Detection in tissue or identification in culture can also
Gueiph.)
be accomplished by using DNA primers designed to amplify
species-specific portions of the gene encoding the flagellar
 protein flagellin by PCR, and have been used successfully
to differentiate the histotoxic clostridia.
 Treatment and Control. Treatment is often disappoint-
ing. Penicillin should be given intravenously at first, fol-
lowed by repository forms intramuscularly.
 Cattle are vaccinated against blackieg in endemic
regions at 3-6 months of age and annually thereafter. Vac-
cination should precede exposure by at least 2 weeks. Dur-
ing an outbreak, all cattle are vaccinated and given long-
acting penicillin. Pregnant ewes are vaccinated 3 weeks
prior to parturition, when infection often occurs. Lambs
may require vaccination during their first year. Because of
the infectious nature of the disease, a change of pasture is
O20.
 often advisable when cases are first observed.
are associated with endemic disease and flooding with the
C. haemolyticum
spread ofinfection,little is known ofthe agent'spersistence
in soil. Shedder animals may have a role in dissemination.
C. haemolyficum is a nonencapsulated, motile, strict anaer-
Cases are clustered in the summer and fall, typically
 obe, producing large, oval, highly heat-resistant spores. C.
haemolyticum (previously known as type D C. novyi) resem-
among well-nourished animals a year or more of age. Corre-
lation with fluke infection is less consistent than in “black
bles type B C. novyi in practically all phenotypic traits. Its
toxin, a phospholipase C, is identical to that of the type B
disease" (see C. novyi type B, in Section "Infectious Necrotic
Hepatitis").
C. novyi β-toxin, but is produced in much larger amounts.
Serologic and toxigenic variants of C. haemolyticum have
Immunologic Aspects. Immunity is antitoxic. Animals
been noted.
C. haemolyticum produces bacillary hemoglobinuria
in endemic areas develop some immunity. Whole culture
("red water") disease of ruminants.
bacterin-toxoids are effective prophylactically.
Reservoir and Transmission. C. haemolyticumexists in the
Laboratory Diagnosis. Liver lesions are the best source of
ruminant digestive tract, in the liver, and in soil. Appear-
positive smears for Gram stains and immunofluorescence
ance of the disease in new, widely separated regions sug-
tests. Cultivation requires freshly poured blood agar and
gests that movement of cattle plays a part in its dissemina-
strict anaerobic conditions.
tion. Transmission is by ingestion.
Detection in tissue or identification in culture can be
accomplished by using PCR as noted for other histotoxic
Pathogenesis.
The
 pathogenesis
of
bacillary
clostridia.
hemoglobinuria involves ingestion of spores, colo-
nization of the liver, liver injury, spore germination,
Treatment and Control. Early treatment of sick animals
and toxinogenesis (see C. novyi type B “black disease,” in
with a broad-spectrum antibiotic (e.g., tetracycline), anti-
Section “Infectious Necrotic Hepatitis"). The exotoxin is a
toxin (if available), and blood transfusion produces good
powerful phospholipase C that produces a hemolytic crisis
results. Animals in endemic areas are vaccinated minimally
and death within hours or days. Other pathological effects
every 6 months and preferably 3-4 weeks before anticipated
include serosal effusions and widespread hemorrhages.
exposure.
The diagnostic lesions are circumscribed areas of liver
necrosis (misnamed “infarcts"), which are the effects of β-
C. novyi
toxin (Figure 35.11). Clinically there are fever, pale, icteric
mucous membranes, anorexia, agalactia, abdominal pain,
Descriptive Features. C. novyi is a nonencapsulated,
motile, gram-positive, obligately anaerobic rod, produc-
cows may abort.
ing large, oval, highly heat-resistant spores. There are two
pathogenic types (A and B), which differ biochemically,
Epidemiology.
 Bacillary hemoglobinuria occurs in North
epidemiologically, and pathogenically. A different species,
America in the Rocky Mountain and Pacific Coast states
C.haemotyticum, discussed earlier, used to be known as type
and along the Gulf of Mexico, and in Latin America, parts
of Europe, and New Zealand. Although swampy lowlands
"black disease" of ruminants, and, rarely, blackleg of cattle.
256
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
of irritant chemicals has sometimes produced iatrogenic
fatal myositis in horses.
Toxins. C. novyi produces a number of extracellular pro-
tein toxins that are responsible for the diseases associated
Infectious Necrotic Hepatitis.
C. novyi type B causes infec-
with it. Of these, the v- and β-toxins and the cholesterol-
binding cytolysin novyilysin have proven roles in the dis.
tle, and rarely horses, swine, and other species. Spores
eases produced by this species.
 originating in the intestine reach the liver and remain
there dormant within Kupffer cells. When liver cells are
α-Toxin. α-Toxin is produced by C. novyi types A and B.
injured, as commonly follows fluke migration, the result-
It is a glycosyltransferase that glucosylates Rho GTPases,
ing anaerobic conditions cause the spores to germinate.
rendering them ineffectual in interacting with their sub-
Vegetative growth results in toxin production and dissem-
strates and therefore as cell signaling systems. In addition,
ination. Death may be sudden or within 2 days of clinical
glycosylation blocks interaction of Rho GDP with guanine
onset. Signs include depression, anorexia, and hypother-
exchange factor, and the interaction of Rho GTP with
mia. Necropsy reveals edema, serosal effusion, and one 0r
GTPase-activating factor, thereby preventing membrane
more areas of liver necrosis, containing bacteria. Subcuta-
cycling. As a consequence, several signaling pathways are
neous venous congestion secondary to pericardial edema
disrupted, resulting in a breakdown of the cytoskeletal com-
darkens the underside of the skin, henice the name "black
ponents of the affected cell, followed by its death.
disease." The occasional outbreak in swine might be asso-
ciated with ascarids migrating through the liver.
3-Toxin.  3-Toxin is produced by C. novyi type B. It is a
phospholipase C (a lecithinase) that hydrolyzes the phos-
Epidemiology. The agent occurs worldwide. “Bighead"
phatidylcholine and sphingomyelin constituents of host
is recognized in Australia, South Africa, and North Amer-
cell membranes, resulting in death of the cell. This toxin is
ica. Distribution of "black disease" largely coincides with
also hemolytic.
that of the liver fluke Fasciola hepafica. Both diseases occur
8-Toxin (Novyilysin). &-Toxin or novyilysin is pro-
ease" affects notably well-nourished animals.
duced by C. novyi type A, and is a cholesterol-binding
cytolysin (see also perfringolysin O, mentioned earlier).
Immunologic Aspects.
. Circulatingantitoxins(antibodies
Novyilysin binds to cholesterol-containing rafts in the
to α-, β-, and novyilysin toxins) and antibodies to cellular
eukaryotic cell membrane. Once bound, it forms a pore
components of the organism are presumably the basis of
resulting in the death of the cell.
immunity to C. novyi infections. Whole culture bacterins
and toxoids have prophylactic value.
Miscellaneous Toxins. C. novyi produces a number
of other extracellular protein enzymes or minor toxins
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Liver lesions contain large gram-
with uncertain roles in the pathogenesis of disease. These
positive to gram-variable rods with oval subterminal, large
 include lecithinases, lipases, and myosinases.
 spores, which are identifiable by fluorescent anti-C. novyi
conjugates.
Reservoir and Transmission.
Type A is common in soil.
Isolation of the bacteria requires the strictest anaerobic
Types A and B occur in the healthy intestine and liver of
 conditions, especially for type B, which is also nutritionally
 herbivores, and may also be found as spores persisting in
fastidious. C. novyi may be demonstrable in normal livers
muscle. All enter their hosts by ingestion or by wound
 of herbivores within hours after death, and therefore, post-
infection.
mortem invaders need to be differentiated from genuine
pathogens.
Pathogenesis.
 Of several toxins produced by C. novyi, α-,
Increasingly, detection in tissue or identification in cul-
8-, and novyilysin toxins are lethal and necrotizing, and
ture is accomplished by using PCR, including real-time
are of established pathogenic significance. The pathogenic
PCR, that allows quantitation of the bacterial load. DNA
roles of the minor nonlethal toxins are uncertain.
primers designed to amplify species-specific portions of the
gene encoding the flagellar protein, flagellin, have been
Gas Gangrene and Blackleg. C. novyi type A is implicated
used successfully to differentiate histotoxic clostridia
 in gas gangrene ("clostridial wound infection") of humans
and animals. One unique form of these, "bighead of rams,"
Treatment and Control. There is no effective treatment.
starts as a fightinjury atthetop of the head of rams, and may
Control is directed at eliminating flukes and other hepato-
result from the activation of spores endogenously present
pathic agents. Prophylactic vaccination with a bacterin--
 in muscles of the head. Toxic endothelial damage produces
toxoid combination is generally effective.
edema involving head, neck, and cranial thorax. Death
occurs in 2 days. The yellow tinge of the edema fluid, which
C. septicum
is clear and gelatinous with little hemorrhage, is a post-
mortem change. C. novyi may also rarely cause a blackleg-
Descriptive Features.
.C. septicum is a short, stout, and
like disease of cattle, sometimes known as “pseudoblack-
pleomorphic gram-positive, motile, spore-forming obli-
leg" to distinguish it from the identical disease caused by
gately anaerobic rod. In some exudates, long filaments are
found.
Chapter 35
Clostridium
257
C. septicum is the leading cause of wound infections
(gas gangrene = malignant edema) of farm animals and
FIGURE 35.12.
Gas gangrene in a young piglet, likely
gangrenous dermatitis in poultry, but may also cause a
associated with injection or castration. The necrotizing process
fatal abomasitis in sheep and, unusually, blackleg (*"pseu-
has followed fascial planes. (Courtesy of Department of
doblackleg") in ruminants.
Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. C. septicum pro-
duces a number of protein exotoxins that are purportedly
responsible for the diseases associated with it. However,
only α-toxin has been definitively shown to be a virulence
factor. The α-toxin is a pore-forming, lethal toxin. Follow-
ing secretion, it is bound to glycosylphosphatidylinositol-
anchored proteins on the eukaryotic cell surface (mainly
endothelial cells). There, the cell-bound proteolytic
enzyme, furin, cleaves it, resulting in fragments that insert
into the membrane forming pores leading to death of
the cell. C. septicum also produces a DNAase ("3-toxin")
with leukocytotoxic activity, a hyaluronidase ("y-toxin"),
a cholesterol-bindingcytolysin (septicolysin O) (with activ-
ity similar to thatofperfringolysin O and novyilysin, and so
on), and miscellaneous extracellular products (chitinases,
neuraminidases, lipases, sialidases, and hemagglutinins)
hygiene, overcrowding, and likely fecal contamination of
with undefined roles in the pathogenesis of disease.
pressure sores.
Reservoir and Transmission. C. septicum occurs in soils
Severe and fatal abomasitis (braxy in Scottish or brad-
worldwide and in the animal and human intestines. It is
sot in Danish) is a fatal C. septicum cold weather disease of
sheep in which C. septicum produces a necrotizing lesion in 
acquired by wound infection and ingestion.
the abomasal wall comparable to the subcutaneous one
Wound infection caused by C. septicum is
described earlier. Clinical signs are mostly toxemia and
Pathogenesis.
often called “malignant edema,”" but the term “gas gan-
gastrointestinal distress. Most aspects of the pathogene-
grene” is probably better understood. All of the toxic prod-
sis of this unusual, dramatic, and generally fatal disease are
poorly understood. The association of the infection with
ucts outlined earlier probably play a role in this serious
ingestion of frozen food including hay might suggest trau-
necrotizing infection, but only the α-toxin has been shown
to be definitively involved. Systemic effects are thought
matic damage of the abomasal mucosa (Figure 35.13).
Human wound infections due to C. septicum may
to be the result of endothelial damage throughout the
develop into serious cellulitis and gas gangrene, and are
body, leading to severe fluid and electrolyte imbalances
associated with illegal intravenous drug injection, abortion 
as well as for the edema seen locally. Membrane-active tox-
(producing septic metritis) under unhygienic conditions,
ins, dissolution of connective tissue components, along
malignancies, skin infections, the peripheral vasculopathy
with destruction of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and
associated with diabetes, and severe trauma. The organ-
release of their digestive enzymes may accoun t for the tissue
destruction observed. The infectious process radiates from
myonecrosis ("gas gangrene") in humans with pathogene-
the point of inoculation within hours to days of exposure.
A hemorrhagic,edematous, necrotizing processfrequently
sis likely similar to that of blackleg in cattle.
follows fascialplanes as adjacent muscle is darkened (Figure
35.12). With muscular involvementand emphysema, there
Epidemiology. Gas gangrene may follow such procedures
as castration, docking, shearing, tagging, and injections.
ium chauvoei'). Crepitant swellings change from painful
Postparturient genital infections are sometimes linked to
and hot to painless and cold. Signs include fever, tachycar-
dystocia and unskilled obstetrical assistance. “Braxy" o1
"bradsot" occurs mostly in colder countries such as Canada,
dia, anorexia, and depression. The course may be rapid and
fatal within a day. Wounds include traumatic wounds, but
Scotland, and Scandinavian countries.
may include the postparturient uterus of animals.
C. septicum causes a blackleg-like disease of cattle, some-
Immunologic Aspects. Immunity is probably antitoxin
times known as “pseudoblackleg" to distinguish it from
dependent.
the identical disease caused by C. chauvoei. Activation of
endogenous spores by injection of irritant chemicals has
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Sporulated rods may be demon-
 produced iatrogenic fatal myositis in horses.
strable in exudates by Gram stain or immunofluorescence.
C. septicum also causes gangrenous dermatitis, a fatal
necrotizing cellulitis and myonecrosis of poultry includ
conditions, producing hemolytic colonies up to 5 mm in
  sd  ss ra e san s
diameter within 48 h, with rhizoid contours and a frequent
con currently involved. The factors precipitating the some-
times devastating infection are unclear, but include poor
of this agent by culture are not difficult, positive results
258
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
the intestine. The presence of the lethal toxin of C. sordel-
FIGURE 35.13.
"Braxy" in the abomasum of a lamb,
lili (TesL) has been demonstrated in myofibers of affected
showing extensive hemorrhage, edema, gas formation, and
horses by immunohistochemistry.
areas of focal necrosis. (Courtesy of Department of
C. sordellii has caused fatal disease in perinatal foals
Pathobiology, University of Guelph.)
following infection of the umbilical remnants as well as
fatal uterine infections in postparturient sheep. It is also
 emerging as a pathogen of humans, associated with very
serious and often fatal infections following abortion and
"spontaneous" non-wound-associated myonecrosis ("gas
gangrene") similar to blackleg.
There is increasing evidence that the organism can cause
severe enteric disease including a disease identical to C.
septicum abomasitis ("braxy") in lambs. The organism has
been isolated from fatal enteric disease in lions.
Mixed clostridial bacterin-toxoids for blackleg and gas
 gangrene usually contain C. sordelli.
Neurotoxic Clostridia
Clostridium botulinum (the cause of botulism) and Closirid-
ium tetani (the cause of tetanus) produce disease strictly
through the action of neurotoxins, botulinum and tetanus
toxins, respectively. Although botulinum and tetanus tox-
should be interpreted with caution since C. septicum is an 
ins have the same mechanism of action, they produce
aggressive postmortem invader. Its presence may therefore
different diseases with remarkably different manifesta-
be unrelated to the problem at hand and may obscure that
tions because they affect different sites in the nervous
of more significant pathogens, such as C. haemolyticum and
system.
C.chauvoei.
 Botulinum and tetanus toxins block neurotransmitter
 Demonstration in tissue or identification of isolates
release. Both toxins are zinc endopeptidases that inter-
is possible by fluorescent antibody staining or by PCR
fere with the fusion of neurotransmitter-containing vesi-
amplification of the α -toxin. PCR amplification of species-
cles with the membrane lining the presynaptic cleft. Inter-
 specific portions of flagellin gene has been to differentiate
ference is due to hydrolysis of the proteins involved with
the organism from other clostridia causing severe tissue
"docking,”" which precedes fusion of neurotransmitter-
necrosis.
containing vesicles with the membrane lining the cleft.
Hydrolysis of these proteins leads to degeneration of
Treatment and Control. Prognosis is guarded. Possible
the synapse and to the blockage of neurotransmis-
therapy includes penicillin or tetracycline given systemi-
 sion. Regeneration of the synapse takes several weeks to
cally, incision and drainage of the wounds, and their irri-
months.
gation with antiseptics.
Calves are vaccinated at 3-4 months of age, sheep and
C. botulinum
goats at weaning. Hygienic precautions at times of likely
exposure are helpful.
C. borulinum is a gram-positive, spore-forming, obligately
anaerobic rod, which produces the disease botulism, a neu-
roparalytic intoxication characterized by flaccid paralysis.
C. sordellii
The intoxication is caused by any of seven protein neuro-
toxins (A to G) (Table 35.3) that are identical in action but
The role of C. sordellii in serious infections of animals and
 differ in potency, antigenic properties, and distribution.
humans may have been underestimated, or infections may
 They are produced by a heterogeneous group of clostridia.
be increasing. The agent produces numerous toxins and is
called C. botulinum(C. botulinumgroup G has been renamed
experimentally pathogenic for many species of animals.
C. sordelli is associated with a fatal myositis and hep-
C. argentinense) on the basis of the toxins, which in some
types (C and D) are bacteriophage encoded.
atic disease in ruminants and horses, although the pre-
Botulism is seen mainly in ruminants, horses, mink,
cise pathogenic process is not known. “Acute pasture
-sd posas, edoa rde aunba,) dou
and birds, particularly waterfowl, though the infection is
increasingly diagnosed in commercial poultry. Swine, car-
ture myopathy"), associated with acute and usually fatal
rhabdomyolysis, has become an increasing problem in
nivores, and fish are rarely affected.
recent years in European countries. It occurs especially in
Descriptive Features
young adult grazing horses under frosty and stormy, fall-
like, conditions. The disease is associated with sudden onset
Morphology. C. bohulinum is a gram-positive, spore-
of muscle weakness, the result of generalized myodegener-
forming obligately anaerobic rod. At a pH near and above
ation, although the focus of infection is unclear. It may be
neutrality, it produces subterminal oval spores.
Chapter 35
 Clostridium
259
Table 35.3.
Classic Botulinum Toxin Types: General Distribution, Origin, and Pathogenicity
Type (Toxin
Present)
 Geographic Distribution
Source
Species Affected
A(A)
Western North America, former Soviet Union
Vegetables, fruits (meat, fish)
Humans (chicken, mink)
B (B)
Eastern North America, Europe, former Soviet Union
Meat, pork products (vegetables, fish)
Humans (horses, cattle)
Cα (C!
New Zealand, Japan, Europe
Vegetation, invertebrates, carrion 
Waterfowl
Cβ (C1. D)
Australia, Africa, Europe, North America
Spoiled feed, carrion 
Horses, catle, mink (humans)
D(D)
Africa, former Soviet Union, Southwestern United States.
 Carrion, chicken manure
Cattle, sheep, chickens (horses, humans)
Europe
E
 North America, North Europe, Japan, former Soviet Union 
 Raw fish, marine mammals 
 Humans, fish, fish-eating birds
United States, North Europe fomer SovietUnion
Meat, fish 
Humans
G
Argentina
Soil
Humans
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
the cytoskeleton. Neither enzyme appears to play a role in
the disease process.
Toxin. C. bohulinum produces several proteins with
“toxie" activity (botulinum toxin, C2 toxin, and C3 exoen-
zyme), but only botulinum toxin has a central role in the
Resistance. A
Although heat resistance of spores varies
 production of botulism.
between culture groups, toxin types, and strains, moist
x n  s   r  o e 
There are seven types of botulinum toxins (BoNT for
botulinum neurotoxin), differentiated by antigenic differ-
exist. Low pH and high salinity enhance heat sterilization.
Salt, nitrates, and nitrites suppress germination of spores in
 e  sn , a  's
described. Letters A through G depict the types (Table
foods. Heating to 80*C for 20 min inactivates the toxin. The
35.3). The type of neurotoxin characterizes the strain of
seven types of toxins differ in antigenicity, heat resistance,
C. boulinum producing it. Thus, a strain of C. bonulinum
and lethality for different animal species (probably related
 producing type A BoNT would be described as C. boulinum
to receptor density on the surface of the motor neuron).
type A.
Four culture groups are also recognized.
m sasadoa juz ae inon no sa uas i
identical activity, that is, hydrolysis of the docking pro-
Reservoir and Transmission. Reservoirs of C. botulinum
teins required by neurotransmitter-containing vesicles to
are soil and aquatic sediments. Vehicles of intoxication
fuse with the presynaptic membrane. Although the end
are animal and plant material contaminated from these
result is the same (blockage of the release of neurotransmit-
sources. When animals die, C. bohulinum spores, which are
ter), the various types of BoNT hydrolyze different docking
common in gut and tissues, germinate and generate toxin.
proteins. Types A and E hydrolyze SNAP (synaptosomal-
This may contaminate the immediate local environment.
associated protein); types B, D, F, and G hydrolyze VAMP
An example of this is an animal killed during hay making
tobrevin), and type C hydrolyzes SNAP and syntaxin.
a similar process occurs. Apart from toxin ingestion, spore
Once hydrolyzed, the synapse degenerates, taking weeks
ingestion and wound contamination may lead to botulism.
to months to regenerate.
Spore ingestion is important in human infant botulism.
 BoNT isa “di-chain" molecule consisting of a light chain
Wound infection botulism is seen rarely in humans and
(with zinc endopeptidase activity), a heavy chain com-
horses.
posed of a translocation domain (responsible for form-
ing a pore through which the light chain passes), and a
Pathogenesis.
binding domain (responsible for binding to nerve cells).
 Botulinum toxin is the most toxic protein
known; 1 μg can kill a person. Ingested BoNT is absorbed
Several “accessory" proteins thought to aid the survival
from the glandular stomach and anterior small intestine
of the toxin in the gastrointestinal tract are secreted
and distributed via the bloodstream. It binds to receptors
with BoNT
 BoNT binds to cholinergic nerve cells, each type of BoNT
and enters the nerve cell after receptor-mediated endocy-
tosis. How BoNT gets from the bloodstream to the sur-
binding to a different receptor. After binding, the toxin
face of nerve cells is not understood. Toxin-containing
is internalized by way of receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Vesicles containing BoNT remain at the neuromuscular
vesicles remain at the myoneural junction. A fragment
of the toxin (light chain) translocates across the vesicle
junction. Following a cleaving event, the light chain (the
zinc endopeptidase) translocates across the vesicle mem-
membrane into the cytosol of the nerve cell and sub-
d  d , e s ns
brane into the cytosol of the nerve cell where it hydrolyzes
the docking proteins.
tein depends upon which botulinum toxin). The synapse
degenerates and flaccid paralysis results due to the lack of
Both the C2 toxin and C3 exoenzyme are ADP-
neurotransmitter (acetylcholine). When this affects mus-
ribosyltransferases. C2 toxin and C3 exoenzyme ribosylate
cles of respiration, death due to respiratory failure occurs.
G-actin and Rho, respectively, resulting in disruptions in
No primary lesions are produced.
260
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Clinical signs include muscular incoordination leading
African cattle, the condition is called lamziekte ("lame dis-
to recumbency, extrusion of the tongue, and disturbances
ease"), which describes the lameness associated with phos.
in food prehension, chewing, and swallowing. No changes
phorus deficiency. Type D botulism is increasingly identi-
in consciousness occur. The temperature remains normal
fied in ruminants in the United Kingdom exposed to broiler
unless secondary infections such as aspiration pneumonia
chicken litter.
supervene. In nonfatal cases, recovery is slow and residual
Type E botulism has emerged in fish-eating birds in the
signs may persist for months. There is still an unproven
Great Lakes of North America, the result of complex ecolog-
but plausible suggestion that equine grass sickness, a com-
monly fatal dysautonomia, affecting the enteric nervous
invasive species. Migrating fish-eating birds catch fish with
system is associated with the ingestion of BoNT secreted
botulism, which makes them easier to catch, and succumb
by C. bohulinum type C living in association with blades of
to intoxication.
grass (as a biofilm).
Human botulism is usually traced to improperly pro-
 In birds such as ducks, the disease has been named “lim-
cessed meat, seafood, or canned vegetables. In fant botulism
berneck" after the characteristic drooping head posture,
involves clostridial growth and toxinogenesis in the intesti-
which often causes waterfowl to drown.
nal tract, producing the “floppy baby syndrome," and may
be associated with ingestion of honey, since this frequently
Epidemiology. Types Aand Bare found in all soils, includ.
contains large numbers of C. botulinum spores. Wound
ing virgin soils; types C, D, E, and F are linked with wet
infection botulism results from contaminated external
environments—that is, muddy soils or aquatic sediment.
injuries.
 In animals, types C and D predominate. Type C living in 
biofilms on the surface of blades of grass may be the source
Immunologic Aspects.
Resistance to botulism depends on
of BoNT seen in equine grass sickness, although whether
circulating antitoxin . Some carrion-eating animals, such as
equine grass sickness is truly the result of botulism remains
vultures, apparently acquire immunity through repeated
to be definitively demonstrated. Type E is associated with 
sublethal exposure.
aquatic environments, so is characteristically associated
with eating affected or contaminated fish.
Laboratory Diagnosis. Diagnosis of botulism requires
 Dead animals (birds, rodents, and cats) in feed can be
demonstration of toxin in plasma or tissue before death
 sources of outbreaks, as can chicken litter (which may con-
 01 from a fresh carcass. Isolation of the organism, espe-
tain dead chickens) when used as a cattle and sheep feed
cially from intestinal contents, or postmortem demonstra-
supplement, as bedding, or is spread as a fertilizer onto pas-
tion of toxin is not definitive. Demonstration of toxin in
tures to which ruminants have access. The increasing use
feedstuffs, fresh stomach contents, or vomitus supports a
of "big bale silage” and round hay baling in recent years,
diagnosis of botulism.
 in which grass is ensiled without acidification in large plas-
Toxin is extracted from suspect material (unless fluids)
tic airtight bags or wrapped in tight round bales, has been
overnight with saline. The mixture is centrifuged and the
associated with increased botulism in horses and cattle. It
clear portion filter-sterilized and trypsinized (1% at 37 *C
is likely that this is a combination of the cutting of grass
for 45 min). Guinea pigs or mice are injected intraperi-
very close to the ground, so that baby grassland nestling
toneally with the extract, mixtures of extract and antitox-
birds or rodents are collected, as well as the anaerobic con-
ins, and extract heated to 100 *C for 10 min. Death due to
 ditions of ensilage or of tightly wrapped hay. Outbreaks on
botulism occurs within 10 h to 3 weeks (average is 4 days)
mink ranches are usually due to tainted meat, and those
preceded by muscular weakness, limbparalysis,and respira-
 in fish hatcheries to fish food containing C. boulinum type
tory difficulties. To confirm thatanimals die ofintoxication
E spores that germinate in bottom sludge. Decaying veg-
rather than peritonitis, any toxin must be neutralizable by
etation triggers outbreaks in waterfowl. As lakes recede in
one of the C. bohulinum antitoxins.
summer leaving muddy shores or shallow pools, rotting
Isolation of C. bohulinum from suspect feeds or tissue
plant material becomes accessible. C. bohulinum and its
begins with heating suspect material at 65-80 *C for 30 min
toxin are ingested and after death permeate the carcass,
 to induce germination. Type E spores require, in addition,
which is fed upon by blowfly larvae that absorb the toxin.
treatment with lysozyme (5 mg/ml of medium). Culture
Waterfowl ingesting these larvae become intoxicated. Type
C and type D botulism is increasing in commercial laying
biochemical reactions and toxin production. Immunoflu-
 and broiler chickens, apparently as a result of production
orescenice is used to identify some cultural groups. Primers
of toxin within the intestine ("toxicoin fectious" botulism),
designed to amplify the genes encoding the various toxins
although the reason for this increase is unclear. This intesti-
(by the PCR) can be used to support the demonstration that
nal infection may be related to the increased botulism
C. botulinum has been isolated.
observed in ruminants exposed to chicken litter.
Type B botulism has been seen in cattle and mules.
Treatment and Control. If recent ingestion is suspected,
 In “toxicoinfectious botulism" of foals ("shaker foal syn-
 evacuation of the stomach and purging are helpfui. Anti-
drome") and adult horses, no toxin has been demonstrated,
toxin treatment following onset of signs is sometimes ben-
but the agent has been isolated consistently from tissue.
eficial, especially for mink and ducks, but prevention by
Type D botulism is classically linked to phosphorus-
vaccination is infinitely preferred. Mink and other animals
deficient ranges, where grazing animals feed on carcasses
at risk should be vaccinated with toxoid (types A, B, C, and 
and bones that often contain botulinum toxin. In South
D). Clinical trials to prevent equine grass sickness with a
Chapter 35
Clostridium
261
botulinum toxoid vaccine are ongoing. Removalofaffected
in volved with vesicles containing the neurotransmitters y-
waterfowl to dry land, if feasible, saves many from exposure
aminobutyric acid and glycine.
and drowning. Placing food on dry ground may lure birds
The other toxin, tetanolysin is a cholesterol-binding
from contaminated areas. It is mandatory that farmers in
cytolysin but has no known pathogenic significance in the
the United Kingdom remove carcasses from chicken litter
production of tetanus.
before selling it as fertilizer.
Growth Characteristics. C. tetani grows on blood agar
release, and germine intensifies neural impulses. Clinical
under routine anaerobic conditions. There may be swarm-
reports on their use are few and mixed.
ing. Its differential reactions (carbohydrate fermentation,
proteolysis, and indole production) vary with the medium
used. Spores resist boiling up to 1.5 h, but not autoclaving
C. tetani
(121 *C for 10 min). Disinfection by some halogen com-
C. tetani is a gram-positive, spore-forming, obligately anaer-
pounds (3% iodine) can be effective within several hours,
obic rod, which produces the disease tetanus, a neuropara-
but phenol, lysol, and formalin in the usual concentrations
lytic intoxication characterized by tetanic spasm of muscle
are ineffective.
and tonic-clonic convulsions. The intoxication is due to a
protein neurotoxin.
Reservoir and Transmission. C. tetani is widely dis-
 All mammals are susceptible to varying degrees to
tributed in soil and is often a transient in the intestine.
tetanus, with horses, ruminants, and swine being more
Spores are introduced into wounds.
susceptible than carnivores and poultry. In all animals, the
mortality rate is high. Humans and horses are the most
Pathogenesis. Spore germination requires an anaerobic
susceptible species.
environment as is found in tissues devitalized by crush-
ing, burning, laceration, breakdown of blood supply (e.g.,
Descriptive Features
umbilical stump or placental remnants), or bacterial in fec-
tion. Under these circumstances, C. tetani proliferates and
Morphology. C. tetani is a gram-positive, spore-forming,
its toxin diffuses via vascular channels or peripheral nerve
obligately anaerobic rod. A distinguishing morphologic
trunks. The toxin attaches to receptors on the nearest
feature of C. tetani is the spherical shape and terminal posi-
cholinergic nerve and is internalized within a vesicle,
tion of its spores ("drumstick" or “tennis racket"; Figure
which travels retrograde inside the axons to the cell bod-
35.1).
ies in the ventral horns of the spinal cord. The light chain
of the toxin translocates across the vesicle membrane into
Cellular Products of Medical Interest. C. tetani produces
the cytosol where it hyd rolyzes "docking" proteins and sup-
two toxins (tetanolysin and tetanus toxin), though only
presses release of afferent inhibitory messenger substances
tetanus toxin is of clinical significance.
(glycine and y -aminobutyric acid), causing the innervated
The genes encoding tetanus toxin (TeNT for tetanus
muscles to remain in sustained clonic or tonic spasms. The
neurotoxin, also called tetanospasmin) are located on a
toxin also travels within the cord to other levels affecting
large plasmid. TeNT is released upon lysis of the clostridial
cell. There is only one type of TeNT, a zinc endopep-
hydrolysis of the vesicular docking proteins, taking several
tidase, which hydrolyzes the docking proteins required
weeks to regenerate.
by neurotransmitter-containing vesicles to fuse with the
The process described ("ascending tetanus") is typical of
presynaptic membrane. TeNT hyd rolyzes the docking pro-
animals not highly susceptible to tetanus toxin (e.g., dogs
tein VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein, also
and cats). Only nerve trunks near the toxigenic site absorb
known as synaptobrevin). Once the docking proteins are
sufficient toxin to produce overt signs.
hydrolyzed, the synapse degenerates, taking weeks to
"Descending tetanus" (a generalized toxemia) is typi-
months to regenerate.
cal of highly susceptible species (horses and humans) in
 TeNT is a “di-chain" molecule consisting ofa light chain
which effective toxin quantities are disseminated via vascu-
(with zinc endopeptidase activity), a heavy chain com-
lar channels to nerve endings in areas remote from the toxi-
posed of a translocation domain (responsible for forming a
genic site. Toxin enters the central nervous system at many
pore through which the light chain passes), and a binding
levels producing generalized tetanus, frequently beginning
domain (responsible for binding to nerve cells).
cranially since the cranial nerves have short distances into
TeNT binds to cholinergic nerve cells by virtue of
the central nervous system. The sequence reflects suscepti-
receptors that are different from those recognized by
bility of various neurons.
 BoNT. These receptors are composed of lipid-containing
rafts and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins.
Disease Patterns. Early signs, following an incubation
After binding, the toxin is internalized by way of receptor-
period of a few days to several weeks, are stiffness, muscular
mediated endocytosis. Vesicles containing TeNT travel by
tremor, and increased responsiveness to stimuli.
retrograde axonal transport to the inhibitory interneu-
 In horses, ruminants, and swine, which usually develop
rons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. Following a
descending tetanus, retraction of the third eyelid (because
cleaving event, the light chain (the zinc endopeptidase)
of spasm of ophthalmic muscles), erectness of ears, grind-
translocates across the vesicle membrane into the cytosol
ing of teeth, and stiffness of the tail are observed. Bloat
of the nerve cell where it hyd rolyzes the "docking" proteins
is common in ruminants. Feeding becomes impossible
262
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
("lockjaw"). Rigidity of extremities causes “sawhorse" atti
4%) inhibits swarming, and a drop of antitoxin will inhibit
tudes and, eventually, recumbency. Tetanic spasms occur
hemolysis on that portion of the plate.
first in response to stimuli, but later become permanent.
Traditionally, replicate cooked meat broth cultures were
There are fecal and urinary retention, sweating, and high
fever. Consciousness persists. Death, due to respiratory
ods (up to 20 min) to kill bacteria other than spores. All were 
 alrest, occurs in lambs and piglets within the first week,
incubated at 37 *C for 4 days and subcultured to blood agar 
in adult animals in 1-2 weeks. Full recovery requires weeks
periodically during that time. Previously unheated ones
to months. Mortality is at least 50% and highest in the
were heated before subculture. Suspect isolates were iden-
young.
tified by differential tests and confirmed as tetanus toxin
 In canivores, the incubation period tends to be longer,
producers by intramuscular injection of a 48 h broth cul-
and local (ascending) tetanus (stiffness and tremors) is fre-
ture into two mice, one of which had received antitoxin. It
quently seen near the original wound. Progression may be
is actually now rare for this to be done because the dis-
slower than in ungulates, but signs and course are compa-
ease is so characteristic that laboratory diagnosis is not
rable.
required.
Primers designed to amplify the gene encoding tetanus
 toxin (by the PCR) can also be used to support the demon-
Epidemiology.
 Occurrence of tetanus is linked to the
introduction of C. tetani spores into traumatized tissue (see
stration that C. tetani has been isolated.
Section “Pathogenesis"). Penetrating nail wounds of the
foot, barnyard surgery, the use of rubber bands for castrat-
Treatment and Control. Therapy aims at neutralization
ing and docking sheep, ear tagging, injections, shearing
of circulating toxin, suppression of toxin production, and
wounds, postpartum uterine infections, perinatal umbili-
life support and symptomatic relief to the patient. The
cal infections, and small animal fights and leghold traps
first objective is pursued by injection of adequate doses of
antitoxin, 10 000-300 000 units for horses. Some suggest
 all predispose to the type of injury and the soil or fecal
contamination associated with tetanus.
intrathecal administration since this can be beneficial
 Wound care and parenteral penicillin or metronidazole
 are aimed at stopping toxin production. Supportive treat-
Immunologic Aspects. TeNT is antigenically uniform.
ment includes use of sedatives and muscle relaxants and
Acquired resistance to tetanus depends on circulating anti-
exclusion of external stimuli. Artificial feeding by a stom-
toxin. Small amounts have been demonstrated in normal
 ach tube or intravenously may be necessary after the hyper-
ruminants. Surprisingly, but because of its great toxicity,
esthetic phase. Nursing care is most important.
survivors of tetanus with the possible exception of dogs
Wounds should be properly cleaned and dressed. Dur-
and cats are susceptible to rein fection. The amount of toxin
ing surgical procedures, especially on a mass scale under
needed to result in tetanus in dogs and cats is sometimes
 farm conditions, appropriate hygienic precautions should
large enough to elicit an antitoxin response. Passive and
be observed. Horses, unless actively immunized, are given
active protection is provided by administration of anti-
antitoxin after injury or surgery, and depot penicillin.
toxin or immunization with toxoid, respectively (see Sec.
Active immunization employs formalinized toxoid,
tion "Treatment and Control").
given twice at 1- to 2-month intervals and often annually
thereafter, although it is increasingly common to immu-
Laboratory Diagnosis.
A Gram-stained smear from a sus-
nize less frequently. All highly susceptible species, espe.
pect wound may reveal the typical "drumstick" type of
cially horses, humans and sheep, should be vaccinated
bacteria (see Figure 35.1). Their absence does not exclude
against tetanus. Package insert directions should be fol-
tetanus, and their presence is merely suggestive as the mor.
lowed. Passive immunity passes from immunized mare to
phology is not unique. Wound exudate is plated on blood
nursing foals and provides protection for about 10 weeks,
agar for anaerobic culture. Increased agar content (up to
when toxoid can be given.
36
Filamentous Bacteria:
Actinomyces
Nocardia
Dermatopi
US
. and
Streptobacillus
MEGAN E. JACOB
Members of the genera Actinomyces, Nocardia, Der-
morphologically similar species including Nocardia. Sur-
matophilus, and Streptobacillus are associated by theil ability
face fibrils in A. viscosus may be adhesins for host cells
 to appear in flamentous forms. Apart from this character-
 s  o,)   
istic, and a common manifestation of pyogranulmatous
related to chemotactic and mitogenic activities.
inflammation, these organisms have little in common.
Table 36.1 summarizes their differential characteristics.
Growth Characteristics. Actinomyces species are faculta-
tive or strict anaerobes that require a rich media, preferably
Actinomyces
containing serum or blood for growth in viro. The organ-
isms tend to be capnophilic, so growth is enhanced with
carbon dioxide. Development of macroscopiccolonies may
Actinomyces organisms are anaerobic or facultative anaer-
obic, gram-positive, branching rods considered normal
require several days (2-3) of incubation at 37 *C. Colonial
morphology varies between and within species and hemol-
flora in the oral, gastrointestinal, and urogenital tracts of
ysis is rare.
humans and animals. They are most commonly associated
with oral cavity colonization, where they can subsequently
Resistance. Actinomyces species are readily killed by heat
result in pyogranulomatous inflammation after disruption
and disinfectan ts and require frequent passage to survive in
of the mucus membrane. The genus is composed of multi-
culture. The antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of Actino-
ple species and clinical manifestations may resemble other
myces are predictable, particularly with regard to penicillin,
 morphologically similar organisms like Nocardia species.
and resistance is not widely reported. Resistance to fluo-
rquinolones has been noted.
Descriptive Features
Morphology and Staining. Members of the genus Acti-
Ecology
 nomyces are gram-positive, non-acid-fast, diphtheroid or
filamentous rods. These organisms do not form spores.
Reservoir. Members of the genus Actinomyces are nor-
Branching filaments, often beaded due to uneven stain-
mal flora, most often present on the oral mucous mem-
ing, are most readily observed in pathologic specimens. In
branes or tooth surfaces; however, they can colonize
culture, diphtheroid forms predominate.
the mucous membranes of the urogenital tract and
be found secondarily in the gastrointestinal tract of
Structure and Composition. Actinomyces species have dis-
many animal species. They are not associated with the
tinctive cell wall constituents, differentiating them from
environment.
Transmission. Most Actinomyces infections are endoge-
nous; that is, they are caused by introduction of a commen-
Original chapter written by Drs. Ernst L. Biberstein
and Dwight C. Hirsh.
sal organism into susceptible tissue of its host. Although
rare, bites are another means of transmission.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
263
264
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 36.1.
 Differential Characteristics of Actinomyces, Nocardia, Dermatophilus, and Streptobacillus Genera
Actinomyces
Nocardia
Dermatophilus
Streptobacillus
Gram reaction 
+
+
+
 Acid-fast reaction
 Partial +
Motility 
Motile zoospores
Atmospheric preference 
Strict or facultative anaerobe 
Aerobe
 Facultative anaerobe
 Facultative anaerobe
 Primary reservoir
Oral mucosa
Soil
Skin
 Pharynx of rodents 
Pathogenesis
The similarity of clinical signs of Actinomyces infection
Members of the genus Actinomyces typically evoke pyogran-
with other disease patterns (e.g., strangles in horses) makes
these organisms important differentials clinically.
ulomatous reactions by largely unknown mechanisms.
 Bacterial colonies form in tissue, triggering suppurative
Epidemiology.
responses in the immediate vicinity. Peripheral to this,
Actinomycosis are noncommunicable,
granulation, mononuclear infiltration, and fibrosis furnish
except via bites (which is a rare form of transmission). Con-
tamination of bursae or body cavities may be hematoge-
the granulomatous elements. Sinus tracts carry exudate to
the outside; the exudate often contains characteristic yel-
nous or result from perforations of the alimentary tract,
reis aq uen sanueis ingns asaul a sanueis inins, mol
01 body wall. Actinomycosis associated with plant awns
than 5 mm in size and have also been referred to as rosettes
have been reported in outdoor dogs in semiarid areas.
or club colonies. Actinomyces species are often part of a
Actinomyces-associated disease has been reported in goats,
sheep, wild ruminants, monkeys, rabbits, squirrels, ham-
polymicrobial infection.
sters, marsupials, and birds throughout the world.
Disease Patterns
Immunologic Factors
Ruminants. In cattle, Actinomyces bovis, or rarely, Actino-
Infected humans show cell-mediated and humoral
introduced from an oral reservoir by a traumatic event (e.g.,
immune responses. Circulating antibody, produced dur-
poor-quality feed) into the alveolar or paralveolar region of
ing infection, confers no protection. Specific resistance, if
the jaw initiating a chronic rarefying osteomyelitis. This
any, is probably cell-mediated. Phagocytes kill Actinomyces.
leads eventually to replacement of normal bone by porous
No commercial vaccine is available.
bone, which is laid down irregularly and honeycombed
with sinus tracts containing pus. There may be dislodge-
Laboratory Diagnosis
ment of teeth, inability to chew, and mandibular fractures.
The lesion expands but has little tendency for vascular dis-
Aspirates from unopened lesions or tissues, preferably
semination. Similar infections occur in humans and mar-
 including granules, are optimal for laboratory diagnosis.
 supials. A. bovis also has been associated with pulmonary
Suspected exudates are examined for “sulfur granules"-
infection in cattle.
yellowish particles, varying in firmness, up to several mil-
limeters in diameter. Granules are washed, crushed and
observed under the microscope. Rosettes are suggestive
Horses. Reports of Actinomyces isolated from abscesses,
 corneal swabs, and skin pustules have all been described
of actinomycosis, especially if bacterial-sized filaments
extend into the clubbed fringe.
in horses. Organisms have been associated with fistulous
Crushed granules, exudate, or tissue impressions can be
withers, often accompanying a Brucella species. In addi-
 stained with Gram and acid-fast stains. Branching, gram-
tion, because horses can develop a lymphadenitis, Actino-
s, no a ds a     s
positive, beaded, non-acid-fast filaments suggest Actino-
infections.
myces species. Most Actinomyces strains obtained from ani-
 mals do not require anaerobic incubation but benefit from
increased carbon dioxide. Granules offer the best chance
Dogs and Cats.  Actinomyces have been associated with tho-
of isolation from the usually mixed flora. Colonies can
 racic and abdominal infections in companion animals. In
develop within 48-72 h after incubation at 35-37 *C.
dogs, actinomycosis may be associated with foreign bodies
(e.g.,by licking), particularly migrating grass awns. If these
 teristics can be evaluated biochemically to aide in identifi-
are lodged near vertebrae they can cause an actinomycotic
cation. Different species can react differentially on most
discospondylitis. Cutaneous actinomycosis in dogs is a rare
common biochemical tests. Colonies are typically non-
noduloulcerative lymphangitis.
 hemolytic and white and can appear either smooth or
 rough; colonies tend to adhere to the surface of the media.
Swine.
 Clinically, Actinomyces in fection in swine, usually
Meaningful species identification is improved with molec-
A. suis,is associated with mastitis, likely initiated from suck-
ular techniques. DNA primers based upon the sequence of
 ling piglets. Actinomyces has also been recovered from lung
genes encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA have been designed 
lesions and aborted fetuses.
for speciation of Actinomyces members.
Chapter 36
Filamentous Bacteria: Actinomyces, Nocardia, Dermatophilus, and Streptobacillus
265
Treatment and Control
Growth Characteristics. Pathogenic Nocardia species are
obligate aerobes, capable of growing on simple (e.g,
In bovine actinomycosis, iodine compounds have been
Sabouraud's) or enriched (blood agar) media over a
used for treatment, however, must be stopped when signs
of toxicity appear. Accessible soft tissue lesions can be
wide temperature range (10-50 *C). Small, indiscriminate 
colonies can appear after 48 h. Older colonies can vary phe-
drained or excised. Antimicrobials including penicillin and
notypically, appearing opaque or variously pigmented. The
aminoglycoside combinations are often administered con-
currently. Treatment of lumpy jaw will not restore normal
velvety depending on the abundance of aerial growth. The
bone structure, but the process can be arrested by systemic
formation of aerial hyphae aides in differentiating Nocardia
medication aided by drainage, lavage (iodine), and debride-
species from related genra. Colonies may develop a wrin-
ment of lesions.
kled appearance with age. In broth, a surface pellicle or
In other species, surgery (drainage, lavage, excision,
sediment is produced, but little turbidity.
removal of foreign bodies) is controversial but may be used
and supplemented by long-term antimicrobial therapy. A
Resistance. Nocardiae thrive in the environment yet
penicillin derivative (e.g., ampicillin) is the drug of choice.
Alternatives are erythromycin, clindamycin, doxycycline
are susceptible to disinfectants. Nocardia species exhibit
varying resistance patterns to antimicrobials, which have
Or amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. Relapses are common, espe-
traditionally been used in the differentiation of species.
cially with short-term therapy or thoracic involvement.
It is important to note that many Actinomyces infections
Nocardia farcinica have been reported to be particularly
resistant to antimicrobials. Resistance to trimethoprim-
are polymicrobial and may require modified treatment
 sulfamethoxazole has been reported in a large proportion
strategies.
 of human Nocardia isolates, where it is considered the drug
of choice.
Nocardia
Ecology
 Nocardia species are aerobic, saprophytic, gram-positive, fil-
Reservoir.
 Nocardia species are common inhabitants of
amentous bacteria ubiquitous in the environment includ-
the environment including soil, water, decaying vegeta-
ing the soil and water. The list of recognized species
tion, and can also be shed in the feces of animals. The organ-
is rapidly expanding, currently consisting of more than
isms have a worldwide distribution; however, species can
 a n  e  s 
cluster geographically. Because of the nature of these organ-
human medical importance. Infections attributed to Nocar-
isms, they can be environmental contaminants or rarely
dia species have been reported in mammals, fish, mollusks,
asymptomatically colonize humans or animals; when iso-
and birds. Because of the opportunistic nature of these
 organisms, they are frequently found in immunocompro-
lated from a clinical specimen they are generally considered
pathogens.
mised individuals. Nocardia infections often begin as sup-
purative or pyogranulomatous processes that can become
chronic; however, species can differ in their ability to cause
Transmission.
. Three main routes of infection are inhala-
tion, direct contact through trauma, and ingestion. Dust,
disease. Nocardia asteroides, historically the species most
soil, and plant material can serve as vehicles. Nocardia asso-
often associated with diseases, is now designated as the N.
 asteroides complex with several member species and types.
ciated with bovine mastitis can be introduced and dissemi-
For this reason, in the discussion that follows, a species
nated by equipment and personnel. The route of transmis-
sion is associated with the clinical presentation of disease.
designation will not be given to the nocardial agents asso-
ciated with the various diseases ascribed to members of this
genus, unless isolates were identified by techniques(mostly
Pathogenesis
Pathogenic Nocardia strains are facultative intracellular
of this group of bacteria.
organisms that survive within phagocytic vacuoles ini-
tially by preventing phagolysosome formation. The cell
Descriptive Features
wall contentand mycolicacids exhibited duringthe growth
phase of the bacteria facilitate intracellular survival. Super-
Morphology and Staining.
Nocardia species are non-
oxide dismutase and lysosomal enzyme inhibition protect
motile, gram-positive bacteria that when gram-stained are
against phagocytic killing. Other cell wall lipids may trigger
difficult to distinguish from Actinomyces species. They often
granulomatous reactions. Variations between strains and
appear as branching, beaded filaments that can fragment
growth phases in cell envelope constituents are paralleled
into pleomorphic rods or cocci. They are partially acid-fast
by changes in virulence and infectivity.
due to the presence of mycolic acids in their cell wall, which
variable granulomatous features. Lymph nodes are consis-
tently involved, particularly in wound cases. Lesions, par-
Structure and Composition. The cell wall is typical
ticularly in the lung, can erode into blood vessels and result
of gram-positive bacteria, with the addition of meso-
in dissemination and widespread abscess formation. Cen-
tral nervous involvement is rare in animals, though fairly
acids. The cell wall contains a high concentration of lipids.
common in human patients. In dogs, the common form is
266
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
thoracic empyema with granulomatous serositis. Exudates
 mastitis is most often traceable to unsatisfactory hygienic
are sanguinopurulent and sometimes contain small (<1
mm diameter), soft granules consisting of bacteria, neu-
period" with intramammary mastitis therapy.
trophils, and debris ("sulfur granule-like"). They usually
lack the microstructure of sulfur granules sometimes seen
Immunologic Aspects
with Actinomyces infections (see Section “Actinomyces").
Antibody and cell-mediated immune responses, includ-
Disease Patterns. Nocardiosis is frequently overlooked
ing hypersensitivity, commonly develop during nocardial
because of its ability to co-exist with or masquerade as
infections. Yet severe nocardiosis is commonly associated
other familiar diseases. Infection due to a Nocardia species
with immunosuppression, particularly of cell-mediated
may be difficult to distinguish from mycobacterial and
responses. Antibody apparently confers little protection.
Actinomyces infections without laboratory diagnosis. In fec-
Specific resistance is largely cell-mediated. No practical
tions can be regional or disseminated. Human and animal
 immunization method is presently available.
immune status of the individual.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Ruminants. Bovine mastitis is the most common manifes-
Branching, gram-positive, filaments and or shorter, coc-
tation of Nocardia infection in cattle. This infection is gen-
cobacillary forms are found in smears made from Nocardia-
erally associated with the hygiene of the herd. Onset is sud-
infected samples, impressions, or sections. The presence
den with fever, anorexia, and abnormal milk secretion. The
of these organisms is not definitive for Nocardia diagnosis
affected gland is swollen, hot, and painful. Discharging fis-
because of the morphological similarities with other gen-
tulous tracts may develop. Lymphadenopathy is common,
era. For confirmation, samples should be submitted for cul-
and there is occasional dissemination. The affected gland
ture or molecular identification.
usually becomes non functional. Rarely, pneumonia, abor-
Nocardial colonies on blood agar, incubated at 37 *C,
tion, and lymphadenitis associated with Nocardia species
will initially appear small and indistinct; older cultures
have been reported in ruminants.
will vary phenotypically, ranging between dull opaque to
 orange or yellowish. The colony surface may appear velvety
Horses. In horses, local or disseminated infections with
 Nocardia have been reported, including Nocardia-induced
Colonies may be hard to dislodge by loop or needle, ad her-
mycetomas, pulmonary infection and abortion. “Nocar-
ing to the surface of the medium. Stains confirm nocardial
dioform placentitis" is a relatively uncommon condition
morphology that may be pleomorphic rods, coccobacilli or
of mares that can result in late-term abortion, still birth, o1
branching filaments. Acid-fastness may be lost on culture.
 premature birth. Although morphologically similar, gram-
Biochemical activities include catalase production, nitrate
positive, branching, and filamentous, the causative agent,
reduction, and acidification of various carbohydrates. Bio-
Crossiella equi, is unrelated to Nocardia.
crobial agents have traditionally been used in identification
Dogs and Cats. Dogs and cats often develop debilitating.
of specific Nocardia species, however, are now considered
febrile illness with depression and anorexia. Pneumonia
insufficient to differentiate members of the N. asteroides
and suppurative pleuritis with empyema is the common
complex.
finding in dogs. Dissemination occurs to liver, kidneys,
Serological tests are not widely available for Nocardia
bones, joints, and, rarely, the central nervous system. Co-
detection and their reliability is uncertain. Molecular meth -
infection with canine distemper virus is common. Cuta-
ods are gaining popularity for identification of Nocardia
neous subcutaneous abscess formation is the more com-
species. Determination of restriction enzyme patterns from
mon clinical manifestation in cats, although pulmonary
a heat shock protein gene, hsp65, had been used to differ-
O1 systemic disease can also occur. There is a high mortal-
entiate species; however, the discriminative ability of this
ity rate in these animals, although that may be related to
test has been challenged. Sequencing of the DNA encoding
predisposing factors such as being immunosuppressed or
the 16S rRNA or hsp65 gene has been proposed as useful
co-infection status.
identification tools for Nocardia species. The usefulness of
these techniques in clinical settings in not established.
Swine. Pneumonia, abortion, and lymphadenitis associ-
 ated with Nocardia have rarely been reported.
Treatment and Control
Other Species. Nocardiosis observed in birds (rare),
 Antimicrobial therapy of nocardial mastitis may produce
whales, and dolphins are mostly respiratory in nature with
temporary clinical relief and cessation of shedding, but no
signs of dissemination. In fish, granulomas within the mus-
permanent cures. Control in volves removal of infected ani-
cle or associated with internal organs have been reported.
mals, thorough disinfection of premises and equipment,
and scrupulous stabling and milking hygiene.
Epidemiology.  The distribution of Nocardia species in the
In
other forms
of nocardiosis，
trimethoprim-
environment is worldwide; however, some species cluster
sulfonamide combinations have been considered the
 geographically. In animals and humans, disease is asso-
therapy of choice. Amikacin, linezolid and some beta-
ciated largely with immunodeficiency. Bovine nocardial
lactam compounds (imipenem, cefotaxime) have also been
Chapter 36
Filamentous Bacteria: Actinomyces, Nocardia, Dermatophilus, and Streptobacillus
267
used effectively in humans and animals. Fluoroquinolones
are common hosts; however, it has been diagnosed in
are reported to have limited therapeutic value. Therapy
goats, swine, dogs and cats, turkeys, primates (including
(s pd rd si so o jo
humans), and wild mammals, including marine mammals.
with relapses common in short-term courses. Abscesses
The distribution of D. congolensis is world wide, but its great-
' po pue As pn o arn eda 1
est economic significance is in tropical regions in Africa.
in combination with administration of antimicrobials.
Younger animals appear to be more susceptible than older
 Antimicrobial resistance has been observed during the
animals, possibly related to an immature immune system.
course of treatment, and there are species-associated
susceptibility profiles.
Transmission. Spread of D. congolensis is by direct physi-
cal contact of animals or indirect contact via arthropods.
Injury by thorny range plants and shearing cuts may create
Dermatophilus
portals of infection or inoculate the agent. Transmission is
exacerbated in moist conditions.
Dermatophilus species are generally associated with exuda-
tive dermatitis or skin lesions in animals and occasion-
 ally humans. The most predominant and type species of
Pathogenesis
the genus is Dermatophilus congolensis that is responsible
for dermatophilosis or streptothricosis (cattle and other
 D. congolensis results in an exudative epidermitis. Its pri-
mary activity is confined to the living epidermis. Infec-
species), rain scald or rain rot (horses), grease heal (horses),
lumpy wool (sheep), and strawberry footrot (sheep). Der-
tion results after soaking or trauma occur to this area.
matophilus chelonae is also rarely isolated from skin lesions
Deposited zoospores respond to a CO2 gradient and pen-
of more exoticanimals, although the taxonomy this organ-
etrate deeper cell layers. Upon germination, germ tubes
ism has recently been challenged . Dermatophilus species are
and filaments arborize within the epidermis and colonize
 gram-positive, branching, filamentous rods that exhibit
hair follicles. A layer of inflammatory cells (largely neu-
a unique bacterial life cycle. In temperate climates, der-
trophils) forms under the infected epidermis, which ker-
matophilosis is often a cosmetic problem controllable by
atinizes. Beneath the neutrophils new epidermis forms,
 management practices. In sheep and cattle of tropicalareas,
which can be invaded. The even tual result is a scab consist-
it can severely affect productivity and may be a disposing
ing of layers of neutrophilic exudate and infected keratiniz-
factor for other problems including myiasis. Dermatophilus
ing epidermis. The scabs are easily lifted by the hair, which
 Organisms are rarely found at sites other than the skin.
protrudes from both surfaces. Virulence factors of D. con-
golensis including phospholipase and proteolytic enzymes
aide by increasing the permeability of the epidermis and
Descriptive Features
interacting with the inflammatory response.
Morphology and Composition. D. congolensis are gram-
The primary lesions from D. congolensis are painless
and nonpruritic. Wetting favors their expansion. Biting
positive bacteria that exhibit a unique life cycle that
arthropods can infect areas protected from soaking rain.
includes the germination of a motile coccoid “zoospore,"
Soaking provides the preparatory step for lesions on the
forming a germ tube. Next, transverse and longitudinal
septa formation occurs, forming a strand several layers
, ) sn e  ( , aa) 
thick. Binary fission of constituent cells become coccoid
berry footrot," equine “grease heel'"). The extent varies from 
in shape and appears in parallel rows. Mature, motile (flag-
a few scabby areas of roughened hair or “lumpy wool"
to widespread loss of epidermis, causing secondary par-
ellated) zoospores are released, completing the life cycle.
The cell wall of Dermatophilus contains meso-DAP, but lacks
asitisms or infections and eventual loss of the animal.
More severe disease is generally associated with infesta-
galactose and arabinose.
tion with the Amblyomma variegafum tick that promotes
Growth Characteristics. D. congolensis grows well on
an immunosuppression. The genetic makeup of the ani-
 e asonxap pnnoqes uo jou nq 'epa ree poo
mal may also contribute to the severity of disease. Der-
matophilosis in nonepidermal tissue including the tongue
is a facultative anaerobe and capnophilic. Colonies, which
develop in 48 h, vary from mucoid to viscous and waxy,
and lymph nodes has only been rarely reported in cats.
whitish-gray to yellow, and smooth to wrinkled. There is
Epidemiology.
large phenotypic variation, includ ing hemolytic and enzy.
.Infection with D. congolensis is strongly
matic activity between D. congolensis isolates. Generally,
correlated to environmental conditions, and as such,
D. congolensis is highly hemolytic on blood agar plates. In
prevalence can vary significantly. The prevalence of der-
addition, antigenic variation has been reported in field iso-
matophilosis depends on (1) infected animals; (2) dissemi-
lates. Genotyping work suggests that the variation between
nation, forexample, by arthropods or thorny plants; and (3)
susceptible hosts' epidermis rendered accessible by trauma
location.
0r wetting.
Ecology
Immunologic Aspects
Reservoir.
D. congolensis does not multiply saprophyti-
Antibody is widespread among cattle in endemic areas. Its 
cally, it is an obligate parasite. Cattle, sheep, and horses
protective role is not well understood.
268
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Laboratory Diagnosis
of the organism. Infection is generally attributed to being
bit by an infected animal reservoir; however, oral inges-
Gram or Giemsa stains of crushed scab or scab flakes usu-
tion of contaminated material also can result in infection.
ally show typical phases of the D. congolensis life cycle and
Oral-related infection in humans, usually from rat excre-
 provide a strong presumptive diagnosis. In subacute and
ment contamination of water, milk, or food is referred to
chronic cases, bacterial elements may be rare and lack,
as “Haverhill fever."
for example, multicellular branching filaments. Zoospores
resemble large cocci. They and other Dermatophilus frag-
Bite lesions are inflammatory and often purulent or
necrotic. Reports of clinical disease in rodents range from
ments in skin debris may be identified by fluorescent anti-
swelling of the joints and lymph nodes to bronchopneu-
body. Impression smears from the base of recently removed
monia, abscess formation in the liver, and septicemia. In
scabs may also be useful in identification.
turkeys and mice, septicemic infections lead to polyarthri-
 D. congolensis is cultured from the undersurface of fresh,
tis or synovitis and often death. Clinical infection of S.
uncontaminated scabs on blood agar under 5-10% car-
moniliformis in dogs has resulted in vomiting, diarrhea, and
bon dioxide at 35-37 *C. Small, grayish yellow hemolytic
arthritis in the hindlegs. Other animals associated with the
rat reservoir may become infected and develop a range of
cally adhere to the media and after an extended incuba-
clinical signs.
tion (3-4 days) appear larger (3 mm), rough, and wrin kled.
In humans, an abrupt fever, accompanied by a
When colonies are gram-stained, branching filaments or
headache, vomiting and a rash on the extremities precede
coccoid forms are seen. A wet mount may reveal motile
localization in joints in 50-70% of S. moniliformis patients.
zoospores. The organisms are not acid-fast and catalase and
Other complications including endocarditis, pneumonia,
urease positive, indole and nitrate negative.
abscess formation on organs, and meningitis may occur.
Mortality rates may approximate 10% in untreated cases.
Treatment and Control
Treatment may induce the L-form of S. moniliformis, which
Acute cases of D. congolensis in fection are often self-limited.
 may persist in the body and cause relapses, including recur.
Mild cases respond to grooming and removal of the animal
rent fever, after therapy is completed.
from the moist environment. Severe cases can be treated
with antimicrobials including penicillin and streptomycin,
Immunologic Aspects
tetracycline, and chloramphenicol. Control should be
aimed at minimizing skin trauma and exposure to rain and
Although antibodies against S. moniliformis are produced
arthropods. Multiple live and killed vaccines have been
during in fection, the role of immunity is not understood.
investigated for D. congolensis control in sheep and cattle;
however, there has not been widespread implementation
Laboratory Diagnosis
of a vaccine do to their effectiveness.
S. moniliformis is fastidious yet can be cultured in the lab-
oratory using a blood or serum-enriched media. Proper
Streptobacillus
diagnostic submissions include blood or joint fluid, abscess 
aspirates, synovial fluid and wound cultures. Some antico-
Streptobacillus moniliformis is the only known species in a
agulants from blood culture systems may impede growth.
 genus renamed numerous times, and now taxonomically
The organism is a facultative anaerobe and in enriched
placed in the family Fusobacteriaceae. The organism is the
liquid media, S. moniliformis forms a characteristic “puff-
more common of two zoonotic agents (the other is Spirillum
ball" appearance. On enriched plates, incubation for 48 h 
 minus) associated with rat-bite fever.
or more at 35-37 *C produces visible gray, mucoid colonies.
Subsequent identification is by morphologic and biochem-
Descriptive Features
ical characteristics. Although S. moniliformis is relatively
S. moniliformis is a nonmotile, non-spore-forming gram-
unreactive, including catalase, oxidase, indole, urease, and 
negative, pleomorphic rod. There is no capsule. The organ-
nitrate negative, it can produce acid from select carbohy-
isms often grow in culture as long, beaded filaments bearing
drates including glucose. In culture, the production of L-
knobby irregularities. Its cellular proteins vary with geo.
form colonies may be favored by special media, forming
graphic and pathologic sources. Cell wall deficient L-forms,
mycoplasma-like colonies that are recognizable among the
which can be more difficult to grow, can form readily. Very
con ventional colonies.
little is known about specific virulence factors or cellular
Direct fluorescent antibody tests and molecular meth-
products; however, antigens expressed by the two forms
ods including PCR and sequencing have been used more
may not be identical.
recently for diagnostic identification of this organism, and
in rodents, ELISA and immunoblot tests have been used.
Ecology
Treatment and Control
The primary reservoir for S. moniliformis is the pharynx of
rodents, particularly rats. Wild mice are not considered a
Penicillin is the antibiotic of choice; however, tetracy
primary reservoir and S. moniliformis has been associated
cline is also effective in treating S. moniliformis infections
with severe clinical disease in these animals. Other car-
in penicillin-allergic individuals. Although antimicrobial
nivores that feed on or mouth rats may also be a source
resistance is not thought to be a large problem, resistance to
Chapter 36
Filamentous Bacteria: Actinomyces, Nocardia, Dermatophilus, and Streptobacillus
269
cephalosporins and aminoglycosides have been reported.
20 antimicrobial agents. Antimicrob Agents Chemother, 55,
The most obvious preventive measure is avoidance of direct
2995-2998.
and indirect contact with likely cairiers.
Norris BJ, Colditz IG, and Dixon TJ (2008) Fleece rot and der-
matophilosis in sheep. Vet Microbiol, 128, 217-230.
Further Reading
Rodriguez-Nava V, Couble A, Devulder G et al. (2006) Use
of PCR-restriction enzyme pattern analysis and sequenc-
ing database for hsp65 gene-based identification of Nocardia 
Burd EM,Juzych LA, Rudrik JT,and Habib F (2007) Pustular der-
species. / Clin Microbiol, 44, 536-546.
matitis caused by Dermatophilus congolensis. J Clin Microbiol,
Saubolle M and Sussland D (2003) Nocardiosis: Review of clin-
45,1655-1658.
ical and laboratory experience. / Clin Microbiol, 41, 4497-
Gaastra W, Boot R, Ho HTK, and Lipman LJA (2009) Rat bite
4501.
fever. Vet Microbiol, 133, 211-228.
 Sullivan DC and Chapman SW (2010) Bacteria that masquer-
 Larrasa J, Garcia A, Ambrose NC et al. (2002) A simple random 
ade as fungi: Actinomycosis/Nocardia. Proc Am Thorac Soc,
amplified polymorphic DNA genotyping method for field
7,216-221.
isolates of Dermatophilus congolensis. / Vet Med B: Infect Dis
Wauters G, Avesani V, Charlier J et al. (200s) Distribution of
Vet Public Health, 49, 135-141.
Nocardia species in clinical samples and their routine rapid
Larruskain J, Idigoras P, Marimon JM, and Perez-Trallero
identification in the laboratory. / Clin Microbiol, 43, 2624-
E (2011) Susceptibility of 186 Nocardia sp. isolates to
2628.
37
cobacterium
RAUL G. BARLETTA AND DAVID J. STEFFEN
Members of the genus Mycobacterium are aerobic, acid-fast
ssp. hominissuis are usually dome shaped with most viru-
rods with high guanine-cytosine (GC) content (approxi-
lent strains assuming a smooth, transparent appearance,
mately 65%) in their genomes. There are approximately
Ae auana se anbedo pe yni o suuo An
100 species and subspecies within this genus, and most of
be lost upon repeated culturing.
a  a n s s are s 
The presence ofan outer layer (capsule) ofloosely bound
environment. However, the genus also includes some of
carbohydrates and proteins has been demonstrated by cry-
the most dreaded pathogens such as the agents of bovine
 oelectron microscopy. This material is shed during growth
and human tuberculosis,leprosy, and various types ofgran-
in liquid medium, but is readily visible in vivo. Some exper-
ulomatous diseases in normal or compromised mammals,
iments indicate that mycobacteria may form spores. These
birds, reptiles, and fish.
     s
 Based on growth rate, mycobacteria can be classified
of aged cultures, remain highly controversial.
in fast (colonies develop in agar plates in 7 days or less;
e.g., Mycobacterium smegmatis and Mycobacterium fortui
fum) and slow growers (colonies take more than 7 days to
Structure and Composition
develop in agar plates; e.g., Mycobacterium fuberculosis and
Mycobacterium avium). Most of the pathogenic species are
Mycobacteria are characterized by lipid-rich cell walls.
 slow growers with generation times of 12 h and upward.
 Lipids account for acid-fastness and some pathogenic and
It is to be noted that even the fast growers have a con-
immunologic properties. The surface mycosides (mostly
siderable longer generation time as compared to typical
glycolipids and peptidoglycolipids) determine colonial
Escherichia coli strains that may develop colonies in agar
characteristics, serologic specificities, and bacteriophage
susceptibilities. Subsurface layers of long-chain branched
ful in the classification of mycobacteria is the presence
mycolic acids and their esters make up the bulk of cell wall
of carotenoid pigments in some species ("chromogens"
lipids. Mycolic acids are linked to the innermost peptido-
o, a n   (so, 
glycan layer by way of arabinogalactans (see also Chapters
tochromogens" vs. "scotochromogens").
30 and 36). Determination of mycolic acid chain length
has diagnostic relevance for genus and species identifica-
Morphology and Staining
tion as mycobacteria have longer chains of 60-90 carbon 
atoms. Some mycolic acids are loosely bound to the disac-
charide trehalose in the form of trehalose monomycolates
Mycobacteria are nonflagellated, predominantly rod-
(TMM) and dimycolates (TDM). One of the capsular anti-
shaped, about 0.5 μm wide, and variable in length.
gens (antigen 85) carries the enzymeactivity responsible fo1
Cytochemically, these microorganisms are gram-positive,
the formation of TMM and TDM. TDM has recently been
but often resist staining with the Gram stain. How.
identified as "cord factor," the mycobacterial component
ever, mycobacteria can be stained with carbolfuchsin
that determines the characteristic serpentine-like appear-
(Ziehl-Neelsen stain, Figure 37.1) or fluorescent dyes (e.g.,
 auramine-rhodamine). Their most noted staining property
ance observed upon culture in certain liquid media. TDM
is associated with multiple activities in the mechanisms of
is their acid-fastness (i.e., once stained, they resist discol-
pathogenesis, both protecting mycobacteria from phago-
oration with 3% hydrochloric acid in ethanol). Growth in
 cytic killing and contributing to disease pathology of host
agar media leads to colonies of variable morphology, but
cells within the granuloma.
typically they are dry and crumbly. Colonies of M. avium
The mycobacterial peptidoglycan has also an unusual
structure as the muramyl dipeptide subunit component
has a 50% mixture of N-acetylated and N-glycosylated moi-
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
eties that departs from the typical 100% N-acetylated moi-
Ernst L. Biberstein.
ety of most eubacteria. This particular composition seems
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
270
Chapter 37  Mycobacterium
271
studies provided the basis to develop the Koch's postulates
FIGURE 37.1.
Acid-fast staining. The procedure
of disease causation. Rodents, especially mice and guinea
demonstrates numerous rods in the cytoplasm of the
macrophages of the lamina propria in the jejunum of a bovine
with M. bovis and M. huberculosis. However, M. huberculosis
with Johne's disease (Ziehi-Nielsen acid-fast stain, 60x).
is a human-adapted pathogen and rarely infects other ani-
(Specimen from the University of Nebraska Veterinary
mals. Transmission occurs from one individual to another
Diagnostic Center.)
by in fected aerosols. In contrast, M. bovis isazoonotic agent
that can be transmitted by aerosols bidirectionally from (to)
animals to (from) humans, though the most frequent case
n    dn   s
(cattle and other ruminants) that serve as a main source of
infection. The work of Koch involved samples from both
humans and animals. Thus, Koch worked with both M.
 bovis and M. uberculosis, at a time when the subtle distinc-
tions between these microorganisms had not been defined.
There are two closely related host-adapted mycobacteria
that have been given special names based on the infected
hosts: Mycobacterium pinnipedi (seals) and Mycobacterium
caprae (goats). Latest citations refer M. caprae as a sub-
species ofM. bovis. The antituberculosis vaccine BCG (bacil-
lus Calmette-Guerin) is an attenuated strain of M. bovis.
The original isolate was sent to different locations around
the world, and each isolate underwent independent muta-
tions during passage and maintenance and was defined as
BCG substrains (e.g., BCG Copenhagen, BCG Pasteur, BCG
Tokyo, and BCG Russia).
directly linked to the ability of this component to potenti-
Another related human-restricted pathogen is the
ate humoraland cellular immune responses (ad juvanticity)
African version of the tubercle bacillus designated Mycobac-
and the basis for its inclusion as the active component of
terium africanum. Another microorganism, Mycobacterium
Freund's complete adjuvant.
canettii has also been described in North Africa. The host
Mycobacteria possess typical cell membranes composed
range of M. caneti remains unknown. Mycobacterium
by lipid bilayers, but they have the salient characteris-
 microti is another member of the complex identified as the
tic that one major cell wall glycolipid (lipoarabinoman-
agent of tuberculosis in voles and more recently isolated
nan, LAM) is covalently attached to this membrane. LAM
from some human cases. Molecular and genomic studies
is also involved in mycobacterial pathogenesis (phagocy-
 established that mycobacterial genomes were generated
tosis and inhibition of phagolysosome fusions see Sec-
by reductive evolution involving both single-nucleotide
tion "The Immune Response to Mycobacterial Infections"),
polymorphisms and serial deletions of genetic materials.
especially in M. fuberculosis as LAM is capped with man-
The deletions gave rise to regions of difference in the cor-
nose residues (ManLAM). Other mycobacterial lipids (gly-
responding genomes and defined major speciation events.
colipids, phospholipids, sulfolipids, and waxes) may also
This analysis leads to the conclusion thatan ancestral strain
play some role in these processes.
of M. canettii is the precursor of M. huberculosis and M. bovis.
The mycobacterial cell wall architecture is completed
Thus, the old paradigm that M. fuberculosis evolved from
by the presence of porins and other proteins such as trans-
M. bovis (e.g., human tuberculosis has its origin in bovine
porters involved in nutrient acquisition. Some of the pro-
tuberculosis) is no longer tenable. Interestingly, M. bovis,
teins are antigenic and can be readily isolated in large
the species with the smaller genome, has a greater host
 amounts from broth culture supernatant fluids. In addi-
range than M. huberculosis. This has been attributed to dele-
tion to the already mentioned antigen 85, mycobacteria
tions of "avirulence" islands (e.g., encoding regulatory ele-
"secrete” superoxide dismutase, L-alanine dehydrogenase,
 ments that modulate the expression of virulence determi-
and glutamate synthetase.
nants) from the genome, allowing M. bovis to have a greater
host range.
Overview of Pathogenic Species, Epidemiology. and
is considered an obligate intracellular pathogen as it has
Microbial Evolution
never been grown in vitro. The nine-banded armadillo is
The group of closely related mycobacteria causing tubercu
one of the few experimental hosts that can be used to grow
losis in humans and animals is denominated the M. huber-
the microorganism under laboratory conditions. Both in
culosis complex. In medical terms, a complex is a group
 experimental infections of armadillos and in human in fec-
of microorganisms producing similar disease, but the term
tions, M. leprae has a favorite niche in bodily areas of lower
does not have taxonomic implications. The microorgan-
temperature, such as the extremities (feet and hands) fol-
isms Mycobacterium bovis and M. fuberculosis were discov-
lowed by spreading to the face. Transmission of leprosy
ered to be the agents of tuberculosis in animals and human
occurs by contact and may be mediated by aerosols. Very
beings by Robert Koch in his 1882 pioneering studies. These
few cases of zoonotic transmission have been observed.
272
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
M. leprae attacks the peripheral nervous system, but does
to time may cause opportunistic infections in human and
not affect the central nervous system. These features result
animal hosts.
 in mentally normal patients with characteristic disfigure-
ments due to these peripheral lesions. This disease was
Primary Interaction with Phagocytic Cells and Disease Onset
well documented in biblical times both in the Old Tes-
 tament and the New Testament. This disease was popular-
Upon entry via the bronchial or the intestinal mucosa, res-
ized in theaters in the 1959 epic movie “Ben-Hur." From the
ident alveolar or intestinal macrophages are mobilized to
ancient times until the early years of the twentieth century,
engulf the pathogenic mycobacteria. This phagocytic pro-
leprosy patients were confined in isolation; nowadays the
cess is receptor mediated and antibody independent with
disease is readily treatable and only progresses to the worst
the involvement of complement receptors, the mannose
scenario, if patients are left untreated or if complications in
receptor, and/or integrins.Mycobacterium avoids antibody-
therapy occur.
dependent receptors that normally trigger, as it is the case
M. avium complex (MAC) infections were once consid-
with many bacterial pathogens, macrophage activation,
ered the most common opportunistic bacterial infections
and a bactericidal response. In this way, mycobacteria
of AIDS patients. Advances in AIDS therapy have resulted in
remain in phagocytic vacuoles preventing phagosome acti-
patients maintaining a higher, yet less than normal, level
vation (production of bactericidal reactive intermediates)
of T cell CD4 counts, and thus in better control of MAC
and maturation (e.g., phagosome acidification and fusion 
infections. M. tuberculosis, the most virulent mycobacte-
with lysosomes). In this way, mycobacterial bacilli are able
rial species, has now overtaken MAC as the main cause of
to survive and multiply within resident phagocytic cells.
complicating coinfections in AIDS patients. However, MAC
There are some reports that highly virulent strains of M.
infections are still of concern in patients that do not under-
uberculosis could even escape from the phagosome into
take proper AIDS therapy. The MAC complex includes
the cytosol where they can replicate faster.
related but distinct species: Mycobacterium intracellulare and
Monocytes (blood phagocytic cells) are then recruited
M. avium (these two usually grouped as the MAI complex,
to the site of infection that finally evolves into a granu-
a term without taxonomical relevance), and the fast grow.
loma or tubercle. This focal rounded structure is evident in
ers Mycobacterium chelonae and M. forhuitum. As a result of
gross pathology as yellow nodulations near the entry/exit
biochemical and genetic analysis, the species M. avium is
of blood vessels from affected organs (e.g., the Ghon com-
now divided in four subspecies: M. avium ssp. avium, the
plex in lungs). The tubercle contains in fected macrophages
agent of a tuberculosis-like disease in birds; M. avium ssp.
at its center encircled by enlarged phagocytic cells (epithe-
hominissuis, the classical M. avium in the medical literature
lioid cells), lymphocytes, and fibroblasts surrounded by a
that affects humans and swine, and the main example of
collagen layer. At the center of the lesion, caseation necro-
"environmental mycobacteria"; M. avium ssp. parahubercu-
sis develops. Depending upon disease outcome, this lesion
losis, the agent of Johne's disease in ruminants and asso-
may either calcify if the disease is contained, or liquefy
ciated with Crohn's disease in humans; and M. avium ssp.
if disease worsens. Tubercles may enlarge, coalesce, and
silvaticum found colonizing wild life such as wood pigeons,
eventually occupy sizable portions of organs. Such tuber-
whose status as a pathogen has not been well defined. Both
cles consist mostly of caseous material.
aerosols and contaminated water have been associated with
In the case of human M. huberculosis infections, a favor-
infection, especially with the ssp. hominissuis. In the case
 able host immune response may prevent disease altogether
 of the ssp. parauberculosis, the main route of infection in
or keep bacilli in check within granulomas that eventually
calcify. However, live bacillistill remain in a nonreplicating
contaminated milk from their dams or by the ingestion
state, the so-called latent state. If the host response is weak
of fecal material from contaminated manure. An en viron-
from the start, or the host response wanes after 40-50 years,
mental exposure of susceptible individuals or consump-
infectious centers may become necrotic and release infec-
terated) milk has been mentioned as a potential source
is known as reactivation from latency. This clear sequence
of infection in humans. Regarding evolutionary lineage,
of latency and reactivation is not well documented in non-
it has been suggested that an ancestral strain of the MAC
human hosts. Certainly, granulomas are formed in animal
leads to two subspecies—M. avium sp. avium and M. avium
hosts, but it is unclear whether a true process of latency and
ssp. hominissuis—and the species M. intracellulare. The ssp.
reactivation takes place. Possibly, as a result of a shorter
 parauberculosis seems to have been originated from the ssp.
life span and a weaker host response, in many nonhuman
hominissuis.
 animal hosts, mycobacterial infections may progress from
 Another species of relevance is Mycobacterium kansasii, a
 subclinical to overt disease in absence of drug therapy.
 species related to the MAC complex that may cause dissem-
inated infections in AIDS patients and pulmonary diseases
Immune Response to Mycobacterial Infections
in patients with noninfectious lung disease. Mycobacterium
marinum, apathogen of fish, has also been related to human
Mycobacteria possess numerous antigenic macromolecules
skin granulomas in swimming pools. Mycobacterium ulcer-
including proteins, lipids, glucan, and glycolipids that
ans is an emerging pathogen associated with severe skin
induce humoral immunity. However, as mycobacteria are
ulcerations prevalent in tropical regions. Other mycobac-
intracellular pathogens, the humoral response is ineffec-
teria such as Mycobacterium aurum and M. smegmatis are
tive to control the infection and appears at medium or
usually saprophytic environmental species, but from time
late stages of disease. Thus, the humoral response has only
Chapter 37  Mycobacterium
273
diagnostic significance as a way to determine whether a
occur. Infected macrophages secrete IL-10 and IL-4 instead
-sd aseas jo sae e se lm se pa si iso
of IL-12. This process leads to the maturation of CD4+
sion. However, research in the last few years has impli-
cells via the TH2 pathway. TH2 cells secrete more IL-4 that
cated a role for humoral immunity in the host defense
stimulates B cells to mature into antibody-secreting cells.
against mycobacterial pathogens. For example, antibod-
 Unfortunately, this delayed humoral response dependent
ies against surface virulence determinants preventing the
On TH2 cells is completely nonprotective and it has devastat-
entry of mycobacterial into phagocytic cells may have a
ing consequences for the host. For example, in tuberculosis
protective effect if timely administered.
infections it can lead to disseminated (miliary) tuberculosis
The major host defense against 
mycobacterial
 and high number of bacilli with many organs compromised
pathogens is nonetheless the acquired cellular immune
in addition to the lung. In leprosy, cases of disfigurement
response that results in macrophage activation and the
occur upon activation of the Th2 response.
production of cytotoxic T cells. Mycobacteria may activate
macrophages to a first level of responsiveness via an
innate immune process mediated by the interaction of
Overview of Disease Patterns in Veterinary Medicine
mycobacterial products with Toll-like receptors present
Birds. Birds are naturally susceptible primarily to M.
on the phagocytic cells. This process results in dendritic
avium ssp. avium. Most poultry infections occur via the
cells and macrophages producing the polypeptide mes-
alimentary canal and disseminate to liver and spleen. Bone
senger interleukin-12 (IL-12, a type of cytokine) and
marrow, lung, and peritoneum are often affected. Although 
presentation of mycobacterial antigens to helper CD4+
the agent has been isolated from eggs, transovarian infec-
T cells. This antigen presentation process requires anti-
tion of chicks is rare. Although M. avium ssp. avium affects
gen degradation in the phagosome and association of
degraded peptides with class II major histocompatibility
ceptible to M. fhuberculosis. Canaries are also more suscepti-
complex (MHC) molecules. In presence of IL-12, and
 ble to mammalian than to avian bacilli.
possibly other cytokines such as IL-17, these cells undergo
a differentiation process and become Thi cells with the
Cattle.
 Cattle are usually infected with M. bovis, and the
property of producing y-interferon that further activates
infection is centered on the respiratory tract and adjacent
leads to the increased production of highly bactericidal
lymph nodes and serous cavities. The disease is commonly
products known as reactive oxygen (superoxide anion
progressive via air spaces and passages. Hematogenous dis-
semination involving liver and kidney occurs. The uterus
and hydrogen peroxide) and nitrogen (nitric oxide (NO)
may serve as portal for fetal infection, a pattern virtu-
and nitrite) intermediates. It seems that NO and a com-
bined product of nitrogen and oxygen intermediates
ally unknown in other domestic animals. Surviving calves
commonly develop liver and spleen lesions. Udder infec-
(peroxynitrite) exert the most important bactericidal
action. Still, mycobacteria partially resist these actions
tion is rare (<2% of cases) but has obvious public health
implications. Infection with M. avium ssp. hominissuis is
by producing catalase—superoxide dismutase and alkyl
 generally subclinical. Abortions resulting apparently from
hydroperoxidase—enzymes that detoxify these reactive
localization of bacilli in the uterine wall occur, in some
intermediates by a redox mechanism. NO has also an
instances repeatedly. In experimental infections, M. uber-
immunostimulatory role that results in further cytokine
culosis causes minor, nonprogressive lesions in cattle.
secretion and the activation of macrophage apoptosis that
further reduces the number of host cells that can be used
for mycobacteria to replicate. Activated macrophages also
Cervidae.  M. bovis readily infects free-ranging and domes-
ticated cervidae and is problematic in captive herds and
phagolysosome fusion events, thus complementing the
maintained in some wild populations. Disease progression
bactericidal action of NO and other reactive intermediates.
and lesions are similar to those in cattle, although species
IL-12 (IL-17)-activated TH1 cells also secrete IL-2 that
variations exist among cervidae particularly at the histo-
logic level. Lesions are, in some species, more suppurative,
triggers the differentiation of CD8+ T cells into cytotoxic
T cells. Their role is to lyse infected macrophages that
varied in numbers of acid-fast bacteria, giant cell numbers,
then release the intracellular bacilli. These microorgan-
and in degree of encapsulation.
isms can be further phagocytosed and cleared by activated
macrophages. Thus, the effective control of mycobacterial
Dogs and Cats. I
 Dogs and cats are readily infected with M.
infections requires both branches of the acquired cellu-
bovis but rarely with M. avium spp. Dogs are also suscepti-
lar response: macrophage and cytotoxic T cell activations
ble to M. uberculosis. Intestinaland abdominallocalization
upon antigen presentation. It is to be noted that activation
of infection is more common in cats than in dogs, reflect-
of CD8+ cells requires antigen presentation with the assis.
ing a likely alimentary route of exposure. Ulcerative skin
tance of class I MHC molecules. This process requires anti-
lesions are more common in cats than in other hosts, as is
gen presentation via secretion of mycobacterial antigens
eye involvement, with tuberculous choroiditis leading to
from the phagosome into the cytosol, escape of mycobac-
blindness. Lesions, especially in dogs, often more closely
teria into the cytosol, and/or an effective crosstalk of the
resemble a foreign body reaction than tubercles, since they
antigen presentation pathways.
may lack typical epithelioid and giant cells, and neither
Depending upon the immune status of the host, dif-
caseate and calcify, nor liquefy. The course is usually pro-
ferentiation of CD4+ cells into the THi pathway does not
gressive.
274
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Horses. Horses are rarely infected, but relatively more
are also found in nonhuman primates in laboratory
often with M. avium ssp. hominissuis than with M. bovis.
colonies and zoos.
 Infection enters usually by the alimentary tract, with pri-
In commercial poultry establishments, rapid popula-
mary complexes related to pharynx and intestine. Sec.
tion turnover (<1 year) and eliminating transgenerational
ondary lesions may be in lung, liver, spleen, and serous
transmission has eradicated M. avium ssp. avium from that
membranes. Lesions in cervical vertebrae may be due to
population. Mycobacteria remain a problem in barnyard
 a secondary, nonspecific hypertrophic periostitis. Gross
flocks, aviaries, and zoological parks, particularly since the
lesions are tumor-like. They lack caseation and gross cal-
agent can survive in soil for several years. It has been
cification and contain few lymphocytes. There is fibroblast
 hypothesized that amoeba may be involved in the trans-
proliferation but usually no firm encapsulation.
esis has been provided by experiments indicating that
Primates. Nonhuman primates are susceptible to M.
bacilli grown in amoeba have increased infectivity and
fuberculosis and M. bovis, but resistant to M. avium unless
pathogenicity than those microorganisms grown in broth
or agar cultures.
virus infection or preexisting bronchopulmonary disease.
These individuals also become infected with nontubercu-
Effects on Age, Breed, and Sex. In general, across all
lous mycobacteria.
 animal species, immature individuals often develop more
severe lesions than older ones to a given mycobacte-
Sheep and Goats. Sheep and goats are susceptible to M.
rial infection. Breed susceptibilities differ: zebu cattle are
bovis and perhaps slightly less so to M. avium ssp. hominis-
 more resistant than European breeds, and fox terriers and
suis, but they are resistant to progressive infection by M.
Irish setters are more often infected than dachshunds and
 uberculosis. Disease patterns resemble those described in
 Doberman Pinscher dogs. The higher prevalence in dairy
cattle.
than beef cattle may reflect closer confinement and greater
 di    ss 
Swine. Swine can be infected by tubercle bacilli, usually
pregnancy and lactation may explain the lower disease
via the alimentary route, but only M. bovis causes pro-
prevalence in bulls than in cows, although in dogs the
gressive disease with classical lesions. M. tuberculosis infec-
 reverse sex ratio is observed.
tions do not ad vance past regional lymph nodes. M. avium
 ssp. hominissuis infections, the predominant form in many
Laboratory Diagnosis
countries, may disseminate to viscera, bone, and meninges.
The lesions lack the organization of tubercles, but contain 
Sample Collection
granulomatous elements. Caseation, calcification, or liq-
uefaction is negligible. Bacteria may be abundant.
Collection of sputum and serum samples is more common
in human cases. In animals, especially ruminants, sam
Wild Life and  Infection  Reservoirs.  With near-
ples include aspirates or biopsies of active lesions, tracheo-
eradication of bovine tuberculosis in North America
bronchial and gastric lavages, lymph nodes (thoracic and
and Europe, the traditional reservoir in domestic mam-
 abdominal), urine orfeces, and biopsy specimens. Lung and
 mals might be of diminished concern. However, resurgence
 lymph nodes associated with the respiratory tract includ.
is a problem where efforts toward eradication are losing
 ing pharynx and lymph nodes of the intestinal tracts are
support and consolidation of livestock enterprises makes
 common sites for lesions and are selectively sampled at
elimination of large infected herds cost prohibitive. Game
necropsy when gross lesions are not obvious. Freezing sam-
farms, animal parks, zoos, and isolated wildlife pockets of
ples during transit or preserving tissue in sodium borate is
infection can serve as reservoirs of M. bovis. Tuberculosis is
effective, preserving mycobacterial viability and diminish-
typically a disease of captivity and domestication. Clinical
ing growth of microbial contaminants.
improvement and more limited spread in free-living
animals contrast with high communicability in confined
Direct Examination
domestic groups. M. bovis, probably originating from
cattle, is endemic in badgers of southern England and in
 Fluids are concentrated by centrifugation in tightly capped
brush-tailed opossums of New Zealand, both of which are
containers. Smears of sediment or tissue are processed
considered sources of infection for livestock. Infections
using the acid-fast staining procedure, or with auramine-
in raccoons, opossums, foxes, and coyotes can also be
rhodamine where fluorescence microscopy is available.
important as transmission to and from cattle in shared
Histologic sections are stained with hematoxylin-eosin
environments may frustrate infection control measures.
and acid-fast stains. Positive acid-fast staining results
Coyote-deer interaction is also common, and coyote
should be confirmed by culture or nucleic acid detection.
sampling has been proposed as a way to monitor in fection 
spread in wild deer. Farming of exotic animals comingling
Culture and Identification
with ruminants has also significantly increase risks of
bovine tuberculosis transmission, as captive cervidae are
Digestion and selective decontamination are advisable
highly susceptible to M. bovis. Sporadic cases of canine
especially with specimens likely to contain a mixture of
tuberculosis often prove to be M. uberculosis infections
traceable to human contacts—"reverse zoonoses"— that
acteristics (fast vs. slow), pigmentation (in the presence 0r
Chapter 37  Mycobacterium
275
absence of light), and biochemical reactions. DNA probes,
butol. Second-line drugs are para-aminosalicylic acid,
specific for the main groups, are commercially available.
kanamycin, cycloserine, capreomycin, and ethionamide.
Tests for the amplification of mycobacteria-specific DNA
Since resistance often develops under a single-drug regi-
fragments by use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
men, a combination is commonly used; a favored one in
have become methods of choice to demonstrate or identify
human medicine is INH-ethambutol-rifampin given for at
members of this genus.
least 9 months.
Because of the public health hazards inherent in
Immunodiagnosis
the retention of tuberculous animals, antituberculous
chemotherapy for animals is discouraged. Prophylactic
Tuberculin Test. The Mantoux tuberculin skin test
treatment with INH may be considered for pets recently
consists in the intradermal application of tuberculin
exposed to tuberculosis. Some experimental successes with
(tuberculin-purified protein derivative, tuberculin PPD)
INH for prophylaxis and treatment of calves have been
that is a cell-free extract of proteins and peptides released by
reported. In countries with eradication programs, treat-
M. huberculosis into the culture medium. This inoculation,
ment is generally discouraged or illegal.
in infected individuals, results in swelling characterized by
Bovine tuberculosis is controlled by identification and
an induration area 48-72 h postapplication (delayed-type
elimination of infected animals. This approach has resulted
hypersensitivity reaction). In cattle, a 0.2-0.3 mg/dose of
in near-eradication of the infection in many countries.
bovine PPD (PPD from M. bovis) is injected intradermally in 
Continued surveillance is required to prevent resurgence.
the caudal, vulvar, or anal skin or, in some situations, the
These efforts have changed tuberculosis from a clinical dis-
neck region. In positive cases, a swelling (>5 mm) develops
ease in cattle and a frequent source of zoonotic infection
within 72 h. While tuberculin cannot induce the hypersen-
to an often subclinical disease and rare source of human
sitive state, it may desensitize animals for weeks or months.
infection.
A positive test implies past or present infection, requiring
Vaccination of humans with BCG produces temporary
the reacting animal to be slaugh tered and necropsied. False-
immunity and hypersensitivity. The benefits of vaccina-
positive reactions occur and are explained by hypersensi-
tion have been greatest where exposure is mostintense, and
tivity to non tuberculous (e.g.,M. avium), and related agents
negligible where prevalence is low. Vaccination in humans
such as Nocardiae. Simultaneous use of avian "tuberculin"
is focused on infants and tuberculin-negative individuals
(M. avium PPD) often helps to decide, by comparative size
anticipating exposure.
assessment of the two reactions, whether sensitivity is due
 BCG has been used in calves. This practice is inap-
to M. bovis or other mycobacteria. False-negatives occur
propriate in countries attempting to eradicate tubercu-
in animals too recently infected and in advanced cases in
losis because it interferes with the interpretation of the
which anergy (lack of reactivity) develops due to antigen
tuberculin test. Vaccines of moderate efficacy are avail-
excess or immunosuppression. Nonspecific factors, such as
able against Mycobacterium paratuberculosis, but most of
malnutrition, stress, and impending or recent parturition,
these vaccines also interfere with diagnostic tests. New
approaches include the development of new and more
ate specificity are used on swine and poultry. In swine the
effective vaccines capable of distinguishing infected from
ears are injected, in poultry the wattles. The reliability of
vaccinated animals (DIVA formulation).
tuberculin tests on horses, sheep, goats, dogs, and cats is
 not established. The ease and the sensitive and inexpen-
sive nature of the skin test establish it as the most effective
M. Avium Ssp. paratuberculosis, the Agent
of Johne's Disease
antemortem screening test in ruminants.
M. avium ssp. parahuberculosis (MAP) is thecausative agentof
y-Interferon Assays. These tests are based on the release
a chronic, irreversible wasting disease of ruminants called
of y-interferon from whole blood ofinfected animals when
Johne's disease. Young animals are the most susceptible to
mixed with mycobacterial antigens (e.g., PPD) as the result
in fection. Older animals can be infected, but with larger
of the activation of the cell-mediated immune response.
inocula. Economic losses are traced to reduced milk pro-
Recent studies have demonstrated increases in specificity
duction and breeding problems (e.g., longer calving inter-
by altering the antigens used to stimulate the interferon
vals), and an increased incidence of mastitis (not caused by
response. Other studies suggest thatadding cytokines to the
MAP), and to general ill thrift.
analysis such as interleukin 1β may increase test sensitivity
Like the rest of the genus Mycobacterium, MAP is aerobic
as well.
but grows extremely slowly (8-12 weeks of incubation at
37 *C) in Herrold's egg yolk medium. Primary clinical iso-
Serology. Serologic tests have been moderately useful.
lates require the addition of the siderophore mycobactin
These assays are sensitive but are produced late in the dis-
(an iron-binding compound derived from hydroxamic
ease process. The greatest success has been in the detection
acid). This growth dependency on mycobactin is of diag-
of animals infected with M. avium ssp. parahuberculosis.
nostic value to identify and confirm MAP in clinical
samples.
Treatment and Control
The reservoir for MAP is the intestinal tract of infected
animals, both the clinically affected and, more impor-
First-line drugs for tuberculosis therapy are isoniazid
tantly, those infected but asymptomatic. In an affected
(INH), rifampin, pyrazinamide, streptomycin, and etham-
herd, infected, asymptomatic fecal shedders may be
276
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 37.2.
Typical histopathology of the jejunum of a
FIGURE 37.3.
Large epithelioid macrophages.
bovine infected with Johne's disease. Lamina propria is
Epithelioid macrophages dominate the superficial lamina
are sdkin sabeudoinew pio!auda juepunge Ag papuedxa
propria and separate crypts in the jejunum of a bovine with
rarified and contain some debris (hematoxylin and eosin
Johne's disease. A few degenerate celis are evident in crypts
staining, 10x). (Specimen from the University of Nebraska
Veterinary Diagnostic Center.)
University of Nebraska Veterinary Diagnostic Center.)
 20 times more numerous than those showing clinical signs.
found in the gene encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA, the
An infected animal may also shed MAP into colostrum and
insertion sequence Is900 (proper primer selection is crucial
 milk, and may pass the organism to her fetus in utero. MAP
since there are segments within this genetic element shared
has been isolated from semen, seminiferous tubules, and
with insertion sequences found in other subspecies).
the prostate glands of infected bulls. The infection is usu-
At present there are no economically useful antimicro-
ally acquired through the ingestion or contact with fecally
bial agents that are effective against MAP in vivo. The newer
contaminated materials (food and fomites). In utero infec-
 macrolides, such as clarithromycin, and some experimen-
tion and ingestion of contaminated colostrum or milk are
tal fluoroquinolones are effective invitro, but are too expen-
also possible routes.
sive to use clinically. As mentioned earlier, live attenuated
 MAP probably enters into the intestinal mucosa th rough
M cells and is later found within macrophages in the sub-
 mucosa of the ileocecal area and the adjacent lymph nodes
(ileocecal) following ingestion (Figure 37.2, 37.3,and 37.4).
FIGURE 37.4.
Large epithelioid macrophages. These
The establishment of the primary focus of infection is the
cells are seen among the crypts in the jejunum of a bovine
intestine. Initially the animal shows no signs of disease. The
with Johne's disease. Nuclei are eccentric and cytoplasm
 incubation period before overtclinical disease is 12 months
slightly vacuolated and sometimes granular (hematoxylin and
01 longer. Disease progression follows the course of other
eosin staining, 40x). (Specimen from the University of
 mycobacterial infection as described earlier with the for-
Nebraska Veterinary Diagnostic Center.)
mation of slowly progressing granulomatous lesions.
The disease in some affected animals progresses to mal-
absorption, protein-losing enteropathy, and overt clini-
cal disease. However, only 3-5% of the animals in an
infected herd progress to this terminal phase. The mucosal
epithelium displays a characteristic appearance (corru-
gated mucosa) that underlies the malabsorption syndrome.
Diarrhea is not a common clinical sign of the disease
 in sheep and goats. Herd unthriftiness, however, should
prompt examination for MAP. Intestinal lesions in sheep
 and goats are less obvious than in cattle. Weight loss has
been a consistent finding in affected goats.
A number of DNA tests have been developed for the
demonstration of the presence of MAP. These assays utilize
a specific sequence for the development of probes or fo1
the design of primers needed to amplify DNA by using the
PCR. Specific sequences that have been exploited are those
Chapter 37  Mycobacterium
277
and killed vaccines are used in some countries, but are not
not well defined. The location of lesions on the head,
universally available.
neck, and forelimbs suggests transmission by rodent bite
Eliminating infected animals and preventing possi-
Or arthropods. Nodules occur in cutis or subcutis in many
ble spread within the herd is an effective means of dis
sites, and are freely movable and painless. Ulceration and
ease control. Husbandry procedures that must be imple-
lymph node involvement are frequent. Disease is more
 mented include segregating the neonate from the dam
common in older cats and is slowly progressive. The form
and other adult animals, ensuring that parturition takes
Of disease does not consistently predict rate of progression.
 place in noncontaminated areas, and taking precautions
The general health of the cat may be unaffected. Micro-
against feeding neonates potentially in fectious, unpasteur-
scopically, the lesions are granulomas largely of monocytic
ized colostrum or milk. Immunologic and cultural tests are
with variable neutrophilic, lymphocytic, plasmacytic, and
applied topromptlyidentify those animals thatare infected
giant cell admixtures. Caseation necrosis and irregular neu-
and shedding.
ral involvement occur. Neurotropism has not been a fea-
Pasteurization is an important step in control on dairies
ture. Acid-fast bacteria abound within histiocytes. Routine
in assuring that calves receive milk or colostrum that is free
-oa r  o   n 
of MAP. Given the potential relationship between MAP
teria causing tuberculosis is negative. PCR technology may
and Crohn's disease, this process has also significance from
aid in making a definitive diagnosis.
a public health perspective. High-temperature, short-time
Treatment includes surgical excision of affected sites
pasteurization has been shown not to be 100% effective in
coupled with antibiotics. Clofazimine, fluoroquinolones,
killing MAP in naturally infected milk, but only if the num-
doxycycline, and clarithromycin individually or in combi-
bers of microorganisms in the milk are large. This probably
nation have been tried with varied success. Treatment as
has little public health consequence in areas where large
long as 3-6 months is required to prevent relapse.
quantities of milk are mixed together from several dairies,
thereby diluting any infected milk. However, this may
become important for producers that process milk from a
Canine Leproid Granuloma Syndrome
single farm. En vironmental contamination of water reser-
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome is caused by an uncul-
voirs may be another source of MAP infection in Crohn's
tured, saprophytic species of Mycobacterium (based on
disease cases.
sequence comparisons of DNA obtained from infected tis-
sue with other members of this genus as regards the gene
encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA). Diagnosis is based upon
Feline Leprosy Syndrome
demonstration of numerous acid-fast organisms in stained
There is no true leprosy in domestic animals. Since a disease
(Ziehl-Neelsen) biopsies or smears of affected tissue or sites.
 of cats is called feline leprosy, it is appropriate to contrast
The condition affects the subcutis and skin of the outer pin-
key features of the prototype (human) condition with dis
nae, face, and forelimbs. Lesions can be single, but multi-
ease in animals.
ple lesions are common. Large lesions may ulcerate. Histo-
In leprosy, the disease picture ranges between two
logic features are of pyogranulomatous inflammation with
extremes. In lepromatous leprosy, bacterial proliferation
necrosis and limited numbers of giant cells. Nerve bun-
is profuse. Poorly circumscribed nondestructive lesions
dles are not involved, and thus leproid refers only to the
develop, dominated by a monocytic response, but little
mycobacterial etiology rather than pathologic similarity
other inflammatory reactivity. Cell-mediated immunity is
to human disease. The disease can be self-limiting and is
suppressed, but circulating immunoglobulins are high. In
cured by surgical excision or antibiotic therapy. A combi-
tuberculoid leprosy, bacteria are scarce. Lesions are gran-
nation of rifampicin and clarithromycin has been effective
ulomatous, and cell-mediated inflammatory responses are
as has enrofloxacin. The disease was described first in Africa
well developed. They cause neural damage, leading to anes.
and has been well characterized in Australia and Brazil and
thesia, paralysis, dystrophy, disfigurement, and mutila-
is present in North America. Boxers may be predisposed.
tion.
The disease is most common in large breed, short-haired,
 Feline leprosy syndrome is a chronic noduloulcera-
outdoor dogs during summer months. This summer occur-
tive, mycobacterial infection of the skin. It exists in
rence and a strong predilection for lesions on the pinnae
two histomorphologic forms, lepromatous (organism rich)
and tuberculoid (paucibacillary). Mycobacterium leprae-
Cases in the United States, Brazil, and Australia all share
murium, the rodent leprosy bacillus, has been identi-
fied in tuberculoid and occasionally lepromatous lesions.
 The causative agent varies and new mycobacterial species
named Mycobacterium visibile and Mycobacterium sp. strain
Ulcerative Dermatitis of Cats and Dogs due to Rapidly
Growing Mycobacteria
in several cats in independent reports of the lepromatous
The most common cases of ulcerative dermatitis are
form. Several other mycobacterial species are described in
chronic(months to years), nonhealingskin lesions. There is
s  o o ss  sdr i 
a tendency for lesions to occur on the ventral and inguinal
arate leprosy syndrome from other forms of mycobacte.
regions and for disease to be progressive and requiring
riosis, and in some instances the possibility of surface epi-
dermal mycobacterial contaminants cannot be excluded.
sies of affected tissue reveals pyogranulomatous inflam-
Sources, mode of spread, and pathogenic mechanisms are
mation. Microorganisms may stain poorly ("ghosts" or
278
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
"speckled" structures, thought to represent nonstaining 0r
 Dhama K, Mahendran M, Tiwari R et al. (2011) Tuberculosis in
poorly staining mycobacteria, respectively) when stained
birds: Insights into the Mycobacterium avium infections. Vet
with Gram's or a Romanovsky-type stain (e.g., Wright's and
Med Int, 2011, 712369. Epub July 4, 2011.
Giemsa). When samples are stained by the acid-fast method
Fyfe JA, McCowan C, O'Brien CR et al. (2008) Molecular char-
(Ziehl-Neelsen), microorganisms are not often seen. Cavi-
acterization of a novel fastidious Mycobacterium causing lep-
tated nonstaining areas may contain clusters of bacteria.
romatous lesions of the skin, subcutis, cornea, and conjunc-
 Culture on standard blood agar medium will result in the
tiva of cats living in Victoria, Australia. / Clin Microbiol, 46,
isolation of rapidly growing (48-72h incubation) colonies.
618-626.
Isolates are identified by biochemical traits and DNA tests.
Gengenbacher M and Kaufmann SH (2012) Mycobacterium
tuberculosis: Success through dormancy. FEMS Microbiol Rev.
The most commonly isolated in western North America
is M. forruitum. A wide array of opportunistic mycobac-
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6976.2012.00331.x.
Hunter RL, Olsen MR, Jagannath C, and Actor JK (2006) Mul-
teria have been identified and each clinical case needs
tiple roles of cord factor in the pathogenesis of primary,
careful evaluation if etiologic diagnosis is sought. Other
secondary, and cavitary tuberculosis, including a revised
species identified in cases of dermatitis and panniculitis
description of the pathology of secondary disease. Ann Clin
include M. smegmatis, M. chelonae, M. abscessus, M. microti,
Lab Sci, 36, 371-386.
M. flavescens, M. massiliense,M. ulcerans,and Mycobacterium
Kalscheuer R, Syson K, Veeraraghavan U et al. (2010) Self-
 sp. strain Tarwin. M. bovis and M. avium have also been iden-
poisoning of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by targeting GlgE
tified in individual cases of feline dermatitis. Geographic
in an alpha-glucan pathway. Nat Chem Biol, 6, 376-
 location of studies varied on common isolates, suggesting
384.
 the distribution of opportunistic mycobacteria in the envi-
Kaufmann SH (201l) Fact and fiction in tuberculosis vaccine
ronment is the critical factor in anticipating what agent
research: 10 years later. Lancet Infect Dis, 11, 633-640.
 might be in fecting cats in a particular location.
Kaur D, Guerin ME, Skovierova H et al. (2009) Chap-
 Percutaneous wound infection is the likely portal of
ter 2: Biogenesis of the cell wall and other glycoconju-
entry. Mycobacteria that can be isolated from soil and
gates of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Adv Appl Microbiol, 69,
water are likely to lead to opportunistic infections of skin
23-78.
wounds. Treatment includes surgical excision of affected
 Kaur D, McNeil MR, Khoo KH et al. (2007) New insights into
sites coupled with antibiotic treatment. Clofazimine, fluo-
the biosynthesis of mycobacterial lipomannan arising from
roquinolones, doxycycline, and clarithromycin, individu-
deletion of a conserved gene. / Biol Chem, 14, 282, 27133-
 ally or in combination, have been tried with varied success.
27140.
Antimicrobial resistance patterns vary between species in
 Mishra AK, Driessen NN, Appelmelk BJ, and Besra GS (2011)
the limited studies published and, thus, etiologic diagnosis
Lipoarabinomannan and related glycoconjugates: struc-
 ture, biogenesis and role in Mycobacterium tuberculosis phys-
iology and host-pathogen interaction. FEMS Microbiol Rev,
as long as 3-6 months is required to prevent relapse.
35, 1126-1157.
Niederweis M, Danilchanka O, Huff J et al. (2010) Mycobacte-
Special topic
rial outer membranes: in search of proteins. Trends Microbiol,
18, 109-116.
Is the paradigm changing on M. uberculosis intracellular
Palmer MV, Waters WR, and Thacker TC (2007) Lesion devel-
localization? Prior and latest research suggest this may be
opment and immunohistochemical changes in granulo-
the case and a mechanism has been proposed.
mas from cattle experimentally infected with Mycobacterium
bovis. Vet Pathol, 44, 863-674.
Palmer MV, Waters WR, and Whipple DL (2002) Lesion devel-
Further Reading
opment in white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) experi-
mentally infected with Mycobacterium bovis. Vet Pathol, 39,
334-340.
Chacon O, Bermudez LE, and Barletta RG (2004) Johne's
Russell DG (2007) Who puts the tubercle in tuberculosis? Nat
disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and Mycobacterium
Rev Microbiol, 5, 39-47.
paratuberculosis. Annu Rev Microbiol, 58, 329-363.
 Cole ST and Riccardi G (2011) New tuberculosis drugs on the
Takayama K, Wang C, and Besra GS (2005) Pathway to synthe-
horizon. Curr Opin Microbiol, 14, 570-576.
sis and processing of mycolic acids in Mycobacterium tuber-
 Conceicao LG, Acha LM, Borges AS et al. (2011) Epidemiology,
culosis. Clin Microbiol Rev, 18, 81-101.
Tsai MC, Chakravarty S, Zhu G et al. (2006) Characterization
clinical signs, histopathology and molecular characteriza-
 of the tuberculous granuloma in murine and human lungs:
tion of canine leproid granuloma: a retrospective study of
cellular composition and relative tissue oxygen tension. Cell
cases from Brazil. Vet Dermatol, 22, 249-256.
Microbiol,8, 218-232.
De Leon J, Jiang G, Ma Y, et al. (2012) Mycobacterium tubercu-
van der Wel N, Hava D, Houben D, et al. (2007) M. fuberculosis
losis ESAT-6 exhibits a unique membrane-interacting activ-
and M. leprae translocate from the phagolysosome to the
ity that is not found in its ortholog from non-pathogenic
cytosol in myeloid cells. Cell 129, 1287-1298.
Mycobacterium smegmatis. / Biol Chem, 287, 44184-44191.
38
Chlamydiaceae
ROMAN R. GANTA
Descriptive Features
active. The replicating form is called reticulate body, which
is larger in size (0.6-1.0 μm) compared to elementary bod-
The family Chlamydiaceae includes obligate, intracellu-
ies. The reticulate bodies replicate by binary fission, which
lar pathogenic bacteria that can only survive and mul-
later transform to elementary bodies, and are released upon
tiply inside a host cell. They also have a cell wall like
complete lysis of the infected host cell or by exocytosis.
most other Gram-negative organisms, respond to antibi-
Members of the order Chlamydiales do not grow in stan-
otics (tetracyclines and chloramphenicol), and possess
dard bacteriological media or on media plates. They require
ribosomes, DNA, and RNA. Members of the order Chlamy-
eukaryotic cells or yolk sacs of chicken embryos for their
diales are transmitted primarily by inhalation of dust par-
growth under in viro conditions. Members of Chlamydi-
ticles, droplets, and through interpersonal contact, all of
ales undergo replication inside a phagosome of a host cell
which containing chlamydial organisms (known as the
  r  si n s  g
elementary bodies). These microorganisms infect the host
pathogens of the genera Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and Neorick-
epithelial cells and mucous membranes. The cell tropism
ettsia. Members of Chlamydiales also have a broad host
of Chlamydiales to epithelium is similar to that by several
 preference that is similar to Rickettsiales.
Mycoplasma species; therefore, the infections in target tis-
sue and the diseases caused by Chlamydia and Mycoplasma
are very similar. Based on the clinical symptoms, some-
Diagnosis, Immunity, and Control
times it is difficult to distinguish a Chlamydia infection
 Diagnosis is almost always established by serological meth-
from a Mycoplasma infection. Taxonomically members of
ods to detect chlamydial antibodies. Diagnosis is based
Chlamydiales are classified in the order, Chlamydiales hav-
on clinical signs and demonstration of the organism by
ing only one family, Chlamydiaceae, with the genera,
Giemsa or other polychromatic-stained impression smears
Chlamydophila and Chlamydia. Four known pathogens are
of an infected animal tissue, immunological assays, and/or 
Chlamydophila psittaci, Chlamydophila pecorum,Chlamydia
molecular techniques. An enzyme-linked immunoadsor-
trachomatis, and Chlamydia pneumoniae. C. psittaci has been
bent assay (ELISA) technique is also used to detect chlamy-
reclassified into two species: C. psittaci and C. aborhus. C.
dial antigens from a sample. Serological tests include com-
psiftaci, C. trachomatis, and C. pneumoniae cause infections
plement fixation and ELISA to detect antibodies in the
in people. Veterinarians and workers in poultry and slaugh-
serum of an infected animal. Molecular methods are also
terhouses are at the highest risk of acquiring the infections
available to detect nucleic acids derived from infection-
from birds and farm animals.
associated chlamydial organisms. Many different and most
sensitive molecular methods have been developed in viro
to amplify a target of chlamydial nucleic acids, mostly
Morphology and Staining
representing the 16S and 23S ribosomal DNA or riboso-
Members of Chlamydiales are short cocci bacteria with a
mal RNA. Molecular methods allow the most sensitive
size of the organisms ranging from 0.2 to 1.0 μm that is sim-
means of rapidly detecting an infection in a tissue sam-
ilar to Rickettsiales. Giemsa or other polychromatic stains
ple from clinically ill animals or people or from a sample
are used to stain these organisms.
collected from a persistently infected patient. Chlamydial 
 Organisms can also be detected in an impression smear of
an infected tissue sample stained with a Diff-Quick stain
Life Cycle and Growth Characteristics
(Figure 38.1).
Infectious organisms called elementary bodies, 0.2-0.4 μm
       s
in size, enter susceptible cells by receptor-mediated endocy-
mediated and humoral immune responses resulting in the
tosis. The phagosome containing the organism is not fused
rise of antibody titers, but the immune response does not
with lysosomes, and the elementary body changes into a
eliminate the infectious agents, nor does it help in pre.
noninfectious and replicating form that is metabolically
venting reinfection. Members of Chlamydiales establish
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
279
280
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
C. psittaci/C. abortus Infections
FIGURE 38.1.
C.abortus inclusions identified from an
impression smear sample prepared from an aborted placenta
C. psittaci has been reclassified into two species, C. psittaci
collected from an infected sheep. The smear is stained with
and C. aborhus. C. abortus is the causative agent of abortions
Diff-Quick stain (magnification, 1000×). (The slide prepared by
in sheep and goats in many countries. It is also responsi-
Dr Jerome C. Nietfeld, Department of Diagnostic
ble for abortions in cattle, pigs, and women. C. psittaci is
Medicine/Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
responsible for the majority of infections in various verte-
Kansas State University.)
brate animals. This species infects birds, goats, sheep, pigs,
cattle, and humans.
Birds. C. psittaci infections in birds are referred to as avian
chlamydiosis (AC), psittacosis, and parrot fever in parrots,
 and ornithosis in all other bird species. It is an impor-
tant cause of systemic illness in companion birds and
 poultry and can cause large economic losses in the poul-
try industry throughout the world. A great variation in
pathogenicity exists for this species resulting from strain-
specific variations. AC could be asymptomatic, acute, sub-
acute, or chronic clinical disease. Clinical signs and mor-
tality depend on the species of birds, virulence of a strain,
infective dose, stress factors, age, and extent of treatment o1
prophylaxis. Birds in fected with C. psittaci typically exhibit
clinical signs such as lethargy, anorexia, and ruffled feath-
ers. Other signs include ocular or nasal discharge, diarrhea,
and excretion of green to yellow-green urates. Infected
birds may die soon after the onset of the illness or may
become emaciated and dehydrated before death.
Cattle. C. psittaci is well recognized in many countries
as an important bovine pathogen. The infection in neu-
persistent infections in the infected host. Tetracycline is
 10epithelium is implicated to cause the neurological dis.
the drug of choice in the treatment of chlamydial infec-
ease, sporadic bovine encephalomyelitis (SBE), also known
tions. It is offered as part of the feed additive or to treat
as Buss disease. SBE is more common in cattle less than
clinically ill animals. The dose for controlling infections
3 years of age and is characterized by encephalitis, fibri-
is moderate, whereas higher dose is used to treat active
nous pleuritis, and peritonitis. It is manifested with pro-
infections. Vaccination against chlamydial infections has
 found depression, and is usually associated with fever that
a variable success, and vaccines are constituted of modified
lasts unti recovery or death.A staggering gait is often seen
or killed organisms.
and some infected animals tend to walk or stagger in cir-
cles. The disease can be transmitted to calves through the
milk of infected dams. In addition to SBE, C. psittaci infec-
Pathogenicity and Toxins
tions can lead topolyarthritis, pneumonitis, conjunctivitis,
abortion, and infertility. C. psittaci infections can result in
Members of the order Chlamydiales infect epithelial cells
 and mucous membranes. These bacteria possess hemag-
great economic losses. C. pecorum is also isolated from cat-
tle and sheep. It is responsible for various diseases, includ.
glutinin that facilitates attachment to cells. The cell-
 ing sporadic encephalitis, polyarthritis, pneumonia, and 
mediated immune response is largely responsible for tis-
sue damage during inflammation. Chlamydial cell wall
diarrhea.
lipopolysaccharides and low-density lipoprotein oxidation
    d s   
Sheep. C. psittaci infections in sheep cause pneumoni-
pathogenicity.
tis, polyarthritis, and conjunctivitis. C. aborfus causes abor-
tion.
Diseases Caused by Chlamydiales
Goats.
 Pneumonitis, abortion, enteritis/diarrhea, and
 arthritis in goats are caused by C. psittaci/C. abortus.
Because chlamydial infections are primarily in the epithe-
lium, they infect the respiratory tract, eyes, urogenital
Horses.
 Chlamydial infections by C. psittaci also cause
tracts, and joints, thus causing respiratory disease, con-
 pneumonitis, arthritis, abortion, and infertility in horses.
 junctivitis, urogenital infections, and polyarthritis, respec-
tively. With respect to the host cell preference, the mode
Cats.
 C. psittaci infections in cats may begin with conjunc-
of transmission, and the diseases they cause, chlamydial
tivitis and nasal discharge, followed by interstitial bron-
infections resemble many Mycoplasma infections.
chopneumonia.
Chapter 38(
 Chlamy diaceae
281
Swine. Infections in swine are associated with pneumoni-
as fever, diarrhea, chills, conjunctivitis, and sore throat. C.
tis, conjunctivitis, and polyarthritis.
psittaci infections in both people and birds are treated with
doxycycline or tetracycline. People are treated for 3 weeks,
Other Animal Species. C. psittaci also infects guinea pigs,
while birds are treated for 45 days.
rabbits, and mice, causing conjunctivitis and fertility prob-
lems.
C. trachomatis
C. pecorum Infections
C. frachomatis is the most common sexually transmitted
C. pecorum infects cattle, sheep, and pigs. Clinical signs of
pathogen of humans in the United States. It is responsi-
a C. pecorum infection vary from no clinical symptoms to
ble for approximately 3-4 million cases each year. Pelvic
severe disease, involving the central nervous, respiratory,
inflammatory disease (PID), a serious complication of
and digestive systems, joints, and conjunctiva. After recov-
chlamydial infection, has emerged as the leading cause
ery from a clinical disease, many animals remain as the
 of infertility among childbearing age-group women. In fec-
carriers of infection and excrete elementary bodies for a
-u n mn no d e  o pssd aq  
long time.
borns during delivery, which can also cause neonatal con-
junctivitis and/or pneumonia. C. trachomatis cases are five
times more in females compared to males. Clinical symp-
Chlamydiosis: A Zoonotic Disease
toms are also often milder in males although some infected
females can be asymptomatic. Chlamydiosis in both sexes
C. psittaci
can lead to a serious disease, and can cause sterility due to
the scarring of the tubes. C. frachomatis infections can also
Infections in people with C. psittaci are reported world-
cause blindness in people. C. frachomafis infections are also
wide. The disease is referred to as psittacosis, which can
cause fatal pneumonia. Most human cases are acquired
reported in pigs, monkeys, and laboratory mice.
from the organisms shed from parrots, pigeons, turkeys,
sheep, and goats. The disease agent can also be transmit-
ted from person to person. Infected birds and animals shed
C. pneumoniae
elementary bodies in their feces, urine, saliva, ocular and
nasal secretions, and feather dust. These infectious parti-
C. pneumoniae is responsible for causing a respiratory dis-
cles are inhaled or ingested by other birds, animals, and
ease in people (Figure 38.2). This is very similar to pneu-
monia caused by Mycoplasma. The mode of transmission of
infective particles in the air. The incubation period is 1-2
the organism is by inhalation. C. pneumoniae infections are
weeks. Symptoms are generally like those of the flu, such
also implicated in causing atherosclerosis.
FIGURE 38.2.
C. pneumoniae infection in HEp-2 cells (A and B) containing typical incfusions inside phagosomes of the infected
cells. EB, elementary bodies; RB, reticulate bodies; im, incfusion membrane. (Reproduced from Kutin et al. 2001 with the permission
from the American Society for Microbiology.)
（A)
B
282
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Reference
HarveyJW (2012) Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and
Color Atlas, Elsevier Inc.
Kutlin A, Flegg C, Stenzel D et al. (2001) Ultrastructural study of
Raskin RE and Meyer DJ (2010) Canine and Feline Cytol-
 Chlamydia pneumoniae in a continuous model./ Clin Micro-
ogy, A Color Atlas and Interpretation Guide, Elsevier
biol, 39,3721-3723.
Inc.
Stephens RS (1999) Chlamydia: Intracellular Biology, Pathogene-
sis, and Immunity, ASM Press.
Further Reading
 Stuen S and Longbottom D (2011) Treatment and control of
 chlamydial and rickettsial infections in sheep and goats.
Bavoil PM and Wyrick PB (2006) Chlamydia: Genomics and
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 27 (1), 213-233. Epub
Pathogenesis, Horizon Scientific Press.
December 13, 2010.
39
Mollicutes
ERIN L. STRAIT AND MELISSA L. MADSEN
The mollicutes are members of the order Mycoplasmatales
red blood cells infected with hemoplasmas have also been
and class Mollicutes (Latin: mollis, soft; cutis, skin). Only
observed. The diameter of the spherical form ranges from
the genera Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma have pathogenic
0.3 μm to 0.8 μm. Due to the size and shape of these organ-
species important in veterinary medicine. Members of the
isms, they are able to pass through 0.22 μm and 0.45 μm
Acholeplasma are sometimes encountered, but usually as
membrane filters commonly used to filter sterilize liquid
contaminants. “"Mollicutes" is the correct term to use when
media; therefore, it is diffcult to rid tissue culture cell lines
collectively referring to members in this order; however,
of these organisms.
Mollicutes stain poorly by the Gram method due to their
pose. Mollicutes are ubiquitous in nature. Species have been
lack of a cell wall. Giemsa, Castaneda, Dienes, cresyl-fast
found in mammals, reptiles, fish, arthropods, insects, and
violet, orcein, and acridine orange stains are preferred.
plants. They are also common tissue-culture contaminants.
It is likely that only a small portion of the total number of
Structure and Composition
ever one looks a new species can be found. Over 113 ani-
The mollicutes lack the genetic capacity to produce a cell
mal mycoplasmas and 5 ureaplasmas have been identified
wall. Instead, they are bound by a single trilaminar mem-
with many more at the “candidatus" stage, and of these
brane composed of proteins, glycoproteins, lipoproteins,
more than 45 complete genomes have been sequenced.
phospholipids, and sterols. Cholesterol in the membrane
In addition, hemotrophic rickettsial species of the genera
provides osmotic stability. Carbohydrate capsules have
Haemobartonella and Eperythrozoon were reclassified to the
been described for some species.
genus Mycoplasma in 2001, based on 16S ribosomal RNA
The mollicutes have a small genome (ranging from
 gene sequence analysis. They have collectively been given
540 to 1380 kb) relative to other bacteria and are the small-
the common name “hemoplasmas."
est self-replicating organisms that have yet been described.
 Infections with mollicutes are parasitic in nature. They
Their base composition is poor in guanine and cytosine
are most often subclinical to mild but severely debilitat-
content, with their G+C mol% content of DNA ranging
ing and sometimes fatal diseases can also be observed.
from 24% to 40%. They are related most closely to the
Most pathogenic mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas in fect the
Clostridium-Streptococcus--Lactobacillus group from which
mucosa of the respiratory and/or urogenital tract, but are
it is presumed the mollicutes evolved through a process
also found in other body sites such as the conjunctiva, syn-
of reductive or degenerative evolution. Transposons, plas-
ovial surfaces, and mammary glands. The hemoplasmas
mids, and bacteriophages have been demonstrated in some
infect red blood cells and most commonly cause hemolytic
species.
anemia.
Descriptive Features
Nonhemotrophic Mollicutes
Morphology and Staining
The “nonhemotrophie" mollicutes include members of the
genus Ureaplasma and those of the genus Mycoplasma that
The cell morphology of the mollicutes is extremely pleo-
do not colonize red blood cells. Unlike the “hemotrophic"
morphic. Cell shapes include spherical, ring-shaped, pear-
mollicutes (see Section “Hemotrophic Mollicutes"), they
shaped, spiral-shaped, and filamentous forms. Cells some-
can be grown in vitro on axenic (lifeless) media. Clini-
time appear as chains of beads, the result of asynchronized
cal manifestations include respiratory and urogenital tract
genomic replication and cell division. Ring forms found in
infections, conjunctivitis, arthritis, mastitis, septicemia,
and otitis media. Most species exhibit a high degree of
 host specificity, but infections across host species are also
Original chapter written by Richard L. Walker.
observed, most commonly in immunocompromised indi-
viduals (Table 39.1).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. Edited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kemedy ard M.M. Chergapa
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
283
284
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 39.1.
 Pathogenic Mycoplasma Species and Their Primary Host(s)
 Animal Species
Agent
Common Clinical Manifestations
Cats
M. felis
 Conjunctivitis
M. feliminutum
Respiratory disease
M. gatae
Arthritis
Cattle
M.alkalescens
 Arthritis, mastitis
M. bovigentialium
 Infertility, mastitis, seminal vesiculitis 
M. bovis
 Abscesses, arthritis, mastitis, otitis, pneumonia
M. bovoculi
Keratoconjunctivitis
M. californicum
 Arthritis, mastitis
M. canadense
 Arthritis, mastitis
M. dispar
 Aveolitis, bronchiolitis 
M. diversum
Infertility, pneumonia, vulvovaginitis 
M. mycoides sp. mycoides SC)
 Arthritis, pleuropneumonia 
M. wenyoni
Anemia
Chickens
M. gallisepticum
 Respiratory disease
M. synoviae
 Airsacculitis, sternal bursitis, synovitis 
Dogs
M. canis
Urogenital tract disease
M. cynos
 Preumonia
M. spumans
Arthritis
Felids
M. felifaucium
 Respiratory disease
M. teocaptivus
Respiratory disease
M. teopharyngis
Respiratory disease
M. simbae
Respiratory disease
Goats
M. agalactiae
 Agalactiae, arthritis, conjunctivitis
M. capricolum sp. capricorum
 Arthritis, mastitis, pneumonia, septicemia
M. capricolum sp. capripneumoniae
 Pleuropneumonia 
M. conjunctivae
Keratoconjunctivitis
M. mycoides ssp. mycoides (LC)
 Abscesses, arthritis, mastitis, septicemia
M. mycoides ssp. capri
 Pneumonia 
M. putrefaciens
 Arthritis, mastitis
Horses
M. equigenitalium
 Infertility 
M. equirhinis
Respiratory disease (suspected)
M. fastidiosum
 Respiratory disease ( suspected)
M. felis
 Pleuritis
M. subdorum
 Infertility 
Mice
M. neurolyitcum
 Conjunctivitis, neurological disease
M. pumonis
Respiratory disease
Rats
M. arthritidis
Arthritis
M. purmonis
 Respiratory disease, genital tract disease
Sheep
M. agalactiae
Agalactiae
M. conjunctivae
Keratoconjunctivitis
M. ovipneumoniae
Pneumonia
Swine
 M. hyopneumoniae
 Enzootic pneumonia
M. hyorhinis
 Arthritis, pneumonia, polyserositis
M. hyosynoviae
Arthritis
Turkeys
M. gallisepticum
 Sinusitis, respiratory disease
M. iowae
Embryo mortality, leg deformities
 M. meleagridis
Airsacculits, decreased egg hatchability, perosis
M. synoviae
 Sternal bursitis, synovitis
Growth Characteristics
demands of the mollicutes, media supporting growth of
the various mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas are often highly
The nonhemotrophic mollicutes are generally slow-
enriched and complex. Most are based on beef heart infu-
growing and often require 3-10 days (or more) of incu-
sion, peptone, yeast extract, and serum along with various
        
 other supplements. Optimal pH for growth ranges from
 growth is generally best at 33-38 *C in an atmosphere of
6.0 to 8.0 for mollicutes depending on the normal host
increased CO2. Mollicutes lack many biosynthetic path-
environment in which they are found. Mollicute colonies
ways. They are unable to synthesize any amino acids and
are small and difficult to visualize with the unaided eye.
have either a complete orpartial inability to synthesize fatty
Colony sizes vary from 0.01 to 1.0 mm. When observed
acids. Exogenous sterols are required by mycoplasmas that
with a dissecting microscope, many species exhibit a "fried-
they acquire from serum. Because of the high nutritional
Chapter 39  Mollicutes
285
Transmission occurs predominately by spread from ani-
FIGURE 39.1.
"Fried-egg" colony morphology that is
typical of many Mycoplasma species.
aerosolization of respiratory secretions o1 venereal trans-
 mission. Introduction of an infected animal into an unin-
fected population is a common route for dissemination
of infection. Asymptomatic carriers, usually colonized on
mucosal surfaces, serve as the source for maintaining organ-
isms within a population. Long-distance spread of infec-
tious Mycoplasma can occur through wind under optimal
conditions. For instance, viable Mycoplasma hyopneumo-
         
herd source. Mechanical transmission through milking
machinery is a means for spreading bovine and caprine
mycoplasma mastitis, and contaminated milk can be a
source of infection for calves and goat kids. In poultry,
vertical transmission through hatching eggs is an impor-
tant means of spread for many of the pathogenic avian
species. Little is known regarding the role of ectoparasites
and /or flying insects in transmission; however, pathogenic
    n  s 
of goats.
is the result of the central portion of the colony embed-
Pathogenesis and Immunity.I
 Mollicutes employ a variety
ding into the agar with a peripheral zone of surface growth.
of strategies in order to occupy such a wide range of host
Some species produce film spots, which are composed of
niches and to maintain themselves as chronic, parasitic
infections. These organisms have a complex relationship
film on the media surface. Differences in colony morphol-
with their host(s) especially with regard to immunity, mak-
ogy and size can be used to distinguish some of the molli
ing it difficult to separate the pathogenesis of the organ-
cutes. For example, the colony size of Mycoplasma mycoides
ism from the host's own immune response against them.
ssp. mycoides isolates from goats is consistently larger than
In fact, the immune response of the host is intimately
those isolated from cattle. This size difference is used to
in volved in the pathogenesis of disease (immunopathol-
distinguish between the two variants. Ureaplasma species
ogy).
produce substantially smaller colonies than other molli-
The chronicity of mollicute infections suggests that the
cutes and often lack the fried-egg colony morphology.
immune response is not effective at eliminating infec-
tion once established, and latent infections are common.
Ecology
In the face of an intense inflammatory response in the
acute stage of infection, mycoplasmas generally appear
Reservoir. The major reservoir for the nonhemotrophic
able to avoid elimination and at least a portion of hosts
mollicutes is the host they infect. Subclinically infected ani-
maintain long-term infections. Antigenic variability is a
mals carry organisms on mucosal surfaces, including upper
mechanism employed by some mollicutes to evade host
and lower respiratory tracts, the urogenital tract, conjunc-
defenses. The pMGA gene family, which accounts for 16%
tiva, alimentary canal, mammary glands, and/or joints. In
of the entire genome of Mycoplasma gallisepticum, gener-
general, mollicutes can survive outside the host for substan-
ates antigenic variants of a major surface protein. Incor-
tial lengths of time in moist, cool environments. They are
poration of host antigens by mycoplasmas, a condition
very susceptible to heat and most detergents (tween) and
referred to as capping, further aids some mollicutes in
 disinfectants (quaternary ammonium, iodine, and phenol-
escaping detection by the immune system. Phase shift
based compounds).
in Mycoplasma hyorhinis aids in eluding the host immune
Aa os 'sd ans jo  an e aq ass
Transmission and Epidemiology.
While there are several
are less accessible to immune cells. Alternatively, antigens
clinically and economically important species of molli-
shared between Mycoplasma species and the host tissues
cutes, primary pathogens such as M. mycoides ssp. mycoides,
may result in a biological mimicry, whereby the host rec-
small colony (SC) variants in cattle are the exception rather
ognizes the Mycoplasma as self, leading to persistent infec-
than the rule. Mollicutes mostoften cause mild to moderate
tions. Similarly, shared hostand Mycoplasma antigens, such 
disease that can be exacerbated by cofactors including age,
as the galactans found in the lungs of cattle and in M.
genetic predisposition, environmental conditions, crowd-
mycoides ssp. mycoides, can also result in autoimmune dis-
ing, and concurrent infections. These are all involved in
ease. Another mechanism to achieve carrier state in a host
con tributing to resistance to infection or lack thereof. Min-
is to form biofilms that are a community of individual
imizing predisposing stresses will minimize disease. Viru-
organisms living in a matrix of extracellular polymeric sub-
lence varies not only among species but also among strains
stance as a means of avoiding the host immune response
within species of mollicutes. This also accounts for some of
and antibiotic therapies. Several mycoplasmas readily form
the observed variations in disease manifestation.
biofilms (Figure 39.2). Underlying factors such as age,
286
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 39.2.
Mycoplasma colony forming a biofim attached to an air saccule surrounded by leukocytes (A) and an in vitro
grown Mycoplasma biofim on glass wool (B). (Courtesy of Dr D. Trampel and Dr FC. Minion, respectively.)
[A]
(B)
overcrowding, concurrent infections, and transportation
monia are able to induce ciliostasis, which damages and
stresses lead to overt disease.
impedes the effectiveness of the mucociliary escalator, aid-
Attachment to host cells is the first step in establishing
ing colonization.
 infection and is facilitated by the anionic surface layer on
Downregulation of the innate immune response, such
most mycoplasmas (Figure 39.3). Host receptors for attach-
 as inhibition of macrophage phagocytic activity, has been
 ment are surface proteins, especially glycoconjugates that
associated with some Mycoplasma infections. Alternatively,
allow colonization of mucosal surfaces. In some species
lipoproteins abundant in the plasma membrane of mol-
such as M. gallisepticum, attachment is mediated through
licutes activate the innate immune system through Toll-
-  s  od  as d ds e
like receptors 2 and 6 and stimulate a proinflammatory
strated in some species, including M. gallisepticum, and
response mediated by the production of cytokines and var-
also has a role in adherence to host cell surfaces. These
ious other factors. In addition, mycoplasmas activate the
blebs aid in the motility of mycoplasmas that possess them,
complement cascade by the classical pathway, which con-
which is referred to as gliding motility. There is evidence
tributes to the inflammatory response. The inflammatory
that some Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma species can pene-
response results in damage to bystander host cells that may
trate and exist inside nonphagocytic cells, protecting them
benefit the mycoplasmas by freeing nutrients from host
from the immune system and facilitating their dissemina-
cells that these parasitic organisms require for growth while
tion within the host. Some mycoplasmas that cause pneu-
 the ensuing immune response does not effectively clear the
organisms.
Injury to host tissue may also be induced through
other mechanisms. Products of metabolism such as hydr0-
FIGURE 39.3.
Scanning electron micrograph of M.
 gen peroxide and superoxide radicals in mycoplasmas
hyopneumoniae attached to cilia of the respiratory epithelia.
result in local host cell damage. Ureaplasmas have potent
(Courtesy of Dr F C. Minion.)
enzymes as well, including phospholipases and urease. Per-
sistence of antigen in selected sites, such as joints, allows
for further damage due to development of an immune
 complex-mediated inflammatory response. Induction of
interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-6, IL-12, IL-18, and tumor necro-
sis factor from activated macrophages leads to activation
of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes and results in an endotoxin-
like effect in the host. Acute, septicemic forms of dis-
ease can result in a coagulopathy and widespread vascular
 thrombosis, which resembles a gram-negative septicemia
and is, at least in part, mediated through induction of
cytokines.
 Both the cellular and humoral immune systems respond
to infection by mollicutes, and each has been demonstrated
to have a role in controlling the number of Mycoplasma
organisms present in the host. Yet similar to the innate
immune response, mollicutes are able to subvert these host
Chapter 39
Mollicutes
287
response mechanisms as well. For example, Mycoplasma
 bovis has been shown to suppress lymphocyte responses;
FIGURE 39.4.
Infraorbital sinusitis ina turkey caused by
conversely many Mycoplasma species have been shown
M. gallisepticum. (Courtesy of Dr D. Trampef.)
to possess unique mitogenic factors that induce nonspe-
cifc polyclonal B and/or T cell stimulation. Mycoplasma
arthritidis possesses a small peptide, MAM, which acts as
a superantigen and stimulates a broad population of T-
lymphocytes. While the mechanism of action has not been
elucidated for all suppressive and mitogenic factors uti-
lized by mollicutes, it is clear that they are important in the
 pathogenesis of these organisms.
Disease Patterns. Infections can manifest in a variety
of ways including septicemias, disseminated infections
involving multiple sites, or localized infections. Common
manifestations caused by the different pathogenic species
in major animal species are listed in Table 39.1. In addi-
tion to specific effects related to Mycoplasma, generalized
effects on the immune system may increase susceptibil-
ity to secondary infections with other bacterial and viral
pathogens.
avian species. Synovitis resulting in lameness, swelling
The lesions associated with Mycoplasma infections vary
of joints and tendon sheaths, and retarded growth are
from acute to chronic and are dependent on the agent
common presentations. Sternal bursitis is also frequently
involved and the site affected. In acute infections, there
observed in turkeys. Airsacculitis, which is usually subclin-
is an inflammatory reaction with an infltration of neu-
ical, is another manifestation. Mycoplasma meleagridis and
trophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes and an accu-
Mycoplasma iowae infections are mostly limited to turkeys.
mulation of fibrin. An infiltration of lymphocytes and
M. meleagridis causes respiratory disease, predominately an1
plasma cells is often observed in Mycoplasma infections,
airsacculitis, which is often clinically mild or inapparent.
particularly around vessels, airways, and in the sub-
Skeletal deformities, including bowing or twisting of the
mucosa. Peribronchial, peribronchiolar, and perivascu-
tarsometatarsal bone and cervical vertebrae, are occasion-
lar lymphoplasmacytic cuffing is a characteristic finding
ally detected. Decreased egg hatchability is a serious conse.
in respiratory tract infection. The profound perivascu-
quence of M. meleagridis infections. Airsacculitis, leg defor-
s  n rd  
mities, and stuntingin poults have been demonstrated with 
in many infections is due to nonspecific mitogenic
M. iowae. Decreased egg hatchability has also been noted
effects as well as to a specific antimycoplasmal immune
with M. iowae infections. Natural outbreaks of conjunctivi-
response.
tis in house finches due to M. gallisepticum have caused sub-
Generalized in fections lead to a fibrinopurulent exudate
stantial reductions in the finch population on the eastern
on serosal surfaces and synovial membranes. In persistent
coast of the United States.
localized infections, tissue destruction can be substantial.
Abscesses may develop at pressure sites in calves and are
Bovine. M. mycoides ssp. mycoides SC variant is consid-
characterized by an eosinophilic coagulative necrosis with 
ered the most virulent of the bovine mycoplasmas. It
peripheral fibrosis. In cases of mycoplasma mastitis, pock-
causes a respiratory disease, contagious bovine pleurop-
ets of purulent exudate may develop in affected mammary
neumonia (CBPP), in cattle that ranges from a persistent,
tissue. Eventually the affected gland becomes fibrosed. In
subclinical infection to an acute, sometimes fatal disease.
the acute stage of Mycoplasma infections of the joint, the
Clinical signs include respiratory distress, coughing, nasal 
joint becomes distended with fluid containing fibrin. As
discharge, and reluctance to move. In severe cases, the ani-
infections become chronic, there is villus hypertrophy
 mal will stand with its neck extended and mouth open to
of the synovia and a proliferative and erosive arthritis
facilitate breathing. Subclinically affected animals serve as
develops.
a source for maintaining and spreading infection in the
herd. Most infections are limited to the respiratory tract,
Avian.
 Mycoplasmosis in poultry has important eco-
although arthritis occurs in calves.
nomic consequences. M. gallisepficum causes a chronic
Mycoplasma mastitis is caused by a number of species.
respiratory disease in chickens and infectious sinusitis in
M. bovis is the most common cause and results in the most
turkeys, and infects a number of other domestic avian
severe disease. Mycoplasma californicum and Mycoplasma
species. Clinical signs include coughing, nasal discharge,
canadense are also frequently involved. Mycoplasma alka-
and tracheal rales. Turkeys can develop sinusitis with pro-
lescens and Mycoplasma bovigenitalium have also been impli-
duction of a thick, mucoid exudate that results in severe
cated as etiologic agents on occasion. Typically, there is
swelling of the infraorbital sinuses (Figure 39.4). Occa-
a drop in milk production. The milk becomes thick and
sionally, clinical signs related to brain and joint involve-
intermixed with a watery secretion and may progress to
ments are recognized. Decrease in egg production also
a purulent exudate. The udder is often swollen, although
occurs. Mycoplasma synoviae also infects a wide range of
not painful. Sometimes all four quarters are in volved. It is a
288
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
found mostly in kenneled animals. Mycoplasma cynos is
FIGURE 39.5.
 Pneumonia in a cow caused by M. bovis.
the primary Mycoplasma associated with the disease and is
(Courtesy of Dr R. Rosenbusch.)
found to exacerbate the pathogenesis of CIRD. Mycoplasma
spumans has been reported to cause arthritis.
Caprine. Mycoplasma infections in goats are economically
important and can result in disease of epizootic propor-
tion. M. mycoides ssp. mycoides (large colony variant) in fec-
tions present as a mastitis, pneumonia, bursitis, or arthri-
tis in adult animals. Some develop a generalized toxic
disease that can be fatal. A rapidly fatal septicemia is
common in kids. Those that survive develop a chronic,
destructive arthritis and/or bursitis. M. mycoides ssp. capri
causes a pleuropneumonia similar to that of goat strains
of M. mycoides ssp. mycoides. It has been proposed that M.
mycoides ssp. mtycoides (large colony variant) be combined
with M. mycoides ssp. capri as a single subspecies capri based
on the high DNA homology they share. Septicemia, arthri-
tis, and mastitis occur with Mycoplasma capricolum ssp.
capricolum infections. M. capricotum ssp.capripneumoniae
d s s ( s  )
pleuropneumonia (CCPP), which is similar to CBPP in cat-
destructive mastitis and often refractory to treatment. Most
tle. Both Mycoplasma agalactiaeand Mycoplasma putrefaciens
infections are limited to the mammary gland; however,
cause mastitis. The mastitis due to M. putrefaciens is puru-
arthritis subsequent to bacteremia occurs. In some cases
lent in nature, while infections with M. agalactiae result
disseminated infection results in periarticular in volvement
in a decrease or total cessation in milk production. Both
and fasciitis. Spread from cow to cow is directly related to
species can cause arthritis. Mycoplasma conjunctivae causes
inadequate management and sanitation practices.
a keratoconjunctivitis that presents with lacrimation, con-
Mycoplasma respiratory tract infections in calves often
junctival hyperemia, and keratitis. Pannus is sometimes
present as pneumonia in association with other bovine res-
evident.
inant species recovered. Mycopiasma dispar causes a mild
Equine. Mycoplasma felis is the only species that has been
respiratory disease characterized by bronchiolitis and alve-
solidly associated with disease in the horse. It is recovered
olitis and is usually precipitated by environmental stresses
from the upper respiratory tract as a commensal, but can
Or a primary viral in fection. Both M. bovis and M. dispar can
cause a pleuritis, usually related to some exertional activity.
be recovered as commensals from the upper respiratory
The pleuritis is self-limiting and frequently resolves sponta-
tract.
neously. Mycoplasma equirhinis and Mycoplasma fastidiosum
 Urogenital tract infections are caused by M. bovigenital-
have been suspected of causing respiratory disease, but this
ium and Ureaplasma diversum. Seminal vesiculitis in bulls
has not been confirmed. Mycoplasma equigenitalium and
and granular vulvitis, vaginitis, endometritis, infertility,
Mycoplasma subdolum have been identified in the genital
and abortion in cows are associated with both of these
tract of both stallions and mares and are implicated as a
organisms. Both are found as normal commensals in the
cause of infertility in mares.
lower urogenital tract.
Arthritis in calves occurs sporadically. While a number
 Feline. A variety of commensal mycoplasmas have been
of different species can cause arthritis, M. bovis is most
recovered from mucosal surfaces of cats. Relatively few are
frequently recovered. Other less common presentations
associated with disease. Mycoplasma gatae has been recov-
include otitis media and decubital abscesses. Otitis media
ered from cats with arthritis. M. felis has been associated
usually occurs in conjunction with respiratory disease.
with a serous to mucoid conjunctivitis. Typically the con-
Decubital abscesses have been associated with confined
junctiva is edematous; however, the cornea is not involved.
housing conditions. M. bovis, again, is the usual agent.
A Mycoplasma-like organism has been associated with sub-
cutaneous abscesses, but neither the disease nor the organ-
Canine. A number of Mycoplasma species have been iso-
ism has been well characterized. Mycopiasma spp. have
lated from dogs; however, little is known regarding their
 been isolated as part of the polymicrobial component from
 role in disease. Experimental and clinical evidence sug-
pyothorax exudates.
gests that Mycoplasma canis can cause urogenital tract dis-
ease including prostatitis, cystitis, endometritis, orchitis,
Murine. Mycoplasma pulmonis causes a low-grade respira-
and epididymitis. The role of Mycoplasma in reproductive
tory diseasein rats. Infections involve the nasal cavity, mid-
disorders of the bitch is uncertain although infertility has
dle ear, larynx, trachea, and lungs. The most common clin-
 been associated with mycoplasmal infections, especially
ical sign is a low-pitched wheezing or snuffling resulting
in kennels with poor hygiene. Canine infectious respi-
 from the purulent nasal exudate. In mice, clinical signs
ratory disease (CIRD) is a common respiratory infection
are often inapparent, although a chattering sound and
Chapter 39
Mollicutes
289
continued rubbing of the eyes and nose may suggest in fec-
tion in the colony. Mortality is low and when it occurs
FIGURE 39.6.
Arthritis in a pig with villous synovial
tissue proliferation caused by M. hyosynoviae.(Courtesy of Dr
is related to pneumonia. Genital tract infections with M.
pulmonis are also recognized in rats. M. arthritidis causes a
J.C.G. Neto.)
polyarthritis in rats and mice, although many infections are
subclinical. Experimental in fections in mice result in joint
swelling and, in some cases, posterior paralysis. Natural
infections with Mycoplasma neurolyticum generally do not
cause disease, although conjunctivitis has been reported.
Experimental inoculation with M. neurolyticum or cell-free
filtrates causes a neurologic syndrome referred to as rolling
disease.
Ovine.
 Compared to other ruminant species, Mycoplasma
infections in domestic sheep are generally mild. wild pop-
adansns a aq o reade daaus uou sra jo suoen
affected. The disease in big horn sheep is often fatal when 
previously naive populations become in fected. M. ovipneu-
moniae is associated with pneumonia and is usually found
in conjunction with other common bacterial pathogens of
the ovine respiratory tract. Outbreaks of keratoconjunctivi-
tis have been attributed to M. conjunctivae. Agalactic mas-
(>24 h) is expected, samples should be shipped frozen and
titis caused by M. agalactiae is similar to that observed in
preferably on dry ice or in liquid nitrogen.
goats. Sheep can also be infected with many of the other
species that affect goats.
Direct Examination. The variability in microscopic mor-
phology and poor staining with the Gram method make
Porcine. A number of clinical entities are associated with
direct examination for most mollicutes unrewarding.
Mycoplasma infections in swine.M. hyopneumoniae causes a
Direct fluorescent antibody tests and DNA fluorochrome
chronic respiratory disease referred to as “porcine enzootic
staining have been described, particularly for diagnosing
A mn nq q i si au onud
conjunctivitis and mastitis, but they are not widely used.
associated with this disease. The principal clinical sign is
Immunoperoxidase,
immunofluorescent,
and
immunohistochemistry staining
of histopathologic
and impaired weight gain. M. hyopneumoniae is a signifi-
sections has been used successfully for identification of
cant contributor to the porcine respiratory disease com-
some species in tissues, including M. bovis in cattle tissues,
plex (PRDC). The PRDC has a severe negative impact on
M. hyopneumoniae in pig lungs, and some of the poultry
swine production, and M. hyopneumoniae has been shown
mycoplasmas.
to potentiate the disease caused by other agents in this
complex, such as the porcine reproductive and respira-
lsolation. No one media formulation is suitable for
tory syndrome virus. M. hyorhinis causes a systemic infec-
 growth of all of the mollicutes. The media selected should
tion in pigs between 3 and 12 weeks of age. Initial signs
be based on the specific species or group of species of inter-
include fever, inappetence, and listlessness. Arthritis and
est. In general, a fairly complex and enriched medium
lameness frequently follow. There is a characteristic poly-
is required. Serum is the usual source of sterols and is
serositis that involves pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial
required by most species. Different species, however, grow
serosa. Mycoplasma hyosynoviae causes arthritis in grow-
better with different sources of serum. Yeast extract is also
ing pigs 12-24 weeks of age (Figure 39.6). Lameness and
included as a source of growth factors. Growth of some
species is enhanced or requires incorporation of specific
signs.
substances such as vaginal mucus (M. agalactiae)and nicoti-
namide adenine dinucleotide (M. synoviae). Some goat
Laboratory Diagnosis
mycoplasmas grow on sheep blood agar as small colonies
with an α-type ("greening") hemolysis. Mollicutes are resis-
 Sample Collection.  The appropriate sample for isolation
tant to a number of antibiotics and growth inhibitors
attempt is determined by the clinical presentation and
such as nafcillin, bacitracin, cefobid, thallium acetate, and
includes exudates, swabs from affected sites, affected tis-
amphotericin B are commonly added to media to inhibit
sues, and milk. Because of the mollicutes' fastidious nature,
contaminating bacteria and fungi. Specific immune sera
samples should be submitted to the laboratory as soon as
possible after collection. During transportation, samples
rated in media toallow forselective isolation for pathogenic
should be kept cool and moist. Various commercially avail-
species. For optimal recovery, samples are inoculated into
able media (Stuart's and Amies' without charcoal) are suit-
both a liquid and a solid media and incubated at 36-38 *C
able for transporting swabs. If a prolonged transport time
in 5-10% CO2 for at least 7 days. Some species require
290
PART II
Bacteria and Fung
ity, fermentation of glucose, and hydrolysis of arginine
FIGURE 39.7.
Immunoperoxidase staining method used
or urea.
for typing Mycoplasma isolates directly on agar media. Twvo
While some antigens are shared among the mollicutes,
different types of Mycoplasma are present in the sample. One
antigenic differences are usually sufficiently specific to
type (M. hyorhinis) stains when anti-M. hyarhinis antisera is
allow for species identification. A number of identifica-
used (darkly stained cofonies); the other colonies of M.
tion methods have been employed based on either the abil-
hyosynoviae do not significantly react with that antisera.
ity of specific antisera to inhibit growth or metabolism or
the demonstration of reactivity with specific antisera using
either a fluorescence or chromogen-based detection sys-
tem. Growth inhibition tests employ antisera-impregnated
disks or antisera placed in wells in media and demonstrat-
ing a zone of inhibition. Metabolic inhibition tests use
 growth inhibition in liquid mediaand a color change based
on pH as an indicator system. Other test procedures that
have been used to demonstrate specific reactivity are direct
01 indirect immunofluorescence on colony impressions,
colony epifluorescence, and immunoperoxidase staining
of colonies on agar plates.
 A number of immunodiagnostic tests have been devel-
oped for many of the important Mycoplasma diseases,
although problems with sensitivity, especially related to
asymptomatic carriers, are common and can complicate
interpretation of results. Lack of specificity as a result of
cross-reacting antibodies is also a problem.
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, plate agglutina-
tion, and hemagglutination inhibition tests are routinely
longer incubation times. Semen and joint fluids may con-
used to detect flock infections with M. gallisepticum, M.
tain inhibitory factors and should be diluted prior to culture
meleagridis, and M. synoviae in poultry and are an impor-
to enhance recovery. Blind passages from broth to broth
 tant part of overall eradication programs used by commer-
for up to three passages may enhance the recovery. Ure-
cial poultry operations.
aa e s s d n nd  sds i
 Fast replacing the traditional assays described earlier are
of hydrolysis of urea included in the media and must be
 molecular assays, primarily based on the polymerase chain
subcultured frequently to maintain their viability when
reaction (PCR). Amplification of specific DNA sequences
isolation attempts are made. None of the hemoplasmas are
by PCR, or less frequently restriction endonuclease analy-
cultivable.
sis of PCR products, has been used for identification and
characterization of isolates. A number of PCR methods
Identification. Agar cultures must be examined with the
have been described foridentification ofpathogenicspecies
aid of a dissecting microscope. Colonies with the typical
directly from clinical material that bypasses the need for
umbonate morphology can be stained directly on the agar
culture.
to differentiate them from other bacteria (Figure 39.7) or
can be smeared on a glass slide. Mollicutes stain poorly
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
by the Gram method due to their lack of a cell wall.
Current understanding of the immunology related to
because of their inability to reduce methylene blue in the
Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma infection(s) is very incom-
 stain. Other bacteria reduce methylene blue by using it
plete, and the necessary components of a protective
as a hydrogen acceptor in maltose oxidation, and there-
immune response to these organisms are not well-defined.
fore appear colorless with the Dienes stain. The exceptions
Both killed and attenuated vaccines have been shown to
are L-form bacteria, which exhibit a similar colony mor-
be at least partially protective against Mycoplasma-induced
phology and staining reaction as the mollicutes. L-forms
disease, but do not provide complete immunity. Vac-
must be differentiated from mollicutes by demonstrating
cinated animals demonstrate fewer lesions and have a
reversion of the L-form bacteria back to a walled form.
reduced number of organisms present relative to non-
Other stains used to detect mollicutes include Giemsa,
vaccinated animals, but disease is still observed in both
Castaneda, Wright's, cresyl-fast violet, orcein, and acridine
 groups. Some vaccine preparations have actually resulted
orange.
in increased disease after subsequent infection. The mech-
Digitonin
sensitivity can be used to distinguish
anism by which this occurs is not known.
Mycoplasma and Ureapiasma from Acholeplasma. A large
An attenuated vaccine is used to protect cattle in
zone of inhibition around paper disks saturated with 1.5%
 areas where CBPP is enzootic. Protection lasts for approx-
digitonin will be present with Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma,
imately 18 months. Attenuated and killed, adjuvanted
but only a small or no zone is observed with Achole-
vaccines have been used with variable success to control
plasma. Commonly used biochemical tests to further char-
some caprine infections, specifically those caused by M.
acterize isolates include detection of phosphatase activ-
s     ss s  
Chapter 39
 Mollicutes
291
capripneumoniae. Killed vaccines for M. hyopneumoniae in
Table 39.2.
Hemotrophic Mycoplasma Species and Their
swine reduce the severity of mycoplasmal pneumonia,
Primary Host
but do not prevent disease or colonization. In poul-
try, live (attenuated strain) and inactivated vaccines are
Animal
employed to control egg production losses and respira-
Species
Agent
 Common Clinical Manifestations
tory disease associated with M. gallisepticum in fections. No
Cat
M. haemofelis
Anemia (feline infectious anemia)
vaccines for ureaplasmas or hemoplasmas are currently
Cattle
M. wenyoni
Anemia
available.
Dog
M. haemocanis
Anemia
 Antibiotics are used to treat Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma
Mice
M. coccoides
Anemia
infections. The lack of a cell wall renders mollicutes
M. haemomuris
 Anemia
resistant to the action of antimicrobial agents that tar-
Sheep
M. ovis
 Anemia
get the cell wall or its synthesis, such as the glycopep-
Swine
M. suis
 Anemia
tides and β-lactams, but are sensitive to compounds
that interfere with protein and nucleic acid synthesis.
Mycoplasmas show sensitivity to the following antibi-
 be pasteurized to prevent infecting young animals in
otics: tetracyclines, macrolides, lincosamides, ketolides,
aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, pleuromutilins, and flu-
the herd.
0roquinolones. Treatment success varies depending on the
species involved, the affected site, and the time course
Hemotrophic Mollicutes
of the disease. Isolates of mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas
have been identified with resistance to many of these
The hemotrophic mollicutes include microorganisms pre-
antibiotics, which is mediated through a variety of mech-
viously included in the genera Haemobartonella and Epery-
anisms. The incidence of antibiotic resistance is not well-
throzoon (Table 39.2). All are parasites of red blood cells
documented because of the difficulties in culturing these
(Figure 39.8), and produce hemolytic anemia, which can
Organisms that is necessary for most antibiotic susceptibil-
be observed in animals of any age, but is often observed
in immunocompromised or otherwise stressed individu-
laboratories.
als. Subclinically infected animals are the source for hemo-
Control measures depend on the disease status of the
plasmas, and they are spread by blood-to-blood contact.
country, specific disease, and animal species infected. Dis-
Several members of this group are transmitted by ectopar-
eases such as CBPP and CCPP, which affect large popu-
asites. Unlike the non hemotrophic mollicutes, they have
lations of animals, are controlled by test and slaughter
not been cultivated on axenic media.
of affected herds in countries attempting to maintain a
Infections with the hemoplasmas may cause icterus,
disease-free status. Vaccination, culling of infected ani-
splenomegaly, and/or bone marrow hyperplasia. Diagno-
sis is based upon clinical signs, demonstration of the agent
are employed in countries where the disease is enzootic.
in stained (e.g., Wright's, Giemsa, or acridine orange)
 In general, because of the poor success in treating infected
smears of peripheral blood, or detection by PCR. Treatment 
animals, culling of clinically ill animals is often employed
includes correction of the hemolytic anemia and antibiotic
as a control measure in in fected populations where test and
treatment, usually with tetracyclines.
slaughter are not feasible. Routine culturing of bulk tanks
is used to monitor for Mycoplasma-induced mastitis in cow
and goat herds. Animals identified as shedding organisms
in the milk are usually culled. Industry-driven efforts, par-
FIGURE 39.8.
Mycoplasma haemofelis on feline
ticularly for poultry, have outlined measures to eliminate
erythrocytes (modified Wright's stain, 1000x). (Courtesy Dr S.
01 prevent infection. Attempts to eradicate infections, par-
Hostetter.)
ticularly in breeding flocks, include serologic testing and
elimination of positive flocks and antibiotic treatment of
hatching eggs to produce Mycoplasma-free chicks. Treat-
 ment of eggs involves immersing warmed eggs in a chilled
antibiotic solution, which promotes antibiotic penetration 
into the egg.
Preventing infection should be based on following strict
biosecurity practices to preclude introduction of infected
animals into a Mycoplasma-free herd. New animals should
be quarantined and tested before being mixed with the
herd, but subclinically infected animals can be difficult to
identify. Taking animals to shows and fairs and return-
ing them to the herd may also serve as a source for
introducing infection. Good hygiene and management
mals where infections are enzootic. Because milk can be a
 source of infection, especially in goats and cattle, it should
292
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Further Reading
Bacteriology, Vol. 4, 2nd edn, The Bacteroidetes, Spirochaetes,
Tenericutes (Mollicutes), Acidobacteria, Fibrobacteres, Fusobac-
Dybvig K and Voelker LL (1996) Molecular biology of
teria, Dictyoglomi, Gemmatimonadetes, Lentisphaerae, Verru-
mycoplasmas. Ann Rev Microbiol, 50, 25-57.
comicrobia, Chlamydiae, and Planctomycetes, Springer, New
York, NY, pp. 567-723.
Herrmann R and Razin S (eds) (2002) Molecular Biology and
Pathogenicity of Mycoplasmas, Springer, New York, NY.
 Miles R and Nicholas R (1998) Mycoplasma Protocols, Methods
in Molecular Biology, Vol. 104, Humana Press, New York,
Krieg NR, Staley JT, Brown DR et al. (eds) (2010) Division (=
Phylum) Ill. Tenericutes, in Bergey's Manual of Systematic
NY.
40
Rickettsiaceae and
Coxiellaceae: Rickettsia
and Coxiella
ROMAN R. GANTA
Descriptive Features
Pathogenicity of Rickettsiales is not well defined and
 may be complex because they represent organisms belong-
The order Rickettsiales includes small obligate intracel-
ing to multiple genera having widely different host speci-
lular gram-negative bacteria. Two families within this
ficities and host cell associations. Virulence may be due
order are Anaplasmataceae and Rickettsiaceae, both of
to release of endotoxins (lipopolysaccharides), produc-
which include several important pathogens causing dis-
tion of immune complexes, and hypersensitivity reactions.
eases in various vertebrate animals and people. The family
The pathogens mostly damage vascular endothelium or
Anaplasmataceae of the class Alphaproteobacteria includes
hematopoietic cells and severely weaken the host defense
intraphagosomal pathogens of the genera Anaplasma,
 mechanisms. Rickettsiales are highly pathogenic and are
Erlichia, and Neorickettsia. These organisms look very sim-
    s    
ilar under the microscope, as they reside within a phago-
mals. Typical diagnosis is based on the clinical presen-
some of an infected host cell. The cell tropism is a major dis-
tation, detection of organisms in specific host cell types
tinguishable feature for identifying the organisms in a ver-
and cell organelles, serology, and molecular techniques.
tebrate host. The family Rickettsiaceae includes pathogens
Culture isolation methods are available for some bacte-
of the genus Rickettsia that invade vascular endothelium.
ria, but are time-consuming and are not practical for rou-
The family Coxiellaceae of the class Gammaproteobacte-
tine diagnosis. However, in viro culture methods serve as
lia includes one pathogen, Coxiella burneti which infects
excellent research tools for studies on these pathogens.
macrophages.
Vertebrate hosts produce antibodies and several species
The Rickettsiales are like viruses in that they multiply
share extensive antigen similarity. Antibodies cross-react
only inside a host cell (intracellular). Most of the Rick-
between species; thus, it is difficult to use antibody tests as
ettsiales, except Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species, have a cell
specific diagnostic tools. Inactivated or live attenuated vac-
wall like most other gram-negative organisms, respond to
cines are available for some pathogens, but appear to lose
antibiotics (such as tetracycline derivatives and chloram-
effectiveness rapidly, probably due to continuous changes
phenicol), and possess ribosomes, DNA, and RNA. They are
in their outer membrane expressed proteins. Control may
small coccid to short rod shaped bacteria. The size of the
be best achieved by controlling vector burden for some of
 organisms ranges from 0.2 to 0.5 μm in diameter and 0.8
the pathogen infections.
to 2 μm in length. Giemsa or other polychromatic stains
The pathogens of veterinary importance of the family
stain the organisms the best. These aerobic pathogenic bac
Rickettsiaceae are discussed in this Chapter. Anaplasmat-
teria are responsible for many fatal and chronic infections
aceae family pathogens are discussed in Chapters 41 and
in animals and people. They do not grow in standard bac-
42. Two major pathogens of the genus Rickettsia are R. rick-
teriological media. In viro growth requires the close asso-
ettsi (the disease causing agent of Rocky Mountain spot-
ciation with eukaryotic cells such as yolk sacs of chicken
embryos, macrophages, or epithelial cells of vertebrate 01
typhus disease agent in people). The parasitic bacteria of
arthropod vectors. The pathogens replicate by binary fis-
the genus Rickettsia infect vascular endothelium. Transmis-
sion inside a phagosome or in the cytoplasm. They heavily
sion from arthropod vectors to vertebrate hosts is achieved
depend on their host for energy (ATP) and other nutrients.
when arthropods take a blood meal. The capillary endothe.
Some pathogens (e.g., Rickettsia species) have an ATP/ADP
lium is damaged, thus producing hemorrhagic skin rashes.
translocase with which they obtain ATP molecules from
Hallmark symptoms of acute disease are fever, petechial
the host in exchange for ADPs.
rashes, and intractable headache. The organisms escape
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
293
294
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
R. rickettsii replicates in the epithelium of an infected
FIGURE 40.1.
(A) R. rickettsi showing long actin tails
tick, and is transferred to salivary glands and ovarian
that are frequently comprised muitipie, twisting, distinct
tissue. After an infected tick bites a suitable host, the
F-actin bundfes. (B) High magnification of an R. rickettsi actin
pathogen enters into the blood stream of that animal
tail in panel A comprised of two F-actin bundles. (Reproduced
and infects vascular endothelium cells by endocytosis and
with permission from theAmericanSociety for Microbiology;
Van Kirk et al. 2000.)
subsequently escapes from the phagosome and multiplies
within cell cytoplasm and nucleus. Rickettsial phospho-
lipase and proteases damage endothelial cell membranes,
leading to necrosis, vasculitis, hemorrhage, edema, perfu-
sion inadequacies, thrombosis, and dyspnea. The infected
dogs present clinical signs that include high fever (40 *C),
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, petechiated or ecchymotic
mucous membranes, and tenderness over lymph nodes,
joints, and muscles. Central nervous system disturbances
may also occur. In some instances, heart and kidney
involvement leads to fatal outcomes. Immune complexes
are suspected in the pathogenesis of late vascular mani-
[A]
{B]
festations of RMSF. Humoral and cell-mediated responses
occur. The latter especially is significant for removal of the
 agents by activated macrophages. No vaccine is available
the phagosome and multiply freely in the cytoplasm or
 nucleus. The genus Coxiella includes one major pathogen,
for RMSF.
C. bumetii. This organism is transmitted from one host to
Laboratory Diagnosis
does not require an invertebrate host for completing its
Indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) and enzyme-linked
lifecycle. This organism differs from Rickettsia species by
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are most commonly per-
its way of growth in a host cell cytoplasm. It replicates
formed to detect antibodies specific to rickettsial antigens
within the cytoplasmic phagocytic vacuoles ofunder acidic
and the detectable antibody response may take at least two
conditions.
weeks following the rickettsial infection. The organisms
may also be detected in the host endothelial cells by direct
Rickettsia rickettsii
immunofluorescence assays. The molecular methods such 
as the polymerase chain reaction are available to evaluate
Ecology
for R. rickettsii DNA in ticks and dogs.
R. rickettsii is responsible for the century old disease, Rocky
Treatment and Control
Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), in dogs and people. RMSF
is common in both North and South America but has a
Treatment with tetracycline, doxycycline, and chloram-
worldwide occurrence. R rickettsii is transmitted by Derma-
phenicol for 14-21 days is effective against R. rickettsii in fec-
centor andersoni and D. variabilis ticks. Cell-to-cell migra-
tions. Infected dogs with clinical signs must also receive
tion of R rickettsii from within the cytoplasm of infected
aggressive supportive therapy. Control of RMSF disease
cells occurs as a result of polymerization of host cell actin
is also better achieved by reducing the tick burden and
induced by the pathogen (Figure 40.1). Infection may result
exposure.
in a spectrum of diseases ranging from subclinical to severe
or fatal multiorgan collapse. The disease agent is main-
Epidemic typhus fever
tained in nature in small mammals and ticks. Canines and
humans are infected following bites from infected ticks.
Epidemic typhus, caused by Rickettsia prowazeki, is a highly
fatal human disease. The disease is responsible for more
Pathogenesis
than 3 million deaths during the last century (considerable
number of fatalities resulted during wars, such as during
Early clinical signs in dogs are often nonspecific. Labo-
the World Wars I and I1). This louse-borne typhus spreads
rapidly in crowded areas under cold weather and unhy-
serologic testing is necessary to confirm infection. Differ-
gienic conditions. The mortality rate with this agent is very
entiation of RMSF cases by clinical signs from canine ehrli-
high (~30%). The organism persists in wild animals such
chiosis (described in Chapter 4l) is often difficult. Both
as wild squirrels.
diseases resulting from tick-borne rickettsial agents are
characterized by fever, depression, lymphadenopathy, and
Coxielfa burnetii
signs of neurologic d ysfunction. Distinctive red rashes,par-
 ticularly in people, are one of the important symptoms of
Ecology
the RMSF. RMSF and most other tick-borne illnesses tend
to be seasonal as they result from tick bites. Younger dogs
Coxiella burnetii is distributed globally and is responsible fo1
the zoonotic disease, Q fever, in people. This organism dif-
with RMSF.
fers from other Rickettsiales, as it is transmitted by aerosol.
Chapter 40
Rickettsiaceae and Coxiellaceae: Rickettsia and Coxiella
295
This pathogen, however, can also be hosted by vectors,
such as ticks. Cattle, sheep, and goats are the primary reser-
FIGURE 40.2.
Transmission electron micrograph image
voirs of C. bumetii infection. This pathogen does not usu-
showing a typical vacuole in 1774A.1 cells infected with
ally cause clinical disease in these animals, although abor-
C. burneti (100 nm). (Reproduced with permission from the
tions in goats and sheep have been implicated to C. burnetii
American Society for Microbiology; Howe and Mallavia 2000).
infections. The organisms in infected animals are excreted
in the milk, urine, and feces. During birth, the organisms
are shed in high numbers within the amniotic fluids and
the placenta. C. burneti is resistant to heat, drying, and to
many common disinfectants, which enable it to survive for
long periods in the environment. Moreover, inhalation of
a single organism can cause the disease in a person.
Human infections usually occur by inhalation airborne
organisms from barnyard dust contaminated by dried pla-
cental material, birth fluids, and excreta of infected herd
animals. Humans, particularly those in close contact with 
the animals shedding the organisms, are often very suscep-
tible to this disease, and as few as one organism is sufficient
to cause infection and disease. About one-half of all people
(A)
infected with C. burneti show signs of clinical illness. Most
acute cases of Q fever begin with the sudden onset of one o1
more of the following: high fevers, severe headache, gen-
cent staining aids in identifying the organisms. Polymerase
eral malaise, myalgia, con fusion, sore throat, chills, sweats,
chain reaction-based assays are also established in detect-
nonproductive cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdom-
ing the Coxiella DNA from a sample. In culture, C. burneti
 inal pain, and chest pain. Fever usually lasts for l-2 weeks.
replicates inside a phagosome. Two forms of the organ-
Weight loss can occur and persist for some time. C. burneti
ism are the replicating large variants and infectious form,
is a highly infectious agent that is also resistant to heat and
referred to as the small variant (Figure 40.2).
drying. It can become airborne and inhaled by humans.
Because, a single C. burnetii organism may cause disease in
Treatment and Control
a susceptible person, it could be developed for use in bio-
The major challenge for successful therapy is that the
logical warfare and is considered a potential bioterrorism
phagosome where C. burneti persists is highly acidic, and
agent. However, as the fatality rate is low, it is not a serious
        
cause of concern.
Alkalinizing cells by using chloroquine has been shown
to improve clinical efficacy of tetracycline. Drugs with
Pathogenesis
moderate efficacy for C. burnetii infection include tetracy-
C. buneti is acquired through inhalation, ingestion, 01
cline, chloramphenicol, clarithromycin, enrofloxacin, and
arthropod bite and gains access to lung macrophages. It
trimethoprim-sulfa. Long-term tetracycline feeding is con-
replicates within the phagosome of a macrophage, simi-
sidered as an attempt to control excretion of C. burnetii
lar to Ehrlichia canis, E. chaffeensis and Neorickettsia species.
organisms from animals. Pregnant sheep and goats may be
About 50% of people acquiring the pathogen exhibit no
treated with tetracycline to reduce the risk of abortions.
clinical signs or show mild, self-limiting infection. Less
than 10% may develop severe disease with signs includ-
References
ing vasculitis, pneumonitis, splenomegaly, fever, and lym-
phocytosis. Mortality in human cases is primarily due to
 pneumonia, hepatic in fection, or endocarditis.
Van Kirk LS, Stanley FH, and Robert AH (2000) Ultrastructure of
Rickettsia rickettsi actin tails and localization of cytoskele-
tal proteins. Infect Immun, 68, 4706-4713.
Immunologic Aspects
Howe D and Mallavia LP (2000) Coxiella burnetii exhibits mor-
A vaccine is available in some countries but is reported to
phological change and delays phagolysosomal fusion after
have apoor efficacy. A whole cell killed vaccine may be pro-
internalization by J774A.1 cells. Infect Immun, 68: 3815-
tective. There is considerable interest in the development
3821.
of a Q fever vaccine, as it is classified as a select agent.
Further Reading
Laboratory Diagnosis
C. burneti can be isolated following injection into guinea
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP et al. (2001) Reorganization
pigs and mice, cultured in chicken eggs, or grown in
of genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmat-
cell cultures. This is not a useful diagnostic tool. Indi-
aceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of some species
rect immunofluorescence, complement fixation, or ELISA
of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrlichia and
tests are used to detect antibodies. In cell culture, eggs,
Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia, descriptions of six new species
and experimental animal tissues, direct immunofluores-
296
PART ll  Bacteria and Fungi
agent" as subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila.
otic cells. Trends Mol Med, 17(10), 573-583. Epub July 15,
Int / Syst Evol Microbiol, 51(Pt 6), 2145-2165.
2011.
HarveyJW (2012) Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and
Rikihisa Y (2006) New findings on members of the family
Color Aflas. Elsevier Inc. ISBN: 978-1-4377-0173-9.
Anaplasmataceae of veterinary importance. Ann N Y Acad
Raskin RE and Meyer DJ (2010) Canine and Feline Cytology: A
Sci, 1078, 438-445.
Color Aflas and Interpretation Guide, Elsevier Inc. ISBN: 978-
 Stuen S and Longbottom D (2011) Treatment and control of 
1-14160-4985-2.
chlamydial and rickettsial infections in sheep and goats.
RenvoiseA, Merhej V, Georgiades K, and Raoult D (2011) Intra-
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 27(1), 213-233. Epub
 cellular Rickettsiales: Insights into manipulators of eukary-
December 13, 2010.
41
Anaplasmataceae:
Ehrlichia and
Neorickettsia
ROMAN R. GANTA
Descriptive Features
ing to multiple genera having widely different host speci-
ficities and host cell associations. Virulence may be due
The order Rickettsiales includes small, obligate intracel-
to release of endotoxins (lipopolysaccharides), produc-
lular gram-negative bacteria. Two families within this
tion ofimmune complexes, and hypersensitivity reactions.
order are Anaplasmataceae and Rickettsiaceae, both of
The pathogens mostly damage vasculal endothelium 01
which include several important pathogens causing dis-
hematopoietic cells and severely weaken the host defense
eases in various vertebrate animals and people. The family
mechanisms. Rickettsiales are highly pathogenic and are
Anaplasmataceae of the class Alphaproteobacteria includes
responsible for high mortality rates in humans and ani-
intraphagosomal pathogens of the genera Anaplasma,
mals. Typical diagnosis is based on the clinical presen-
Ehrlichia,and Neorickettsia. These organisms look very simi-
tation, detection of organisms in specific host cell types
lar under the microscope as they reside within a phagosome
and cell organelles, serology, and molecular techniques.
of an infected host cell. The cell tropism is a major distin-
Culture isolation methods are available for some bacte-
guishable feature for identifying the organisms in a verte-
ria, but are time-consuming and are not practical for rou-
brate host. The family Rickettsiaceae includes pathogens of
tine diagnosis. However, in vitro culture methods serve as
the genus Rickettsia that invade vascular endothelium.
excellent research tools for studies on these pathogens.
Members of the Rickettsiales are like viruses in that they
Vertebrate hosts produce antibodies, and several species
multiply only inside a host cell (intracellular). Most of the
share extensive antigen similarity. Antibodies cross-react
Rickettsiales, except Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species, have a
between species; thus, it is difficult to use antibody tests as 
cell wall like most other gram-negative organisms, respond
specific diagnostic tools. Inactivated or live attenuated vac-
to antibiotics (such as tetracycline derivatives and chloram-
cines are available for some pathogens, but appear to lose
phenicol), and possess ribosomes, DNA, and RNA. They are
effectiveness rapidly, probably due to continuous changes
small coccoid to short rod-shaped bacteria. The size of the
in their outer membrane-expressed proteins. Protection
organisms ranges from 0.2 to 0.5 μm in diameter and 0.8-
may be best achieved by controlling vector burden for some
2 μm in length. Giemsa or other polychromatic stains stain
of the pathogen in fections.
the organisms the best. These aerobic pathogenic bacte
The Anaplasmataceae family pathogens of the genera
ria are responsible for many fatal and chronic infections
Ehrlichia and Neorickettsia, which are of veterinary impor-
in animals and people. They do not grow in standard bac.
tance, are discussed in this chapter. Pathogens of the genus
teriological media. In vitro growth requires the close asso-
Anaplasma are discussed in Chapter 42, and the Rick-
ciation with eukaryotic cells such as yolk sacs of chicken
ettsiaceae family pathogens are discussed in Chapter 40.
embryos, macrophages, or epithelial cells of vertebrate 01
Ehrlichia species are transmitted from infected ticks to verte-
arthropod vectors. The pathogens replicate by binary fis-
brate hosts, while Neorickettsia species are fluke transmitted.
sion inside a phagosome or in the cytoplasm. They heavily
The major pathogens of the Ehrlichia genus causing diseases
depend on their host for energy (ATP) and other nutrients.
in animals include Ehrlichia canis (an important mono-
Some pathogens (e.g., Rickettsia species) have an ATP/ADP
cyte/macrophage tropic canine pathogen), Ehrlichia rumi-
translocase with which they obtain ATP molecules from
nantium (ruminant heartwater disease agent, which infects
the host in exchange for ADPs.
vascular endothelium of a wide range of domestic and wild
Pathogenicity of Rickettsiales is not well defined and
ruminants), Ehrlichia ewingii (mostly a canine granulocytic
pathogen), and Ehrlichia chaffeensis(the human monocytic
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
297
298
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
otes). Two species of the Neorickettsia causing diseases in
FIGURE 41.2.
 E. chaffeensis cuftured in canine
animals are Neorickettsia risticii Potomac horse fever agent)
macrophage ceff line, DH82. inclusions within the cytoplasm
and Neorickettsia helminthoeca (canine salmon poisoning
agent). Both the Neorickettsia species infect monocytes and
and stained with polychromatic stain.
macrophages.
E. canis (Figure 41.1), E. chaffeensis (Figures
41.2 and 41.3), E. ewingii (Figure 41.4), and
E. ruminantium
Ecology
Reservoir and Transmission. E. canis is the major
pathogen responsible for causing the disease canine mono-
cytic ehrlichiosis. It is transmitted by Rhipicepha/us san-
guineus tick, commonly referred to as the brown dog tick.
The organism causes a clinical disease within first 2 weeks
following infection. The pathogen persists in recovered ani-
mals for the rest of the life with high titers of antibody
response, but the organism is often undetectable in the
blood. The infected and carrier status animals are also a
major source of infection for ticks. Young and German
shepherd breed dogs are the most severely affected and
E.numinantium (formerly Cowdria ruminantium) is an
exhibit clinical signs. E. canis infection is prevalent in trop-
important tick-borne pathogen in sub-Saharan Africa, as it
ical and subtropical regions of the world and occurs on all
is responsible for causing the heartwater disease in domes-
continents except Australia. A few cases of human mono-
tic and wild ruminants. This organism infects vascular
cytic ehrlichiosis caused by E. canis infection are reported
endothelium and causes a severe neurological disease in
in Venezuela.
cattle, sheep, and goats. The pathogen is vectored by sev-
The vector for E ewingii, the agent of canine granulo-
eral exotic ticks of the genus Amblyomma. The importa-
 cytic ehrlichiosis, is Amblyomma americanum,which is com-
tion of this pathogen together with the Amblyomma ticks
monly referred to as the lone star tick E. ewingii infections
onto the Caribbean islands resulted in a significant concern
are more common in central North America; however, as
 that the pathogen might be in troduced onto the American
the tick is more widely distributed throughout the south-
 mainland. In particular, if the pathogen is introduced into
eastern part of the United States, the disease occurrence is
a nonendemic region, the mortality rates can reach up to
 also reported from coastalareas. E. ewingii in fections in peo-
 90% in domestic and wild ruminants.
ple, also transmitted from the lone star tick, are reported
E. chaffeensis is first identified as the pathogen caus-
from the mid-western region of the United States.
ing the human monocytic ehrlichiosis. Subsequently,
infections with this organism are also reported in dogs,
FIGURE 41.1.
E. canis cultured in canine macrophage
celline, DH82. inclusions within the cytoplasm contain many
organisms. in vitro cultures transferred to a slide and stained
FIGURE 41.3.
Transmission electron micrographs (TEM)
with polychromatic stain.
of E. chaffeensis infection (morula) in the cytoplasm of
cultured canine macrophages (DH82) (A) and tick celis (B). The
TEM images with morulae containing multiple Ehrlichia
organisms can be seen in the figure. (Reproduced with
permission from Ganta et al. 2009.)
(A
(B)
1
Chapter 41
Anaplasmataceae: Ehrlichia and Neorickettsia
299
Pathogenesis. Acute onset of disease is more common
FIGURE 41.4.
E. ewingii infection (morula) in the
within 2-3 weeks following the tick transmission of
cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from an infected dog
a  n  on sd sds 
(Wright-Giemsa stain). (Reproduced with permission from
time the organisms replicate within a phagosome of an
Harvey 2012.)
infected host cell by binary fission. In severe acute cases
where the disease may be lasting up to several weeks, there
may be several clinical symptoms that may be undistin-
guishable for some of the pathogens. For example, clinical
symptoms significantly overlap for E. canis, E. chaffeensis,
and E ewingii. They may include high fever, muscle aches,
vomiting, anorexia, and lethargy. Leukopenia and anemia
are common, as the blood cell count drops due to Ehrlichia
species infections. Other clinical signs include malaise,
depression, loss of appetite, weight loss, lymphadenopa-
thy, and joint pains (joint pain is more common in dogs
and people with E. ewingi infections). Canine monocytic
ehrlichiosis is characterized by three stages: acute, sub-
clinical, and chronic. Dogs with E. canis infection remain
infected for their entire life, and the persistent presence of
the pathogen occurs even after the animals treated with the
antibiotic doxycycline. Chronic phase with canine ehrli-
chiosis persists for several months to several years, may
cause reduction of all blood cell types, which may accom-
pany hemorrhages, edema, dyspnea, interstitial pneumo-
nia,anemia,and secondary infections, and may becoupled
with enlarged spleen, liver, and lymph nodes.
Heartwater disease caused by E ruminantium is an
acute and fatal disease of ruminants. Goats and sheep are
more susceptible than cattle. Clinical symptoms of the
coyotes, and goats. All four Ehrlichia species have close
disease include a sudden increase of high fever, depres-
genetic similarity, and thus antibodies against one
sion, and neurological signs, which may lead to mortality.
pathogen have extensive cross-reactivity against other
Hydropericardium and hydrothorax and lung edema are
members of the Ehrlichia. The extensive genetic similar-
commonly associated with the mortality. Animals recov-
ity, establishment of persistent infections, and serological
ered from a clinical disease, including both domestic and
cross-reactivity, together with the shared cell tropism for
wild ruminants, become carriers of infection that is similar
to canine ehrlichiosis.
some pathogens, pose a challenge in the accurate diagnosis
of clinical diseases and in initiating a treatment. The white-
tailed deer and other wildlife animals play a major role in
Immunologic Aspects
 maintaining the pathogens' persistence in nature.
Infection with E. canis induces strong humoral and cellu-
lar immune responses. Antibodies are raised by an infected 
host against several outer membrane proteins, and the anti-
body titers increase with time postinfection. Despite the
FIGURE 41.5.
N. helminthoeca inclusions in canine
strong humoral and cellular response, and even after treat-
lymph node peripheral aspirate (Romanowsky; HP oil)
ing the animals with an antibiotic, such as doxycycline, the
(Reproduced with permission from Raskin and Meyer 2010.)
pathogen remains in the host virtually for the life. Upon
challenge with live E. canis, rapid anamnestic humoral
 responses were detected in the serum of immunized dogs,
and primary antibod y responses were detected in the serum
from control dogs. The immune response against E rumi-
nantium is also associated with the development of high
antibody titers developed against major outer membrane
proteins. The response also includes strong cell-mediated
response. Immune responses against E. ewingi and E. chaf
feensis are also very similar to E. canis and E. ruminantium.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Giemsa-stained blood smears of buffy coat or total blood
  d     
lar inclusions (commonly referred to as morulae). The
300
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
inclusions, however, are most likely to be visible dur-
laminitis are the symptoms associated with the disease at
ing the acute phase of infection. The morulae with all
e ot dn seo on pe un pe sis sae
species of Ehrlichia, Neorickettsia, and Anaplasma are very
 similar in their appearance. Thus, the distinguishing fea-
Immunologic Aspects
tures of infection with a specific pathogen may depend
on the host cell tropism and vector and host associa-
Immunologic factors are not fully understood, but the
tions with the pathogen. All Ehrlichia species, except E.
infected animals induce humoral response. Recovered
ewingii, can be cultivated under in vitro conditions using
 ssns 'ass on a aa on reade ss
a canine macrophage cell line or using tick cell cultures.
the cellular immune response may be a major contributing
factor.
01 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect
antibodies against outer membrane-expressed proteins is
Laboratory Diagnosis
a commonly used diagnostic tool. This method, however,
 Microbiologic diagnosis involves demonstration of the
Ehrlichia species antigens. Molecular methods such as the
 agent in monocytes in Wright-stained blood smears. Sero-
 polymerase chain reaction assays are developed for the spe-
logic diagnosis is made by an indirect fluorescent antibody
cific pathogen diagnosis, and this method is most useful for
test or by ELISA. Nucleic acid assays such as the polymerase
detecting active infection in blood during the early clini-
chain reaction are described for the pathogen diagnosis.
cal phage of infection and prior to initiating the antibody
treatment.
Treatment and Control
Tetracycline, if given early, is considered important in 
Treatment and Control
reducing mortality. Supportive care is also necessary. An
effective bacterin is commercially available, but appeared
Tetracycline derivatives are the most effective in treating
to be less effective against infections resulting from strain
the early clinical phase of in fections with Ehrlichia species,
variations.
but less effective against clearing chronic infections. Con-
trolling the tick burden and live infection vaccination in
younger animals or infection and treatment vaccination
N. heiminthoeca
protocol are important steps for reducing the heartwater
disease caused by E. ruminantium in sub-Saharan African
Descriptive Features
countries. Although several inactivated whole-cell or sub-
N. helminthoeca causes salmon poisoning in dogs. This
unit vaccines are under evaluation, their value to protect
pathogen multiplies in the cytoplasm of monocytes and
against Ehrlichia infections remains to be established.
macrophages. This infection is very similar to E. canis and
E. chaffeensis in dogs, except that the organism is not trans-
N. risticii
mitted by ticks. After staining a sample with a Giemsa
stain, the organism may be visible as cytoplasmic inclu-
sions in the macrophages of a lymph node tissue or in the
In the late 1970s, Potomac horse fever in the Potomac
monocytes from a blood smear made from a clinically ill
River Valley of Maryland is recognized as an epidemic in
horses. The Anaplasmataceae pathogen, N. risticii (previ-
animal.
ously known as Ehrlichia risticii) is the agent responsible
for this disease. Clinical signs with this disease in animals
Ecology
include depression, fever, poor appetite, and diarrhea, and 
Reservoir and Transmission. The reservoir of infection
are often accompanied by laminitis (founder). Diarrhea is
for N. helminthoeca is the fluke, Nanophyehus salmincola.
fairly common and can vary from being profuse and watery
The life cycle of the fluke includes passage through a fish 
to scant and cow-like in consistency. Death occurs in 5-
and a snail. Dogs eating raw fish infested with a fluke
30% of untreated horses and can result in toxemia, colic,
containing N. helminthoeca are likely to acquire infection
Or euthanasia due to severe founder.
and the disease. The geographical distribution of salmon 
 poisoning pathogens is limited by the range of the snail,
Ecology
intermediate hosts of the fluke. In particula1, the distribu-
tion of the snail includes North American coastal regions,
Reservoir, Transmission Pathogenesis. The infection
such as northern cost of California, Oregon, Washing-
was initially recognized in North America. Later it was
ton, and British Columbia. Dogs are the definitive hosts
reported also from Canada and Europe. N. risticii infects
of the fluke, harboring the adults in their intestine. If N.
equine monocytes, intestinal epithelium, and colonic mast
helminthoeca fluke gains entry into a dog as a result of eat-
cells and is transmitted by cercaria that is released from the
ing fluke-infected fish, the pathogen infection establishes
infected snails into the water, which are taken up by the
in the dog. Fluke eggs are shed in canine feces and hatch
horses when drinking the contaminated water. Clinically,
 miracidia, which reach to a snail in the en vironment. Cer-
Potomac Horse Fever resembles ehrlichioses with fever, list-
caria emerges from the fluke-infected snail and invades
lessness, anorexia, and variable leukopenia. Diarrhea and
a fish.
Chapter 41
Anaplasmataceae: Ehrlichia and Neorickettsia
301
Pathogenesis. Exposure to an infected raw fish in an
Flukes and N. helminthoeca are killed by cooking at high
endemic area is the primary cause for acquiring the N.
temperatures or by freezing for 24 h.
 helminthoeca infection by dogs as a result of fluke gain-
ing entry from the fish. The fluke then matures in the
dog's gastrointestinal tract where N. hetminthoeca organ-
References
isms are released, which enters into the canine bloodstream
and lymph nodes. In blood, the organism infects mono-
Ganta RR, Peddireddi L, Seo GM et al. (2009) Molecular char-
cytes. The replication of the organism in the dog results in
acterization of Ehrlichia interactions with tick cells and
the clinical signs associated with the disease. Within 1-2
macrophages. Front Biosci, 14, 3259-3273.
weeks of exposure, dogs develop fever, anorexia, depres-
Harvey JW (2012) Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and
sion, weight loss, swollen lymph nodes, and often hemor-
Color Aflas, Elsevier Inc.
rhagic enteritis. Vomiting and diarrhea are also common
Raskin RE and Meyer DJ (2010) Canine and Feline Cytology, A
clinical signs. Mortality can be up to 90% in untreated ani-
Color Afflas and Interpretation Guide, Elsevier Inc.
mals, which can occur within 2 weeks.
Further Reading
Immunologic Aspects
 Dogs recovered from the clinical disease appear to be pro-
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP et al. (2001) Reorganization
tected from the disease.
of genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmat-
aceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of some species
of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrlichia and
Laboratory Diagnosis
Ehrlichia with Neorickeftsia, descriptions of six new species
The presence of organisms within the cytoplasmic vacuoles
h, p  p go s p s
of monocytes in a stained blood smear or in lymph node
agent" as subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila.
aspirates is an evidence of the disease. The organisms may
Int / Syst Evol Microbiol, 51 (6), 2145-2165.
be cultured, but it is a time-consuming method. Molecular
RenvoiseA, Merhej V, Georgiades K, and Raoult D (2011) Intra-
methods can be used to detect the rickettsial nucleic acids
cellular Rickettsiales: Insights into manipulators of eukary-
from a blood or lymph node sample.
otic cells. Trends Mol Med, 17 (10), 573-583. Epub July 15,
2011.
Rikihisa Y (2006) New findings on members of the family
Treatment and Control
Anaplasmataceae of veterinary importance. Ann N Y Acad
Sci, 1078, 438-445.
Tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and sulfonamides are
Stuen S and Longbottom D (2011) Treatment and control of
effective in treating N. helminthoeca infections. Supportive
chlamydial and rickettsial infections in sheep and goats.
treatment is also necessary. The best preventive measure
Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 27 (1), 213-233. Epub
is the exclusion of infected salmon from the canine diet.
December 13, 2010.
plasmataceae:
Anaplasma
ROMAN R. GANTA
Descriptive Features
Pathogenicity of Rickettsiales is not well defined and
 may be complex because they represent organisms belong-
The order Rickettsiales includes small, obligate intracel-
ing to multiple genera having widely different host speci-
lular gram-negative bacteria. Two families within this
ficities and host cell associations. Virulence may be due
order are Anaplasmataceae and Rickettsiaceae, both of
 to release of endotoxins (lipopolysaccharides), produc.
which include several important pathogens causing dis-
tion ofimmune complexes, and hypersensitivity reactions.
eases in various vertebrate animals and people. The family
The pathogens mostly damage vascular endothelium or
Anaplasmataceae of the class Alphaproteobacteria includes
hematopoietic cells and severely weaken the host defense
intraphagosomal pathogens of the genera Anaplasma,
mechanisms. Rickettsiales are highly pathogenic and are
Ehrlichia, and Neorickettsia. These organisms look very
responsible for high mortality rates in humans and ani-
similar under the microscope as they reside within a
mals. Typical diagnosis is based on the clinical presen-
phagosome of an infected host cell. The cell tropism is
tation, detection of organisms in specific host cell types
a major distinguishable feature for identifying the organ-
 and cell organelles, serology, and molecular techniques.
isms in a vertebrate host. The family Rickettsiaceae includes
Culture isolation methods are available for some bacte-
pathogens of the genus Rickettsia thatinvade vascular endo-
ria, but are time-consuming and are not practical for rou-
thelium.
tine diagnosis. However, in viro culture methods serve as
 Members of the Rickettsiales are like viruses in that
excellent research tools for studies on these pathogens.
they multiply only inside a host cell (intracellular).
Vertebrate hosts produce antibodies, and several species
Most of the Rickettsiales, except Ehrlichia and Anaplasma
share extensive antigen similarity. Antibodies cross-react
species, have a cell wall like most other gram-negative
between species; thus, it is difficult to use antibody tests as
organisms, respond to antibiotics (such as tetracycline
specific diagnostic tools. Inactivated or live attenuated vac-
derivatives and chloramphenicol), and possess ribosomes,
cines are available for some pathogens, but appear to lose
DNA, and RNA. They are small coccoid to short rod-
effectiveness rapidly, probably due to continuous changes
 shaped bacteria. The size of the organisms ranges from
in their outer membrane-expressed proteins. Protection
0.2 to 0.5 μm in diameter and 0.8-2 μm in length.
may be best achieved by controlling vector burden for some
Giemsa or other polychromatic stains stain the organ-
of the pathogen infections.
isms the best. These aerobic pathogenic bacteria are
The pathogens of veterinary importance of the genus
responsible for many fatal and chronic infections in ani-
Anaplasma from the family Anaplasmataceae are discussed
mals and people. They do not grow in standard bac-
in this chapter. Pathogens of the genera Ehrlichia and
teriological media. In viro growth requires the close
Neorickettsia are discussed in the Chapter 4l and the
association with eukaryotic cells such as yolk sacs of
Rickettsiaceae family pathogens are discussed in Chapter
chicken embryos, macrophages, or epithelial cells of ver
40. The genus Anaplasma includes the species Anaplasma
tebrate or arthropod vectors. The pathogens replicate
marginale and Anaplasma centrale (bovine erythrocytic
by binary fission inside a phagosome or in the cyto-
pathogens), Anaplasma ovis (the causal agent of ovine
 r is r    a 
anaplasmosis infecting erythrocytes), Anaplasma platys
(ATP) and other nutrients. Some pathogens (e.g., Rick-
(canine cyclic thrombocytopenia agent, which infects
ettsia species) have an ATP/ADP translocase with which
thrombocytes), and Anaplasma phagocytophilum (granulo-
they obtain ATP molecules from the host in exchange
cytic pathogen causing a disease in a broad range of hosts,
fo1 ADPs.
including cattle, horses, dogs, and people).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
302
Chapter 42
Anaplasmataceae: Araplasma
303
of its cell surface-expressed proteins and replicate within
FIGURE 42.1.
A. marginale in bovine erythrocytes
a phagosome by binary fission. New infectious organ-
(Wright-Giemsa stain, 1000x).
isms are released from the infected erythrocytes by lysing
the cells. Erythrocyte destruction can also occur follow-
 d     
cytes, resulting in indiscriminate erythrocyte removal by
the macrophage system. Clinical sings of bovine anaplas-
mosis vary from diarrhea, fever, anemia, increased heart-
beat, anorexia, depression, constipation, abortion, mus-
cle weakness, myocardial hypoxia, and finally to cardiac
arrest.
Severity of the disease varies and depends on the age of
an infected animal. Typically, infected calves of less than 
6 months old exhibit no clinical signs, whereas cattle ages
ranging from 6 months to 3 years may develop a serious
illness. Cattle over 3 years old have a 30-50% mortality rate.
However, animals that recover from the disease establish
persistent, chronic infections with no apparent signs of
illness.The chronically infected animals serve as the source
of infection for ticks and for naive animals. In mature cattle
 si      ( 5<)
seen in cattle 1 year of age or more.
Immunologic Factors.  A. marginale-infected animals
induce both humoral and cell-mediated responses. Sev-
A. marginale
eral major surface proteins are expressed by the pathogen
during its growth in erythrocytes. During the organism's
Descriptive Features
persistent growth in cattle, some of its major antigenic sur-
face proteins’ expression is varied. The antigenic variation
In Giemsa- or polychromatic-stained blood smears, A.
is likely to aid in the pathogen's escape from host immune
 marginale organisms appear as purple inclusions within the
clearance. Animals that recover from the early clinicalstage
cytoplasm of bovine erythrocytes and are typically located
near to the periphery of erythrocytes (Figure 42.1). These
the possibility of serving as the reservoirs of infection for
marginal (inclusion) bodies are membrane-bound phago-
transmission to ticks and naive animals. Thus, immunity
cytic vacuoles containing up to 10 organisms. The organ-
developed against the clinical disease is not an indication
ism can be serially propagated by needle inoculation of
that the pathogen is cleared.
infected blood from one animal to the other. Recent stud-
Infection with A. centrale causes a mild disease. Animals
ies also allowed the establishment of in vitro cultivation and
infected with A. centrale are also protected against infec-
serial passaging of the organism Ixodes scapularis in tick cell
tion with A. marginale. Cattle can be protected against A.
culture under aerobic conditions.
marginale infection with an inactivated whole-cell vaccine
that produces immunity for several months. A modified
live vaccine is also known to induce protective immunity
Ecology
for a long period of time. Infection followed by treatment
Reservoir and Transmission.1
 Infected ruminants are the
 poa poo e praiso osie si sauannan u
primary reservoirs of infection with A. marginale.Although
conferring protection against bovine anaplasmosis clini-
many vertebrate animals can be in fected, the infection with
cal disease, but this type of vaccine does not induce sterile
this organism is the major cause of illness in cattle as a
immunity.
result of tick-borne and mechanical transmission. Bovine
anaplasmosis is reported from all continents. Transmis-
sion through the use of contaminated needles, dehorning
procedures, or from the use of other surgical instruments
Laboratory Diagnosis
is a major source of the disease spread from an infected
A. marginale is demonstrable in erythrocytes of a blood
animal. In nature, most often transmission occurs from
smear following the staining with polychromatic stain (Fig-
infected ticks, such as Dermacentor variabilis, when taking
ure 42.1). Immunofluorescence can be performed using
blood meals on naive animals. Other means oftransmission 
the polyclonal sera against the pathogen. Blood smear
staining may not detect infection beyond the first few
ing insects, such as horseflies.
weeks following the infection. Molecular techniques such
as the polymerase chain reaction, utilizing a gene-specific
Pathogenesis. Infectious organisms enter erythrocytes
primer set, are most valuable for the sensitive detection of
by endocytosis after adhering to the cell surface by way
A.marginate.
304
PART II
Bacteria an d Fungi
tion for both of the organisms. Clinical diseases with these
FIGURE 42.2.
A. phagocytophilum infection (morula) in
Rickettsiales, like most other tick-borne illnesses, are most
likely reported during summer months. A. phagocytophium
(Wright-Giemsa stain). (Reproduced vith permission from
 is transmitted to vertebrate hosts as a result of Ixodes species
Harvey 2012.)
ticks, whereas the tick association for A. platys remains to
be established. Much can be understood about the disease
 from clinical picture and the patient history in predicting
that theanimals are likely suffering with A. phagocytophilum
and A. platys infection.
Ecology, Reservoir, and Transmission
Rodents are considered the primary reservoirs of A. phago-
cytophilum infection. The reservoirs of infection may also
be significantly different in different geographical regions.
In eastern region of the North America, the white-footed
mouse (Peromyscus leukopus) and the I. scapularis tick are
the primary reservoir host and vector, respectively. In the
US West Coast, the Ixodes pacificus may be the important
vector. In Europe, the primary transmitting vector is Ixodes
ricinus tick, and various rodent species are implicated as
the reservoirs of infection. The reservoir host(s) and vec-
tor(s) for A. platys remain to be determined, although
Treatment and Control
the pathogen transmission to dogs is suspected to be via
Tetracycline is the most effective antibiotic against A.
tick bites.
 marginale infection in cattle. Vaccination and vector con-
trol are effective in reducing the disease in animals.
Pathogenesis. The primarily granulocytic infection with
A. phagocytophilum was originally documented in rumi-
nants in Europe where it was commonly referred to as
A. phagocytophilum (Figure 42.2) and A.
the tick-borne fever. Later, the pathogen infections were
platys (Figures 42.3 and 42.4)
reported in North American horses (earlier, it was called
the equine ehrlichiosis agent, Ehrlichia equi). The pathogen 
Descriptive Features
also infects humans and dogs in North America. All hosts
develop vasculitis associated with thromboses, thrombo-
In polychromatic stained thick blood smears, A. phago-
 cytophilum appears in neutrophils as membrane-bound
cytopenia, edema, and hemorrhage. Vascular changes are
morulae consisting of several organisms. The infection is
 more noticeable in testes and ovaries of ruminants. Lesions
common among ruminants, horses, dogs, and humans
as a result of the A. phagocytophilum infection may include
A. platys infection occurs within the canine platelets and
splenomegaly and hemorrhages. Clinical symptoms may
include fever, depression, accelerated breathing, lack of
causes a cyclic thrombocytopenia. This organism may be
visible in the think blood smear as well. Blood smear posi-
apatite, edema, anemia, icterus, and ataxia. Ataxia appears 
to be more common in horses. The infection in cows may
tives may be seen during the early clinical phages of infec-
also result in the drop in milk yield. The disease is milder in
young animals. As a result of depressed neutrophil count,
the infected animals are also more susceptible to a sec-
FIGURE 42.3.
A. platys infection (morula) in the
ondary in fection. More serious complication of the disease
cytopiasm of platelets in blood from an infected dog
can occur in some animals, which may include respira-
(Wright-Giemsa stain). (Reproduced with permission from
tory infections and/or laminitis. Canine A. platys infection
Harvey 2012.)
 results in developing cyclic thrombocytopenia.
(A)
(B)
Immunologic Aspects
Host immune response against the pathogens includes cel-
lular and humoral responses. Antigenic variation in both
A. phagocytophilum and A platys may contribute to the
pathogens’ persistence and immune evasion. Although
considerable research has been caried out in support
of understanding of the variation in some of the outer
surface-expressed antigens of A. marginale and A. phagocy-
tophilum,little is known about the mechanism of antigenic
Chapter 42
Anaplasmataceae: Anaplasma
305
FIGURE 42.4.
Transmission electron micrograph of A. platys infection (morula) in the cytoplasm of platelets in blood from an
infected dog, with morulae containing multiple (A) and four visible organisms (B). (Reproduced with permission fromHarvey et al.
1978.)
(B)
variation for A. platys. However, cyclic thrombocytopenia
References
in A. platys may be caused as a result of cyclical changes in
the bacteremia levels, leading to cyclical changes in platelet
Harvey J (2012) Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and
counts. Significant diversity in the expressed major sur-
Color Aflas, Elsevier Inc.
face proteins is also reported for A phagocytophilum and A.
Harvey JW, Simpson CF, and Gaskin JM (1978). Cyclic throm-
marginale strains.
 so   a e a  d
Infect Dis, 137, 182-188.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Further Reading
Inclusions in the cytoplasm (replicating organisms in
phagosomes) of granulocytes may be detected during the
early clinical phage of infection following the polychro-
Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP et al. (2001) Reorganization
matic (such as the Giemsa stain) stained thick smear
of genera in the families Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmat-
of a blood or buffy coat sample (Figure 42.2 and 42.3).
aceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of some species
Indirect immunofluorescent antibody and enzyme-lin ked
of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrlichia and
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests have been developed
Ehrlichia with Neorickettsia, descriptions of six new species
using infected neutrophils of a host. Recombinant anti-
h, p  p go s p sn
 gens are typically used for an ELISA. Molecular methods
agent" as subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophila.
such as the polymerase chain reaction are used to detect
Int / Syst Evol Microbiol, 51 (6), 2145-2165.
the pathogens during the clinical phase of the disease. Sim-
Raskin RE and Meyer DJ (2010) Canine and Feline Cytology, A
ilarly, A. platys organisms may be detected in the polychro-
Color Aflas and Interpretation Guide, Elsevier Inc.
matic stained platelets of infected dogs.
RenvoiseA, Merhej V, Georgiades K, and Raoult D (2011) Intra-
cellular Rickettsiales: Insights into manipulators of eukary-
otic cells. Trends Mol Med, 17 (10), 573-583. Epub July 15,
Treatment and Control
2011.
Rikihisa Y (2006) New findings on members of the family
As with other Rickettsiales, tetracycline is the most effec-
Anaplasmataceae of veterinary importance. Ann N Y Acad
Sci, 1078, 438-445.
Vector control may be effective in reducing the disease
Stuen S and Longbottom D (201l) Treatment and control of
in animals. Currently, there are no vaccines available for
 chlamydial and rickettsial infections in sheep and goats. Vet
use in controlling A. phagocytophilum or A. platys infections
Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 27 (1), 213-233. Epub 2010
in animals.
December 13, 2010.
Bartonellaceae
BRUNO B. CHOMEL AND RICKIE W. KASTEN
Members of the Family Bartonellaceae are small gram-
Bartonella famiae has been isolated from febrile
 negative rods. Until the early 1990s, the genus Bartonella
people in Thailand.
consisted of only one species, Barfonella bacilliformis. The
Bartonella claridgeiae is suspected to also be a
 genus now contains all the species that were once included
minor agent of CSD.
in the genera Bartonella, Rochalimaea, and Grahamella. The
2.A
Associated with animal patients: Some of the Bar-
genus Bartonella has been placed into the family Bartonel-
tonella species that are pathogenic to humans (B.
laceae (which has also been removed from the order Rick-
vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi, B. clarridgeiae, B. henselae,
ettsiales). Members of the genus Bartonella belong to theα -2
B. elizabethae, B. quintana, B. washoensis, B. eliza-
subgroup of theα-proteobacteria. Most of these bacteria are
bethae, B. grahamii, B. taylori and new BKl, KK1,
erythrocyte-adherent bacilli.
and KK2) have recently been associated with various
The present family consists of more than 20 species
clinical entities, including endocarditis, in domestic
or subspecies and many Candidatus species, of which
dogs. Several other species have been diagnosed in
 14 species, subspecies, or Candidaus species are human
dogs without report of specific clinical entity, such 
pathogens:
as B. vinsonii ssp. arupensis, B. volans-like, B. bovis
Or strain HMD (proposed Candidaus B. merieuxii).
1. Associated with disease in human patients: B. bacil-
Cases of endocarditis have been described also in
liformis is the etiologic agent of Oroya fever, an
cats caused by B. henselae and in cattle caused by
acute bacteremic infection characterized by sepsis
B. bovis.
and hemolysis, and of verruga peruana, mainly a
Several other Barfonella species, such as B. vinsonii
ssp. vinsonii, B. doshiae, B. taylorii, B. peromysci, B.
chronic infection.
birlesi, B. fribocorum, B. talpae, B. bovis, B. schoen-
Bartonella quintana, the agent of trench fever,
buchensis, and B. capreoli, have only been isolated
has also been found to be one of the agents of
from the blood of various animal species, including
bacillary angiomatosis (BA), a vascular proliferative
various wild rodents, squirrels, rabbits, felids, canids,
lesion observed in immunocompromised individu-
bovids, and cervids. At present, these species are not
als, mainly with acquired immunodeficiency syn-
known to induce any specific disease in the infected
drome (AIDS). BA caused by B. quintana usually
animal.
occurs in homeless people infested with body lice.
BA can also be caused by Bartonella henselae.
Descriptive Features
B. henselae causes mainly catscratch disease (CSD)
in immunocompetent individuals.
Morphology and Staining
Bartonella elizabethae,B. koehlerae, B. alsatica, and
Candidarus B. mayotimonensis have been associated
Bartonellaceae are fastidious, aerobic, short, pleomorphic
with endocarditis in immunocompetent patients.
Aq  g s q  oo -
Bartonella vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi and B. washoensis
1.0 μm) that take from 5 to 15 days and up to 45 days
 are associated with endocarditis or myocarditis.
on primary culture to form visible colonies on enriched
Bartonella grahamii has been associated with neu-
blood-containing media, as they are highly hemin depen-
roretinitis.
dent (Figure 43.1). In infected tissues, Warthin-Starry sil-
B. vinsonii ssp. arupensis was isolated from the
ver impregnation stain reveals small bacilli, which tend to
blood of a rancher with fever and mild neuro-
appear as clumps of tightly compacted organisms. Simi-
logical symptoms and detected in a patient with
larly, small organisms can be identified in red blood cells
endocarditis.
by May-Grunwald Giemsa coloration. Bartonellae have a
 B. melophagi has been associated with pericarditis
close evolutionary resemblance with members of the gen-
 and fatigue.
era Brucella, Agro bacterium, and Rhizobium.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
306
Chapter 43
Bartonellaceae
307
blood (or sheep or horse blood) at 35 *C (except for B. bacil-
FIGURE 43.1.
B.henselae colonies on blood cufture on
liformis, which grows best at 28 *C) in 5% CO2. On primary
5%rabbit blood agar.
isolation, some Bartonella,such as B.henselae, B. clarridgeiae,
B. vinsonii, or B. elizabethae, have colonies with a white,
rough, dry, raised appearance and pit the medium. They
are hard to break up or transfer. Other bartonellae such as
B. quintana have colonies that are usually smaller, gray,
translucent, and somewhat gummy or slightly mucoid.
A novel pre-enrichment liquid medium Bartonella/alpha-
 Proteobacteria growth medium (BAPGM) has been devel-
oped and used successfully to detect Bartonella in biological 
products.
Ecology
Reservoir, Transmission, and Geographic Distribution
Most members of the genus Bartonella species are vector-
 borne organisms. The reservoirs, vectors, and geographic
distribution are shown in Table 43.1.
Pathogenesis
Cellular Composition
Mechanisms
B. bacilliformis and B. clarridgeiae are the only members of
the genus that are motile by means of unipolar flagella. B.
B. quintana and B. henselae are clinically associated with pro-
quintana and B. henselae have a twitching motility associ-
liferative neovascular lesions (Figure 43.2). The pathogen-
ated with fimbriae or pili. Because of their slow growth,
esis of BA involves injury and proliferation of the vascular
standard biochemical methods for identification are not as
endothelium both with B. henselae and B. quintana. These
useful for identification. The bartonellae are oxidase and
organisms induce endothelial cell proliferation and migra-
catalase-negative. Measurements of preformed enzymes
tion in vitro, and a protein fraction was identified as the
and standard testing have revealed differences between
angiogenic factor. Bartonella infection (in vitro) stimulated
 species. Most species are biochemically inert except for the
endothelial cell proliferation and induced obvious mor-
production of peptidases. The MicroScan Rapid Anaerobe
phological changes due to modifications of the cytoskele-
Panel (Baxter Diagnostics, Deerfield, IL) has been reported
ton. B. henselae has been shown to induce infected cells to
to provide species identification. Whole cell fatty acid
produce vascular endothelial growth factor, which in turn
(CFA) analysis for the genus has proven useful for identifi-
stimulated the proliferation of endothelial cells and the
cation because Bartonellae have a unique and characteristic
growth of B. henselae.
whole CFA composition. The Bartonellae have gas-liquid
B. henselae seems to share with B. bacilliformis, a common
chromatography fatty acid profiles consisting mainly of
mechanism for mediating pathogenesis. A bacteriophage-
C18:09, C18:19, and C16:o. Molecular genetic methods such
like particle similar to the bacteriophage observed in B.
as restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of
bacilliformis has been found in culture supernatant from
 genes encodingcitrate synthase, 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
B. henselae. This particle has at least three associated pro-
or 16S-23S rRNA spacer region, and more recently anal-
teins and contains 14 kbp linear DNA segments that are
ysis based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of ran-
heterogeneous in sequence. It has been speculated that an
dom, repetitive extragenic palindromic sequences have
ancestor of B. henselae and B. bacilliformis acquired the abil-
been used to distinguish strains and species of Bartonella.
RFLP or sequence analysis of DNA encoding 16S rRNA, cit-
its dissemination or its acquisition of nutrients within the
rate synthase genes after PCR amplification both directly
 host. It is possible that a common transducting phage may
from specimens or pure cultures have been largely used
be the mechanism of genetic exchange by which the two
for detecting and characterizing Bartonella. Identification
 organisms acquired this pathogenic trait.
is mainly performed with the amplification of the DNA
 All Bartonella species multiply and persist in red blood
encoding the 16S-23S rRNA intergenic spacer region (ITS)
cells. B. bacilliformis possess polar flagella that have been
shown to mediate erythrocyte adhesion. For nonflagellated
those encoding the citrate synthase (gltA), the heat shock
Bartonella, bundle-forming pili as well as surface proteins
protein (groEL), the riboflavine (ribC), a cell division pro-
may play a role in erythrocyte adhesion. Until recently,
tein (ftsZ), and a 17-kDa antigen.
mechanisms of persistence of Bartonella bacteremia in
mammals were not well understood. Recent reports have
revealed the intraerythrocytic localization of these bac-
Growth Characteristics
teria, which is a unique strategy for bacterial persistence.
Traditionally, members of the genus Bartonella are culti-
Nonhemolytic intracellular colonization of erythro-
vated in semisolid nutrient agar containing fresh rabbit
cytes would preserve the organisms for efficient vector
308
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 43.1.
Bartonelia spp.
Main Reservoir
Vectors or Potential Vectors
B. alsatica?
Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
Fleas (Spilopsyllus cunicuti)
B. bacilliformis
Humans
Pheblotomines (sand flies) (l. verrucarum)
B. quintana?
 suewnh
Human body lice (Pedicurus humanis corporis)
B. henselae?
Cats (Felis catus)
Fleas ( Ctenocephalides felis) Ticks?
B. clarridgeiae
Cats {Felis catus)
Fleas (Ctenocephalides felis)
B. koehlerae?
Cats (Felis catus)
Fleas (Ctenocephalides felis)
 B. vinsonif ssp. vinsonif
Meadow voles (Microtus
Ear mites ( Trombicula microth?
pennsylvanicus)
B. vinsoni ssp. arupensis?
White footed mice ( Peromyscus
Fleas?
leucopus)
B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffia
Coyotes (c. latrans)
Ticks? Fleas?
Dogs ( Canis familiaris)
B. talpae
Moles (Talpa europaea)
Fleas?
B. peromysci
Field mice (Peromyscus spp.)
Fleas?
B. birtlesif
Wood Mice (Apodemus spp.)
Fleas?
B. grahami?
Bank voles (Clethrionomys glareolus)
Fleas (Ctenophthaimus nobilis)
B. taylori
Wood mice (Apodemus spp.)
Fleas ( Ctenophthalmus nobilis)
8. doshiae
Meadow voles (Microtus agrestis)
Fleas?
B.elizabethae?
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
Fleas
B. tribocorum?
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
Fleas?
B. rochalimae?
Gray and red foxes, fUrocyon 
 Fleas (Puex irritans, P. simulans)
cinereoargenteus, Vulpes vuipes)
Raccoons (Procyon lotor)
B. bovis (weissin)
 Domestic cattle (Bos taurus)
 Biting flies? Ticks?
B. chomeli
 Domestic cattle (Bos taurus).
 Biting flies? Ticks?
B. capreoli
Roe deer (capreorus capreorus)
Biting flies? Ticks?
8. schoenbuchensis
Roe deer (capreorus capreorus)
Deer keds (Lipoptena cervi, Lipoptena mazamae)
 B. aff. schoenbuschensis
Rusa deer (Cervus timorensis russa)
Deer keds?
B. volans
 Southern flying squirrel (Glaucomys
Fleas?
volans)
B. japonica
 Small Japanese field mouse (Apodemus 
Fleas?
argenteus)
B. silvatica
Large Japanese field mouse (Apodemus 
Fleas?
speciosus)
B. tamiae
Rat (Rattus sp.)?
chigger mites? ( Leptotrombidium, Schoengastia,
Bankarrtia), ticks?
B. rattimassiiensis
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
Fleas?
 B. phoceensis
Rats (Rattus norvegicus)
Fleas?
B. australis
 eastern grey kangaroos (Macropus
Fleas? Ticks
giganteus)
Candidatus B. melophagi?
Sheep (Ovis aries)
Sheep ked (Melophagus ovinus)
Candidatus B washoensis?
 California ground squirrel
Fleas (Cropsylla montana)
(Spermophius beecheyi)
Candidatus B. thailandensis
Rodents
Fleas?
Candidatus B. mayotimonensis?
Rodents? (mice)?
Fleas?
B. rattaustraliani
Australian rodents
Fleas?
B. queenstandensis
(Melomys sp., Uromys caudimaculatus
Rattus tunneyi, R fuscipes, R.
conatus, R leucopus)
 B. coopersplainsensis
Rattus leucopus
 Candidatus B. antechini
Yellow-footed Antechinus 
Fleas (Acanthopsylla jordan)
(Antechinus flavipes)
Ticks (fxodes antechini)
Candidatus B. bandicooti
Western barred Bandicoot (Perameles
Flea (Pigiopsylla tunney)
bougainville)
Candidatus B. woyliei
Woylie (Bettongia Penicillata)
Flea (Pygiopsylla hiln)
Tick ( xodes australiensis)
Candidatus B. merieuxi (HMD strain)
jackal (Canis aureus)
Ticks, fleas?
 Bartonella species or subs peties reported to be zoonotic.
7-Indicates most likely vector species.
Chapter 43
Bartonellaceae
309
appearance of clinical signs. In 50% of the cases, asmall skin
FIGURE 43.2.
Canine endocarditis caused by B.
lesion, often resemblingan insect bite, appears at the inocu-
clarridgeiae. (Used with permission from Chomef et al. 2001.)
lation site, usually the hand or forearm, and evolves from a
papule to a vesicle and partially healed ulcers. These lesions
resolve within a few days to a few weeks. Lymphadenitis
develops approximately 3 weeks after exposure and is gen-
 erally unilateral. It commonly appears in the epitrochlear,
axillary, 0r cervical lymph nodes. Swelling of the lymph
node is usually pain ful and persists for several weeks to sev-
eral months. in 25% of the cases, suppuration occurs. The
large majority of the cases show signs of systemic infection:
fever, chills, malaise, anorexia, headaches. In general, the 
disease is benign and heals spontaneously without seque-
lae. Atypical manifestations of CsD occur in 5-10% of the
cases. The most common of these is Parinaud's oculog-
landular syndrome (periauricular lymphadenopathy and
palpebral conjunctivitis), but also meningitis, encephali-
tis, osteolytic lesions, and thrombocytopenic purpura may
occur. Encephalopathy is one of the most serious compli-
cations of CsD, which usually occurs 2-6 weeks after the
transmission, protect Bartonella from the host immune
onset of lymphadenopathy. However, it usually resolves
response and contribute to decreased antimicrobial effi-
with complete recovery and few or no sequelae.
cacy. Persistence of infection was demonstrated in a rat
There were an estimated 22 000 human cases of CsD
model using B. fribocorum. After a 5-day "hidden/silent"
in the United States in 1992, some 2000 of whom were
phase following experimental infection, the organism
hospitalized. The estimated annual health cost of CsD was
more than $12 million. From 55% to 80% of CsD patients
per red blood cell. Thereafter, the organisms remained
are under the age of 20 years. There is a seasonal pattern,
within the cell for the life of the erythrocyte. Non hemolytic
with most cases seen in autumn and winter.
intracellular colonization of erythrocytes is likely a bac-
New clinical presentations associated with B. henselae
terial persistence strategy that preserves the Bartonella
infection have been reported in immunocompetent per-
species for potential transmission by arthropods, because
sons, including neuroretinitis or bacteremia as a cause of
the reservoir host would serve as a source of infection for
chronic fatigue syndrome, and cases of B. henselae endo-
 blood-feeding arthropods, which could then subsequently
carditis in a cat owner. B. henselae was also recently deter-
infect a new host.
 mined as a frequent cause of prolonged fever and fever
Bacterial type IV secretion systems, which are
of unknown origin in children. Rheumatic manifestations
supramolecular transporters ancestrally related to bacte-
of Bartonella infection have been described in children,
lial conjugation systems, represent crucial pathogenicity
including a case of myositis and a case of arthritis and
factors that have contributed to a radial expansion of the
skin nodules. Arthritis has also been described in a very
Bartonella lineage in nature by facilitating adaptation to
limited number of cases. Other 1heumatic manifestations
unique mammalian hosts. On the molecular level, the type
related to Barfonella in fection in humans include erythema
IV secretion system VirB/VirD4 is known to translocate a
nodosum, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, fever of unknown
cocktail of different effector proteins into host cells, which
origin with myalgia, and arthralgia. Chronic infection and
subvert multiple cellular functions to the benefit of the
bacteremia have been reported in humans, especially in the
infecting pathogen. Furthermore, bacterial adhesins medi-
United States.
ate a critical, early step in the pathogenesis of the bartonel-
lae by binding to extracellular matrix components of host
Endocarditis.
 Several Bartonella spp. have also been recog-
cells, which leads to firm bacterial adhesion to the cell sur-
nized as causative agents of blood culture-negative endo-
face as a prerequisite for the efficient translocation of type
carditis or myocarditis in humans, including B. henselae,
IV secretion effector proteins. The best-studied adhesins in 
B. quintana, B. elizabethae, B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi and B.
bartonellae are the orthologous trimeric autotransporter
vinsonii ssp. arupensis, B. alsatica, and Candidatus B. mayoti-
adhesins, BadA in B. henselae and the Vomp family in
 monensis. Bartonella spp. account for approximately 3% of 
B. quintana. Genetic diversity and strain variability also
all human cases of endocarditis, a percentage similar to
 appear to enhance the ability of bartonellae to invade not
endocarditis cases caused by Coxiella burnetii, the agent of
 only specific reservoir hosts but also accidental hosts, as
Q fever (see Chapter 40).
shown for B. henselae.
Bacillary Angiomatosis. For BA in immunocompromised
Disease Patterns and Epidemiology
persons, the signs and symptoms are very different from
Human Patients
CSD. BA, also called epithelioid angiomatosis, is a vascular
proliferative disease of the skin characterized by multiple,
Cat Scratch Disease. CSD is caused by B. henselae. In CSD,
blood-filled, cystic tumors. It is usually characterized by
1-3 weeks elapse between the scratch or bite ofa cat and the
violaceous or colorless papular and nodular skin lesions
310
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
dogs presented nonspecific clinical abnormalities, such as
ically resemble epithelioid hemangiomas. When visceral
severe weight loss, protracted lethargy, and anorexia. A
 parenchymal organs are involved, the condition is referred
fourth dog was diagnosed as being infected with B. eliz-
to as bacillary peliosis hepatis, splenic peliosis, or systemic
abethae by PCR amplification and sequencing, increasing
BA. Fever, weight loss, malaise, and enlargement of affected
the number of Bartonella species identified in infected dogs.
 Organs may develop in people with disseminated BA. Endo-
Serological studies in North America and Europe indicate
carditis has also been reported in patients with BA.
that Bartonella infection in domestic dogs is quite rare (less
than 5%%), whereas high seroprevalence has been reported
Cats. No major clinical signs of CsD have been reported 
from dogs living in tropical countries (up to 65% of dogs
in cats under natural conditions, but infection is very com-
tested from Sudan). In North America, especially in the
mon, especially in young kittens. It is estimated that about
Southeast, high seroprevalence has been reported in dogs
10% of pet cats and up to 30-50% of stray cats are Bartonella
bacteremic at a given time. In western North America
Erlichia, Babesia, Anaplasma) . A high seroprevalence (35%)
(California), a 40% prevalence of bacteremic cats was found
has been reported in coyotes from California, and in one
in the San Francisco-Sacramento area.Minor clinical signs,
 specific California county, 28% of the coyotes tested were
including fever, enlarged lymph nodes, uveitis, and mild
bacteremic.
tally infected cats. However, several cases of uveitis and a
Rodents.l
 Experimental infection of pregnant laboratory
few cases of B. henselae endocarditis were diagnosed in pet
mice with B. birtlesii showed pathogenic effects on the
cats. Potential association between either seropositivity 0r
reproductive function of these mice. Bacteremia was sig-
bacteremia and presence of oral lesions (gingivitis, stomati-
nificantly higher in virgin females than in males. In mice
tis) has been reported, too. Additionally, reproductive dis-
infected before pregnancy, fetal loss and resorption was
higher in infected mice than controls, and the weight
breedings and stillbirths) have been observed in experi-
of viable fetuses was significantly lower for infected than
mentally infected queens. Bacteremia usually lasts a few
for uninfected mice. Transplacental transmission was also
weeks to a few months. The organisms have been reported
demonstrated, since 76% of the fetal resorptions were
to be intraerythrocytic, and pili may be a pathogenic deter-
culture-positive for B. birflesii. The histopathological analy-
minant for this Bartonella species. Cats can yield more
sis of the placentas ofinfected mice showed vascular lesions
than 1 million colony-forming units (CFU) per milliliter of
in the maternal placenta, which could explain the repro-
blood. Direct transmission from cat to cat, as well as vertical
ductive disorders observed. The isolation and character-
transmission from bacteremic female cats to kittens, was
ization of the complete virB homolog (virB2-11) and a
unsuccessful in various experiments. Transmission from
downstream-located virD4 gene in B. fribocorum has been
cat to cat was successfully achieved by depositing infected
described. An essential role for this VirB/VirD4 T4SS in
fleas collected from bacteremic cats onto noninfected kit-
establishing intraerythrocytic infection was demonstrated.
tens. It was shown that flea feces are the likely infectious
material that transmits infection when inoculated by a cat
scratch. The role of saliva as a possible source of infection
Immunologic Aspects
still needs to be fully demonstrated. Presence of B. hense-
lae DNA was found in infected fleas. Epidemiological stud-
Infection by Bartonella organisms stimulates both the cel-
ies clearly demonstrate that antibody prevalence and bac-
lular and the humoral responses. B. henselae and B. quin-
teremia prevalence is the highest in stray cat populations
tana induce proliferation and migration of endothelial
living in warm and humid areas where flea infestation is
cells. These effects are due to a trypsin-sensitive factor
usually highier.
that appears to be associated with the bacterial cell wall
01 membrane or intracellular molecules. B. henselae infects
Dogs. B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi has been identified as an
and activates endothelial cells. B. henselae outer membrane
important cause of canine endocarditis, especially in large
proteins are sufficient to induce NFxf activation and adhe-
breed dogs. In a 2-year prospective study of endocarditis
 sion molecule expression, followed by enhanced rolling
cases, almost one-third of the 18 cases were caused by Bar-
and adhesion of leukocytes.
tonella species. B. claridgeiae, B. washoensis, B. rochalimae,
In infected individuals, specific antibodies can be
B. quintana, B. koehlerae, and B. henselae have been asso-
 detected a few days to a few weeks after infection. Most
ciated with dog endocarditis cases. The clinical spectrum
of the clinical cases of CSD or BA are associated with ele-
of this infection in dogs has also been expanding, as it has
vated titers against B. henselae or B. quintana. Immunity is
been associated with cardiac arrhythmias, endocarditisand
usually long lasting in cases of CsD. Human cases of endo-
myocarditis, granulomatous lymphadenitis, and granulo-
 r aa a oss aa ar s
matous rhinitis. In some dogs, intermittent lameness, bone
fluorescent antibody (IFA) titers (>1 : 800).
pain, or fever of unknown origin can precede the diagnosis
 In a murine model, spleen cells from infected C57BL/6
of endocarditis for several months. B. clarridgeiae DNA was
 mice proliferated specifically upon stimulation with heat-
detected in a dog with lymphocytic hepatitis. B. henselae
killed Bartonella antigen and CD4 T-lymphocytes mainly
DNA was initially detected in a dog with peliosis hepatis,
mediate proliferative responses. These responses increased
and in a dog with hepatopathy and in three dogs with var-
during the course of infection and peaked at 8 weeks postin-
ious clinical entities. These three B. henselae-DNA-positive
fection. Gamma interferon, but not interleukin-4, was
Chapter 43
Bartonellaceae
311
produced in vitroby spleen cells from infected animals upon
4 weeks. Colonies usually will develop in a few days from
stimulation with Bartonella antigens. As described also in
cat blood, although some strains may require a few weeks
humans, cats, and dogs, Bartonella-specific IgG antibodies
(Figure 43.1).
were detectable in the serum of the infected mice by the
Bacterial isolation, ELISA or IFA detection of Bartonella
second week, and the antibody concentration peaked at
12 weeks postinfection. IgG2s was the prominent isotype
DNA directly from patient samples all have substantial
among the Bartonella-specific serum IgG antibodies. There-
diagnostic limitations. As antibodies to B. vinsonii ssp.
fore, B. henselae induces cell-mediated immune responses
 i (t>)  n ae s 
with a TH1 phenotype in immunocompetent C57BL/6
sick referral or healthy (<1%) dog population. Detection
mice.
of B. vinsoni ssp. berkhoffi antibodies in a sick dog provides
 In cats, B. henselae antibodies detected by IFA or enzyme.
strong clinical evidence for prior exposure to and poten-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) appear 2-3 weeks
tially active infection with this organism.
after experimental inoculation and usually persist for sev-
    n  n s 
eral months. Most infected cats are bacteremic for sev-
using Bactec blood-culture system or BacT/Alert blood-
eral weeks despite high antibody titers. Chronic bac-
culture system. Identification of isolates as Bartonella can
teremia, despite a humoral immune response, is commonly
be performed by using enzyme-based identification sys-
observed amongcats. There is no directcorrelation between
tems, but is usually confirmed by DNA amplification using
antibody titer and the magnitude of bacteremia; however,
PCR-RFLP analysis. Several restriction endonucleases, such
cats with IFA serologic titers of 512 or more are more likely
as Taql and Hhal for citrate synthase gene, are used to
to be bacteremic than cats with lower titers.
digest the single product amplified by specifc primers. PCR
has also been used to identify Bartonella spp. in tissues,
In experimentally infected dogs, B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi
in absence of culture. Diagnosis of Barfonella endocarditis
establishes chronic infection, which may result in immune
relies heavily on this method in humans and dogs in con-
suppression, characterized by defects in monocytic phago-
junction with high antibody titers.
cytosis, an impaired subset of CD8 T-lymphocytes,
Evidence of infection can be detected in humans or ani-
and impaired antigen presentation within the lymph
mals by detection of antibodies by IFA or ELISA. An IFA titer
node.
of at least 1 : 64 is considered positive. B. henselae antibodies
can be detected despite concurrent bacteremia in cats and
sometimes in humans.
Laboratory Diagnosis
 In 2005, Maggi et al. described a novel, chemically mod-
ified, insect-based liquid culture medium (BAPGM) that
For years, the diagnosis of CsD was based on clinicalcriteria,
supports the growth of at least seven Bartonella spp. This
history of exposure to a cat, failure to isolate other bacteria,
and/or histologic examination of biopsies of lymph nodes.
Bartonella spp. Subsequently, a unique diagnostic platform
A skin testusing an tigen prepared from pasteurized exudate
that combines pre-enrichment culture utilizing BAPGM,
from lymph nodes of patients with CsD was also used in
followed by a highly sensitive PCR assay (which has a sen-
diagnosing CsD, but this test was not standardized and
sitivity of 0.5 bacterial genome copies per microliter of
elicited concerns about the safety of such a product.
sample DNA template) targeting the 16S-23S ITS region
Serologic tests, such as IFA or ELISA, and techniques
01 Pap31, a bacteriophage-associated gene was developed.
to isolate the organism from human, dog, and cat speci-
This approach has allowed tocharacterize and quantify Bar-
mens have been developed since the mid-1990s. Because
tonella infection in blood, CSF, aqueous, and joint fluids in
Bartonellae are intraerythrocytic bacteria, cell lysis using
addition to seroma fluids, transudates, and modifed tran-
alysis-centrifugation technique greatly facilitates bacterial
sudates from dogs with idiopathic cavitary effusions and
isolation from the blood. However, blood isolation is sel-
tissue biopsy samples obtained at surgery.
dom obtained from human cases of CsD and from domestic
dogs. On the contrary, isolation is more commonly success-
ful from human BA cases, for which serology is often neg-
Treatment
ative. Isolation from the blood of natural reservoirs is also
quite common with bacteremia prevalence ranging from
In humans, antimicrobial treatment is generally indicated
10% to 20% (such as for wild felids or coyotes) to up to 95%
for patients with BA, bacillary peliosis, or relapsing bac-
(beef cattle and deer).
teremia. BA patients respond dramatically to macrolide
For blood culture from cats, 1.5 ml of blood is drawn
antibiotics. Treatment with erythromycin, rifampicin, 0r
into lysis-centrifugation tubes (Isostat Microbial System,
doxycycline for at least 2-3 months in immunocompro-
Wampole Laboratories) or more commonly, cat blood col-
mised people is recommended, but relapses can occur. In
lection in EDTA tubes kept frozen at 270 to -70 *C for a
such cases, patients should receive lifelong treatment with
few days or weeks has been a preferred alternative because
one of these antibiotics. For CsD, antimicrobial treatment
of easier handling and lower cost. For dogs or cattle a larger
is not generally indicated, because most typical cases do
volume of blood can be collected (3-5 ml). The tubes are
not respond to antimicrobial administration. Intravenous
centrifuged and the pellet spread onto infusion agar plates
administration of gentamicin and doxycycline and oral
containing 5% fresh rabbit blood, which are maintained at
administration of erythromycin have been used success-
35 *C in a high humidity chamber with 5% CO2 for 3 or
fully in the treatment of disseminated CsD and therapy
312
PART ll Bacteria and Fungi
of patients with neuroretinitis. In cases of Bartonella endo-
relapses. Declawing cats has also been suggested but has
carditis, patients receiving an aminoglycoside were more
 a limited value, because fleas can transmit infection from
likely to fully recover, and those treated with aminoglyco-
cat to cat. Flea control, therefore, appears to be one of the
sides for at least 14 days were more likely to survive than
 major control measures to prevent cat infection and its
those with shorter therapy duration.
spread from cat to cat. The most effective means of pre-
Treatment with azithromycin is recommended for
venting B. henselae infection are common sense, hygiene,
dogs with microbiologic documentation of active Bar-
flea control, and, possibly, modification of behavior of the
 tonella spp. infection. A standard treatment regimen using
cat owners themselves. Wash hands after handling pets and
azithromycin (5-10 mg/kg daily for 7 days followed by
 clean any cuts, bites, or scratches promptly with soap and
every other day administration for an additional 5 weeks)
water.
has proven effective for most, but not all cats and dogs.
 For dog bartonellosis, where tick infestation could be
Fluoroquinolones alone, or in combination with amoxi-
 a risk factor for acquiring infection, tick and flea control
cillin, have also elicited a positive therapeutic response in 
measures should be used during the tick and flea season.
dogs, which is accompanied by a progressive decrease in
Systematic inspection of the dog for the presence of ticks
B. vinsonii antibody titers. Doxycycline may or may not
after a walk in infested areas is highly recommended.
be effective for treatment of B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi, but
henselae or B. clarridgeiae indicate that a high dose of doxy-
Reference
cyline (10 mg/kg, q 12 h, for 4-6 weeks) may be necessary to
eliminate Bartonella infection in cats, dogs, or other animal
Chomel BB et al. (2001) Aortic valve endocarditis in a dog due 
species.
to B. cdarridgeiae. J Clin Microbiol, 39(10), 3548-3554.
Various
antibiotics 
(doxycycline, erythromycin,
enrofloxacin) have been shown to reduce the level of
bacteremia in experimentally infected cats but do not
 eliminate infection, and the level of bacteremia may
Further Reading
 surpass the initial level a few weeks after the cessation of
Billeter SA, Levy MG, Chomel BB, and Breitschwerdt EB (2008)
treatment.
Vector transmission of Bartonela species with emphasis on
the potential for tick transmission. Med Vet Entomol, 22(1),
Prevention
1-15.
Breitschwerdt EB, Maggi RG, Chomel BB, and Lappin MR
A large reservoir for B. henselae and possibly for B. clar-
(2010) Bartonellosis: an emerging infectious disease of
ridgeiae exists among the 68.9 million pet cats residing in
zoonotic importance to animals and human beings. / Vet
 one-third of homes in North America. Consequently, neg-
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio), 20(1), 8-30.
Chomel BB, Boulouis HJ, Breitschwerdt EB et al. (2009) Ecolog-
ative publicity about the perceived hazards of cat owner-
ical fitness and strategies of adaptation of Bartonella species
ship is likely, especially for immunocompromised people.
to their hosts and vectors. Vet Res, 40(2), 29.
 Seronegative cats are likely not to be bacteremic, but young
Chomel BB and Kasten RW (2010) Bartonellosis, an increas-
kittens, especially impounded kittens and flea-infested kit-
tens, are more ikely to be bacteremic. Therefore, peo-
750.
ple who want to acquire a pet cat, especially if they are
Tsai YL, Chang CC, Chuang ST, and Chomel BB (2011) Bar-
immunocompromised, should seek a cat raised in a cattery
tonella species and their ectoparasites: selective host adapta-
0r an adult cat coming from a flea-controlled environment.
tion or strain selection between the vector and the mam-
Unfortunately, there is no correlation between seropositiv-
malian host? Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis, 34(4),
ity and bacteremia. Bacteremia can also be transient with
299-314.
44
Veasts
otococcus
Malassezia, and Candida
LISA M. POHLMAN AND M.M. CHENGAPPA
Whether a fungus is categorized as mold or yeast is based
Descriptive Features
upon the microscopic appearance in tissue or on rou-
Morphology. C. neoformans is a yeast. The spherical cells
tine culture media (the asexual stage). Microscopically,
(2-20 μm in diameter) produce single (usual) buds attached
if hyphal structures are observed, the fungus is termed
by slender stalks and surrounded by polysaccharide cap-
a mold; if single-celled, budding structures are observed,
the fungus is termed a yeast. On routine culture media,
sules (Figure 44.1). It is a monomorphic fungus with only
molds will have a "“fuzzy" or wooly appearance, and a yeast
one morphology in infected tissue and in the en vironment.
It has a very thick capsule that is very characteristic of this
will be bacteria-like in its colonial morphology and consis.
fungus.
tency. Some pathogenic fungi will produce either hyphal-
like structures or yeast-like structures, depending upon the
conditions in which they are growing. Such fungi are called
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
dimorphic fungi (Chapters 46 and 47).
Capsule. The polysaccharide capsule (composed primar-
In this chapter, three important representatives of yeast
ily of a glucuronoxylomannan) is a major virulence fac-
fungi are discussed: Cryptococcus neoformans, Malassezia
tor in that it mediates many deleterious effects on the
pachydermatis, and Candida albicans.
host immune response. These harmful effects include, but
are not limited to, the following: prevention of effec-
tive antibody-mediated phagocytosis, stimulation of T-
C. neoformans
regulatory (formerly known as suppressor) lymphocytes,
inhibition of leukocyte migration, alteration of cytokine
C. neoformans is typically associated with ulcerative lesions
production, blockage of costimulatory molecules, and lim-
affecting the mucous membranes of the upper respiratory
itation of complement activation to the alternate pathway.
tract (including nasal sinuses), the central nervous sys-
Capsule size is significantly affected by environment.
tem (meninges), and eyes (chorioretinitis) and has been
 s  sd a   n
domestic animal most commonly affected), dogs, ferrets,
Melanin. Melanin (which is produced from phenols by
horses, sheep, goats, cattle, llamas, parrots, and elk. It is
phenol oxidase via the laccase pathway) is a powerful
the most common systemic mycosis of cats, an uncom-
antioxidant (free radical scavenger) and thus reduces the
toxicity of hydroxy radicals, superoxides, and singlet oxy-
mon cause of mastitis in cattle and has been, in rare
instances, associated with intestinal disease, endometritis,
gen radicals found within the phagolysosome. Melanin
and abortion in horses. However, this yeast has the poten-
also provides temperature tolerance and protects the organ-
tial to affect all animals, including humans. It is an oppor-
ism against enzyme degradation, radiation, and heavy met-
tunistic pathogen of humans, especially immunocompro-
als, and while allowing acquisition of nutrients, the pack-
ing of melanin granules within the cell wall decreases
mised patients all over the world. In all species, there is
the tendency for the central nervous system to become
entrance of antifungal compounds.
involved.
Phospholipase. Phospholipase is important for survival
within macrophages, and is needed for the systemic spread
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
of the yeast from the respiratory tract to the central ner-
Ernst L. Biberstein.
vous system. Phospholipase is believed to be involved in
the membrane disruption process in the host.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
313
314
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Ecology
FIGURE 44.1.
Impression smear of an oral lesion from a
cat caused by C. neoformans. Note the narrow-based budding
Reservoir.
C. neoformans (var. grubiiand neoformans) lives
(arrow) (modified Wright's stain, 1000x).
in surface dust and dirt. In soil it does not compete
well with resident microbiota. Acanthamoeba, an ameba,
phagocytoses and destroys some strains of cryptococci.
Interestingly, there are other strains that are capable of
 surviving within ameba by using the same intracellular
survival strategies that are used for their survival within
macrophages. Thus, some strains are destroyed, while oth-
ers are endosymbionts using amebae as an environmental
niche. In dried pigeon droppings (rich in creatinine, which
inhibits other microorganisms), the fungus reaches high
concentrations and survives for more than a year at much
 reduced capsular and cell size. C. neoformans var. gatti is
 now considered a distinct species, Cryptococcus gatfii. This
species lives mainly in association with decaying wood of
the red river gum group of eucalyptus trees. C. neoformans
var. neoformans and var. grubii are occasionally isolated
from decaying wood in hollows of a variety of different
 species of trees.
Transmission. The route of infection is usually respira-
Sialic Acids. Sialic acids found within the cell wall direct
tory, rarely percutaneous. Cryptococcosis is nonconta-
gious.
complement proteins toward the degradative pathway,
 rather than generating effective opsonizing fragments and
anaphylatoxins.
Pathogenesis
 In an environment where moisture and nutrients are plen-
Growth Characteristics. C. neoformans grows on com
tiful, C. neoformans makes little if any capsular material. 1n
 0 i n sdn   1  o
arid conditions, the capsule collapses and protects the yeast
Encapsulation is optimal on chocolate agar plates (see
from dehydration. In either case, the size (approximately 3
Chapter 13) incubated under 5% carbon dioxide at 37 *C.
μm) is small enough to make it to the lung alveoli. At phys-
iologic concentrations of bicarbonate, CO2, and free iron,
are convex, grayish white to white and mucoid and can
a capsule is produced. The cryptococcal capsule is a very
reach diameters of several millimeters.
efficient activator of the alternate complement pathway,
resulting in the deposition of C3b on its surface. Although
opsonized, even in the presence of anticapsular antibody,
Biochemical Reactions.
Cryptococcus spp. hydrolyze urea.
the yeast is poorly phagocytosed, as capsular components
Their carbohydrate assimilation patterns are utilized
block the binding of IgG via interference of the interaction 
in identification procedures. C. neoformans (but few
between the Fc portion of bound antibodies and receptors
 other Cryptococcus spp.) utilizes creatinine and produces
 on host phagocytes. Capsular polysaccharide increases par-
melanin-pigmented colonies on media containing diphe-
ticipation of regulatory T-lymphocytes (formerly known as
nolic and polyphenolic compounds. These substances are
suppressor T-lymphocytes) and decreases antigen process-
used in media for selective recovery of C. neoformans.
ing, leading to a poor antibody response. Capsular polysac-
charide also diminishes the chemoattractive effects of the
Resistance.
 Cycloheximide concentrations found in
anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a generated by activation of
the alternate complement pathway. In the event phago-
some fungal isolation media inhibit C. neoformans. Repli-
cytosis occurs, the production of melanin and mannitol
kill the agent.
by the yeast scavenges free radicals and reduces the hostile
environment within the phagolysosome by inactivating
superoxides, hydroxyl, and singletoxygen radicals.In addi-
Variability.
 Four antigenic types A, B, C, and D based on
tion, phospholipase is produced, further diminishing the
the antigenic makeup of the capsular polysaccharides have
ability of phagocytic cells in eliminating the fungus. Thus,
been described. Phenotypic, genetic, and epidemiological
inflammatory responses are minimal and cryptococci grow
differences between the antigenic types have resulted in the
 establishment of three varieties of C. neoformans: var. grubii
ing of capsular slime, yeast cells, and few inflammatory
(serotype A), var. gatti (serotypes B and C), and var. neofor-
cells. Eventually these masses acquire histiocytes, includ-
 mans (serotype D). Varieties grubiand neoformans predom-
ing epithelioid and multinucleated macrophages.
inate in the temperate zone except for an area in Southern
Development of pulmonary lesions is erratic. Infections
California, where variety gattii is prominent.
Chapter 44
Yeasts-Cryptococcus, Malassezia, and Candida
315
to lower complement concentrations in the central ner
 Results of experimental immunization have been equiv.
vous system and high concentrations of catechols, a sub-
ocal. No vaccines are available.
strate for phenol oxidase, the enzyme the yeast uses to pro-
Cryptococcosis is not more common in cats with retro-
duce melanin) following dissemination from the lungs and
viral infections (e.g., feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
 ('t   ss nu  s 
and feline leukemia virus (FeL V)), whereas it is much more
involvement, leading to chorioretinitis and blindness, is
common in human patients infected with human immun-
relatively common.
Odeficiency virus (HIV). FIV- or FeLV-positive cats may OI
Disease Patterns
HIV-positive patients respond poorly if at all.
Cats and Dogs. Cats and dogs are most often clinically
affected. Signs include ulcerative lesions of the mucous
Laboratory Diagnosis
membranes in nose, mouth, pharynx, and sinuses or myxo-
Direct Examination. In the clinical setting, cyto-
matous nasal masses. Central nervous system in volvement
logic preparations stained with Romanowsky-type stains
is common. These lesions may arise from local infections.
(Wright's and Giemsa) are frequently used to diagnose
Most skin lesions are probably hematogenous. Infection
infection of Cryptococcus spp. via visualization of the pale
in dogs is less common than in cats. Infection in cats is
blue/purple or clear capsule surrounding the blue-stained
generally seen between 3 and 7 years of age.
yeast that may exhibit narrow-based budding (see Figure
44.1). To enhance visualization, a small amount of sedi-
Cattle. Cattle acquire cryptococcosis during administra-
ment from exudates, tracheobronchial washes, and cere-
     n 
brospinal fluids can also be mixed with an equal amount
cation. There are gross swelling, hardening of the gland,
of India ink on a slide; a cover slip is placed on top and the
and gradual changes in the secretions. Destruction of the
lactiferous epithelium is extensive. Several glands may be
organisms appear as bright circular lacunae in a dark field,
irreversibly damaged. The disease rarely advances beyond
containing the yeast celis in their centers. Yeast cells with
regional lymph nodes.
Or without budding cells are visible. With hematoxylin and
eosin stain, the organism appears as a round to oval yeast
Horses.
C. neoformans causes meningitides, nasal granu-
body within a clear (unstained) capsule. Fungal stains—for 
lomas, and occasionally rhinitis and granulomatous pneu-
example, periodic acid Schiff and Gomori methenamine
monia in horses. In rare instances, it has been associated
silver—-delineate the cell wall but not the capsule, which is
with intestinal disease, endometritis, and abortion.
stainable by mucicarmine.
Cryptococcosis has been reported in other animals such
In sections processed by the usual histologic methods,
as chickens, pheasants, goats, sheep, koalas, opossums, and
the capsules are unstained halos separating the yeast cells
a cheetah. Cryptococcosis is not common in sheep and
from tissue constituents or from each other.
goats.
Culture. Blood agar and Sabouraud's agar cultures (with-
Epidemiology. Cryptococcus can probably affect any
out cycloheximide) are incubated, respectively, at 30 *C
mammal. Its occurence is sporadic and worldwide. Birds,
and room temperature (see Chapter 46). Suggestive
particularly pigeons, often carry the agent in their intesti-
colonies are examined by India ink wet mount. If found to
nal contents and contribute to its reservoir. They are rarely
consist of encapsulated yeasts, C. neoformans is confirmed
affected clinically, and then mostly on mucosal surfaces.
by demonstration of urease activity, absence of lactose,
Human cryptococcosis is often associated with
melibiose, and nitrate assimilation. Commercial test kits
immunosuppression (organ transplants, Hodgkin's dis-
are available for identification of C. neoformans.
ease, pregnancy, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
Selective media incorporatingantibacterial and antifun-
and malignancy) or intensive exposure. Attempts to relate
gal drugs, creatinine and diphenyl, are used for environ-
animal infections to similar circumstances have been spec-
mental sampling.
ulative.
Some normal dogs and cats harbor small numbers of C.
Bovine cryptococcal mastitis usually starts as an iatro-
 neoformans in their nasal cavities. Therefore, care should
genically induced inoculation infection.
be taken when interpreting culture results from samples
obtained from this site. Examination of direct smears (the
Immunologic Aspects
numbers of yeast in smears from clinically normal animals
are too low to see) and/or analysis of serum for capsular
 Immunosuppression is a predisposing factor. The capsular
antigen are helpful adjuncts to culture. Capsular antigen
 polysaccharides produce immune paralysis, complement
is not detectable in serum of normal dogs, regardless of
depletion, and antibody masking.
whether they harbor C. neoformans in their nasal passages.
Humoral and cell-mediated phenomena (Th1 subset
resulting in macrophage activation) evidently contribute
Immunodiagnosis.
. Antigen demonstration in serum and
to defense against cryptococcal infection. Macrophages
cerebrospinal fluid is attempted in diagnosis and assess-
participate in disposal of the agent. There is some evidence
ment of patient progress. Latex particle suspensions coated
that T-lymphocytes (CD4 and CD8) as well as natural killer
cells kill or inhibit C. neoformans directly.
tion test kits.
316
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Antibody is irregularly demonstrable because of the
"sponging" action of circulating capsular antigens. Its pres-
FIGURE 44.2.
Exudate of canine otitis externa
ence (demonstrated by indirect fluorescent antibody tests
containing many M. pachydermatis yeasts. Note characteristic
"shoe print”" pattern of budding yeasts (arrow) (modified
or by latex particles coated with capsular polysaccharide) is
Wright's stain, 1000x).
a favorable sign of decreasing antigen levels.
 An enzyme immunoassay is also available for the sero-
 diagnosis of cryptococcosis in cats and dogs.
Treatment and Control
The treatment of choice is fluconazole and itraconazole.
Alternative therapy is 5-fluorocytosine, but its efficacy
should be tested periodically as strains may be resistant
01 become resistant. Amphotericin B is used in severe dis-
 seminated cases. It is used sometimes in combination with
flucytosine.
Therapy should be continued until clinical signs are
resolved and antigen disappears from serum and cere-
brospinal fluid.
Contaminated surfaces (pigeon lofts, attics) can be dis-
infected with lime solution (1 1b hydrated lime/3 gal water)
prior to physical cleanup. Dirt removed is placed in con-
tainers and covered with hydrated lime powder, which can
also be used on exposed floors and beams. Masks are worn 
 in either an aerobic or microaerophilic atmosphere (it does
during the operation.
 not grow well anaerobically).
M. pachydermatis
Biochemical Reactions. M. pachydermatis assimilates the
carbon of glucose and D-mannitol, but does not ferment
M. pachydermatis is commonly associated with animal dis-
carbohydrates. Urea hydrolysis is strain dependent. How-
ease, mostoften otitis externa, and dermatitis in dogs. How-
ever, M. pachydermafis strains produce enzymes such as pro-
ever, this lipid-dependent yeast has been isolated from skin
teinase, chondroitin sulfatase, hyaluronidase, and phos-
and external ear canals of normal and clinically affected
pholipase, which are believed to contribute to the dis-
dogs, cats, ruminants, and horses. Thus, the reason why
ease process. Immune-mediated hypersensitivity reaction
M. pachydermatis is more commonly found may be due to
 is also believed to be a contributing factor of the disease
the relative ease in which this species is demonstrated. It is
believed to be an opportunistic pathogen of animals and
Resistance. M. pachydermatis is resistant to cyclohex
humans. There are numerous other species of Malassezia
imide.
believed to be associated with diseases in animals. However,
these diseases or conditions are rare and in many instances
Variability.
There are a number of biotypes of M. pachyder-.
not diagnosed with proper identification procedures.
matis as reflected in variability in D-mannitol and sorbitol
assimilation, hydrolysis ofurea, and cell wall fatty acid con -
Descriptive Features
centration.
Seven genetic types (la through Ig) have been described
Morphology and Composition. M. pachydermatis is an
using the sequence of DNA, encoding the large ribosomal
pue) sieas joaip u1 (wm g Aq um z) iseak Suppnq leao
subunit as the basis for comparison. Others have delin-
from colonies obtained from culture), there will be a single
eated four genetic types (A through D) after using the ran-
bud attached by a broad base (0.9-1.1 μm) (Figure 44.2).
dom amplification of polymorphic DNA method, together
Filaments are not usually observed, regardless of culture
with sequence comparisons of the gene encoding chitin
conditions. The cell wall is composed of glycoproteins (75-
synthase.
80%), lipids (15-20%), and chitin (1-2%).
Ecology
Growth Characteristics. Although not requiring lipids
for growth, M. pachydermatis is lipophilic, and growth is
Reservoir.
 M. pachydermatis lives on the skin and external
improved when lipids are added to the medium. Most
ear canal of healthy animals, including dogs, cats, ferrets,
strains of M. pachydermatis grow on blood agar plates,
pigs, and rhinoceros (from which it gets its name). The sur-
though the colonies will be very small (<1 mm in diam-
face of M. pachydermatis has mannose-containingglycopro-
eter, and sometimes only a “greenish" tint will be seen on 
teins that are responsible for binding to mannose receptors
the surface of the plate) after several days of incubation
on the surface of corneocytes, thus allowing adherence in
(optimum temperature is 37*C, although it will grow at
this niche. It is rarely isolated from human skin, or the
temperature ranging from 25 to 41 *C). The yeast will grow
environment.
Chapter 44
Yeasts-Cryptococcus, Malassezia, and Candida
317
Iransmission.  M. pachydermatis is an opportunistic fun-
coloration) will appear within 24-48 h after incubation of 
gus, contributing to disease processes already in progress
the plate at 37 *C incubator. M. pachydermatis grows well
(e.g., allergic dermatitis). The source of the yeast is endoge-
on fungal selective media such as Mycosel or Sabouraud
nous (i.e., a member of the patient's normal flora). Ilatro.
dextrose agar plates incubated at 37 *C.
genic disease has been reported for the transmission of the
yeast from a dog with otitis externa to a human patient
Molecular Techniques. Polymerase chain reaction ampli-
via the hands of a caregiver (the dog's owner) who han-
fication of DNA, encoding either the large or the small ribo-
dled a lipid-rich intravenous solution (for total parenteral
somal subunit together with the internal transcribed spacer
 nutrition) subsequently administered to the patient.
region, may be used to detect Malassezia spp. The same
 n no ds o e a s 
Pathogenesis
Culture. As a means of determining whether M. pachyder.
M. pachydermatis plays a secondary, but significant, role in
mafis is a contributor in otitis externa, culture is not worth
otitis externa and dermatitis in a variety of animals, but
the effort because mostsamples taken from such conditions
most commonly in dogs and, to a lesser extent, in cats.
contain bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas) that quickly overgrow
The exact role played by M. pachydermatis remains unclear,
the slower growing yeast.The determination that M.pachy-
and what causes the yeast to change from a harmless com-
dermatis is involved can be made quicker by microscopic
mensal to one that contributes to disease is unknown.
examination of samples.
However, it is believed that the disease may be associated
Culture plays a role in assessing the microbiological
with immunosuppression and other predisposing condi-
makeup of dermatological conditions, as well as formu-
tions. If its presence is ignored when formulating a treat-
lating a treatment regimen. Media that have proven useful
ment regimen, however, resolution of the disease process is
include Mycosel or Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Plates are
problematic.
incubated at 37 *C.
Epidemiology.
.M. pachydermatis is a parasite of skin
Treatment and Control
(including the external ear canal) of nonhuman animals.
M. pachydermatis-associated dermatitis is more commonly
Correction of the underlying condition is the most impor-
reported in Australian silky terriers, basset hounds, cocker
 spaniels, dachshunds, poodles, and West Highland white
tis externa or dermatitis. Almost all commercially available
terriers. The yeast has worldwide distribution.
topical preparations that contain an antifungal agent (nys-
tatin, clotrimazole, or miconazole) are effective in treating
Immunologic Aspects
the fungal component of otitis externa. Medicated sham-
poos (e.g., miconazole + chlorhexidine), along with sys-
M. pachydermatis is an opportunistic yeast, contributing to
temic antifungal administration (ketoconazole or itracona-
preexisting compromises of the skin and external ear. It
zole), are effective in reducing the influence of M. pachy-
is unknown how M. pachydermatis contributes to disease.
dermatis upon dermatological diseases. Griseofulvin is not
However, M. pachydermatis strains produce enzymes such
effective.
as proteinase, chondroitin sulfatase, hyaluronidase, and
phospholipase, which are believed to contribute to the dis-
ease process. Immune-mediated hypersensitivity reaction
C. albicans
is also believed to be a contributing factor of the disease.
Candidiasis is usually due to the parasitic yeast C. albicans,
Laboratory Diagnosis
which inhabits mucous membranes of most mammals and
birds. Of the more than 200 other species of Candida that
Direct Examination. The numbers of yeasts on normal
are associated with many diverse habitats, few are associ-
skin or in the normal external ear canal are usually too
ated with animal disease and C. albicans is the most impor-
low to visualize in samples taken from such sites. Thus,
 tant pathogen of animals and humans. Disease produced
determining whether M. pachydermatis is a contributing
by C. albicans usually occurs in an immunocompromised
factor to otitis externa or to a dermatological condition
host. Overuse of antibiotics and prolonged use of steroids
is relatively easy, because the numbers of yeasts will be
and hormonal therapy could disrupt the normal cutaneous
high enough to be seen in samples taken from affected
defense mechanisms, leading candidiases in animals and
areas. However, some atopic dogs have been shown to have
humans.
increased numbers of M. pachydermafis in normal as well as
affected areas.
Descriptive Features
Samples taken with cotton-tipped swabs are the easi-
est to obtain from cases of otitis externa. Swabs are “rolled"
Cell Morphology and Composition. On routine labo-
Over the surface ofa microscope slide;the smear is air-dried,
ratory media and mucous membranes, C. albicans typi-
then stained with a Romanowsky-type stain (Wright's and
cally grows as oval budding yeast cells (blastoconidia), 5-
Giemsa). Examination of smears will reveal yeasts with
8 μm in size. Under certain conditions of temperature, pH,
characteristic “bottle-shaped" or "shoe print” morphology
nutrition, and atmosphere, yeast cells sprout germ
(see Figure 44.2). If the swabs are also streaked onto the
tubes (Figure 44.3) that develop into septate-branching
surface of a blood agar plate, small colonies (or a greenish
318
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
studied in culture unstained. With Gram stain, Candida
FIGURE 44.3.
C. albicans in peritoneal fluid from a dog.
cells are gram-variable.
Note the yeast cells (blastoconidia and pseudohyphae)
(modified Wright's stain, 1000x).
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Adhesins.
Various cell wall components (chitin, manno-
proteins, and lipids) have been associated with adherence
to extracellular matrix proteins.
Miscellaneous Products. Proteases and neuraminidases
have been proposed to play a role in pathogenesis. Cell
wall glycoproteins have endotoxin-like activity (see Chap-
 ters 7 and 8). Virulence factors such as phospholipases and
 proteases have been demonstrated in C. aibicans. These
enzymes seem to promote tissue invasion and adherence
of yeasts to host cells, respectively.
Growth Characteristics. C. albicans, an obligate aerobe,
 grows on ordinary media over a wide range of pH and
temperature. At 25-30 *C, creamy to pasty white colonies
consisting predominantly of yeast cells appear in 24-48 h.
Incubation temperatures above 35 *C, a slightly alkaline
pH, and a rich, carbohydrate-free fluid medium are often
of the blastoconidia and their failure to separate. In vivo,
recommended. It grows well on a variety of nonselective
 mycelial (a collection of hyphae) or pseudomycelial growth
fungal and bacterial media including Sabouraud's dextrose
 or blood agar plates.
is associated with active proliferation and invasiveness.
The so-called chlamydospore (chlamydoconidium) is a
Differential ability to ferment or assimilate carbohy-
thick-walled sphere of unknown function, attached by a
drates is the basis of species identification.
C. albicans cells are killed by heat above 50 *C, ultra-
fined to in viro growth (Figure 44.4) of C. albicans (rarely
violet light, chlorine, and quaternary ammonium-type
other Candida spp.).
 disinfectants. They withstand freezing and survive well
 The cell wall contains glycoproteins; the polysaccharide
in the inanimate environment. They are susceptible to
portions are glucans and especially mannans. Lipids and
polyene antimycotics, and usually to flucytosine and the
chitin are also present. Mannoproteins are found on the cell
azoles.
surface. Cellular products include peptidolytic enzymes,
which may be virulence factors. Two major cross-reacting
Ecology
 serogroups are recognized. These are termed A and B, and
Reservoir.
C. albicans is associated with mucocutaneous
are identifiable with absorbed sera.
areas, particularly of the alimentary and lower genital tract,
Candida can be visualized under light microscopy
of mammals and birds. However, C. albicans can invade any
when stained with Romanowsky-type stains (Wright's
organ of the body and cause disease.
and Giemsa) (Figure 44.3), periodic acid Schiff, Gomori
 methenamine silver, and other fungal stains, but is usually
Transmission. Most Candida diseases arise from an
 endogenous source; thatis, they are caused by a commensal
strain. The bovine udder becomes in fected via the teatcanal
C. albicans culture on chiamydospore agar,
by way of administered medication, during milking, by
FIGURE 44.4.
cow-to-cow spread, or from the environment. Hematoge-
showing blastoconidia (arrow).
ss o si pad a o i prs so
infections with this yeast.
Pathogenesis
Mechanisms.
.Chitin, mannoprotein, and lipids are
possible adhesins, in human candidiasis; several extracel-
lular matrix proteins have been shown to be the recep-
tor. Germ tube formation is correlated with experimen-
tal pathogenicity, but the role of mycelium formation in
virulence is under dispute. Proteases and phospholipases
are believed to be virulence factors. Cell wall glycoproteins
have endotoxin-like activity.
Pathology. Candidiasis most frequently affects the
mucous surfaces on which the agent is normally found,
Chapter 44
Yeasts-Cryptococcus, Malassezia, and Candida
319
possibly the anterior digestive tract from mouth to stom
plement) is to facilitate phagocytosis. Macrophages are
ach; it typically remains confined to areas of squamous
activated by y -interferon secreted by Thi cells stimulated
epithelium. The genital tract, skin, and claws can be
 by interleukin 12 from macrophages actively engaged in
involved as well. Occasional respiratory, intestinal, and
phagocytosis.
septicemic infections occur.
There is no vaccine for candidiasis.
On epithelial surfaces, candidiasis forms whitish to yel-
low or gray plaques, marking areas of ulceration with vary-
ing degree of inflammation. Diphtheritic membranes may
Laboratory Diagnosis
form in the gut or respiratory tract, and abscesses may form
In exudate, Candida appears as yeast cells (blastoconidia) or
in the viscera. Granulomatous lesions are rare. Inflamma-
(pseudo)hyphae. All forms are demonstrable in unstained
 tory responses are predominantly neutrophilic.
wet mounts, or in fixed smears stained with Gram's stain,
Romanowsky-type stains (Wright's and Giemsa) or fungal
Disease Patterns
stains (e.g., periodic acid Schiff and Gomori methenamine
Birds. Avian candidiasis affects chickens, turkeys,
silver).
C. albicans grows well on blood or Sabouraud's agar,
pigeons, and other birds. Crop mycosis (thrush) in avian
species is caused by C. albicans. The existing digestive tract
with or without inhibitors (see Chapter 46). Other Can-
of birds can be affected; and mortality is very high with
dida spp. may be inhibited by cycloheximide. Yeast isolates
this disease condition.
producing (pseudo)mycelium can be considered Candida
spp. Isolation of Candida spp. from mucous membranes
Swine. In the alimentary tract of pigs, candidiasis is seen
as ulcerative lesions that may lead to rupture.
only in the presence of compatible lesions, and abundant
(pseudo)hyphal forms in direct smears.
Incubation at 37 *C for ≥2 h of a lightly inoculated tube
Equine. In the alimentary tract of foals, candidiasis is
seen as ulcerative lesions that may lead to rupture.
of serum will produce germ tubes if the isolate is C. albicans
(see Figure 44.3), which also produced chlamydospores on
Equine genital infections cause infertility, metritis, and
cornmeal-Tween 80 agar (see Figure 44.4). Yeast identifica-
abortions.
tion kits are commercially available.
Molecular and serologic methods for diagnosis of can-
Cattle.
.Pneumonic, enteric, and generalized candidiasis
didiasis are not routinely done in the diagnostic laborato-
affects calves on intensive antibiotic regimens. Candida
mastitis in dairy cows is typically mild and self-limiting,
ries. However, DNA-based tests are available in the refer-
ence laboratories.
ending in spontaneous recovery within about a week.
Bovine abortions have been reported.
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
Dogs and Cats. Localized infections in dogs and cats are
 Correcting conditions underlying clinical candidiasis may,
characterized by nonhealing, ulcerative lesions of the oral,
in itself, lead to recovery.
upper respiratory, gastrointestinal, and/or genitourinary
mucosae. Rarely, dogs and cats may develop disseminated
In poultry, copper sulfate in drinking water is a tradi-
disease; clinical signs on presentation will typically reflect
tional treatment. Nystatin can be given in feed or water. It
involvement of a specific organ system.
is also used topically in mucosal and cutaneous forms of
candidiasis of mammals, as are amphotericin B, itracona-
Other. Lower primates and marine mammals may acquire
zole, and miconazole. Fluconazole (preferred) or flucyto-
sine is useful for treating dogs or cats with lower urinary
mucocutaneous candidiasis.
tract candidiasis.
Epidemiology. The common agents of candidiasis are
 In disseminated forms, oral fluconazole and flucytosine
are drugs of choice. Susceptibility testing is advisable. Com-
commenisal with most warm-blooded species. Disease is
linked to immune and hormonal inadequacies, reduced
bined flucytosine-amphotericin B is sometimes used in
colonization resistance (a measure of the “health" of the
humans and occasionally in animals.
normal flora), or intensive exposure of weakened hosts or
vulnerable tissues. These conditions account for suscepti-
Other Yeasts
bility of infants, diabetics, subjects on antibiotic and steroid
regimes, patients with ind welling catheters, and mammary
Geotrichum candidum
glands of lactating cows.
This yeast-like fungus occurs widely in nature and causes
an uncommon disease in animals called geotrichosis. Diag-
Immunologic Aspects
nostic relevance of this fungus in clinical samples is always
Immunoincompetent individuals are preferred targets for
questionable. However, it is known to cause infections of
infection.
mucous membranes of alimentary tract, respiratory tract,
Polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes and acti-
and mammary glands of animals including cattle, pigs,
vated macrophages form the chief defense against can-
horses, dogs, avian species, and humans. The organism
didiases. The role played by opsonins (antibody, com-
grows rapidly on fungal growth medium and is identified
320
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
based on colony characteristics and microscopic examina-
Further Reading
tions of culture. It is susceptible to amphotericin B and
flucytosine.
 Bond R (2006) Malassezia dermatitis in cutaneous fungal infec-
tions, in Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 3rd edn, Saun-
ders Elsevier, pp. 565-569.
Trichosporon beigelii
Greene CE and Chandler FW (2006) Candidiasis and
 It is a soil-borne, yeast-like, imperfect fungus that causes
rhodotorulosis, in Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd
 trichosporonosis. It is an opportunist fungus that causes
edn, Saunders Elsevier, pp. 627-633.
Malik R, Krockenberger M, O'Brian CR et al. (2006) Crypto-
promised animals and humans. Colonies are initially
coccosis, in Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn,
creamy, smooth on Sabouraud's agar and may take
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 584-598.
Quinn PJ, Markey BK, Carter ME et al. (2002) Veterinary micro-
5-7 days of incubation at 37 *C. Definitive identifica-
tion is based on assimilation tests, growth characteristics,
biology and microbial diseases, in Yeast and Disease Produc-
tion, Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp. 233-239.
 and microscopic appearance. Treatment is like other yeast
 Songer JG and Post KW (2005) Veterinary Microbiology: Bacterial
infections.
and Fungal Agents of Animal Diseases, Elsevier Saunders.
45
Dermatop
tes
M.M. CHENGAPPA AND LISA M. POHLMAN
Whether a fungus is categorized as mold or yeast is based
In the parasitic state, only hyphae and arthroconidia
upon the microscopic appearance in tissue or on routine
(arthrospores), another asexual reproductive unit, are seen.
culture media (the asexual stage). If hyphal structures are
Except in size ranges, which overlap among dermatophyte
observed, the fungus is termed a mold; if a single-celled,
species, arthroconidia are indistinguishable from species to
budding structure is observed, the fungus is termed a yeast.
species.
On routine culture media, molds will have a “fuzzy" or
wooly appearance, and a yeast will be bacteria-like in its
phase.
 colonial morphology and consistency. Some pathogenic
The
distinguishing features of the three gen-
era of dermatophytes—Microsporum, Trichophyton, and
like structures, depending upon the conditions in which
Epidermophyton—are shown in Table 45.1. Only Microspo-
they are growing. Such fungi are called dimorphic fungi
rum and Trichophyton affect animals consistently. Epidermo-
(Chapters 46 and 47).
phyton is seen primarily in humans.
Dermatophytes are molds capable of parasitizing only
keratinized epidermal structures: superficial skin, hair,
feathers, horn, hooves, claws, and nails. Those that have
Growth Characteristics
a sexual reproductive phase belong to the ascomycetes.
The traditional medium for propagating dermatophytes
Dermatophyte infections are called ringworm or dermato-
(and other pathogenic fungi) is Saboraud's dextrose agar
phytoses. Occasionally, yeast and saprophytic fungi cause
containing 2% agar, 1% peptone and 4% dextrose. Its
cutaneous infections mimicking infections caused by der-
acidity (pH 5.6) renders it mildly bacteriostatic and selec-
matophytes; hence, the generic term dermatomycoses is
tive. The selectivity is enhanced by addition of cyclo-
 used to represent all fungal Infections of skin.
heximide (500 μg/ml), which inhibits saprophytic fungi,
and gentamicin and tetracycline (100 μg/ml of each) or
chloramphenicol (50 μg/ml), which inhibit bacteria. Der-
Descriptive Features
matophytes are aerobes and nonfermenters. Some attack
proteins and deaminate amino acids. They grow opti-
Morphology
mally at 25-30 *C and require several days to weeks of
In their nonparasitic state, including culture, dermato-
incubation.
phytes produce septate, branching hyphae collectively
Some dermatophytes in skin and hair (but not in cul-
called mycelium. The asexual reproductive units (coni-
ture) produce a green fluorescence due to a tryptophan
 dia) are found in the aerial mycelium. These units may
metabolite that is visible under ultraviolet light (366 nm),
be either macroconidia: pluricellular, podlike structures up
sometimes referred to as a Wood'slight. Of animal dermato-
to 100 μm long; or microconidia: unicellular spheres 0r
phytes, only Microsporum canis produces this reaction.
rods less than 10 μm in any dimension. Shape, size, struc-
ture, arrangement, and abundance of conidia are diagnos-
Resistance
tic criteria. Hyphal peculiarities—spirals, nodules, rackets,
chandeliers, and chlamydoconidia (chlamydospores)—are
Dermatophytes are susceptible to common disinfectants,
more common in some species than others, but they are
particularly those containing cresol, iodine, or chlorine.
rarely diagnostic. Colony characteristics and pigmentation
They survive for years in the inanimate environment.
are useful in dermatophyte differentiation.
Variability
There are a number of strains of each species of Microsporum
Original chapter written by Drs. Ernst L. Biberstein and
and Trichophyton, making construction of effective immu-
Dwight C. Hirsh.
nizing products diffcult.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
321
322
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
Table 45.1.
 Features of Dermatophyte Genera
toses by inflammatory responses (through the influx of
 iron-binding proteins and by enzyme inhibitors.
Microsporum
Tricophyton
Epidermophyton
The infectious unit, a conidium, enters via a defect in the
stratum corneum. Germination is triggered by unknown
Macroconidia
Usually
Variable; often   Present 
cues. The germ tube develops into hyphae branching
 present
 absent
among cornified epithelium. Portions of hyphae differen-
Walls
Thick
Thin 
Thick
tiate into arthroconidia. This growth pattern in the hairless
Surface
Rough
Smooth 
Smooth 
Spindle, cigar 
skin predominates with some dermatophytes (Microsporum
Shape
Club (slender)
Club (broad)
Microconidia
Variable, often
Usual
Absent
nanum and Trichophyton rubrum). Hair invasion, which is
absent
 prominent in most animal ringworm, begins with germina-
 Sexual form 
Nannizzia
Arthroderma
 None known
tion of a spore near a follicular orifice. Hyphal strands grow
 into hair follicles along outer root sheaths and invade grow.
ing hairs near the living root cells. Hyphae grow within
the hair cortex, in the outer parts of which arthroconidia
Ecology
form and accumulate on the surface of the hair. The pat-
tern of accumulation of arthroconida outside the hair shaft
Reservoir
is called ectothrix, whereas, the accumulation of arthro-
conida inside the hair shaft is called endothrix formation.
One speaks of geophilic, zoophilic, and anthropophilic der-
matophytes when discussing dermatophytes having a soil,
animal, or human reservoir, respectively. Table 45.2 shows
Pathology
the important dermatophytes of animals. Animal dermato-
The pathogenic process begins with colonization, during
phytes can infect humans through direct contact, whereas
which the events just described occur but evoke little
human dermatophytes rarely infect animals.
host response. There may be hypertrophy of the stratum
corneum with accelerated keratinization and exfoliation,
Transmission
producing a scurfy appearance and hair loss. In dogs with
M. canis infections, this is often the main effect. In adult
Dermatophytes are disseminated by direct and, owing to
cats there may be no signs. Adult cats are known to carry M.
their persistence on fomites and premises, indirect contact.
canis spores on their skin without exhibiting any clinical
signs or lesions of ringworm.
The second phase begins at about the second week with
Pathogenesis
 inflammation at the margin of the parasitized area. Man-
ifestations range from erythema to vesiculopustular reac-
Mechanisms
tions and suppuration. Mild forms are seen in Trichophyto
 Proteolytic enzymes (elastase, collagenase, keratinase) may
verrucosum infection of calves. Severe reactions are typi-
 determine virulence, particularly in severe inflammatory
cal in T. mentagrophytes infection of dogs and Microspo-
disease. Localization in the keratinized epidermis has been
num gypseum infection of horses. Local plaques ("kerion")
 attributed to the lack of sufficient available iron elsewhere.
may resemble certain skin tumors, especially in dogs. The
This may account for the frequent arrest of dermatophy-
inflammatory reaction may arrest the mycotic infection
purative bacterial in fection.
Table 45.2.
Important Dermatophytes of Animals
The circular pattern of the lesions and their inflamed
 margins suggested the terms ringworm and tinea (Latin for
Dermatophyte
Humans
worm).
Species
Affected Animal Hosts
Affected
Microsporum canisa
Cat, dog, thorse, sheep.
十
 Disease Patterns
cattle, pig, others)
M. gallinae
Poultry (cat, dog)
The patterns of dermatophytosis in domestic animals are
十
M. gypseum
 Dog, horse (cattle, pig.
summarized in Table 45.3.
+
Others}
Ringworm generally regresses spontaneously within a
M. nanum
Pig
few weeks or months, unless complicated by secondary bac-
Trichophyton equinum
Horse (dog)
+
terial infections or constitutional factors. The agents may
T. mentagrophytes
 Dog fhorse, cattle, sheep.
 persist after clinical cure.
cat, pig, others)
T. verrucosum
Cattle (cat, dog, sheep.
+
horses, others)
Epidemiology
T. simif
Monkey, poultry
+
 Dermatophytoses often affect the young. Extent and sever-
Otcasionallyreported in cattle, sheep, horses and pigs.
 ity are influenced by environmental factors. Crowding of
0 untommon host.
animals or assembling of large numbers is often associated
with increased prevalence. Improvement in calves often
Chapter 45
Dermatophytes
323
Table 45.3.
Important Dermatophyte Infections in Domestic Animals
Host
Agent
Nature of Lesions
Horse
T. equinum
 Dry, scaly usually noninflammatory (unless secondarily infected)
M. gypseum
 Often suppurative under alopecic thickened areas
M. equinum
 Not more than mildly inflammatory, resembling T. equinum lesions 
Cattle
T. verrucosum
Painless, thick, white, "asbestos" plaques, local alopecia
Swine
M. nanum
'ssl yey on paweui auas suaeu 'ssauied yunn ua Aeanyuan hupaids asna 'ysuuel
Dog
M. canis
Typically noninflammatory, scaby, alopecic patches, occasional kerion 
T. mentagrophytes 
 Often spreading, extensively scaling to inflammatory lesions, secondary suppuration 
M. gypseum
As T.mentagrophyes
Cat
M. canis
paegap ui pazeauah awoag aeu 'suay hunon uiidarxa 'tewweuuou Aeauan shnpe ui jeupgns uana
kittens. Occasional mycetoma (Persian cats).
T. mentagrophytes
As in dogs
Chicken
M. gallinae
 Generally affects unfeathered portions. whitish chalky scaling on comb and wattles, noninflammatory.
T. simif
Superficially similar to M. galinae but often inflammatory and even necrotizing. A poultry problem only in India.
follows their release from damp, dark, crowded winter quar-
reducing the number of infected herds and new infections.
ters to the outdoors.
Mixtures of Microsporum and Trichophyton—-either as a live,
 Infected individuals of the same species perpetuate the
 attenuated vaccine, or a killed product—have been disap-
important dermatophytoses of animals. Sporadic occur-
pointing in protecting cats from developing dermatophy-
rence of the soil-derived M. sypseum infections contrasts
-u uon perds psai on reade op a yno si
with endemic to epidemic but bland infections of swine
vidual cats. Although live vaccines appear to elicit a better
with geophilic M. nanum.
immune (protective) response, the presence of numerous
 The major agents of animal ringworm are globally dis-
strains of Microsporum and Trichophyton make concocting
tributed.
such products difficult.
Immunologic Aspects
Laboratory Diagnosis
Immune Mechanisms of Disease
Direct Examination
The major antigens associated with dermatophyte infec-
tions are the keratinases (elicitcell-mediated responses) and
In 50-70% of cases, hairs and skin scales infected with M.
glycoproteins (carbohydrate moieties stimulate antibody;
canis or M. audouinii may emit a bright greenish-yellow
 protein moieties stimulate cell-mediated responses).
fluorescence under ultraviolet light, for example, a Wood's
 Antibody-mediated and cell-mediated hypersensitivi-
lamp (x =366 nm).
ties occur in the course of dermatophytoses. Their onset
generally coincides with that of the inflammatory phase
of infection and may contribute to its manifestations. Pro-
Microscopic Examination
duction of skin lesions is facilitated due to the release of
interferon gamma in the host.
Skin scrapings and hair are examined microscopically for
Sterile inflammatory skin lesions (phytids) occur in
the presence of hyphae and arthroconidia. The scraping
human ringworm infections. They are allergic reactions to
should include material from the margins of any lesion
circulating fungal antigens.
and the full thickness of the keratinized epidermis. The hair
is plucked, so as to include the intrafollicular portion. The
sample is placed on a slide, flooded with 10-20% potassium
Recovery and Resistance
hydroxide, covered with a cover slip, and heated gently.
Antibodies play at best a limited role in resistanice. Evidence
The treatment clears the sample (makes it "transparent")
favors cell-mediated mechanisms as decisive in protection
and recovery.
epidermis intact to reveal the agent in its relation to the
Recovered individuals resist reinfection, although local
 parasitized structures.
reactions may be more acute and intense than on primary
Microscopic examination should begin under low
exposure. Acquired resistance varies in degree and duration
power (100x) and subdued light. At higher magnification
with host, dermatophyte species, and possibly anatomical
(400x) of such hairs, individual, spherical arthroconidia
area.
are recognizable.
Stains and penetrating and wetting agents (permanent
ink, lactophenol cotton blue, dimethylsulfoxide) improve
Artificial Immunization
visualization. Calcofluor white reagent imparts fluores-
Mycelial T. verrucosum vaccines, inactivated and live avir-
cence to fungal structures and facilitates diagnosis where a
ulent, are used in Europe in cattle. They are credited with
fluorescent microscope is available.
324
PART II
 Bacteria and Fungi
FIGURE 45.1.
Microsporum canis. Lactophenol cotton
FIGURE 45.2.
Trichophyton verrucosum. Lactopheno!
blue mount from Sabouraud's dextrose agar culture.
cotton blue mount from Sabouraud's dextrose agar culture
Spindle-shaped macromedia, 400x.
grown at 37 *C. Macromedia, 400x.
spacer region, determination of the sequence of the DNA
Culture
encoding large ribosomal subunit (28s), and generation
Scrapings are planted onto and into the surface of selec-
of unique DNA fragments following arbitrary or randomly
tive media (Sabouraud's agar with chloramphenicol and
primed polymerase chain reactions. These both are not rou-
cycloheximide, Dermatophyte Test Medium (DTM), Rapid
tinely used in the diagnostic laboratories.
 Sporulation Medium (RSM), which are incubated at 25 *C
 (1oom temperature) for up to 4 weeks. Samples suspected
Treatment and Control
of containing T. verrucosum are incubated at 37*C. On DTM
and RsM, an alkaline reaction suggests presence of a der-
Combined topical and systemic treatment is often prefer-
matophyte. (Dermatophytes, if given a choice of glucose
able. Topical antifungal agents include, but are not lim-
and protein, will usually digest the protein first, leading to
ited to, products containing miconazole, econozole, keto-
alkaline products; saprophytic fungi will most often uti-
lize glucose, leading to acid by-products. Caution: After the
conazole, itraconazole and thiobendazole. Terbinafine (an
allylamine antifungal that inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis,
preferred substrate is utilized, the microorganism will make
and concentrates in skin and nails), fluconazole and itra-
use of the other, shifting the pH in the other direction.)
conazole (especially effective in cats) are drugs of choice
Suspicious growth is examined microscopically. The
 adhesive side of a clear cellophane tape strip is pressed gen-
may be a useful alternative.
tly on the suspect colony (taken from RsM, or Sabouraud's
Antifungal orchard spray is effective on ringworm of
large and small animals (Captan 45% powder, 2 table-
agar
with
chloramphenicol
1   and  cycloheximide-
spoons/gal). Affected areas are first clipped. In large
dermatophytes do not sporulate well on DTM) and
mounted in a drop of lactophenol cotton blue on a slide
and examined microscopically (see Table 45.1, Figure 45.1,
45.2, and 45.3). Colony color (front and back), texture,
FIGURE 45.3.
Microsporum nanum. Lactophenol cotton
and rate of growth are important for identification of
blue mount from Sabouraud's dextrose agar culture.
dermatophytes. Also important are the size and shape
Pear-shaped macromedia, 400x.
of macro- and microconidia of dermatophytes. With
Trichophyton spp., in the absence of diagnostic conidia,
 auxotrophic tests are used for speciation.
 Knowledge of source (host species and type of lesion)
aids significantly in provisional identification of animal
dermatophytes.
Molecular Techniques
There are a number of DNA-based techniques that are
available for direct examination of clinical samples, or for
use in identification of an isolated dermatophyte. These
techniques include determination of the sequence of DNA
encoding specific products (e.g., chitin synthase 1 gene),
determination of the sequence of the internal transcribed
Chapter 45
 Dermatophytes
325
animals, two applications at biweekly intervals are recom-
is useful in population screening of cat colonies where M.
mended. With dogs, weekly dips can be repeated to effect.
canis is the only concern. Infected individuals should be
Contact with human skin should be avoided. Thiabenda-
 isolated and treated. Exposed animals are treated prophyl-
zole is used on small and large animals. Lime sulfur dips in
actically.
combination with systemic miconazole or other azoles is
Successful vaccination is widely practiced on European 
effective.
cattle. A live attenuated strain (T. verrucosum) appears to be
Povidone-iodine
(Betadine)
chlorhexidine
most immunogenic. Neither live attenuated vaccines nor
(Nolvasan), available as lotions and ointments, are
killed products have been effective in preventing dermato-
general antiseptics with antifungal action.
phytosis in cats.
A thorough cleanup of premises involving use of an
iodine, chlorine, or phenol-containing disinfectant is
Further Reading
essential. Utensils and equipment are disinfected with Cap-
tan or Bordeaux orchard spray.
Identification of carriers in kennels and catteries can
Songer JG and Post KW (2005) Veterinary Microbiology: Bacterial
be attempted by culture of brushings. The Wood's lamp
and Fungal Agents of Animal Diseases. Elsevier Saunders.
gents of Subcutaneous
coses
LISA M. POHLMAN AND M.M. CHENGAPPA
Whether a fungus is categorized as mold or yeast is based
mised human patients (e.g., alcoholics; individuals affected
upon the microscopic appearance in tissue or on routine
with the human immunodeficiency virus). In immune-
culture media (the asexual stage). If hyphal structures are
competent horses and dogs, the disease is usually limited to
observed, the fungus is termed a mold; if a single-celled,
the cutaneous or cutaneolymphatic form, and organisms
budding structure is observed, the fungus is termed a yeast.
are typically sparse or rare within the lesions. Disseminated
On routine culture media, molds will have a “"fuzzy" or
disease is very rare in horses and dogs unless the patient is
wooly appearance, and yeast will be bacteria-like in its
immunosuppressed. Con versely, most cats with sporotri-
colonial morphology and consistency. Some pathogenic
chosis will develop cutaneolymphatic or disseminated dis.
fungi will produce either hyphal-like structures or yeast-
ease regardless of their immune status at the time of infec.
like structures, depending upon the conditions in which
tion. Further, in cats, organisms are typically abundant and
they are growing. Such fungi are called dimorphic fungi,
found easily within the lesions and exudates.
which are discussed here and in Chapter 47.
This chapter deals with dimorphic fungi and fungus-
like microorganisms affecting skin and subcutis. To be
Descriptive Features
discussed are Sporothrix schencki, which is the cause of
Morphology and Staining. S. schenckiis a dimorphic fun-
 gus; that is, it exhibits a different morphology depend-
quently in humans, horses, dogs, and cats; Histoplasma cap-
ing upon the conditions of growth. At room temperature
sulahum var. farciminosum, the cause of epizootic lymphan-
(25 *C, on Sabouraud's agar), S. schenckii grows as a mold.
gitis in equids (horses, donkeys, and mules); the agents of
This so-called saprophyticphase consists of septate hyphae,
0omycosis (Aphanomyces, Lagenidium, Pythium, and Sapro-
with oval or tear-shaped conidia (2-3 μm by 3-6 μm) in
legnia), which cause a variety of diseases in fish and mam-
clusters on conidiophores and along hyphae. At 35-37 *C
mals; and miscellaneous conditions involving the skin
(in tissue or on rich media, e.g., blood agar, incubated at
and subcutis, including chromoblastomycosis, phaeohy.
that temperature), it exists as budding pleomorphic yeasts
phomycosis, and mycetoma. Systemic mycoses, of which
skin lesions may be one manifestation, are described in
yeasts can also be round shaped) measuring up to 10 μm
Chapter 47.
in the longest dimension. The yeast phase stains with the
Gram's stain, and either phase accepts Romanowsky-type
S. schenckii
stain (e.g., Wright's or Giemsa) (Figure 46.1) or fungal
stains (periodic acid Schiff, Grocott methenamine silver,
and Gridley).
Sporotrichosis is a relatively rare disease caused by
Sporothrix species {usually S. schenckii, although several
other causative species have recently been reported) that
Cellular Constituents and Products. S. schencki possesses
are saprophytic, dimorphic fungi. In immune-competent
a typical fungal cell wall containing chitin, and ergosterol.
people, this disease usually manifests as a chronic, ulcer-
Various glycoconjugates found upon the wall have adhe-
ative lymphangitis of skin and subcutis. Systemic (dis-
sive properties (see Section "Cellular Products of Medical
Interest").
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
Adhesins. The cell wall of S. schenckii contains glyco-
Ernst L. Biberstein.
conjugates with affinity for extracellular matrix proteins
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
326
Chapter46
 Agents of Subcutaneous Mycoses
327
off-white to black colonies develop that become wrinkled
FIGURE 46.1.
Exudate from a cutaneous sporotrichosis
and fuzzy. On blood agar at 35-37 *C, whitish, smooth
lesion in a cat. Note the pleomorphism of the yeast cells;
yeast colonies appear within a few days. Colonies at
shapes vary from round- to oval- to cigar-shaped (cigar bodies)
room temperature on potato dextrose agar are black and
(modified Wright's stain, 1000x).
wrin kled.
Variability. Examination of mitochondrial DNA (by
restriction length polymorphism analysis) shows that there
are at least 20 different types 0r strains of S. schenckii (1-20).
Ecology
Reservoir.
 The organism prefers soil rich in decaying and
Organic matter; it has also been isolated on many live plants
throughout the world. Occasionally itis isolated from claws
of clinically healthy cats, mucous membranes of healthy
animals and animal products. Disease has been reported
in people, dogs, cats, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, cat-
tle, rats, mice, hamsters, foxes, birds, camels, dolphins,
armadillos, and chimpanzees. The disease is most common
in the cat, dog, and horse where it occurs in multiple forms.
Human infections are often associated with rose gardening
(and often called a "rose gardener's disease") since infection
(fbronectin, laminin, and type II collagen). This interac-
usually occurs via a traumatic puncture wound after han-
dling plants and plant materials. More correctly, however,
any thorny plant should be regarded as a possible source of
infection. Infection via inhalation of spores has also been 
Cell Wall. The cell wall of S. schenckii contains several
reported, but this is much less common.
substances that may play a role in the virulence of this
 microorganism. These include lipid, melanin, peptide-
Transmission. The mycelial form of the organism enters
rhamnomannan, and sialic acid:
the tissue via traumatic inoculation and then converts to
the yeast form where local proliferation of the organism
1.1
Lipid: The lipid portion of the cell wall of S.
occurs to result in ulcerated, exudative, cutaneous nodules
that involve the dermal and subcutaneous tissues. These
macrophages.
discharging lesions may be contagious, especially in cats
2.
Melanin: Melanin found in the cell wall protects S.
where the numbers of microorganisms in the exudates from
schenckii from the effects ofreactive oxygen interme
this species are quite large. The organism has also been iso-
diates within phagolysosomes of phagocytic cells.
lated from nails ofaffected cats, and from clinically healthy
Melanin is a free radical scavenger (reduces the tox-
cats in contact with infected individuals. Rare cases of inter-
icity of hydroxy radicals, superoxides, and singlet
nal infection are due to inhalation or ingestion.
 oxygen radicals found within the phagolysosome).
3.
Peptide-rhamnomannan:
The
peptide-
rhamnomannan fraction of the cell wall acts
Pathogenesis
Postinoculation, local proliferation of the organism and
the liberation of proinflammatory cytokines by
the associated inflammatory reaction results in draining
phagocytic cells.
wounds that first appear similar to cat-bite abscesses or
Sialic acids: Sialic acids found in the cell wall inhibit
cellulitis. These wounds, that are refractory to antibiotic
uptake of S. schenckii by phagocytic cells. Sialic acid
therapy, progress to become ulcerated cutaneous nodules
directs complement proteins toward the degradative
that involve the dermal and subcutaneous tissues. Sub-
pathway, rather than generating effective opsoniz-
sequently the affected area becomes ulcerated and forms
ing fragments and anaphylatoxins needed to gener-
large crusts. The typical inflammatory reaction is pyogran-
ate an effective inflammatory response.
Proteinases. S. schenckii produces two proteinases: I and
lymphocytes and plasma cells. However, upon removal of
I1. The significance of these enzymes in the pathogene-
the crusts there is often a purulent exudate. The infectious
sis of sporotrichosis is unclear. However, these enzymes
process follows subcutaneous lymph channels, producing
are believed to hydrolyze human stratum corneum cells in
suppurating ulcers at intervals. These heal slowly but often
vitro.
re-erupt. Lymphatics often become thickened. In immune-
competent patients (except cats), the disease is usually lim-
Growth
Characteristics. After  several
days
On
      n m
 Sabouraud's agar at room temperature, initially moist,
with the exception of cats, disseminated disease is very rare
328
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
unless the patient is immunosuppressed. Con versely, most
Treatment and Control
cats will develop cutaneolymphatic or disseminated disease
regardless of their immune status at the time of infection,
The cutaneous form responds generally to the oral admin-
istration of sodium or potassium iodides. The azole
and thus dissemination to viscera, joints, bones, and the
drugs, especially itraconazole and ketoconazole, are effec-
central nervous system is common in cats.
 Proteinases arepossible virulence factors, and proteinase
tive. Terbinafine (an allylamine antifungal agent, which
 inhibitors have been shown to suppress nodule formation.
inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis) has shown some success
 in treating human patients with the cutaneous form of
Cell wall constituents and adhesins delay elimination of
 sporotrichosis. Amphotericin B and flucytosine are used
the microorganism.
on deep and disseminated forms.
Epidemiology.
 Sporotrichosis is acquired from the non-
living environment, but transmission from suppurating
H. capsufatum var. farciminosum
lesions is possible. The zoonotic potential ofinfection from
cats to people is well established. The occurrence of infec-
H. capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus existing as a mold at
tion transmission from dogs and horses to people is not
 25-30 *C (saprophytic phase) and as a yeast at 37 °C (para-
as well documented. It is reported that the abundance of
sitic phase). This fungus has three varieties: H. capsulaium
organisms in the lesions, exudates, feces, and under the
va1. capsulatum, H. capsulatum var. duboisi, and H. capsu-
nails of infected cats and the relative lack of organisms in
latum var. farciminosum. Varieties capsulatum and duboisii
the lesions of dogs is the reason for this difference. How.
cause histoplasmosis, a systemic fungal disease that is dis-
ever, transmission from cats to people has been reported
cussed in Chapter 47. Variety farciminosum causes epizootic
even when the cat's lesions have had very few organisms,
lymphangitis (pseudoglanders), a chronic pyogranuloma-
and transmission from dogs has not occurred when own-
tous disease typically involving the skin and lymphatics
ers have been exposed to lesions with abundant organisms.
that mainly affects horses, donkeys, and mules but has also
Therefore, it is likely that there are other factors that affect
 been reported in camels, cattle and dogs. In mice, guinea
zoonotic potential, and not simply the number of organ-
pigs, and rabbits, experimental in fections have been estab-
isms in a lesion. Transmission from person to person does
lished. Rarely, internal organs may be involved.
not occur.
Descriptive Features
Immunologic Aspects
Morphology and Staining. H. capsulatum var. farcimi-
Cell-mediated reactivity is significantly related to resis-
 nosum, a dimorphic fungus, produces budding yeasts (2-
tance. No artificial immunization procedures exist.
3 μm by 3-4 μm) in tissue, and usually sterile hyphae in
its mycelial form when grown at 25 *C or room tempera-
ture. Exceptionally, arthroconidia, chlamydoconidia, and
Laboratory Diagnosis
spherical, thick-walled macroconidia are seen.
The yeast phase is best demonstrated
dwitha
Direct examination of exudates is often unrewarding
Romanowsky-type stain (e.g., Wright's or Giemsa) or fun-
except with feline specimens or specimens from immune
 compromised patients, which generally contain abundant
gal stains (periodic acid Schiff, Grocott methenamine sil-
yeast cells (round-shaped organisms and cigar bodies) (Fig-
ver, and Gridley).
ure 46.1). If organisms are present in the cytologic prepa-
ration, identification of the organism is straightforward
Growth Characteristics..
H. capsulatum var. farciminosum
assuming the classic oval to cigar-shaped yeast forms (cigar
grows on common laboratory media (Sabouraud's glucose,
bodies) are seen. However, in rare instances when only the
infusion, and blood-supplemented media with or with-
round-shaped yeast forms are present, these organisms can
out cycloheximide and antibacterial agents) over a broad
be difficult to distinguish from H. capsulahum. In tissue sec-
temperature range. The optimum for mycelial growth is
tions, S. schenckii has also reportedly been misidentified as
 25-30 *C, taking several weeks to form a cottony, white
Cryptococcus neoformans. This error is likely due to an arti-
to brown colony. Pigmentation parallels abundance of
macroconidia. The yeast phase requires rich media (e.g.,
fact of sample preparation in which there is contraction of
the cytoplasm from the cell wall resulting in the impression
glucose cysteine blood agar and brain-heart infusion blood
of a large clear capsule. With other hosts, fungal stains and
agar) and temperatures of 34-37 *C, taking several days to
immunofluorescence may help detect yeast cells.
form a cream to tan, yeast-like colony. Con version of mold
The agent grows readily in culture. Definitive diagno-
 to yeast on blood-containing agar requires incubation at
sis requires demonstration of both phases. Serologic tests
 37 *C under 15-20% CO2. Several passages may be needed
(yeast cell and latex agglutination, agar gel diffusion) have
to convert the mold to the yeast phase.
had limited use in animals. Molecular techniques utilizing
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with primers designed
Resistance. H. capsulatum var. farciminosum is quite resis-
to amplify segments of the gene encoding the chitin syn-
tant to physical and chemical agents. It survives in soil at
thase i have been used todemonstrate the fungus in clinical
ambient temperatures for mon ths (several weeks in corrals
samples, as well as identification ofisolates (useful when an 
and stables) and at refrigerator temperature or in a desic-
isolate resists the mold-yeast conversion).
cated form for years.
Chapter 46 Agents of Subcutaneous Mycoses
329
Ecology
bodies, demonstrable by indirect fluorescentantibody, agar
Reservoir.  The primary reservoir for Histoplasma species
gel diffusion, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 01
by the serum agglutination tests, are indicative of in fection.
is nitrogen-rich soil.
Transmission.  Infection is thought to occur through skin
Laboratory Diagnosis
wounds. Infective organisms may be in the yeast form and
come from skin lesions, or nasal and/or ocular exudates
"S. schenckir") and ulcerative lymphangitis produced by
of infected animals, or they may be in the mycelial from
Corynebacterium pseudohuberculosis (see Chapter 30). The
the environment (e.g., soil). Fomites such as grooming or
agent must be demonstrated. Directexamination ofstained
harness equipment are also a source of infection. Organ-
exudates (Wright's or Giemsa stained) or biopsy mate-
isms spread most readily where large numbers of equids are
rial (hematoxylin-eosin, periodic acid Schiff, and Gro-
assembled in high concentrations in tropical and subtropi-
cott methenamine silver) may reveal intracellular (within
cal climates since warm, moist conditions allow the organ.
macrophages) or extracellular characteristic yeasts.
ism to survive in the soil for months. Arthropods may play a
H. capsulahum var. farciminosum grows on Sabouraud's
part. Respiratory and localized gastrointestinal in fections,
glucose agar with inhibitors (cycloheximide and chloram-
which are rare, likely develop subsequent to inhalation or
phenicol). Mycelial extracts contain genus-specific anti-
ingestion of the organism, respectively. However, experi-
gens demonstrable by agar gel diffusion or by the serum
mental studies have not reliably been able to establish gas.
agglutination test. Growth patterns and microscopic mor-
trointestinal disease with oral administration of organisms.
phology differentiate H. capsulatum var. farciminosum from
H. capsulatum var. capsulaium (Chapter 47).
Pathogenesis
Treatment and Control
The first symptom is a painless, freely moveable skin
nodule, which overtime enlarges, becomes abscessed, and
Intravenous iodides (with or without griseofulvin) have
eventually bursts resulting in an ulcerated lesion. Although
been relatively successful. Amphotericin B has been used
some lesions seem to heal spontaneously, more commonly
with some success. Itraconazole and fluconazole may also
they continue to ulcerate and grow, with periods of granu-
 be used. In nonendemic areas, destruction of infected ani-
lation, and partial healing, followed by the development of
mals is advisable.
new lesions. Typically, adjacent lymphatics develop nod-
ules along their course, showing the same alternating activ-
Oomycosis
ity. Regional lymph nodes develop abscesses, which drain
by sinus tracts to the outside, but fever is uncommon.
Oomycosis is caused by a member of a group of eukaryotic
Hematogenous spread and visceral involvement is possi-
ble. Histologically, the process evolves from suppurative to
microorganisms belonging to the kingdom Stramenopiles
(which also contains the diatoms and brown algae). They
granulomatous (pyogranulomatous), marked by lympho-
are saprophytic microbes that usually live in water and
cytes, macrophages, and giant cells, to eventual fibrosis.
Yeast cells occur extracellularly and intracellularly, espe.
moist soil. Although they are morphologically similar to
fungi (they produce hyphae in tissue and grow as mold-
cially in macrophages.
Skin lesions, chiefly on head, neck, and limbs, are the
like colonies on media in vitro), they are not members of the
kingdom Fungi. Members of this groupare the agents of sev-
predominant signs. The general condition is usually unaf-
fected except in the primary respiratory tract or dissemi-
eral plant and animal diseases. Historically, the most noto-
nated infections. Mild cases do not progress beyond the
rious is Phytophthora, the cause of the Irish potato famine,
local stage.
which at present is responsible for killing oak trees along
the Pacific coast of North America. The following genera
are associated with disease in animals: Aphanomyces (ulcer-
Epidemiology. Endemic areas include parts of Africa,
ative disease of fish and crustaceans), Lagenidium (pyo-
much of Asia including India, Japan, and Pakistan, and
granulomatous disease of dogs and cats identical clinically
the Mediterranean littoral. The epidemiology of H. capsu-
to pythiosis), Pythium (pyogranulomatous disease, called
laum var. farciminosum infection is unclear. Manifestations
pythiosis, of a variety of animal species), and Saprolegnia
vary with geographic area. Seasonal peaks suggest arthro-
(systemic disease of cultured salmonids). The discussion
pod transmission.
that follows is focused on Pythium insidiosum, the cause of
The disease mainly affects equids but cattle, camelids,
pyogranulomatous conditions (pythiosis) of dogs ("swamp
and dogs may also be affected. Young horses (less than 6
cancer"), horses ("Florida horse leeches"), cattle, cats, and
years of age) are most susceptible.
people.
Immunologic Factors
Cutaneous Pythiosis ("Swamp
 The role of immune mechanisms in pathogenesis or resis-
Cancer"—"Florida Horse Leeches")
tance is not known, but cell-mediated immunity is proba-
bly the key host defense. Skin sensitivity develops following
The genus Pythium contains over 85 species, and only
exposure, even in the absence of disease. Circulating anti-
P. insidiosum is associated with disease in animals.
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
P. insidiosum causes ulcerative fibrogranulomatous or pyo
granulomatous reactions. No tissue colonies or granules
granulomatous and eosinophilic cutaneous and subcuta-
 are seen. Nodular or larger swellings develop, which may
neous lesions in horses, cattle, dogs, and cats, and gas-
ulcerate and discharge pus.
d  o s  so n  
Diagnosis is made by biopsy and culture. Sclerotic bod-
as a cause of arteritis, keratitis, or periorbital cellulitis
ies (chromoblastomycosis) and hyphae (phaeohyphomy-
in people. It is mainly seen in tropical or subtropical
cosis) are seen in stained (hematoxylin-eosin,periodic acid
areas—in North America this disease is seen most fre-
 Schiff, and Grocott methenamine silver) biopsy sections.
quently diagnosed along the Gulf Coast. Dogs and horses
Culture, on Sabouraud's agar without inhibitors, often
are the species most commonly affected. The agent is
requires lengthy incubation. The resulting colonies range
   )     
from olive to brown to black, depending on the color of
hyphae. Lesions in horses are typically large, exudative
 species of fungus involved
swellings, usually on extremities, ventral trunk, or head.
Lesions are excised, but may recur. Medical treatment
The nasal mucosa may be involved. Hyphae are demon-
(flucytosine, itraconazole, amphotericin B, and ketocona-
strable within granulomatous coagula (termed “kunkers"
zole) has given mixed results.
or “leeches"in horses) consisting of necrotic macrophages
(including epithelioid and multinucleated macrophages),
eosinophils.
Eumycotic Mycetoma
Diagnostic methods include cytology (in which the
broad, poorly septate, and branching hyphal elements
 Swelling, granule formation, and discharging sinus tracts
 are seen among the pyogranulomatous and eosinophilic
are characteristics of mycetoma. They may be associ-
inflammation), serology (an enzyme-linked immunosor-
ated with bacteria, most notably an actinomycete such
bent assay), molecular techniques (utilizing primers
as members of the genus Nocardia or Actinomyces (actino-
designed to amplify P. insidiosum-specific DNA by means of
mycotic mycetoma, see Chapter 36) or a fungus (eumy-
the PCR), immunohistochemical examination ofexudates,
     
and culture. Cultural techniques are tedious and time-
in cattle, horses, dogs, and cats. The cutaneous form
consuming and entail growth of a mold-like microorgan-
is often nodular and is associated with similar nasal
ism on Sabouraud's dextrose agar or brain-heart infusion
lesions.
agar after 24-48 h at 30 *C. Identification requires demon-
Fungi associated with eumycotic mycetoma include
stration of motile zoospores and/or reaction of extracts of
Pseudallescheria boydi, Cochliobolus spiciferus (the sexual
the isolate with reference antisera. The PCR-based assay
forms of Scedosporium apiospermum and Bipolaris spicifera,
mentioned is used to establish the presence of P. insidiosum
respectively),and Curvularia genicutata.All are saprophytes
in clinical samples as well as for identification of isolates.
 that presumably enter via a wound. It is not clear what trig-
The PCR assay also successfully identifies members of the
 gers this course of pathogenesis because the same agents
 can cause other pathologic patterns.
similar clinical picture in dogs and cats.
Fungal colonies are surrounded by suppuration bor-
Early diagnosis is the key to successful treatment. Treat-
dered by granulomatous reactions. Sinus tracts carry pus
ments include surgery and antifungal therapy (ampho-
and granules, consisting of microorganisms and inflam-
tericin B). Immunotherapy utilizing killed whole organ-
matory components, to the surface. The color and the tex-
isms or extracts has shown promise.
ture of granules vary depending on the species of fungus
involved in the mycetoma. The processes are slowly pro-
 gressive, involving adjacent tissues
Chromoblastomycosis and
Treatment is excision if possible. Antifungal agents
Phaeohyphomycosis
(azoles and amphotericin B) have been disappointing.
Chromoblastomycosis
and
phaeohyphomycosis
are
caused by dark-pigmented (dematiaceous) fungi. Most
Rhinosporidiosis
of the roughly 70 species implicated belong to the gen-
era Altemaria, Bipolaris, Cladosporium, Cladophialophora,
The cause of this disease is Rhinosporidium seeberi. This fun-
Curvularia, Exophiala, Fonsecaea, Phaeoacremonium, and
 gus occurs in nature and has not been cultivated on fungal
Phialophora. In chromoblastomycosis, the fungal elements
media, but has been propagated in cell culture. It causes
in tissue are large (<12 μm), pigmented, “sclerotic bod-
chronic granulomatous type of infection at mucocuta-
ies." Infections in which hyphae are present are called
neous junction in horses, cattle mules, dogs, goats,and wild
phaeohyphomycosis.
waterfowls. Infection, though rare, occurs in humans. For-
Chromoblastomycosis is rare in nonhuman mammals,
 mation of cauliflower-like growths, also known as polyps,
but occurs in frogs and toads. Phaeohyphomycosis is seen
is very characteristic of infection caused by this fungus.
sporadically in cats, dogs, horses, cattle, and goats and may
The disease occurs mostly in tropical and subtropical coun-
be systemic. Cladophialophora bantiana is the fungus most
tries; however, sporadic cases have been reported in the
commonly seen in dogs and cats, with central nervous sys.
United States. Diagnosis is based on gross lesion and micro.
tem localization frequently observed.
scopic examination of tissue sections or discharge from
The agents, soil- and plant-associated saprophytes, enter
polyps. On tissue section, presence of large sporangia (200-
through skin and multiply subcutaneously, causing pyo-
300 μm) filled with endospores is sufficient to make a
Chapter 46
 Agents of Subcutaneous Mycoses
331
definitive diagnosis of this disease. On cytologic prepara-
FIGURE 46.2.
Impression smear of cauliflower-like
tions, however, sporangia are rarely seen and the numerous
growth in the nasal cavity of a dog. Note the central clump of
endospores are the typical finding (Figure 46.2). Treatment
endospores among the pyogranulomatous inflammation
is not effective. Surgical excision is practiced, but many
(modified Wright's stain, 1000x).
lesions recur.
 Further Reading
Ginn PE, Mansell JEKL, and Rakich PM (2007) Skin and
Appendages in fubb, Kennedy, and Palmer's Pathobiology of
 Domestic Animais, vol. 1, Sth edn, Elsevier Saunders.
Greene CE (2006) Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 3rd edn,
 Elsevier Saunders.
Gross TE, Ihrke PJ, Walder EJ, and Affolter VK (2006) Skin Dis-
eases ofthe Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis,
2nd edn, Blackwell Science.
Raskin R and Meyer D (2009) Canine and Feline Cytology: A
Color Aflas and Interpretation Guide, 2nd edn, W.B. Elsevier
Saunders Company.
SongerJG and Post KW (2005) Veterinary Microbiology: Bacterial
stemic
M.M. CHENGAPPA AND LISA M. POHLMAN
Whether a fungus is categorized as mold or yeast is based
6. Since the inflammatory lesions are granulomatous
upon the microscopic appearance in tissue or on rou-
 to pyogranulomatous, all have the potential to cause
tine culture media (the asexual stage). Microscopically, if
 hypercalcemia in the patient. This hypercalcemia
hyphal structures are observed, the fungus is termed a mold;
occurs as a result of the response to granulomatous
if single-celled, budding structures are observed, the fungus
inflammation in which activated macrophages are
is termed a yeast. On routine culture media, molds will have
stimulated to convert vitamin D precursors to the
a “fuzzy" or wooly appearance, and yeast will be bacteria-
active form of vitamin D (i.e., calcitriol) in an unreg-
like in its colonial morphology and consistency. Some
ulated manner. This chapter discusses the dimorphic
pathogenic fungi will produce either hyphal-like structures
fungi Coccidioides immitis, Histoplasma capsulatum,
or yeast-like structures, depending upon the conditions in
and Blastomyces dermatitidis, together with the mold
which they are growing. Such fungi are called dimorphic
Aspergillus. The fungus Pneumocystis and the alga Pro-
fungi. These fungi are discussed here and in Chapter 46.
 totheca are briefly mentioned.
The agents of most systemic (or “deep") mycoses
 e    
diverse, they share disease-related features:
Coccidioides
Members of the genus Coccidioides are dimorphic fungi.
1. Many are dimorphic; that is, their saprophytic and
The genus Coccidioides contains two species: immitis and
parasitic phases differ morphologically. Coccidioides,
posadasii. The disease, coccidioidomycosis, is caused by
Histoplasma, Blastomyces, and Paracoccidioides grow
both. C. immitis and C. posadasii differ in their preferred
as molds in their inanimate habitat. In tissue, Coccid-
geographic habitats. Both species occur only in the Western
ioides produces sporangia, whereas the others grow
Hemisphere in the Lower Sonoran Life Zone, apparently
as bud ding yeasts.
as a result of the area's peculiar soil properties and tem-
2.
 In fection is usually by inhalation.
perature and rainfall patterns. C. immifis is found in the
3.
Host factors are often the decisive disease determi-
Central Valley of California in the United States (mainly
nants. Some mycoses (aspergillosis and zygomyco-
the San Joaquin Valley), whereas C. posadasii is found in 
sis) are seen primarily in immunocompromised ani-
non-California locations (Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona
mals.
in the United States, and in South America). Of domestic
4. Lesions tend to be granulomatous to pyogranuloma-
tous. After primary pulmonary in fection, the course
occasionally affected. Less commonly infections are also
of disease is determined by the effectiveness of cell-
 reported in cats, swine, sheep, cattle, human and non-
mediated immune responses. If these are inade-
human primates, and some 30 species of nondomestic
quate, dissemination may occur to bone, skin, cen-
mammals.
tral nervous system, or abdominal viscera.
 5. Systemic mycoses are noncontagious. Although the
 agent is often demonstrably shed, it fails to infect
Descriptive Features
individuals on contact.
Morphology. Structure, and Composition. In the soil,
Coccidioides is a mold made up of slender septate hyphae
that give rise, on thicker secondary branches, to chains
of infectious arthroconidia (arthrospores, arthroaleu-
Original chapter written by Drs. Dwight C. Hirsh and
riospores, and arthroaleurioconidia). These are bulging,
Ernst L. Biberstein.
barrel-shaped, thick-walled cells, 2-4 μm by 3-6 μm,
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
332
Chapter 47
Agents of Systemic Mycoses
2. Chitinase 1: Cts1 (for chitinase 1) is one of sev-
FIGURE 47.1.
Tissue section from a skin lesion on a dog.
eral chitinases that are involved with the formation
A large C immitis spherule containing endospores (arrow)
of, and release of, endospores from the spherule.
surrounded by pyogranulomatous inflammation
An important target for the Cts enzymes is the
(hematoxylin-eosin stain, 1000x).
"segregation apparatus" (a weblike mesh of chitin-
containing structures within the spherule). Anti-
 bodies (IgG isotype) to Ctsl are made late in the
useful diagnostically (detected by the complement
fixation, CF, test).
5
3.
β-1,3-glucanosyltransferase:
Gel
(for
glucan-
elongating glucanosyltransferase) is located on
the surface of endospores. Gel elicits a strong THt
lymphocyte response, resulting in elevated levels
of y-interferon followed by protection against
disseminated disease (activates macrophages).
4.
 Serine proteases: These enzymes play a role in the
stimulation of the inflammatory response elicited
by Coccidioides. These enzymes digest elastin, colla-
 gen, and immunoglobulins
5.
Urease: Although its role in virulence is unknown,
the enzyme urease (Ure) elicits a strong protective
immune response following stimulation of Tui lym-
separated by empty cells (disjunctors), through which
phocytes (activates macrophages).
breaks occur when arthroconidia are dispersed.
 In tissue, arthroconidia grow into spherical sporangia
Growth Characteristics. Coccidioides grows on simple
with birefringent walls, “spherules" (10-100 μm in diam-
media over a broad temperature range. On Sabouraud's 01
eter), which by internal cleavage produce several hun-
blood agar, growth is mycelial. Over several days, initially
 (r / a (a ui  g-) sodsoa, pa
dull gray colonies develop with sparse aerial mycelium,
walls disintegrate, allowing dissemination of endospores,
which gradually becomes more abundant. Arthroconidia
each of which may repeat the cycle or, on a nonliving
are produced in 5-7 days.
substrate, give rise to mycelial (a collection of hyphae)
Spherules (sporangia) can be demonstrated in vitro by
growth. Although only arthroconidia are naturally infec-
growth at 40 *C in media containing casein hydrolysate,
tious, endospores can experimentally initiate disease. Sex-
glucose, biotin, glutathione, and a salt mixture (spherule
ual spores are not known.
medium).
"Coccidioidin" in supernatants of mycelial Coccidioides
broth cultures is largely polysaccharide, but contains some
amino acid nitrogen. It is used in cutaneous hypersensi-
Ecology
tivity and serologic tests. “Spherulin," a lysate of cultured
spherules, is also used in skin tests.
Reservoir.
 Coccidioides inhabits the soil in the Lower
Sonoran Life Zone, including parts of California in North
America (C. immitis) and the southwestern portion of
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
the United States, Mexico, Central America, the northern
Adhesins. SOWgp (for spherule outer wall glycoprotein)
and western rim states of South America, Argentina, and
is a proline-rich glycoprotein adhesin on the surface of
Paraguay (C. posadasi). High prevalence is associated with 
spherules. SoWgp has affinity for extracellular matrix pro-
an annual rainfall of 5-20 inches and mean summer and
teins (laminin, fibronectin, and collagen). sOWgp stimu-
winter temperatures of over 80 *F and 45 *F, respectively.
lates a strong Th2 lymphocyte response, resulting in ele-
Arthroconidia resist drying and tolerate heat and salin-
vated levels of antibody and suppression of the protective
ity better than do competing soil organisms. In summer
cell-mediated immune response. Mutants unable to pro-
heat, Coccidioides survives in soil layers nearer the surface
than its competitors. When conditions favor growth again
duce SOWgp have greatly reduced virulence.
after rains, Coccidioides repopulates the superficial soil lay-
ers first, ensuring its widespread dispersai. Arthroconidia
Miscellaneous Products
are dispersed by wind. Rodent burrows are heavily con-
β-Glucosidase 2: Bgl2 (for β-glucosidase 2) is an
centrated with arthroconidia in endemic areas. Dogs are
1.
enzyme secreted by the endospores of Coccidioides
frequently exposed to the fungus by sniffing the burrows.
that most likely plays a role in endospore mor-
phology. Antibodies (IgM isotype) to Bgl2 are
Transmission.
. Infection is caused mainly by inhalation of
made early in the infectious process, and are
arthroconidia. The organism is highly infectious and very
useful diagnostically (detected by the precipitin test)
few arthroconidia need to be inhaled to produce disease.
to signal that a recent infection has occurred.
Primary cutaneous infections are rare.
334
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Pathogenesis
Epidemiology. In all species, overt disease is the excep-
tion. Highest prevalence of canine systemic coccid-
Mechanisms and Pathology. Following inhalation, the
ioidomycosis is observed in male dogs, 4-7 years of age,
barrel-shaped arthroconidia round into spherical-shaped
endospores, which, following enlargement and internal
with peak occurrence of illnesses from January to March
and May to July. These peaks may represent seasonal stress
cleavage, differentiate into multinucleate spherules (10-
and increased exposure, respectively. Geographic and cli-
100 μm) containing hundreds of endospores (2-5 μm), a
 matic factors have been mentioned. Young Boxer dogs and
process that takes several days. Spherules rupture, releas-
ing endospores, and the cycle is repeated. Arthroconi
dia, endospores, and spherules trigger an inflammatory
response in the lung (serine proteases are partly respon-
Immunologic Aspects
sible). Arthroconidia and endospores are engulfed but
Cell-mediated hypersensitivity, as determined by skin tests,
not killed by phagocytes, and are conveyed to the hilar
lymph node, where another inflammatory focus develops
develops within one or more weeks of exposure and can
persist indefinitely. Its presence is an indicator of resistance
(as well as more spherules). Inflammation is stimulated in 
part by serine proteases, which are liberated during the
to progressive disease. Its absence is the rule in disseminated
 infections, and its return is a favorable sign.
growth of the fungus. Normally, cell-mediated immune
IgM antibody (specific for Bgl2), demonstrable by tube
responses arrest the process at this stage following stimu-
lation of Thi lymphocytes that activate macrophages, per-
infection and usually disappears. IgG antibody titers (spe-
mitting destruction of the endospores. Antibodies to Bgl2
cific for Cts1), which are detectable by CF and immunodif-
are made during this phase of the infectious process. With
inadequate cell-mediated immunity (caused by SOWgp-
fusion tests, rise in disseminated disease and remain high
 directed immunomodulation, genetic makeup, and infec-
(1 : 16) until the process is brought under control.
No vaccine is presently available.
tious dose), dissemination can occur to bones, skin, abdom-
inal viscera, heart, genital tract, and eyes (and rarely in
animals to brain and meninges). Gross lesions are white
Laboratory Diagnosis
 on s    s
Direct Examination of Specimens. 
Animal fluids and tis-
masses. Peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial effusions occur.
 n  m  ss n a  s
Antibodies to Cts1 are made during this phase of the infec-
containing 10% KOH. Spherules are 10-100 μm in diam-
tious process. Microscopically, the predominant response
eter, have a thick wall (<2 μm), and contain endospores
is pyogranulomatous: to arthroconidia and endospores,
when mature (see Figure 47.1). Free endospores look indis-
the response is suppurative; and to spherules, the response
is granulomatous, with epithelioid macrophages the chief
tinct in wet mounts but are recognizable in fixed smears
 stained by a fungal stain (e.g., periodic acid Schiff, Gridley,
component, admixed with multinucleated giant cells, lym-
 0r Gomori methenamine silver stains).
phocytes, and neutrophils (Figure 47.1).
Cytologic preparations, such as aspirates or imprints of
lesions, stained with Romanowsky-type stains, typically
Disease Patterns
reveal the pyogranulomatous inflammation and may have
Dogs. Disseminated disease of dogs is the pattern seen
the characteristic large (diameter of 10-100 μm), double-
most commonly by veterinarians. The complaints are las-
contoured, clear to blue spheres that have variably visible
situde, anorexia, and loss of condition. There may be respi
round endospores inside. It is the presence of endospores
 and the extreme variation in size of the spheres that dif-
ratory signs (including cough), fever, and lameness due to
bone involvement or arthritis, or discharging sinuses from
ferentiates this organism from B. dermatitidis. Stained tis-
deep lesions.
sue sections (hematoxylin and eosin, Figure 47.1, Gomori
 methenamine silver, or Gridley) show both the agent and
Cats. Disseminated disease in cats presents with less
the characteristic lesion.
osseous and more visceral involvement. Skin lesions are
the most frequent reason for presentation to the veterinar-
Culture. Blood agar and Sabouraud's agar with or with-
ian.
out antibiotics are inoculated, tape-sealed, and incubated
at 37 *C and 25 *C, respectively. All processing of cultures is 
done under a microbiological safety hood. Mycelial growth
Horses. As with cats, there isusually less osseous and more
 should be evident within a week and is examined for pres.
visceral involvement.
ence of barrel-shaped arthroconidia in a lactophenol cot-
ton blue wet mount. Colonies are white and cottony with
Cattle, Sheep, and Swine. In these species, the disease is
tan, brown, pink, or yellow pigmentation. The isolate can
usually asymptomatic, limited to lungs and regionallymph 
be reconverted to the sporangial phase by animal inoc-
nodes, and undiagnosed until slaughter.
ulation or cultivation in a spherule medium (see Section
"Growth Characteristics"). Culturing and handling of cul-
Human Beings. Naturally occurring, asymptomatic coc
ture should be avoided if a proper biocontainment facil.
cidioidomycosis occurs frequently in humans. Clinical
ity is not available. Contamination of the laboratory with
 symptoms range from a flu-like illness to severe pneumo-
arthrospore could easily occur if the culture is not handled 
nia. It is fatal in immunocompromised patients.
with the proper procedure.
Chapter 47
Agents of Systemic Mycoses
A commercially available “exoantigen" test kit furnishes
prepared antisera to Coccidioides, H. capsulatum, and B. der-
FIGURE 47.2.
H. capsulatum, mycelial phase.
matitidis to be tested against extracts of suspect cultures in
Lactophenol cotton blue mount of a culture grown at 25 *℃.
 an immunodiffusion agar plate, where precipitation lines
"Tuberculate" macromedia studded with finger-like
develop between extracts and their homologous antisera.
projections,400x.
Immunodiagnosis. The CF and immunodiffusion tests
detect disseminated disease. Because it is quantifiable, the
CF test gauges progress and cure of infection more accu-
rately.
The coccidioidin skin test has been used in animal
surveys.
Molecular Methods.
. Most molecular methods used to
identify or detect Coccidioides make use of primers specific
for sequences contained within the DNA encoding ribo-
somal RNA. These sequences are amplified using the poly-
merase chain reaction.
Treatment and Control
Amphotericin B has been the mainstay of anticoccidioidal
 therapy in human patients. Limitations are its toxicity and
ture, the mold becomes a yeast consisting of round or oval,
the intravenous route of administration, requiring hos-
singly budding cells that measure 2-4 μm in diameter. A
pitalization or frequent visits. Liposomal preparations of
sexual, ascomycetous state,Ajellomycescapsulaus,hasbeen
amphotericin B show promise because of lower toxicity,
described.
which makes possible higher doses. Fluconazole (drug of
Histoplasmins, which are used in immunodiagnosis,
choice) ketoconazole and itraconazole are also used in
are obtained from mycelial culture filtrates. They con-
small animals. Given orally over a period of months, they
tain polysaccharides, with variable admixtures of glycopro-
have affected permanent cures. Toxic effects are relatively
minor except during pregnancy, when fetal deaths may
phases differ in cellular constituents, some of which (e.g.,
occur. The CF titer is used to monitor the effect of treat-
cell wall glucan) have been related to virulence.
ment.
Vaccines are not available.
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
Adhesins. Inhaled microconidia and yeast-phase parasitic
H. capsufatum var. capsufatum
forms are recognized by, and bind to, 3-2 integrins on the
surface of neutrophils and macrophages. It is unknown
H. capsulahum is a dimorphic fungus existing as a mold
what fungal structure is involved. Likewise, an unknown
at 25-30 *C (saprophytic phase) and as a yeast at 37 *C
adhesin is responsible for the adherence of H. capsulatum
(parasitic phase). This fungus has three varieties: H. capsu-
to fibronectin receptors on dendritic cells. Adherence in
latum var. capsulatum, H. capsulatum var. duboisi, and H.
this fashion to neutrophils, macrophages, or dendritic cells 
capsulatum var.farciminosum.Variety farciminosum causes
allows the fungus to enter the cell without triggering an
epizootic lymphangitis (pseudoglanders), a chronic pyo-
effective oxidative burst and the generation of reactive oxy-
granulomatous disease of equine skin and is discussed in
 gen and nitrogen intermediates.
Chapter 46. Varieties capsulatum and duboisii cause histo-
plasmosis, a systemic fungal disease of mammals. Variety
Miscellaneous Products.
H. capsulahum produces a variety
duboisi is found only in Africa, whereas variety capsula
of products that may play a role in histoplasmosis:
fum is found worldwide, and is the most common cause of
histoplasmosis. In this chapter, histoplasmosis is discussed
1.
 Calcium-binding protein: The yeast (parasitic) phase
without regard to this varietal distinction; that is, H. cap-
of H. capsulatum produces a calcium-binding pro-
sulahum var. capsulatum and H. capsulahum var. duboisii are
tein (Cbp) that permits the yeast phase to grow in
regarded as H. capsulatum.
low-calcium environments (the phagolysosome) by
efficiently chelating calcium and delivering it to the
Descriptive Features
fungus. In addition, since Cbp chelates available
calcium within the phagolysosome, this impedes
Morphology. Structure, and Composition. The free-
effectiveness of several calcium-requiring lysosomal
living form of H. capsulatum consists ofseptate hyphae bear-
enzymes. Normal acidifcation of the phagolyso-
ing spherical to pyriform microconidia 2-4 μm in diameter,
some is also a calcium-dependent event. H. capsu-
and “tuberculate" macroconidia, thick-walled spheroidal
laum mutants unable to produce Cbp are avirulent.
cells, 8-14 μm in diameter, studded with fingerlike pro-
2.1
Hantigen: Host immune responses to H-antigen were
jections (Figure 47.2). In animal hosts or appropriate cul-
originally used as a diagnostic toolin the diagnosis of
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
histoplasmosis. Subsequently, H-antigen was found 
Ecology
to be a β-glucosidase that elicited a cell-mediated
Reservoir.
 Although most are concentrated in the Mis-
(protective) immune response to the yeast (parasitic)
sissippi and Ohio River watersheds of North America, H.
phase of H. capsulatum.
capsulatum occurs sporadically worldwide. It is found in
3.
Iron acquisition: Iron is an absolute growth require-
ment for H. capsulahum (as it is for all life forms).
H. capsulatum acquires iron in several ways: pr0-
starlings in North America and chickens in South America)
 and bat guano, which provide both enrichment (nitrogen)
duction of hydroxamate siderophores capable of
and inoculum. Birds are mainly passive carriers, whereas
removing iron from host iron-binding proteins
bats undergo intestinal infectious processes. H. capsulafum
(transferrin and lactoferrin); expression of a hemin-
is favored by neutral to alkaline soil environments with
binding receptor on the surface of yeast (para-
annual rainfall between 35 and 50 inches and mean tem-
sitic) forms; glutathione-dependent ferric reductase,
which reduces Fe(Ill) to Fe(I1), thereby releasing it
peratures between 68 *F and 90 *F.
from host iron-binding proteins; and several poorly
defined iron reductases on the surface of the yeast
Transmission. Transmission is mostly by inhalation of
phase.
M-antigen: Host immune response to M-antigen was
and, rarely, by wound infection.
4.
originally used as a diagnostic tool in the diagno-
sis of histoplasmosis. Subsequently, M-antigen was
Pathogenesis
found to be a catalase enzyme, which played a role in 
the survival of the yeast phase within the phagolyso-
Mechanisms and Pathology. Microconidia, hyphal frag-
some.
ments (from the environment), or yeast cells (from an
Melanin: Melanin is produced by H. capsulahum.
intraphagocytic cell environment) attach to macrophages
Melanin is a free radical scavenger (reducing the tox-
in the lung by way of a β-2 integrin. It is immediately
icity of hydroxy radicals, superoxides, and singlet
phagocytosed, a minimal respiratory burst occurs, and a
oxygen radicals found within the phagolysosome).
phagolysosome results following fusion with lysosomes.
6. Phagolysosome acidification: Normal phagolyso-
Microconidia and hyphal elements differentiate into yeast.
Survival within the phagolysosome is related to modula-
ity of many of the digestive enzymes found in this
tion of phagolysosome pH (around 6.0-6.5), secretion of
environment. H. capsulahum raises the pH of the
M-antigen (a catalase), secretion of Cbp, melanin, and suc-
phagolysosome to 6.0-6.5, thereby reducing the
cessful acquisition of iron from intracellular iron stores.
activity of these lysosomal enzymes. How the fungus
The yeast multiplies within the phagolysosome, ultimately
does this is unknown.
killing the cell and the release of yeast cells which continue
the cycle). Intracellular multiplication continues until an 
effective cell-mediated immune response occurs resulting
Growth Characteristics. H. capsulatum grows on com-
in activated macrophages, which effectively control the
 mon laboratory media over a broad temperature range. The
multiplication of the yeast.
optimum temperature for mycelial growth is 25-30 *C. The
 Early events and lesions resemble those of tuberculosis.
cottony aerial mycelium is white, brown, or intermediate.
Thoracic lymph nodes become enlarged, and lungs may
 Pigmentation parallels abundance of macroconidia. The
 contain grayish-white nodules. The histologic response
yeast phase requires richer media (e.g., glucose cysteine
varies from suppurative to granulomatous inflammation.
blood agar) and temperatures of 34-37 *C. Growth may
Caseation necrosis and calcification are common.
take a week or more before characteristic colonies are seen.
 In disseminated disease, lymph nodes and parenchy-
H. capsulafum survives at ambient temperatures for
matous organs are enlarged and may contain gross nodu-
months and at refrigerator temperature for years. It with-
la1 lesions. There may be ulcerations of skin and mucous
stands freezing and thawing and tolerates heating for more
membranes, abdominal and pleural effusions, and in volve-
than 1 h at 45 *C.
ment of the central nervous system (including eyes),
skin, and bone marrow. The inflammatory exudate con-
Variability.
H. capsulatum exists as three varieties: cap-
sists of macrophage elements colonized by yeast cells
sulatum, duboisii, and farciminosum. Varieties capsulatum
(Figure 47.3).
(worldwide) and duboisii (Africa) produce histoplasmosis,
Disease Patterns.
Histoplasmosis can occurin almost any
(pseudoglanders) of equids (see Chapter 46). Although H.
animal species, but dogs and cats are the most commonly
capsulatum var. capsulatum is found worldwide, its central
affected. Most affected dogs and cats have disseminated
focus is in the Americas. Genetically, variety capsulatum is
disease by the time they present to the veterinarian. A wide
divided into six classes: class 1 and class 2 are found in North
range of nonspecific clinical signs are seen in these patients 
America; class 3 is found in Central and South America;
including depression, fever, lethargy, anorexia, weight
class 4 is found in Florida (North America); and class 5 and
loss, diarrhea, dehydration, and anemia. Hepatomegaly,
class 6 are found in human patients with acquired immun.
splenomegaly, mesenteric lymphadenitis, and ascites may
odeficiency syndrome from New York (North America) and
cause abdominal distention. Coughing is relatively com-
Panama (Central America), respectively.
mon in dogs but not in cats; however, both species often
Chapter 47
Agents of Systemic Mycoses
well as in monocytes in peripheral blood. Fungal stains
FIGURE 47.3.
Rectal scraping from a dog with systemic
(periodic acid Schiff, Gridley, or Gomori methenamine sil-
histoplasmosis.Note the numerous intraphagocytic yeast cells
ver) may be used to aid visualization, but are not routinely
that are round to oval and ~2 μm in diameter (modified
used on cytologic preparations.
Wright's stain, 1000x).
In sections stained with hematoxylin-eosin, H. capsula-
tum appears as tiny dots surrounded by haloes. A duplicate
fungal stain (e.g., periodic acid Schiff, Gridley, or Gomori
methenamine silver) can be helpful.
 Immunofluorescence has been used to identify the yeast
in tissue and exudates.
Culture.
 Specimens are inoculated onto blood agar and
Sabouraud's agar, with and without inhibitors) and incu-
Z 01 dn 1oj aieiaduat wooi je seq jnsed 1o sie! u pateq
months.
Colonial growth may look reddish-wrinkled before the
appearance of cottony brownish to white mycelium.
Microconidia and macroconidia are demonstrated in
lactophenol cotton blue wet mounts. Dimorphism must
plates at 37*Cor by intravenous injection of mice. Mice will
die within a few weeks. Their macrophages will contain the
yeast forms.
exhibit dyspnea and have abnormal lung sounds. Clinical
A commercially available “exoantigen" test kit furnishes
signs resulting from gastrointestinal involvement are very
prepared antisera to Coccidioides, H. capsulatum, and B. der-
 common in affected dogs, but rare in affected cats
matitidis to be tested against extracts of suspect cultures in
Disease patterns in human patients parallel those
an immunodiffusion agar plate, where precipitation lines
described.
develop between extracts and their homologous antisera.
Epidemiology. Subclinical infections with histoplasmo-
Immunodiagnosis. Histoplasmin skin and CF tests using
sis are common in dogs and cats—and humans—in
endemic areas. Clinical disease is most prevalent in dogs
antigens of either mycelial or yeast origins have not been
reliable diagnostic aids in animal in fections. The position of
aged 2-7 years, in early autumn (September to Novem-
the precipitin band in immun odiffusion tests differentiates
ber) and later winter to early spring (February to April).
No sex predilection is reported, but the pointing breeds,
early and recovered human cases (near serum well) from
active and progressive ones (near antigen well). Limited
Weimaraners, and Brittany spaniels have the greatest risk.
 Disseminated histoplasmosis in people, dogs, and cats is
use of these tests on animals has given erratic results.
found in association with immunosuppression.
A radioimmunoassay for antigen detection has been
described.
Immunologic Aspects
Molecular Techniques. Molecular methods used to iden-
Recovery and resistance are governed by cell-mediated
tify or detect H. capsulafum make use of primers for specific
immune responses, while circulating antibodies have n0
sequences contained within the DNA, for example, genes
 apparent protective function. Recovery from histoplasmo-
encoding ribosomal RNA, or those encoding the M protein.
sis appears to confer immunity.
These sequences are amplifed using the polymerase chain
No vaccines are available. However, certain antigens of
reaction. These tests are notused routinely in the diagnostic
H. capsulatum appear to protect mice against experimental
laboratory.
challenge.
Treatment and Control
Laboratory Diagnosis
Azoles (ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole) and
Direct Examination.
Blood films, buffy coat smears and
amphotericin B have been used successfully in the treat-
cytologic preparations such as aspirates, and tissue impres-
ment of some cases of canine and feline histoplasmosis.
sions are stained with a Romanowsky-type (e.g., Giemsa
The duration of treatment is variable depending on
01 Wright's) and examined for intraphagocytic yeast cells
the severity of the infection and the patient's response.
-xoidde pue (padeus 1esi jou) lao on punoi aie ye
Response to therapy is monitored by frequent evaluation
for resolution of clinical signs and radiographic lesions
to half the size of a RBC) (Figure 47.3). The yeasts stain
and abnormalities in hematologic and biochemical pro-
light blue and have a pink to purple-staining, eccentrically
files. When treatment is not continued for the appropriate
placed nucleus. Organisms are observed primarily within
length of time (at least 4-6 months), relapses are common.
macrophages, but may also be seen within neutrophils, as
The prognosis for disseminated cases is guarded to grave.
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
 Applications of formalin (3%) or phenol (5%) seem to
develop on blood agar at 37 *C. They are opaque off-white
help control the fungus in the environment. Elimination of
 to tan, with rough surface and a pasty consistency.
 starling and pigeon roots may also help control the fungus.
Variability. The two recognized serotypes are related to
B. dermatitidis
geographic origin of the strains. Similar geographic rela-
tionships are seen when polymerase chain reaction-based
fingerprinting systems are used.
B. dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus existing as a mold in
the soil (saprophytic stage) and as a yeast in tissue (par-
asitic stage). It causes the systemic fungal disease called
Ecology
"blastomycosis,” which occurs mostcommonly in the east-
Reservoir.
 Soil is believed to be the reservoir for Blasto-
ern third of North America. Cases of the disease arise
myces. Moisture, low pH, animal wastes, and decaying veg-
sporadically in Africa, Asia, and Europe. People and dogs
 etation appear to favor colonization. Humidity promotes
are the species most frequently affected by blastomyco-
release of conidia.
sis. However, the disease has been reported in many ani-
mals including horses, cats, ferrets, and numerous wildlife
Transmission.
 Blastomycosis most commonly begins by
species.
inhalation of microconidia. Percutaneous infection proba-
bly occurs in dogs with organisms entering tissue via trau-
Descriptive Features
 matic inoculation, but generally, solitary lesions should be
considered part of a systemic disease.
Morphology, Structure, and Composition. In the sapro-
phytic phase (in soil or on artificial media at 25-30 *C),
the hyphae of B. dermatitidis produce conidiophores with
Pathogenesis
spherical or oval smooth-walled conidia, 2-10 μm in diam-
Microconidia or hyphal fragments are inhaled and con-
eter. In tissue or on blood agar at 37 *C, the agent is a
vert to the yeast form within the alveolar spaces of the
thick-walled yeast, 5-20 μm in diameter, that reproduces
       s 
by single buds attached by a broad base. The fungus has a
lowed by uptake (with minimal respiratory burst) by
sexual form Ajellomyces dermatitidis.
phagocytic cells. Downregulation of tumor necrosis fac-
 Cell wall extracts contain 3-10 parts of polysaccharide
tor production by affected macrophages delays stimula-
to 1 part ofprotein. Protein is highest in the mycelial phase,
tion of cell-mediated immunity (which is necessary to kill
while chitin is highest in the yeast phase. The lipid content
the yeast). In dogs, an inflammatory response involving
of B. dermatitidis is higher than in other fungi. Lipid, pro-
macrophages and neutrophils and resulting in pyogranu-
tein, and chitin levels vary directly with virulence.
lomatous lesions occurs in the terminal bronchioles, fol-
lowed by similar reactions in satellite lymph nodes. Blasto-
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
mycosis is more often progressive than histoplasmosis and
Adhesin.  The yeast phase of B. dermatitidis produces a pro-
coccidioidomycosis. Dissemination is believed to occur via
tein adhesin termed Bad1 (for Blastomyces adhesin 1), for-
vascular and lymphatic routes. Preferred sites in the dog are
mally called Wl-1. Bad1 has two functions related to viru-
the lymph nodes, skin, bones, bone marrow, eyes, subcu-
lence ofthe fungus: (1) Bad1 adheres to β-2 integrins on the
taneous tissue, brain, testes, and external nares. Less com-
surface of phagocytic cells, triggering uptake of the yeast,
mon sites of dissemination are mammary glands, prostate,
invoking a minimal respiratory burst, resulting in little gen-
liver, heart, mouth, vulva, and urogenital tract. Although
(   e   
organisms usually enter the body via the lungs, occasion-
Bad1 downregulates the production of proinflammatory
ally lung lesions have resolved by the time the animal is
cytokines (particularly tumor necrosis factor) by affected
presented to the veterinarian. The nodular lesions can be
macrophages. The amino acid sequence of Bad1 is homol-
tubercle-like, with mononuclear cell types predominating,
aas nusian Aq paonid uod uoisaui a on snoso
01 there may be numerous neutrophils admixed. Liquefac-
Chapter 10). B. dermatitidis mutants that do not produce
 tion and caseation occur, but calcification and encapsula
Bad1 are avirulent.
tion are exceptional.
Signs include skin lesions and respiratory distress
Miscellaneous Products. B. dematitidis produces a variety
with fever, depression, anorexia, and weight loss. Loco-
of extracellular enzymes and products that may be involved
motor disturbances result from bone or joint infection
with disease production. These include proteases, phos-
O1—rarely—central nervous system involvement. Ocular
phatases, esterases, and glycosidases. Culture filtrates are
disease is common in disseminated blastomycosis. Most
leukotactic for human neutrophils. Therole played by these
dogs with multiple organ system involvement die within
 products in the production of disease is unknown.
months. Evidence for a benign form is uncertain . Although
much less common, the disease in cats resembles that in
Growth Characteristics. B. dermatitidis grows on most
dogs.
 media at room temperature and 37 *C. Colonies develop
from within 2 to over 7 days. Mold colonies, formed at
 si  n  n  i
ambient temperatures (25-30 *C), are cottony white to tan
spring to fall. Male dogs less than 4 years of age are most
depending on the abundance of conidia. Yeast colonies
often affected. In general, large breed dogs are more
Chapter 47
Agents of Systemic Mycoses
often affected than small breed dogs. No sex, age, 0r
breed predisposition has been identified in cats. Although
FIGURE 47.5.
Exudate from the center ofa necrotic
generally noncontagious, one human infection resulted
lymph node from a dog with blastomycosis. Note the dark
from a dog bite.
staining B. dermatitidis yeasts characterized by the thick,
double-contoured cell wall(arrow) (modified Wright's stain,
1000x).
Immunologic Aspects
Impaired  cell-mediated  responsiveness  may  explain
canine-disseminated blastomycosis.
Humoral and cell-mediated responses occur as a result 
of infection. Cell-mediated immunity is decisive in
determining resistance. Artificial immunization is not
available.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Direct Examination. B. dermatitidis can be demonstrated
in wet mounts of exudates and tissue smears as thick-walled
yeast cells with single buds attached bya broad base. In sec-
tion, intracellular yeasts may be found. Cytologic prepara-
tions, such as aspirates, and tissue impressions are stained
with a Romanowsky-type (e.g., Giemsa or Wright's) and
        
in diameter, have a thick, retractile, double-contoured cell
wall (Figure 47.4 and 47.5). Broad-based budding of organ-
 In sections stained with hematoxylin-eosin, B. dermafi-
fidis appears as thick-walled yeast cells with single buds
isms may be seen in some preparations; however, most
attached by a broad base. A duplicate fungal stain (e.g.,
organisms are singular. Blastomyces organisms are differ-
periodic acid Schiff, Gridley, or Gomori methenamine sil.
entiated from Cryptococcus species by their lack of a clear
ver) can be helpful.
capsule, their deeply basophilic cell wall, and by the pres-
ence of broad-based budding. Fungal stain (periodic acid
Culture. Cultures on Sabouraud's agar (with or without
Schiff, Gridley, or Gomori methenamine silver) can also
inhibitors) are incubated at ambient temperature (25-
be applied to aid visualization of the organisms but is not
30 *C) for up to 3 weeks. It is difficult to obtain the yeast
routinely done on cytology.
form on primary isolation, but itis relatively easy to convert 
the mold to the yeast phase by increasing the temperature
to 37 *C.
A commercially available “exoantigen" test kit furnishes
FIGURE 47.4.
B. dermatitidis. Yeast phase, skin scraping
of dog (hematoxylin-eosin stain, budding yeast cell, 1000x).
prepared antisera to Coccidioides, H. capsulatum, and B. der-
matifidis to be tested against extracts of suspect cultures in
an immunodiffusion agar plate, where precipitation lines 
develop between extracts and their homologous antisera.
Immunodiagnosis.
 Blastomycin skin and CF tests lack
acceptable sensitivity and specificity. The commercially
available agar gel double diffusion test (making use of
antigens composed of a cell wall autolysate called “anti-
'(%l6) aisuas pue (996) yyoads a 0n sieadde (y uas
but titers remain after successful treatment. Antibodies to
Bad1 detected by various means (e.g, radioimmunoas-
say) increase during disease, and decline with success-
ful treatment, making detection of antibodies with speci-
ficity to Badl more useful clinically. An enzyme-linked
 gen has been effective in diagnosis of blastomycosis.
Molecular Methods. Molecular methods used to identify
01 detect B. dermatitidis make use of primers for specific
sequences contained within DNAencoding ribosomal RNA
(e.g, 28S RNA; the internally transeribed spacer region).
These sequences are amplified using the polymerase chain
reaction.
340
PART II
Bacteria and Fungi
Treatment and Control
Cell Wall.  The cell wall ofAspergillus displays a "pathogen-
associated molecular pattern" that is recognized by Toll-
Blastomycosis responds to amphotericin B and ketocona-
like receptors (see Chapter 2) on the surface of host
zole (or both together), and toitraconazole (drug of choice).
macrophages. Binding to these receptors leads to the secre-
Fluconazole is moderately effective. Precaution must be
tion of proinflammatory cytokines.
taken to avoid exposure when handling animals or tis-
sues suspected ofblastomycosis; even though transmission
Extracellular Enzymes. Aspergillus produces a number of
from animals to humans is extremely rare.
enzymes that have the potential to function in vivo to break
down host tissue. These include elastase, proteases, and
Aspergillus spp.
phospholipases. In addition, members of this genus pro-
duce catalases that reduce the effectiveness of peroxides
generated by phagocytic cells.
Members of the genus Aspergillus are ubiquitous sapro-
phytic molds with opportunistic pathogenic patterns that
Iron Acquisition. Aspergillus produces several hydroxam-
depend on impaired, overwhelmed, or bypassed host
ate siderophores (a ferrichrome and a fusarinine) needed to
defenses. Of some 900 species, Aspergillus fumigafus is most
acquire iron from host iron-binding proteins (transferrin
frequent in animal and human infections.
and lactoferrin).
Descriptive Features
Pigment (Melanin). Conidia of Aspergillus are pigmented.
The pigment, melanin, is a free radical scavenger (reducing
Morphology and Composition. Aspergillus spp. are molds
the toxicity of hydroxy radicals, superoxides, and singlet
consisting of septate hyphae and characteristic asexual
 oxygen radicals found within the phagolysosome).
fruiting structures that are borne on conidiophores. Coni-
  e   s p  s
Growth Characteristics. Aspergilli grow on all common
in the vegetative mycelium and ending in an expanded
laboratory media over a wide range of temperatures (up to
vesicle. The vesicle is covered by a layer or layers of flask-
 50 *C). Their biochemical activities have not been clearly
shaped phialides, from which chains of pigmented conidia
related to virulence or utilized diagnostically.
(the asexual reproductive units) arise (Figure 47.6). They
Aspergilli thrive in the en vironment. Some are highly
give the fungal colony its color.
resistant to heat and drying. Most do not grow in
 In tissue, only hyphae are seen. In aerated cavities (e.g.,
cycloheximide-containing fungal media.
 nasal passages, air sacs, and cavitary lesions), fruiting struc-
tures may be found.
Ecology
Fruiting bodies are important diagnostic features of
Reservoir.
 Aspergilli are present in soil, vegetation, feed,
and secondarily in air and water and objects exposed to
Cellular Products of Medical Interest
them. A. fumigatus becomes predominant over competing
microbiota in fermented plant material (e.g., hay, silage,
Adhesins. Members of the genus Aspergillus produce a
and compost). Animal disease outbreaks are often traced to
number of surface proteins (conidial and hyphal) that bind 
such sources.
to extracellular matrix proteins (collagen, fibronectin, fib-
rinogen, and laminin).
Transmission. Aspergillosis is acquired from environ-
mental sources, generally by inhalation or ingestion. Most
Aspergillus mastitis follows intramammary inoculation.
Intrauterine in fections in cattle result from dissemination
FIGURE 47.6.
A. fumigatus. Lactophenol cotton blue
of subclinical lung or intestinal in fections.
mount from Sabouraud's dextrose agar culture, 400x.
Pathogenesis
Mechanism.
 Following their deposition in tissue or on a
surface (adhesins hinder removal), recognition (by way of
cells triggers an inflammatory response. Inflammation,
along with release of fungal elastase, proteases, and phos-
pholipases, results in tissue damage. Pigment and catalase
delay destruction by phagocytic cells.
Allergenic factors, which are recognized in human
 aspergilloses, are insufficiently documented in animal dis-
ease.
 Pathology. In pulmonary infection, suppurative exudate
accumulates in bronchioles and adjacent parenchyma. It
Chapter 47
 Agents of Systemic Mycoses
341
surrounds colonies of mycelial growth, which may extend
Aspergillus terreus and Aspergillus deflectus cause dissem-
into blood vessels and produce infected thrombi and vas-
culitis, leading to dissemination. Infection may also spread
herd dogs. Osteomyelitis is a common feature.
directly into adjacent air spaces. Granulomas develop; they
 Intestinal aspergillosis presenting as diarrhea has been
are grossly visible as grayish white nodules and consist of
reported in cats.
mononuclear cells and fibroblasts. In older lesions, colonies
are fringed by acidophilic clubs (asteroid bodies), which
Horses. Aspergillus infection of the cornea is the leading
resemble actinomycosis (see Figure 37.2).
cause of keratomycosis.
Lesions in avian lungs are caseous nodules. On serous
membranes, caseous foci are covered by macroscopic mold
sis of the equine guttural pouch. Intestinal aspergillosis
colonies, accompanied by thickening of the membranes
may cause diarrhea in foals.
(e.g., air sacs). The cellular response is acute suppurative to
chronic granulomatous.
Human Beings.
s o Ad e aa ino dds smds
Bovine abortion results from hematogenous seeding of
ondary pathogen in humans, depending on the immune
placentomes, which is possibly a response to a growth fac-
status of the individual. Tissues involved include lungs,
tor in placental tissue. There is hyphal invasion of blood
bones, sinuses, ear skin, and meninges.
placentitis. The fetus undergoes disseminated infection
Miscellaneous Species. Infrequent infections involving
with signs of emaciation and dehydration. Lymph nodes,
viscera, and brain may be involved. Ringworm-like plaques
the lungs occur in other animals as well.
on the fetal skin are often seen.
On mucosal surfaces (e.g., nasal passage and trachea),
Epidemiology.  Intensity of exposure is a significant fea-
 mold colonies form on top of necrotic tissue, which is sur-
ture in animal aspergillosis. Bovine abortion outbreaks are
rounded by a hemorrhagic zone.
often related to moldy fodder. Aspergillosis in chicken
flocks commonly coincides with the use of heavily con-
taminated litter.
Disease Patterns. Pulmonary and disseminated infec-
 Stress aspects are usually recognizable in outbreaks.
tions, frequently in volving kidneys and the central nervous
Avian aspergillosis is seen under conditions of poor hus-
system, occur in most species.
bandry. In oiled seabirds, there is severely impaired thermal
regulation. In pregnant cattle, ad vanced gestation com-
bined with low-quality feed and poor weather and housing
Avian. Avian aspergillosis, which affects many species of
add up to severe challenge.
birds, sometimes in epidemics, reflects heavy exposure or
Canine nasal aspergillosis occurs especially in young
severe stress on domestic flocks or pet bird operations,
dogs of dolichocephalic breeds.
or the effects of oil spills on marine birds. The disease
Some T-lymphocyte deficiency may exist.
is usually a respiratory tract infection, sometimes with
 In keratomycosis of horses, the frequent history of top-
hematogenous dissemination. The disease is also called
ical antibacterial and steroid treatment suggests immuno-
"brooder pneumonia" in chicks and poults. The young bird
suppression and impaired colonization resistance.
acquires the disease by inhaling a massive dose of spores
in the brooder. Signs are inappetence, listlessness, weight
loss, dyspnea, sometimes diarrhea, and abnormal behav-
Immunologic Aspects
ior and posture. The eyes are often affected. Mortality may
Circulating antibody with no demonstrably protective role
approach 50%, especially in young birds. In mild cases, only
-  de   s n nd  
gasping and hyperpnea may be seen. The course varies from
tion “Treatment, Control, and Prevention"). Cell-mediated 
a day to several weeks.
immunity is believed to be the major factor in limiting the
dissemination of infection.
Ruminant. Bovine abortions usually occur late in preg-
 Immunization procedures are not available.
nancy and resemble abortions due to other causes. Fetal
skin plaques occur also in other mycotic abortions.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Mastitis due to A. fumigatus is reported at an increased
Direct Examination. Hyphae, fruiting heads, and coni-
rate, especially from Europe. It is usually chronic progres-
sive, producing abscesses in the udder. Occasionally it
dia can often be demonstrated in samples either in wet
causes diarrhea in calves.
mounts in 10% KOH or with calcofluor white. For fixed-
stained smears, fungal stains (periodic acid Schiff, Gridley,
01 Gomori methenamine silver) are best; Romanowsky-
Dogs and Cats. Aspergillosis of mucous membranes occurs
type stains (e.g., Wright's and Giemsa) are satisfactory, and
commonly in dogs, rarely in cats, in nasal passages or
Gram stains are of limited use. Septate branching hyphae
paranasal sinuses. It is manifested by sneezing and unilat-
constitute strong evidence of aspergillosis. Other fungi
eral or bilateral persistent nasal discharge that is unrespon-
(Penicillium, Pseudallescheria, and Paecilomyces) present a
sive to medical treatment. Purulent nasal discharge may be
similar picture but rare. Conidia may occur in air passages 
seen due to secondary bacterial infection.
Or other exposed sites in the absence of infection.
342
PART Il Bacteria and Fungi
 In stained cytologic preparations and tissue sections,
ing various viscera and the central nervous system. They
septate hyphae dividing dichotomously at acute angles are
are secondary to stress, such as dietary changes and inade-
the only structures seen.
quacies, antibiotic suppression of the gastrointestinal flora,
concurrent infections, recent parturition, or trauma. Sev.
Isolation and Identification. Aspergillus is readily cul-
      s  s 
tured. Because it is a ubiquitous contaminant, interpreta-
reported in humans and nonhuman primates. These agents
tion of positive cultures is often problematic. Presence of
grow rapidly on Sabouraud's agar at room temperature.
the agent must always be correlated with pathologic and
Amphotericin B is the preferred drug for treatment in both
clinical findings. Identification of agents rests upon mor-
animals and humans.
phologic features and growth characteristics of isolates.
Paecilomyces spp. are associated with disseminated
canine, and feline paecilomycosis with bone involvement
Immunodiagnosis. Serologic tests are useful adjuncts to
and a respiratory epidemic in captive turtles have been
the diagnosis of aspergillosis. Because the tests that are
reported. Conidiobolus spp. and Basidiobotus spp. cause
available are species specific, it is necessary to know which
nasal granulomas and subcutaneous infections in horses,
Aspergillus to expect. For example, A. fiumigafus is most com-
mules, dogs, sheep, nonhuman primates, and humans.
monly seen in nasal aspergillosis of dogs, whereas dissemi
Agents are identified by direct examination of clinical sam-
nated aspergillosis in that species is either A. deflectus or A.
ples and by cultural techniques. Considerable expertise is
terreus. An immunodiffusion kit is commercially available
needed for species identification in the laboratory. Ampho.
for detection of antibodies to A. fumigatus. An enzyme-
tericin B is the drug of choice. Other agents such as flucona
linked immunosorbent assay and a counterimmunoelec.
zole and 5-flurocytosine are also effective. Diplorhinotricum
trophoresis test are also available for the serodiagnosis of
gallopavum causes dactylariosis in turkeys and chickens. It
aspergillosis in humans.
is a central nervous system disease with high morbidity and
approximately 20% mortality. Treatment is not practical,
Molecular Methods. Primers designed to amplify DNA
but good sanitation of the poultry house and the hatchery
- ,     
is essential for control of this disease.
scribed spacer" region) are available for demonstration 0r
identification of members of the genus. Amplification of
 DNA is by the polymerase chain reaction.
Pneumocystis
Members of the genus Pneumocystis are fungi capable of
Treatment, Control, and Prevention
causing pneumonia in immunocompromised individu-
The nasal form in dogs is treated topically with instillation
als. They have only been isolated from affected hosts
of clotrimazole or enilconazole into the nasal passages and
(e.g, humans, dogs, cats, horses, pigs, goats, ferets, mice,
sinuses. Itraconazole (given orally) has been successfully
rats, chimpanzees, and monkeys). At present there are
used to treat nasal aspergillosis when topical treatment is
two species: jiroveci (affecting human patients) and carinii
not possible.
(affecting all the rest). The taxonomy of members of the
 Itraconazole has been beneficial in treating dissemi-
genus Pneumocystis is still not clear and needs further stud-
nated aspergillosis.
ies. Pneumocystis carinii is composed of at least 30 varieties
There is no established treatment for mammary
O1 "special forms,” with each “special form" affecting a par-
aspergillosis.
ticular host. For example, P. carinii f. sp. raffi affects rats,
For intestinal infections in pigs, foals, and calves, oral
while P. carinii f. sp. muris, only mice. Thus, Pneumocys-
nystatin is recommended.
fis is a host-specific fungus, which is contagious between
Keratomycosis is treated topically with antimycotic
members of the same species but is not zoonotic.
ointments and solutions.
Spread is by way of aerosol. Affected hosts are usu-
 Avoidance of massive exposure requires elimination of
 ally immunocompromised, though there are reports of
cattle feed, particularly hay and silage that has undergone
healthy animals (with no evidence of immunosuppression 
noticeable deterioration. A fumigatus only reaches high
 0r underlying condition) developing pneumocystis pneu-
concentrations under conditions of "biologic heat" gen-
monia when housed with known infected animals.
 eration, after other microbiota are eliminated. With poul-
The fungus has not been grown in a cell-free culture
  o s hn  s d  
system. Diagnosis is made by examination of material
 prevent such buildup.
from the alveolar spaces, which is usually concentrated 
by cytocentrifugation and stained with Romanowsky-type
stains (e.g., Giemsa or Wright's). On these cytologic prepa-
Other Saprophytic/Opportunistic Fungal
rations, intracellular (within alveolar macrophages) and
Pathogens
extracellular round-shaped cysts (approximately 4-7 μm
in diameter) that contain four to eight basophilic bod-
Rhizopus spp., Rhizomucor spp, Absidia spp, Mucor spp,
ies arranged in a circle are observed. Numerous ovoid to
and Mortierella spp. cause mycotic bovine abortion, gas-
trointestinal infections, marked by ulcerative lesions and
also typically seen. Silver stain (e.g., Gomori methenamine
mesenteric lymphadenitis, in ruminants, swine, and dogs,
silver) can also be used to aid visualization of the organism.
as well as respiratory and hematogen ous infections affect
DNA primers have also been designed to amplify specific
Chapter 47
7 Agents of Systemic Mycoses
343
segments of the fungal genome, so that detection and iden
system involvement and eye lesions are frequent. In cats
tification is possible using the polymerase chain reaction.
and humans, cases to date have been cutaneous. Immun-
Treatment includes one or more of the follow-
odeficiency is suspected. In cattle, chronic progressive mas-
ing: trimethoprim-sulfonamides, carbutamide, dapsone,
titis develops. Tissue reactions are pyogranulomatous.
atovaquone, pentamidine, clindamycin, or trimetrex-
The agent is easily cultured and can be demonstrated
ate/leucovorin.
in unstained wet mounts from specimens or in fixed
smears stained with a Romanowsky-type (Wright's 0r
Giemsa) or fungal (periodic acid Schiff, Gridley, or Gomori 
Protothecosis
methenamine silver) stain.
Amphotericin B and ketoconazole are used in humans.
Prototheca is an alga lacking chlorophyll. It multiplies
The agents are susceptible to the aminoglycosides in vitro.
by endosporulation, producing roughly spherical cells
Treatment of animals has not been effective, although lipo-
that are 8-25 μm in diameter. Prototheca zopfi and Pro-
somal formulations of amphotericin B show promise.
Auxenochlorella)are occasionally pathogenic. They grow on
fungal media (without cycloheximide) at 25 *C and 37 *C,
respectively, into white to tannish dull colonies in less than
Further Reading
a week and are differentiated serologically and by carbohy-
drate assimilation tests.
Greene CE (2006)Infectious Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat, 3rd edn,
Elsevier Saunders.
ingestion, percutaneously, or, in dairy cows, by intramam-
Raskin R and Meyer D (2009) Canine and Feline Cytology: A
mary injection.
Color Aflas and Interpretation Guide, 2nd edn, W.B. Elsevier
Disease occurs in dogs, cats, cattle, deer, bats, snakes,
Saunders Company.
fish, and humans. In dogs, it is usually disseminated and
Songer JG and Post KW (2005) Veterinary Microbiology: Bacterial
accompanied by hemorrhagic diarrhea. Central nervous
and Fungal Agents of Animal Diseases, Elsevier Saunders.
PART III
Viruses
Pathogenesis of
Viral Diseases
MELISSA KENNEDY
Pathogenesis can be defined as the process(es) by which a
There are several major routes of viral entry into a
virus produces disease in the host. The term “virulence" is
host: the respiratory, alimentary, and urogenital routes
used to describe the degree of pathogenicity of a virus—-a
and direct transmission (such as by an insect or animal
virulent virus being the one that results in a significant dis-
bite). Successful establishment of viral infection depends
ease. The pathogenesis of viral infections is a multifactor
on the presence of appropriate cell receptors and theph ysic.
process and involves both the status of the host and prop-
ochemical nature of the viral agent. In order to success-
erties of the infecting virus. The outcome of viral infection
fully initiate infection in the host, the virus must be able
(i.e., the severity of disease or death) is, therefore, deter-
to survive until a susceptible host is encountered and gain
mined by the virulence of virus and susceptibility of the
access to cells/tissues in which it can replicate (permissive
host. Susceptibility of a host to a viral infection is deter-
cells). This requires the virus to overcome the host's defense
mined by many factors including the genetic background
mechanisms at these sites. For example, viruses that infect
of the host, species of the host animal affected, level of
animals through the alimentary tract are typically resistant
immunity, immune competency of the host, nutritional
to the low pH and potent enzymes that occur in the diges-
status, age, and presence of concurrent infection(s). Some
tive tract.
of the viral virulence-related properties include production
of cytotoxic effects by the virus (direct or indirect), replica-
tion strategies, tissue tropism, dose of the infecting virus,
Modes of Dissemination of Viruses within the Hosts
and route of exposure. The host-virus interaction, as deter-
Viruses cause two basic patterns of infection: localized and
mined by these factors, can be examined at the cellular level
generalized (Figure 48.1). In localized infections, viral mul-
and at the level of the host animal. The former relates to the
tiplication and cellular damage remain localized near the
ability of a virus to infect and replicate in a cell and effects
site of entry (e.g., the skin or the mucous membranes of
of virus replication on that cell, while the latter is related to
the respiratory, gastrointestinal, or genital tract), so that
the cumulative effects of cellular infection on the animal
the infecting virus spreads only to neighboring cells imme-
host. Thus, what is seen at the host level is a reflection of
diately adjacent to the original site of infection. For exam-
the cellular effects of the virus.
ple, rhinovirus infections of animals are often restricted to
the nasal epithelium and do not even spread to the lower
respiratory tract. Other respiratory viruses, such as parain-
Virus-Host Relationships
fluenza and respiratory syncytial viruses, replicate within
the lungs of infected animals, but tissue injury induced
The outcome of any virus-host interaction can differ,
by these viruses typically remains restricted to the respi-
       
ratory tract. Generalized infections develop through sev-
tions, species of the animal host, route of exposure, mode
eral sequential steps: (1) the virus undergoes primary repli-
of virus dissemination, and host resistance. Most virus-
cation at the site of entry and in regional lymph nodes,
infected animals that present to veterinarians do so because
(aa Aed) poonq qon sperds sna Auod (z)
they exhibit clinical signs of their infection. However, it
and lymphatics to additional tissues, where (3) further virus
is very important to recognize that microbial infections
replication takes place, (4) the virus is disseminated to the
of animals often do not result in clinical disease. In fact,
other target organs via a secondary viremia, and (5) it mul-
the majority of virus-animal interactions result in asymp-
tiplies further in these target tissues where it causes cellu-
tomatic or subclinical infection, and viruses, however viru-
 lar degeneration and/or necrosis, tissue injury, and clinical 
lent, will not infect animals that are resistant to them. The
disease.
 The incubation period is the asymptomatic period after
shown in Table 48.1.
infection and prior to expression of clinical disease. In
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
347
348
PART III
Viruses
Table 48.1.
Potential Consequences of Virus-Animal
associate with red blood cells of the infected host. The dis-
Relationships
 semination of virus to the central nervous system can occur
by viremia or, in the case of rabies, by transmission along
1. Animal is resistant to viral infection-no relationship established 
peripheral nerves.
 2. Asymptomaic or subclinical infection-recovery or persistent infection
3. Acute viral infection-death, recovery, or persistent infection
 4. Chronic viral infection-recurrent clinical disease, or persistent infection
 5. Tumor formation 
Viral Tropism
The restriction of viral infection and/or replication to cer-
tain cells or tissues is referred to as tropism. Some viruses
 generalized viral infections, overt disease begins only after 
 of cell types, organs, and even host species. Pseudorabies
the virus becomes widely disseminated in the body and
virus, a herpesvirus, can infect the respiratory tract, cen-
has attained maximum titers. It is at this stage of the infec-
tral nervous system, and fetus in swine. In addition, this
tion that the veterinarian is usually first alerted. Canine
virus causes fatal infection in most mammals except pri-
distemper illustrates a generalized viral infection of ani-
mates. The virus of malignant catarrhal fever, also a her-
mals. The canine distemper virus initiates the infection at
pesvirus, infects only a subpopulation of T-lymphocytes in
the site of entry, but then disseminates through the blood
some ruminant species, including cattle and wildebeests.
or the lymphatic system to produce generalized infection
Viral tropism is integral to understanding the disease that
with involvement of a variety of target organs (Figure 48.2).
results from infection with a particular virus.
The sequence of events during the incubation period and
 The tropism of a virus, though it manifests at the host
development of signs of disease in experimental canine dis-
level, is largely determined at the cellular level. The pres-
temper infections indicate that the different clinical signs
ence or absence of certain cellular factors governs whether
that occur in individual animals depend on which of the
various organ systems are infected by the virus. The virus is
cell. The cell must express an appropriate cellular recep-
disseminated to these organs during viremia, which may be
tor for virus attachment, the first step in virus replication.
characterized by the presence of free virus particles in the
Viruses exploit these normal cell surface molecules to enter
blood or, as with the canine distemper virus, blood cells
 the cell. A particular cell surface molecule/receptor may be
can also serve as carriers to disseminate the virus to target
utilized by more than one virus. Conversely, a virus may be
organs (cell-associated viremia). Cell-associated viremias
able to utilize multiple cellular receptors for attachment.
typically involve blood leukocytes, but some viruses, such
The expression of appropriate cell receptor is a major fac-
as bluetongue virus, hog cholera virus, or parvovirus, can
tor in determining the susceptibility of cells to a specific
FIGURE 48.1.
Modes of viral dissemination within the host.
Virus
Disease
(e.g., rhinovirus)
?
Disease
Target organs
Peripheralnerve
(e.g..
(e.g.,rabies)
parainfluenza
type 3)
Disease
(primaryviremia)
central
nervous system
Targetorgans
→Blood
(e.g.,canine distemper)
(secondaryviremia)
Disease
(e.g.,feline
panleukopenia)
Chapter 48 Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
349
FIGURE 48.2.
Pathogenesis of canine distemper viral infection in dogs.
Day
0
Exposed toviral aerosol.
1
Macrophages in bronchial lymph nodes and tonsils: multiplication.
2
3
Lymph nodes,parenchymal organs,eyelid,leukocytes:multiplication.
4
5
6
Bloodstream: viremia.
7
8
Lymph nodes, parenchymal organs, footpad, leukocytes, alimentary tract, urogenital tract, conjunctiva, eyelid
respiratory tract:multiplication.
9
10
Most dogs with serum neutralizing antibody titer 1:100or greaterrecover andvirus disappears.
Dogs with antibody titer 1:10 or less, virus in various tissues including CNS (meninges, cerebellum, cerebrum,
brain stem, spinal cord).
60
virus. In order for a virus to complete its replicative cycle
The severity of the outcome of a viral disease in an ani-
after entry into a cell, the cell must provide certain factors.
  (    n 
The absence of these factors prevents production of infec-
of organs that do not tolerate even minimal tissue dam-
tious progeny by the virus. The cellular factors required
age, such as the nervous tissue, can be life-threatening. In
by viruses vary. Some of these cellular factors are available
other tissues, particularly those that are capable of regener-
only during certain stages of cell growth cycle. For exam-
ation such as the intestine, the infection may result in mild
ple, parvoviruses require cellular DNA polymerase for syn-
O1 short-lived, self-limiting disease. In pregnant animals,
thesis of their genome. This enzyme is expressed in abun-
viruses that may cause little disease in adult animals may
dance in actively dividing cells (i.e., cells in S phase of their
be lethal to the gestating fetus.
growth cycle). Thus, parvoviruses replicate in cells with
Viral infections that occur without producing overt dis-
high mitotic index, such as hemopoietic cells in the bone
ease are very common and are potentially important in the
marrow and intestinal crypt cells where the cell turnover
dissemination of viruses. Significantly, inapparent infec-
rate is very high. Viruses that infect cells of the immune
ns   d  n s
system are especially dependent upon the stage of differen-
challenge with virulent strains of the same agent. Several
tiation ofthe cell. Activated lymphocytes and macrophages
factors are involved in producing inapparent infections:
(1) the nature of the virus (e.g., virulent or attenuated
tion than resting cells, though the mechanisms are unclear.
strains), (2) degree of host immunity, (3) appearance of
The progeny of papillomaviruses is produced only in the
viral interference, and (4) failure of the virus to reach the
differentiated keratinocytes.
target organ (e.g., due to the blood-brain barrier).
Local environmental factors can also determine the tis-
sue tropism for a given virus. These include temperature
and pH. Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) prefers temperatures
Host Responses to Viral Infections
 of 33-35 *C for replication—temperature of the upper res-
piratory tract. Thus, FHV-1 is associated with disease of the
The resistance of animals to viral infection is dependent in
upper respiratory tract, rhinotracheitis. The enteroviruses
 part on factors that act indiscriminately on most viruses
of the family Picornaviridae are quite resistant to acidic pH
and are therefore called nonspecific or innate resistance 
and can survive transit through the stomach to the intes-
factors. These include anatomical barriers, physiologic
tine, the target organ. Rhinoviruses, which are also mem-
conditions (e.g., pH and temperature), hormonal factors,
bers of the Picornaviridae, are degraded by the acidic pH of
inhibitors otherthan antibodies, and phagocytes. Phagocy-
the stomach and therefore remain confined to the upper
tosis is an important defense mechanism in bacterial in fec-
respiratory tract.
 tions. However, many viral agents are capable of infecting
350
PART III
Viruses
lymphocytes and/or monocytes/macrophages, and thus
2-5A. In turn, 2-5A activates a specific endonuclease that
these cells can actually serve as a vehicle to spread the virus
degrades viral and cellular RNA and so inhibits protein
through the host.
synthesis.
 Besides its action on virus replication, interferon exerts
other effects on cells, including effects on cell multiplica-
Interferon
tion and regulation of such cellular functions as phagocyto-
 sis, production of antibodies and lymphokines by lympho-
cytes, expression of cell surface antigens, and cytotoxicity
An important component of viral defense is the pro-
of cellular immunity. Interferon plays an important role in
duction and secretion of interferon. Interferons are a
host resistance to viral infection.
group of cell proteins (cytokines) that can modulate the
immune system, regulate the differentiation of certain
cells, confer antiviral resistance on sensitive cells, and exert
 anticancer effects. Many viruses will induce interferon syn-
Humoral and Cellular Immunity
thesis in infected cells, and many cell types have the abil-
 ity to synthesize interferon after appropriate stimulation.
Viruses are antigenic and typically induce a strong spe-
 At least three different types of interferon can be pro-
cific immune response after infection. Humoral immune
duced in the course of a viral infection: α, β, and y. Two
responses involve the production of antibodies that can be
distinct mechanisms have been identified in interferon-
 demonstrated by the usual serologic procedures, such as
treated cells (Figure 48.3). The first involves the produc-
complement fixation, agglutination, precipitation, and gel
tion in interferon-treated cells of a protein kinase (P1/elF2α
diffusion techniques. Antibodies, when bound to a virus
kinase), which, in the presence of double-stranded RNA,
 01 viral protein, mediate several antiviral events, including
blocks initiation of protein synthesis by phosphorylat-
viral neutralization, virus agglutination, activation of com-
ing the protein synthesis initiation factor elF-2. The other
plement, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated immune
mechanism involves an enzyme, 2-5A synthetase, which,
responses. These effects play an important role in terminat-
in the presence of adenosine triphosphate and dsRNA, syn-
ing primary viral infection, limiting viremia, and prevent-
thesizes a group of oligoadenylates collectively known as
 ing disease and reinfection. The neutralizing antibody is of
FIGURE 48.3.
Mechanisms of interferon action on protein synthesis.
Interferon
W
Cells
2'-5′ synthetase
PI/elF-2αkinase
dsRNA
ATP
DsRNA
2'-5'A
Phosphorylates
个
Activates cellular
initiationfactorelF-2
endonuclease
(RNase L)
Inhibits initiation
Degrades mRNA
of protein synthesis
Inhibitsproteinsynthesis
Chapter 48  Pathogenesis of Viral Diseases
351
particular importance in viral infections—when prepara
nia virus, feline leukemia virus, bovine viral diarrhea virus,
hog cholera virus, Newcastle disease virus, and infectious
mixtures are inoculated in susceptible hosts, infection will
bursal disease virus of chickens. The destruction of lym-
not occur if the antisera contain the virus-neutralizing anti-
phocytes and resultant atrophy of lymphoid tissues by the
body. Three classes of immunoglobulins—IgG, IgM, and
viruses can suppress or compromise immune response, pre-
IgA—can serve as neutralizing antibodies. The interaction
disposing the affected host to other opportunistic bacterial
of a virus and an antibody, particularly antibodies specific
 Or viral infections. Less commonly, a variety of inherited
to the viral antigens responsible for attachment to specific
cell receptors, results in a virus-antibody complex forma-
can predispose them to infectious diseases. A good exam-
tion that prevents attachment of the virus to cell receptors,
ple is the fatal respiratory tract infection of Arabian foals
and to a lesser extent prevents the penetration of the virus
with combined immunodeficiency disorder (lack of pro-
into the susceptible cell. It is possible to recover the infec-
duction of functional T- and B-lymphocytes) by equine
tious virus from such apparently inert virus-antibody mix-
adenovinus.
tures by simple dilution or centrifugation, suggesting that
the virus and the antibody may be linked in a loose com-
bination in the initial stages of reaction. The interaction
Persistent Viral Infection
between the virus and the antibody does not physically
alter viral structure; however, the complement system and
 Persistent and latent viral infections are characterized by
antiviral antibody can induce lysis of enveloped viruses as
the fact that the virus is not eliminated from the host. Dis-
well as destroy virus-infected cells.
         
Cellular immunity, discussed in Chapter 2, is another
animals. Potential mechanisms of viral persistence include
important factor in host resistance to some viral infections.
noncytocidalinfection of hostcells, destruction of immune
The destruction of virus-infected cells by cytotoxic lym-
effector cells or growth within these cell types, evasion of
phocytes can limit the infection and dissemination of the
protective host responses including cytokines and antibod -
virus, particularly in instances where the virus is transmit-
ies, and integration of the viral genome into that of the host
ted from infected to noninfected cells. Recent evidence also
cell. Persistent infections are those in which the virus is con-
indicates that macrophages play a role in host resistance to
tinuously present, with or without expression of disease.
viral infections. Macrophages are key participants in the
Disease, when it does occur in persistently infected ani-
inflammatory response, and they can be activated either
mals, often is a result of immunopathologic mechanisms.
by interaction with viruses or by the soluble products pro-
Latent infections are those in which the virus is demonstra-
duced by the virus reacting with lymphocytes. Activated
ble only when reactivation (recrudescence) occurs; this is
macrophages have been shown to participate in a wide
highly characteristic of herpesvirus in fections.
range of hostresponses to viralinfections, includingphago-
cytosis of virus-antibody complexes, production of inter-
Viral Shedding
feron, cytotoxicity for virus-infected cells, and immunoreg-
ulatory functions.
 In viral infections, cellular and tissue damage result not
The final stage of a viral infection is the shedding of the
only directly from the viral infection but also from the
virus by the host into the environment. This may occur
 host's immune response generated against the invading
from the same body surface where the virus gained entrance
 ss   r m s 
into the host, even if systemic dissemination occurs. For
the virus as well as virus-infected cells. In addition,
example, many viruses infecting the respiratory tract are
"bystander" destruction of nearby uninvolved cells occurs.
shed via respiratory secretions. Viruses that do not dissem-
Cytotoxic mediators released from neutrophils, cyto-
inate within the host are generally shed from the site of
toxic T-lymphocytes, and natural killer cells may affect
 entry. Papillomaviruses enter through traumatic openings
uninfected cells in close proximity. In most cases, this
in the skin, replicate in the layers of epidermis, and are
damage is minimal and is a necessary component of the
shed from the differentiated keratinocytes on the skin sur-
recovery process in viral diseases because virus-infected
face. Viruses that infect multiple tissues may be shed from
cells must be destroyed. However, in some instances such
a variety of locales. Canine distemper virus, which infects
as persistent infections, the immune response may be
many epithelial cells throughout the host during general-
responsible for the disease. The prolonged presence of
ized disease, may be shed in feces, respiratory secretions,
antigens continually stimulates immunocompetent cells,
Ocular secretions, and urine. Viruses that infect the gas-
leading to an excessive inflammatory response. The exces-
trointestinal tract are usually shed in the feces. Semen
sive response can be humoral and cell mediated. The end
and milk can be the source of some viruses, particularly
result is cellular, tissue, and organ damage that manifests as
those that infect leukocytes. Viruses that infect hematopoi-
disease.
etic cells or that cause a significant viremia can spread via
blood. Blood is the source of infection for the arthropod-
borne viruses as wellas for viruses that spread iatrogenically
Viral Immunosuppression
via the contaminated needles, through blood transfusions,
and so on.
Several viruses of veterinary importance can in fectlympho-
In certain viral infections, no shedding of virus may
cytes, including canine distemper virus, feline panleukope-
occur from the host. This happens most often in viruses
352
PART III
Viruses
infecting an aberrant or a “dead-end" host. For example,
Further Reading
Eastem equine encephalitis virus, a togavirus, normally cycles
between birds and mosquitoes. When horses, which are
Flint JS, Racaniello VJ, Krug Ret al. (1999) Principles of Virology:
not the natural host of this virus, are bitten by infected
Molecular Biology, Pathogenesis, and Control, ASM Press.
 mosquitoes, a transient viremia leads to the infection of the
 Norkin LC (2009) Virology: Molecular Biology and Pathogenesis,
central nervous system. Because the viremia is so transient, 
ASM Press.
horses are not normally a source of virus for mosquitoes
MacLachlan NJ and Dubovi EJ (2010) Fenner's Veterinary Virol-
and there is no virus shedding.
ogy, Sth edn, Academic Press.
Parvoviridae and
Circoviridae
RICHARD A.HESSE, BENJAMIN R. TRIBLE, AND
RAYMOND R. ROWLAND
Parvoviridae
common diseases of economic significance in pets and pro-
duction animals, which are discussed in detail. A variety
Members of the genus Parvovirus in the family Parvoviri-
of other animal parvoviruses have been identified, includ-
dae are the causative agents of specific diseases in animals
ing chicken parvovirus, mink enteritis virus, mice minute
 but not in humans. They tend to be species specific, but
virus, mouse parvovirus 1, and raccoon parvovirus, as well
this is not always the case. For example, some strains of
as a number of uncharacterized parvoviruses from a variety
canine parvovirus in fect not only dogs but also cats, wolves,
of species.
 and foxes. The name parvovirus is derived from the Latin
term parvus, which means small. Parvoviruses are some of
Feline Panleukopenia
the smallest viruses known (18-26 nm). These viruses are
nonenveloped, have icosahedral symmetry, and contain
Disease. Feline panleukopenia, also known as feline dis-
a linear single-stranded DNA genome of approximately
temper and feline infectious enteritis, is a highly conta-
5000 nucleotides that typically codes for two open read-
gious, acute viral disease of cats. The disease is character-
ing frames. One open reading frame codes for proteins that
ized by high fever, anorexia, depression, and vomiting.
mediate the functions required for transcription and DNA
followed by dehydration, diarrhea, and death due to the
replication, while the other open reading frame codes for
loss of small intestinal crypts cells, which results in villus
the capsid proteins that enclose a single-stranded minus-
atrophy and subsequent prevention of the absorption of
sense DNA genome. A useful characteristic of these viruses
nutrients and fluids. Leukopenia is also a prominent char-
is that they hemagglutinate (HA) red blood cells and an
acteristic of feline panleukopenia. The clinical severity of
disease is often linked directly to the severity of leukope-
antibody response following infection results in the gen-
eration of hemagglutination inhibition (HAl) antibodies,
nia; secondary bacterial infections often occur as a result
which correlate with viral neutralization. HA and HAI are
of a compromised immune system. Cats of all ages are
useful assays for the study of pathogenesis, protection, and
susceptibie to infection, but mortality is highest among
prevalence. The icosahedral virion confers great stability
kittens. Infection can occur by either oral or respiratory
to the virus particles that are resistant to inactivation by
routes, and the incubation period following infection is
pH, organic solvents, and temperatures up to 60 *C. They
short. Pregnant queens may experience intrauterine infec-
are among the most stable viruses known and are resis-
tion with the feline panleukopenia virus, which leads to
tant to environmental factors and many commercial dis-
neonatal death or congenital abnormalities of the central
infectants. A 5% solution of household bleach (sodium
nervous system manifested by cerebellar ataxia in kittens
hypochlorite) is an effective and practical virucidal disin-
after birth. This syndrome has also been observed in kittens
fectant for these viruses
infected with the virus before 2 weeks of age. Infection of
Because of the simplicity of these viruses, actively divid
healthy seronegative mature cats usually results in mild or
ing cells are a strict requirement for productive viral repli-
 no apparent disease.
cation. Virus replication occurs within the nucleus of host
cells, and because the virus lacks its own DNA polymerase,
Etiologic Agent. Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) is
replication of parvoviruses requires cells that are cycling
a typical parvovirus in regard to virion structure,
(late S phase or early G2 phase of the cell cycle) so that they
 genomicorganization, replication requirements, and phys-
can utilize host cell enzymes for their own replication.
ical/chemical properties as previously described. FPV is
Infections with feline parvovirus, canine parvovirus,
closely related to the canine parvovirus and mink enteritis
porcine parvovirus, and mink parvovirus cause the most
virus. Although all three viruses are antigenically related,
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
354
PART III
Viruses
they can be distinguished by sequence analysis. A very
species of parvovirus result in congenital lesions similar to
closely related virus that is antigenically indistinguish-
those observed in kittens.
able from FPV causes enteritis in mink and can produce
Host Responses to Jnfection. Following
infection,
disease in raccoons and coatimundi. Canine parvovirus
type 2 (CPV2) is ancestrally closely related to FPV (dis-
hemagglutination-inhibiting and neutralizing antibodies
cussed in detail in Section “Canine Parvovirus"). Canine
 s       
parvoviruses types 2a, 2b, and 2c are capable of infecting
 levels of antibodies are generally present after 10-12 days,
felines and causing a disease indistinguishable from feline
and these antibodies can persist in cats for several years.
panleukopenia. FPV grows in primary or continuous feline
Lactogenic immunity based on maternal antibodies with
kidney cell cultures but not in canine cell cultures
neutralizing HAI titers of more than 80 against FPV
protects kittens against viral infection; however, these
antibodies also interfere with active immunization by
Host-Virus Relationship
modified live o1 inactivated FPV viral vaccines. Cellular
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. All members
immune responses are also generated during infection and
of the family Felidae, as well as mink, ferrets, and rac-
 likely are important in limiting virus replication during
coons, are likely to be susceptible to infection with FPV
acute in fection.
and recently evolved canine variants. Feline panleukope-
Laboratory Diagnosis. Kittens or young cats presenting
nia occurs worldwide with infected cats being the principal
with the clinical signs of high fever, anorexia, depression,
reservoir. Both infected cats suffering from acute disease
and those having clinically inapparent infection excrete
vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydration or the presence of
the virus in their urine, feces, and various secretions. Phys-
severe leukopenia should be considered for the presump-
tive diagnosis of feline panleukopenia. The diagnosis can
ical contact with FPV-contaminated utensils, cages, and
be confirmed by one of the following laboratory methods:
bedding results in infection and subsequent transmission
that rapidly spreads in contained housing situations. The
1. The viral antigen may be detected in feces from
virus is highly stable in the environment making it more
live animals by antigen-capture enzyme-linked
difficult to control.
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) amplification of viral nucleic acid,
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Inhalation or ingestion of
 or electron microscopy.
secretions from animals infected with the virus is the most
2. The virus may be detected in tissues from dead
common means of transmission. The virus replicates in
animals by antigen-capture ELISA, immunofluores-
tissues and then travels via the bloodstream, resulting in
cence staining or immunohistochemistry with an
 a generalized infection. Cell-free viremia occurs for sev-
FPV-specific antisera conjugate, or PCR.
eral days in kittens experimentally infected intranasally
3.
The virus may be isolated in cell culture from filtered
or orally with FPV. The virus disseminates throughout the
feces or tissue samples, using cultured feline kidney
body and infects cells with the correct receptors. Feline par-
cells.
vovirus requires actively dividing cells that are in S phase
of the cell cycle, particularly hematopoietic cells located
SerodiagnosisofFPV following acute disease or for moni
within the bone marrow and lymphoid tissues (thymus,
toring vaccine antibody levels may beaccomplished by HAI
spleen, and lymph nodes), or cells of the intestinal crypts.
testing (HAI titers of >80 are considered protective). Other
Infection of hematopoietic and lymphoid cells leads to
antibody tests that are useful to monitor exposure include
severe and protracted leukopenia, affecting all white blood
ELISA or indirect immunofluorescence. Paired sera and a
cell types and leading to atrophy of lymphoid tissues,
 fourfold rise in titer are required to confirm the diagnosis
whereas infection of crypts cells leads to marked destruc.
or “vaccine take."
tion of the intestinal epithelium with resultant malabsorp-
tion diarrhea. Severe infections often result in death of the
Treatment and Control.
Supportive therapy directed to
animal due to secondary infections or severe dehydration.
restoration of fluid and electrolyte balance will increase the
Histologic lesions of acutely infected animals are character-
survivalrate of clinically affected animals; however, there is
ized by necrosis of the epithelium of the intestinal crypts
 no specific treatment that eliminates FPV from the infected
and marked destruction and depletion of lymphocytes in
animal. Prevention of infection is the key to controllingthis
the lymph nodes, thymus, and spleen. Animals that survive
disease. Vaccination, isolation of cats that survive infec-
 a miid in fection undergo regenerative lymphoid hyperpla-
 tion, and meticulous decontamination of premises that
sia followed by recovery.
have housed affected cats are critical for containment of
 In utero infection of late-term fetuses and very young
this highly transmissible virus. Household bleach at a 5%
kittens results in the destruction of the cells within the
 solution is (1 : 20 dilution) or commercial products labeled
external granular layer of the cerebellum. This leads to cere-
for use against parvovirus provide effective virucidal activ-
bellar hypoplasia, degeneration, loss of Purkinje cells, and
ity against FPV and should be used extensively. Numerous
atrophy as a consequence of failure of the internal granular
efficacious inactivated and modified live FPV vaccines are
layer to develop. Kittens that develop this condition expe.
commercially available. Maternal antibodies can interfere
rience tremors of the head and have difficulty walking and
with the immunization of young kittens, and this needs to
maneuvering. In utero infections of rats, hamsters, ferrets,
be considered as part of the vaccination regime. The passive
antibody typically wanes around 4-12 weeks of age, and
Chapter 49
Parvoviridae and Circoviridae
355
multiple vaccinations are required in order to immunize
kidney, as well as continuous cell lines such as canine cell
line A72, and feline cell lines NLFK and CRFK.
and ensure uniform protection.
Host-Virus Relationship
Canine Parvovirus
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. CPV infection
Disease. I
 Parvoviral disease in dogs is a relatively new dis-
of dogs, other members of the family Canidae, as well
ease of canines. It is somewhat similar to FPV disease in
as most carnivores, is prevalent throughout the world.
felines, characterized by sudden onset of diarrhea, vomit-
Parvovirus-infected dogs continue to excrete the infectious
ing, anorexia, fever, depression, lymphopenia, and dehy-
virus in their feces for up to 10 days after the onset of infec-
dration. Mortality is higher in puppies than in adults, and
tion, and the virus is readily transmitted between dogs by
very young puppies sometimes develop myocarditis with-
the fecal-oral route.
out clinical signs of enteritis.
 Canine parvovirus disease (CPD) was first recognized in
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis of CPV
North America in 1978, but retrospective serological stud-
infection of dogs is similar to that of panleukopenia virus
ies indicate that the virus was rapidly spreading around the
infection of cats, although cerebellar hypoplasia and atro-
world in the early 1970s and caused a global pandemic.
phy are not recognized as a consequence of in utero infec-
CPD is caused by CPV2, which is a variant of FPV. CPV2
has continued to evolve since it first emerged in dogs. New
vovirus infection of young pups, whereas it is not described
variants of CPV seem to have arisen through point muta-
in panleukopenia virus-in fected kittens.
 tions in the capsid protein and are designated as CPV type
Inhalation or ingestion of secretions from animals
 2a, type 2b, and most recently type 2C. Another parvovirus
in fected with the virus is the most common means of trans-
capable of infecting canines is the minute virus of canines
mission. The virus replicates in tissues and then travels
via the bloodstream and can result in a generalized infec-
not cause clinical disease.
tion. Virus replication requires infection of rapidly divid-
ing cells in the intestinal epithelium and lymphoid tissues,
Etiologic Agent.  CPV2 is clearly a variant of FPV that has
including thymus, tonsils, retropharyngeal and mesenteric
acquired the ability to infect canines through a small num-
lymph nodes, and spleen. Widespread infection of the
ber of mutations in the capsid protein VP2. Those muta-
intestinal mucosa occurs on about the sixth day following
tions resulted in modifications of surface-exposed residues
experimental inoculation. Fecal excretion of virus begins as
and allowed for binding to the transferrin receptor type
early as the third day postexposure and peaks soon there-
I molecule of dogs. CPV2 was replaced in 1979-1980 by
after. Most dogs stop excreting the virus by the twelfth day
CPV2a, which has different antigenicity and receptor bind -
postinfection.
ing than its parent. CPV2a has an extended host range and
Hemorrhage is the most striking lesion of parvovirus
is capable of infecting a number of carnivores including
enteritis in dogs, occurring in the lumen of the small bowel
felines. CPV2a is the common ancestor of the CPV2b and
and accompanying enlargement and edema of the mesen-
CPV2c variants that currently circulate in dogs worldwide.
tericlymph nodes. Gross myocarditis lesions that appearas
Recent cross-species transmission data suggest that raccoon
mottled white streaks within the myocardium are indica-
parvovirusesand subsequent canine-raccoon passages may
 tive of cardiac involvement in young puppies.
have served as intermediates to the evolution of the CPV2a
Histological lesions resulting from CPV infection are
lineage and their extended host range.
confined to organs with large populations of rapidly prolif-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. CPV is a typ-
erating cells, such as the small intestine, lymph nodes, and
ical parvovirus and is very stable in the en vironment. It is
bone marrow. Necrosis of crypt epithelium and atrophy of
resistant to environmental factors, such as extremes of tem-
epithelial villi are the most frequent findings in the small
intestine. Regeneration of intestinal epithelium occurs in
perature, pH, and most disinfectants. The virus can persist
for long periods in premises where infected dogs are kept
 dogs surviving the acute phase of enteric infection. CPV
in fects lymphocytes in the th ymic cortex and germinal cen-
and can be transmitted to other areas by fomites. House-
hold bleach ata 1: 20 dilution (5%) or commercial products
ters of lymph nodes, which results in lymphocytolysis and
labeled for use against parvovirus provide effective viruci-
cellular depletion in lymphoid tissue. The myocardial form
dal activity against CPV and should be used extensively.
of CPV infection of the ventricular myocardium results in
myofiber degeneration and necrosis that is accompanied
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. CPV2
by infiltration of mononuclear cells.
infects dogs of all breeds and other members of the fam-
ily Canidae, such as wolves, foxes, and coyotes. Domes-
Host Response to Infection. The immune response of
tic cats without antibodies to the virus are susceptible to
canines following CPV infection is similar to that of felines.
experimental infection but remain asymptomatic. CPV2a,
CPV2b, and CPV2c also infect all breeds of dogs and mem-
mately 1 week after infection. High levels of antibodies are
bers of Canidae family, but unlike CPV2, these viruses are
 generally present after 10-12 days, and these antibodies
capable of infecting felines and causing panleukopenia.
can persist for the life of the animal. Lactogenic immunity
Canine parvoviruses can be isolated and propagated in
based on maternal antibodies with neutralizing/HAI titers
       s  
Ia is Ande sid A ise og u ao jo
356
PART III
Viruses
infection; however, these antibodies also interfere with
world and is enzootic in most herds in the United States.
active immunization by modified live or inactivated CPV
 Infection of pregnant dams with PPV causes reproduc-
viral vaccines. Cellular immune responses are also gener-
tive failure or SMEDI syndrome, which is characterized
 ated during infection, and are likely important in limiting
by stillbirth, mummification, embryonic death, and infer-
virus replication during acute infection.
tility. Typically, the virus infects seronegative pregnant
dams resulting in transplacental infection of developing
Laboratory Diagnosis. Laboratory diagnosis of CPD is
fetuses. If fetal infection occurs prior to the development
very similar to feline parvovirus disease. Puppies or young
of immunocompetency, generalized infertility, embryonic
dogs presenting with the clinical signs of high fever,
death, mummification, and stillborn pigs are observed.
anorexia, depression, vomiting, diarrhea, and dehydra-
Infection of nonpregnant swine with PPV results in the
tion, or the presence of severe leukopenia should be consid-
 development of a rapid and lifelong immune response to
ered for the presumptive diagnosis of CPD. The diagnosis
the virus with no apparent clinical disease.
can be confirmed by one of the following laboratory meth-
ods:
Etiologic Agent
 Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. PPV is a typ-
 1. The viral antigen may be detected in feces from live
  e rs s n sd 
animals by antigen-capture ELISA, PCR amplifica-
organization to FPV and CPV. To date, four different geno-
tion of viral nucleic acid, or electron microscopy.
types of porcine parvovirus (1-4) have been described,
2.
 The virus may be detected in tissues from dead
however, genotype 1 is the most common PPV found in 
animals by antigen-capture ELISA, immunofluores-
North America. Like other parvoviruses, PPV is very stable
cence staining or immunohistochemistry with a
because viral infectivity, hemagglutinating activity, and
CPV-specific antisera conjugate, or PCR.
antigenicity are resistant to a wide range of heat, pH, and
 3. The virus may be isolated in cell culture from filtered
feces or tissue samples using cultured feline or canine
the virus can be inactivated by a 5% household bleach solu-
cells.
tion and commercial disinfectants that have been “parvo
approved." Only one serotype has been identified, and all
Serodiagnosis following disease or tracking vaccine anti-
 isolates of Ppv that have been compared have been found
body levels may be accomplished by HAI testing (HAI titers
to be antigenically similar to each other. PPV is antigeni-
of >80 are considered protective). Other antibody tests that
cally distinct from other parvoviruses.
are useful to monitor exposure include ELISA or indirect
immunofluorescence. Paired sera and a fourfold rise in titer
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systens. The host
are required to confirm the diagnosis or "vaccine take."
range for PPV appears to be limited to swine. The virus can
 replicate in fetal or neonatal swine kidney cells as well the
Treatment and Control. Severe cases of canine parvovi-
established PK-15 (porcine kidney) and ST (swine testicle)
ral disease are characterized by marked dehydration and
cell lines.
 metabolic acidosis. Supportive therapy directed to restora-
tion of fluid and electrolyte balance will increase the sur-
Host-Virus Relationship
vival rate of clinically affected animals; however, there is n0
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
 PPV is ubiqui-
specific treatment that eliminates CPV from the infected
tous in swine herds throughout the world, and serosurveil-
animal. Prevention of infection is the key to controlling
lance data indicate that infection is very common. PPV
this disease. Vaccination, isolation of dogs that survive
is maintained in the environment due to shedding of
infection, and meticulous decontamination of premises
the virus in oral secretions and feces following infection.
that have housed affected animals are critical for contain-
There is evidence that in utero infection and immunotol-
ment of this highly transmissible virus. Household bleach
erance may occur and persistently infected animals can
at a 1 : 20 dilution or commercial products labeled for
 shed the virus for prolonged periods of time. In one study,
use against parvovirus provide effective virucidal activity
gilts were inoculated with PPV prior to 55 days of gesta-
against CPV and should be used extensively. Antibody lev-
tion. As a result, seronegative, live-born offspring carried
els correlate directly with the degree of protection against
the virus in a variety of tissues up to 8 months of age when 
CPV in fection. Numerous efficacious inactivated and mod-
the study was terminated. PPV can persist in the environ-
ified live CPV vaccines are commercially available. Mater-
 ment for extremely long periods of time, making contam-
nal antibodies can interfere with the immunization of
inated premises a major reservoir for infection of naive
young puppies, and this needs to be considered as part
swine. Venereal transmission through infected semen is
of the vaccination regime. The passive antibody typically
also a mechanism of PpV transmission. Immunotolerant,
wanes around 4-12 weeks ofage, and multiple vaccinations
persistently infected boars can harbor the virus for at least 8
 are required in order to immunize puppies immediately
months and acutely infected seronegative boars can main-
prior to the “susceptibility window" and ensure uniform
tain the virus for at least 35 days postinfection.
protection.
Since most herd sows have experienced PpV infection,
they are solidly immune to the virus and have high anti-
Porcine Parvovirus Infection Disease. Porcine par-
body levels that are then passed to their offspring through
vovirus (PPV) is ubiquitous among swine throughout the
colostrum. Young pigs are resistant to PPV infection until
Chapter 49
Parvoviridae and Circoviridae
357
the maternal antibody wanes, typically around 3-6 months
antiserum conjugate, and/or PCR are the most common
of age. Gilts infected prior to pregnancy mount a vigorous
diagnostic techniques used to confirm PPV. Isolation of
immune response with no clinical disease and are refractal
the virus in cell culture from tissue samples can sometimes
to subsequent exposure and infection. Infection of gilts 01
be accomplished using cultured swine cells as the substrate;
sows during the first half of pregnancy often results in gen-
however, this is not a very reliable method of detection as 
eralized infertility, embryonic death, mummification, and
 isolation attempts are not always successful.
stillborn pigs.
Serodiagnosis following infection or tracking vaccine
antibody levels in adult swine may be accomplished by
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
PPV infection of nonpreg-
serum neutralization or HAI testing (HAI titers of >40 are
considered protective). Detection of PPV antibodies in tho-
ease and is accompanied by a vigorous antibody response.
racic fluids of mummified or stillborn pigs is indicative of
Most herd sows have experienced PPV infection, causing
in utero in fection.
them to remain immune to the virus and maintain very
high antibody levels that are then passed to their offspring
Treatment and Control. There is no treatment for repro-
through colostrum. Young pigs are resistant to PPV infec-
ductive failure caused by PPV infection. Vaccination is the
preferred method of controlling PPV infection in the breed-
6 months of age. Gilts infected prior to pregnancy mount
ing herd. Controlled infection and acclimation during gilt
a vigorous immune response with no clinical disease and
development will induce infection in nonpregnant gilts,
maintain immunity to subsequent exposure and infection.
Infection of gilts or sows during pregnancy often results in
failure. Both vaccination and acclimation must be care-
generalized infertility, embryonic death, mummification,
fully timed to ensure that animals are immunized and/or
and stillborn pigs.
infected after passive antibodies wane but before breeding
PPV infection occurring early in gestation (<30 days) is
occurs.
not always apparent as it often results in embryonic death
 and fetal resorption, which may be misinterpreted as gen-
Aleutian Disease in Mink Disease.  Aleutian disease (AD)
eralized infertility and return to service. However, if the
or mink plasmacytosis was first recognized in the mid-
fetus becomes infected between 30 and 70 days of gesta-
1950s in ranch-raised mink. Aleutian mink have a gun-
tion, death and mummification generally occur. Ifthe fetus
metal gray-colored phase and tend to be more suscepti-
becomes infected between 70 days of gestation and term,
ble to infection and clinical disease with Aleutian disease
 an immune response is generated and although live birth
virus (ADV) than other color variations of domesticated
generallyoccurs,often times theselate-gestation infections
mink. AD tends to be a lethal disease in mink that pro-
result in offspring that fail to thrive.
gresses slowly after infection, often times taking up to a
Gross lesions of PPV-infected pregnant dams have not
year before producing clinical symptoms. The disease is
 been reported. Microscopic lesions following experimen-
characterized by poor reproduction, gradual weight loss,
 Oral and gastro-intestinal bleeding, renal failure, uremia,
tal infection include extensive cuffing of myometrial and
endometrial vessels with mononuclear cells and focal
and frequently death. ADV infects mink, ferrets, and possi-
accumulation of lymphocytes in the uterus. Microscopic
bly other Mustelidae. AD causes significant economic loss
changes in the fetus are often nonspecific, but can include
foci of necrosis and mononuclear cell infiltration in organs
mink populations. It is also becoming a significant threat
such as the liver, heart, kidney, and cerebrum.
to pet ferrets.
Etiologic Agent
Host Responses  to Infection.
.No clinical disease is
observed when PpV infection of seronegative, nonpreg-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. ADV is the
nant swine occurs. Following infection, the animals
only known member of the genus Amdovirus in the fam-
become viremic and mount a vigorous antibody response
ily Parvoviridae and is similar to "true" parvoviruses in the
that provides lifelong immunity in most cases. Immune
genus Parvovirus. ADV-infected animals shed the virus in
dams provide high levels of lactogenic immunity to thei1
saliva, feces, and urine, and these secretions may be infec-
 offspring through colostrum. Young pigs remain resis-
tious for months or even years. ADV is a small, naked virus
tant to infection with PPV until the maternal antibody
containing a single linear strand of DNA that is highly resis-
wanes, usually around 3-6 months ofage. Reproductive dis-
tant to inactivation by pH solvents, extreme temperatures,
ease may occur if seronegative gilts become infected while
and most disin fectants. Decontamination of infested pens
pregnant.
is best achieved by steam cleaning followed by prolonged
contact with a 5% bleach solution or a disinfectant that has
Laboratory Diagnosis. PPV should be considered in the
 been demonstrated to be efficacious against parvoviruses.
differential diagnosis of reproductive failure when there
The virus is genetically and antigenically distinct from the
is evidence of embryonic or fetal deaths. This is espe-
mink enteritis virus as well as other carnivore parvoviruses.
cially true if gilts but not sows are affected. Direct detec-
tion of PPV antigens or nucleic acid from tissues of mum-
Infectivity for Other Species and Cell Systems. ADV infects
mified or stillborn pigs will result in a solid diagnosis
mink of all types (domestic and wild), although disease is
of PPV-induced reproductive failure. Immunofluorescence
more severe in mink that have the Aleutian color phase.
staining or immunohistochemistry with a PPV-specific
There is some serological evidence that ADV is spreading in
358
PART III
Viruses
wild mink populations in Canada. which may be associated
immune complexes that are not cleared from circulation.
with the decline of wild mink. Ferrets can be infected with
Antibody response following infection can be detected in
ADV but do not always develop clinical disease, and the
a number of assays including indirect fluorescent antibody
animals that do develop disease often show no apparent
detection and counterimmunoelectrophoresis
clinical signs until shortly before death. Some strains of the
virus can be propagated in fetal mink kidney cell cultures
Laboratory Diagnosis. Following infection, immunoflu-
or in feline cell lines.
orescence, immunohistochemistry, and PCR assays may
be used to detect the virus in body secretions and tissues.
Host-Virus Relationship
 Serological methods for detection of antibodies following
 infection include indirect fluorescent antibody testing and
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. AD of mink is
counterimmunoelectrophoresis. Both assays are useful for
present in many mink ranches around the world. Infected
identifying infected carrier animals that need to be culled
animals shed the virus in blood, saliva, feces, and urine,
 Or quarantined from naive mink. Both assays are also useful
and the virus is transmitted by fecal-oral or possibly res-
for monitoring the infection status of pet ferrets that may
piratory routes. The historical reservoir for ADV has been
be shedding the virus.
infected domestic mink with overt clinical signs or with
undetected infections. In recent times, cross-transmission
Treatment and Control. For both mink and ferrets, biose-
between ranch-raised mink and wild populations has been
 observed in Canada and Europe. AD in pet ferrets is receiv-
curity is the only effective control mechanism for main-
taining seronegative animals. Secure physical separation 
ing attention because asymptomatic animals are carriers of
 between domestic and wild mink populations should be
the virus and are capable of transmitting it at ferret shows
in place to minimize transmission. All animals entering an
and other gathering places. There has been a recent report
established seronegative mink ranch need to be screened
of possible human disease associated with ADv. Two unre-
for the antibody prior to entry. If seropositive animals
lated incidents of mink ranchers with vascular disease and
are found on a mink ranch, they should physically sepa-
 microangiopathy were found to have ADV antibodies and
rated and maintained from seronegative animals and then
viral nucleic acid.
culled at harvest. Seropositive ferrets should be isolated
from seronegative animals in order to prevent horizontal
Pathogenesis and Pathology. ADV replicates rapidly in
transmission. Contaminated pens should be thoroughly
experimentally infected mink, and virus titers are observed
 cleaned, preferably with steam treatment followed by pro-
10 days postinoculation. Most animals become persistently
longed exposure to a 5% Clorox solution or a disinfectant
infected and harbor the virus in the viscera, serum, and
that is labeled as parvocidal.
urine for the remainder of their lives. Antibody response
following infection reaches very high levels and binds
with circulating ADV to form infectious immune com-
Circoviridae
plexes. Arterial and glomerular lesions that are classic of
AD are caused by deposition of immune complexes and
The term "circovirus" originates from the covalently closed
the subsequent inflammatory response. The disease pro-
circular arrangement of the single-stranded genome char-
cess observed in natural infections is a slowly progressive
acteristic of these viruses. Currently, two genera, Circovinus
d p is 0 r e on d an  h a
and Gyrovirus, are included in the Circoviridae family. The
noticeable symptoms. During this time infected mink shed
 genus Circovinus contains 11 species, including Porcine cir-
the virus in urine and feces and can infect naive animals.
covirus types 1 (PCV1) and 2 (PCV2), Canary circovirus,
Infected mink do not exhibit symptoms until several weeks
Duck circovinus, Finch circovinus, Goose circovinus, Gull cir-
or months after they are infected, at which time loss of
covirus, Pigeon circovirus, Starling circovirus, Swan circovirus,
appetite, decreased activity, weight loss, tarry diarrhea, and
and Beak and feather disease vinus (BFDV). Additional cir-
a rough coat are observed. Once the symptoms become
covirus species have been reported in chimpanzees, bats,
obvious, death of the mink is certain. Gross lesions include
bovine, fish, and canines; however, whether they play
splenomegaly, glomerulonephritis, and enlarged mesen-
a significant role in disease manifestation is unknown.
teric lymph nodes. Histologic lesions are characterized by
While chicken anemia virus is the only member of the
plasma cell infiltration in the kidneys, liver, spleen, lymph 
Gyrovirus genus, additional Gyrovirus species have been 
nodes, and bone marrow. Infection of young mink results
reported in other avian species and humans. Recently, a
in a more rapid onset and death is often due to acute inter-
 new genus termed Cyclovirus has been proposed within the
stitial pneumonia. In all cases the animals are immuno-
family Circoviridae. Cyclovirus sequences have been iden-
compromised and subject to secondary in fections.
tified in chimpanzees, goats, sheep, camels, bats, chickens,
 Infection in pet ferets occasionally results in clinical
and dragonflies. Furthermore, cyclovirus sequences have
been found in beef products and human stool samples.
most ferrets that become infected remain asymptomatic
Currently, knowledge of cycloviruses is based strictly on
and clear the virus over time.
 genomic sequence data.
The family Circoviridae encompasses some of the small-
Host Responses to Jnfection. Following i
infection,
est known viruses with genomes ranging from 1 to 4 kb.
immunoglobulin levels rise markedly and the antibody
         
complexes with the circulating virus to form infectious
 most essential genes, including a viral replicase and capsid
Chapter 49
Parvoviridae and Circoviridae
359
protein. Similar to parvoviruses, members of Circoviridae
captive birds. However, the outcome of infection is depen-
rely on host enzymes during their life cycle. Virus propaga-
dent on many factors, such as the age of the bird at initial
tion within the host requires an actively replicating cell.
exposure, the presence and levels ofprotection provided by
the maternal antibody, and the route and titer of the in fect-
ing virus. The incubation time for BFDV may be prolonged
Characteristic Physical and Chemical Properties
with resulting clinical signs appearing long after the initial
Circoviridae are characterized as nonenveloped, single
infection. Clinical signs in young birds may presentas inap-
stranded circular DNA viruses, with genomes ranging from
petance, lethargy, crop stasis, progressive feather abnor-
1 to 4 kb. Virions range in size from ~17 to 28 nm and are
malities, and eventual death. In some cases, secondary
composed of 60 capsid protein subunits arranged in T = 1
infections stemming from immune suppression are the pri-
icosahedral symmetry. Virions have a buoyant density of
mary cause of death. Histologic lesions are dependent upon
1.37 g/ml in a CsCl gradient.
multiple factors including the duration and severity of the
disease. However, characteristic intranuclear and intracy-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents.
Cir-
toplasmic inclusion bodies may be present in macrophages
coviruses are stable at a pH of 3.0 and at temperatures of
in the thymus, bursa, and other lymphoid tissues, as well
56 *C for 1 h, or 70 *C for up to 15 min. Disinfectants
as in epithelial cells lining the shaft of the feather.
aimed at dissolving lipids such as those utilizing bases of
alcohol, chlorhexidine, iodine, and phenol are ineffective.
Host Responses to Infection.F
Exposure to BFDV results in
Virus inactivation requires alkaline disinfectants (sodium
 lesistance to reinfection. Maternal antibodies likely pro-
 ( )  o 
vide passive protection of chicks against BFDV infection
quaternary ammonium compounds.
for several weeks after birth.
Beak and Feather Disease
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis of PBFD is based on
identification of the clinical signs and characteristic gross
Disease. While avian-specific medicine for poultry has
and histologic changes in the tissues of affected birds.
significantly progressed over the years, only minimal in for-
Assays for the identification of BFDV infection include
mation is available for psittacine birds. Viral infectious
 in siu hybridization, hemagglutination and HAl, electron 
diseases such as beak and feather disease, also termed
microscopy, PCR, and real-time PCR.
psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD), are some of
the most common problems with psittacine birds. PBFD
was first observed in Australia in the early 1970s, and since
Treatment and Control. The most effective method to
then it has emerged in multiple countries. The onset and
control PBFD involves elimination or quarantine of carrier
severity of disease is dependent on the age of the host. PBFD
birds to prevent transmission of BFDV. Currently, there
typically presents as necrotic or otherwise abnormal feath-
are no commercially available vaccines for BFDV, although
ers such as feathers that are bent, contain hemorrhages, 0r
experimental efforts involving recombinant BFDV capsid
are prematurely shed. Chronic in fection may result in beak
protein are underway.
and nail deformities. Neonatal birds are particularly suscep-
tible to severe acute disease characterized by pneumonia,
Chicken Infectious Anemia Disease. Chicken infectious
enteritis, rapid weight loss, and death.
anemia (CIA) was first recognized in 1979 as a highly conta-
gious disease of young chickens (2-4 weeks of age). Clinical 
Etiologic Agent
disease resulting from in fection with chicken anemia virus
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The pri-
(CAV), the etiologicalagent ofCIA, is rare due in large to the 
 mary host for the causative agent of PBFD, the BFDV, is
practice of widespread vaccination. However, the subclin-
ical form of disease, which occurs at all stages of produc-
psittacine birds. There is currently no cell culture system
available for virus propagation.
tion, remains prevalent worldwide. Clinical signs in young
birds include aplastic anemia, generalized lymphoid atro-
Host-Virus Relationship
phy, and profound immune suppression often resulting in
secondary viral, bacterial, and fungal infections. The sub-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. 1
PBFD has been
clinical form of disease, characterized by prolonged viremia
and reduced growth performance, results in serious eco-
Germany, Italy, New Zealand, South Africa, Taiwan, Thai-
nomic losses to the poultry industry. Within the Circoviri-
land, the United States, and Australia. Movement of
dae family, CAV represents the most distinct virus, with
infected Australian psittacine birds is likely the cause of
a genetic organization that more closely resembles viruses
dissemination since BFDV is endemic in free-ranging pop-
classified within the Anelloviridae family. Genetically dis-
ulations of several psittacine species in Australia. BFDV
tinct strains of CAV have been identified, although strains
has been identified in over 60 species of captive and free-
are similar in terms of antigenicity and virulence.
ranging psittacine birds. Transmission of the virus occurs
through both horizontal and vertical routes.
Etiologic Agent
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Exposure to BFDV results in
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The pri-
subclinical infection in the majority of free-ranging and
mary host for CAV is the chicken. CAV can be propagated
360
PART III
Viruses
in chicken embryos, chicken primary blood mononuclear
pathogenic viruses, respectively. To date, PCV2 infection
cells, and the MDCC-MSB-1 cell line in vitro.
has been linked with a variety of syndromes, collectively
termed porcine circovirus-associated disease (PCVAD)
Host-Virus Relationship
PCVAD describes a group of complex multifactorial syn-
dromes that occur during all stages of pork production.
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. CAV is ubiq-
Manifestations of PCVAD can range from nonovert clini-
uitous in commercial and specific pathogen-free chicken
 cal signs to acute death. Clinical signs typically present as
 stocks. While all ages of chickens are susceptible to infec-
wasting, diarrhea, respiratory distress, dermatitis, o1 repro-
tion, older chickens are more resistant to clinical disease.
ductive failure. PCVAD first appeared in the early 1990s,
Transmission of the virus occurs through both the horizon-
and continues to impact the world's pork industry. The
tal and vertical routes.
primary factor for the onset of PCVAD involves infec-
tion with PCV2. PCV2 isolates are divided into two main
Pathogenesis and Pathology. In nonprotected chicks,
 genotypes, known as PCV2a and PCV2b. Recently, a
CAV targets hemocytoblasts in the bone marrow and lym-
new classification scheme has been proposed to describe
phocytes in the thymus, resulting in aplastic anemia,
PCVAD syndromes. Typical PCVAD syndromes include
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and thymic atrophy. Clin-
porcine multisystemic wasting syndromes (PMWS), PCV2-
ical signs generally appear 7-14 days after infection, pre-
associated enteritis, PCV2-associated respiratory disease,
senting as gangrenous lesions on the wings. Furthermore,
proliferative and necrotizing pneumonia, PCV2-associated
immunosuppression often results in opportunistic infec-
 reproductive failure, porcine dermatitis and nephropathy
tions from other viruses, bacteria, or fungi. Early investiga-
syndrome, and acute pulmonary edema.
tions indicate that maternal antibodies play a significant
role in the prevention of disease. However, older chick-
Etiologic Agent
ens become susceptible to CAV infection once maternal
antibodies decay, which may result in the subclinical form
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Domes-
of disease. In addition to reduced growth performance,
tic and feral pigs are the primary hosts for PCV2. Porcine
 immunosuppression has recently been identified as a dis-
epithelial celis from kidney and testicle support PCV2 repli-
ease manifestation in older chickens.
cation in cell culture systems. Experimental in fections with 
PCV2 have been established in mice.
Host Responses to Infection. Maternal antibodies provide
Host-Virus Relationship
passive protection to CAV infection and disease for several
weeks after birth. Upon decay of maternal antibodies, CAV
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. 1
Historically,
exposure may result in a persistent infection, resulting in 
PCV2 isolates were classified based on similarities with
reduced growth performance and immunosuppression.
isolates from North America (PCV2a) or Europe (PCV2b).
However, both genotypes are considered endemic within
Laboratory Diagnosis. Aclinical diagnosis ofClA is based
the world pig population. PCV2 establishes a long-term
on flock history, clinical signs, and pathological findings.
infection and is shed in oronasal fluid, urine, blood, and
Assays to confirm infection with CAV include virus isola
feces in pigs for up to 28 weeks of age on PCVAD-affected
tion, PCR, real-time PCR, or immunohistochemical stain-
farms. Transmission most often occurs pig to pig through
ing of tissues with CAV-specific antibodies. Serological
the horizontal route. In addition, PCV2 is very stable within
 assays for the detection of CAV infection include ELISA,
the environment, which likely plays a role in virus trans-
indirect immunofluorescence (IFA), and virus neutraliza-
mission.
tion assay.
Pathogenesis and Pathology.T
The clinical manifestation
Treatment and Control. The most effective practice for
and severity of PCVAD are linked to a variety of cofactors,
controlling CAV involves vaccination of breeding flocks
such as the disease potential of the PCV2 isolate, the pres-
with a modified live virus, which prevents vertical transmis-
sion of the virus and provides protective maternal antibod.
 ics, and use of immunostimulating agents such as vaccines.
 ies. No specific treatment is available for chickens infected
In general, clinical and pathological signs are syndrome
with CAV.
specific. Clinicalsigns of PMWS, the most common PCVAD
syndrome, include lethargy, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy,
discoloring of the skin, jaundice, and wasting. Gross patho.
Porcine Circovirus-Associated Disease
logical signs include enlargement of the submandibular,
Disease. Porcine circoviruses (PCV) were first discovered
inguinal, and bronchial lymph nodes, noncollapsed mot-
as a cell culture contaminant in the 1970s. At that time,
tled lungs, occasional spleen infarcts, atrophic and dis.
the virus was considered nonpathogenic and ubiquitous
colored liver, and enteritis. Histopathological character-
within the swine population. in the early 1990s, a novel
istics of PMWS may include lymphocyte depletion with
wasting syndrome was described in pigs. Subsequently, the
 granulomatous inflammation of lymphoid tissues, which
etiological agent was identified as a PCV, which shared
 may include intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies, granulo-
matous to lymphohistiocytic interstitial pneumonia, lym-
identified virus. Since then, the viruses have been termed
phohistiocytic hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, and gran-
PCV1 and PCV2 to distinguish the nonpathogenic and
ulomatous enteritis. An electron microscopic image of a
Chapter 49
 Parvoviridae and Circoviridae
361
FIGURE 49.1.
Electron microscope image of swine
FIGURE 49.2.
Immunofluorescent staining of PCV2
testicle cells infected with PCV2.
antigens in swine testicle cells.
PCV2a-induced inclusion body following infection of
swine testicle cells is shown in Figure 49.1.
Currently, several commercial vaccines incorporate the
Host Response to Jnfection. PCV2 infection results in a
PCV2a ORF2 antigen, which may be expressed in bac-
pronounced humoral and cell-mediated response that, in
ulovirus, inactivated PCV2, or an inactivated PCV1/2
general, is incapable of clearing viral infection. Maternally
derived antibodies resulting from natural infection typi-
chimera. Of the five commercial vaccines currently avail-
 able, four are recommended for use in piglets and only one
cally provide minimal protection against PCV2 infection.
for sows. Vaccine schedules for piglets are either one or two
doses with the first dose administered at 3 weeks of age. In
Laboratory
Diagnosis.
Clinical signs, history, and
the case of the two-dose vaccine, the second dose is admin-
histopathological examinations are useful in a presump-
istered 3 weeks later. Sow vaccination is recommended at 2
tive diagnosis of PCVAD. Laboratory procedures used to
and 5 weeks antepartum.
 confirm PCV2 in fection include the following:
1.1
 Isolation of PCV2 from serum or tissues of infected
 Further Reading
animals on susceptible cell cultures, or by identifi-
cation of PCV2 nucleic acid in infected tissues by
Allison AB, Harbison CE, Pagan I et al. (2012) Role of multiple
PCR.
hosts in the cross-species transmission and emergence of
 Detection of PCV2 antigens in histological sections
pandemic parvovirus. / Virol, 86, 865-872.
of lung or lymphoid lesions by immunofluores-
American Ferret Association (2012) Aleutian Mink Disease:
cent or immunohistochemical staining with virus-
A Hidden Danger to Your Ferret, http://www.ferret.org/
specific antibodies.
read/aleutianarticle.html (accessed January 11, 2013).
 Detection of PCV2-specific antibodies in serum
Bachmann PA,Sheffy BE, and Vaughan JT (1975) Experimental
using serologic tests such as IFA, virus neutraliza-
in utero infection of fetal pigs with a porcine parvovirus.
tion assay, 0r ELISA. Figure 49.2 shows the typical
Infect Immun, 12, 455-460.
PCV2 staining of an IFA-positive serum sample.
Balamurugan V and Kataria JM (2006) Economically impor-
tant non-oncogenic immunosuppressive  viral diseases
Treatment and Control. Before the advent of vaccines,
of chicken—current status. Vet Res Commun, 30, 541-
566.
multiple measures were incorporated with varying effects.
These included proper housing, stress reduction, practic-
Battilani M, Balboni A, Ustulin M et al. (2011) Genetic com-
plexity and multiple infections with more Parvovirus species
ing an “all-in-all-out" policy, and the prevention of age
in naturally infected cats. Vet Res, 42, 43.
mixing. Further methods that were used with minimal
Bonne N, Shearer P, Sharp M et al. (2009) Assessment of recom-
success included antibiotics to control secondary infec-
binant beak and feather disease virus capsid protein as a
tions, serum therapy, and depopulation. The most effective
vaccine for psittacine beak and feather disease. / Gen Virol,
method for controlling PCV2 today is vaccination. Field
90,640-647.
and experimental vaccine trials have demonstrated preven-
 Cheng F, Chen AY, Best SM et al. (2010) The capsid proteins of
tion of PCVAD, decreased viremia, and increased growth 
Aleutian mink disease virus activate caspases and are specif-
performance.
ically cleaved during infection. / Virol, 84, 2687-2696.
362
PART III
Viruses
Cutlip RC and Mengeling WL (1975) Pathogenesis of in utero
 Mengeling WL and Cutlip RC (1975) Pathogenesis of in utero
infection of eight and ten-week-old porcine fetus with
infection: Experimental infection of 5-week-old porcine
porcine parvovirus. Am / Vet Res, 36, 1751-1754.
fetuses with porcine parvovirus. Am / Vet Res, 36, 1173-
Ettinger SJ and Feldman EC (1995) Textbook Vet. Internal Med,
1177.
W.B. Saunders Company.
Mengeling WL, Cutlip RC, and Barnett D (1978) Porcine par-
Farid AH, Rupasinghe P, Mitchell JL, and Rouvinen-Watt K
vovirus: Pathogenesis, prevalence, and prophylaxis. Proc Int
(2010) A survey of Aleutian mink disease virus infection
Congr Pig Vet Soc, 5, 15.
of feral American mink in Nova Scotia. Can Vet J, 51,
Miller MM and Schat KA (2004) Chicken infectious anemia
75-77.
virus: an example of the ultimate host-parasite relationship.
Gillespie J, Opriessnig T, Meng XJ et al. (2009) Porcine cir-
Avian Dis,48, 734-745.
covirus type 2 and porcine circovirus-associated disease. /
 Nituch LA, Bowman J, Beauclerc KB, and Schulte-Hostedde AI
Vet Intern Med, 23, 1151-1163.
(2011) Mink farm predicts Aleutian disease exposure in wild
Grau-Roma L, Fraile L, and Segales J (2011) Recent advances in
American mink. PLoS One, 6, 7.
 the epidemiology, diagnosis and control of diseases caused
Opriessnig T and Halbur PG (2012) Concurrent infections are
by porcine circovirus type 2. Vet J, 187, 23-32.
important for expression of porcine circovirus associated
 Hoerr FJ (2010) Clinical aspects of immunosuppression in
disease. Virus Res, 164 (1-2), 20-32.
poultry. Avian Dis, 54, 2-15.
Redman DR, Bohl EH, and Ferguson LC (1974) Porcine par-
Ikeda Y, Mochizuki M, Naito R et al. (20o0) Predominance of
vovirus: Natural and experimental infections of the porcine
canine parvovirus (CPV) in unvaccinated cat populations
fetus and prevalence in mature swine. Infect Immun, 10, 718-
and emergence of new antigenic types of CPVs in cats. Virol,
723.
278, 9-13.
 Segales J (2012) Porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) infections:
Jepsen JR, d'Amore F, Baandrup U et al. (2009) Aleutian
 clinical signs, pathology and laboratory diagnosis. Virus Res,
 mink disease virus and humans. Emerg Infect Dis, 15, 2040-
164 (1-2) 10-19.
2042.
Segalés J, Allan GM, and Domingo M (2012) Porcine cir-
 Johnson RH (1973) Isolation of swine parvovirus in Queens-
 coviruses, in Diseases of Swine, 1oth edn, Blackwell Publish-
land. Aust Vet /, 49,257-259.
ing Ltd, Ames, pp. 405-417.
 Johnson RH and Collings DF (1971) Transplacental infection
Tapscott B (2010) Aleutian Disease in Mink, Ministry of Agricul-
of piglets with a porcine parvovirus. Res Vet Sci, 12, 570-572.
ture, Food and Rural Affairs, Ontario.
Jones TC (1997) Vet. Patho, Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Trible BR and Rowland RRR (2012) Genetic variation of porcine
Katoh H, Ogawa H, Ohya K, and Fukushi H (2010) A review
circovirus type 2 (PCV2) and its relevance to vaccination,
of DNA viral infections in psittacine birds. / Vet Med Sci, 72,
pathogenesis and diagnosis. Virus Res, 164 (1-2), 68-77.
1099-1106.
Varsani A, Regnard GL, Bragg R et al. (201l) Global genetic
 Lobetti R (2003) Canine parvovirus and distemper. Proceed-
diversity and geographical and host-species distribution of
ings 28th World Congress. World Small Animal Veterinary
beak and feather disease virus isolates. / Gen Virol, 92, 752-
Association.
767.
50
Asfarviridae and
Iridoviridae
MELISSA KENNEDY
Asfarviridae
emaciation), and exhibit swollen joints and lameness, skin
ulcerations, and pneumonia.
The family Asfarviridae includes just one genus, the genus
Asfivirus, of which African swine fever virus is the type
Etiologic Agent
species.
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The ASF virus 
is an enveloped DNA virus with a nucleoprotein core of
70-100 nm that is surrounded by lipid layers and an icosa-
African Swine Fever Virus
hedral capsid of 170-190 nm in diameter (Figure 50.1). The
African swine fever (ASF) is a highly contagious disease
genome is a single large (170-190 kb) molecule of double
of domestic and some species of wild swine. Disease in
stranded DNA that includes approximately 150 open read-
ASF virus-infected pigs ranges from peracute to chronic
ing frames. Virions contain more than 50 different pro-
and inapparent. The primary natural reservoirs of the virus
teins, including a large number of enzymes and proteins
are warthogs and arthropod vectors in sub-Saharan Africa.
required for replication. The viral genome also encodes pro-
While present in its wildlife host for a long time, it was
teins that appear to modulate the protective host antiviral
first noted in domestic swine in 1921 in Kenya. It was
response.
first noted outside of Africa 0ccurring in Portugal in 1957.
Several genetically distinct groups of ASF viruses have
Since this time, the virus has been identified at various
been identified by restriction endonuclease analysis of
times in European countries and Caribbean islands. In
the genomes of ASF viruses isolated in different regions
recent years, outbreaks have occurred in Russia (reviewed
 of the world. Strains of the ASF virus can vary markedly
in Costard et al. 2009). Incursions of the virus into pop-
in their virulence in swine. The greatest genetic variation
ulations of domestic and swine typically result in exten-
occurs in regions where the sylvatic cycle is present.
sive outbreaks of acute ASF, and the subacute and chronic
forms appear after the virus becomes established in the
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. The ASF virus
pig population. Whether endemic or newly introduced,
is stable in tissues and excretions. It can withstand pH in
ASF has a profound impact on economics and food secu-
a considerable range (pH 4-13). The virus is inactivated
by heating to 60 *C for 20 min and by lipid solvents and
rity. Given that several species of wild and domestic pigs
as well as tick vectors are susceptible, it continues to be a
some disinfectants (paraphenylphenolic disinfectants are
global threat.
very effective against the virus).
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The ASF
Disease. Acute, severe ASF has a high mortality, often
virus infects domestic and wild pigs (including European
approaching 100%, and death may occur prior to devel-
opment of clinical signs. The disease is characterized by
Soft ticks of the genus Ornithodoros transmit the virus as
 high fever and leukopenia, often followed by the appear-
biological vectors. Only domestic and wild pigs (feral pigs
ance of erythema (red areas on the skin), weakness, acceler-
and European wild boars) express clinical disease, whereas
ated respiration and pulse, vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and
African wild pigs do not.
nasal and conjunctival discharges. Subacute ASF is charac-
The ASF virus replicates in pig macrophages, and can
terized by less dramatic clinical signs and death or recov-
 be propagated in vitro on cultures of swine bone marrow
ery in 3-4 weeks. Affected pigs typically experience a high
cells, monocytes, and alveolar macrophages. The virus can
fever; abortion is common and may be the only sign of
also be adapted to various established cellines (pig kidney,
illness. Pigs with chronic ASF fail to thrive (stunting and
VERO, and baby hamster kidney).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
364
PART III
Viruses
 ously noninfected regions. Pigs that survive infection with
FIGURE 50.1.
ASF virus in thin section of infected tissue
the ASF virus become carriers of the virus.
culture celis (58 000x). (Courtesy of 1.C. Pang.)
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Followingoralor nasalexpo-
sure of domestic pigs to the ASF virus, virus replication
initially occurs in the upper respiratory tract with subse-
quent dissemination to adjacent lymph nodes and then
systemic spread via leukocytes, erythrocytes, or both in the
lymph and blood; this occurs within 3 days postinfection
and corresponds closely with the onset ofpyrexia. The virus
replicates in macrophages; thus, the highest titers of the
virus occur in those tissues in which macrophages are most
abundant.
Acute severe AsF is characterized by edema and hem-
orrhage within internal organs, particularly the lymph
nodes and spleen, which can be very large and intensely
hemorrhagic. Pulmonary edema and intestinal congestion
and hemorrhage are also common. The lesions of suba-
cute ASF are similar but less pronounced, whereas animals
with chronic ASF may show fibrinous pericarditis and pleu-
ritis, lobular consolidation of the lungs, swollen joints,
and patchy necrosis of the skin. Lesions in aborted piglets
are relatively nonspecific, but may include disseminated
petechial hemorrhages.
 Microscopic lesions are most pronounced in the lym-
phoid tissues, and include extensive necrosis of both lym-
phocytes and mononuclear phagocytic cells. Endothelial
 cell necrosis and thrombosis of the pulmonary vasculature
 is common in fulminant cases of acute ASF.
Host Responses to Infection. Pigs that survive infection
Host-Virus Relationship
with ASF virus develop a strong humoral immune (anti-
body) response; however, this response is largely ineffec-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. ASF was first
tual in neutralizing the virus. Why the antibody response
described in European domestic pigs in Kenya in the early
of swine to ASF is largely ineffectual remains uncertain, but
1900s, and the disease regularly has emerged into other
it is clearly a reflection of the inherent properties of the ASF
regions of the world since that time. The disease spread
virus itself. Nevertheless, efforts at developing an effective
outside of Africa for the first time in 1957 when it appeared
-d  am p  a    
on the Iberian Peninsula, and subsequently has occurred in
 duce high titers of neutralizing antibodies to the virus.
Mediterranean Europe (Spain, France, Italy, Malta, and Sar-
 It appears that cell-mediated immunity is important in
dinia), northern Europe (Belgium and the Netherlands), the
protection.
Caribbean (Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti), and
South America (Brazil). ASF has been described throughout
Laboratory Diagnosis. Laboratory tests are required to
much of Africa.
distinguish between hog cholera and ASF because the two
The ASF virus exists in two distinct cycles of infection:
diseases cause very similar signs and lesions in suscepti-
first, a sylvatic cycle in ticks and wild pigs in Africa; and,
ble pigs, including fever, high mortality, and hemorrhages
second, epidemic and endemic cycles in domestic swine.
within internal organs. Tissues submitted should include
The reservoirs of the sylvatic cycle of ASF virus infection
spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and blood. Virus isolation can 
in Africa are persistent or inapparent infections in African
be used to identify the ASF virus, and then confirmed
wild pigs (warthogs in particular) and the soft tick vector.
with hemadsorption. Immunofluorescent or immunoper-
Vertical transmission of the ASF virus in the tick vectors
oxidase staining of sections of tissue from affected pigs
makes them an especially efficient reservoir of the virus.
using ASF virus-specific antisera provides a rapid method of
The virus spreads into domestic swine through the bites of
diagnosis. Techniques based on polymerase chain reaction
infected ticks, or by ingestion of tissues from carrier swine.
can also be used to rapidly identify the presence of ASF virus
The virus is then readily transmitted to susceptible pigs by
genomic material.
direct contact, including aerosols and fomites. The virus is
easily transmitted over long distances because of its stabil-
Treatment and Control.
 There is no effective vaccine 01
ity in infected tissues, including uncooked and some cured
treatment for ASF. Eradication of the disease is accom-
pork products. Importantly, soft ticks become infected with
 sird pasodxa le po pesod pe sarness aa pad
the virus after they feed on viremic swine, and thus they
the virus incurs into new areas. These drastic measures,
can become reservoirs of the virus after it incurs into previ-
however, may not prevent the virus from spreading to
Chapter 50
 Asfarviridae and Iridoviridae
365
the local populations of soft ticks and wild pigs. Premises
that undergo eradication procedures not only must slaugh -
FIGURE 50.2.
Cope's gray tree frog (Hyla chrysoscelis)
ter all pigs but also must be treated with insecticides and
larvae experimentally exposed to ranavirus. The body and legs
disinfectants containing O-phenylphenol with surfactants
are swollen and there is hemorrhage in the legs, consistent
and must remain free of livestock for at least a month.
with ranaviral disease.
Prior to restocking, susceptible sentinel animals should
be placed on the premises to confirm eradication of the
virus.
 In endemic areas, contact between domestic and wild
 swine must be avoided. Early detection is critical in con trol
of outbreaks in domestic swine. Localized disease eradi-
cation with the establishment of ASF-free zones is benefi-
 cial, and can enhance support of larger scale eradication
programs.
Iridoviridae
The family Iridoviridae includes five genera (lridovinus,
Chloriridovinus,Ranavinus,Lymphocystis vinus,and Megato
cytivirus) that are serologically distinct. Viruses in the gen-
era Megalocytivinus and Lymphocystisvinus cause important
diseases of fish, while viruses in the genus Ranavirus are
being associated with flounder and LCDv-2 being associ-
significant pathogens of reptiles and amphibians as well
ated with dabs.
as fish. In particular, Megalocytivirus and Ranavinus have
In contrast, the Ranavirus genus has been associated
 emerged as important economically, causing systemic dis-
with high mortality in both farmed and free-ranging fish.
ease in freshwater and marine environments (Whittington
These pathogenic iridoviruses causing fatal systemic dis-
ease are closely related to frog virus 3, the latter serving as
2010).
Iridoviruses are enveloped viruses that have icosahe-
the prototype ranavirus. Members of this genus have been
dral symmetry with a virion diameter of 120-200 nm
reported to cause epizootic hematopoietic necrosis and sys-
but occasionally up to 350 nm. The genome is a single
temic hemorrhagic disease in fish. Ranaviruses of amphib-
molecule of double-stranded DNA of between 140 and
ians are virulent for larval anurans, though susceptibility
300 kb pairs. Iridoviruses, like asfarviruses, are structurally
varies among different species. Recent widespread die-offs
complex with large numbers of virus-specific proteins (at
in amphibian populations may be the result of a combi-
least 36) encoded by the genome. A single protein consti-
nation of host immunity, natural and man-made stressors,
tutes the majority of the outer capsid. The double-stranded
and the emergence of novel strains (Figure 50.2). Mega-
DNA genome is circular and terminally redundant with
locytiviruses affect a wide variety of tropical marine and
many of the internal cytosine residues being highly methy-
freshwater fish leading to systemic infection with signif-
lated. Viral replication occurs in the nucleus and cytoplasm
icant mortality. The commercial trade and movement of
of infected cells. These viruses are resistant to drying, and
fish, amphibians, and reptiles may contribute to the emer-
can persist in water for months. Definitive diagnosis is
 gence of new iridoviruses (Gray et al. 2009).
best made by viral isolation and/or characterization of the
genome by molecular biology techniques.
The lymphocystis virus infects a wide variety of fish
References
and causes unsightly wart-like cutaneous lesions. These
lesions consist of benign proliferations of hypertrophied,
Costard S, Wieland B, de Glanville W et al. (2009) African swine 
virus-infected cells (fibroblasts and osteoblasts) on the skin,
fever: how can global spread be prevented? Phil Trans R Soc
peritoneum, and mesentery. The lesions typically resolve
B, 364, 2683-2696.
with minimal mortality. The virus spreads by direct con-
Gray MJ, Miller DL, and Hoverman JT (2009) Ecology and
tact through abrasions, especially when fish are crowded;
pathology of amphibian ranaviruses. Dis Aquat Organ, 87,
thus, disease caused by the lymphocystis virus is especially
243-266.
important in fish raised in aquaria and in some commer-
Whittington, RJ, Becker JA, and Dennis MM (2010) Iridovirus
cial aquaculture operations. Two strains of lymphocystis
infections in finfish—critical review with emphasis on
disease virus (LCDV) have been described, with LCDV-1
ranaviruses. / Fish Dis, 33, 95-122.
Papillomaviridae and
Polyomaviridae
MELISSA KENNEDY
Papillomaviridae
(warts), proliferation of nonstratified squamous epithelium
(polyps), and subcutaneous fibromas with or without asso-
Papillomaviruses are widespread among mammals, hav.
ciated cutaneous papillomas (fibropapillomas).
ing been identified in cattle, sheep, goats, deer, elk, horses,
rabbits, dogs, monkeys, pigs, opossums, mice, elephants,
Bovine Papillomaviruses. At least six types of bovine
and several species of birds. Cottontail rabbit papillomavinus
papilloma virus are distinguished on the basis of their anti-
is the type species. Virus-induced papillomas (warts) are
 genic and nucleotide sequence homologies. They can be
benign, hyperplastic epithelial proliferations of the skin or
further distinguished on the basis of the nature of the
mucous membranes that may undergo malignant transfor-
lesions that they cause in cattle. This has led to the estab-
mation in certain circumstances. Some papillomaviruses
lishment of three genera of bovine papillomaviruses: Xipa-
also cause proliferations of mesenchymal tissues in the
pillomavirus, which is epitheliotropic; Deltapapillomavirus,
skin, with or without associated epithelial pro-liferations.
which causes fibropapillomas; and Epsilonpapillomavinus,
Those with exclusively epithelial proliferation are papillo-
which contains properties of both xipapillomaviruses
mas, whereas those with proliferation of both mesenchy-
and deltapapillomaviruses. However, most bovine papillo-
mal (fibrous tissue) and epithelial tissue are termed fibropa-
 maviruses are referred to by type number, of which there are
pillomas. Papillomaviruses are highly species specific, and
at least ten. Cutaneous fibropapillomas (warts) caused by
thus are generally contagious only to the animal species
papillomavirus types 1, 2, and 5 occur commonly in calves
in which they naturally occur. Virus-induced cutaneous
less than 2 years old. They appear most frequently on the
papillomas (warts) are common in horses and cattle and
head, especially in the skin around the eyes. They may also
infrequent in dogs, sheep, and goats. In some cases, papil.
appear on the sides of the neck and less commonly on other
 lomaviruses may play a role in neoplastic development as
parts of the body. They begin as small, nodular growths that
occurs in humans.
then grow rapidly into dry, horny, whitish, cauliflower-
like masses that eventually regress spontaneously. The his-
tological appearance is a variable mixture of proliferating
Etiologic Agents
dermal fbrous tissue and overlying epithelium. Infectious
 Papillomaviruses have naked icosahedral capsids approxi-
papillomas ( without a fibrous tissue component) that occur
mately 55 nm in diameter (Figure 51.1). The viral genome
on the skin and teats of dairy cattle are also associated with
is a single circular molecule of double-stranded DNA that
infection by bovine papillomaviruses, as are some epithe-
encodes between 8 and 10 proteins; two are structural (L1
lial proliferations (polyps) thatoccur in the bladder and gas-
and L2) and the remainder are nonstructural proteins that
trointestinal tract, particularly those that affect the esoph-
are essential for virus replication.
agus, forestomachs, and intestines.
Fibropapilloma is a papillomavirus-induced tumor that
Papilloma Types
occurs on the penis of young bulls and the vagina and vulva
 of young heifers. These are fleshy, raised multinodular pro-
 Papillomaviruses are distinguished by their hostspecificity,
liferations that consist of abundant fibrous tissue covered
tissue and cell tropism, and sequence relatedness. How.
by epithelium of variable thickness.
ever, some papillomaviruses may abortively infect other
Host immune responses eventually control papillo-
species leading to neoplastic development, such as sarcoids
mavirus infections because most warts persist for variable
 in horses linked to bovine papillomavirus types 1 (BPV-1)
periods and usually regress spontaneously. The host is then
and 2 (BPV-2).
immune to reinfection with thesame virus, but not to other
Papillomaviruses are also distinguished on the basis
types of bovine papillomaviruses. Occasionally, they may
 of the lesions they induce, including skin papillomas
 evolve into cancers of epithelial or mesenchymal origin.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
366
Chapter S1 Papillomaviridae and Polyomaviridae
367
and mesenchymal components to the tumor. Sarcoids
FIGURE 51.1.
Negatively stained preparation of equine
are frequently multiple in affected horses, and they are
papillomaviruses (75 000x). (Reproduced with permission from
commonly ulcerated. Recurrence after surgical removal is
Sundberg and O'Banion 1986.)
common, but metastasis has not been described; thus, they
are not malignant tumors despite their locally aggressive
behavior.
Canine Oral  Papillomavirus.  Canine papillomavirus
induces warts in the mouths of dogs. The warts gener-
ally develop on the lips and spread to the buccal mucosa,
tongue, palate, and pharynx. The warts are usually benign
and disappear spontaneously after several months. Occa-
sionally, the papillomas may interfere with eating, or may
compromise breathing necessitating excision. Dogs recov-
ered from the infection develop immunity to reinfec-
tion. The infection is highly contagious, often spreading
through all the dogs in a kennel. Dogs that are immuno-
suppressed have been reported to be more susceptible to
development of papillomatosis.
Warts have been experimentally transmitted by rubbing
pieces of wart tissue on scarified mucous membranes of sus-
ceptible dogs. Under such conditions the incubation period
In cattle grazing on bracken ferns, BPV-2 and BPV-4 have
was 4-6 weeks. Infectious venereal papillomas (warts) have
been associated with urinary bladder and upper gastroin-
 also been described in dogs.
testinal tumors, respectively. Conversely, DNA of BPV has
Azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, has been shown
been identified in normal bovine skin, indicating thatitcan
to be effective for treatment of human papillomatosis.
persist in a latent state causing no clinical signs. Treatment
Recent studies indicate that it may also be effective in treat-
of bovine papillomatosis with finely ground wart tissue sus-
ing canine papillomatosis. While the mechanism of this
pended in a 0.4% formalin solution has been used for many
activity is unknown, it may aid resolution in chronic cases.
years to combat outbreaks of the disease, but it is difficult
to evaluate the efficacy of this procedure since the disease
Feline Papillomavirus. Recently, DNA of a papillo-
is self-limiting and its duration varies between individual
 mavirus has been identified in feline viral plaques. These
animals. A significant proportion of vaccinated animals
skin lesions are often of little clinical significance, but
apparently fail to reject their warts after vaccination with
occasionally may progress to SCC. To date, at least two
autologous tumor preparations. Cattle vaccinated with the
 L2 structural protein of BPV-4 did not develop alimentary
lomaviruses (FdPV) 1 and 2, have been associated with
papillomas when challenged with that virus type.
feline viral plaques. The identification of papillomavirus
DNA has led to speculation that it may play a role in this
neoplastic development in cats. However, as with other
Equine Papillomavirus and Equine Sarcoids.
 Skin warts
Hu u pnon uaq se vna re 'sasnded
of horses are not as common as those affecting cattle.
feline skin.Additional research is needed to define the role,
They develop most often on the nose and around the lips
if any, of FdPV in viral plaques and SCC in cats.
of young horses, appearing as small, elevated, papillary
(horny) masses. They also occur in the inner aspects of ear
(aural plaques). The causative virus is spread by direct con-
Polyomaviridae
tact of infectious material through wounds and cutaneous
abrasions. The virus can be experimentally transmitted to
Polyomaviruses have not been associated with diseases of
horses by intradermal inoculation of a suspension of wart
domestic animals with the notable exception of an avian
tissue, but not to other animal species. Equine papillomas
polyomavirus that causes an acute generalized infection in
are usually self-limiting and disappear spontaneously in 4-
fledgling budgerigars. Polyomaviruses are nonenveloped
8 weeks, although they can progress to squamous cell car-
40 nm in diameter, with an icosahedral capsid and a
cinoma (SCC) in rare instances. Natural infection provides
genome of a single molecule of circular double-stranded
solid immunity.
DNA. The genome encodes at least three structural and five
Sarcoids are common skin tumors of horses that grossly
nonstructural proteins.
and histologically resemble fibropapillomas of cattle.
The avian polyomavirus is the agent of budgerigar
 Interestingly, the genome of BPv-1 or BPV-2 is present
fledgling disease, a disease characterized by abdominal dis-
within some of these tumors, whereas that of equine papil-
tention, feather abnormalities, and acute death. To date,
 lomavirus is not. Sarcoids have been reproduced by direct
at least four polyomaviruses of birds have been identi-
inoculation of bovine papillomavirus into susceptible
fied, with some occurring in species other than psittacines,
horses. The tumors range from being largely epithelial
including finches and crows. The virus is transmitted hor-
in nature to intensely fibroblastic, and the histological
izontally and vertically. It targets endothelial cells and
diagnosis is dependent on demonstrating both epithelial
macrophages, and may be found in any tissue. Nestling and
368
PART III
Viruses
juvenile birds are the most susceptible and asymptomatic
 Further Reading
adults are the major source. Diagnosis is made through clin-
ical signs and polymerase chain reaction detection of the
Borzacchiello G and Roperto F (2008) Bovine papillomaviruses,
virus. There is no treatment.
 papillomas and cancer in cattle. Virus Res, 39, 45.
 Hiroshi K, Ogawa H, Ohya K, and Fukushi H (2010) A review
of DNA viral infections in psittacine birds. / Vet Med Sci, 72
Reference
(9), 1099-1106.
Potti J, Blanco G, Lemus JA, and Canal D (2007) Infectious
Sundberg JP and O'Banion MK (1986) Cloning and character-
offspring: how birds acquire and transmit an avian poly-
ization of an equine papillomavirus. Virology, 152, 100.
 omavirus in the wild. PLoS One, 2, e1276.
52
Adenoviridae
MELISSA KENNEDY AND D. SCOTT MCVEY
Adenoviruses have been isolated from many species of
may exhibit increased thirst, anorexia, tonsillitis, petechial
animals, but it is likely that additional animal aden-
hemorrhages on the mucous membranes, and diarrhea,
oviruses exist that have not yet been identified. The
and be reluctant to move. During the acute phase of ill-
host range of individual adenoviruses is frequently highly
ness, dogs may also develop conjunctivitis and photopho-
restricted. Although adenovirus infections of animals are
bia. Severe ICH is most likely to occur in pups that are not
often asymptomatic or subclinical, some adenoviruses are
immune to the disease.
pathogenic and cause respiratory and/or systemic diseases.
Most dogs that survive acute ICH recover uneventfully,
Table 52.1 lists the diseases of domestic animals caused by
but transient coneal edema may occur in some convales-
adenoviruses
cent animals after acute signs disappear. The CAV-1 also
 The family Adenoviridae is divided into four genera:
has been implicated as a cause of chronic progressive hep-
Mastadenovirus, which includes many of the adenoviruses
atitis and interstitial nephritis, but its role in spontaneous
that infect mammals, and Aviadenovirus, which includes
occurrence of these disorders in dogs is highly conjectural
adenoviruses that infect birds. In recent years, some mem-
(CAV-1 is most unlikely to be a significant cause of either
bers ofthese genera have been reclassified into separate gen-
 of these two common diseases of dogs).
era: Atadenovirus, which includes adenoviruses of reptiles
as wellas the agent of egg drop syndrome of fowl, and Siade-
Etiologic Agent
novirus, which includes the agent of hemorrhagic enteritis
of turkeys and marble spleen disease of pheasants. Mem-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. CAV-1 is
bers of these genera do not share a common group anti-
antigenically related but distinct from CAV-2. CAV-1 is
gen. Adenovirus virions are nonenveloped icosahedrons
 morphologically similar to other adenoviruses, but anti-
that are 70-90 nm in diameter and are composed of 252
genically distinct.
 capsomers. Extended fibers project from the virion surface
and are used for attachment to target cells. The genome
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. CAV-1 is
of adenoviruses is a large molecule (26-45 kb) of linear
resistant to ether, alcohols, and chloroform. It is stable for
double-stranded DNA. Approximately 40 differentproteins
at least 30 min at a wide range of pH (3-9), and is also stable
are encoded by the adenovirus genome. Adenoviruses repli-
in soiled material at room temperature for several days.
cate in the nucleus of infected cells. They affect cells in
Viral infectivity is lost after heating at 50-60 *C for 10 min.
     n 
Steam cleaning and treatment with iodine, phenol, sodium 
DNA synthesis and causing cell death.
hydroxide, or lysol are effective means of disinfection.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. CAV.
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
1 causes clinical disease in dogs and other canids (wolves,
(Canine Adenovirus 1)
foxes, and coyotes). Skunks and bears also are susceptible.
Antibodies to CAVs have been detected in marine mam-
Disease
mals as well as other terrestrial carnivores. Infection in
foxes can manifest as encephalitis. CAV-1 replicates well
Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) is a disease of dogs caused
 in canine kidney cells.
by canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1). Although once an impor-
Although some strains of CAV-1 and CAV-2 are onco-
tant disease of dogs, ICH is increasingly rare in much of
genic in inoculated hamsters, these viruses have not been
the world, perhaps as a result of widespread vaccination.
associated with neoplastic disease in dogs.
Outbreaks are still observed in regions where CAV vac-
cines are not routinely used. The majority of infections are
Host—Virus Relationship
asymptomatic, but the disease in susceptible dogs is char-
acterized by fever, hepatic necrosis, and widespread hem-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
ICH has
 orrhage as a consequence of vascular injury. Affected dogs
a worldwide distribution, although clinical disease is
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
369
370
PART III
Viruses
Table 52.1.
Dise ases of Domestic Animals Caused by
Host Response to Infections. Recovery from ICH, regard-
Adenoviruses
 less of the severity of illness, results in long-lasting immu-
        
Virus
Type of Disease
titers of neutralizing antibodies to CAV-1.
Mastadenovirus
Bovine adenovirus, types 1-10 
 Conjunctivitis, pneumonia,
Laboratory Diagnosis
diarrhea, polyarthritis
Canine adenovirus type 1
 Hemorrhagic and hepatic
The diagnosis of ICH can be confirmed by serologic test-
(CAV-1; infectious canine 
ing (complement fixation, hemagglutination inhibition,
hepatitis)
 01 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) to demonstrate
 Canine adenovirus type 2
 Respiratory
 rising titers of antibodies to CAV-1, polymerase chain reac.
Equine adenovirus types 1-2
Respiratory
tion (PCR) detection of viral nucleic acid or virus isolation
 9-I sadk sasnAuape auna
 Respiratory and enteric
from affected tissues, or immunohistochemical staining of
 Porcine adenoviruses types 1-4
 Diarrhea or meningoencephalitis.
tissues with CAV-1-specific antibodies. Antemortem, ocu-
 Or both
 Deer adenovirus
lar and oropharyngeal swabs, feces, and urine may be used
 Systemic vasculitis, with 
for virus identification.
hemorrhage and pulmonary 
edema
Aviadenovirus
Treatment and Control
 Chicken adenoviruses types
Respiratory disease, enteric
1-12
disease, egg-drop syndrome.
Therapy for dogs that develop ICH in volves supportive and
aplastic anemia, atrophy of the
 symptomatic treatment. Control is achieved by vaccina-
bursa of Fabricius 
tion and strict sanitation of affected premises with quaran-
Turkey adenoviruses types 1-4
Respiratory disease, enteritis.
tine of exposed dogs. Available vaccines include both inac-
 marble spleen disease
tivated and modified live virus varieties, including CAV-2
vaccines that induce heterologous protection against CAV-
Deer adenovirus, egg-drop syndrome virus of poultry, bovine adenovirus 4, and
1. CAV-2 vaccines do not induce immune complex uveitis
duck adenovirus 1 are proposed to be members of a new genus Atadenowirus
similarly. hemorrhagic enteritis of turkeys virus and marble spleen disease of
in dogs as do some other modifed live virus vaccines. Care
 pheasants virus are proposed to be members of a new genus Siadenovirus.
 must be exercised to ensure that maternal antibodies do not
 interfere with active immunization of pups, because vacci-
 nation success is directly related to the level of neutralizing
antibodies.
increasingly rare. The infection is spread through the urine
of infected dogs. Dogs may retain the virus in their kidneys
and shed it in urine for months after infection.
Canine Adenovirus Type 2
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Following aerosol infec-
CAV-2 has been isolated from dogs with acute cough and
 tion, the virus localizes in the tonsils and spreads to regional
is one of several infectious agents implicated in infectious
lymph nodes and then to the systemic circulation. Viremia
tracheobronchitis (kennel cough). Experimental infection
results in rapid dissemination of the virus to all body tissues
produces mild pharyngitis, tonsillitis, and tracheobronchi-
and secretions, including saliva, urine, and feces. The virus
tis, and the virus persists in the respiratory tract for up to
has a particular tropism for hepatocytes and endothelial
 28 days. Unlike CAV-1, CAV-2 does not produce gener-
cells, which produces the characteristic signs of the dis-
 alized disease, is not excreted in the urine, and does not
ease. Virus-induced injury to endothelial cells leads to con-
produce renal and ocular lesions. CAV-2 is antigenically
sumptive coagulopathy (disseminated intravascular coag-
related to CAV-1, and CAV-2 vaccines have been developed
ulation) and a generalized bleeding tendency (hemorrhagic
 as ICH vaccine since they do not produce postvaccinal ocu-
diathesis) that is reflected by abnormalclotting parameters.
lar lesions.
Dogs that die during the acute phase generally have
edema and hemorrhage of superficial lymph nodes and
cervical subcutaneous tissue. The abdominal cavity often
Bovine Adenoviruses
contains fluid, which may vary in color from clear to bright
red. Hemorrhages are present on all serosal surfaces. A fibri-
Bovine adenoviruses (BAV) are currently classified into
nous exudate may cover the liver, which can be swollen
10 serotypes (BAV-1-BAV-10), of which BAV-3 and BAV-5
and congested. The gallbladder is characteristically ede-
appear to be more pathogenic than the other serotypes.
 matous. Large characteristic intranuclear inclusion bodies
may be present in hepatocytes, vascular endothelium, and
but only in very young or immunosuppressed cattle. Ade-
macrophages.
 noviruses are frequently isolated from apparently normal
 Theocularlesions thatdevelop in somedogs that recover
cattle, and serologic surveys indicate that asymptomatic
from ICH are the result of deposition of immune complexes
or subclinical BAV infection of cattle occurs worldwide.
within the ciliary body of the eye. Interstitial nephritis may
BAV-3 can produce mild pneumonia in susceptible calves,
also occur as a consequence of immune complex deposition
with necrosis of the epithelium lining terminal airways
1-3 weeks after recovery.
in the lungs, causing necrotizing bronchiolitis with
Chapter 52 Adenoviridae
371
characteristic intranuclear inclusion bodies in the affected
Deer Adenovirus
epithelial cells.
Immunocompetent calves inoculated with BAV develop
neutralizing antibodies in 10 to 14 days, and immunity
A unique adenovirus was recently identified as the cause of
after natural infection is long-lasting. Diagnosis requires
a fatal systemic hemorrhagic disease of mule deer (includ-
viral isolation or serology. Bovine adenoviruses can be iso-
ing black-tailed deer). The virus was originally identified
lated from rectal, nasal, or conjunctival swabs. Most types
as the cause of extensive outbreaks of fatal disease in mule
do not produce characteristic cytopathogenic effects until
deer in North America (California), both captive and free-
after several blind passages.
ranging, but subsequently has been recognized to have a
Although no vaccines are licensed for use in the United
much wider distribution. A similar disease has also been
States, there is limited use of vaccines against BAV-1, BAV-3,
identified in moose. The causative adenovirus is genetically
and BAV-4 in Europe.
unique and is serologically related to some adenoviruses of
cattle (BAV) and goats. It is proposed that deer adenovirus
be included in the genus Atadenovirus, along with BAV-4,
Equine Adenovirus
duck adenovirus 1, and certain other adenoviruses. The
virus causes either localized or systemic vascular injury as
Adenovirus infection rarely results in respiratory tract dis-
a consequence of infection of endothelial cells and sub-
ease in healthy horses, and immunocompetent foals nor-
sequent thrombosis, leading to severe pulmonary edema,
mally develop either subclinical or asymptomatic infec-
ulceration of the oral cavity and gastrointestinal tract, and
tions. However, Arabian foals with severe combined
widespread hemorrhages. Mortality can be high, especially
immunodeficiency (SCID) are highly susceptible to in fec-
among fawns. The virus can be propagated in primary deer
tion with equine adenovirus 1. The respiratory disease
respiratory epithelial cell cultures, but diagnosis is based
induced by equine adenovirus in SCID Arabian foals is
on the characteristic gross and histologic lesions, immuno-
protracted and characterized by coughing, dyspnea, and
histochemical staining with antisera to BAV, and electron
fever. These foals also develop generalized adenovirus
microscopy.
infections, with involvement of a variety of organs and
tissues.
Avian Adenoviruses
There are two serotypes of equine adenovirus, as deter-
mined by serum neutralization. For laboratory diagnosis,
the virus may be isolated from infective tissue and nasal and
Adenoviruses infect poultry and other bird species world-
wide. Although adenoviruses are often isolated from appar-
ocular swab material in equine fetal kidney or equine fetal
dermis cell cultures. The virus can be identified by electron
ently normal birds, specific diseases are also associated with 
microscopy or by immunofluorescent (IF) or immunohis-
adenovirus in fections. These include egg drop syndrome, a
tochemical staining of infected tissues. Adenovirus nucleic
disease of both wild and domestic birds thatis characterized
acid can also be detected by PCR assay. Viral neutralization
 by production of eggs that lack shells or have abnormally
soft shells, and hemorrhagic en teritis of turkeys and marble
and hemagglutination-inhibition test are used to detect the
presence and rise of antibody titers for serological diagnosis
spleen disease of pheasants, which are similar diseases char-
of adenovirus infections.
acterized by intestinal hemorrhage and enlargement of the
There is no commercially available vaccine.
spleen of affected birds and are classifed as siadenoviruses.
Aviadenoviruses are associated with inclusion body hep-
atitis, usually seen in 3- to 7-week-old broilers, and quail
Ovine Adenoviruses
bronchitis, and may have significant mortality in young
birds. A relatively new syndrome of broilers, hydroperi-
Adenoviruses have been isolated from the feces of appar-
cardium or Angara disease, has been associated with fowl
ently normal sheep and from lambs with respiratory dis-
adenovirus 4, and has a mortality approaching 75% among
ease. Six serotypes have been identified. The pathogenic
3- to 5-week-old chicks.
role of most of the ovine adenoviruses is uncertain because
Among psittacines, adenoviruses have been associated
  no   ad A a
with clinical depression and diarrhea with cloacal hemor-
tion of the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. However,
rhage; birds may be found dead in their enclosures. Lesions
apparent outbreaks of adenovirus-induced pneumonia and
affecting liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs, and gastrointesti-
enteritis have been described in lambs, as have sporadic
nal tract have been identified. Basophilic intranuclear
cases of generalized (systemic) infections of very young
inclusions are often seen associated with liver and splenic
lambs.
necrosis.
53
Herpesviridae
REBECCA P. WILKES
Herpesviruses have been found in virtually every species
long replication cycle; infected cells often become enlarged
that have been investigated and cause significant disease
(cytomegaly), thus thei1 designation as cytomegaloviruses.
in each domestic animal species except sheep. Within this
Latency can be established in numerous tissues, including
 group of viruses, there is wide variation in biological prop-
secretory glands and lymphoreticular tissues. Gammaher-
erties including pathogenicity and oncogenic potential.
pesvirinae, with some exceptions, tend to be tropic for B or 
Herpesviruses are morphologically similar, with a double-
T lymphocytes (lymphotropic), replicate in lymphoblas-
 stranded DNA core and an icosahedral capsid consisting
toid cells, and may cause lytic infections in certain types
of 162 capsomeres, surrounded by a granular zone com-
of epithelial and fibroblastic cells. Infection is frequently
posed of globular proteins (tegument) and encompassed by
arrested at a prelytic stage with persistent and minimum
a lipid envelope (Figure 53.1). The genome of herpesviruses 
expression of viral genome in the cell. Latency is estab-
is large, 125-290 kilobases (kb), and encodes many differ-
lished frequently in lymphoid tissue. Host range is narrow
ent proteins; functions of the proteins encoded by the viral
with experimental hosts usually limited to the order of the
genome include virus replication, virus structural proteins,
natural host.
and a variety of proteins that regulate cell growth and mod.
ulate the host's antiviral response.
Viral replication and encapsidation occur in the nucleus,
Equid Herpesviruses
and the envelope is obtained by budding through the inner
layer of the nuclear en velope. Intranuclear inclusion bodies
Both alpha- and gammaherpesviruses have been identified
are a characteristic feature of infection (Figure 53.2). Infec.
in equids. The alphaherpesviruses isolated from domes-
tion with herpesviruses results in lifelong latent infection
tic horses are equid herpesvirus 1 (EHV-1; equine abor-
with subsequent recrudescence and intermittent or contin-
tion virus), EHV-3 (equine coital exanthema (ECE) virus),
uous shedding of virus.
and EHV-4 (equine rhinopneumonitis virus). Alphaher-
 Herpesviruses do not survive well outside of the host.
pesviruses have also been isolated from donkeys, includ.
Transmission usually requires close contact, but respira-
ing EHV-6 (asinine herpesvirus 1) and EHV-8 (asinine her-
tory droplet spread is important in facilities with confined
pesvirus 3). Asinine herpesvirus 1 produces a disease that
populations, such as cattle feedlots and animal shelters.
     e   s
The virus may survive longer in cool, moist en vironments,
EHV-1. In addition to infecting donkeys, these viruses also
but latently infected animals serve as the reservoir for trans-
infect zebra and asses. Another equid alphaherpesvirus is
mission.
EHV-9, which genetically resembles EHV-1 and was first
 Herpesviruses have been assigned to the order Herpesvi-
isolated from Thomson's gazelles. Infection causes little 01
rales, which contains three distinct families: Herpesviri-
no illness in equid species, and zebra are suggested to be the
dae includes herpesviruses of birds, mammals, and reptiles;
natural host and reservoir of EHV-9. EHV-9 produces neu-
 Alloherpesviridae includes herpesviruses of fish and frogs;
and Malacoherpesviridae contains a single virus isolated
 ated with encephalitis in giraffes and polar bears.
from oysters (ostreid herpesvirus 1). The family Herpesviri-
Equid gammaherpesviruses include EHV-2, EHV-5, and
dae consists of three major subfamilies, alpha-, beta-, and
EHV-7 (asinine herpesvirus 2). Some additional gamma-
gammaherpesvirinae, which were initially distinguished
herpesviruses have been isolated from donkeys with neu-
by host range, duration of replication, reproductive cycle,
rologic disease or severe interstitial pneumonia, but these
cytopathology, and latent infection characteristics. The
viruses have not been well characterized.
alphaherpesvirinae are generally highly cytopathic in cell
culture, have a relatively short replication cycle (24 h), and
EHV-1 (Equine Abortion Virus)
frequently cause latent viral infections in sensory ganglia.
Most of these viruses are restricted in their host range, indi-
Disease. EHV-1 causes abortion in mares, respiratory tract
cating that they evolved with their hosts over long periods
disease, and occasional neurologic disease. While abortion 
 in mares may occur as early as 4 months of gestation, it
of time. Betaherpesvirinae have a variable host range and a
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
372
Chapter 53
Herpesviridae
373
incontinence and limb paresis to paralysis and death has
FlGURE 53.1.
Negatively stained preparation of
been associated with certain strains of EHV-1. EHM is a rel-
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus. n, nucleocapsid; ev,
atively uncommon manifestation of EHV-1 infection, but
envelope; rv, enveloped virus; tn, twin nucleocapsids. 17 000x.
recently these outbreaks have been reported with increased
Inset: Minute projections on the envelope of a matured virus.
frequency, and devastating losses can occur. A study has
sp, virus spikes; cd, virus core; ve, virus envelope. 100 000x.
shown that EHV-1 strains with increased genetic propen-
(Reproduced with permission from Talens and Zee 1976.)
sity to cause neurologic disease are continuing to increase
in prevalence within the latent reservoir of the virus, lead-
ing to greater risks for outbreaks of EHM.
Etiologic Agent
Physical, Chemical, and Antigen Properties.
The equine
tinguished from each other based on their morphology.
They are, however, antigenically distinct and can be distin-
guished by serological assays.
SD
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. The equine
herpesviruses are inactivated by ether, acid (pH 3), drying,
exposure to heat of 56 *C for 30 min, and detergents and
commonly used disinfectants.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. EHV-1
usually infects only horses; however, ocular disease due to
EHV-1 characterized by vitritis, retinitis, and optic neuri-
most frequently occurs between the seventh and eleventh
tis leading to blindness has been described in new-world
months of gestation and usually without any premonitory
signs. Foals infected in utero may be born alive but are
tis and acute death in these species. Abortions due to EHV-1
usually weak and die within 2-3 days. Naturally occur-
have been described in cattle and zebras.
ring respiratory disease due to EHV-1 is characterized by
EHV-1 can be propagated in equine fetal kidney, rabbit
fever, anorexia, nasal discharge of varying severity, and
kidney, and L (mouse fibroblast) cells, resulting in forma-
ocular discharge. Experimentally, EHV-1 causes a much
tion of cytopathic effect (CPE) and intranuclear inclusion 
more severe respiratory disease than thatinduced by equine
bodies.
herpesvirus 4 (equine rhinopneumonitis virus).
Equine herpesvirus myeloencephalopathy (EHM) with
Host-Virus Relationship
variable neurologic signs ranging from ataxia, urinary
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
0.EHV-1is preva-
lent in horses worldwide. The virus appears to be main-
tained in the horse, but it is possible that dogs, foxes, and
FIGURE 53.2.
Photomicrograph of the liver (100x)
carrion birds may carry infection with fragments of aborted
stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Several nuclei with
fetuses from one farm to another. Transmission may occur
peripheralized chromatin and herpesviral eosinophilic
by directcontact with virus-laden aborted fetuses or placen -
intranuclear inclusion bodies are indicated by arrows. (Photo
tas. Aerosol transmission is considered less important than
courtesy of Dr Robert Donnell, The University of Tennessee.)
direct contact or spread of secretions on fomites between
horses by handlers.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Primary EHV-1 replication
occurs in the upper respiratory tract epithelial cells
 and local lymph nodes resulting in leukocyte-associated
viremia. This leukocyte-associated viremia in an acute
 infection has been shown to be a prerequisite for abortion
 and EHM by initiating replication of EHV-1 in endothelial
cell lining of blood vessels in the pregnant uterus or central
nervous system (CNS). A widespread infection of endome-
trial blood vessels results in severe vasculitis and multifocal
thrombosis, which could result in an abortion of a virus
negative fetus. Less extensive uterine vascular pathology
may allow focal transfer of virus across the utero-placental
20um
barrier and abortion of a virus-infected fetus. A near term
transplacental EHV-1 infection could result in the birth of
374
PART III
Viruses
live infected foals, which usually die a few days afterward-
high frequency of memory cytotoxic T lymphocytes and a
a condition known as neonatal foal disease. These differ-
resistance to abortion in ponies exposed to EHV-1. Neu-
ences in abortigenic potential may relate to differences in
ropathogenic strains of EHV-1 are thought to replicate
the level of viremia or endothelial cell in fection induced by
 more efficiently than non neuropathogenic strains, and the
different virus strains.
quantitative load of circulating virus that follows in fection 
Macroscopically, the most prominent lesions of the
by EHV-1 was defined as a major risk factor for postexpo-
virus-infected fetus are jaundice, mucous membrane
sure development of EHV-1 CNS disease, and cytotoxic T
petechiation, subcutaneous and pleural edema, splenic
 lymphocytes appear to have a role in maintaining immuno-
enlargement with prominent lymphoid follicles, and focal
logic control of EHV-1 viremia.
hepatic necrosis. Histologically, there is bronchiolitis,
pneumonitis, severe necrosis of the splenic white pulp,
Laboratory Diagnosis. In cases of abortions, diagnosis
is based on characteristic lesions with intranuclear inclu-
inclusion bodies. The early fetus (<3 months) shows little
 sions present in the fetal liver, spleen, lung, and thymus.
Or no response to the viral infection. However, the fetus in
The same tissues provide a good source of virus, which
its last 4 months of gestation shows a marked ability to react
can be demonstrated by immunofluorescence or immuno-
in a specific manner to the presence of the virus. Lesions
histochemical staining of tissue sections. Histopathologi-
in the fetus less than 7 months of age differ from those in
cal examination of the brain and spinal cord is essential
older fetuses, suggesting that the lesions represent a fetal
in confirming EHV-1 infection in a horse with suspected
response to the virus.
EHM. Vasculitis and thrombosis of small blood vessels in
The neurological signs of EHM do not result from direct
the spinal cord or brain are consistent changes and virus
  p a  p    
 detection in the CNS is achieved using immunohistochem-
 instead result from diffuse, multifocal myeloencephalopa-
istry, in sihu hybridization, or polymerase chain reaction
thy secondary to vasculitis, hemorrhage, thrombosis, and
(PCR). Virus isolation can be used to confirm the diagnosis
ischemic neuronal injury due to viral replication in the
in abortion cases, but isolation from neural tissues in EHM
endothelial cells lining the arterioles of the CNs. The
cases is difficult.
 os a s  n  n sn
PCR has become the diagnostic test of choice due to
the sites and extent of CNS infection. Clinical signs ini-
its high sensitivity and specificity, and PCR detection of
tially reflect lower motor neuron defects, including an ini-
EHV-1 is routinely performed on secretions from nasal or
tial dysuria, constipation, perineal analgesia, protrusion of
nasopharyngeal swabs or from uncoagulated blood sam-
the penis, locomotor dysfunction varying from mild ataxia
ples. A variable region in the EHV-1 DNA polymerase gene
to severe paralysis, and possible tetraplegia. When the cor-
(ORF 30) involved in initial viral replication within cells has
 tex or brainstem is involved, encephalitic signs, including
been linked to EHM. PCR assays based on ORF 30 have been
con vulsions, may occur.
developed and used to differentiate between EHV-1 isolates
from neurologically and nonneurologically affected horses
Host Responses to Infection. Virus persists in circulating
(Allen 2007). However, the genotyping of field isolates
leukocytes for as long as 9 days following infection. Abor-
needs to be interpreted carefully, because between approx-
tion in mares may occur as long as 90-120 days following
   s      
infection. Both complement-fixing and virus-neutralizing
EHM do not have this neuropathogenic marker (Nugent
antibodies appear in the sera of infected horses. In gen-
et al. 2006; Perkins et al. 2009).Strain characterization may
eral, complement-fixing antibodies are demonstrable for
be important; however, given that the odds of neurological
6 mon ths after infection, with virus-neutralizing antibod-
disease when infected with the neurotropic EHV-1 geno-
ies persisting longer. IgG antibodies against the viral en ve-
type versus the nonneurotropic genotype are 162 times
lope neutralize virus, while those against the nucleocap-
greater.
sid do not. Results from an experimental challenge study
 Serology that demonstrates a fourfold or greater increase
failed to reveal any significant relationship between preex-
in serum antibody titer, using serum neutralization tests,
posure virus neutralizing antibody titer and the magnitude
on acute and convalescent samples collected 7-21 days
of postinfection EHV-1 viremia. The intracellular location
apart provides presumptive evidence of infection. The
of EHV-1 during most of its infection cycle within horses
mares' sera may, but does not invariably, demonstrate a
may limit the effectiveness of virus neutralizing antibody
rise in titer. Also, many horses with EHM do not exhibit
in controlling cell-associated EHV-1 viremia. Experimen-
a fourfold rise in serum neutralization titer, because titers
tally, pregnant mares with antibody to EHV-1 may abort
when challenged with EHV-1.
signs appear.
Also, the concentration of antibodies prior to virus inoc-
ulation does not correlate with protection against chal-
Treatment and Control. Both modified live and inacti-
lenge with neuropathogenic EHV-1. Although the specific
vated vaccines are commercially available and widely used;
immune mechanisms required for control of EHV-1 neuro-
however, the vaccines do not block infection, the devel-
logic disease are largely unknown, data suggest that pres-
opment of viremia, or the establishment of latency. Reg-
ence of a high frequency of preexposure EHV-1 specific
ular vaccination of mares has been shown to reduce the
memory cytotoxicTlymphocytes is significantly correlated
risk of EHV-1 induced abortion, but no vaccine currently
with protective immunity against development of EHM. A
offers protection against the development of EHM and it
 previous study also demonstrated an association between a
   s  o  s
Chapter 53 Herpesviridae
375
EHV-1 at 3-5 monthly intervals with inactivated o1
Culture Systems.I
 Primary rabbit kidney and equine der-
modified-live vaccines. To achieve protective efficacy
mal cells as well as hamster embryos can be used for virus
against EHV-1 myeloencephalopathy by vaccination, the
isolation.
vaccines must be able to stimulate the equine immune
response toward the production of functional effector cyto-
Host-Virus Relationship
toxic T lymphocytes. Horse owners must develop an under-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. EHV-2 has been
stan ding of the concept of boosting herd immunity to help
protect individual horses rather than having an (as yet
isolated from horses worldwide. Ninety-seven percent of
unattainable) expectation that the attending veterinarian
horses less than 1 year old have antibodies to EHV-2, and
in one study, the virus could be isolated from the leuko-
can reliably protect an individual horse from developing
potentially fatal EHM by administering one of the currently
cytes of 88.7% of normal horses. Similarly, virus was iso-
available vaccines.
lated from 68 of 69 foals sampled once between 1 and 8
Thus, disease control measures are important for pre-
months of age. Both “healthy" and clinically ill horses act
venting the spread of virus. Limiting traffic in and out of
as a reservoi1 for the virus. In ponies experimentally inoc-
brood-mare bands and weanling fields, minimizing stress
ulated with EHV-2, the virus was recovered up to 118 days
to pregnant mares, and separating pregnant mares from the
postinoculation. The virus is latent in B lymphocytes and
is frequently isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs follow.
remaining population have been suggested to help prevent
abortion disease.
ing infection or viral recrudescence. Foals generally shed
 It is known that the nasal secretions of horses with EHM
higher loads of EHV-2 in nasal secretions early in infection,
contain large amounts of replicating virus and these secre-
and progressively less with age.
tions in particular contribute to the spread of disease to
other susceptible individuals. As a consequence, horses
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Little is known about the
suspected of having EHM must be removed from the sta-
pathogenesis of EHV-2. It is suggested that infection is ini-
 ble environment as quickly as possible and placed in strict
tiated in tonsils, with replication in other sites based on an
isolation until they have been shown to be asymptomatic
observed viremia and its cell-associated nature. Young foals
for 21 days. The treatment of EHM is challenging and the
are probably infected by their dams and can be infected
outcome is directly related to the severity of the neuro-
despite the presence of maternal antibodies. The virus can
logical deficits in the affected horse. As no specific treat-
then be spread horizontally to in-contact foals. Sequence
ment is available, the management of affected animals is
  s n s   
directed toward supportive nursing and nutritional care
infected with more than one strain at a time. One study
and in reducing CNS inflammation. Affected horses that
suggests the heterogeneity may be due to positive selec-
remain standing have a good prognosis, and improvement
tion, producing variation in a neutralization domain; how-
is generally apparent within a few days,though some horses
ever, strain variation and viral load were not correlated to
may be left with residual neurological deficits.
any clinical manifestation of disease. A recent study sug-
gests disease produced by EHV-2 may be immunologically
mediated, similar to infectious mononucleosis caused by
Equid Herpesvirus 2
the related gammaherpesvirus, Epstein-Barr virus (human
herpesvirus 4). Fever in individual foals was associated with 
Disease. EHV-2 is prevalent in horses worldwide and has
an increase in EHV-2-specific responses of PBMC, though 
been isolated from both clinically healthy and ill horses.
the results were not statistically significant. Several aspects
It has been isolated from cases of superficial and chronic
of the immune response of the foals and EHV-2 infection
pharyngeal lymphoid follicular hyperplasia, mild respira-
status were unrelated to occurrence of clinical disease in
tory disease, and horses with gastroesophageal ulcers, foals
the foals.
with pneumonia, and foals with keratoconjunctivitis. It
has also been associated with granulomatous dermatitis
Laboratory Diagnosis. T
 There are no specific diagnostic
and abortion. There is considerable skepticism by some
features associated with EHV-2 infection. The virus can
concerning its role in disease. The relationship of EHV-2
be isolated from nasal and pharyngeal swabs and from
to disease causality is uncertain because of the ubiquity
blood buffy coats and identified by PCR assay. EHV-2 slowly
of the virus in horse populations worldwide. The fact that
induces CPE in culture and cannot be differentiated from
gammaherpesviruses are optimally adapted to their natural
other equid gammaherpesviruses such as EHV-5 solely on
hosts means that significant clinical expression of infection
its growth characteristics. The CPE of EHV-2 are usually
is rarely encoun tered.
detected within 12-21 days.
Etiologic Agent
Treatment and Control.
 Control methods have not been
established, and a vaccine is not available for EHV-2.
Physical, Chemical, and Antigen Properties.F
EHV-2 is a typ-
ical gammaherpesvirus.
EHV-3 (ECE Virus)
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents.
The vinus is
Disease.
ECE, caused by EHV-3,is an acute, sexually trans-
labile in the environment and infectivity is destroyed by
 mitted disease characterized by the formation of papules,
heat, drying, detergents, and common disin fectants.
vesicles, pustules, and ulcers on the penis and prepuce of
376
PART III
Viruses
stallions and on the external genitalia and perineal skin
Laboratory Diagnosis. ECE genital lesions in both mares
       
and stallions are usually characteristic enough for a clini-
14 days. Lesions have occulred, infrequently, around the
cal diagnosis to be made with reasonable certainty. A pre-
lips, external nares, nasal mucosa, and conjunctiva. The
sumptive diagnosis can be confirmed in the laboratory by
virus does not cause systemic disease, nor does it cause
isolation of the virus. Detection of EHV-3 DNA by PCR or
infertility or abortion. The negative impact of the virus
demonstration of either seroconversion or a fourfold or
results from potential serious economic consequences as
greater rise in antibody titer in paired serum samples can
a result of temporary disruption of mating activities in
also confirm diagnosis. Reactivation from latency can be
affected animals (specifically the thorough bred breed) and
 associated with low or decreasing neutralizing antibody
the risk of iatrogenic EHV-3 dissemination and outbreaks
titers.
of ECE in artificial insemination and embryo transfer
facilities.
Treatment and Control. Atthe present time, ECE vaccines
are not commercially available, and vaccination to prevent
the disease has not been investigated. Treatment includes
Etiologic Agent
 daily cleansing of the affected areas with antiseptics, using
Physical, Chemical, and Antigen Properties.
.EHV-3 is a typ-
 anti-inflammatory agents to reduceinflammation, and pre-
ical alphaherpesvirus and is antigenically, genetically, and
venting secondary bacterial infections with antimicrobials.
pathogenically distinct from the other equid herpesviruses.
Reco very from ECE is complete in a matter of 2-3 weeks and
occurs without permanent sequelae. Prevention of ECE in
 stallions requires examination of mares before breeding;
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. The virus is
labile in the environment and infectivity is destroyed by
however, as reactivation of latent virus is not preventable,
 and subclinical virus excretion does occur, the basis for
heat, drying, detergents, and common disinfectants.
controlling ECE outbreaks in breeding establishments is
containment of the spread of infection. Clinically affected
Infection for Other Species and Culture Systems. The only
animals should not be bred until lesions have healed and
known reservoir for the virus is the horse, and EHV-3 only
virus excretion has ceased. Mechanical transmission of the
replicates in cell cultures of equine origin.
virus can be prevented by early recognition of new clinical
cases and strict adherence to hygiene procedures.
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. EHV-3 was first
isolated in 1968 concurrently in North America and Aus-
EHV-4 (Equine Rhinopneumonitis Virus)
 tralia and is endemic in most horse breeding populations
Clinical manifestations of EHV-4 are seen principally in
world wide. The usual mode of transmission is venereal, but
EHV-3 can be spread without coitus. EHV-3 can be poten-
foals and younger horses as protection from maternal anti-
tially transmitted to the ejaculate through penile contact
body wanes. Though historically the clinical condition
with an artificial vagina or sleeve and, consequently, by
equine rhinopneumonitis was associated with EHV-1, this
fresh or frozen semen. The infection may also spread via
terminology is now assigned to EHV-4. Signs often include
fomites, or insects may act as mechanical carriers. The vulva
malaise and elevated temperature up to 105 *F, which may
and vagina need not be damaged for infection to occur. It is
persist fo1 2-5 days; watery nasal discharge, which becomes
suggested that in some infected stallions and mares, EHV-3
mucopurulent in the later stages; congested conjunctiva;
becomes latent in the nonbreeding season and is reacti-
and, infrequently, enlarged submandibular nodes. Bacte-
vated during the breeding season. The anatomical site that
rial proliferation in nasal passages may be a contributory
harbors latent EHV-3 is unknown, but it is hypothesized
factor in the development of rhinopneumonitis. Sporadic
that the virus establishes a latent infection in sciatic and/or
cases of equine abortion have also been associated with this
sacral ganglion cells.
virus. In contrast to EHV-1, the pathogenesis of EHV-4 has
not been well studied. Leukocyte-associated viremia is not
a consistent feature of EHV-4 infection. The agent appears
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
Viral replication is limited to
to have worldwide distribution; however, it is infrequently
the stratified epithelium of epidermal tissue present within
isolated. EHV-1 and -4 share many antigens, resulting in
the skin or at muco-cutaneous margins. The destruction of
serologiccross-reactivity between these viruses, and protec-
epithelium caused by the lytic virus infection elicits a vigor-
tion against EHV-4 can be produced with use of EHV-1 vac-
ous, localized inflammatory response that gives rise to the
cines. There are also vaccines available that contain both
formation of the characteristic cutaneous lesions of ECE.
EHV-1 and -4. Both inactivated and modified live vaccines
Microscopic examination of vulvar tissue demonstrates
are used, but results are not uniformly favorable. With a
shallow erosions along with occasional typical intranuclear
specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) now
 inclusions scattered in germinal epithelium or in nuclear
available, it is possible to distinguish EHV-1 from EHV.
remnants in necrotic areas.
4 serologically. PCR assays can also distinguish between
EHV-1 and EHV-4 infection.
Host Responses to Infection.
.Immunity to EHV-3 has not
been studied in detail; the horse responds to infection by
Equid Herpesvirus 5
EHV-3 with the production of serum complement-fixing
(CF) and virus-neutralizing(VN) antibodies thatreach max-
In a study of multiple EHV-5 isolates, several were found
imal levels 14-21 days after infection.
d       o
Chapter 53 Herpesviridae
377
composition. EHV-5 has been proposed for this group of
Etiologic Agent
viruses that were isolated from equine respiratory tracts.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
Although cattle appear to be the major species affected by
cytes and nasal swabs of clinically normal adult horses in
BHV-1, the virus has been incriminated in swine vaginitis
New Zealand, Australia, and the United States. EHV-5 can
and balanitis, and has been isolated from stillborn and new-
also be cultured from samples of horses with clinical respira-
born pigs. Approximately, 11% of swine tested in parts of
tory disease and the virus has been associated with equine
North America (lowa and Texas) had antibodies to IBR. The
virus has been isolated from red deer with ocular disease,
and could be reactivated in Malaysian buffalo by steroid
ical pulmonary lesions. Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis of
administration. It does not appear that BHV-1 virus is a sig-
alveolar parenchyma with intraluminal accumulation of
nificant pathogen of goats. Only 3% of 1146 serum samples
neutrophils and macrophages within the alveoli and air-
of captive ruminants in United States zoos had antibodies
ways has been described. Eosinophilic intranuclear viral
 inclusion bodies are rarely seen in macrophages. The exact
to IBR vinus.
BHV-1 virus can be grown in a wide variety of cells,
pathogenic role this virus plays in EMPF is un known; EHV
including bovine, canine, feline, equine, ovine, rabbit,
5 may be an etiologic agent or cofactor in the development
monkey, and human, where it produces a characteristic
of EMPF. EHV-5 can be isolated on RK13, equine fetal kid-
ney, equine dermal, and Vero cells. Slow development of
CPE.
CPE is described over three to four passages with evidence
 of ballooning, resulting in syncytia formation on equine
Host-Virus Relationship
dermal cells.
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. The disease
occurs worldwide, though several countries in the Euro-
pean Union have eradicated the virus. It has been suggested 
Ruminant Herpesviruses
that wildlife may play a role in disease transmission, but in
light of demonstrated viral recrudescence, cattle must be
Herpesviruses,
， representing alpha- and
gammaher-
considered the primary reservoir. Virus is transmitted by
pesviruses, are responsible for a wide range of conditions
respiratory, genital, and conjunctival secretions of infected
in ruminants, including neurologic, genital, fetal, and res-
cattle.
    s ss 
to fatal. Several herpesviruses infect cattle (bovine her-
Pathogenesis and Pathology. IBR is commonly diagnosed
pesviruses (BHV): infectious bovine rhinotracheitis (IBR)
in cattle in feedlots as a result of close contact between cat-
virus (BHV-1), bovine mammillitis virus (BHV-2), and
tle and respiratory droplet transmission. The virus induces
bovine encephalitis virus (BHV-5) are alphaherpesviruses.
injury to the respiratory mucosa, which becomes hyper-
  e (  o s 
emic and lesions within the nasal cavity progress from areas
(infectious pustular vulvovaginitis (IPV) in cattle. BHV-4 is
of focal epithelial necrosis to large areas of ulceration, cov-
a gammaherpesvirus, butits role in causing disease is uncer-
ered by a pseudomembrane composed of fibrin and cellular
tain. Another gammaherpesvirus, Alcelaphine herpesvirus
 debris that results from an intense inflammatory response
1 (AlHV-1), is the cause of African malignant catarrhal fever
to the virus. The injury predisposes the cattle to bacte-
(MCF) associated with wildebeest and the sheep gamma-
rial infection and subsequent bacterial bronchopneumo-
herpesvirus ovine herpesvirus 2(OvHV-2) is the cause of the
nia (shipping fever complex). Virus can be recovered from
sheep-associated form of MCF. Alphaherpesviruses have
nasal secretions for almost 2 weeks following infection.
also been isolated from goats (CpHV-1) and deer (CerHV-
Although viremia is diffcult to demonstrate, experimental
1 and CerHV-2), and CpHV-1 is the cause of reproductive
infections have yielded virus from various organs, perhaps
disease in goats.
as a consequence of a leukocyte-associated viremia.
Conjunctivitis is common in BHV-1 infection. Typi-
Bovine Herpesviruses
cally, it presents with profuse lacrimation and occasionally
extends into the cornea, resulting in a keratitis. In some
cattle, a multifocal lymphoid hyperplasia may be seen in
Bovine Herpesvirus 1 (IBR and IPV Viruses)
the palpebral conjunctiva.
 Disease. BHV-1 infection in cattle may present as ocular,
Genital infections are most common in dairy cattle
genital, and respiratory disease. Respiratory disease typi-
and most likely venereally transmitted, though mechanical
cally presents as rhinotracheitis (IBR), which may lead to
severe and often fatal bronchopneumonia. Conjunctivi-
nation centers. Artificial insemination with in fected semen
tis is common. Occasionally, the cornea is involved and
 may also produce genital infection. Lesions consisting of
a panophthalmitis may occur. BHV-1 can infect genitalia,
pustules and later fibronecrotic plaques are usually limited
resulting balanoposthitis and vulvovaginitis (IPV). BHV-1
to the vulva and posterior vagina in the female. Similar
has been isolated from vesicular lesions on the udder and
lesions are seen on the prepuce of affected bulls. Lesions
teats ofa cow with mastitis. Previous reports of meningoen-
typically heal in 10-14 days, and many cases are subelin-
cephalitis in young calves associated with BHV-1 are now
ical. Respiratory disease has been produced with genital
being attributed to a different BHV-5. Rarely can BHV-1
isolates, and genital lesions have been produced with res-
reach the brain of infected cattle, but a few cases of BHV-1
piratory isolates. Natural outbreaks of simultaneous respi-
associated encephalitis have been reported in cattle.
ratory and genital disease are rare. Abortion may be seen in
378
PART III
Viruses
pregnant cattle with IBR or occasionally following vacci
BHV-2 (Bovine Mammillitis Virus)
nation with modified live virus vaccine. The incubation 
BHV-2 has been isolated from cattle with generalized
period between infection of the dam and fetal death varies
from 15 to 60 days. Since fetal death occurs several days
 skin disease (pseudolumpy skin disease), mammillitis, and
stomatitis. BHV-2 will replicate in a wide range of cells,
before abortion, the fetus is often severely autolyzed. Fetal
edema, especially of the fetal membranes, occurs along
but bovine kidney cell culture is most widely used. Cattle
appear to be primarily infected, with mild experimental
with extensive hemorrhagic edema in the perirenal tissue.
 disease produced in sheep, goats, and pigs.
Extensive hemorrhagic necrosis of the renal cortex is seen
along with a focal necrosis in the liver and usually in the
BHV-2 has been isolated from cattle skin and mucosal
infection in the United States, Africa, Europe, and Aus-
lymph nodes. Some necrosis may be observed in placen-
tralia. Originally virus was isolated from South African
tomes, which are usually good sources of virus for isolation 
cattle with generalized skin disease, subsequently termed
attempts.
pseudolumpy skin disease. Mammillitis due to BHV-2 was
 Sites of latency are the trigeminal and sciatic gan-
described in Africa and England, and subsequently in the
glia following respiratory and genital disease, respectively.
United States. Stomatitis in bovine and buffalo calves has
Recrudescentshed dingof virus has been observed naturally
been described in association with calves nursing cows with
and in response to corticosteroid administration.
mammillitis. Suggested modes of infection include trans-
Host Response to Infection. The immune response to BHV.
mission at milking, by insects, or activation of latent virus.
 Intravenous exposure produces generalized skin lesions,
1 in volves many factors in addition to the stimulation of
which are characterized by a severe intercellular edema in
neutralizing antibodies, most of which are directed toward
surface glycoproteins. IgG and IgM antibodies appear
the epidermis along with syncytia with intranuclear inclu-
sions. An epidermal mononuclear cell and neutrophil infil-
7 days following exposure.
trate is present along with mononuclear and lymphocytic
Laboratory Diagnosis. The fibrinonecrotic plaques com-
dermal perivascular infiltration.
The diagnosis of pseudolumpy skin disease and mam-
monly present in the external nares and on the nasal sep-
millitis can be based on clinical signs and viral isolation in
tum of cattle with IBR are good sources of material for viral
isolation. The conjunctival form can be tentatively diag-
cell culture. Serology on paired samples will demonstrate
 an increase in antibody.
nosed by the observation of multifocal white lesions in
the palpebral conjunctiva. In their absence, viral isolation 
o1 PCR detection of viral DNA is needed. The virus can
Bovine Herpesvirus 4
be readily isolated from the conjunctival swabs. Abortion
may be difficult to diagnose as the fetus is often presented
in an autolyzed condition. If placenta is available and rel-
been isolated from different clinical syndromes and nor-
atively fresh, isolation attempts can be made from the pla-
 mal cattle. Their importance as pathogens is unclear. Only
centomes. Immunohistochemical staining of aborted fetal
 strain DN-599 has been reported to produce conjunctivi-
tissues as well as PCR detection of viral DNA can be used
tis and respiratory disease. Viruses related to this group
for diagnosis. Diagnosis based on serology may be difficult
have been repeatedly isolated from cases of metritis in
because animals often have high titers at the time of abor-
 some North American cattle and are suspected of causing
tion, regardless of cause, making it difficult to demonstrate
vaginitis in heifers. There is no proven etiologic association
between the virus and these diseases and when experimen-
rising titers. Detection of BHV-1 in semen is possible by
PCR-based techniques.
tally inoculated into susceptible cattle, no disease is pro-
duced. The North American and European strains appear
Treatment and Control. Both modified-live and inacti-
to be closely related. Latency has been suggested for this
vated vaccines are available for BHV-1 and are used exten.
 asdsn   a on se a s d
sively in areas where BHV-1 is endemic. Experimental
other inflammatory processes.
recombinant DNA vaccines have also been developed.
Breeding animals should be vaccinated prior to coitus to
Bovine Herpesvirus 5
prevent abortion, and vaccination prior to weaning or
 transport is also useful to maintain herd immunity during
BHV-5 is an alphaherpesvirus responsible for nonsuppu-
stressful situations. Vaccination does not prevent infection 
rative meningoencephalitis in young cattle and is closely
but does reduce the incidence and severity of disease.
antigenically and genetically related to BHV-1. Although a
case of BHV-5 associated disease in Europe and some out-
Eradication. Several countries within the European
breaks in United States and Australia have been reported,
Union (EU) have either successfully eradicated BHV-1
the current geographical distribution of BHV-5 infection is
(Denmark, Finland, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, province
mainly restricted to South America, especially Brazil and
of Bolzano in Italy) or implemented an EU-approved com-
Argentina. However, since this virus is closely related to
pulsory program (Germany). Use of attenuated or whole-
BHV-1 and currently available serological tests do not dif-
virus vaccines is prohibited in these areas and strict import
ferentiate antibodies against each virus, the true prevalence
restrictions are aimed at preventing the reintroduction of
of BHV-5 infection remains unknown. PCR-based methods
virus-positive animals and embryos or obtaining semen
can differentiate between the two viruses and monoclonal
from positive bulls.
antibodies can also be used for serological differentiation.
Chapter 53  Herpesviridae
379
Cattle are the natural hosts and latently infected cattle are
AlHV-1 MCF is associated with mixing wildebeest and
reservoirs of BHV-5. Natural occurrence of BHV-5 antibod-
cattle during periods when the wildebeest are calving. New.
ies has also been reported in sheep. Based on experimental
born wildebeest calves shed virus in nasal and ocular secre-
evidence, sheep and goats may be potential reservoirs of
tions up to 3 months of age. Viral shedding also occurs in
the virus. There are scarce data regarding BHV-5 transmis-
adult wildebeest given corticosteroid. There is no evidence
sion. Viral DNA and infectious virus have been detected in
for congenital infection of sheep with OvHV-2; rather,
semen of subclinically infected bulls. BHV-5 initially infects
lambs appear to become infected during the first year of
epithelial cells at the portal of entry. After initial replica-
life and typically do not shed virus until after 5 months of
tion, spread of virus probably occurs by three routes, as
age. While sheep-associated MCF in cattle has been associ-
described previously for BHV-1: local dissemination, sys-
 ated with lambing, it appears that the newborn lamb does
       
not play the same role as the newborn wildebeest. It also
appears that all domestic United States sheep carry OvHV.
of the pathogenesis of BHV-5, and BHV-5 infection induces
 2. Cattle are considered dead-end hosts for OvHV-2 because
either a subclinicalinfection or disease of moderate severity
cow-to-cow transmission has not been demonstrated.
in adult cattle. However, it can induce lethal encephalitis
Both AlHV-1 and OvHV-2 produce similar clinical dis-
in young animals (less than 6 months of age). Although
ease syndromes in cattle. Affected animals present with
BHV-5 and BHV-1 are related, they differ in their neuroin-
   r  p 
vasion and neurovirulence capacities. BHV-1 neuroinva-
corneal opacity. Oral lesions may be present, consisting of
sion usually does not go further than the first order neu-
multiple erosions preced ed by a diffuse hyperemia and pro-
ron located in the trigeminal ganglion, where the latent
fuse salivation. Central nervous disturbances are frequent
infection is established, whereas BHV-5 is able to in fect dif-
and diarrhea is common.
ferent regions of the brain. The main macroscopic lesions
Histologic lesions are those of a lymphoproliferative
reported following BHV-5 infection consist of softening of
disorder characterized by perivascular mononuclear infl-
the parenchymal tissue, focal meningeal hemorrhages in
tration, necrotizing vasculitis, and tissue lymphoid infil-
the frontal and/or ventral areas and hemorrhagic foci in
tration, resulting in enlarged, edematous and potentially
the pons and left parietal lobe. Gross respiratory lesions,
hemorrhagic lymph nodes. Deposition of immunoglobu-
such as nasal congestion, petechial hemorrhages and con-
lin and complement has been described in the glomeruli
gestion of the pharyngeal and laryngeal mucosa, as well as
of affected cattle, suggesting an immune-mediated disease.
bronchopneumonia, have also been detected. BHV-5 can
Death usually occurs in 2-7 days following the onset of
be reactivated and re-excreted without clinical signs or cat-
clinical signs. History, clinical signs, and histopathology
tle may develop clinical manifestations ofencephalitis sim-
suggest the diagnosis of MCF. Confirmation of the diagno-
ilar to those observed during acute infection. Specific BHV.
sis of AlHV-1 can be made by isolation of the virus from
5 vaccines remain at an experimental stage of development.
peripheral blood leukocytes in calf thyroid cells or by PCR
The use of BHV-1 vaccines is, therefore, considered to be
detection of the viral DNA. OvHV-2 has not been isolated
the best option to protect against BHV-5; however, several
in cell culture but viral DNA may be detected in the tissues
studies show that full protection against BHV-5 infection
of infected animals by PCR. There is currently no vaccine
is diffcult to induce with a BHV-1 vaccine.
available for MCF and control is aimed at preventing con-
tact between susceptible hosts and viral carriers.
 OvHV-2 associated MCF has also been reported in swine.
Alcephaline Herpesvirus 1 and Ovine Herpesvirus 2 (MCF)
DNA was detected in the blood and semen of asymp-
MCF, an often fatal infection of many species of bovi-
tomatic boars and from the brain of symptomatic sows
dae and cervidae, occurs as two epidemiologically dis-
tinct entities: wildebeest-associated and sheep-associated
ficial insemination. Signs in symptomatic sows and gilts
MCF. Alcephaline herpesvirus 1 (AlHV-1) is responsible for
included depression, fever, anorexia, abortion, followed
wildebeest-derived (or African) MCF, which occurs when
by neurologic signs including ataxia, tremors, convulsions,
cattle or other susceptible wild ruminants and wildebeest
and aggressive behavior and death. Pigs that survived dis-
graze together. This form of the disease occurs in Africa
played forelimb paralysis. Pigs are terminal hosts and are
and has occurred in zoos that house African ungulates. The
not believed to spread the virus.
sheep associated form of MCF has been described in cat-
tle, bison, and deer outside of Africa and in zoos where
Caprine Herpesvirus 1
        
for the sheep-associated form of MCF has not been iso-
Caprine herpesvirus 1 (CpHV-1) is an alphaherpesvirus that
lated; however, MCF can be transmitted to cattle or bison
is spread worldwide where goat husbandry is practiced. In
by aerosolization of nasal secretions from sheep experi-
the United States, neither the prevalence of seropositive
goats nor the prevalence of disease associated with them
implicating OHV-2 as the cause of this form of MCF. The
is known. CpHV-1 is genetically and antigentically related
genome of OHV-2 has been completely sequenced and it is
to BHV-1 and though the virus can infect cattle, it has not
closely related genetically to AlHV-1. AlHV-1 and OvHV-2
been associated with disease in cattle.
are both gammaherpesviruses and are not recognized as sig-
CpHV-1 induces generalized, often lethal, infection in 
nificant causes of disease in thei1 natural hosts, wildebeest
1-2-week-old kids. Gross lesions are limited to the gastroin-
 and sheep, respectively.
testinal tract with necrosis and ulceration in rumen, cecum,
380
PART III
Viruses
and colon. Intranuclear inclusions are present in epithelial
been identified; however, strain variability has been shown
cells near the necrotic areas. In adult goats, the infection
by restriction end onuclease digestion of viruses from differ-
is mild or subclinical, with affected animals showing very
ent geographic areas. Attenuated strains have been demon-
slight signs of respiratory distress, vaginitis, balanoposthi-
 strated to have a deletion in their genome, suggesting that
tis, or occasionally, abortion.
specific regions are associated with virulence.
CpHV-1 establishes latent infections, but, unlike other
herpesviruses, its reactivation is extremely diffcult to
Sensitivity to Physical and Chemical Agents. The PRV is
demonstrate under both natural and experimental condi-
fairly sensitive to high temperatures and is stable in cell
tions. In the natural infection, CpHV-1 reactivates during
culture fluid between a pH of 6-8 at cooler temperatures.
estrus, but only in animals with low neutralizing antibody
Virus has been observed to survive in nonchlorinated water
titers. After a primary infection, neutralizing antibodies are
for 7 days and for 2 days in an anaerobic lagoon. Chemi-
detected in the serum 1-2 weeks after infection; they reach
cals that cleave chlorine appear to be the most effective
a peak in the following third or fourth week and decrease
disinfectants.
slowly about 6-10 months later. If the animals are stressed
at this stage, CpHV-1 can reactivate and be shed, espe-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systens. The dis
cially by the genital route. In response to the reactivation,
ease occurs naturally in cattle, sheep, dogs, cats, and rats. In
 all but adult swine, the disease is almost always fatal; henice,
It should be noted that a residual sero-neutralizing activity
other animals are essentially “dead-end" hosts. Although 
one report exists of human infection, PRV is not readily
The disease can be diagnosed by viral isolation from
transmitted to humans.
nasal secretions and fecal material. CpHV-1 replicates in
The virus replicates readily in cell cultures from many
canine, rabbit, feline, equine, bovine, and lamb cells. PCR
species and tissues, including cat, dog, cattle, badger, coy.
assays for DNA detection are also available. Serum neutral-
ote, deer, buzzard, chicken, and goose.
ization is the gold standard for serological diagnosis and an 
ELISA has also been developed.
Host-Virus Relationship
No CpHV-1 vaccine is presently available in the United
States, and it is unlikely that such a vaccine will be devel-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
Pseudorabies
oped because of the small market size. Antibodies directed
has been eradicated from domestic pigs in several parts of
against BHV-1 will react with CpHV-1; thus, it has been sug-
Europe, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States. How-
gested that BHV-1 vaccines could be used in goats to pro-
ever, it is recognized as one of the most important diseases
tect against CpHV-1 infection. However, a challenge study
 of domestic pigs, particularly in regions with dense pig pop-
found that vaccinating goats with an attenuated BHV-1
ulations, including some remaining regions in Europe and
vaccine induced only partial protection against CpHV-1
 also in Latin America and Asia. The principal reservoir of
infection. No studies have determined whether vaccina-
tion would protect against CpHV-1 abortion.
to pig. The virus is transmitted by ingestion and inhalation,
and during coitus the virus can be transmitted from boar
to sow or vice versa. The virus is not shed in urine or feces.
Suid herpesvirus 1 (Pseudorabies; Aujeszky's Disease Virus)
Transmission can occur in a contaminated environment
Disease. Pseudorabies in swine is a notifiable disease that
under crowded conditions
causes substantial economic loses to the swine industry in
Feral swine can transmit the virus to domestic swine
countries where the virus is present in domestic pigs. The
and endemic infections in wild swine populations in the
 United States and Europe represent a constant danger for
virus is most severe in younger animals. The virus com-
Ieintroduction of PRV into free domestic pig herds and
monly affects the nervous system and the mortality rate
varies from 5% to 100%. Infection of sows during mid- to
regions. The pig is the primary source of viral spread to other
late pregnancy can result in abortion, fetal death, mummi-
 species. Cases in dogs have been linked to consumption of
fication, or stillbirths. In adult pigs, severe nervous disor-
feral swine tissues. The cat appears to be more sensitive,
ders are rare, and pseudorabies usually presents as a rather
 and infection in cats was observed in 51% of PRV-infected
vague illness of transient pyrexia, dullness, inappetence,
farms where cats were present.
incoordination, and ataxia. Respiratory disease can also be
seen in pigs of various ages but is most common in grower
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The virus replicates primar-
and finishing pigs. Inapparent or mild disease may be
ily in the upper respiratory epithelium including the tonsil-
missed or misdiagnosed in older swine. Pseudorabies also
lar tissue. Virus can be isolated from the brain 24 h follow.
 occurs in a number of other species, including cattle, sheep,
ing infection, which suggests that the route of infection is
dogs, cats, and raccoons, in which the clinical signs areusu-
via the axoplasm. Viremia is difficult to demonstrate; how-
ally neurologic and manifested by an intense pruritis.
ever, viral shedding may persist in nasal secretions for up to
14 days. Lower airway infection often results, and cardiac
Etiologic Agent
and splanchnic ganglia become involved.
The virus produces a nonsuppurative meningoen-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The pseu-
cephalomyelitis with extensive damage to neurons,
dorabies virus (PRV) is an alphaherpesvirus that is desig-
widespread perivascular cuffing, and gliosis. The brain stem
nated Suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1). Only one serotype has
is particularly affected, but lesions also occur throughout
Chapter 53  Herpesviridae
381
ocular infection in susceptible adult dogs, in the absence of
clear inclusion bodies in all types of cells. In the respiratory
concurrent overt systemic disease. CHV-1 can induce geni-
form of the disease, a necrotizing tracheitis and pneumo-
tallesions in male and female dogs. Affected animals appear
nia occur that result in loss of epithelium in airways and
 healthy but often present with a history of infertility.
necrosis of alveolar cells.
 Microscopic lesions in aborted fetuses include necrosis
Etiologic Agent
of many organs, but primarily liver, spleen, visceral lymph
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Canine her-
nodes, and adrenal glands. Intranuclear inclusion bod-
 pesvirus is a typical alphaherpesvirus. There is no cross-
ies are often present in degenerating hepatocytes, cells of
neutralization between CHV-1 and the viruses of herpes
the adrenal cortex, and occasionally mononuclear phago-
simplex, PRV, or IBR. However, CHV-1 appears to be anti-
cytic cells of the spleen and lymph nodes. Placental lesions
genically related to herpes simplex virus. Only one serotype
are characterized by degeneration and necrosis of the tro-
of CHV-1 is recognized; however, restriction endonuclease
phoblasts and mesenchymal cells of the chorion.
analysis of CHV-1 isolates has detected genotypic differ-
ences between viruses. Currently, no correlation between
Host Response to Jnfection. IgM antibodies are first
different CHV-1 genomes and disease patterns has been
detectable about the fifth day after infection followed by
demonstrated.
measurable IgG antibodies about the seventh day, reach-
ing maximum levels by the twelfth to fourteenth day.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The host
range for CHV-1 is restricted to domestic and wild canids.
Laboratory Diagnosis. Because signs of the disease in
Limited growth occurs in human lung cells and calf, mon-
swine vary widely with the age of the animal, the dose of
key, pig, rabbit, and hamster kidney cells.
virus received, the strain of virus, and the route of exposure,
clinical diagnosis is often difficult.
Host-Virus Relationship
 In the laboratory, a definitive diagnosis of pseudorabies
can be made by viral isolation or detection of viral DNA by
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. CHV-1 has a
PCR. Immunofluorescent staining of frozen tonsil or brain
worldwide distribution. CHV-1 seroprevalence is high in
tissue can provide a rapid diagnosis. ELISA tests are used to
n d  sdd   
differentiate antibody response to gene-deleted vaccines
tion is generally believed to occur at a young age in most
 and field infection and have been used in eradication pro-
dogs. The only known reservoir of CHV-1 in allgeographic
grams. In an acute outbreak, serology may not be helpful
areas is the dog, with the possible exception of coyotes in
 because of the time need ed for antibodies to develop.
the United States. Pups born to seronegative bitches are
infected oronasally either from the bitch or from other
Prevention and Control. In PRV free areas, biosecurity
infected dogs from viral shedding in venereal, ocular, 01
should be maintained to prevent contact between infected
nasal secretions.
wild swine populations and domestic pigs. Yearly serologic
monitoring of domestic pigs is required for maintaining
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Clinical manifestations and
pseudorabies free status. In areas with endemic disease in
domesticpigs, efforts should be taken to avoid the disease in
herpesviruses, including CHV-1, are host age dependent.
a breeding herd. In infected herds, quarantine is the most
In pups less than 4 weeks of age, primary CHV-1 infec-
urgent obligation and it is recommended that the move-
tion may result in severe generalized disease due to
ment of swine be limited for slaughter only. Attenuated live
hematogenous spread of the virus. This produces a necro-
vaccines are available and have been successful in reducing
tizing vasculitis in many organs, and the disease is often
death losses in endemic areas. These vaccines do not pre-
fatal. Grossly, the kidneys may appear mottled and there
vent reinfection with virulent field virus or the shedding
s  n  d  
of virulent virus for variable periods. Latently infected and
lymphadenitis, and nonsuppurative meningoencephalitis.
vaccinated animals may shed the virus for indeterminate
Widespread foci of necrosis and hemorrhages character-
periods while asymptomatic.
ize the histologic lesions in affected organs such as kid-
 Inactivated vaccines are commercially available. Their
ney, liver, lung, and the gastrointestinal tract. Intranuclear 
principle use has been in susceptible sows in endemic areas
  ne s n nd a  
to provide antibodies to colostrum for protection of new-
lesions, specifically in the liver. Primary CHV-1 infection in
born pigs during the first few weeks of life. In certified pseu-
older canids is frequently subclinical or results in localized
dorabies free areas, vaccination is prohibited.
respiratory tract, genital mucosa, or ocular disease. Ocular
lesions associated with primary CHV-1 infection in adult 
dogs include conjunctivitis and less frequently, keratitis.
Canid Herpesvirus 1
Viremia is not typical of CHV-1 infection in immunocom-
Disease. Canid herpesvirus 1(CHV-1) causes a fatal sys-
petent adult dogs; however, generalized disease resulting
temic infection in newborn pups and relatively mild in fec-
from viremia has been reported in an immunocompro-
tions in older dogs. CHV has been isolated from dogs with
mised adult dog.
respiratory diseases, and, with other viruses and bacteria
may be involved in the “kennel cough" syndrome. CHV-
Host Response to Jnfection. Neutralizing antibodies
1 may be associated with outbreaks of highly contagious
develop in dogs inoculated with CHV-1 and are detectable
382
PART III
Viruses
CPE in primary cell cultures of feline testicle, lung, and
renal cells.
lation. Reactivation of CHV-1 in experimentally infected
 pups and dogs has been demonstrated with administration
Host-Virus Relationships
of corticosteroids. Latency is established in neurons of the
sensory ganglia. During viral reactivation, CHV-1 neutral-
Distribution,
Reservoir, and Transmission. Serological
ization titers become detectable and elevate in as few as
 studies show that FHV-1 is widespread in the feline pop-
 7 days, but rapidly decline in a matter of weeks following
ulation worldwide, with reported exposure rates of up to
active infection resolution.
97%. Cats serve as reservoirs. Healthy cats that are latently
infected with FHV-1 may shed virus when stressed and
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Clinical signs and histopathology
following corticosteroid administration, and viral tran-
can be useful in diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis is by viral
scripts have been detected in trigeminal ganglia of latently
isolation and more rapidly by immunofluorescent staining
infected cats. The major avenue for spread of FHV-1 is
of affected tissues or by detection of genomic DNA by PCR.
by direct cat-to-cat contact through infectious discharges,
particularly respiratory secretions. Overcrowded condi-
Prevention and Control.(
 Commercial CHV vaccines are
tions and close housing greatly increase the likelihood of
not available in the United States; a killed virus vaccine is
viral transmission as FHV-1 is short lived in the environ-
available in Europe. Hyperimmune globulin may be useful
ment. Indirect or fomite transmission via a contaminated
but difficult to obtain because the virus is poorly immuno-
environment, personnel, or feeding and cleaning utensils
genic. Removal or separation of infected animals should
appears important only in multi-cat situations such as cat-
be considered. Optimal temperature for viral replication is
teries, shelters, and multi-cat households. Strict attention 
 approximately 33 *C. Due to the poor ability of puppies to
to hygiene should be sufficient to prevent this route of
con trol their body temperature until about 4 weeks of age,
infection. Given that parturition and lactation have been
 younger animals are susceptible to severe disease. Main-
shown to precipitate viral shedding, neonatal infection is
sanddnd pasodxa ui aeadan Apoq leou jo aueuat
highly probable, and the primary in fection typically occurs
may have therapeutic value.
in kittens. Transplacental infection has not been demon-
 strated in natural infections.
Felid Herpesvirus 1 (Feline Viral Rhinotracheitis Virus)
Pathogenesis and Pathology. FHV-1 has a tropism for the
Disease. Felid herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1) is the cause of feline
conjunctival, nasal and pharyngeal epithelium. The patho-
viral rhinotracheitis (FVR). Primary infection causes acute
genesis of the infection differs with the route of inocula-
 rhinitis and conjunctivitis, usually accompanied by fever,
 tion. As FHV-1 infection is often manifested in the upper 
depression, and anorexia. Ulcerative keratitis is a frequent
respiratory tract; experimental studies have been done by
sequela to recurrent FHV-1 infection and should be consid-
nasal and ocular routes. When introduced intranasally, the
ered the cause of corneal ulceration in cats unless proven
virus produces rapid, cytolyticinfection ofepithelialcells of
otherwise. The virus has also been associated with ulcera-
the nasal passages. The virus generally persists in the upper
tive stomatitis, abortions, pneumonia, and facial dermatits.
respiratory tract for 2 weeks. Damage to the nasal turbinates
in acute disease predisposes some cats to chronic rhinitis. In
Etiologic Agent
cases of chronic rhinosinusitus, the virus does not replicate,
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. FHV-1 is a
mechanisms.
typical alphaherpesvirus. Serologic comparisons suggest
Although many cats develop conjunctivitis during the
that FHV-1 from around the world belong to a single known 
primary disease, very few develop corneal disease. Reac.
serotype; however, differences in the clinical manifesta-
tivation of FHV-1 latency is usually associated with con-
tions caused by various isolates have been observed. Viral
 DNA analysis suggests genetic differences between strains.
junctivitis and may be accompanied by corneal epithelium
 invasion, which is associated with epithelialulceration, ini-
tially of a pathognomonic dendritic form (Figure 53.3), but
Sensitivity to Physical and Chemical Agents. The virus is
progressing rapidly to a larger irregular geographical form.
 inactivated by most commercially available detergents, dis-
Intranuclear inclusion bodies are numerous in the strat-
infectants, and antiseptics. Virus in cell culture fluid loses
ified squamous epithelium of the conjunctiva with con-
90% of its viability within 6 h at 37 *C, 6 days at 25 *C,
junctival and corneal lesions. Histologically, corneal ulcers
and 1 month at 4 *C. The virus is most stable at pH 6, and
reveal disorientation and degeneration of the epithelial
complete activity is lost in 3 h at pH 3 and pH 9. FHV can be
cells, some of which contain nuclear inclusions. Many of
recovered for up to 18 h in a moist environment at 15 *C,
these ulcers are slow to heal, leading to a more chronic evo-
but for less than 12 h in a dry room.
lution than seen in primary disease. Chronic keratitis is an
immune-mediated condition that results from persistence
Jnfectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Natural
of virus antigen in the corneal stroma and leads to corneal
infections with FHV-1 have been observed only in the cat
vascularization and infiltration of inflammatory cells. For-
family. FHV-1 in vitro growth is limited to cells of feline ori
mation of corneal sequestra can occur secondarily to any
gin. The virus propagates to high titers with demonstrated
chronic ulcerative keratitis, including FHV-1 ulceration.
Chapter 53  Herpesviridae
Titers may be low in both acute and chronic disease. Serol-
FIGURE 53.3.
Dedritic corneal ulcer (arrow),
ogy, therefore, is only of limited value in the diagnosis of
pathognomonic for herpesviral infection. (Photo courtesy of
FHV-1 infection.
Dr Diane Hendrix, The University of Tennessee.)
Prevention and Control. Both modifed-live and inacti-
vated parenteral vaccines are available. Subunit FHV vac-
 cines and modifed-live intranasal vaccines are no longer
available in Europe. Vaccination protects against disease,
but not necessarily against infection. However, it can
reduce virus excretion upon infection. Assessment of the
duration of immunity is complicated: vaccination does not
provide complete protection even shortly after vaccination 
the degree of protection decreases with time. Even vacci-
nated cats remain at some risk because FHV-1 vaccines,
nity against clinical signs and no protection against reac-
tivation/shedding. Maternally derived antibodies provide
some degree of humoral protection in kittens up to the
age of around 8 weeks, and therefore, primary vaccination
Host Response to lnfection. In general, the immune
should be instigated around 9 weeks of age, with a second
response protects against disease, but not against infec-
tion, and mild clinical signs have been observed following
 important for cats in high-risk situations or en vironments.
reinfection only 150 days after primary infection. The pri-
However, for cats in low-risk situations (e.g., indoor-only
mary immune response of cats to intranasal infection as
cats without contact with other cats), 3-yearly intervals are
measured by serum neutralizing antibodies is not impres-
 recommended. Care should be taken to avoid in troducing
sive. Antibodies usually persist for 1-3 months, although
cats with developing, subclinical, or latent infections to a
colony.
titers have been observed to fluctuate in a cat over a 12-
month period. Correlation between presence of antibodies
and resistance to infection is not absolute. As with other
alphaherpesviruses, cell-mediated immunity plays a very
Macacine Herpesvirus 1 (B-virus of macaques)
important role in protection, because vaccinated cats with-
Herpesvirus B causes a natural infection in Macaca—-a genus
out detectable antibody are not necessarily susceptible to
of Old World monkeys (rhesus and cynomolgus species).
disease.By contrast, seroconversion has been shown to cor-
The infection in monkeys is characterized by oral vesicles
relate with protection against virulent FHV challenge. In
similar to the cold sores in humans caused by herpes sim-
these cases, antibodies may serve as an indicator of cellular
plex virus. The disease is common in macaques, is not
immune responses, because T lymphocytes are required for
fatal and the virus may remain latent in the trigeminal
the maintenance of B lymphocyte function. Because FHV
 and lumbosacral ganglia of infected animals. Direct con-
is a pathogen of the respiratory tract, mucosal cellular and
tact is the most common means of viral spread in mon-
humoral responses are important. Although a correlation
keys, because virus can be recovered from saliva and from
exists between FHV antibodies and protection against clin-
the central nervous tissues of clinically asymptomatic, per-
ical signs, there is no test available to predict protection in 
sistently infected animals.
individual cats.
The virus can cause fatal central nervous infection
in humans and laboratory animals such as rabbits and
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Immunofluorescent staining can
unweaned mice. Most human infections are caused by a
demonstrate viral antigens in the tissues of infected cats.
bite from a monkey secreting infectious virus, although
However, the test is not particularly sensitive and use of
handling virus-infected primary monkey kidney cell cul-
stains, such as fluorescein, may result in false positive
tures can also lead to infection. The incubation period in
results. PCR has become the mainstay for diagnosis of FHV-
humans is 10-20 days. Usually, there is local inflammation
1 infections. Detection of virus may indicate either coin-
at the bite site followed by vesicle formation and necrosis of
cidental reactivation of latent infection, a consequential
the area. Virus reaches the CNS by peripheral nerves, and in 
reactivation due to another disease process or the cause
the majority of cases, death occurs due to acute encephalitis
of the disease. Feline herpesvirus 1 may also be isolated
0r encephalomyelitis.
from tissue samples and from swabs of the ocular, nasal, or
Herpesvirus B is morphologically similar to other alpha-
oropharyngeal mucosa. The virus can be cultured for 14-
21 days after infection, but most consistently during the
virus can be cultivated on the chorioallantoic membrane of
first week. Virus isolation is more difficult in chronic cases.
embryonated chick eggs and in rabbit, mon key, and human 
Virus-neutralizing antibodies can be detected in the serum
cell cultures, producing intranuclear inclusion bodies and
of convalescent cats. Serology is complicated by vaccine
syncytia formation. Strong cross-reactivity exists between
virus and positive titers are independent of clinical signs.
human herpes simplex viruses and herpesvirus B.
384
PART III
Viruses
 B virus infection can be diagnosed by isolating virus
been isolated from chickens 2 years after infection. Unvac
from the central nervous tissues of fatal human cases. A
cinated birds are susceptible to infection from vaccinated
PCR-based assay has been developed for viralidentification
birds, and vaccinated birds may become carriers. Acutely
 Diagnostic detection of herpes B specific antibodies is dif-
 infected birds represent a greater source of virus than clini
ficult. An effective vaccine has not been developed. Rapid
cally recovered carrier birds.
diagnosis and initiation of therapy, such as antiviral drugs
like acyclovir can be of benefit and may prevent death or
Pathogenesis and Pathology. ILTV in natural conditions
 permanent disability in patients that survive. Caution and
enters through the upper respiratory tract and ocular tract.
wearing of protective gear when handling monkeys remain
In the natural disease, the greatest concentration of ILTV
the best ways to avoid in fection.
is found in the trachea, and the virus replicates only in the
nasal cavity, trachea, and lower respiratory tract. Latent
virus has been demonstrated in the trigeminal ganglion.
Gallid Herpesvirus 1 (lnfectious Laryngotracheitis Virus)
Viremia has not been reported.
Disease. Infectious laryngotracheitis virus (ILTV) usually
Lethal infections ofILTV can occur due to asphyxiation,
occurs as an acute disease in chickens and represents a seri-
resulting from extensive diphtheritic membrane formation
ous problem in areas of intense poultry husbandry. The
thatplugs the tracheal bifurcation. Histopathology demon -
virus produces signs of respiratory distress and coughing
strates fibrinous laryngotracheitis, with detachment of the
that often produce a bloody discharge. Mild enzootic forms
trachealepithelium and large intranuclear inclusion bodies
 of ILTV infection may result in reduced egg production,
in detached cells that are the basis for a strong presumptive
conjunctivitis, and persistent nasal discharge with swollen
diagnosis.
nasal and infraorbital sinuses. The mild enzootic form is
the most common form in modern poultry operations.
Host Response to Infection.
The first signs of ILTV infec-
Etiologic Agent
 Resistance to disease following the infection or vaccination
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. ILTV is a typ-
develop precipitating and serum-neutralizing antibodies;
ical alphaherpesvirus that is also designated as gallid her-
pesvirus 1 (GaHV-1). There is one serotype of the virus,
tant in resistance. Full immunity can be demonstrated
but genetic variation occurs among strains from different
in bursectomized chickens in the absence of a humoral
regions.
response.
Sensitivity to Physical and Chenmical Agents.
.ILTVis inacti
Laboratory Diagnosis. Virus can be isolated from tracheal
vated by 3% cresol, 1% sodium hydroxide, and 1% lye, 24 h
 and lung tissue in embryonated chicken eggs, cell culture,
exposure to ether, and 10-15 min at 55 *C. The virus can be
 stored for lengthy periods by lyophilization and freezing.
and ILTV DNA can be demonstrated by PCR. Immunoflu-
orescent staining of trachea can demonstrate presence of
viral antigen up to 14 days postinfection. ELISA-based serol-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. ILTV
 ogy is widely used.
is primarily a disease of chickens and is most common
in birds 4-18 months of age. The disease has also been
reported in pheasants and peafowl. Young turkeys have
Prevention and Control. Use of live ILTV vaccine results
in carriers, which can shed to nonvaccinated susceptible
  i    
birds. Vaccine strains have been associated with outbreaks
occurs in turkeys. Starlings, sparrows, crows, doves, ducks,
in some flocks following reversion of the strains to viru-
pigeons, and guinea fowl have been found to be resistant to
ILTV. There are no known wild bird reservoirs of this virus.
 lence. Because the virus can survive for 10 days at tempera-
tures of 13 *C to 23 *C, the cleaning of infected premises is
Chicken kidney monolayer cell cultures, embryonated
chicken eggs, and chicken embryo (kidney, liver, and lung)
very important. Complete depopulation and disin fection 
of premises has been used to control the disease.
cell cultures have been used to culture ILTV.
Use of attenuated vaccines is a common practice for
breeding and egg production flocks, though vaccination
Host-Virus Relationship
does not protect against infection with virulent virus o1
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission.
ILTV has been
development of latency. The development of genetically
identified in almost every country in the world; it occurs
engineered vaccines holds promise for improved control
primarily in areas with high concentrations of chickens.
strategies.
 ILTV continues to cause disease problems, especially in the
Americas and Australia. Chickens are assumed to be the
Gallid Herpesvirus 2 (Marek's Disease Virus)
primary reservoir and mode of transmission, which occurs
by direct contact through droplet infection of the ocular
Disease. Marek's disease (MD) is a lymphoproliferative
and respiratory secretions. Mechanical transmission can
disease, lymphoma being most common, of chickens that
occur via contaminated equipment and litter. Egg trans-
 may involve numerous tissues. Most frequently peripheral
mission of ILTV has not been demonstrated. A carrier state
nerves are affected . Prior to vaccine development, MD was
can develop in birds with sublethal disease, and ILTV has
responsible for heavy losses, and increased losses to MD
Chapter 53 Herpesviridae
586
in vaccinated flocks have suggested an evolution toward
Affected chickens have enlarged visceral organs with white
greater virulence.
nodular or miliary foci. Occlusive atherosclerosis has been
Progressive paralysis of one or more extremities, incoor-
observed experimentally.
dination, drooping wings, and lowered head position are
the most common signs of MD. Mortality varies from 10%
Host Response to Infection.
 The immune response to
with mild MD to more than 50% in unvaccinated birds.
MDV is complex, in that both humoral and cell-mediated
immunity (CMl) develop in normal birds. Bursectomized
Etiologic Agent
birds survive experimental infection, suggesting that CMI
is important. In chicks, passively acquired antibody is
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Gallid her-
 pesvirus 2 (GaHV-2) is an alphaherpesvirus, and virulence
thought to limit the extent of infection rather than pre-
vent it or clear the virus. Viral-specific antibodies appear
varies greatly among strains.
within 1-3 weeks following in fection and neutralizing anti-
bodies persist for the life of the bird. The genome of MD
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. Cell-free virus
is readily inactivated at temperatures greater than 37 *C and
virus has incorporated onc genes, which result in transfor-
is only relatively stable at 25 *C(4 days) and 4 *C (2 weeks).
mation of infected T cells and production of T cell lym-
phomas following infiltration and proliferation of these
MDV can be maintained for long periods at 27 *C. Virus is
inactivated by pH 3 and pH 11. Infectivity of dried MDV-
transformed cells. Following infection, transient CMl sup-
infected feathers is destroyed by chlorine, organic iodine, a
pression is common; it may persist in birds that develop
neoplasms. Genetic resistance is correlated with birds that
quaternary ammonium compound, cresylic acid, synthetic
phenol, and sodium hydroxide.
carry the B21 alloantigen of the B red blood cell group. The
basis for this resistance has not been fully characterized.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systens.
The
chicken is the primary natural host for the MDV, and
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 On necropsy, gross lesions are
disease is rare in other species except for quail. MD virus
common in peripheral nerves, root ganglia, and the spinal 
has not been shown to affect any nonavian animals.
roots. Lymphomatous lesions are characteristically com-
 posed of small lymphocytes, lymphoblasts, and reticulum
No etiologic link has been demonstrated between MDV
cells. Arterial lesions of atherosclerosis are often present.
and human cancer. The virus is most often cultivated on
chicken or duck embryo fibroblast cells. Chicken kidney
Confirmatory diagnosis is made by viral isolation or by anti-
cells have also been used.
gen detection using fluorescent antibody or immunoper-
oxidase, or by detection of viral DNA by PCR. Antibod-
Host-Virus Relationships
ies can be detected by agar gel immunodiffusion, indirect
immunofluorescence, and viral neutralization and ELISA
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. MD is a major
assays.
disease of domestic chicken flocks worldwide. The virus
tends to remain highly cell associated but release of cell-
Prevention and Control. Experimentally, MDV-free
free infectious virus is associated with productive in fection
flocks can be maintained by strict isolation, constant
of epithelial cells at the base of feather follicles and birds are
surveillance, and frequent monitoring for virus and anti-
usually infected through inhalation of this cell-free virus in
body, but these techniques have been of limited commer-
feather dander. The virus can persist in litter and poultry
cial use. Commercial vaccines are available and have been
house dust. The virus is not transmitted in ovo.
effective in reducing the incidence of MD. Vaccination
does not prevent infection or shedding of virulent MDV,
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The incidenice of MD is vari-
but it does prevent tumor formation, particularly in vis-
able, depending on the strain of the virus and the age of
ceral organs. Peripheral nerve lesions continue to occur,
the chicken. It usually occurs in chickens between 2 and
but at reduced rates. Turkey herpesvirus strains (HVT; MDV
5 months old and is commonly felt not to be seen in birds
serotype 3) are antigenically related viruses that have been
olde1 than 22 weeks; however, disease has been observed in
routinely used for vaccination, but the emergence of more
birds as young as 3-4 weeks and in 60-week-old laying hens.
virulent strains of GaHV-2 has resulted in vaccine failures
The virus primarily affects the nervous system although vis-
and increased use of avirulent gallid herpesvirus 3 (MDV
ceral organs and other tissues may also be in volved. Lesions
serotype 2) viruses or strains of low-pathogenicity GaHV-2
involve peripheral nerves and spinal roots. The principal
fo1 vaccination. Birds are vaccinated annually in the United
infected nerve trunk shows gross lesions consisting of a
States and the vast majority are vaccinated in ovo.
grayish-white swelling, which histologically are character-
ized by extensive lymphocytic infiltrations. Nerve enlarge-
ment is frequently unilateral. Edema may be present and
References
myelin degeneration of nerve sheaths may be apparent.
 Ocular lymphomatosis is another possible outcome of
Allen GP (2007) Development of a real-time polymerase chain
MDV infection, with blind ness resulting due to iris in volve-
reaction assay for rapid diagnosis of neuropathogenic strains
ment. Histologically, a similar infiltration of lymphocytes
of equine herpesvirus-1. / Vet Diag Invest, 19, 69-72.
is present, which can also occur in the optic nerve.
 (     1  f 
In the visceral form, lymphoid tumors of varying degrees
sis of equid herpesvirus l strain variation reveals a point
of severity infiltrate the gonads, liver, lung, and skin.
mutation of the DNA polymerase strongly associated with
386
PART III
Viruses
 neuropathogenic versus nonneuropathogenic disease out-
Kasem S, Syamada S, Kipuel M et al. (2008) Equine herpesvirus
breaks. / Virol, 80(8), 4047-4060.
type 9 in giraffe with encephalitis. Emerg Infect Dis, 14 (12),
Perkins GA, Goodman LB, Tsujimura K et al. (2009) Investiga-
1948-1949.
tion of the prevalence of neurologic equine herpes virus type
Kleiboeker SB, Schommer SK, Johnson PJ et al. (2002) Associa-
1 (EHV-1) in a 23-year retrospective analysis (1984-2007).
tion of two newly recognized herpesviruses with interstitial
Veterinary Microbiology, 139(3-4), 375-378.
pneumonia in donkeys (Equus asinus). / Vet Diag Invest, 14,
Talens LT and Zee YC (1976) Purification and buoyant density
273-280.
of infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus. Proc Exp Biol Med,
Ledbetter EC, Dubovi, EJ, Kim, SG et al. (2009) Experimental
151, 132.
primary ocular canine herpesvirus-1 infection in adult dogs.
Am / Vet Res, 70 (4), 513-521.
Ledbetter EC, Kim SG, Dubovi EJ. (2009) Outbreak ofocular dis-
Further Reading
ease associated with naturally-acquired canine herpesvirus-
1 infection in a closed domestic dog colony. Vet Ophthalmol,
12 (4), 242-247.
Allen GP (2008). Risk factors for development of neurologic
Malone EK, Ledbetter EC, Rassnick KM et al. (2010) Dissem-
disease after experimental exposure to equine herpesvirus-1
inated canine herpesvirus-1 infection in an immunocom-
in horses. Am / Vet Res, 69 (12), 1595-1600.
promised adult dog. / Vet Inter Med, 24, 965-968.
Azevedo Costa E, de Marco Viott A, de Souza Machado G, ef
Marinaro M, Bellacicco AL, Tarsitano E etal. (2010) Detection of 
al. (2010) Transmission of ovine herpesvirus 2 from asymp-
caprine herpesvirus 1-specific antibodies in goat sera using
tomatic boars to sows. Emerg Infect Dis, 16 (12), 2011-2012.
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and serum neu-
Baigent SJ, Smith LP, Nair VK, and Currie RJW (2006) Vac-
tralization test. / Vet Diag Invest, 22 (2), 245-248.
cinal control of Marek's disease: Current challenges, and
McCoy MH, Montgomery DL, Bratanich AC et al. (2007) Sero-
future strategies to maximize protection. Vet Immunol
 logic and reproductive findings after a herpesvirus-1 abor-
Immunopathol,112, 78-86.
tion storm in goats. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 231 (8), 1236-
Barrandeguy M and Thiry E (2012) Equine coital exanthema
1239.
and its potential economic implications for the equine
Muller T, Han EC, Tottewitz F et al. (20ll) Pseudorabies virus
industry. Vet / 191 (1), 35-40.
in wild swine: a global perspective. Arch Virol, 156, 1691-
Borchers K, Lieckfeldt D, Ludwig A et al. (2008) Detection
 of equid herpesvirus 9 DNA in the trigeminal ganglia of
1705.
Nardelli S, Farina G, Lucchini R et al. (2008) Dynamics of infec-
 a Burchell's zebra from the Serengeti ecosystem. / Vet Med
tion and immunity in a dairy cattle population undergoing
Sci, 70 (12), 1377-1381.
an eradication programme for Infectious Bovine Rhinotra-
Brault SA, Blanchard MT, Gardner IA et al. (2010) The
cheitis (IBR). Prev Vet Med, 85, 68-80.
immune response of foals to natural infection with equid
 Patel JR, and Heldens J (200s) Equine herpesviruses 1 (EHV-
herpesvirus-2 and its association with febrile illness. Vet
1) and 4 (EHV-4)—epidemiology, disease and immunopro-
Immunol Immunopathol, 137, 136-141.
phylaxis: A brief review. Vet J, 170, 14-23.
Brault SA, Bird BH, Balasuriya UBR, and MacLachlan NJ (2011)
 Pusterla N, Wilson W, David M etal. (2009) Equine herpesvirus-
 Genetic heterogeneity and variation in viral load during
 1 myeloencephalopathy: A review of recent developments.
equid herpesvirus-2 infection of foals. Vet Microbiol, 147,
Vet J,180,279-289.
253-261.
Schrenzel MD, Tucker TA, Donovan, TAet al. (2008) New Hosts 
Davison AJ (2010) Herpesvirus systematics. Vet Microbiol, 143
for Equine Herpesvirus 9. Emerg Infect Dis, 14 (10), 1616-
(1-2),52-69
1619.
 Del Medico Zajac MP, Ladelfa MF, Kotsias Fet al. (2010) Biology
 Smith, KL, Allen, GP, Branscum, AJ et al. (2010) The increased
 of bovine herpesvirus 5. Vet J, 184, 138-145.
prevalence of neuropathogenic strains of EHV-1 in equine
Donovan TA, Schrenzel MD, Tucker T et al. (2009) Menin-
abortions. Vet Microbiol, 141 (1-2), 5-11.
 goencephalitis in a polar bear caused by equine herpesvirus
Thiry E, Addie D, Belak S et al. (2009) Feline herpesvirus infec-
9 (EHV-9). Vet Pathol, 46 (6), 1138-1143.
tion ABCD guidelines and prevention and management. /
Fortier G, van Erck E, Pronost S et al. (2010) Equine gammaher-
Feline Med Surg, 11, 547-555.
 pesviruses: pathogenesis, epidemiology and diagnosis. Vet
Vengust M, Wen X, and Bienzle D (2008) Herpesvirus-
/,186,148-156.
a    e   Su is
Hartley C (2010). Aetiology of corneal ulcers assume FHV-1
Invest, 20, 820-823.
unless proven otherwise. / Feline Med Surg, 12, 24-35.
Williams KJ, Maes R, Del Piero F et al. (2007) Equine multin-
House JA, Gregg DA, Lubroth J et al. (1991) Experimental
odular pulmonary fibrosis: a newly recognized herpesvirus-
equine herpesvirus-l infection in llamas (Lama glama). / Vet
associated fibrotic lung disease. Vet Pathol, 44 (6), 849-
Diag Invest, 3, 137-143.
862.
 Jones RC (2010) Viral respiratory diseases (ILT, aMPV infec-
Wong DM, Belgrave RL, Williams KJ et al. (2008) Multinodular
tions, IB): are they ever under control? Br Poult Sci, 51 (1),
pulmonary fibrosis in five horses. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 232
1-11.
(6), 898-905.
54
Poxviridae
GUSTAVO A. DELHON
Viruses of the Poxviridae family are among the largest and
cate, and induce pathology in the skin and, to a lesser
more complex viruses infecting animals. The enveloped,
extent, selected mucosae. Lesions in the skin may be local-
pleomorphic, roughly brick-shaped poxvirus virions are
ized or extend over a large surface. Frequently skin lesions
220-450 nm long and 140-260 nm wide, just at the limit
adopt the form of exanthema, evolving through stages of
of the resolution power of light microscopes, and consist of
erythema, papula, and scabs, with or without clear inter-
copies of approximately 80 different viral proteins. Charac-
mediate vesicular and pustular stages. Some poxviral dis-
teristic tubular structures decorate the virion surface (Fig-
eases are characterized by nodular skin lesions, while oth-
d sx    s   
ers are prominently proliferative. For some diseases (e.g.,
are so distinctive that many veterinary virology laborato-
swinepox), skin lesions may be the only manifestation of
ries use negative-stain electron microscopicexamination of
disease. For others, skin lesions are accompanied by fever
lesion material for rapid preliminary diagnosis of poxviral
and other manifestations of systemic disease such as lesions
infection.
 in internal organs (e.g., sheeppox and mousepox) and gen-
The poxviral genome consists of a linear double-
eralized lymphadenopathy.
stranded DNA molecule with lengths ranging from 134
In general, the main skin target cell for chor-
to 300 kilobase pairs and encodes for 130 to more than
dopoxviruses is the keratinocyte. Keratinocytes are found
300 genes. Genes with roles in virus structure and mor-
in different stages of differentiation in the epidermis and
phogenesis, transcription, and DNA replication are clus-
associated hair follicles, forming multiple strata from basal 
tered into a large central genomic region and are con-
stem cells to apical corneocytes (i.e., keratin scales). Typi-
served among poxvirus genera. Regions flankingthe central
cal poxviral histopathology during the papular stage shows
genomic region are less conserved and contain genes with
hyperplasia of the epidermis, balooning degeneration of
roles in immune evasion, host-range, and virulence. Many
keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum, and aberrant ker-
genes in the flanking regions of the viral genome exhibit
atinization (Figure 54.2A). Viral particles in different mat-
homology to host genes that function in innate immunity,
uration stages are seen in infected keratinocytes with the
suggesting that poxviruses can manipulate host antiviral
electron microscope (Figure 54.1B).
responses. It is believed that modulation of host antivi-
A conspicuous feature of poxvirus-infected cells is the
ral responses is important for successful poxviral in fection
presence of cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. Two types of
and disease. Exceptional for DNA viruses, poxviruses repli-
poxviral inclusion bodies are known. Most poxviruses
cate in the cytoplasm of infected cells, implying that they
induce formation of Guarnieri's or type B inclusion bodies,
can dispense with host nuclear functions. The presence
 of a relatively large number of replicative viral genes in
ticles and protein aggregates (Figure 54.2A, inset). In addi-
poxviral genomes reflects independence of host nuclear
tion, some poxviruses (e.g., cowpox virus and ectromelia
enzymes and factors. Cytoplasmic replication of poxviruses
virus) induce type A inclusion- or ATI bodies, which are
occurs in virus infection-induced cytoplasmic compart-
acidophilic and consist largely of aggregates of one type
ments known as viroplasm or virus factories, where viral
 of viral protein. The size and type of inclusion bodies as
 genome replication and virion assembly take place.
well as the time frame during infection in which they are
Viruses of the family Poxviridae are classified into two
detected vary broadly among poxviral diseases. Detection
subfamilies, Chordopoxvirinae (poxviruses that infect ver-
of inclusion bodies in tissue sections from lesions aids to
tebrates) and Entomopoxvirinae (poxviruses that infect
the diagnosis of some poxviral diseases.
insects). The current classification of chordopoxviruses
Poxvirus can not infect intact skin. Contact of infectious
is shown in Table 54.1. Some poxviruses are very host
material (e.g., scabs, secretions, and fomites) with broken
species specific, while others in fect multiple species. Several
or lacerated skin is a common route of poxvirus trans-
poxviruses maintained in animals cause zoonotic infec-
mission. While some poxviruses have adapted for aerosol
tions in humans.
transmission (e.g., sheeppox virus), others are mechani-
A common feature of chordopoxviruses is that, at some
cally transmitted by biting arthropods (e.g., myxoma virus
stage during infection of the host, they colonize, repli-
and avipox viruses).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. Edited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kemedy ard M.M. Chergapa
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
387
882
PART III
Viruses
human diseases until eradication in 1980. With mortality
FIGURE 54.1.
(A) Transmission electron micrograph of a
 rates approaching 35%, and transmission by the respiratory
contagious ecthyma virion. Note the ovoid shape of the
route, smallpox caused massive epidemics that impacted
particle and the cris-cross pattern of surface tubular structures.
human demographics worldwide. In its most frequent pre-
Negative stain; bar= 200 nm. (B) Transmission electron
sentation (ordinary smallpox), the disease was character-
micrograph ofa section ofa capripoxvirus-infected
ized by fever, enanthema in the pharynx and oral cavity,
keratinocyte. N, nucleus; C, cytoplasm; V, virus particles; T,
tonofilaments; d, desomosomes; m, mitochondrium. Bar = 500
and generalized exanthema. The most serious complica-
nm. inset, eniargement of a mature viral particle. Bar =
tion of the disease was bronchopneumonia, as a result of
100 nm.
virus replication and/or secondary bacterial infection in
the respiratory tract. Orthopoxviruses that cause disease
(A)
(B)
 in animals include cowpox virus, vaccinia virus, camelpox
virus, and ectromelia virus.
Cowpox
 Infections by cowpox virus are endemic in Europe and
Western Asia. The virus is maintained in rodents, and nat-
urally infects humans and multiple animal species. The
 name cowpox virus refers to its association with pustular
lesions of the teats of milking cows, currently a rare con-
dition. More recently cowpox virus infections have been
associated with cats, dogs, mice, and a number of zoo ani-
 mals, including elephants, large felids, foxes, anteaters, and
Orthopoxviruses
rhinoceros.
 Cowpox virus enters the host through broken skin. In
Members of the genus Orthopoxvirus are the best-known
 most species, including humans, infection results in local-
poxviruses. One reason for this is that variola virus, the
ized, selflimiting pustular, often erosive skin lesions that
human pathogen that causes smallpox, is an orthopox virus.
evolve to crust in a few days, and a swelling draining lymph
Historically, smallpox was one of the most devastating
node. In domestic cats, however, cowpox virus infection 
Table 54.1.
Poxviruses that Infect Vertebrate Species
Genus
Virus, Examples?
Reservoir Host
Other Infected Hosts
Geographic Distribution
 Orthopoxvirus
Cowpox virus
Wild rodents
 Cats, humans, cattle, zoo animals
Europe, Asia
Monkeypox virus
 Likely wild rodents 
Monkeys, humans, zoo animals
Africa
Variola virus
Humans
Nil
Eradicated
Vaccinia virus
Unknown
Humans, cattle, water buffaloes
Worldwide
Camelpox virus
Camels
NH
Africa, Asia
Horsepox virus
Unknown
Horses
Asia?
Ectromelia virus
Unknown
Laboratory mice
Europe
Leporjpoxvirus
Myxoma virus
Wild rabbits
 European or common rabbit 
Americas, Europe, Australia
 Rabbit fibroma virus
Wild rabbits
 European or common rabbit
Europe
 Squirrel fibroma virus 
Gray squirrel
Woodchuck
North America
Suipoxvirus
Swinepox virus
Swine
Nil
Worldwide
Capripoxvirus
Sheeppox virus
Sheep, goats 
I!N
Africa, Asia
Goatpox virus
Goats, sheep
I!N
Africa, Asia
Lumpy skin disease virus
Unknown
Cattle
Africa
Cervidpoxvirus
Deerpox virus
Cervids
Unknown
 North America
Yatapoxvirus
Tanapox virus
Monkeys
 Humans, monkeys
Africa
 Yaba monkey tumor virus 
Monkeys
Humans
Africa
Parapoxvirus
orf virus
Sheep, goats 
 Humans, camels, wild mammals 
Worldwide
 Bovine papular stomatitis virus 
Cattle
Humans
Worldwide
Pseudocowpox virus
Cattle
Humans
Worldwide
 Parapoxvirus of red deer
Red deer
Unknown
New Zealand, Europe
Molluscipoxvirus
 Moltuscum contagiosum virus
Humans
I!N
Worldwide
Avipoxvirus
Ganarypox virus 
Canaries
Unknown
Worldwide
Fowipox virus
Chicken 
Unknown
Worldwide
 Pigeonpox virus
 Pigeons
Unknown
Worldwide
 Psittacinepox virus
Psittacidae
Unknown
Worldwide
 The prototype virus of the genus is indicated in italis.
Chapter 54 Poxviridae
686
as bovine vaccinia, is indistinguishable from cowpox, with
FIGURE 54.2.
Histopathology of a skin lesion induced by
papules, vesicles, and crust in the udders and teats. Unpro-
poxvirus infection (contagious ecthyma). (A) Five days
tected milkers become infected by contact and may spread
postinfection. The epidermis (e) exhibits hyperplasia of
the disease in cattle. Vaccinia virus strains have been iso-
keratinocytes, most notably in the stratum spinosum, with the
lated from wild rodents in bovine vaccinia areas as well as
upper celis in the stratum undergoing ballooning
Brazilian forests, providing a hypothesis for maintenance
degeneration. Pale cytoplasmic inclusion bodies are observed
in a few keratinocytes (arrows). The dermis (d) is infitrated
of the virus in Nature and outbreaks in cattle.
with neutrophils and inflammatory mononuclear cells. H&E,
Similar to cowpox and bovine vaccinia viruses, buf-
X400. (B) Tventy days postinfection. The hyperplastic
falopox virus, a virus circulating in water buffalos in north -
ern India and, to a lesser extent, in Pakistan, Egypt, and
interdigitate with the infitrated dermis (d); c= crust. H&E,
Indonesia, causes pustular lesions on the teats and udders
X100.
of milking buffalos. Buffalopox can be enzootically trans-
 mitted to unprotected milkers, producing lesions on the 
(A)
（B
hands and face. Buffalopox virus and rabbitpox virus (i.e.,
thecausative agentofa highly lethal airborne disease oflab-
oratory rabbits) are considered vaccinia virus strains that
have adapted to buffalos and rabbits, respectively. Vaccine
escape has been hypothesized to account for the origin of
 buffalopox and bovine vaccinia strains.
Camelpox
Camelpox is an economically significant disease in Middle
East, and Asian and African countries with an indigenous
camel population, in which the disease is endemic. New
world camelids are also susceptible. DNA sequencing and
analysis of virus genomes have shown that camelpox virus
is most similar to variola virus. Indeed, in the past, camels
have been successfully protected against camelpox with
has a systemic character. A primary in fection occurs at the
vaccinia virus-based vaccines.
site of virus entry followed by viremia. Seven to ten days
Camelpox virus entry into the host is thought to occur
later multiple lesions develop, primarily on the skin of the
via the respiratory route and by contact with skin abra-
head, neck, and limbs and, occasionally, in the oral cav-
sions. Arthropod vectors, including ticks and biting flies,
ity. Some cats exhibit conjunctivitis and become pyretic.
may also play a role in virus transmission (reviewed in
In rare cases, the infection is fatal, with lesions manifested
Bhanuprakash et al. 2010). Camelpox may adopt several
in internal organs such as the liver and lungs. Most cowpox
clinical forms, ranging from local mild skin infections
virus infections in cats occur in late summer and autumn
to moderate and severe systemic infections. The incuba-
due to a higher density of potentially in fected rodents. Cat-
tion time for systemic forms is 8-13 days, which is fol-
to-cat transmission can occur but usually results in subclin-
 lowed by fever and various degrees of exanthema and lym-
ical in fection. Seroprevalence of cowpox virus in cats varies
phadenopathy. Skin rash appears 1-3 days after the onset
from 0% to 16%.
of fever, following the progression macula-papula-vesicle-
Zoonotic transmission of cowpox virus to humans
pustule-scab. Lesions are first observed in the head, and
Occurs via contact with infected animals. Transmission to
then in the neck and limbs. In the most severe infections
humans has been reported primarily from cats, especially
(generalized camelpox), skin lesions spread to the entire
in children, but also from cattle, mice, and zoo animals.
body surface and the mucosa of the oral cavity and respira-
lesions resolve in 4-6 weeks. Camels may exhibit lacrima-
Vaccinia
tion, salivation, and nasal discharge. In complicated cases,
Vaccinia virus, the prototype orthopoxvirus, is closely
death occurs as a consequence of secondary bacterial in fec-
related immunologically to variola and cowpox viruses.
tions. In epizootics involving young animals, the case-
Various vaccinia virus strains have been successfully used as
fatality rate may be as high as 25%. High rates of abortion
vaccines during the worldwide smallpox eradication cam-
have been described. Zoonotic transmission of camelpox to
paign by the World Health Organization. The name vac-
people in close contact with sick camels has been recently
cinia derives from the Latin word vacca for cow, but there
reported. Diagnosis of camelpox is based on clinical signs.
is no evidence that the virus is originated from cows. The
Electron microscopic examination of lesion material and
natural host for vaccinia virus remains unknown.
virus isolation confirms involvement of an orthopoxvirus.
Although smallpox vaccination has been suspended 30
Mild forms of camelpox can be confounded with infec-
years ago, infections by vaccinia virus have been sporadi-
tions by Ausdyk virus, a poorly characterized parapoxvirus
cally reported in multiple species. For example, infections
that cause localized skin lesions primarily in the face. Both
by various vaccinia virus strains have been reported in
inactivated and live attenuated virus-based vaccines can be
daily cattle and milkers in Brazil. Disease in cows, known
used to protect camels from camelpox.
390
PART III
Viruses
Mousepox
FIGURE 54.3.
(A) Ecthyma contagiosum in a lamb. Thick
Mousepox is a rare fatal disease of laboratory mice caused by
crust surrounds the mouth and nostris. The arrow indicates a
mousepox (ectromelia) virus. Although natural infection
proliferating mass originated from the inner side of the lower
by mousepox virus in wild mice has been reported, the
fip. (B) Papilomatous proliferative lesions in the mucosa lining
natural reservoir for the virus is unknown. Mousepox virus
the hard palate and upper lip. (Courtesy of Francisco A. Uzal.)
enters the body through skin breaks and causes an acute
systemicdisease, resultingis massive liver necrosis as well as
(A)
(B)
necrosis of the spleen, lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches. If
mice survive acute disease, they develop a generalized skin
rash together with necrosis and ulceration of distal parts of
the feet, snout, and tail. Conjunctivitis is often associated 
with mousepox, with large amount of virus being shed in
ocular discharges.
 Susceptibility to mousepox depends on virus strain, and
mouse age, immune status, and genetic background (e.g.,
Balb/c and A/J mouse strains are highly susceptible, while
AKR and C57BL6 mice resist severe disease). Highly suscep-
tible mouse strains die rapidly after dissemination of infec-
tion without shedding significant amount of virus. Little
virus is also shed by resistant strains that exhibit limited
infection. Mice with intermediate susceptibility are, there.
 fore, most important in spreading virus in a colony since
they develop generalized disease and survive long enough
to spread virus to other animals.
animals less than 1 year old, with morbidities in suscep-
 Mousepox outbreaks may significantly impact labora-
tible flocks that may reach 90%. Mortality is usually low;
tory mouse colonies. Prevention and control are based on
 however, lesions in lips and udders may prevent affected
quarantine and regulation of mice traffc. Serological tests
lambs and kids from suckling, which can result in rapid
such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are
emaciation. Lesions are largely confined to areas surround.
periodically performed on valuable mouse colonies.
ing the virus entry sites, evolving through stages of ery-
thema, papules, and crust. Histological examination shows
classical poxviral lesions, including epidermal hyperplasia,
Parapoxviruses
ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes, hyperkeratosis,
occasional inclusion bodies, infiltration of the dermis and
Viruses of the genus Parapoxvirus infect farm and wild ani-
epidermis with inflammatory cells, and deposition of scale-
mals worldwide. The genus includes contagious ecthyma
crust on the skin surface (Figure 54.2A). Intraepidermal
virus, bovine papular stomatitis virus, pseudocowpox
microvesicles and micropustules rarely coalesce to form
virus, and parapoxvirus of red deer in New Zealand.
macroscopic vesicles and pustules. Evidence of angiogen-
A distinct subclade of parapoxviruses infect seals and
esis is often seen in the infiltrated dermis. As the infec.
sea lions. Virus particles are ovoid, 260 nm long and
tion progresses, the epidermis grows deep into the der-
160 nm wide, and exhibit a regular alray of superfi-
 mis forming an intricate epithelial network (rete pegs) that
cial tubule-like structures arranged in a characteristic
persists beyond the macroscopic resolution of lesions Fig-
criss-cross pattern (Figure 54.1A). The size and mor-
ure 54.2B). Advanced lesions, specially around the mouth,
phology of virus particles allows for rapid diagnosis of
d pd ss   e n s 
parapoxvirus infection following electron microscopic
 stage in the form of papillomatous growths (Figure 54.3B).
examination of lesion material. In general, parapoxviruses
In the absence of secondary infections, lesions are usually
cause self-limiting, nonsystemic, localized disease of the
resolved in 6-8 weeks; however, persistent infections have
skin and oral mucosa, with a preference for mucocu-
been reported. Contagious ecth yma virus is a highly epithe-
taneous transitions. Many parapoxviruses zoonotically
liotropic virus and keratinocytes and their counterparts in 
infect humans, with infections in immun ocompetent per-
the oral mucosa are the most important if not the only cell
 sons being mild and self-limiting.
type to support virus replication. Viral antigen, most abun-
dant in the second and third week postinfection, is seen in
Contagious Ecthyma
regenerating keratinocytes.
 In spite of a vigorous and typical anti-viral T-helper type
Contagious ecthyma, orf, or contagious pustular dermatitis
1 (Th1) immune response, immunity elicited by contagious
is a highly contagious ubiquitous disease of sheep and goats
ecthyma virus is short-lived, and animals can be repeatedly
characterized by maculopapular and proliferative lesions
infected, albeit lesions are smaller and resolve sooner than
affecting the skin around the mouth, nostrils, interdigital
in primary infections. Contagious ecthyma is a zoonotic
region, and teats, and the oral mucosa (Figure 54.3). Spread
disease, affecting humans in close contact with infected
in a flock is rapid and occurs by contact with affected ani
animals. In general,lesions aresolitary and nodular, usually
mals or shed crust. Contagious ecthyma primarily affects
in the hands. Evidence suggests that contagious ecthyma
Chapter 54 Poxviridae
391
virus occasionally infects camels and wild mammals,
tion rates, decreased weight gain, and increased suscepti-
including chamois, ibex, musk ox, and the Japanese serow.
bility to secondary bacterial infections. Capripoxvirus dis-
 Pregnant ewes can be vaccinated using nonattenuated
virus derived from crust material collected from sick ani-
and are on the World Organization for Animal Health
mals. The vaccines are applied to prescarified skin, which
list of important animal diseases that need to be notified.
develops a localized lesion. While immunity achieved in
Capripoxviruses are not present in the Americas, South-
this way is short lived, vaccinated animals and their off-
east Asia, and Australasia. Although Europe has been free
spring are less prone to develop ecthyma.
of capripoxviruses for decades, outbreaks of sheeppox have
been recently reported in Greece.
Virus particles are ovoid, 300 nm x 270 nm in size,
Bovine Papular Stomatitis
and morphologically indistinguishable between the three
Bovine papular stomatitis is a mild disease of cattle char-
viruses (Figure 54.1B). Comparison of the genomic DNA
acterized by the presence of papules, often mildly erosive,
sequences of sheeppox, goatpox, and lumpy skin disease
on the muzzle, lips, nares, dental pad, palate, tongue, and
viruses has shown that they are closely related viruses. A
udder. Lesions can be occasionally seen in the esophagus
reflection of this is that infection with any virus induces
and forestomach. Histologically, lesions are similar to but
cross-protection to heterologous capripoxviruses. While
less extensive and proliferative than those in contagious
lumpy skin disease virus affects only cattle, some strains
ecthyma. The disease occurs worldwide with highest inci-
of sheeppox and goatpox viruses can infect both sheep and
dence in milking herds and animals less than 1 year old.
goats, with most virus strains causing more severe disease
Similar to contagious ecthyma, reinfection with bovine
in the homologous host. Sheeppox and goatpox are clini-
papular stomatitis virus is commonly observed, suggest-
cally indistinguishable, and they are described as a single
ing that virus infection does not confer significant immu-
entity.
nity. Because its clinical resemblance to foot-and-mouth
disease, the disease is reported to veterinary authorities for
Sheeppox and Goatpox
differential diagnosis. Like other parapoxvirus infections,
bovine papular stomatitis is an occupational zoonotic
Sheeppox and goatpox occur in Africa north of the Equator,
disease.
southwest and central Asia, and Middle East. The diseases 
vary from inapparent to severe generalized disease. Fac-
tors influencing disease presentation are breed, age, and
Pseudocowpox
immune status of the animals, and virus strain. In the most
Pseudocowpox is a frequent enzootic infection of cat-
frequent form, acute disease, the incubation time ranges
tle worldwide caused by pseudocowpox virus. Infections
from 6 to 12 days. Fever is the first clinical sign followed
by pseudocowpox virus are mild, affecting the teats and
by skin rash 2-4 days later. Skin lesions start as erythema
udder of milking cows, and occasionally the mucocuta-
that develop into papules of 0.5-1.0 cm in diameter (Figure
 neous transitions around the mouth and muzzle of nursing
54.4A). The skin lesions initially localize to wool-less areas
calves. Typical parapoxvirus lesions develop at these sites.
such as the axilla, inner side of the tights, inguinal and
Manual removal or natural falling of crust leaves exposed
perineal regions, and the face, and they tend to become
granulomatous tissue that heals centrifugally forming a
confluent in a few days, especially in the lips, eyelids, and
characteristic scabby circular ring, a process that takes 1-
around the nose. Eventually, skin lesions may cover the
2 weeks. Chronic infections have been reported. The infec-
entire body surface. Coincident with the appearance of
tion spreads slowly in herds, likely by cross-suckling of
papules, animals show excessive salivation, and nasal and
calves and mechanical virus transmission by flies. Cattle
conjuctival discharge. As the rectal temperature drops, the
may become reinfected in subsequent lactations. Electron
superficial lymph nodes become enlarged. If animals sur-
microscopicexamination of scab homogenates shows para-
vive this stage, papules further develop into scabs, with or
poxvirus particles, thus excluding cowpox and vaccinia
without intermediate vesicular and pustular stages. Scabs,
virus infections and mechanical injuries. Pseudocowpox
which may persist for 6-8 weeks, remain infectious for
can spread from cattle to man by contact, leading to painful 
months after detaching from the skin. Bronchopneumonia
nodular lesions, usually in the hands, known as milker's
is a frequent complication in fatal cases, and is usually asso-
nodules.
ciated with a second peak in rectal temperature. Although
the virus causes primary nodular lesions in the lungs, it is
though that secondary bacterial infection is responsible fo1
Capripoxviruses
bronchopneumonia. Nodular lesions are also observed in
the gastrointestinal tract, including the liver, and in the kid -
The three recognized capripoxviruses, sheeppox virus,
neys (Figure 54.4C). Lesions in the upper respiratory tract
goatpox virus, and lumpy skin disease virus, are the
and oral cavity are short lived, and ulcerate, becoming a
causative agents of sheeppox, goatpox, and lumpy skin
significant source of infectious virus (Figure 54.4B). Histo-
disease, respectively, arguably the most serious poxviral
logically sheeppox lesions frequently contain cells with a
diseases of production animals. These are systemic diseases
distinctly vacuolated nucleus and marginated chromatin
affecting domestic ruminants in regions of Asia and Africa.
known as sheeppox cells, which represent virus-infected
In addition to direct mortality, capripoxvirus diseases are
epithelialand phagocytic cells, and perhaps other cell types
associated with reduced milk production, increased abor-
(Figure 54.4D and E).
392
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 54.4.
Sheeppox lesions; lamb. (A) Papules in axillary skin. (B) Hemorrhagic ulcers in the tracheal mucosa. (C) Nodular
virus replication (arrows), H&E, X380. (E) Macrophage with a sheeppox cell phenotype in the dermis (arrow) H&E, X400.
(A)
B)
(D)
E
Mortality in young animals can be as high as 50-70%,
over 75% have been recorded. While virus neutralization
-ou shnpe un oot yooide Ae saiei Ane-asen pue
activity has been occasionally detected in selected wildlife
tality rates range between 1% and 10%. Sheeppox and
species, there is no decisive support for a role of these species
goatpox viruses propagate mainly by aerosols, requiring
as capripoxvirus reservoirs.
close contact between animals. Experimental infections in
Lumpy skin disease is a subacute to acute generalized
 sheep and goats suggest that extended excretion of virus
disease characterized by extensive cutaneous lesions. Fol-
in secretions may take place following clinical recovery.
lowing an incubation period of4-14 days, fever of40-41 *C
Mechanical transmission of virus by insect vectors has been
develops, persisting for 1-2 weeks. At this time, animals
suggested. Interestingly, high concentration of infectious
show depression, salivation, nasal and ocular discharges,
virus in sick animals has been detected even in normal skin
and enlarged superficial lymph nodes. Erythematous skin 
between lesions.
lesions appear in the first or second week after the onset of
 In endemic areas, clinical signs and necropsy findings
the disease, rapidly evolving to firm, well-circumscribed
 are sufficient for the diagnosis. Several tests have been pro-
nodules of 0.5-5 cm in diameter. The nodules are first
posed for laboratory confirmation of sheeppox and goat-
seen in the head, neck, and perineum, but they can even-
 pox, including ELISA and agar immunodiffusion tests to
tually cover the entire body surface. Some nodules may
detect capripoxvirus antigen, polymerase chain reaction 
persist for weeks or even months before becoming hard
 (PCR), and real-time PCR. Virus isolation in primary sheep
and dry. Nodules finally detach leaving ulcers that heal in
cells (e.g., lamb testis or kidney cells) can be achieved using
a few weeks if not complicated with secondary bacterial
skin samples or nasal and oral secretions as source of virus.
infection.
Virus neutralization is the most widely used assay for anti-
 Transmission of lumpy skin disease between cattle is
body detection.
inefficient. The disease is prevalent in wet seasons when
Virus strains attenuated by serial passage in cell culture
insects are abundant, and wanes with the onset of the
have been successfully used as vaccines, yet vaccine break-
dry season. Experimental transmission of the disease to
down and short duration of protection have been reported.
reported. These observations suggest that biting insect-
vectored transmission may be significant in epizootic out-
Lumpy Skin Disease
breaks.
Lumpy skin disease occurs in sub-Saharan Africa, alth ough
Live field strains of lumpy skin disease virus have been
outbreaks have been reported in Egypt and Israel. It is
attenuated by serial passage in tissue culture or in the
essentially a cattle disease, with morbidity varying from
chorioallantoic membranes ofembryonated hen's eggs and
10% to 85%, and mortality of 1%, although mortality rates
successfully used as vaccines.
Chapter 54 Poxviridae
Avipoxviruses
FIGURE 54.5.
Fowipox, cutaneous form. Shown are
Avipoxviruses have been identified as the causative agents
scab-stage lesions in unfeathered parts of the head, with those
in the eyelids completely obliterating the eyes. (Courtesy of
of disease in more than 200 bird species, including domes-
Francisco A. Uzal.)
tic, pet, and wild birds. They are classified on the basis
 of host species, disease characteristics, virus growth prop-
erties, and antigenicity. The genomes of fowlpox virus,
the type member of the genus, and canarypox virus have
been sequenced, revealing that avipoxviruses are the most
complex poxviruses currently known. A distinctive fea-
ture of fowlpox virus is the presence in many field and
vaccine strains of a near full-length reticuloendothelio-
sis provirus integrated into the viral genome (Hertig et al.
1997). Reiculoendotheliosis viruses are avian immunosup-
pressive retroviruses that cause lymphomas in chickens.
While the selective advantage of this natural recombina-
tion for the viruses is unknown, some speculate that reticu-
loendotheliosis virus-induced immunosuppression might
favor fowlpox virus infection of the host and subsequent
transmission.
Fowlpox
Fowlpox isa serious slow-spreading, worldwide disease that
affects chickens and turkeys. Transmission is by contact
through abrasions in the skin and by biting insects. In its
most frequent form, cutaneous form or dry fowlpox form,
the disease is characterized by proliferative lesions primar-
ily confined to the skin of unfeathered body parts such as
used to protect poultry from fowlpox. The vaccines are usu-
eyelids, comb, wattle, legs, feet, and base of the beak. When
ally applied by wing web inoculation, a laborious method
lesions affect the eyelids, complete closure of the eyes is
fo1 large facilities. Highly attenuated vaccines obtained by
common (Figure 54.5). Lesions range from small nodules
 serial passage in vitro or by recombinant DNA technology
to wart-like masses that evolve to scars before healing. His-
exist for inoculation in ovo.
tologically, the hyperplastic epidermis shows degenerate
keratinocytes containing large cytoplasmic eosinophilic
Poxviral Diseases in Other Bird Species
(H&E) inclusion bodies known as Bollinger's bodies. In
noncomplicated cases, lesions heal in 3 weeks.
Avipoxviruses infect a variety of wild and caged birds,
While mortality with fowlpox is low, the transient drop
including penguins, ostriches, canaries, parrots, and spar-
 in eggproduction in laying hens and decreased growth rates
rows. Disease ranges from cutaneous lesions in the head and
in young birds may be economically significant. A less com-
feet to severe diphtheric forms. Disease in canaries is usu-
mon, severe form of the disease known as diphtheric fowipox
ally systemic, with hepatic necrosis and pulmonary nod-
01 wetpox is characterized by caseous plaques or necrotic
ules, and mortalities that may approach 90%. Vaccination
pseudomembranes firmly attached to the mucosa lining
is practiced by some canary breeders. With the exception of
the upper respiratory tract and esophagus. Cutaneous and
canarypox virus, little is known on the biology of causative
diphtheric forms may coexist in the same animal. Aerosols
viruses, strain variability, and thei1 relationship to known
have been suggested to play a role in transmission of fowl
avipoxviruses. Chickens are usually used to determine the
diphtheria.
     's   
Diagnosis of fowlpox is based on clinical signs and
pathogenic or are marginally pathogenic in these species
histopathology (inclusion bodies). Virus can be isolated
(e.g, pigeonpox virus), indicating host-specificity of iso-
by inoculation of lesion material into avian cell cultures
lates.
for appearance of cytopathic effect, or the chorioallantoic
membrane of chicken embryos for development of pock
Avipoxviruses as Vaccine Vectors in Veterinary Medicine
lesions. While most strains induce pock lesions on the
membrane by 3-5 days, not all isolates grow well in embry-
As an alternative to con ventional vaccines, poxviruses have
 onated eggs. PCR allows for sensitive and specific detec-
been engineered to express heterologous genes and used as
tion of fowlpox virus DNA sequences as well as distinction
vaccine vectors. For this purpose, genes encoding immuno-
between field and vaccine virus strains.
genic pathogen proteins are inserted into genomes of atten-
 Insect control programs and sanitation of housing are
uated poxviruses and expressed upon infection of vaccine
important to reduce the likelihood of fowlpox outbreaks.
recipients. Avipoxviruses such as fowlpox virus are used as
Attenuated live fowlpox and pigeonpox virus strains are
vaccine vectors for avian influenza, Newcastle disease, and
394
PART III
Viruses
infectious laryngotracheitis. The important observation
caused by a virus antigenically related to orthopoxviruses.
that avipoxvirus can enter mammalian cells and undergo
Viruses morphologically similar to molluscum contagio-
a nonproductive infection (i.e., progeny virus is not pro-
 sum, a poxvirus affecting humans (Table 54.1), have been
 duced) led to developmentof safe avipoxvirus recombinant
demonstrated in small persistent lesions affecting the skin
vaccines for mammals. Licensed canarypoxvirus-vectored
of horses.
vaccines exist for rabies, canine distemper, West Nile virus,
feline leukemia virus, and equine influenza virus.
References
Swinepox
Bhanuprakash V, Prabhu M, Venkatesan G et al. (2010)
Camelpox: epidemiology, diagnosis and control measures.
Swinepox, a mild acute disease ofswine worldwide, is char-
Expert Rev Anti-Infective Ther, 8, 1187-1201.
acterized by typical poxvirallesions of the skin. The disease
Hertig C, Coupar BE, Gould AR, and Boyle DB (1997) Field and
is caused by swinepox virus, the sole member of the genus
vaccine strains of fowlpox virus carry integrated sequences
Suipoxvirus in the family Poxviridae. The virion is morpho-
from the avian retrovirus, reticuloendotheliosis virus. Virol-
logically similar to vaccinia virus, exhibiting a brick-like
ogy, 235, 367-376.
structure approximately 320 × 240 nm in horizontal sec-
Nollens HH, Gulland FMD, Jacobson ER et al. (2006) Para-
tion.
poxviruses of seals and sea lions make up a distinct subclade
 Swinepox morbidity rates can be as high as 100%, but
within the genus Parapoxvirus. Virology, 349, 316-324.
the mostsusceptible, with adults usually developing a mild,
self-limiting form of the disease. Multiple cutaneous lesions
Further Reading
are commonly found on the flanks, belly, inner side of
the legs, ears, and less frequently on the face of affected
Babiuk S, Bowden TR, Boyle DB et al. (2008) Capripoxviruses:
animals.
 Swinepox is usually associated with poor sanitation con-
an emerging worldwide threat to sheep, goats, and cattle.
ditions, which are rarely seen in modern production set-
Transbound Emerg Dis, 55, 263-272.
tings. Swinepox virus is mechanically transmitted by lice
Balinsky CA, Delhon G, Smoliga G et al. (2008) Rapid preclin-
ical detection of sheeppox virus by a real-time PCR assay.
(Haematopinus suis), which affect the extent and distribu
/Clin Microbiol,46,438-42
tion of cutaneous lesions that often occur in less keratinized
Baxby D and Bennett M (1997) Cowpox; a re-evaluation of
 abdominal and inguinal regions. However, swinepox with -
the risk of human cowpox based on new epidemiological
out evidence of louse involvement has been described , sug-
information. Arch Virol, 1l(Suppl), 1-12.
 gesting the role for other insect vectors or the possibility of
Bennett M, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RJ et al. (1986) Poxvirus infec-
horizontal transmission. Vertical swinepox virus transmis-
tions in the domestic cat: some clinical and epidemiological
sion is indicated by sporadic cases of congenital infection
investigations. Vet Rec, 118, 387-390.
resulting in stillborn fetuses with generalized lesions.
Bennett M, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RJ et al. (1989) Studies on
 Clinical signs and epidemiology are usually suffcient
 poxvirus infections in cat. Arch Virol, 104, 19-33.
for swinepox diagnosis. Given that the disease is of rela-
Bera BC, Shanmugasundaram K, Barua S et al. (201l) Zoonotic
tively low economic impact, no vaccine has been devel-
cases of camelpox infection in India. Vet Microbiol, 152, 29-
oped. Good animal husbandry including ectoparasite con-
38.
trol should be practiced.
Bhanuprakash V, Indrani BK, Hosamani M, and Singh RH
(2006) The current status of sheep pox disease. Comp
Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis, 29, 27-60.
Poxviral Infections of Horses
Bowden TR, Babiuk SL, Parkyn GR et al. (2008) Capripoxvirus
tissue tropism and shedding: a quantitative study in experi-
 Although frequently reported in the nineteenth and early
mentally infected sheep and goats. Virology, 371, 380-393.
twentieth centuries, poxviral infections of horses are cur-
Boyle DB (2007) Genus Avipoxvirus, in Poxviruses (eds AA Mer-
rently very rare. Several clinical forms of poxviral dis-
cer, A Schmidt and O Weber), Birkhauser Verlag, Basel-
Boston-Berlin, pp. 217-251.
ease have been described in horses, but only in a few
Brum MC, Anjos BL, Nogueira CE et al. (2010) An outbreak
cases has the causative agent been characterized in any
of orthopoxvirus-associated disease in horses in southern
way. An orthopoxvirus recovered from Mongolian horses
Brazil. / Vet Diagn Invest, 22,143-147.
with severe pustular dermatitis and named horsepox was
Carn VM and Kitching RP (1995a) The clinical response of cat-
found to be very similar to but distinct from vaccinia
tle experimentally infected with lumpy skin disease (Neeth-
virus. Vaccinia virus infections were relatively frequent
ling) virus. Arch Virol, 140, 503-513.
in horses by the times of the smallpox eradication cam-
Carn VM and Kitching RP (199sb) An investigation of possible
paigns. Recently, an outbreak of orthopoxvirus-associated
routes of transmission of lumpy skin disease virus (Neeth-
disease has been reported in horses in Brazil. Affected ani-
ling). Epidemiol Infect, 114, 219-226.
mals exhibited papular lesions around the muzzle and lips
Chihota CM, Rennie LF, Kitching RP, and Mellor PS (2001)
that progressed to vesicles and scabs before healing. A con-
Mechanical transmission of lumpy skin disease virus by
dition named Uasin Gishu, characterized by papillomatous
Aedes aegypti(Diptera: Culicidae). Epidemiol Infect, 126, 317-
skin lesions, affects horses in some regions of Africa, and is
321.
Chapter 54   Poxviridae
395
Davies FG (1991) Lumpy skin disease, an African capripox virus
Jenkinson, DM, Mc Ewan PE, Moss VA et al. (199o) Location
disease of cattle. Br Vet /, 147, 489-503.
and spread of orf virus antigen in infected ovine skin. Vet
de Boer GF (1975) Swinepox, virus isolation, experimental
Dermatol,1, 189-195.
infections and the differentiation from vaccinia infections.
Jubb TF, Ellis TM, Peet RL, and Parkinson J (1992) Swinepox in 
Arch Virol ,49, 141-150.
pigs in northerm Western Australia. Aust Vet J, 69, 99.
de la Concha-Bermejillo A, Guo J, Zhang Z, and Waldron D
Kasza L, Griesemer RA (1962) Experimental swine pox. Am /
(2003)Severe persistent orf inyoung goats. / VetDiagn Invest,
Vet Res, 23, 443-450.
15,423-431.
Knowles DP (2011) Poxviridae, in Fenner's Veterinary Virology,
 Delhon GA, Tulman ER, Afonso CL, and Rock DL (2007) Genus 
4th edn (edsNJ MacLachlan and EJ Dubovi),Academic Press,
 Suipoxvirus, in Poxviruses (eds AA Mercer A Schmidt and O
pp. 151-165.
Weber), Birkhauser Verlag, Basel-Boston-Berlin, pp. 203-
Lange L, Marett S, Maree C, and Gerdes T (1991) Molluscum
215.
contagiosum in three horses. /S Afr Vet Assoc, 62, 68-71.
Diallo A and Viljoen GJ (2007) Genus Capripoxvirus,
in
Mazur C and Machado RD (1989) Detection of contagious pus-
Poxviruses (eds AA Mercer A Schmidt and O Weber),
tular dermatitis virus of goats in a severe outbreak. Vet Rec,
Birkhauser Verlag, Basel-Boston-Berlin, pp. 167-181.
125,419-420.
Essbauer S and Meyer H (2007) Genus Orthopoxvirus: Cowpox
Moss B (2007) Poxviridae: the viruses and their replication,
virus, in Poxviruses (eds AA Mercer A Schmidt and O Weber),
in Fields Virology, vol. 2, 5th edn (eds DM Knipe and PM
Birkhauser Verlag, Basel-Boston-Berlin, pp. 75-88.
Howley), Williams & wilkins, Lippincot, pp. 290s-2945.
 Essbauer S, Pfeffer M, Meyer H. (2010) Zoonotic poxviruses.
Munz E and Dumbell K (1994) Horsepox, in Infectious Diseases
Vet Microbiol, 140, 229-236.
of Livestock—with Special Emphasis to Southern Africa, vol. 1,
Fenner, F (198l) Mousepox (infectious ectromelia): past,
(eds JAW Coetzer, GR Thomson and RC Tustin), Oxford
present, and future. Lab Anim Sci, 31, 553-559.
University Press, Oxford United Kingdom, pp. 631-632.
Fleming SB and Mercer AA (2007) Genus Parapoxvirus, in
Paton DJ, Brown IH, Fitton J, and Wrathall AE (1990) Congen-
Poxviruses (eds AA Mercer, A Schmidt and O Weber),
ital pig pox: a case report. Vet Rec, 127, 204.
Birkhauser Verlag, Basel-Boston-Berlin, pp. 127-165.
Pfeffer M and Meyer H (2007) Poxvirus diagnosis, in Poxviruses
Garner MG, Sawarkar SD, Brett EK et al. (20oo) The extent
(eds AA Mercer, A Schmidtand O Weber), Birkhauser Verlag,
and impact of sheep pox and goat pox in the state
Basel-Boston-Berlin, pp. 355-373.
Of Maharashtra, India. Trop Anim Health Prod, 32, 205-
Rao TVS, Negi BS, and Bansal MP (1997) Development and
223.
standardization of a rapid diagnosis test for sheep pox.
 Griesemer RA and Cole CR (1961) Bovine papular stomatitis.
Indian / Comp Microbiol, Immunol Infec Dis, 18, 47-51.
I1. The experimentally produced disease. Am / Vet Res, 22,
Silva-Fernandes AT, Travassos CE, Ferreira JM et al. (2009) Nat-
473-481.
ural human infections with vaccinia virus during bovine
Haenssle HA, KiesslingJ, Kempf VA et al. (2006) Orthopoxvirus 
vaccinia outbreaks. / Clin Virol, 44, 308-313.
infection transmitted bya domestic cat. / Am Acad Dermatol,
Singh RK, Hosamani M, Balamurugan V et al. (2007) Buf-
54, S1-4.
falopox: an emerging and re-emerging zoonosis. Anim
Haig DM and Mercer AA (1998) Ovine diseases. Orf. Vet Res,
Heaith Res Rev,8, 10s-114.
29, 311-326.
Tripathy DN (1993) Avipox viruses, in Virus Infections of Birds
Haig D M and Mclnnes CJ (2002) Immunity and counter-
(eds JB McFerran and MS McNulty), Elsevier, London, pp.
imm unity during infection with the parapoxvirus orf virus.
5-15.
Virus Res,88, 3-16.
Tulman ER, Delhon G, Afonso CL et al. (2006) Genome of
Heine HG Stevens, MP, Foord AJ, and Boyle DB (1999) A
horsepox. / Virol, 80, 9244-9258.
 capripox virus detection PCR and antibody ELISA based on
Vikoren T, Lillehaug A, Akerstedt J et al. (2008) A severe out-
the major antigen P32, the homolog of the vaccinia virus
break of contagious ecthyma (orf) in a free-ranging musk 
H3L gene. /Immunol Methods, 227, 187-196.
Ox (Ovibos moschatus) population in Norway. Vet Microbiol,
Hinrichs U, van de Poel PH, and van den Ingh TS (1999) Necro-
127,10-20.
tizing pneumonia in a cat caused by an orthopox virus. /
WeliSC and Tryland M (2011) Avipoxviruses: infection biology
Comp Pathol, 121, 191-196.
and their use as vaccine vectors. Virol J, 8, 49-63.
55
Picornaviridae
LUIS L. RODRIGUEZ AND PETER W. KRUG
Introduction
Viral Replication
After entry into the cell via interaction of the viral capsid
The family Picornaviridae comprises 12 genera, with most
with receptors on the susceptible cell, the viral genome is
of them containing members of veterinary importance
released into the cytoplasm. The viral genome functions
(Table 55.1). Common characteristics of the family include
both as mRNA and as a template for genome replication.
a genome consisting of single-stranded positive-sense RNA
Protein synthesis initiates through recruitment of cellular
ribosomal complexes by the viral IREs. Translation of the
Although encompassing some of the smallest viruses,
single ORF produces a 240-250 kDa polyprotein precurso1
picornaviruses cause some of the largest animal health
that is cleaved by viral and host proteases into the viral
problems, such as foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), one of
structural proteins (SPs) derived from the P1 region and the
the most contagious and economically devastating dis-
nonstructural proteins (NSPs), derived from the P2 and P3
eases of livestock. Picornaviruses are characterized by their
regions. Viral RNA replication in infected cells is carried
rapid replication cycle, remarkable stability in the envi-
out primarily by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
 ronment, and swift transmission among susceptible hosts.
(3Dpol), in conjunction with other viral or cellular pro-
These three general features are the main reasons why some
teins. The RNA is transcribed into a negative-strand RNA
animal picornaviruses are associated with high morbid-
from which synthesis of the progeny plus-strand RNA is
ity and extensive economic losses. This chapter discusses
copied in a multistranded replicative intermediate com-
the picornaviruses of veterinary importance from the per-
plex. The negative-sense RNA serves as a template for the
spective of general virology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
synthesis of multiple copies of genomic RNA, some of
control.
 o d are so pe pa are y
particles. Due to the lack of proofreading activity of RNA-
dependent RNApolymerase (3Dpol), errors are generated at
Virion Structure, Genome Characteristics, and Replication
a frequency of 1/10 000 bases incorporated during replica-
Electron micrographs of picornaviruses show icosahedral
tion, resulting in every new genome containing at least one
viral particles with sphere-like morphology and no pro.
mutation. Therefore, the virus population consists of a col-
jections (Figure 55.1). The viral capsid is composed of 60
lection of genetically diverse members (quasi-species) that
identical units (protomers), each consisting of three surface
provide the virus the ability to rapidly respond to selective
proteins 1B, 1C, and 1D or VP3, VP2,and VP1, respectively,
pressure exerted by host factors (e.g. immune response).
and an internal protein 1A or VP4.
Virion physicochemical properties vary among different
Genus Aphthovirus
genera with some members showing instability below pH
7 (e.g., aphthoviruses), and others highly resistant to pH
changes (e.g., enteroviruses). All virions are insensitive to
Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus
Organic solvents such as ether and chloroform.
Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), the type species of
The genome consists of one molecule of ssRNA+, 7.0-
the Aphthovirus genus, is an antigenically variable virus
8.8 kb in size with a single open reading frame (ORF). A
with 7 serotypes: A, O, C, Asia-1, and South African Ter-
poly(A) tail, of varying length located at the 3'-terminus
ritories 1, 2, and 3. Infection with one serotype does
and a small 2.2-3.9 kDa protein (3B or VPg), is linked
covalently to the 5'-terminus. There is a highly structured
 5'-untranslated region (UTR) containing signal sequences
ual serotypes. Therefore, effective immunization requires
such as an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) to initiate
a multiple serotype and subtype-specific vaccines. FMDV
 translation of the viral polyprotein and a clover-leaf "s"
causes a highly contagious disease (FMD) in domestic
fragment essential for viral replication.
and wild cloven-hoofed animals including cattle, buffalo,
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
396
Chapter 55
Picornaviridae
397
Table 55.1.
 Picornaviridae of Veterinary Significance
FIGURE 55.1.
FMDV purified from infected
tissue-cultured celis and negatively stained with 2%
Species with Veterinary.
Associated Major
phosphotungstic acid (magnification, 300 000x). (Courtesy of
Genus
Relevance
Disease
T.G. Burrage, Viral, Celfular and Molecular imaging.
Aphthovirus
Foot-and-mouth disease
Vesicular disease.
Department of Homeland Security, Stience and Technology
virus
lameness 
Directorate, Plum isiand Animal Disease Center.)
 Equine rhinitis virus A
Respiratory disease
Bovine rhinitis virus
Respiratory disease
Erbovirus
Equine rhinitis virus B
 Respiratory disease
Enterovirus
Swine vesicular disease
Vesicular disease, CNS
virus
disease
Bovine enterovirus
Enteritis
Sapelovirus
Porcine sapelovirus
SMEDl, gastroenteritis.
respiratory disease
Avian sapelovirus
 Growth inhibition 
Kobuvirus
Bovine kobuvirus
Enteritis 
Teschovirus
Porcine teschovirus 1
Encephalomyelitis.
SMEDI
 Porcine teschovirus 2 to
 SMEDl, Talfan disease
 Porcine teschovirus 11
Tremovirus
 Avian encephalomyelitis
 Encephalomyelitis
virus
Avihepatovirus
Duck hepatitis A virus
 CNS disease, hepatitis
Duck hepatitis virus 1 and
 CNS disease, hepatitis 
Duck hepatitis virus 3
Turkey hepatopancreatitis
 CNS disease, hepatitis
virus
Cardiovirus
 Encephalomyocarditis
Myocarditis
virus
Senecavirus
 Seneca Valley virus
Not known
CNS, central nervous system; SMEDl, stillbith, mummification, embryonic death,
and infertility.
the use of vaccine resulting in the slaughter of millions of
 animals at a cost of billions of US dollars. Despite this effort,
Republic of Korea had to implement general vaccination in 
order to control the disease.
swine, sheep, goats, and deer. The virus rapidly replicates in
the host and readily spreads to susceptible animals by con-
Pathogenesis
tact and aerosol. The disease is characterized by fever, lame-
ness and vesicular lesions on the tongue, feet, snout, and
 FMDV can be transmitted by direct or indirect contact with
teats resulting in high morbidity but low mortality in adult
infected animals, their secretions, or contaminated food
animals. However, mortality can be high in younger ani-
products, and it has been documented that the virus can
 a u ood psa on an  s
travel over extensive distances to cause incursions at pre-
FMD is considered the most contagious diseases ofanimals,
viously virus-free premises. Natural infection of cattle and
and outbreaks require immediate notification by member
        
countries to the World Animal Health Organization (OIE).
by aerosolized virus, whereas pigs are in fected by consump-
Outbreaks result in trade bans and restrictions of suscep-
tion of virus-contaminated food or through abrasions on
tible animals and their products causing devastating eco-
the skin or in the mucous membranes while in contact
nomic consequences to the affected countries.
with infected animals or their secretions. Recent studies
FMDV is enzootic in many countries and it has occurred
demonstrated that subsequent to exposure to infectious
 in all continents except Antarctica. The disease was erad-
aerosols, the primary site of viral replication was in epithe-
icated from Europe and North America. Large portions of
lial cells of the nasopharynx, followed by infection of pul-
South America control the disease through vaccination.
monary epithelium and onset of viremia. Viremia results
However, disease outbreaks remain prevalent in endemic
in dissemination throughout the body; but high-titer viral
"pools" in South America, East, South East, and central
replication only occurs at lesion predilection sites includ-
Asia, southern Africa, northern Africa, and the Middle East.
ing the interdigital epithelia, coronary bands of the hooves,
From these pools the virus makes incursions into FMDv-
the oral cavity, and less frequently the myocardium. The
free countries, fo1 example in Taiwan in 1997, in the United
specific factors determining tropism and high-titer repli-
Kingdom in 2001, Japan in 2001 and 2010, and multiple
cation at the lesion sites remain undetermined. Following
outbreaks in the Republic of Korea in 2010-2011 including
the acute phase, up to 50% of FMDV-infected ruminants,
an outbreak in 2011 that was the largest in that country's
whether vaccinated or naive animals, become chronic,
history. Some of these outbreaks were controlled without
asymptomatic carriers of the virus. Carrier animals are
865
PART III
Viruses
those from which the live virus can be isolated 28 days
fering with host protein translation, Lpro causes specific
 postinfection. The role of carrier animals in the epidemi-
interference with the host innate response by translocating
ology, ecology, and long-term maintenance of FMDV in
 to the nucleus during viral infection and interfering with
animal populations remains unclear. But in domestic cat-
the signaling of the interferon response by the degradation
tle and African buffalo, the carrier state can last as long
of NF-x B, which regulates interferon-β transcription.
 as 3.5-5.0 years, and there are some reports documenting
Infection of swine with FMDV results in a transient lym-
transmission to cattle from African buffalo carriers.
phopenia during the acute phase of infection, which corre-
lates with viremia and T cell dysfunction but is resolved
Molecular Pathogenesis
early after infection. Another effect on innate response
by FMDV infection in swine is the decreased production
FMDV enters cells via specific cellular receptors (integrins
of interferon-α by various types of dendritic cells dur-
αvβ1,αvβ3,αvβ6, and αvβ8). Invitro,FMDV binds to cellu-
 ing the acute phase. This viral-induced immunopathology
lar integrins via a highly conserved RGD (arginine, glycine,
results in a reduced and delayed innate response. There
 aspartic acid) sequence located on the G-H loop of capsid
might be other effects on the porcine cellular immune
protein VP1. Studies in animals suggest that the integrin
responses including the decreased function of natural
vvβ6 is the major viral receptor since it is expressed con-
killer cells. Even though innate responses are inhibited,
stitutively at high levels on the surface of epithelial cells in
a solid antibody response develops quickly, within 4-6
tissues susceptible to FMDV, and it is also expressed on the
days of infection, which is protective against reinfection
surface of FMDV-infected epithelial cells. Upon binding to
by antigenically related strains of FMDV within the same
cells, virus entry occurs by clathrin-dependent endocytosis
serotype.
followed by acidification of endosomes leading to capsid
Another mechanism of interference with the host
disruption and release of viral RNA.
immune response used by FMDV is degradation of major
Following uncoating and release of viral RNA into
histocompatibility complex class I molecules, thereby
the cytoplasm, translation initiates internally in a cap-
impairing the cytotoxic T cell response. In summary, FMDV
independent mechanism at the IREs located approxi-
infection has dramatic effectsatthe molecular, cellular, and
mately 1500 bases downstream from the 5' end of the
 host response levels, some of which as not yet fully under
genome. Two functionalin-frame initiation codons (AUG),
stood. Understanding these viral mechanisms ofpathogenl-
are present but translation, initiates mainly from the sec-
esis will aid in the development of more effective vaccines
ond AUG, resulting in a single polyprotein that is processed
and antiviral and biotherapeutic strategies against this dev-
by viral-encoded proteinases Lpro and 3cpro and protein
astating disease.
2A to yield SPs and NSPs. Four SPs form the capsid (Vp1-
Vp4) and ten NsPs are necessary for viral replication and
Control and Recovery
encapsidation. Once translated and processed, some NSPs
interact with cellular factors to enhance viral replication.
Approaches to control FMD vary dramatically from coun-
Viral proteins have diverse functions; for example, the RNA
try to country, and depend primarily on the disease status
elongation polymerase activity is contained in 3D, 2C is an
(endemic vs. free), international commerce of animals and
ATPase containing a nucleotide-binding sequence motif,
animalproducts, and political situation. The Food and Agri-
and 2B is essential in the association to cellular membranes
culture Organization has identified guidelines with stages
and formation of replication complexes. Protein VPg (3B
for countries to follow in the progressive control program
in aphthoviruses) acts as a transcription primer after being
of FMD (for details visit http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/
uridylated to form VPgpUpUOH by a cis-acting replication
commissions/en/eufmd/pcp.html, accessed January 25,
element in the viral genome and the viral 3D polymerase.
2013). Stage 0 countries do not monitor or control FMD,
Viral RNA replication in infected cells is carried out
and countries at stages 1-3 include various levels of mon-
primarily by the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
itoring and control strategies including vaccination that
(3Dpol), in conjunction with other viral or cellular pro-
result in no circulation of virus (stage 4), while countries
teins. Virus assembly starts with the formation of a virus
at stage 5 maintain no disease circulation in the absence
particle containing three surface proteins, VP1-VP3, and an
of vaccination (i.e., free without vaccination). Outbreak
internal protein, VP4. The final steps in in fectious virus for-
 response in countries in stages 2-3 might involve some
mation are the maturation cleavage of VP4 and VP2 (from
level of animal movementcontroland targeted vaccination
VPO) and the encapsidation of plus-strand viral RNA.
and in some cases slaughter of animals in affected premises.
Outbreak response in countries free with vaccination might
involve some animal slaughter and revaccination of at-risk
Viral Interference with the Host Immune Response
animal populations. In FMD-free countries without vac-
FMDV has evolved a variety of strategies to interfere with
cination, the main response is usually stamping-out with
the host response (defense) to viral infection. The leader
minimal use of vaccination. This has had devastating con-
protein (Lpre), in addition to cleaving the viral polyprotein,
sequences with millions of animals destroyed at a very high
 also cleaves elongation factor elF4G, which is involved in 
cost not only economically but also socially and morally as
 mRNA cap recognition by the ribosome to initiate pro-
far as animal welfare is concerned. In some cases, stamping-
tein translation. This cleavage effectively prevents cap-
out efforts have not been successful and countries have had
mediated translation of host mRNA. However, viral RNA
 to establish long-term mass vaccination campaigns in order
translation continues mediated by the IRES signal in the
to control the disease (e.g., Argentina and Uruguay in 2001
viral 5'-UTR.In addition to this general mechanism ofinter-
and Republic of Korea in 2011).
Chapter 55
Picornaviridae
665
Vaccination
ily inactivated by sodium hypochlorite (1000 ppm), citric
FMD vaccines have been available for decades and rep-
acid (1%), and sodium carbonate (4%) when dried on non-
porous surfaces. However, when disinfection was tested on
resent the largest share of the veterinary vaccine market
worldwide in terms of sales. Commercial vaccines con-
a porous surface (wood), citric acid (2%) was more effective
in virus inactivation than sodium hypochlorite even when 
sist of killed whole- virus antigen preparations. Due to the
tested at 2500 ppm. Based on these studies, chemicals con-
high variability of FMDV serotypes and subtypes, the anti-
 gen composition of FMD vaccines is tailored for specific
taining very low pH are preferred for FMDV disinfection .
world regions and in many cases to specific countries or
regions within. The use of vaccine in FMD-endemic regions
Other Members of Genus Aphthovirus
requires an in-depth investigation of the epidemiology of
The dissolution of the Rhinovirus genus was the result of
disease, vaccine matchingstudies to determine whether the
sequence analysis comparing human rhinoviruses with
selected vaccine will be effective against the strain(s) circu-
viruses causing bovine and equine rhinitis. These viruses-
lating in the target area. Some FMD-free countries have
bovine rhinitis virus A-1, bovine rhinitis virus A-2, bovine
established vaccine antigen banks to strategically store a
rhinitis virus B, and equine rhinitis virus A (formally bovine
number of viral serotypes and strains that would be used to
rhinovirus types 1, 3, and 2 and equine rhinovirus type 1,
control an outbreak at least during the early stages. Strain
respectively)—have been added to the Aphthovirus genus
selection for these vaccine banks is based on risk analy-
based on genomic organization and sequence similarity
sis and must be regularly updated to ensure that emerging
to FMDV. Specifically, the molecular evidence includes
FMDV strains are well covered.
both genetic structural motif commonalities, substantial
Commercial inactivated FMD vaccines are usually for-
amino acid identity as well as the presence of a functional
mulated as either regular potency for routine control in
Lpro (only found in aphthoviruses and erboviruses). Bovine
endemic settings or high-potency vaccines containing
rhinitis viruses are thought to cause only minor respiratory
higher antigen payload for emergency use in nonendemic
disease since they have been isolated from both healthy
regions. These vaccines are effective in preventing clinical
and symptomatic cattle. Experimental in fection with these
signs of disease and viral shedding and have been effec-
agents results in mild disease or asymptomatic infection in 
tively used in eradication programs in various parts of the
the natural host. The detection of widespread preexisting
world. However, they have some shortcomings, such as
antibodies in cattle populations suggests that these viruses
the fact that manufacturing requires the use of live virus,
often move unnoticed among susceptible hosts. The lack
which poses a risk of escape from manufacturing facilities.
Of serious disease associated with the rhinitis-causing aph-
Another problem is duration of immunity, requiring mul-
thoviruses in cattle has limited the need for any control
tiple semiannual vaccinations in order to maintain protec-
measures. Con versely, the equine rhinitis virus A (ERVA)
tive immunity levels. Additional issues include the narrow
has been associated with severe respiratory disease out-
antigenic coverage and the instability of the finished vac-
breaks in horses, with high fever and viremia. The virus
cines particularly those of the O serotypes. Potency is a
can be isolated from feces. In addition, there is serologi-
major concern with FMD vaccines. The latest revision of
cal evidence for human infection by ERVA among workers
OIE's Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial
with close contact to horses.
Animals states that six protective doses (PDso) for cattle are
preferred. In FMD-free countries where specific vaccines to
Genus Erbovirus
the outbreak-causing strain are not always available, higher
potency vaccines are preferred since they confer greater
protection against heterologous strains, quicker onset of
The genus Erbovirus includes equine rhinitis virus B (ERVB)
immunity, and increased protection from viral shedding
types 1 and 2. These viruses were previously classified under
and transmission.
the genus Rhinovirus. Erboviruses are distinct from other
 One of the important features of FMDV vaccines is the
rhinitis viruses for their acid stability. ERVB types 1 and
ability to differentiate infected from vaccinated animals
 2, formerly designated equine rhinitis virus types 2 and 3,
(DIVA). For this purpose, it is very important that dur-
respectively, are associated with upper respiratory disease
ing vaccine manufacturing all nonstructural viral proteins
and fever in horses similar to ERVA. The virus is shed from
(NSP) are removed from the vaccine, thus allowing test-
nasopharyngeal tissues, in some cases for a month after
ing for antibodies for these proteins that would be present
symptoms have resolved. It is thought there may be signif-
only in infected and not in vaccinated animals. Only high-
icant subclinical infection with ERVB and even in clinical
quality FMD vaccines devoid of NSP enable the differenti-
infections the virus does not establish viremia in infected
ation of infected animals from vaccinated animals.
horses.
Genus Enterovirus
On-farm Control and Disinfection
In the recovery phase after an FMD outbreak it is neces-
The enteroviruses are a large group of acid-resistant picor-
sary to disinfect the affected premises. FMDV is an acid-
naviruses that mainly cause mild gastrointestinal disease
labile virus and begins to dissociate into pentamers at pH
01 can be asymptomatic. They are transmitted via fomites,
below 6.5 o1 over 7.5. This allows the use of acidic and basic
contaminated food products, fecal-oral routes, 0r direct
disinfectants such as citric acid and sodium hypochlorite
contact and have wide distribution among cattle and swine
(bleach). Recent studies have shown that FMDV is read-
populations. Because there tend to be multiple serotypes of
400
PART III
Viruses
each virus, there is little attempt to control these viruses in
Genus Teschovirus
 a veterinary setting.
A notable exception to this is swine vesicular disease
Porcine teschovirus (PTV) infection is limited to swine
virus (SVDV). This virus, once epidemic worldwide, is
( I ds A 1 ds i  a 'i
mostly limited to occasional outbreaks in Europe. Genetic
causes severe disease in adult pigs, known as Teschen dis-
evidence suggests that SVDV may be a porcine variant
ease or teschovirus encephalomyelitis.The virus has world-
of human coxsackievirus B5. It is transmitted via fecal-
wide distribution, as encephalomyelitis has been reported
oral and respiratory routes and may have a carrier state.
in Eastern Europe and Africa over the last two decades,
The most important feature of infection with this virus is
with a recent outbreak in Haiti (discussed later). Like all
that its clinical features in swine resemble FMDV, vesicu-
picornaviruses, PTV is very stable in the en vironment; it is
lar stomatitis virus (VsV), and viral exanthema of swine
virus (VEsV). The vesicles on the feet and mouth are indis-
pletely heat-treated swill or other food products. The virus
tinguishable between those caused by these other viruses.
enters the host by ingestion, replicates in the gastrointesti-
Besides vesicles, other symptoms include fever, lameness,
nal tract, and is shed in the feces. Most infections with
and loss of appetite. While mortality is low, there are severe
serotypes other than PTV-1 result in subclinical disease
 symptoms in young animals associated with high morbid-
except in very young piglets ofnaive sows, which can some.
ity. In these cases, there are signs of neurological involve-
times display signs of neurological disease, but little mor-
ment such as ataxia and chorea. A rapid differential diag-
tality. Usually virus access to the central nervous system
nosis to FMDV, VSV, and VESV is required because these
(CNS) is limited by circulating maternal antibodies, and
agents are reportable. SVDV diagnosis is done by virus
the young pigs generate specifie immunity subsequent to
isolation, antigen enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
weaning. Mild pathogenesis is often referred to as Talfan
(ELISA), or real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
disease. PTV serotype 1, 3, and 6 infections have been ass0-
Serological tests are only useful for surveillance and are per-
ciated with SMEDI.
formed by virus neutralization or ELISA.
On the other hand, teschovirus encephalomyelitis
affects swine of all ages and has up to a 90% mortal-
ity rate. Symptoms include fever, anorexia, depression,
Genus Sapelovirus
muscle tremors, encephalitis, and limb paralysis. Death
can occur due to paralysis of the respiratory muscles as
The genus Sapelovinus (simian, avian, porcine entero-like
soon as 1 week after the onset of symptoms. As the virus
viruses) consists of new and reassigned viruses with genetic
invades the CNs, histopathological lesions are found in
similarity outside the clades of other picornavirus gen-
the brain, spinal ganglia, and cranial nerves. Because of
era. Reassigned viruses include duck picornavirus, now
the CNS involvement, differential diagnoses include pseu-
avian sapelovirus, and porcine enterovirus A, now porcine
dorabies virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, rabies virus,
sapelovirus. Newly discovered viruses are classified as new
and porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome virus.
sapeloviruses by sequence similarity, for example, sea lion
PTV is confirmed by virus isolation and the serotype deter-
 s ss   pn i s s
mined by serological analysis, but since the antibody is
isolated from swine with respiratory disease and gastroen-
widespread, cases of encephalomyelitis must be confirmed
teritis, and it causes the same symptoms in experimentally
by virus isolation or histopathology of brain and spinal
infected naive pigs. Porcine sapelovirus has been isolated
cord. There is no treatment for affected animals; in the
from postmortem respiratory tissue of fetal piglets in utero
past PTV vaccines have been available; however, they are
with the syndrome known as stillbirth, mummification,
no longer in use. Control is mediated by quarantine and
embryonic death, and infertility (SMEDI). The symptoms
disinfection.
are comparable to those caused by porcine parvovirus, the
 A rapidly spreading outbreak of PTV-1 was reported in
 mostcommon cause of SMEDI. Porcine sapelovirus has also
2009 in Haiti, causing severe disease and devastating the
been associated with cases of idiopathic vesicular disease,
pork economy already reeling from endemic classical swine
which is a differential diagnosis for FMD in swine.
fever. By 2010 the virus was found in almost all areas of the
country and new cases were still developing in early 2011.
Up to one-third of all swine in the country were affected
Genus Kobuvirus
and 25% mortality was observed in infected animals. Haiti's
long eastern border with the Dominican Republic puts that
Kobuvirus is another genus organized by genomic similar-
country's swine population at high transmission risk.
ity, members of which are found in human, bovine, and
 In another recent report, a retrospective analysis of sam-
porcine hosts. These viruses are associated with gastroen-
ples from 2002 suggested that PTV-1 caused swine polioen-
teritis and have been shown to cause viremia in pigs. Bovine
cephalomyelitis on many farms in western Canada. While
kobuvirus exhibits widespread prevalence in cattle feces.
less than 1% of swine were affected on each farm, most ani-
Transmission is thought to be fecal-oral based on studies
mals exhibiting symptoms were euthanized prior to death.
on Aichi virus of humans. High levels of specific antibodies
Infected survivors had lingering neurological impairments.
are found in the serum of unaffected animals. Isolates of
The significance of this report is difficult to assess since
putative kobu-like viruses have been detected in bat and
there was no mention of possible sources of the virus
sheep feces based on the phylogenetic analysis of partial
and there was no evidence of spread beyond the initially
genomes.
affected sites.
Chapter 55
Picornaviridae
401
Genus Tremovirus
and monocyte infiltration, as well as pooled blood in the
organs.
The genus Tremovirus, whose sole member is avian
encephalomyelitis virus (AEV), is the etiological agent of
Genus Cardiovirus
epidemic tremor disease in chickens. This virus can also
affect a wide range of other avian hosts, including par-
 Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), the type species for the
trid ge, turkey, quail, guinea fowl, and pheasants. Originally
detected in the New England region of the United States
cardioviruses, is a virus of rodents that is transmissible
in the 1930s, AEV has a worldwide distribution, causing a
to farm animals as well as humans. Outbreaks of EMCV
range of symptoms from decreased egg production to neu-
have also caused mortality in baboon colonies associated
rological disease in young chicks less than 3 weeks of age.
to wild rodent infestation of their cages. It is primarily
Neurological signs include tremors, ataxia, weakness, wing
a disease associated with unsanitary conditions as infec-
drooping, and paralysis. Mortality can be as high as 25%
tion of animals, especially swine, is derived from con-
tact with rodent feces. The virus replicates in the alimen-
with extensive morbidity. Chicks will sit and fall over due
to paralysis, and the survivors often recover with associated
tary tract and establishes a viremia, providing access to
blindness. Hens have a 2-week temporary reduction in egg
the target organ, the heart. This disease manifests mostly
production. The virus is spread by the fecal-oral route. The
inq 'sieuue Sunon u uaas Aeiou pue Apiqiou se
virus replicates in epithelial cells of the digestive tract and
transplacental transmission can also occur, causing still-
is shed in feces 3 days after infection and can shed for up
births. Young piglets die suddenly after primary symp-
to 2 weeks. In young chicks, the virus establishes a viremia,
toms of high fever, difficulty breathing, and a hallmark
spreading to the CNS and other organs. Diagnosis is made
blue skin discoloration. Histopathological observations
by histopathology of brain lesions or by virus isolation on
include edema in the lungs and abdomen as well as an
embryonated eggs; antibodies only indicate prior exposure
enlarged liver. The heart becomes soft and pale with evi-
to disease. While there is no treatment for animals infected
dent necrosis. Animals that survive infection have fibrosis.
with AEV, there is a live attenuated vaccine that can be
There is no treatment for infected animals; control is based
 given as an eye drop or added to the drinking water.
on seclusion and disinfection of premises. An inactivated
antigen vaccine is commercially available. Also, experi-
mental inoculation with live Mengo virus (another car-
Genus Avihepatovirus
diovirus of no veterinary relevance) can protect baboons,
 macaques, and swine against challenge with a lethal strain
Another genus born of consolidation is Avihepatovirus, con-
of EMCV
sisting of the duck hepatitis A virus (DHAV), previously
classified as an enterovirus. DHAV has worldwide distri-
bution, a significant cause of high mortality in ducklings.
Genus Senecavirus
DHAV has almost 100% mortality rate in ducklings aged
 Seneca Valley virus is the sole member of the newly created
less than 1 week; the mortality drops to less than 50% by
3 weeks of age. The clinical signs include paralysis, opistho-
Senecavirus genus. The origin of this virus is unclear as it
tonus, paresis, enophthalmos, and sudden death. Clinical
was originally discovered as a contaminant in cell culture.
specimens show enlarged kidney, spleen, and liver, with
Virtually identical viruses were isolated during a retrospec-
the latter having massive hemorrhage and necrosis and a
tive analysis of swine clinical samples, and serological evi-
green color. The virus is diagnosed by inoculating embry-
dence suggests infection of swine, cattle, and wild mice.
onated duck and chicken eggs with liver homogenates or
The lack of a disease association makes its relevance to vet-
immunofluorescence of tissue sections. There is no treat-
ment for this disease; while there is a vaccine available to
tiple cases of swine vesicular disease in the United States
help prevent spread, the best course of control for DHAV
in which the only agent detected was SvV, confounding
is to restrict contact of ducklings with adults until after the
the diagnosis with other vesicular diseases such as FMD.
fourth week of life
Experimental infection of pigs with an SvV strain resulted
Related to the duck hepatitis A virus is the as-of-yet
in replication and spread to uninfected animals, with no
unclassified turkey hepatopancreatitis virus, the cause of
associated signs of disease on the inoculated or contact-
turkey viral hepatitis. It is found mostly in North Amer-
exposed animals. Interestingly, SVV is purported for use as
ica and Europe, affecting young turkeys under the age of
an oncolytic therapeutic since the virus seems to be selec-
6 weeks. It is transmitted via the fecal-oral route. Clini-
tive for replication in human cancer cells.
cal signs include weight loss, anorexia, and sudden death,
with neurological signs seen in some cases. Adults are
Further Reading
tion. The virus can be isolated by inoculating embryonated
chicken eggs with tissue homogenates of liver, pancreas,
Diaz-Mendez AL, Viel J, Hewson P et al. (2010) Surveillance
spleen, 0r kidney. Histopathological observations include
 Of equine respiratory viruses in Ontario. Can / Vet Res, 74,
multifocal necrosis manifested as depressed gray lesions
271-278.
on the pancreas and liver. Fatal cases demonstrate massive
Dynon KWD, Ficorilli BN, Hartley CA, and Studdert MJ (2007)
hemorrhage in both liver and pancreas with vacuolation
Detection of viruses in nasal swab samples from horses
402
PART III
Viruses
with acute, febrile, respiratory disease using virus isolation,
 ReuterG, BorosA,and PankovicsP (2011) Kobuviruses—a com-
polymerase chain reaction and serology. Aust Vet J, 85,
 prehensive review. Rev Med Virol, 21, 32-41.
46-50.
 Rodriguez LL and Gay CG (201l) Development of vaccines
Grubman MJ and Baxt B (2004) Foot-and-mouth disease. Clin
toward the global control and eradication of foot-and-
Microbiol Rev, 17, 465-493.
mouth disease. Expert Rev Vaccines, 10, 377-387.
Honkavuori KS, Shivaprasad HL, Briese T et al. (201l) Novel 
 Shan T, Li L, Simmonds P et al. (2011) The fecal virome of pigs 
picornavirus in Turkey poults with hepatitis, California,
on a high-density farm. / Virol, 85, 11697-11708.
USA. Emerg Infect Dis, 17, 480-487.
Tannock GA and Shafren DR (1994) Avian encephalo-
Lin F and Kitching RP (20oo) Swine vesicular disease: an
myelitis: a review. Avian Pathol, 23, 603-620.
overview. Vet /, 160, 192-201.
 e yo s  (o  rs  H 
Lin JY, Chen TC, Weng KF et al. (2009) Viral and host pro-
 picornavirus isolate indicates that it together with porcine
teins involved in the picornavirus life cycle. / Biomed Sci, 16,
 enterovirus type 8 and simian picornavirus type 2 should
103.
be assigned to a new picornavirus genus. Virus Res, 129,
 Pogranichniy RM, Janke BH, Gillespie TG, and Yoon KJ (2003)
104-114.
A prolonged outbreak of polioencephalomyelitis due to
Yamada M, Kozakura R, Nakamura K et al. (2009) Patholog-
infection with a group I porcine enterovirus. / Vet Diagn
ical changes in pigs experimentally infected with porcine
Invest, 15, 191-194.
teschovirus. / Comp Pathol, 141, 223-228.
56
Caliciviridae
MELISSA KENNEDY
Caliciviruses are small (27-40 nm in diameter), nonen-
a high morbidity but a low mortality. It is of some eco-
veloped, icosahedral viruses with a genome of single-
nomic importance as a disease in pigs; however, its main
stranded, positive-sense RNA. The viral RNA serves as
impact is that it mimics FMD, from which it must be dis-
mRNA and is infectious. The name calicivirus is derived
tinguished. The last occurrence of this disease occurred in
from the chalice-shaped spheres on the surface of nega-
the United States in 1956. Subsequently, the US Depart-
tively stained viral particles. There are four distinct groups
ment of Agriculture in 1959 declared VES an exotic dis-
in the family: Lagovirus, Norwalk-like virus, Sapporo-like
ease; however, viruses capable of causing VES are endemic
virus, and Vesivirus. Hepatitis E virus, which had ini-
in marine mammals, where they also cause vesicular dis-
tially been classified in the family Caliciviridae, has been
eases and reproductive failure. A wide variety of seals, sea
reclassified as a Hepevirus in the family Hepeviridae. Sev-
lions, walrus, and dolphins are infected with these viruses.
eral members of Caliciviridae—specifically vesicular exan-
Outbreaks of VES occur when these marine mammal cali-
thema of swine virus, San Miguel sea lion virus, feline
civiruses spread to swine, likely as a result of feeding of dead
calicivirus (FCV), European brown hare syndrome, and
marine mammals to swine.
rabbit hemorrhagic disease viruses-are important animal
pathogens.
Etiologic Agent
General Properties
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Vesicular
exanthema of swine virus (VEsV) is a typical calicivirus,
The genome of caliciviruses has only two or three open
and viral particles are associated with cytoplasmic cister-
reading frames. Virions are comprised of a single major
nae in infected swine cells (Figure 56.1) and in crystalline
capsid protein. The nonstructural proteins of caliciviruses
alrays in the cytoplasm (Figure 56.2). VEsV is stable at low
share features with those of picornaviruses. Replication of
pH (pH 5). A large number of antigenically distinct types
caliciviruses occurs in the cytoplasm, although both cyto-
of VEsV have been identified (at least 13), and a number
plasmic and intranuclear inclusions occur in infected cells.
of antigenically distinct viruses that originally were iso-
lated from species other than swine are capable of caus-
ing VES and so are classifed as VEsV, including bovine
Vesiviruses
calicivirus, cetacean calicivirus, primate calicivirus, and a
number of so-called San Miguel sea lion viruses (17 types).
Vesicular exanthema virus and FCV are classified together
Similar viruses have been isolated from fish, birds, reptiles,
in the genus Vesivirus. Viruses within this genus are read.
and other mammals, including skunks. These viruses are
ily propagated in cell culture, in distinct contrast to cali-
distinguished by serological tests, usually serum neutral-
civiruses in the other genera.
ization, and the virulence of these viruses to pigs varies
significantly.
Vesicular Exanthema of Swine
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. VESV can
persistin the environmentand in contaminated meatprod-
Disease
ucts for very long periods. The virus is completely inacti-
Vesicular exanthema ofswine (VEs) is an acute viral disease
vated by 2% sodium hydroxide or 0.1% sodium hypochlo-
characterized by the formation of vesicles in the oral cavity,
rite.
interdigital spaces, and coronary band of the foot. VEs is
clinically indistinguishable from foot-and-mouth disease
Infectivity for Other Species or Culture Systems. Nat-
(FMD), swine vesicular disease, and vesicular stomatitis.
urally occurring VEs disease is confined only to swine of
The incubation period of the disease is approximately 24-
 all ages and breeds. Experimentally, VEsV causes vesicles
72 h and the course is about 1-2 weeks. The disease has
at inoculated sites in seals. Vesicles are also produced at
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
403
404
PART III
Viruses
from 1952 to 1953 it spread to a total of 42 states in
FIGURE 56.1.
Parallel rows of VEsV particles in
the United States. The disease had never been reported
cytoplasmic cisternae (72 000x). (Reproduced with permission
elsewhere in the world except Iceland and Hawaii, and
from Zee et al. 1968.)
these two incidents resulted from shipping contaminated
pork products from California.
0.2.um
Marine mammals serve as reservoirs for VEsV infection.
A calicivirus was first isolated in 1972 from sea lions on
San Miguel Island off the coast of southern California. This
calicivirus was named San Miguel sea lion virus (SMSV),
which was indistinguishable from VEsV by morpholog-
ical, biophysical, and biochemical criteria. Experimental
SMSV infection of swine produces a disease indistinguish-
 able from VEs. SMsV has also been isolated from asymp-
tomatic domestic swine. Serum-neutralizing antibodies to
several serotypes of SMSV and VESV have been demon-
the sites of inoculation in horses and hamsters. The virus
strated in marine mammals and both wild and domestic
is isolated in low titers from some sites of inoculation and
swine in California. Earlier epidemiologic studies during
 draining lymph nodes. VEsV can be propagated in cell lines
the outbreaks of VES confirmed the relationship between
of swine kidney or Vero monkey kidney.
feeding of raw garbage and outbreaks of the disease, and
dead sea lions are known to have been utilized as a food
source for swine.
Host-Virus Relationship
Although outbreaks of VEs likely originated from feed-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. VES was first
ing SMSV-infected marine animal parts to swine, the in fec-
described in North America (California) in 1932, and
tion subsequently spread rapidly within affected herds by
direct contact.
1932 and 1951 (with the exception of 1937-1938). The
disease first appeared outside of California in 1951, and
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
VES is characterized by the
appearance of fluid-filled vesicles on the snout, coronary
band, and tongue of infected swine. These same lesions
develop in swine that are inoculated intradermally with
FIGURE 56.2.
Section of a viral crystal in VESV-infected
either VESV or SMSV. Infected animals are febrile, and the
cells (64 000x). (Reproduced with permission from Zee et al.
virus is present in blood and nasal-oral secretions for sev-
1968.)
eral days after infection. Vesicles appear on the coronary
band and interdigital space of the feet at 3-4 days after
infection. The vesicles rapidly rupture and healing takes
place unless complicated by secondary bacterial infection.
High titers of viruses are present within the fluid in vesi-
cles, which may also contaminate the environment. Mild 
encephalitis occurs in some swine infected with VEsV, and
the virus may also be recovered from brain tissue of swine
infected with SMSV.
Host Response to Infection.I
 Neutralizing antibodies to
VESV and SMSV appear in the sera ofanimals infected with
viruses soon after inoculation and titers peak within 7-
10 days after infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis
VES must rapidly be differentiated from other vesicular
diseases of swine, such as FMD, swine vesicular disease,
and vesicular stomatitis. Laboratory diagnosis is accom-
plished by virus isolation in cell cultures, direct electron
microscopic examination of vesicle fluid, or polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Although the vesicular diseases all
produce similar signs in swine, there are major differenices:
whereas VEs and swine vesicular disease are almost exclu-
sively diseases of swine, vesicular stomatitis frequently
affects horses as well as ruminants, and FMD also affects
ruminants (Table 56.1).
Chapter 56  Caliciviridae
405
Table 56.1.
 Susceptibility of Domestic Animals to Four
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. FCV
Viruses That Cause Vesicles in Swine
is a ubiquitous pathogen that has been isolated from cats
 all over the world. There is no evidence that FCV produces
Animal Species
SVD
VES
FMD
 disease in laboratory animals. The virus can readily be prop-
VSV
agated in feline cell lines. Some strains have been grown in 
Cattle
++
十十
Vero monkey kidney and dolphin kidney cells.
Swine
++
+十
+十
+
Sheep
+
Horse
+十
Host-Virus Relationship
Guinea pig
+
+
Suckling mice
十
十
+
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. 
 The disease
Humans 
-a
+
occurs worldwide, and all species of cats are likely suscepti-
ble. Infection and disease are most common in young cats,
?Occasional lesions produced byspecific virus strains; SvD Swine vesicular disease
and older cats are usually immune. Infected cats recovered
VES, Vesicular exanthema of swine; FMD, Foot-and-mouth disease; v5, Vesicular
from the disease may carry the virus in their oropharynx
stomatitis.
for long periods of time and serve as reservoirs of infec-
tion. The virus is transmitted by horizontal aerosol infec-
tion and by contaminated fomites. The latter mode is of
major importance because of the hardiness of the virus in
Treatment and Control
the environment.
There is no treatment for VES and there are no vaccines for
con trol of the disease. It is now considered to be eradicated
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
Cats acquire FCV infection
in the United States.Enforcementoflaws requiringcooking
via the respiratory route, either by aerosol or from fomites.
of garbage before feedingitto swine was the most important
The primary sites of viral replication are epithelial cells
factor in eliminating the disease.
of the oral cavity and respiratory tract and in the tonsils.
Viremia occurs during acute infection.
The characteristic lesions in typical cases of FCV infec-
Feline Calicivirus
tion in susceptible kittens and young cats are vesicles
within the oral cavity (tongue and hard palate) and on
Disease
the nares. The vesicles rapidly rupture, leaving erosions
 FCV infects the oral cavity and upper respiratory tracts
and ulcers. Highly virulent strains can cause pneumonia in
kittens. Regeneration of the oral mucosa occurs rapidly in
of cats to produce fever, sneezing, and nasal and ocular
uncomplicated cases. FCV has also been associated with a
discharges. Clinical signs include rhinitis, conjunctivitis,
limpingsyndrome characterized by synovitis and increased
oral ulcerations, and, in severe cases, pneumonia. Joint or
synovial fluid. The mechanism of lameness is unknown,
muscle soreness,hyperesthesia, and chronicoralulceration
but may have an immune component.
have also been attributed to FCV infection, and a dissemi-
Virulent systemic strains of FCV (VS FCV) cause epi-
nated highly virulent and fatal systemic disease associated
demics of fatal disease in susceptible cats. VS FCV is charac-
with specificstrains of FCV has recently been described. The
terized by vasculitis and multiorgan involvement. Affected
incubation period of the disease is 2-3 days and infected
animals may exhibit severe oral ulceration, extensive sub-
cats usually recover in 7-10 days in the absence of sec-
cutaneous edema especially of head and limbs, and vari-
ondary bacterial infections. Virulent systemic FCV infec-
able ulceration of the pinnae, paw pads, nares, and skin.
tion is characterized by alopecia, cutaneous ulcers, subcu-
Some affected cats also have pneumonia as well as liver and
taneous edema, and high mortality.
splenic necrosis. FCV antigen is detected by immunohisto-
chemical staining in both epithelial and endothelial cells.
Etiologic Agent
Mortality is high and disease has occurred in vaccinated
cats. Most commonly, VS FCV arises in rescue facilities 01
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. FCV is
 other multicat settings where FCV is circulating.
classifed into a single serotype, but there are multiple
strains of FCV that vary in antigenicity, which impacts
Host Response to Infection. Cats infected with FCV or
vaccine efficacy. The virulence of individual strains varies
vaccinated with inactivated or live modified FCV vac-
substantially as well, and is independent of antigenicity;
cines develop serum-neutralizing antibodies. Kittens bon 
that is, viruses that cause similar clinical syndromes are not
to cats that are immune to FCV acquire maternal serum-
necessarily as similar in antigenicity.
neutralizing antibodies to FCV via colostrum.
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. FCV is resis-
Laboratory Diagnosis
tant to many common disinfectants. It is readily inacti-
vated by a 0.175% sodium hypochlorite solution (Clorox),
Laboratory tests are required to distinguish FCV infection
which is the disinfectant of choice. Quaternary ammonium
from other agents that produce similar respiratory signs in
compounds are generally ineffective against FCv. The virus
cats, particularly feline viral rhinotracheitis (herpesvirus).
is stable at a pH of 4-5 and is inactivated at 50 *C within
These include the isolation of FCV in feline cell cul-
30 min.
tures from nasal secretions, throat swabs, or conjunctival
406
PART III
Viruses
scrapings and the identification of FCV antigens in con-
culture, which means that the viruses have been largely
characterized using homogenates of the livers of affected
chemical staining. Genetic detection by reverse transcrip-
 animals. The viruses appear to be highly species specific.
tion/PCR may also be used. However, positive results must
be interpreted carefully, as asymptomatic carriers occur. In
addition, false-negative results can occur due to the genetic
Host-Virus Relationship
variability of the virus. The characteristic appearance ofthe
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. Although
 RHD was first reported in China, EBHS had been recognized
nosis. VS FCV cannot be distinguished from classical FCV
earlier in Europe. It is possible that a mutation of the EBHS
except by clinical manifestations.
calicivirus led to the emergence of rabbit hemorrhagic dis-
ease virus (RHDV), causing the lethal pandemic of rabbits.
Treatment and Control
The diseaseis transmitted by the oral-fecal route. Morbidity
and mortality of RHD in European rabbits may approach 
Treatment for FCV infection in cats is mainly supportive
 90-100%, and can have significant economic impact on
and symptomatic. Broad-spectrum antibiotics help prevent
 affected farms.
secondary bacterialinfections, and fluid therapy is useful in 
the event of dehydration. All strains of FCV are considered
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Rabbits with RHD have an
variants of a single serotype because there is considerable
 enlarged spleen, swollen liver, and disseminated hemor-
serologic cross-reactivity among viruses. Furthermore, cats
rhages. Extensive liver necrosis is highly characteristic and
immunized with one variant of FCV are protected against
potentially explains the disseminated intravascular coagu-
other strains, though protection can be incomplete. The
lation (DIC) that occurs in affected animals. Lesions may
use of viral neutralization assays in vaccine development is
also be found in other organs such as the kidneys, lungs,
the best method for evaluating cross-protectivity of vac-
and heart. The DIC induced by RHDV is not characteris-
cines. Both inactivated and modified live FCV vaccines
 are commercially available and afford reasonable protec-
tic of other calicivirus infections, but does occur in such
flavivirus-induced diseases as yellow fever and dengue in
tion against FCV infection. The FCV vaccines are usu-
ally combined with feline rhinotracheitis (a herpesvirus)
humans.
and feline panleukopenia (a parvovirus) and administered
either intranasally or intramuscularly.
Laboratory Diagnosis
 FCV infection is controlled primarily by isolating cats
that show respiratory signs and disinfecting cages and
Immunofluorescence and enzyme-lin ked immunosorbent
 premises with Clorox before susceptible animals are in-
assay tests have been developed for the rapid diagno-
troduced.
sis of RHD. The genome of RHDV has been completely
sequenced, so PCR readily can be developed and used for
rapid diagnosis of the infection. The liver is the tissue of
Lagoviruses
choice for viral detection.
Disease (Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease and European Brown
Hare Syndrome)
Treatment and Control
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD) and European brown
There is no treatment for the acute disease. A formalin-
hare syndrome (EBHS) are similar diseases that are caused
inactivated vaccine that incorporates infected rabbit tissue
by related but antigenically distinct caliciviruses. RHD is an
provides effective immunization against the disease. Con-
acute infectious disease of the European rabbit, Oryctolagus 
trol can also be achieved through strict quarantine and iso-
cuniculus, and frequently has a very high mortality rate in
lation to prevent transportation of RHDV-contaminated
 materials into commercial rabbitries. Contaminated pelts
that the disease is only fatal to rabbits over 2 months of age.
and meat can serve as sources of the virus in nonendemic
The disease is characterized by a short incubation period,
areas. It is interesting to note that, although most coun-
followed by fever, disseminated hemorrhage in all body
tries have focused on the control and prevention of RHD,
tissues, and rapid death. The disease was first described in
RHDV has been used as a biologic weapon to con trol rabbit
China in 1984, and it then rapidly spread throughout much
numbers in other countries.
of the rest of the world. EBHS occurs in the European hare,
Lepus europaeus.
Noroviruses
Etiologic Agent
The first norovirus was identified in a human outbreak of
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Various
 gastroenteritis in Norwalk, Ohio, in 1968. Noroviruses have
strains of RHD and EBHS viruses are recognized and dis-
since been recognized in many species of animals, includ-
tinguished serologically.
ing mice, cattle, swine, sheep, and a lion cub where they
have been associated with diarrhea in young animals. Sev-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.1
Ne1
eral genotypes of noroviruses have been identified, most of
ther RHD nor EBHS viruses are readily propagated in cell
which cannot be grown in vitro.
Chapter 56
 Caliciviridae
407
Transmission is fecal-oral, and the virus is stable in
Reference
the environment after shedding. The virus appears to tar-
get enterocytes; disease is generally mild and self-limiting.
Zee YC, Hackett AJ, and Talens LT (1968) Electron microscopic
Diagnosis can be done by electron microscopy or RT-PCR.
studies on the vesicular exanthema of swine virus. Il. Mor-
The zoonotic potential for animal noroviruses is un known
phogenesis of VESV Type H54 in pig kidney cells. Virology,
though human and animal isolates are closely related.
34, 596.
Unassigned Caliciviruses
Further Reading
 Enteric caliciviruses have been described in cattle, dogs,
Chassey D (1997) Rabbit haemorrhagic disease: the new
chickens, and pigs, among others. At least some of these
scourge of Oryctolagus cuniculus. Lab Anim, 31, 33-44.
appear to cause clinical signs ofintestinaldisease analogous
Scipioni A, Mauroy A, Vinje J, and Thiry E (2008) Animal
to that caused by the Norwalk-like viruses in humans.
noroviruses. Vet J, 178, 32-45.
57
Togaviridae and
Flaviviridae
CHRISTOPHER C.L. CHASE
Introduction
alphavirus, southern elephant seal virus (SEsV), has been
identified, but its role in disease is unknown.
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae are two similar positive-sense
single-stranded enveloped RNA virus families that are char-
Physical,
Chemical,
and
 Antigenic
Properties.
acterized by a single mRNA that results in a polyprotein that
Alphavirus virions are spherical, enveloped, and approx-
is posttranslationally modified. Both families contain sev-
imately 70 nm in diameter (T = 4) (Figure 57.1A).
 eral arboviruses. Originally, the genera Flavivirus and Pes-
Alphaviruses are sensitive to lipid solvents, chlorine,
fivirus were included in the family Togaviridae, but based
phenol, acid pH, and heating to 60 *C for 30 min.
on differences in genomic organization and glycoproteins,
 The envelope is derived from the plasma membranes
a new family, Flaviviridae, was established in 1984 that
of host cells through which virions bud as they mature.
included viruses in the genera Flavivinus and Pestivirus.
The envelope encloses an icosahedral nucleocapsid (T =
 n    n n r  
ter and consists of a single-capsid protein as well as the
Togaviridae
genome of linear single-stranded positive-sense RNA (Fig-
ures 57.1B-D). The en velope contains a heterodimer of two
The family Togaviridae derives its name from “toga,” the
viral glycoproteins (E1 and E2) (Figures 57.1A and B) and
Latin word for gown or cloak, which refers to the envelope
some alphaviruses (Semliki Forest virus) have a third gly-
possessed by all members of the family. The family includes
coprotein (E3). At least four different nonstructural viral
two genera, Alphavirus and Rubivirus, which has a single
proteins are produced in infected cells (Figure 57.1D). The
member rubella virus the cause of human rubella (German
alphaviruses are all antigentically related as determined by
measles). Viruses in the Alphavirus genus are predominately
serological assays, and are grouped into distinct antigenic
arboviruses that are transmitted by mosquitoes; thus, they
complexes with numerous subtypes or strains within each.
have the capacity to replicate in insects and vertebrates.
The extensive genetic and antigenic variation that occurs
There are also four nonencephalitic alphaviruses that will
within the various subtypes and variants of each antigenic
be discussed: three recently discovered fish alphaviruses
complex is reflected by differences in their virulence, bio-
and an elephant seal virus (Table 57.1).
chemical characteristics such as electrophoresis mobility
of protein and RNA digests, physicochemical characteris-
Alphavirus
tics, host range, geographic distribution, and vector/host
tropism. WEE virus is the result of recombination between
Sindbis virus is the prototype of the genus Alphavirus.
EEE virus and a Sindbis-like virus in an event that has been
Alphaviruses of veterinary significance include eastern
estimated to have occurred thousands of years ago (Fig-
equine encephalitis (EEE), western equine encephalitis
ure 57.2)
(WEE), and Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE, includ.
ing subtype II Everglades) viruses, along with several other
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The
viruses (Fort Morgan, Highlands J, and Semliki Forest). The
EEV can infect a wide host range, including humans,
three equine encephalitis viruses (EEV) are also zoonoses.
horses, rodents, reptiles, amphibians, monkeys, dogs,
The three closely related salmonid alphaviruses (SAVs)
cats, foxes, skunks, cattle, pigs, birds, and mosquitoes.
are salmon pancreas disease virus (SPDV), sleeping disease
Alphaviruses can be propagated in a variety of cell cul-
virus (SDV), and Norwegian salmonid alphavirus. Another
tures, including chick and duck fibroblasts, Vero, L cells,
and mosquito cells; cytopathology is often absent in the
latter. A variety of laboratory animals can be experimen-
Original chapter written by Drs. MacLachlan anid Stott.
tally infected, with suckling mice being the most common.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
408
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
409
Table 57.1.
Viruses of Veterinary Importance in the Togaviridae Family
Genus
 Serogroup/Agent
Vector
Affected Species
Distribution
Alphavirus  Family Alphavirus
 Equine encephalitis group
Mosquitoes-Cutex Melanoconion
 Horses, humans, pheasants.
 Eastern North America, Caribbean
 Eastern eguine
and Cs. Melanura
turkeys, emus., pigs, deer, dogs.
 Basin, Central America, South
encephalitis virus
 sheep, penguins, cranes 
America
Yenezuelan equine
 Mosquitoes-enzootic Culex
Horses, humans
Central America, South America
encephalitis virus
 melanoconion-epizootic Ades
 and Psophora spp.
Western equine
Mosquitoes--Culex tarsalis
 Horses, humans, emus 
Western North America, South
encephalitis virus
America
 Salmonid alphavirus group
 Salmonid alphavirus 1 & 3
None
Salmon
 Northern Europe
(pancreatic disease virus)
Salmonid alphavirus 2
None
 Rainbow trout
Western Europe
(sleeping disease virus)
Getah virus (Sagiyama virus)
Mosquitoes--Culex spp.
Horse, pigs 
 Southeast Asia (India and Japan)
 Southern elephant seal virus
Lice—-Lepidophthirus macrorhini
 Elephant seal
Australasia
FIGURE 57.1.
Virion structure and genomic organization of Alphavirus: (A) Surface-shaded view of Sindbis virus, the prototype
domain of the capsid protein (yellow), protein-RNA region (orange), and RNA region (red). (C) The nucleocapsid core showing the
virus (VEEV). The single positive-strand RNA genome encodes four nonstructural proteins (nsPs) and three main structural proteins.
produce virion proteins. The three structural proteins are transiated from a subgenomic 26s message and combine with the genomic
RNA to form virions. (Paneis A, B, and C adapted from Jose et al. 2009 and Panel D from Weaver and Barrett 2004.)
(A)
(B)
(C)
Nucleocapsid
T=4
Virion
E2 glycoproteins
T=4
E1 glycoproteins
Lipid envelope
Capsid Proteins
-RNAgenome
(D)
26S
5'cap
PolyA)-3'
nsP1
nsP2
nsP3
nsP4
E
(-)Strand
Helicase,
RNA
RNA
E3
6K
RNA synthesis,
proteinase
synthesis polymerase
RNA capping
Capsid
Envelope
glycoproteins
410
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 57.2.
Diagram of the Recombination Event That
FIGURE 57.3.
Range of EEE, WEE, and VEE. Map
Led to WEE. (Adapted from Strauss and Strauss 1997.)
showing the distribution of the encephalitic aiphaviruses: (A)
EEEV, (B) VEEV, and (C) WEEV. (Adapted from Scott and
Sindbis
Slobodan 2009.)
(A)
nsP1nsP2nsP3nsP4CE3E26KE1
EEE
nsP1nsP2nsP3nsP4CE E23KE1
WEE
Embryonated chicken eggs and young chicks may also be
susceptible to in fection.
Veterinary and Zoonotic Alphaviruses
Eguine Encephalitis Viruses
Disease.
EEE, WEE, and VEE all cause encephalitis in
(B)
 horses, but the signs can vary from inapparent to fatal dis-
ease. Mild and/or inapparent infections are more common
with WEE, whereas EEE and VEE are typically more viru-
lent. Death from VEE may occur in the absence of neuro-
logic signs. Central nervous system (CNS) involvement of
horses following encephalitis virus infection is character-
ized by aimless walking, followed by severe depression and
 behavioral changes (dummy), central blindness, paralysis,
and death soon after the onset of clinical signs. Mortality
can be very high (up to 90%) with VEE and EEE. Young
horses are more susceptible to severe disease. Other mem-
bers EEE and WEE may also cause significant disease in
domestic birds; EEE is more common and mortality can be
very high.
(C)
 Clinical disease is especially common in pheasants and
ratites (emus, etc.). EEE also occurs in swine and cattle. EEE
disease in birds is characterized by encephalitis with leg
paralysis, torticollis, and tremors. Wild birds may also be
infected but rarely experience disease, and they serve as
vertebrate reservoirs of virus.
Epidemiology.
 The EEV occur in the Western Hemi-
sphere, although related viruses occur elsewhere in the
world (Figures 57.3A-C). EEE occurs in eastern North
America (predominantly east of the Mississippi River and
 the Atlantic Seaboard region in particular), the Caribbean
Basin, and Central and South America (Figure 57.3A). EEE
is the most common EEV with an average of 254 cases per
year (range from 65 to 712 cases per year) from 2003 to
encephalitic alphaviruses sporadically occur in the United
2011 (Table 57.2). Often there are localized outbreaks in the
States but a much lower rates with the most prominent
 United States. VEE is confined to South and Central Amer-
being Highland J virus that causes encephalitis in horses
ica (Figure 57.3B), although incursions into North America
especially in Florida and is also pathogenic to turkeys and
have occurred periodically with last outbreak in the United
partridges.
States being in 1971. The United States considers VEE to be
Mosquitoes transmit the EEV, and despite their names,
 a foreign animal disease; however, an avirulent VEE virus
horses and humans are dead-end hosts that are unim-
(type Il, Everglades) is endemic in portions of Florida. WEE
portant to the natural cycle of EEE and WEE virus infec-
occurs throughout much of North America, particularly in 
tions (Figure 57.4). These viruses were the first described
areas west of the Mississippi River, and South America (Fig-
arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses). The viruses all per-
ure 57.3C). Unlike EEE, WEE infection rates have declined
sist in similar but distinct natural cycles of infection that
 dramatically with only a total of four cases diagnosed in
include mosquitoes and birds or rodents that function as
the United States from 2003 to 2011 (Table 57.2). Other
the vertebrate reservoirs of each virus. Except in tropical
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
411
Table 57.2.
 Number of Positive EEE and WEE in Horses in
tional vertebrate hosts during insect feeding. The time
the US 2003-2011
required for this process is the extrinsic incubation period
(EIP) that varies with type of virus and species of mosquito.
Year
EEEab
WEEb
The E1P for EEE virus is quite short at 2-3 days (Figure 57.5).
Once infected, the vector remains infected for life.
2003
712
1
EEE virus exists in two distinct ecosystems: (1) North
2004
133
广
American (eastern United States and Canada) and the
2005
330
Caribbean and (2) Central and South America. Culiseta
2006
111
0
2007
206
melanura mosquitoes transmit the North American strains
0
2008
185
of the virus. The virus is maintained in an enzootic cycle of
0
2009
301
infection that includes these ornithophilic (bird-feeding)
2010
247
0
mosquitoes and the passerine and wading birds that serve
2011
65
as vertebrate virus reservoirs in coastal and inland swamp
environments (Figure 57.4). Periodic spillover of the virus
Data from USDA—Aphis Animal Health and Monitoring and Surveilance
occurs in adjacent horses, humans, birds, and other animals 
site 12/29/2011 htt:/www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/nahss/equine/ee/ee_distribution_
(Figure 57.4). A variety of mosquito species can transmit
maps.htm (accessed February 8, 2013).
the virus during epidemics, and direct horizontal spread
bData from USGS Disease Maps site 12/29/2011 EEE (http://diseasemaps
rdn4) 33M pue (eloz g Nenigad passanne fwny'ueuualansn aaajo6'shsn'
occurs among birds when they peck viremic birds. Another
diseasemaps.usgs.gov/wee_us_veterinary.html accessed February 8, 2013).
mosquito (Culex melanoconion) is responsible for transmis-
sion of EEE in Central and South America, where small
mammals and birds serve as the vertebrate reservoirs of the
virus.
areas where infection occurs year-round, the peak inci-
The host-virus relationship of WEE is similar to that of
dence of these diseases typically is in late summer and
EEE, with the virus being maintained in a transmission
declines when climatic conditions are less favorable for
cycle between mosquitoes (Culex farsalis) and domestic
the mosquito vectors. Mosquitoes are biological vectors of
and passerine birds, with periodic spillover into humans,
these viruses, which requires that the mosquito actually
horses, and domestic birds. Other species of mosquitoes
become infected with the virus rather than simply trans-
can transmit the virus during outbreaks.
mitting it mechanically. For a biological vector to become
The lifecycle of VEE is more complex. There are several
infected, it must obtain a blood meal from a viremic ver-
distinct clusters of VEE viruses (types I-VI), most of which
tebrate host (Figure 57.5). The level of viremia required to
do not cause disease in horses (type 1, varieties D through F,
infect the vector is dictated by viral strain and/or species
types II-VI). These viruses are endemic throughout tropical
of mosquito vector. Upon ingestion, the virus infects the
and subtropical regions of the Americas (including Florida,
insect gut and then spreads to the salivary glands, where
where VEE type Il [Everglades] occurs). These endemic
replication provides a ready source of virus to infect addi-
VEE viruses are maintained in a natural cycle of infection
FIGURE 57.4.
The endemic and epidemic transmission cycles of eastern (EEEV), western (WEEV), and Venezuelan equine
encephalitis viruses (VEEV). (From Pfeffer and Dobler 2010.)
EEEV
EEEV
WEEV
VEEV former
(North Amercia)
(South America)
subtypes ID-IF, Il-vI 
trar
on.
5S
Spp
E
个
Selection through
E2 T213R mutation
in VEEV ID & IE
Promiscuous feeding
Mosquitoes: Cufex,
个
Ochleroraus, Aedes,
VEEV subtypes
Coquillemoia spp., etc.
Ochlerotarus
IAB/IC
melanimon
Psorophora
Cchferoradus
taeniorhynchus
K
412
PART III
Viruses
in preventing reinfection. Antibodies develop to all viral
FIGURE 57.5.
Arbovirus replication in female mosquito
proteins, and peak titers of neutralizing antibody typically
following blood meal: (1) ingests infected blood; (2) virus
develop within 2 weeks of infection in animals that sur-
infects and multiples in mesenteronal epithelial cells; (3) virus
vive. This antibody may be effective in neutralizing virus,
is released across the basal membrane of the epithelial cells
enhancing viral clearance, and lysing infected cells via
and replicates in other tissues; (4) virus infects salivary glands;
complement or natural killer cells. Cell-mediated immu-
and (5) virus is released from cells of salivary glands and
transmitted in saliva. The Extrinsic incubation period for EEE,
JEV, and WNV is fisted.
tive immunity. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes can be identified
as early as 3-4 days postinfection.
①
1
Blood
Laboratory Diagnosis.
Equine encephalitis alpha-
meal
virus infection may be suspected based on the occurrence
of neurologic disease among susceptible animal species in 
3）
endemic areas, thus prior history and seasonal occurrence
Extrinsic ineubation period
can be important. Definitive diagnosis requires laboratory
EEE
2-3 days
 Abdomen
confirmation, which usually is done by serology with an
NNV
14 days
IgM-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
6-20 days
to detect virus-specific antibodies in the serum of acutely
affected animals. The diagnosis is unequivocally confirmed
Salivary
Hemolymph
by virus isolation from blood or CNS tissue, the latter being
gland
preferable due to the variable occurrence of viremia by the
time signs of encephalitis are manifest in infected animals.
Antigen capture ELISA for EEE may be used to help identify
Fat body
the virus in CNS tissue. Immunohistochemistry and poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) may also be used to identify
between Culex mosquitoes and small rodents in tropical
virus in neurologic tissue. Virus may be isolated in a vari-
 swamps. Only VEE types 1AB and 1C are virulent to horses,
ety of systems, including cell cultures, chick embryos, and
and these are only isolated during the epidemics of VEE that
suckling mice.
regularly occur in northern South America. It is believed
that these epidemic strains emerge after mutation of the
Treatment and Control. There is no treatment for
E2 envelope glycoprotein of endemic type 1D strains of
clinically ill animals. Control of equine encephalitis virus
VEE that constantly are circulating in endemic areas but
infections can be achieved through vaccination and pest
are not pathogenic to horses (Figure 57.4). Once strains
 management programs. Vector control can be approached
of VEE emerge that are virulent to horses and humans,
through eliminating mosquito-breeding sites by water con -
infected horses are a major source of virus because, unlike
 trol or spraying programs. In the case of domestic bid
EEE and WEE, VEE replicates to high titers in horses. Thus,
farms, the use of tightly screened (insect-proof) rearing
the endemic and epidemic (epizootic) VEE viruses have
very different cycles of in fection (Figure 57.4).
is also a possibility. Effective inactivated (EEE, WEE, VEE)
and attenuated (VEE) vaccines have been developed for the
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Equine encephalitis
EEV. Regular annual vaccination of susceptible animals is
alphavirus infections can range from inapparent to severe,
required to maintain immunity if inactivated vaccines are
fatal disease. Infection follows the bite of an infected
used.
mosquito. Primary viral replication occurs in regional
lymph nodes adjacent to the site of the bite and is followed
Salmonid alphaviruses
 by generalized infection and viremia in which the virus
replicates in the lymphoid tissues throughout the body,
Disease.
 SAVs are recognized as serious pathogens of
bone marrow, and certain other tissues. The encephalitis
farmed Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., and rainbow trout,
viruses likely gain entry into the CNS after replication in
 Oncorhynchus mykiss, in Europe. There are three alphavirus
the endothelial cells lining blood vessels in the brain, and
salmonid viral diseases. Salmon pancreas disease virus
passage of virus to the brain occurs after the acute phase
s! ((e AvS) & adAqns 1o (1 AvS) I adAqns Avs 1o AadS)
of infection and viremia. Lesions occur throughout the
the causative agent of pancreas disease (PD). The disease
gray matter of the brain and include perivascular cuffing
occurs in farmed Atlantic salmon smolts during their first
with inflammatory cells, infiltration of neutrophilsinto the
 year at sea, with peak prevalence occurring from late July to
 gray matter with neuronal and parenchymal necrosis, and
early September but outbreaks have occurred at all stages of
vasculitis, thrombosis, and hemorrhage. Neutrophils are
Atlantic salmon production. Clinical signs associated with
especially characteristic of the early cerebral lesions of EEE
-addeun uappns aq Ae anuidde nau jo rapno u ad
and VEE.
tence, lethargy and an increased number of fecal casts in the
cages, increased mortality and ill-thrift. Affected fish may
Host Response to Infection. The development of neu-
 appear to be unable to maintain their position in the water
  ndi a on s    
column/currents within the cages due to muscle damage,
predisposing them to erosion and ulceration of the skin and
Chapter 57 Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
413
pled in late phase disease may only have skeletal muscle
cardiac and skeletal muscle damage and exhaustion. Fish
lesions.
 s      n
SD has the same sequential histologicallesions: exocrine
seen swimming in a spiraling or circular motion or appear
pancreas, heart, and skeletal muscle as those described for
dead at the bottom of the cage (similar to SD signs), but
PD. The major histological lesion sign is extensive necrosis
swim away if handled. Mortality rates in PD outbreaks have
of skeletal red muscle.
ranged from 1% to 48%. High mortality tends to occur in
higher energy density feeding sites and when the fish are
returning to feeding after a period of inappetence. Up to
Host Response to Infection. Very few studies have been
carried out on the specific immune responses to SAV infec-
15% of survivors fail to grow and become runts.
tions in fish. There is cross-protection between SAV 1(SPD)
Sleeping disease (SD) is an infectious disease of rain bow
and SAV 2 (SD) in both Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout.
trout reared in freshiwater and it was confirmed by the iso-
The specific VN antibody response occurred in 60% of fish
lation of SDV in France and is now SDV (SAV 2). SDV affects
by 14-16 dpi with all the fish seroconverting by 21 dpi.
rainbow trout at all stages of production. The characteristic
There have been no reported cases of recurrence of PD or SD
clinical presentation is of affected fish lying on their side
 on the bottom of the tank, hence the name “sleeping dis-
in previously infected populations indicating that protec-
ease". These clinical signs are primarily due to extensive
tion following natural infection is adequate for a complete
production cycle.
necrosis of skeletal red muscle. Reported mortality levels
have been variable, from negligible to more than 22% in
affected populations.
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis of early acute SAV infec-
tions can be diagnosed using histology (pancreas, heart,
and muscle) and immunohistochemistry (IHC-pancreas),
Epidemiology. The SAV have been found almost exclu-
detecting viremia and virus RNA in serum and heart tis-
sively in farmed Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout in
sue (real-time PCR). Chronic-stage SAV infections could be
Europe. SPDV or SAV 1 found in farmed Atlantic salmon
in Ireland and Scotland. SDV (SAV subtype 2 (SAV 2))
antibody detection), and virus RNA detection.
was first confirmed in France and is now SAV 2 has
been isolated from diseased rainbow trout in England,
Scotland, Italy, and Spain. SPDV (SAV 1) and SDV (SAV
Treatment and Control.
. Vaccines have been developed for
 2) are closely related subtypes of the same virus species
SAV 1 and SAV 2. A commercial PD vaccine is available.
with the proposed name salmonid alphavirus. Norwegian
While it has proved to be very effective in some field tri-
salmonid alphavirus (NSAV; (SAV 3) was isolated from
als there are concerns about the duration of immunity.
farmed Atlantic salmon with pancreatic disease (PD) and
Sea vaccination or revaccination is being currently inves-
has been detected only in Norway. The genomic organi-
tigated for sites where PD occurs in Atlantic salmon in the
zation of SAV 3 is identical to that of SAV 1 and SAV 2,
second year at sea. A recombinant SAV 2 live vaccine pro-
and the nucleotide sequence similarity to the other two
tected rainbow trout from wild type SAV 2 infection for
alphaviruses is 91.6% and 92.9%, respectively. PD was
5 months.
described only once in North America, in 1987, but no virus
SAV 1 can survive for more than 2 months in sterile
was detected and this remains the only report of a PD-like
seawater at low temperatures so endemic SAV 1 impact
condition outside Europe. A dual infection of infectious
must be minimized by reducing stress through careful man-
salmon anemia virus (a member of the Orthomyxoviri-
agement and good hygiene methods. Some risk factors
dae) and a toga-like virus was described in New Brunswick,
that have been identifed include sea-site-to-sea-site move-
Canada, in 2000.
ments and sea-site to harvest movements by well boat.
Biosecure slaughter methods and safe disposal of offal and
efluent are also important to minimizing the risk from
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
 The principal gross find-
these processes. Good sea lice control is desirable, not only
ings at necropsy in the early stages of a PD outbreak
for the health and welfare of the fish, but because sea lice
are the absence of food in the gut and the presence of
fecal casts. The significant lesions in naturally occurring
may act as reservoirs or vectors of infection. Since most of
the alphaviruses are arboviruses, the possibility of a bio-
PD occur sequentially in the pancreas, heart, and skeletal
muscle of affected fish. Pancreatic necrosis, cardiomyopa-
logical transmission cycle between susceptible vertebrate
 hosts and blood-feeding arthropods is possible. While SAV
thy and skeletal myopathy, including esophageal muscle
lesions, are the most significant PDlesions. Approximately,
infections can be transmitted without an insect vector, the
potential role of sea and freshwater lice in SAV infections
three out of four cases of PD have cardiac and/or skele-
needs to be investigated. There is some evidence that SAV
tal myopathies. These myopathies are significant in the
2 can be transmitted vertically from brood stock to eggs
pathogenesis of PD outbreaks. Relatively small numbers of
and fry, but further work is required to confirm vertical
myopathies have acute pancreatic lesions (<2% of fish)
The acute infection phase of PD is relatively short-lived
transmission.
with rapid destruction of the majority of pancreatic aci-
nar tissue and a variable inflammatory response. As skele-
Other Medically Important Alphaviruses. A number of
tal muscle lesions tend to first appear 3-4 weeks after
other alphaviruses can infect animals, including Sindbis,
the appearance of pancreatic and heart lesions, fish sam-
Semliki Forest, Highlands J, and Getah viruses. Highlands
414
PART III
Viruses
J virus has a similar distribution in North America as EEE
either encephalitis or systemic hemorrhagic-septicemia in 
virus, but it rarely causes encephalitis in horses. It is, how-
animals and/or humans.
partridges, ducks, emus, and whooping cranes. Getah virus
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties.
The name
infects horses and swine in Asia and Southeast Asia. Infec-
Flavivirus is derived from the Latin word “flavus," which
tion in horses is sometimes characterized by fever, rash, and
 means yellow, since YF virus is the family prototype. Mem-
limb edema (but not encephalitis), and Getah virus also can
bers of the genus consist of spherical (50 nm in diameter)
 cause abortion in pregnant swine. Getah virus is included
enveloped particles with small surface projection (peplom-
within the Semliki Forest virus complex of alphaviruses,
ers) (Figure 57.6). Virions are stable at a pH of 7-9, but
and Semliki Forest virus also can cause a febrile disease
are inactivated by acid pH, temperatures above 40 *C,
of horses in Africa. The SEsV, an alphavirus, was isolated
lipid solvents, ultraviolet light, ionic and nonionic deter-
from the elephant seal louse, Lepidophthirus macrorhini, on 
 gents, and trypsin. A single nucleocapsid protein encap-
Macquarie Island in Australasia, and given the high SES
 sulates the genome, and the envelope contains two viral
virus seroprevalence in the seal population suggest that
 membrane proteins (E and M). Several nonstructural viral
the SESV is transmitted by the lice. Southern elephant
proteins are also produced in virus-infected cells (NS1-5).
seal population has decreased by 50% in the last 50 years,
The viral genome is a single linear strand of positive-sense
but there has been no causal effect of SEsV on the seal
RNA. The genomic RNA is infectious and encodes a single
population.
large polyprotein thatis co- and posttranslationally cleaved
into the various viral structural and nonstructural proteins.
The flaviviruses are all serologically related as determined
Flaviviridae
by group-specific assays such as ELISA and hemaggluti-
nation inhibition. They are distinguished by neutraliza-
 The family Flaviviridae contains a large number of viruses
tion assays, although there is considerable cross-reactivity
within three antigentically distinct genera (Table 57.3): Fla-
( s s  an e s 
vivirus, Pestivirus, and Hepacivinus (human hepatitis C virus).
The envelope E protein contains the major determinants
 The family Flaviviridae includes a number of important
of VN.
human pathogens.
Veterinary and Zoonotic Flaviviruses
Flavivirus
Japanese Encephalitis Group.  JEVis the prototype ofthe JE
antigenic complex within the Flavivirus genus. They are all
Members of the genus Flavivirus include arboviruses that
 mosquito-transmitted flaviviruses that cause encephalitis.
are transmitted by either mosquitoes or ticks. Those that
The JE complex includes St. Louis encephalitis virus, Mur-
 are mosquito-transmitted include the Japanese encephali-
ray Valley encephalitis virus, and West Nile virus (WNV)
(and related Kunjin virus), in addition to JEV itself. These
ray Valley encephalitis, St. Louis encephalitis, and West
are all human pathogens, but JEV and WNV are important
Nile and Kunjin viruses), the Yellow Fever (YF) virus
veterinary pathogens as well.
 group (including YF and Wesselsbron viruses) and Dengue
virus (DV) group (the cause of human Dengue hemor-
Japanese Encephalitis Virus
rhagic fever). The tick-borne flaviviruses include tick-bone
encephalitis (TBE; European, Far Eastern, and Siberian),
 Disease.  JEV infection is typically inapparent but can
Powassan, and Louping ill viruses. These viruses cause
cause clinical disease in humans, horses, and swine.
Table 57.3.
Viruses of Veterinary Importance in the Flaviviridae Family
Genus
Serogroup/Agent
Vector
Affected Species
Distribution
Flavivirus
Japanese Encephalitis Group 
 Japanese encephalitis virus 
Mosquitoes- Culex spp.
Horses, humans, swine, poultry
Southeastern Asia
West Nile virus
Mosquitoes—-Culex and Aedes
Horses, humans, geese.
Worldwide
spp.
raptors, corvids
Yellow fever group
Wesselsbron virus
Mosquitoes-——-Aedes spp.
Sheep
Sub-Saharan Africa
Tick-borne encephalitis
Tick-ixodes rincinus
Sheep
British Isles, Southern Europe
Louping I irus 
Pestivirus
 Bovine viral diarrhea virus
None
 Cattle, sheep, wild ruminants
Worldwide
Border Disease Virus
None
Sheep
Worldwide
Classic swine fever virus
None
Swine
Asia, Africa, Europe, and South 
 and Central America
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
415
FIGURE 57.6.
9.7-12 kb. The genome 3' terminus is not polyadenylated but forms a loop structure. The 5' end has a methylated nucleotide cap
http://viraizone.expasy.org/all_by_species/43.htmi; accessed January 25, 2013.)
M protein
(A)Edimer
Capsid
protein
Genomic RNA
T=3 Capsid
T=3-like organization
 of surface dimers
 Flavivirus genome
(B)
Genomic polyprotein
5`C
3'-OH
NS1NS2A NS2B
NS3
54
NS5
Signal peptidase
Golgi protease
NS3 protease
Infection of dogs and domestic poultry also occurs. JEV
Host Response to Infection. Both humoral and cell-
infection of swine is generally inapparent in swine but
mediated immune responses develop in animals follow-
results in abortions and stillborns of naive pregnant sows.
ing JEV infection. Antibodies (Hl and viral-neutralizing)
Infected horses can develop severe neurologic disease that
develop within a few days after infection. Neutralizing
resembles EEE, but mortality is lower.
antibodies largely are directed at the E envelope protein,
whereas cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses are directed
Epidemiology. JEV infection currently is confined to
at the nonstructural viral proteins. Humoral responses
temperate and tropical areas of Asia, where serological sur-
appear to play an important role in both recovery and
veys indicate that infection of horses, cattle, and swine
long-term protection against reinfection. Cell-mediated
is widespread. The virus occurs throughout much of Asia,
from the Indian Subcontinent to the west to the Pacific
tribute to viral clearance. Immunity is lifelong after natural
 Islands in the east (Figure 57.7). Most infections are inap-
infection.
 parent or mild. Horses and humans are unimportant to the
epidemiology of JEV infection because viremias are very
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis of JEV is accom-
low titered in these species, insufficient to serve as a virus
plished by isolating virus from the tissues or blood of
reservoir for susceptible mosquito vectors (Figure 57.8). In
affected animals using cell cultures (vertebrate or insect)
contrast,infected swine and birds serve as amplifying hosts
0r suckling mice. Viral RNA can be identified by PCR
for the virus because they have high-titered viremias (Fig-
from any sample. Viral antigen may also be demonstrated
ure 57.8). Culex spp. mosquitoes are the principal vectors
directly in brain tissue sections by immunohistochemi-
of JEV and the EIP is moderate at 6-20 days (Figure 57.5).
cal staining. A variety of serological assays also are avail-
In swine, virus may also be transmitted from the infected
able, but demonstration of virus-specific IgM (indicative of
dam to the fetus and from boar to sow via insemination of
recent infection) is generally required as IgG assays often
viral-contaminated semen. The virus is maintained in trop-
detect antibodies to related flaviviruses, which complicates
interpretation.
mosquitoes, birds, and swine.
Treatment and Control. Vaccination is used for con-
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis and
trol of JEV infection in endemic areas, and both attenuated
lesion of the disease in horses are similar to that described
and killed vaccines are available. Vector control measures
earlier for the EEV.
are also an important approach to control.
416
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 57.7.
et al. 2009.)
ataxia, weakness, recumbency, muscle fasiculations, and
FIGURE 57.8.
Transmission cycies for Japanese
high fatality rates. Some species of birds suffer high mortal-
encephalitis virus. (From Pfeffer and Dobler 2010.)
ity similar to horses including geese (particularly goslings,
Endemic/natural cycle
 Amplification cycle
raptors, and corvids (crows)).
Epidemiology. Prior to 1999, WNV occurred through-
out Africa as well as portions of Europe, the Middle East,
Asia, and Australia (where it is called Kunjin virus). How-
Culex tritaeniorhynchus
Culex tritaeniorhynchus
(other Culex & Aedes spp.)
ever in 1999, the virus was introduced into the New York
(other Culex spp.)
City and the northeast United States and swept across two-
third of the United States by 2002 and reached the West
Coast of the United States by 2003 (Figure 57.9). Horse cases
peaked in 2002 and have declined since the introduction
"Rice fields”
of an inactivated WNV in 2003 (Table 57.4). Human cases
peaked in 2004, but WNV is the leading cause of arbovirus
infections in the United States (Table 57.4). The virus is
maintained in a mosquito-bird cycle of infection, and
humans and horses are “dead-end" hosts because viremia is
Dead-end hosts
not suffcient to infect susceptible mosquitoes that feed on
infected individuals (Figure 57.10). There are two distinct
 Rural infections
 Rural & peri-urban infections
genetic lineages of WNV, so-called lineage 1 and lineage
2. Lineage 2 viruses are endemic south of the equator in
Africa, where they cause little if any disease in horses. In
West Nile and Kunjin Viruses
distinct contrast, lineage 1 strains of WNV have been asso.
Disease. WNV, a member of the JEV antigenic complex,
ciated with outbreaks of disease in Mediterranean and East-
recently emerged in the Western Hemisphere, precipitat-
ern Europe, North Africa, Asia, and North America. Many
ing a massive epidemic of disease in humans, horses, birds
bird species undergo subclinical or asymptomatic infec-
and an variety ofother animals (alligators,squirrels, moun
tion and have viremias of sufficient magnitude to serve
tain goats, llamas, sheep, cats, dogs, etc.). Although most
as amplifying reservoir hosts of the virus. Specific species
horses are asymptomatic (>90%), the neurological disease
of mosquitoes transmit WNV in endemic areas, whereas a
that occurs in WNV-infected horses is characterized by
wide variety of mosquito species have been incriminated in
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
417
FIGURE 57.9.
Year of first reported human West Nife virus disease case, by state—United States 1999-2008.(From Lindsey et al.
2010.)
MA
RI
CT
 NJ
MD
DC
1999
 2000
 2001
2002
2003
2004
■2006
Table 57.4.
 Number of Positive WNV Cases in Humans and
Horses in the Us 1999-2011
FIGURE 57.10.
Transmission cycles for West Niles virus.
(From Pfeffer and Dobler 2010.)
Year
Humana
Horsea,b
1999
62
25
2000
21
60
2001
66
738
Vertical
Vertical
2002
4156
15 257
transmission
transmission
2003
9 862
5181
2004
2539
1406
2005
3 000
1008
2006
4268
1121
2007
3 630
507
Dead-endhosts
2008
1 356
224
2009
720
298
2010
1021
157
Urban cycle
'Blood
2011
667
115
transfusion
organ
Data from USGS Disease Maps site 1/2/2012 WNv (htp:/diseasemaps.usgs.
transplan
gov/wnv_us_veterinary.html accessed February 8, 2013; http://diseasemaps.
tation"
"(eloz 'g Aenigay passarne jwyuewny sn Aumynof'shsn
bhttp:/www.aphis.usda.gov/v/nahss/equine/wnv/wny_distribution_maps.htm 
(atcessed February 8, 2013).
Mosquitomovement
the transmission of WNV infection in North America (Fig-
Culextarsalis
Culexpipiens
ure 57.10). The EIP for WNV is quite long (>14 days) com-
(other Culex spp.)
(otherCulex&Aedesspp.)
 pared to the other encephalitic arboviruses (Figure 57.5).
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
 The pathogenesis and
Birdmovement/migration
lesion of the disease in horses are similar to that described
earlier for the EEV.
418
PART III
Viruses
Host Response to Infection. The host immune
Other Medically Important Mosquito-Borne Flaviviruses.
response is similar to that described above for JEV.
YF virus is one of the most severe hemorrhagic viral fevers
 of humans. It occurs predominately in areas with jun-
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis of wNV is best done
gle canopies in Central and South America and Africa. It
 by PCR. Virus isolation in appropriate cell cultures is also
involves an interaction between canopy mosquitoes, mon-
possible. WNV-specific IgM capture ELISA is very useful for
keys, and vector mosquitoes. Aedes aegyptis the predomi-
the serological identification of animals that are acutely
nant vector in the Western Hemisphere. YF occurred in the
infected with WNV.
southern United States until the 1890s when vector con-
trol measures eliminated A. aegypti. There is an effective YF
Treatmentand Control.  There are four different WNV
vaccine. DV is responsible for Dengue hemorrhagic fever,
vaccines available for horses: an inactivated WNV vaccine,
one of the greatest human arbovirus threats. DV occurs in
 a canarypox recombinant WNV vaccine, a YF virus-WNV
a wide belt across Central and South America, Africa and
chimera vaccine, and a WNV DNA vaccine. Annual revac-
Southeast Asia and has occurred in the Caribbean and the
cination is highly recommended. Vector control measures
extreme southern United States. A. aegypti is also predomi-
 are also an important approach to control.
nant vector of DV. Reinfection with DV results in immune-
 mediated enhancement that causes the subsequent DV
infection to infect macrophages and cause severe dissem-
Other Medically Important Members of the Flavivirus-
inated intravascular coagulation and hemorrhagic fever.
Japanese Encephalitis Group. Murray Valley encephali-
DV has four different serotypes that do not cross protect
tis virus, another member of the JE mosquito-borne
 and there is no vaccine.
encephalitis complex, is enzootic in New Guinea and Aus-
 tralia and causes sporadic encephalitis in humans. St. Louis
Tick-Borne Encephalitis group. This group of viruses
encephalitis virus, another member of the JE complex is
enzootic in North, Central and South America and also
 causes sporadic encephalitis in humans.
totype virus, TBE virus with its three geographical sub-
types (European (Western), Siberian, Far Eastern (Russian
spring summer encephalitis virus)), Kyasanur forest disease
YF virus group. YF virus group are a small group of
virus, Omsk hemorrhagic fever virus, Powassan virus and
mosquito-borne flaviviruses that cause hemorrhagic fevers.
 the important veterinary pathogen, louping ill virus. This
 YF virus is the prototype virus and this group includes Wes-
group is all transmitted by ticks making their epidemiol-
selsbron virus.
ogy more complex, as the ticks serve as both a reservoir and
a virus vector. Unlike mosquitoes, ticks can live for several
Wesseisbron Virus
 years making them an effective reservoir. In addition, these
tick-borne viruses are transmitted from one developmen-
Disease and Epidemiology.  Wesselsbron virus causes
tal stage to another (transstadial transmission) and verti-
disease of sheep in sub-Saharan Africa. Subclinical infec-
cally from one generation to another (transovarial trans-
tion of cattle, horses, and swine also occur, and the virus
mission). The tick larvae and nymphs feed on birds or
is a zoonotic pathogen causing febrile disease in humans
small rodents, while the adult ticks prefer larger animals
with headache, myalgia, and arthraglia. The virus causes
(Figure 57.11).
extensive liver necrosis, jaundice, subcutaneous edema,
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and fever in infected sheep;
Louping Ill Virus
mortality in lambs can be high, and abortion is common
in pregnant ewes. Aedes mosquitoes transmit Wesselsbron
Disease. Louping ill virus is a tick-transmitted Flavivirus 
virus.
that naturally infects many animal species, including
humans, sheep, horses, deer, and birds. The virus causes
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
 The vinus infects and
causes necrosis of the liver resulting in hemorrhage and
when susceptible sheep are introduced into an endemic
systemic organ failure.
 area. Louping illis characterized by neurologic signs such as
hyperexcitability, cerebellar ataxia, and progressive paral-
Host Response to Infection. A
All immune cells are
ysis. The disease derives its name from the leaping gait
depleted following infection.
sometimes observed in ataxic animals. Louping ill is a
zoonotic disease causing influenza-like syndromes fol-
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis may be based upon 
  s    
viral isolation using a variety of cell cultures (baby ham-
in 4-10 days. The disease also sometimes occurs in cattle,
ster kidney and lamb kidney), chick embryos, or suckling
horses, and goats.
mice. Viral RNA can be identified by PCR from any sam-
ple. Vaccination and/or prior exposure to other flaviviruses
Epidemiology.  1
Louping ill is confined to the British
complicate the interpretation of serological assays.
Isles and portions of continental Europe (Spain, Greece,
and Turkey). Ixodes rincinus ticks are the principal vector.
Treatment and Control. Attenuated virus vaccines
are used to prevent the disease in endemic areas. Vec-
Laboratory Diagnosis.   Diagnosis of louping ill virus is
  dn  o  s n 1
done by viral isolation, immunohistochemical staining of
con trol.
CNS tissue sections from affected animals, or serology. Viral
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
419
FIGURE 57.11.
Transmission cycle of tick-borne encephalitis virus. (From Pfeffer and Dobler 2010.)
Ixodes ricinus
Tran
Ixodes spp.
Transovaria
tansmission
RNA can be identified by PCR from any sample. Virus can be
classical swine fever virus (CsFV; previously referred to as
isolated using vertebrate or insect cell cultures and intrac-
erebral inoculation of suckling mice. Propagated virus can
of livestock. In contrast to the genus Flavivirus, members of
be definitively identified by viral neutralization.
the genus Pestivirus are not arthropod-borne.
Treatment and Control. Louping ill can be controlled
Physical, Chemical, Biotype and Antigenic Properties.
through tick control by dipping and spraying of sheep. A
 Pestiviruses are readily inactivated by low pH, heat, organic
formalin-inactivated cell culture-origin vaccine is available
solvents, and detergents. Virions are spherical to pleomor-
and effective. Lambs born to immune dams are protected
 by colostral antibody for approximately 4 months.
phic (40-60 nm in diameter) and enveloped with small
sur face projections (spikes) emanating from the viral en ve-
lope. The virions consist of an en velope and nucleocapsid
Other Medically Jmportant Tick-Borne Encephalitides.
and include four structural proteins—a nucleocapsid pro-
Powassan virus is the cause of a tick-transmitted encephali-
tein (C) and three envelope glycoproteins (Erns, E1, and
tis of humans and horses in North America. The virus
E2) (Figure 57.12). Some seven or eight viral nonstructural
infects a wide variety of animal species, both wild and
proteins are also produced in infected cells. The genome is a
domestic, as well as several species of ticks. It causes
single molecule ofpositive-sense, single-stranded RNA that
encephalomyelitis in horses that mimics that caused by
contains a single, large open reading frame that encodes a
other flaviviruses like WNV, from which it must be dis-
large polyprotein thatis co- and posttranslationally cleaved
tinguished by either PCR assay or by virus isolation. Sim-
into the various structural and nonstructural viral proteins
ilar tick-borne encephalidities of humans are caused by
(Figure 57.12).
related viruses in Europe and Asia, including Omsk hem-
Pestivirus infection of cell culture can results in one of
orrhagic fever virus, TBE viruses (European, Fa1 Eastern,
two different phenotypes: cytopathic (CP) where the cells
and Siberian), and Kyasanur Forest disease virus. The TBE
die or noncytopathice (NCP) where the cells appear normal.
encephalitis results in a high proportion (up to 50%)
Although both BDV and CSFV CP isolates have been iden-
of the patients having permanent neurological disorders.
tified, BVDV is most frequently associated with CP viruses.
These TBE viruses are maintained in a cycle of infection
NCP viruses are the predominate biotype in nature. All CP
that includes ticks and vertebrates (livestock and dogs)
viruses arise from mutations to NCP usually from recombi-
that serve as amplifying hosts of the virus. The virus can
nation events thatinclude point single nucleotide, cellular
be transmitted to humans in the milk or dairy products
genes or viral gene insertions or in deletions (Figure 57.13)
of TBE-infected cattle sheep and/or goats (Figure 57.11).
in or near the Ns2-3 gene resulting in the production of the 
Encephalitis occurs sporadically among animals in areas
NS3 gene product in CP viruses. These cell culture pheno-
where these viruses are endemic.
typic differences do not reflect pathogenesis or severity of
disease as the most pathogenic viruses are NCP.
The pestiviruses are very closely related and can only
Pestivirus
be distinguished by application of monoclonal antibodies
The genus Pestivirus includes bovine viral diarrhea virus
and/or molecular biology techniques; however, they tend
(BVDV; types 1 and 2), border disease virus (BDV), and
to be host specific. The pestiviruses are all antigentically
420
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 57.12.
Virion structure and genomic organization of Pestivirus. (A) BVDV virion: enveloped, spherical, about 50 nm in
diameter; mature virions contain three virus-encoded membrane proteins (Erns, E1 and E2) in addition to the capsid protein. (B) BVDV
genome: monopartite, finear, ssRNA(+) genome of about 12 kb; the genome 3' terminus is not polyadenylated, but terminates with a
Bioinformatics. http://viralzone.expasy.org/all_by_species/43.html; accessed January 25, 2013.)
E1-E2 cimer
(A)
Capsid protein
Genomic RNA
T=3-like organization
T=?
 of surface dimers
IRES
(B)
Genomic polyprotein
3'-OH
Structural
Genotyping
?
？
site
NS2-3
NS
14 NS43
NSSA
RdRp
NCP
？
NS2
NS3
Nonstructural
Npro protease
 Signal protease
 NS3 protease
related and include cross-reactive epitopes. Several other
ous bovine embryonic cell cultures. Immunofluorescence
pestiviruses have been isolated that are genetically distinct
 0r other immunohistochemical staining methods are used
-d si h! pue 'Ais pue 'Aaa '(z pue I sad) Aaaa wo
 to detect NCP strains of BVDV, which contaminate many
posed that pestiviruses isolated from a giraffe, for example,
 commonly used cel lines. CP strains produce plaques and
be identified as new species. Typing of pestiviruses is based 
can be used for accurate viral titrations.
 On genetic sequence analysis of 5′ untranslated region (Fig-
ure 53.12). Neutralizing antibodies are directed against the
Infectivity for Host Species and Culture Systems. While
 Erns and E2 envelope glycoproteins. Animals infected with
BDV is classically associated with infection of sheep, it can
CP BVDV also mount a strong immune response against
also infect cattle and goats, and pregnant sows that were
the Ns3 protein, whereas the antibody response to other
experimentally infected with BDV gave birth to piglets with
viral proteins is generally weak.
cerebellar hypoplasia. The virus can be propagated in pri-
mary and secondary cell cultures of bovine and ovine ori-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
gin and in established cell lines, including pig kidney, fetal
 BVDV infect cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and wild ruminants,
lamb muscle, and bovine turbinate.
but BVDV principally is an infectious pathogen of cattle
CFSV only infects domestic swine and wild hogs. CFSV
and sometimes sheep. Isolates of BVDV, whether CP or
replicates in cultures of porcine cells such as spleen, kid-
NCP, can be grown in cell culture systems, including vari-
 ney, testicle, and peripheral blood leukocytes. Most strains
Chapter 57
Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
421
FIGURE 57.13.
Recombinations that generated four CP BVDV strains: (1) insertions of cellular sequences coding for ubiquitin;
(2) duplications and rearrangement of viral sequences including the NS3 gene (>2 kb); (3) deletions that led to generation of cp
defective interfering particles (Dis); and (4) a small duplication of a viral sequence (27 nucleotides); the insertion is identical with a
sequence located about 300 nucieotides upstream. (From Kummerer et al. 2010.)
Nonep pestivirus
Structural proteins
NS2-3
C
RNA recombination
 Insertion of cellular sequence
Osloss
NS2-3
structural proteins NS2
NS3
AUb~B
 Duplication and rearrangement of viral sequences
Pe515CP
NS2-3
6
NS3
A
B
C
B
Deletion of viral sequences
CP9DI
NS3
B
C
 Small duplication of viral sequences
CP7
NS2
Structural proteins
NS3
 Original
Duplicate
Sequence
of the virus are noncytopathogenic and may persist in cul-
high morbidity and low mortality if uncomplicated.
ture for many cellpassages. The presence of HCV in infected
Frequently BVDV infection is the viral component
cell cultures is readily demonstrated by immunofluores-
of the bovine respiratory disease complex, a dis-
cent or immunohistochemical staining techniques. Some
ease complex that predisposes cattle to secondary
cytopathogenic strains have been reported.
bacterial and/or mycoplasma respiratory infections
that result in severe bronchopneumonia, resulting
Bovine Viral Diarrhea Virus
in high morbidity and mortality. Occasionally acute
BVDV infection can caused severe, fatal disease with
Disease. BVDV is responsible for a variety of respira-
high mortality in both calves and adult animals
tory, digestive tract, and reproductive syndromes. This dis-
often accompanied by widespread hemorrhages as a
ease complex actually includes three distinct disease syn-
consequence of thrombocytopenia. When this dis-
dromes:
 ease syndrome first arose in the 1990s, type II strains
of BVDV are now increasingly associated with mild
1.
 The consequences of infection of cattle with BVDV
vary from an inapparent infection to severe fatal dis-
type I strains.
ease. Acute BVDV infection is a usually mild dis-
 Reproductive BVDV infection results in a variety
ease of young calves characterized by leukopenia,
of syndromes depending on the stage of develop-
fever, and erosions and ulcers of the upper gas-
ment of the fetal calf. Infections prior to 40 days
trointestinal tract (particularly the hard palate and
of gestation will result in fetal death. BVDV infec-
 gums). The infection is typically characterized by
tion of bovine fetuses with a NCP BVD virus prior to
422
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 57.14.
The generation of BVDV persistent
FIGURE 57.15.
The threat of BVDV persistent infection
infection. (From RL Larson, Kansas State University and D
to a herd. (From Rodning and Givens 2010.)
Connor, University of Missouri.)
Pregnant female whose
Cow and calf that may both
Mostcommonroute
Lesscommonroute
maybecomc
(Over90%)
(Less than 10%)
Susceptible pregnant female
BVDV persistently infected (PI)
(non-PI) infected with BVDV at
about 1% -4 months of gestation.
female becomes pregnant.
BVD virus
PI calf co
from any
sheddingBVDviru
source
to herdmates
BVDV persistently infected (PI)
calf is produced.
Calves exposed to PI calf may develop
Herd bull that may bec
(+）
pneumonia, diarrhea, ec.
PI calf
 Pathogenesis and Pathology.
 The pathogenesis and con-
sequences of BVDV infection of cattle are dependent on
mid-gestation (40-150 days of gestation) often leads
the age and immune status of cattle at infection, as well
to the birth of calves that are persistently infected
as the biological properties of the infecting virus strain.
(P1) with BVDV (Figure 57.14). Usually other animals
BVDV infection in calves results in systemic infection of
are the source but a Pl cow will always produce a PI
variable severity. Lesions in affected calves range from mild
calf (Figure 57.14) These animals subsequently serve
 erosion and ulceration of the upper gastrointestinal tract
as a reservoir of virus in the herd, which they trans-
to severe ulceration throughout the gastrointestinal tract
mit both horizontally and vertically (to their own
 and disseminated hemorrhages. Highly virulent strains of
progeny)(Figure 57.15); furthermore, they develop
BVDV can produce severe lesions in susceptible calves that
weak or no obvious humoral immune response to
mimic MD.
the virus with which they are Pl. PI animals have
 The lesions associated with congenital BVDV infection
a high mortality rate in the first year of life. Calves
include ocular lesions (retinal degeneration and hypopla-
infected with NCP BVDV after 150 days of gestation
 sia, optic neuritis) and cerebellar atrophy/hypoplasia. PI
(after the immune response develops) are congeni-
animals have BVDV virus in all tissues but the hair folli-
tally infected. Although they clear the BVDV infec-
cles have high levels of BVDV virus and can be used for
tion, lifelong damage can occur to their immune
diagnostic samples.
and reproductive systems. Both PI and congenitally
MD manifests when a CP strain of BVD virus emerges
infected calves can exhibit “weak calf syndrome"
in the PI animal. The CP strain usually is a mutant of the
where the calves fail to thrive following birth. Con-
NCP PI strain and these mutations arise as described earlier.
genital abnormalities can also occur. BVDV can
 These NCP and CP viruses in MD are referred to as a pair.
also cause abortion throughout pregnancy and is
MD is characterized by the presence of erosions and ulcers
the most frequent diagnosed viral pathogen from
on the muzzle, throughout the oral cavity, esophagus, and 
abortions.
small intestine (ulcers over Peyers patches are characteris-
3. Mucosal disease (MD) is characterized by low mor-
tic). There also is widespread necrosis of lymphocytes. The
bidity but high mortality in cattle of several mon ths
mechanism of tissue destruction in MD currently is unchar-
to several years of age. It is characterized by severe,
 acterized but might involve apoptosis of cells.
fatal disease with extensive ulceration of the upper
 gastrointestinal tract, diarrhea, and lymphopenia.
Host Responses to Infection.F
 BVDV infection of cattle usu-
MD occurs only in PI animals.
ally results in the production of high titers of neutralizing
antibodies in serum, and cattle that recover from in fection
Epidemiology. BVDV has a worldwide distribution, and
have long-lasting immunity. BVDV infection of animals in 
infection of cattle is very common with high seropreva-
utero prior to 150 days of gestation can result in immuno-
 lence in most countries of the world. Transmission is by
tolerance to BVDV, resulting in persistent postnatal in fec-
contact and horizontal transfer of virus, particularly from
tion and no or very low titers of virus-specific antibodies.
PI carriers of the virus that shed high titers of virus in
all of their body secretions and excretions for horizontal
Laboratory Diagnosis.
.Clinical diagnosis may be diffi-
spread, and transmits the virus vertically to their progeny
cult. MD must be differentiated from other diseases that
(Figure 57.15).
cause ulceration of the gastrointestinal tract, including
Chapter 57Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
423
tion during the first trimester is relatively more severe than
is best accomplished by antigen capture ELISA or immuno-
infection later in gestation. Infection after 80 days' gesta-
histochemical staining of the tissues of affected animals
tion often results in viral clearance without disease. The
with BVDV-specific antibodies. PCR can be used to detect
teratogenic effect of BDV infection is also dependent on
viral nucleic acid from any sample. An ear biopsy has been
fetal age. Infection of the developing central nervous sys-
shown to be an effective sample to use to identify PI ani-
tem leads to reduced or altered myelination and demyelin-
mals. Virus isolation also can be used. The widespread use of
ization, resulting in the characteristic congenital tremors
vaccines complicates serological diagnosis of BVDV infec
of the affected newborn lambs. Necrosis of the developing
tion, as does the low or no obvious titers to BVDV in PI
brain can cause more serious developmental injury, result-
animals.
ing in hydranencephaly, porencephaly, and/or cerebellar
dysplasia.
Treatment and Control. Control of BVDV infection of cat-
tle involves good biosecurity that includes quarantine and
Host Response to Infection. BDV infection of adult sheep
testing of new introductions to the herd for Pl. Purchased
usually results in a prompt humoral immune response char-
bred animals are a high risk to bring BVDV into the herd.
acterized by theappearance of long-lived neutralizing anti-
Within the herd, all Pl carriers need to be identified and
bod y in serum. The fetal immune response reflects its gesta-
removed. Vaccines are only an adjunct to control and will
tional age at the time of infection. Infection during the first 
fail if PI animals are in the herd. Both attenuated (live) or
half of gestation usually leads to persistent postnatal in fec-
killed BVDV vaccines are used. Concerns have been raised
tion and a minimal, inadequate immune response. Such
about the use of live attenuated BVDV vaccines, includ-
animals may remain persistently in fected and seronegative
ing their potential reversion to virulence, dissemination
to BDV for the remainder of thei1 lives. Infection during the
in cattle populations, and potential to cause immunosup-
second half of gestation, at a time when the fetus is gain-
pression as well as fetal infections. In the past, inadvertent
ing immunologic competence, usually results in immune
contamination of bovine cell cultures used for vaccine pro-
responses that resolve the infection.
duction with virulent, but NCP BVDV strains have also
occurred. Vaccination of Pl cattle with attenuated vaccines
Laboratory Diagnosis. Detailed necropsy and histologic
can sometimes produce MD. Vaccination prior to 4 months
evaluation is often diagnostic, especially when immuno-
of age in calves may not be effective due to maternal anti-
histochemical staining is used to identify viral antigens in
 body interference and repeated revaccination may be nec-
the tissues of affected lambs. PCR can be used to detect viral
essary.
nucleic acid from any sample.
Border Disease Virus
Treatment and Control. Control of BDV is difficult. Losses
can be high during initial infection of naive animals,
Disease. Border disease is a congenital pestivirus disease
whereas losses are relatively minimal when the virus is
of sheep characterized by the birth of lambs with abnormal
endemic on a farm. BVDV vaccines are sometimes used.
("hairy') wool and tremors that reflect abnormal myelina-
tion in the central nervous system (so-called hairy-shaker
lambs). Expression of disease varies depending on gesta-
Classic Swine Fever Virus
tional age of the lamb at infection as well as the infecting
Disease. CsFVis an importantdisease of swine worldwide;
viral strain. Infection of the developing fetus may result in
although it has been eliminated in many intensive swine-
fetal death, mummification, abortion, stillbirth, or birth of
producing countries but often reemerges to cause serious,
abnormal lambs, whereas infection of adult sheep is sub-
economically devastating outbreaks. CSFV is characterized
clinical.
by fever (104 *F or higher), leukopenia, and loss of appetite.
Epidemiology. BDV was initially described in the late
together as if chilled. Vomiting and diarrhea are common,
1940s as a congenital disease of sheep in England and
as is conjunctivitis, erythema of the skin, and neurologic
Wales. The disease has since been recognized in many
signs such as paralysis and locomotory disturbances. Infec-
European countries, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and
tion of pregnant sows can result in small litters, fetal death,
the United States. The virus persists in sheep, likely in a
premature births, stillbirths, and the birth of piglets with
manner similar to that of BVDV in cattle, and extensive
cerebellar ataxia or congenital tremors. Morbidity and mor-
outbreaks of BDV can occur when the virus is introduced
a a psn sa  i oq arn a
into immunologically naive flocks. Transmission of BDV is
strains of the virus in fully susceptible swine, whereas dis-
probably most common by the oral and intranasal routes,
ease is less apparent when the virus is endemic, making
from infected animals or infected fetuses.
detection and eradication more difficult.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. BDV infection of immuno-
Epidemiology. CSFV occurs worldwide, but it has been
logically naive sheep results in viremia, with subsequent
eradicated from North America, Great Britain and Ire-
spread of the virus to the fetus in pregnant animals. Gener-
land, Scandinavia, Australia and New Zealand, and por-
alized infection of the fetus can lead to fetal death, with or
tions of Europe. It is endemic in extensive areas of Asia,
without expulsion, or teratogenesis. The consequences of
Africa, Europe, and South and Central America. Domes-
fetal infection are inversely related to fetal age, thus in fec
tic swine and wild hogs serve as reservoir hosts, often as
424
PART III
Viruses
inapparent carriers. Pigs in fected in utero may become per-
References
sistently infected carriers of the virus, analogous to the
reservoirs of other pestiviruses like BVDV and BDV. Trans-
Jose J, Snyder JE, and Kuhn RJ (2009). A structural and func-
mission is by droplet, fomites, and ingestion of infected
tional perspective of alphavirus replication and assembly.
 materials, particularly uncooked garbage.
Future Microbiol, 4, 837-856.
Kummerer BM, Tautz N, Becher P, Theil H-J, and Meyers
Pathogenesis and Pathology. CFSV is an acute, highly
G (2ooo). The genetic basis for cytopathogenicity of pes-
contagious disease that is characterized by disseminated
tiviruses. Vet Microbiol, 77, 117-128.
intravascular coagulation leading to hemorrhage and
Lindsey NP, Staples JE, Lehman JA, and Fischer M (2010)
infarction in many tissues. The incubation period is short
 Surveillance for human west Nile Virus Disease—United
(3-8 days), and the virus first replicates in the lymphoid
States, 1999-2008. MMWR, 59(SS02), 1-17, http://www.
tissues of the upper respiratory tract or tonsils. The virus
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5902a1.htm (acce-
then spreads widely and replicates in endothelial cells and
ssed January 25, 2013)
mononuclear inflammatory cells throughout the body.
Pfeffer M and Dobler G (2010) Emergence of zoonotic
The characteristic lesions are petechial hemorrhages on all
arboviruses by animal trade and migration. Parasites &
serous surfaces, lymph nodes (hemorrhagic lymphadeni-
Vectors, 3, 35, http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/ con-
tent/3/1/35 (accessed January 25, 2013).
tis), and kidney, and the presence of infarcts in the spleen.
More chronic forms of CsFV occur in some endemic areas.
Rodning SP and Givens MD (2010) Bovine viral diar-
rhea virus. Alabama Cooperative 
Extension System
Affected pigs may exhibit growth retardation (stunting),
ANR-1367, http://www.aces.edu/pubs/docs/A/ANR-1367/
 chronic diarrhea, and secondary bacterial pneumonia.
index2.tmpl (accessed January 25, 2013).
 Scott CW and Slobodan P (2009) Alphaviral encephalitides
Host Response to Infection. Animals that recover from hog
(Chapter 21), in Vaccines for Biodefense and Emerging and
cholera have a long-lasting immunity. Neutralizing anti-
Neglected Diseases (eds DT Alan Barrettand LR Stanberry).
body titers correlate with protection against CFsV infec-
Elsevier.
tion. Suckling pigs acquire colostral antibodies from the
Strauss JH and Strauss EG (1997) Recombination in
immune dam. Pigs infected in utero with the virus are
Alphaviruses. Sem Virol, 8, 85-94.
often persistently infected carriers, whether or not they
van den Hurk AF, Ritchie SA, and Mackenzie JS (2009) Ecology
are healthy at birth.
and geographical expansion of Japanese encephalitis virus.
Ann Rev Entomol, 54, 17-35.
Laboratory Diagnosis.
: Diagnosis of CFSV can be suspected
Weaver SC and Barrett ADT (2004). Transmission cycles, host
in free areas by explosive outbreaks of severe disease in
range, evolution and emergence of arboviral disease. Nature
 pigs, but the diagnosis always requires laboratory confi1-
Rev Micro, 2, 789-801.
mation to distinguish it from other septicemias. The virus
 is identified in the tissues of affected pigs by immunohis-
Further Reading
tochemical staining or by virus isolation from the spleen,
tonsils, lymph nodes, and blood. Since many strains are
 noncytopathogenic in cell culture, the fluorescent anti-
McLoughlin MF and Graham DA (2007) Alphavirus infec-
body method is required for the detection of CFSV. PCR
tions in salmonids—a review. / Fish Dis, 30, 511-
can be used to detect viral nucleic acid from any sample.
531.
The diagnosis of chronic forms of CFsV is more difficult
OIE Technical Disease Cards: Japanese Encephalitis Virus,
and requires careful laboratory investigation.
 Classic Swine Fever Virus, Venezuelan equine encephali-
tis
virus,
http://www.oie.int/animal-health-in-the-
Ireatment and Control. Control of CFSV depends on
/P[IOM
technical-disease-cards/ (accessed February 9,
2013)
whether the virus is endemic in a particular country or
Pfeffer M and Dobler G (201l) Emergence of zoonotic
region. In free areas, exclusion of the virus is accomplished 
arboviruses by animal tread and migration. Parasites & Vec-
by regulating the movement (importation) of swine from
tors, http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35
endemic areas and by prohibiting the feeding of garbage
(accessed January 25, 2013).
 and/or food scraps containing pork products to swine. In
Thiel H-J, Collett, MS, Gould EAetal. (2005) Family flaviviridae:
endemic areas, vaccination and/or eradication are used.
positive sense single stranded RNA viruses, in Virus Taxon-
Vaccines for CFsV are attenuated and effective in prevent-
omy, pp. 991-998, Academic Press/Elsevier.
 ing disease. The use of vaccines prevents serological diag-
Weaver,SC,FreyTK,Huang HV etal.(2005)Familytogaviridae:
nosis of CFsV infection, complicating efforts to eradicate
positive sense single stranded RNA viruses, in Virus Taxon-
CFSV from a region or country.
omy, pp. 999-1008, Academic Press/Elsevier.
58
Orthomyxoviridae
WENJUN MA
The Orthomyxoviridae is a family of RNA viruses, which
from seals and pigs, respectively, only influenza A and
includes five genera: Influenzavirus A, Influenzavirus B,
B viruses cause major outbreaks and severe disease in
Influenzavinus C, Isavirus, and Thogotovirus. A novel genus
humans; influenza C is associated with common cold-like
of this family has been recently identified, which includes
illness, principally in children. The nomenclature system
Quaranfil, Johnston Atoll, and Lake Chad viruses. Viruses
for different subtypes of influenza A viruses includes the
in the first three genera, which are identified by antigenic
host of origin, geographic origin, strain number, and
differences in their nucleoprotein (NP) and matrix (M)
year of isolation. A description of the two major surface
proteins, cause influenza disease in vertebrates, including
antigens, the HA and the NA, is given in parentheses, for
birds, humans, and other mammalian species. Isaviruses
example, A/swine/Kansas/8/2007 (H1N1). By convention,
infect salmon; thogotoviruses infect both vertebrates and
the host of origin for human strains is now omitted.
invertebrates, such as mosquitoes and sea lice.
These antigenic subtypes are distinguished by dou-
ble immun odiffusion assays (hemagglutination inhibition 
 and neuraminidase inhibition) with hyperimmune animal
Influenza
sera because such tests revealed antigenic relationships
Influenza viruses are classified as members of the genus
among influenza A virus isolates that were not apparent
Orthomyxovinus in the family Orthomyxoviridae, and are
with other methods.
named according to their type, species where isolated
(except humans), location where isolated, the successive
Morphology
isolate number from that location, and year of isolation.
Influenza viruses are divided into three types, including
Influenza virus particles are pleomorphic; its en velope can
influenza A, B, and C viruses, based on antigenic differ-
be in spherical and filamentous forms, and the virion en ve-
ences in their NP and M proteins. All pandemics in human
lope is derived from the membranes of host cells. Normally,
history were caused by the influenza A virus (1918-1919,
the virion morphology is irregularly shaped spherical par-
1957-1958, 1968-1969, 1977, and 2009) due to the emer-
ticles 80-120 nm in diameter (Figure 58.1) or filamentous
gence of new subtypes of this virus; the Spanish influenza
virions 20 nm in diameter and 200-300 nm long (Fig-
pandemic in 1918-i919is the most devastating one, result-
ure 58.1). There are two distinct types of surface spikes
ing in the deaths of up to 50 million people worldwide.
(peplomers): one is the HA with a rod-shaped form and
the other is the NA with a mushroom-shaped form and
possessing neuraminidase activity. Both the HA and the
Classification
NA are viral glycoproteins that attach to the viral en velope
Influenza A viruses are further divided into different
by short sequences of hydrophobic amino acids (see Fig-
subtypes based on the antigenic nature of the surface
ure 58.2 for a representation of the influenza virus). The
hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). To date,
glycoprotein HA is interposed irregularly by clusters of NA
there are 17 HA and 10 NA subtypes of influenza A virus, all
over the virion surface, with a ratio of HA to NA of about
of which except H17 and N10 have been isolated from wild
4-5 to 1. The viral en velope surrounds an M protein shell,
aquatic birds, including waterfowl and shore birds that
which in turn surrounds the genome of eight (seven in
are the natural reservoir of influenza A viruses. Influenza A
type C influenza viruses) individual molecules of single-
viruses are also able to infect a large variety of mammalian
stranded RNA, along with the NP and three large proteins-
species including human, horse, swine, dog, cat, bat,
polymerase basic 1 (PB1), polymerase basic 2 (PB2), and
and marine mammals. Influenza B and C viruses infect
polymerase acidic (PA)—forming the ribonucleoprotein
humans, and the influenza C virus also infects pigs and
(RNP) complex that is responsible for RNA replication and
dogs. A key difference between them is their host range.
transcription. Each of the eight genomic RNA segments
Whereas influenza B and C viruses are predominantly
encodes for one or two proteins. The segmented nature
 human pathogens that have sporadically been isolated
of the influenza virus genome results in the phenomena
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
425
426
PART III
Viruses
2341 nucleotides, which encode 10 or 11 proteins. The seg-
FIGURE 58.1.
Electron micrograph demonstrating
ments 1 and 3 encode RNA-dependent PB2 and PA pro-
irregularly shaped spherical particles (80-120 nm in diameter)
teins. The segment 2 encodes the PBl and in some virus
of an avian influenza virus.(Courtesy of Dr David Swayne,
strains also encodes a second short protein PB1-F2 using
Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory, USDA/Agricultura!
an additional open reading. The segments 4 and 6 encode
Research Service, Athens, Georgia.)
the surface glycoprotein HA and NA, respectively. The seg-
ment 5 encodes the NP that binds around the viral RNA
(vRNA). The segments 7 and 8 encode two proteins (M1/M2
and NS1/Ns2) due to differentially spliced transcripts. The
function of each protein is described in the next paragraph.
Influenza viral variation is frequent and occurs based on
two major mechanisms: antigenic drift and shift. Anti-
genic drift is theaccumulation ofrandom mutationsin viral
genes because of low fidelity of the vRNA polymerase. Anti-
genic drift is responsible for the variability of the human
seasonal influenza viruses. The segmented nature of the
influenza genome contributes to antigenic shift or reas-
 sortment that occurs when a cell is infected with different
influenza viruses, resulting in exchange of vRNA segments
and generation of new viruses with a novel combination
of high-frequency reassortment; when cells are infected
of genes. The 1957 Asian flu pandemic and the 1968 Hong
with two or more different influenza A viruses, exchange
 Kong flu pandemic as well as the 2009 pandemic are a result
of RNA segments from parental viruses allows the genera-
of antigenic shift.
tion of progeny viruses containing a novel combination of
Viral Proteins
genes.
Hemagglutinin.  Influenza A and B viruses have two major
Viral Genome
surface glycoprotein antigens: hemagglutinin (HA or H)
and neuraminidase(NA or N). For influenza A virus, 17 anti-
The genome of influenza A virus contains eight segments
genically distinct HAs have been recognized, all of which
of negative-sense RNA, varying in length between 890 and
except the H17 can be found circulating in aquatic birds,
where they are generally carried asymptomatically. The HA
protein of influenza A virus is a type I transmembrane glyco-
protein, which is initially synthesized as a single polypep-
FIGURE 58.2.
Diagram of an avian influenza virus
tide precursor (HA0) with a molecular weight of approx-
particle. Note the HA and NA surface proteins and the eight
imately 76 kDa. The mature HA forms homotrimers, and
RNA segments of the viral genome. (Used by permission,
Swayne and King .)
each monomer is generated by cleavage of HA0 into HA1
and HA2 subunits by trypsin-like or furin-like proteases.
Neuraminidase
The HA of influenza A virus has two functions during early
steps of the replication of the virus in host cells: receptor
Hemagglutinin
binding and membrane fusion.First,it attaches the virus to
the cell surface by binding to the cellular receptors that are
sialic acids of cell surface glycoproteins and glycolipids. Sec-
ond, once bound it promotes viral penetration by mediat-
M2
ing fusion of the endosomal and viral membranes to release
 the viral genome into the cell cytoplasm of target cells. The
conserved sialic acid receptor-binding pocket is located on 
the HA1 subunit at the distal end of the molecule. There are
five major antigenic epitopes A-E on the HA1 subunits of
PA
the influenza HA.All strains ofinfluenza viruses are capable
of agglutinating erythrocytes from humans, guinea pigs,
and chickens as well as many other species. Antibodies to
the HA prevent infection of host cells via neutralizing the
virus and are important to host immunity. In fact, it is
the variation of this molecule that is primarily responsible
for emergence of new strains of the virus leading to new
 outbreaks of influenza, and the failure to control them by
vaccination.
Neuraminidase.T
The NA is a type II membrane glyco-
protein that is located on the surface of the virus. The
Chapter 58 Orthomyxoviridae
427
shape of NA protein is mushroom-shaped tetramers with an
n  s a   daa a
average molecular weightof approximately 220 kDa, which
drug. However, amantadine-resistant strains have been
is composed of four identical monomers. The ectodomain
detected widely and contain mutations in the transmem-
of NA consists of a stalk and a globular head. The stalk
brane domain of the M2 protein. Antibodies against M1
and the transmembrane domain sequences are highly vari-
protein provide little, if any, protection against infection.
able among the ten recognized NA subtypes. The NA stalk
The M2 protein is one of important proteins of influenza A
separates the head region with the enzymatic center from
viruses recognized by CTLs.
the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. The NA is
responsible for the cleavage of the sialic acid residues from
the virus and the infected cells during both entry and
Nonstructural Proteins. RNA segment 8 of influenza A
release from the cells. In addition, it seems that NA helps
the virus to penetrate through the mucin layer in the res-
( d dxa P 1e (n) 1 d g
piratory tract to reach the epithelial cells, which are the
formerly referred to as the NS2 protein. The NS1 protein
target cells of the virus. The enzyme activity of the NA pre-
of influenza A viruses is not a structural component of
vents self-aggregation and promotes release of the newly
the virion, but is expressed at very high levels in infected
made virus from the infected cells. The antibody against
cells. The NS1 protein is a multifunctional protein with 
the NA does not protect against infection but does confer
a molecular weight of 26 kDa, and is an antagonist of
 protection against disease and reduces transmissibility.
innate host type I interferon-mediated antiviral response
and the antiviral effects of interferon-induced proteins,
such as dsRNA-dependent protein kinase R and 2'-5'-
Nucleoprotein. The NP was originally designated the sol-
oligoadenylate synthetase/RNase L. NS1 also acts directly to
uble, or "s," antigen and is a structural protein with a molec-
modulate other important aspects of the virus replication
       s
cycle including (i) temporal regulation of vRNA synthesis;
vRNA and interacts with PB1, PB2, and PA subunits in the
(ii) enhancement of viral mRNA translation; (i) regula-
vRNA polymerase forming the RNP, which is involved in
tion of virus particle morphogenesis; (iv) suppression of
viral genome transcription and replication. NP also forms
host immune/apoptotic responses; and (v) activation of
homooligomers to maintain the structure of RNP. It is also
phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway.
thought to be the major switching factor that determines
The NEP was thought to be a nonstructuralprotein, butis
whether genomic vRNA is transcribed into mRNA or used
present in small amounts in the virions in association with
as template to synthesize complementary RNA (cRNA) for
the RNP through interaction with the M1 protein. The NEP
genome replication.
The NP is one of the type-specific antigens used to dis-
functions to mediate the export of newly synthesized RNPs
from the nucleus.
tinguish genera of influenza virus, and can be identified
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), double
immunodiffusion, complement fixation, single radial dif-
Polymerase Proteins. The three largest vRNAsencode the
fusion, and agar gel precipitation. Antibodies to the NP
three subunits of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase: PA
do not provide passive protection. However, the NP of
 influenza A viruses is a major protein recognized by cyto-
and PB1 and PB2. The polymerase subunits PB2, PB1, and
PA together with the NP and vRNAs form the RNP com-
toxic lymphocytes (CTLs).
plex, which is responsible for viral transcription and repli-
cation. In the nucleus, influenza polymerase employs a
Matrix Protein. RNA segment 7 of influenza A viruses
"cap-snatching" mechanism to initiate vRNA replication.
encodes two proteins M1 and M2 by RNA transcript splic-
The PB2 binds cap-containing cellular mRNA in order to
ing, and both matrix proteins are nonglycosylated and
produce primers for RNA synthesis. An endonuclease from
type-specific antigens. The matrix protein (M1), the most
the PA subunit cuts the capped oligonucleotide pre-mRNA
abundant protein in virus particles, which lies inside the
as primers for viral mRNA synthesis. The polymerase then
lipid envelope, is associated with both the RNP and the
transcribes vRNA by elongation, leading to the formation
viral envelope. The Ml protein is thought to play a fun-
of viral mRNA. The PB1 subunit is thought to be in volved in 
 damental role in virus assembly budding processes. The
the catalytic activity of nucleotide elongation. During the
functions of the M1 include (i) interaction with vRNP and
viral genome replication, the vRNAs are used as templates
to synthesize cRNAs that are positive-sense antigenomic
port between the cytoplasm and the nucleus; (ii) regula
RNAs, and then the cRNAs are transcribed into vRNAs that
tion of vRNP transcription and replication; (i) interaction
with viralen velope proteins including HA, NA, and M2; (iv)
merase has no proofreading activity, resulting in a high
recruitment of viral components at the assembly site and
gene mutation rate of approximately one error per repli-
initiation of budding; and (v) recruitment of host compo-
cated genome.
nents for bud completion and virus release.
 PB1-F2, a short polypeptide expressed from an alterna-
The M2 protein acts as an ion channel and plays a role
tive -1 open reading frame of the PB1 in some influenza
in triggering the viral uncoating in the endosome. It has
A stains, is believed to be an important determinant of
been well studied because virus ion channel is an ideal
influenza virus virulence. However, the PBl segment of
antiviral drug target. Amantadine and rimantadine have
 many influenza A viruses encodes a truncated PBi-F2.
428
PART III
Viruses
Equine Influenza
mules, and also is able to cross the species barrier to
infect dogs. The first cross-species transmission of the
Disease
equine influenza H3N8 virus to racing greyhounds was
reported in the United States in 2004, resulting in respi-
Influenza is an acute respiratory disease of horses. While
ratory disease and death of infected dogs. Retrospective
 horses ofallages are affected, those between 2 and 6 mon ths
studies in the United Kingdom have shown that the equine
of age are at greatest risk. The mortality rate of equine
influenza H3N8 virus is responsible for severe outbreaks of
influenza is low, whereas the morbidity rate can approach 
respiratory disease in dogs. Equine influenza virus can be
100%. The incubation period lasts 1-5 days. Disease is man-
experimentally adapted to infect mice when introduced
ifested bya high fever, up to 106°F, which lasts about 3 days.
intranasally. All orthomyxoviruses, including equine
Other clinical signs include a frequent, strong, dry cough
influenza virus, can be propagated in the allantoic cavity of
lasting 1-3 weeks, a nasal discharge that is initially serous in
embryonated chicken eggs. Equine influenza virus can also
character but that later becomes mucoid, anorexia, depres-
be grown in chick embryo kidney, bovine kidney, rhesus
sion, photophobia, lacrimation with a mucopurulent ocu-
monkey kidney, and human embryo kidney cells.
lar discharge, and corneal opacity (sometimes with loss of
sight). Limb edema and muscle soreness can occur and,
in some severe outbreaks, acute deaths due to fulminant
Host-Virus Relationship
pneumonia have occurred. Enteritis was described in a
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Equine influenza virus
1989 outbreak in northern China due to a new equine
infects both the upper and lower respiratory tracts. Virus
influenza virus, A/equine/2/Jilin; this virus is considered
antigen has been detected in samples collected from the
to have emerged from birds into horses.
nasopharynx, trachea, bronchus, and alveoli by bron-
 Equine influenza is caused by two subtypes of influenza
choalveolar lavage. There is an early lymphopenia with
A viruses: A/equine/1 (H7N7) and A/equine/2 (H3N8),
accompanying enlargement of the lymph nodes of the
based on antigenic differences in their HA and NA. There is
head. Initially there may only be a slight serous nasal dis-
no immunological cross-reaction between these two sub-
charge, which later becomes mucoid. Fatal pneumonia can
types. A/equine/1 has one prototype, A/equine/1/Prague,
occur in foals and on occasion in older animals. Occa-
which was first isolated in 1956. Antigenic drift has
sionally there is ventral edema of the trunk and lower
occurred among A/equine/l viruses with the subsequent
limbs. A/equine/2 has been known to cause a postinfection
designation of two subgroups that do not appear to dif-
encephalopathy in foals. Catarrhal and even hemorrhagic
fer significantly in terms of their immunity after vacci-
enteritis may occur. Necrotizing bronchiolitis in which the
nation. In recent years, the H7N7 subtype has not been
bronchioles are progressively obstructed is characteristic of
isolated from horses and is believed to be extinct or to
 equine influenza. Severe necrotizing myositis with elevated
be persisting at a very low level in some regions. Strains
 serum enzyme levels has been observed with A2 in fections.
of A/equine/2 virus have been responsible for all known
Most animals recover within 2-3 weeks; those that do not
outbreaks of the disease since 1980. Significant drift has
may develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Pro-
occurred among A/equine/2 viruses from the original pro.
totype A/equine/2/Miami/63 that was first isolated from
to the level of stress that an affected horse undergoes, thus
a severe outbreak in Florida horses in 1963, resulting in
 adequate rest is important for recovery
the evolution of two distinct lineages that have been des-
Equine influenza virus is most commonly transmitted
via aerosol and can spread extremely rapidly due to the
based on the initial geographical distribution of the viruses.
frequent, violentcough ofinfected horses. Infected animals
In August 2007, an outbreak of equine influenza occurred
 continue to shed the virus for about 5 days after the fist
in Australia, which is one of previously equine influenza
 '  s a ose  s a e s
virus-free countries, and was caused by the American-like
example, the contaminated vehicles.
lineage. Emergence of variant strains has shown that con-
siderable antigenic drift occurs in the A/equine/2 viruses,
which may have implications for effcacious vaccination.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Influenza occurs in horses worldwide, and is a common
A tentative clinical diagnosis of equine influenza can be
and troublesome problem when horses are congregated at
made from the characteristic rapid spread of the disease,
shows, sales, stables, and racetracks.
especially among stabled horses, and the frequent dry
cough of affected horses. A definitive diagnosis requires
isolation of the virus, demonstration of viral antigen, or
Etiologic Agent
 demonstration of rising antibody titers between acute and
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents.
Equine
convalescent sera by complement fixation and hemagglu-
influenza virus is usually inactivated at 56*C in 30 min.
tination inhibition tests. During outbreaks it is important
Like type A influenza viruses, the virus is inactivated by
to isolate and type the causative strains of the influenza
phenol, lipid solvents, detergent, formalin, and oxidizing
virus for the success of future vaccination programs.
agents such as ozone.
The clinical samples are taken by nasal or nasopharyn-
 geal swabs or by nasal or tracheal washings. The washings
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
are usually taken by endoscopy. The virus can be isolated
Equine influenza virus normally infects horses, asses, and
in embryonated chicken eggs or cell cultures, and it can
Chapter 58 Orthomyxoviridae
429
take 5-10 days to complete. Once isolated, the virus can
however, disease may be severe when secondary infections
be sequenced to determine its phylogeny. There are three
occur. The incubation period is short, between 1 and 3
tests for detecting the presence of antibodies to equine
days, with rapid recovery beginning 4-7 days after onset.
influenza viruses in the horse blood: the hemagglutination
Disease symptoms include fever, anorexia, weakness, dys-
inhibition, the single radial hemolysis, and the competi-
pnea, sneezing, coughing, and nasal discharge. Some ani-
tive ELISA. Other assays have been developed that rely on
mals develop conjunctivitis, pulmonary edema, or bron-
 detecting vRNA (real-time polymerase chain reaction test,
chopneumonia.
qPCR), viralproteins (antigen-capture ELISA test) or various
Swine influenza was first recognized during the mas-
commercially available rapid assay kits (such as Directigen
sive human influenza pandemic in 1918, and subsequent
Flu A, Directigen Flu EZ, and A+B tests).
studies confirm that a similar H1N1 virus caused disease in
both humans and swine. Swine influenza virus can spread
from pigs to humans causing illness, and there is concern
Treatment and Control
that swine may serve as a reservoir from which influenza
Vaccination is somewhat an effective method in prevent-
-d  sa  d  a n 
ing influenza in horses. Protection, however, is dependent
demics. Although 16 HA and 9 NA subtypes have been iso-
lated from birds, only the H1N1, H3N2,and H1N2 subtypes
on the manner of vaccination and the quality of the vac-
have established in swine and are most commonly respon-
cine, with particular emphasis placed on proper selection of
vaccine strains. Available vaccines contain the inactivated
sible for disease outbreaks in pigs worldwide. Genetic and
virus of both A/equine/1 and A/equine/2 subtypes. Classi-
antigenic differences among strains of swine influenza
cally,A/equine/Prague/56(H7N7)and A/equine/Miami/63
viruses have been observed; for example, Eurasian avian-
(H3N8) have been used as the prototype A/equine/1 and
like H1, human-like H1, and classical Hl swine influenza
A/equine/2 strains, respectively. There is increasing evi-
viruses exist in pigs worldwide, and at least five clusters of
H3N2 swine influenza viruses have been found in swine
dence of antigenic diversity among contemporary equine
influenza viruses that circulate in nature, suggesting that
herds in North America.
the effectiveness ofthe conventional vaccine strainsin pro-
viding protection will become limited with time. For this
Host-Virus Relationship
reason, current vaccines include some of the newer vari-
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
ant A/equine/2 viruses. However, the level of protection
 On postmortem examina-
tion ofswine with influenza, the mucosa of the upper respi-
has varied as a result of the higher rate of antigenic drift
of H3N8 strains. The various inactivated vaccines available
ratory tract is congested and the bronchial and mediastinal
lymph nodes are enlarged and edematous. Affected lungs
are incorporated with adjuvants that have proved to sig-
display a purple-red, multifocal to coalescing consolida-
immunization requires two doses of vaccines 2-4 weeks
tion of predominantly cranioventral portions of the lung.
apart. These should be followed by a single booster when
Microscopic lesions usually consist of airways filled with
exudate, widespread alveolar atelectasis, interstitial pneu-
the horse is 1 year of age and then repeated every 6 months
until the horse is about 3 years of age, at which time the
monia, and emphysema. Peribronchial and perivascular
cellular infiltration is also seen.
booster interval may be increased to not more than 1 year.
More recently, live attenuated vaccines have become avail-
Swine influenza virus can be transmitted by droplet
and aerosol infection, and also direct contact between
able in some countries.
In horses, a relationship has been shown between titers
infected and uninfected animals. Infection with aerosols
and droplets produced by pigs coughing and sneezing is
ofthenasalantibody to the influenza virus and resistance to
infection. The presence of prechallenge serum antibody has
an important way of transmission of swine influenza. The
also been shown to shorten the duration of viral excretion
virus can be spread rapidly through a herd, resulting in
and febrile response.
infection of all the pigs in a few days. The direct contact is
the main route of transmission of swine influenza by pig
In addition to vaccination, isolation and quarantine
measures are advised during outbreaks to reduce the spread
touching noses. The virus is shed by nasal secretions, which
 of disease, and disinfection of affected premises, equip-
are laden with viruses during the acute febrile stage. If the
pigs are raised in the concentrated feeding operations, it
ment, and clothingis essential toprevent mechanical trans-
mission of the virus.
will increase the risk of transmission of swine influenza
virus. Transmission can also happen through humans and
wild animals, which can spread disease to uninfected farms
from infected farms.
Swine Influenza
Disease
Laboratory Diagnosis
Swine influenza is an important respiratory disease of pigs.
Swine influenza is suspected whenever there is an “explo-
The natural disease commonly affects large numbers of
sive" appearance of respiratory disease involving many
animals in the herd with high morbidity (approaching
pigs, particularly during the fall or winter months. A defini-
100%) and generally low mortality (<1%) rates. Swine
tive diagnosis requires either viral isolation from nasal
influenza occurs more frequently during colder months.
secretions or the lung of dead pigs or demonstration of a ris-
Disease caused by swine influenza alone is usually mild;
ing titer between acute and convalescent sera or vRNA and
430
PART III
Viruses
 antigen detection. Swine influenza virus can be cultivated
viruses. Avian influenza is further classified as HPAI and low
 in 10- to 12-day-old embryonated chicken eggs and various
pathogenic avian influenza (LPAl) on the basis of specific
tissue culture monolayer systems involving primary or sta-
molecular genetics and pathogenesis criteria. The HPAI is
ble cell cultures, such as Madin-Darby canine kidney, PK15
an extremely contagious, multiorgan systemic disease of
(porcine kidney), and Swine testicular cells.
poultry resulting in high mortality. Up to now, all HPAI
 outbreaks have been caused by the H5 or H7 subtype of
viruses in which their HA proteins possess multiple basic
Treatment and Control
amino acids at the cleavage site. Most of avian influenza
Swine that have recovered from influenza develop the neu-
viruses are the LPAl viruses, which are usually associated
tralizing antibodies, which normally can protect animals
with mild disease in poultry, and they only replicate in 
with infection of homologous viruses. Therefore, vaccina-
respiratory and intestinal tracts. The HAs of LPAl viruses
normally have a single basic amino acid at the cleavage
tion is one of efficient measures to control swine influenza.
Swine flu vaccines have been developed and commer-
site.
cially available and widely used in European countries and
 Infection of the domestic poultry with avian influenza
the United States. Commercial swine influenza-inactivated 
viruses including the LPAI or HPAl virus has caused sig-
nificant losses for the industry worldwide. Waterfowl and
vaccines contain H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes of circulating
shorebirds, the natural reservoir of influenza A viruses, nor-
viruses and are effective when the virus strains used in vac-
cines match the epidemic viruses. Prevention and control
mally do not show any clinical signs with infection of dif-
of swine influenza by vaccination has become very difficult
ferent subtypes of viruses. In wild ducks, influenza virus
 in recent years because the rapid evolution of the virus and
replicates in intestinal mucosal cells and is excreted in high
emergence of the novel virus resulted in evading immune
concentrations. The virus has been isolated from lake and
responses to the traditional vaccines. Since much of the ill-
 pond water, and surveys have demonstrated that as many
ness and death associated with swine flu involves secondary
as 60% of juvenile birds may be in fected as they congregate
infection by other pathogens, control strategies thatrely on
prior to migration. In 2005, over 6000 wild migratory birds
died from HPAI H5N1 infection in Qinghai Lake in China.
vaccination may be insufficient. The best way to deal with
swine influenza is to prevent the occurrence and spread
From then on, the HPAI H5N1 virus has been spread to
 Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, most likely through
of the disease. Therefore, facility and herd management is
 also essential to control swine influenza. Facility manage
the migratory birds.
ment includes using standard sanitary measures to control
viruses in the environment. Influenza A viruses are easily
Host-Virus Relationship
inactivated by disinfectants, heat, and formalin. Be sure to
Geographic Distribution, Reservoir, and Mode of Trans-
clean and disin fect trucks, trailers, and any equipment that
may be contaminated. Ifagroup of finishing pigs had swine
mission. Although LPAl viruses exist in wild birds and
 poultry worldwide, HPAl is a major threat to the world's
influenza, it is necessary to clean and disinfect the house
completely before the next group enters. Pigs carrying or
poultry industry. Before 2002, only few HPAI outbreaks in
exposed to influenza virus are normally responsible for the
poultry were documented. Large-scale outbreaks of HPAI
introduction of viruses to uninfected herds; therefore, new
H5N1 started in domestic poultry in several countries in 
animals should be quarantined before they are added into
Southeast Asia from 2003, including China, Indonesia,
Thailand, and Vietnam. Subsequently, the HPAI H5N1
herds. Treatment entails supportive measures including a
draft-free environment with clean, dry, dust-free bedding;
spread to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa after wild
birds were killed by the H5N1 virus at Qinghai Lake in
fresh clean water; and a good source of feed. Antibiotics
given on a herd basis may help prevent secondary bacterial
China in 2005, resulting in HPAI outbreaks worldwide.
This phenomenon caused influenza experts to believe that
infection.
the H5N1 virus would cause the next pandemic. Luckily,
the field H5N1 isolates still have not gained the ability of
Avian Influenza
human-to-human transmission.
The disease is transmitted through poultry flocks mainly
through ingestion of the virus, but it may also be trans-
Disease
mitted by inhalation and by mechanical means involv-
The first description of avian influenza, a contagious dis-
ing movement of personnel throughout flocks or between
premises. In birds, avian influenza viruses are shed in the
in northern Italy in 1878 and was termed “fowl plague"
feces as well as in saliva and nasal secretions. The feces
initially. Influenza A virus was found to be the pathogeny
contain large amounts of virus, and the fecal-water-oral
of “fowl plaque" until 1955. The term “fowl plaque" was
transmission is a major route in waterfowl, but fecal-water-
cloacal route of transmission is also possible. Furthermore,
 at the First International Symposium on Avian Influenza
avian influenza may be transmitted on such objects as
in 1981. To date, 16 different HA and 9 different NA sub-
shoes, clothing, and crates that come in contact with
types of influenza A viruses have been isolated from water-
infected birds or premises. While the possibility of verti-
fowl and shorebirds. There are 144 theoretical combina-
 cal transmission of avian influenza through infected eggs
tions (e.g., H5N1, H9N2, and H6N1) between 16 HA and
exists, no evidence demonstrates its spread by this means.
 9 NA that make up different subtypes of avian influenza
The transmission mode of HPAI H5N1 viruses is intensely
Chapter 58(
 Orthomyxoviridae
431
debated; migratory birds and poultry trades have been dis-
main limitation of antigen-capture tests is the low sensitiv-
 cussed as potential factors.
ity, which makes this assay unsuitable for monitoring and
Waterfowl have been implicated as the major natural
early detection of avian influenza. Virus isolation is a tradi-
reservoir for influenza. Infected ducks can shed the virus for
tional method for the detection and identification of avian
prolonged periods without showing clinical signs or pro-
influenza viruses. Avian influenza viruses can be cultivated
ducing a detectable antibody response. There is evidence
in chick embryos; duckling, calf, and monkey kidney cell
that influenza can persist in some birds for several months
cultures, so viruses could be isolated from samples of tra-
after infection. Various factors affect the viral life cycle,
chea, lung, air sac, sinus exudate, or cloacal swabs. The
including cell surface receptors, host body temperature,
 presence of influenza A virus in allantoic fluids or cell cul-
immune responses, thus different species-specific virus lin-
ture can be confirmed by HA assay, antigen-capture ELISA,
eage formed after adaptation in different animal species.
01 sequencing. For further subtyping of the virus, hemag-
Avian influenza viruses have been found to be capable of
glutination and neuraminidase inhibition tests should be
infecting a wide range of mammalian species in addition to
conducted by using a battery of antisera against each of the
birds, including humans, pigs, horses, dogs, cats, and ter-
16 hemagglutinin (H1-H16) and 9 neuraminidase (N1-N9)
restrial birds, exhibiting thei1 interspecies transmissibility.
subtypes.
 Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis of avian
influenza varies widely depending on strains of the virus,
Treatment and Control
 age, and species infected, concurrent infections, and hus-
 Recovered birds remain immune to subsequent challenge
bandry. It appears that the HA gene is important in
by a homologous strain for at least several months. It has
pathogenicity. The HAs of highly pathogenic H5 and H7
 been demonstrated that the anti-HA antibody is important
viruses contain multiple basic amino acids at the cleav
for protection against infection while the anti-NA anti-
age site that are recognized by ubiquitous proteases, such
body protects against disease and reduces virus shedding
but does not prevent infection. Different avian influenza
trast, the HAs of LPAl viruses lack this series of basic residues
vaccines, such as inactivated whole virus vaccine, Newcas-
at the cleavage site and thus are cleaved by proteases in a
tle disease virus vectored, or fowlpox virus vectored vaccine
limited number of organs, restricting viral replication to
expressing the HA from avian influenza viruses, have been
the respiratory system. In addition to the HA gene, other
developed and commercially available and used to con trol 
 genes such as PB2 and NS1 have also been identified to
avian influenza. Normally, they have been shown effective
affect viral pathogenicity.
in protection against infection of viruses. However, there
 Sudden deaths without any clinical signs may occur
are a lot of challenges for the control of avian influenza
in poultry infected with an HPAl virus; at necropsy, n0
obvious lesion exists in the dead avian body. Chickens
viruses and rapid evolution of influenza A virus. Therefore,
without immediate death may exhibit listless, edema, and
only relying on vaccination is not enough to control avian
cyanosis of the comb, wattles, and legs. At necropsy, lesions
influenza. Careful husbandry and strict biosecurity is nec-
include foci of necrosis of various sites including the
essary for the control and prevention of avian influenza.
skin, comb, wattles, spleen, liver, lung, kidney, intestine,
Careful husbandry to prevent the introduction of the virus
and pancreas. There may be fibrinous exudates in the air
into the flock is important. New birds should not be intro-
sacs, oviduct, pericardial sac, or peritoneum. Other lesions
duced into astarted flock, and careful precautions should be
include petechiation of the heart muscle, abdominal fat,
taken to prevent either direct or indirect contact with wild,
and the mucosa of the proventriculus, nonsuppurative
migratory, or exotic birds. Since turkeys have been found
encephalitis, and serofibrinous pericarditis. Studies showed
also to be susceptible to a swine influenza virus, it is a good
that chickens infected by the LPAl virus had histologic
 management practice not to have pigs on the same farm as
lesions limited to the respiratory system or lacked histologic
turkeys. Eggs for hatching should come from flocks demon-
lesions. The other poultry species, such as ducks, geese,
strated to be free of the virus. The virus has been demon-
ratites, and pigeons, is less vulnerable to avian influenza;
strated to persist for 105 days in liquid manure following
however, infection with HPAI viruses may cause nervous
depopulation. Strict measures should be employed to elim-
symptoms including ataxia, torticollis, and seizures.
inate movement of personnel and equipment, potentially
contaminated by manure, between flocks and premises.
Laboratory Diagnosis
During an outbreak, isolation of a flock along with orderly
marketing of the flock should be considered. Treatment
Avian influenza viruses can be identified by reverse tran-
of infected flocks with broad-spectrum antibiotics is useful
scription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays, anti-
in controlling secondary bacterial infections, and proper 
gen detection, and virus isolation. Influenza A subtype-
specific RT-PCR or real-time RT-PCR tests have been devel-
 oped and utilized widely; these kinds of assays are usually
used for the primary and rapid detection of avian influenza
Zoonotic Significance of Animal Influenzas
with high sensitivity. However, these assays need to be
targeted at genes that are highly conserved among differ-
A growing body of evidence suggests that pandemic
ent subtypes to avoid false negative. Antigen-capture ELISA
strains of human influenza arise as a result of reassort-
tests have been used for rapid viral detection. However, the
ment between different (human and animal or animal and
432
PART III
Viruses
animal) strains ofinfluenza A virus. For example, both 1957
the next pandemic. Furthermore, other subtypes of avian
H2N2 Asian flu and 1968 H3N2 Hong Kong flu viruses are
influenza viruses, such as H9N2 and H7N7, have also been
reassortants between human and avian influenza viruses,
found to infect humans directly. Fortunately, all of these
and 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus is generated by reas-
avian influenza viruses including H5N1 and H9N2 do not
sortment between North American and Eurasian swine
have the ability of human-to-human transmission. Obvi-
 influenza viruses. Waterfowl appear to be of particular sig-
ously, avian influenza is an important zoonotic disease for 
 nificance in the origin of new human isolates. Ducks appear
humans.
to act as a “melting pot" where various strains of influenza
 Swine are susceptible to infection with human, avian,
can come together and undergo genetic reassortment,
 and swine influenza viruses, suggesting that the novel virus
resulting in the generation of new strains of influenza.
might be generated by reassortment in this host to cause
Although little is known whether the past pandemic
epidemic and pandemic due to no immunity against this
viruses are produced in pigs, swine have been considered
virus in humans. Especially, the H5N1 and H9N2 avian
as the “mixing vessels" of “avian-like" and “human-like"
 influenza viruses have been isolated from pigs in South-
influenza viruses. The supportive evidences include that
east Asian countries. Southeast Asia has been considered as
pigs have receptors for both avian and human influenza
"influenza hotbeds" because of the proximity of human
viruses; and that triple-reassortant swine influenza viruses
habitations to the farms, and in close association with
carrying the gene from swine, avian, and human influenza
 swine, poultry, and humans in family farms. It has been
viruses have been circulating in swine herds in North Amer-
implicated as an ideal situation for establishing new anti-
ica for more than 12 years and sporadically transmitted to
 genic strains and introducing these viruses to the human
 and infected humans. Since the internal and HA genes are
population. The fact emphasizes importance of surveil-
critical for host range, and the HA and NA are important
 lance for animal and human influenza viruses in this area
to host immunity, reassortment events in an intermediate
in order to prevent next pandemic. However, the H1N1
host, such as swine or quail, can result in the formation of
virus caused the 2009 pandemic in the twenty-first century,
new virus strains. They contain the same or similar internal
which first occurred in Mexico. Lessons we learnt from the
 genes but possess very different HA and NA proteins and
 2009 pandemic are that the pandemic virus could also be
this HA is able to bind the mammalian receptors. The novel
generated in other locations including the highly industri-
viruses generated in this manner might still be infective to
alized countries in North America or Western Europe with
   n s  sssod  s
the modern swine and poultry facilities except the South-
ent than those to which the human population previously
east Asia.
was exposed (and immune). The result could be a substan-
tial influenza pandemic as the new strain rapidly spreads
through a susceptible population.
Further Reading
 Normally avian influenza viruses do not cross the species
barrier to infect humans and other mammalian hosts
Wright PF and Webster RG (2001) Orthomyxoviruses, in Fields
directly. However, the accumulated evidences demonstrate
Virology, 4th edn (eds DM Knipe and PM Howley), Lippin-
that avian influenza viruses can directly infect human
cott, Philadelphia, pp. 1533-1579.
beings. The first outbreak of H5N1 avian influenza in Hong
Landolt GA, Townsend HG, and Lunn DP (2007) Equine
Kong in 1997 caused death of 6-18 infected people. Since
influenza infection, in Equine Infectious Diseases, 2nd edn
 2005 the H5N1 HPAIV has caused an outbreak in wild birds
(eds DC Sellon and MT Long), St. Louis, MO, pp. 124-133.
in Qinghai Lake in China, and the H5N1 HPAIV has been
Vincent AL, Ma W, Lager KM et al. (2008) Swine Influenza
spread to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa from south-
Viruses: A North American Perspective, in Advances in Virus
east countries. Currently, the H5N1 HPAI is endemic in
Research, (eds K Maramorosch, AJ Shatkin, and FA Murphy),
poultry in several countries, for example, Egypt and Viet-
Academic Press, Burlington, pp. 127-154.
 nam, and human infection with this virus continues to
 Swayne DE (2009) Avian Influenza, John Wiley & Sons/Wiley-
be reported. As of February 24, 2012, 586 of confirmed
Blackwell.
human cases for H5N1 HPAIV have been reported to World
Werner O and Harder T (2006) Avian influenza, in Influenza
Report, (eds BS Kamps, C Hoffmann, and W Preiser), Flying
Health Organization and 346 of them died. The H5N1
Publisher, Paris, Cagliari, Wuppertal, Sevilla, pp. 48-86.
HPAIV has been considered to be the candidate to cause
59
Bunyaviridae
D. ScoTT MCVey, BaRBaRa DrOLET,
AND WILLIAM WILSON
Introduction
lenges for taxonomic efforts. There is considerable genetic
diversity and serological cross-reactivity among viruses
The family Bunyaviridae is the largest family of viruses and
within the various genera ofthe Bunyaviridae. Geneticreas-
includes the genera Orthobunyavinus, Hantavinus, Nairovinus,
sortment may occur when cell cultures or insects are simul-
Phlebovirus, and Tospovinus. There are several hund red bun-
taneously infected with multiple, but closely related, bun-
yaviruses, and viruses of veterinary significance are classi
yaviruses. Within established geographic ranges, the bun-
fied within the genera Bunyavirus—California encephali-
yaviruses undergo genetic drift and selection, especially in
tis serogroup viruses and Akabane virus (as well as Aino
arthropod hosts. Nevertheless, it is unusual for new, sero-
and Cache Valley viruses); Phlebovirus—Rift Valley fever
logically distinct strains to emerge.
virus (RVFV); Nairovirus—Nairobi sheep disease virus; and
The bunyaviruses are generally susceptible to drying.
Hantavinus. Many of the bunyaviruses are arboviruses that
heat, acids, bleaches, detergents, and most common disin-
are transmitted by arthropods such as mosquitoes, ticks,
fectants.
and biting flies, and thus have the capacity to alternately
replicate in vertebrate animals and insects. A descrip-
Genus Orthobunyavirus—Akabane, Aino, and
tion of significant bunyavirus veterinary pathogens is in
Cache Valley Viruses
Table 59.1.
Several bunyaviruses are important zoonotic patho
gens, including hantaviruses (the cause of hantavirus pul.
Akabane virus is the cause of periodic outbreaks of fetal
malformation in ruminants, especially cattle, in Asia, Aus-
 monary syndrome and hemorrhagic fever with renal syn-
drome in people); RVFV; Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
tralia, the Middle East, and Africa. The virus is transmitted
fever virus; and Nairobi sheep disease virus.
by mosquitoes and Culicoides midges and causes distinc-
tive teratogenic defects of the musculoskeletal and nervous
General Family Properties
dams infected during pregnancy. The gestational age of
the fetus at the time of infection determines the type of
Bunyaviruses are enveloped, pleomorphic viruses that are
lesions that will be present at birth; fetuses infected prior
80-120 nm in diameter with surface projections (spikes)
to midgestation are typically born with their limbs held
emanating from the envelope surface of mature virions
in rigid flexion (arthrogryposis), with variable deviation
(Figure 59.1). The virions consist of four structural pro.
of their vertebral columns. The brains of affected fetuses
teins, including two external glycoproteins in the enve
 may lack cerebral hemispheres or these may be represented
lope, a nucleocapsid protein that encapsidates the genome,
only as fluid-filled sacs as a consequence of virus-mediated
and a transcriptase protein (L). The envelope glycoproteins
destruction of the developing cerebrum during gestation
are responsible for neutralization and hemagglutination. A
(hydranencephaly). An inactivated vaccine is used to pro-
variety of nonstructural proteins are also encoded by the
tectively immunize ruminants prior to breeding.
viral genome. The nucleic acid is helical and included in
Aino virus causes a similar disease as Akabane virus
three distinct segments—large (L), medium (M), and small
and has much the same global distribution. Cache Val-
(S)—-each comprised of single-stranded, negative-sense, 01
ley virus has been documented as the cause of outbreaks
ambisense RNA. The organization and structure of the
of arthrogryposis-hydranencephaly of sheep in the west-
genomes determine the genera of these viruses. In addi-
ern and southwestern United States. A similar virus iso-
tion, serological methods are used to provide further classi-
lated from sheep in the Netherlands, Germany, and the
fication. However, many epitopes on envelope and capsid
United Kingdom in 2011 and 2012 causes simila1 terato-
proteins are highly conserved. This creates unique chal-
genic effects in sheep. This Schmallenberg virus is thought
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
433
434
PART III
Viruses
Table 59.1.
Genera of Bunyaviridae, Diseases, Hosts, Principal Vectors, and Zoonotic Status
Arthropod
Virus
Distribution
Vector
Target Species
Disease in Animals
Zoonotic?
Bunyavirus
Akabane virus 
Australia, Asia, Africa.
Mosguitoes,
Cattle, sheep 
Abortion, congenital 
No
the Middle East
Culicoides
defects
Cache Valley virus
 The United States
Mosquitoes
Sheep, cattle
 Congenital defects 
 Rarely, fetal infection 
La Crosse virus, California
 North America
Mosquitoes
Rodents, humans
None in animals
 Yes, encephalitis 
encephalitis group
 Schmallenberg virus 
 The Netherlands.
Culicoides
Sheep, cattle
Abortion, congenital 
No
France, Germany
defects
Phlebovirus
RVFV
Africa
Mosquitoes
Sheep, cattle, wild 
Systemic disease, hepatitis.
Yes, hepatitis.
 ruminants, camels.
encephalitis, abortions 
encephalitis,
humans
hemorrhagic disease
Nairovirus
Crimean-Congo
Africa, Asia, Europe
Ticks
 Sheep, cattle, goats.
 Feww clinical signs
Yes, hemorrhagic fever.
hemorrhagic fever virus
suewny 
 hepatitis
 Nairobi sheep disease virus
 Eastern Africa 
Ticks
 Sheep, goats
 Hemorrhagic enteritis 
Mild febrile illness 
Hantavirus
Hantaan virus
China, Russia, Korea
None
 Striped field mouse 
 None documented 
 Hemorrhagic fever and
renal failure
 New World hantavirus
Western hemisphere
None
 Multiple rodent species
 None documented 
 Pulmonary syndrome
Si pue dnooias nqs aun jo snaeaunqouo ue aq 0
Genus Phlebovirus—Rift Valley Fever
likely a Shamonda/Sathuperi virus reassortant.
Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a zoonotic, mosquito-
California Encephalitis Serogroup Viruses
transmitted virus that causes epidemics of severe, fre-
California encephalitis serogroup viruses are serologically
 quently fatal systemic disease of ruminants, especially
cross-reactive, mosquito-transmitted viruses of the genus
sheep and goats. Mortality is highest in young animals,
and pregnant ruminants often abort following infection.
Bunyavinus and include La Crosse, snowshoe hare, and
RVFV causes extensive liver necrosis in affected sheep and
Jamestown Canyon viruses. These viruses occur in endemic
cycles of infection in different regions of North America
goats and widespread hemorrhages are common. Enceph-
alitis with neuronal necrosis also occurs in some affected
and, although infection occurs in a variety of mammalian
species, encephalitis is rarely documented even in humans.
animals.
 Rift Valley fever (RVF) is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa
Other members of the genus Bunyavirus have been
and periodically incurs into adjacent northern regions such
 sporadically incriminated as the cause of encephalitis in
animals-Main Drain virus in horses, for example.
as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen (Table 59.2). Climatic
conditions influence the occurrence of epidemics, partic-
ularly high rainfall that results in rapid expansion of the
FIGURE 59.1.
Representations of bunyavirus structure
populations of Aedes mosquitoes that harbor the virus.
and genomic organization including the structure of the
RVF is a zoonotic. The overall human mortality rate is
surface glycoproteins, Gc and GN.(A) The two glycoproteins
Gv and Gc are incorporated into the fipid bilayer during the
budding process. The three encapsidated genome segments
Table 59.2.
 Distribution of Recent RVF Disease in Africa
(associated with the nucieoprotein N and the poiymerase L)
and Asia (as of February 2012)
are incorporated into the virion. (B) Schematic representation
The arrow indicates the open reading frames in each segment,
 Countries with endemic
Gambia, Senegal, Mauritania, Namibia,
which are flanked by noncoding regions. (Courtesy of Mandell
RVF
 South Africa, Mozambique.
and Flick 2011.)
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Kenya, Sudan,
GN /Gc
Egypt, Madagascar, Saudi Arabia.
Yemen
Countries with some cases
Botswana, Angola, Democratic
3
 or serological evidence
 Republic of the Congo, Congo.
 of infection 
Gabon, Cameroon, Nigeria, Central 
3
African Republic, Chad, Niger.
 Burkina Faso, Mali, Guinea.
3
Tanzania, Malawi, Uganda, Ethiopia.
Somalia
(A)
(B)
Chapter 59
Bunyaviridae
435
 approximately 1%, but has been reported as high as high
as 30% in recent outbreaks.
FIGURE 59.2.
Immunohistochemical demonstration of
RVFV is widely feared because ofits virulence to humans
virus antigen associated with a focal necrotic lesion in the fiver
and multiple species of animals, as well as its capacity for
 of an RVFV-infected lamb. (Reproduced with permission from
Drolet et al. 2012.)
rapid spread by a variety of species of mosquitoes during
epidemics. Thus, rapid diagnosis is imperative, usually by
virus isolation or serology. An inactivated investigational
vaccine is available for select at-risk veterinarians and labo-
ratory staff working with RVFV-infected animals and mate-
rials.
 Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties
and Virus Structure
RVFV is a spherical, enveloped virus of 80-90 nm diameter.
The viruses have glycoprotein spikes (Gn/Gc) but do not
have a matrix protein. The genome is composed of three
RNA segments: (i) an ambisense S segment that encodes
N and NSs nonstructural proteins, (ii) a negative-sense M
segment that encodes the Gv and Gc spike proteins, and
(ii) a negative-sense L segment that encodes the transcrip-
tase. After the RVFV attaches to target cells through multi-
ple receptors by endocytosis, replication occurs in cellular
cytoplasm. The virus is uncoated and the RNA-dependent
 polymerase (transcriptase) begins initial transcription of
nonstructural proteins critical for viral replication. Sub-
sequent rounds of replication result in synthesis of the
Host Response. As the virus spreads rapidly to hepatic and
      s 
primary lymphoid tissues, liver necrosis, splenomegaly,
by budding from intracytoplasmic vesicles from the Golgi
and subserosal hemorrhages are observed (Figure59.3).
apparatus. Virus particles are then released by exocytosis
from apical or basolateral plasma membranes.
Fever, as well as local and systemic inflammation, is associ-
ated with the tissue necrosis. These tissue changes are seen
Distribution, Reservoirs, and Transmission. RVFV sur-
within 3-5 days. In the more severe cases, liver and kid-
vives in multiple enzootic regions of Africa, primarily
ney failure, hemorrhagic fever syndrome, and encephali-
    (     1
tis all may occur. Animals usually respond by producing
understood how the virus survives the interepizootic peri-
detectable IgM antibodies by day 5 and IgG antibodies by
ods, but mosquito and wild ruminant cycles are thought to
days 10-14. This immune response is associated with recov-
be important. During periods of disease emergence, which 
ery and immunity is generally long lasting.
are associated with heavy rainfall, infected mosquitoes
spread the virus to wild and domestic ruminants. From
Diagnosis. Multiple polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
this point, expansion and spread occur through multiple
assays are available to detect the presence of virus in blood
species of Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles and other species of
0r other tissues. These assays are very specific and sensi-
mosquitoes. The virus may also be contracted by direct con-
tive. Virus isolation in cell culture may also be used as a
tact with infected tissue and milk or by aerosols from these
gold standard test. However, this requires direct laboratory
sources.
exposure of technicians to a virulent, zoonotic virus. Also,
IgM-capture assays, direct antigen detection dip-sticks,
Pathogenesis. Incubation periods for this disease are rel-
and immunohistochemical assays are under development
atively short at 3-5 days.Sheep, cattle,humans, and camels
and/or are available for detecting recent RVFV infection
are frequently affected. Clinical signs include fever, loss of
01 virus antigen detection. These assays can be performed
appetite, purulent nasal discharge, and diarrhea.Almost all
using recombinant protein antigen and are therefore also
pregnant ewes will abort. Mortality may approach 100% in
be used safely to detect viral antigens in infected tissue spec-
lambs and up to 60% in adults. In cattle, the disease is usu-
imens submitted to diagnostic laboratories (Figure 59.2).
ally less severe with mortality rates under 30%; however,
abortion in pregnant animals may approach 100%. Horses,
Control.  Vaccination of susceptible livestock in endemic
camels, cats, and dogs may also be infected during epizootic
regions is a primary method of control. Both inactivated
periods, but only very young animals will develop clinically
virus and attenuated virus vaccines have been used with
significant disease. The disease is an influenza-like illness
reasonable success. Vaccines made from attenuated strains
in humans. Most cases are usually relatively mild with a less
of virus (MP-12 and Clone-13) are efficacious in cattle
than 2% mortality rate. However, up to 10% of cases may
and sheep and licensed in some countries in Africa. These
be associated with hepatitis or neurologic complications
vaccines are undergoing registration and development in
other regions. Further development of these and other
436
PART III
Viruses
is transmitted by Ixodidae (hard ticks). Although both wild
FIGURE 59.3.
Hepatitis in a lamb infected with RVFV: (A)
and domestic animals can serve as reservoirs of the virus,
gross lesions and (B) necrosis and inflammation in the fiver.
 clinical disease is typically only seen in humans and can
(Reproduced with permission from Drolet et al. 2012.)
include severe flu-like illness, jaundice, and hemorrhage.
Transmission can also occur from contact with infected
 animal blood, and person-to-person transmission is pos-
sible through contact with infected blood or other tissue
fluids.
Genus Hantavirus
There are atleast 20 members of the genus Hantavirus. These
viruses are not maintained through chronic infections of
arthropod vectors, but rather in rodents. The Old World 
hantaviruses usually cause a hemorrhagic fever and renal
syndrome disease, while the New World hantaviruses cause
pulmonary disease. One major feature associated with han-
 taviruses is that they are difficult to isolate and maintain
 in cell culture. Thus, PCR assays are critically important for
(A)
diagnosis.
The vast majority of hantavirus infections occur in
Korea, China, eastern Russia, and the Balkans. Human dis-
ease usually occurs after direct contact with rodent feces.
Viremia is transient and is suppressed by the appearance
of neutralizing antibodies. However, the virus persists in 
kidneys and lungs, where the presence of necrosis and
 inflammation causes disease. Diagnosis is usually made by
demonstration of the virus in tissue by immunologic or
 molecular (PCR) methods. Inactivated vaccines have been
used in Korea and China, but the most effective means of
control is through rodent control and personal hygiene.
References
B
Drolet BS, Weingartl HM, JiangJ et al. (2012) Development and
evaluation of one-step rRT-PCR and immunohistochemical
methods for detection of Rift Valley fever virus in biosafety
level 2 diagnostic laboratories. / Virol Methods, 179 (2), 373-
vaccines may provide the ability to distinguish vaccinated
382.
from infected animals.
Mandell RB and Flick R (201l) Virus-like particle-based vac-
Controlof vectors in endemiczones, as well as restricting
cines for Rift Valley fever virus. / Bioterr Biodef, S1, 008.
animal movement and subsequent human exposure, is also
doi:10.4172/2157-2526.S1-008.
moderately effective methods of control.
Genus Nairovirus-Nairobi Sheep Disease
Further Reading
Nairobisheep disease (NsD) and related viruses cause severe
Bird BH, Ksiazek TG, Nichol ST, and Maclachlan NJ.(2009) Rift
disease of sheep and goats in Africa and Asia. The virus is
Valley fever virus. / Am Vet Med Assoc, 234(7), 883-893.
transmitted by the brown ear tick. NSD is characterized by
Boshra H, Lorenzo G, Busquets N, and Brun A (2011) Rift valley
high fever,intestinal hemorrhage, and death of susceptible
fever: recent insights into pathogenesis and prevention. /
 ruminants. Pregnant animals typically abort. NSD is also an
Virol, 85 (13), 6098-6105. Epub March 30, 2011.
occasional zoonotic pathogen causing disease in veterinar-
Goris N, Vandenbussche F, and De Clercq K.(2008) Potential of 
ians and laboratory staff exposed to infected animals or
antiviral therapy and prophylaxis for controlling RNA viral
materials.
infections of livestock. Antivir Res, 78 (1), 170-178. Epub
Other members of the genus Nairovirus that are ofpoten.
November 5, 2007.
tial veterinary significance include Crimean-Congo hem-
Gould EA and Higgs S.(2009) Impact of climate change and
orrhagic fever, a zoonotic disease that occurs throughout
other factors on emerging arbovirus diseases. Trans R Soc
Africa, eastern Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. The virus
Trop Med Hyg, 103 (2), 109-121. Epub September 16, 2008.
Chapter 59
Bunyaviridae
437
 Haller O and Weber F (2009) The interferon response circuit in
Metras R, Collins LM, White RG et al. (2011) Rift Valley fever
antiviral host defense. Verh K Acad Geneeskd Belg, 71 (1-2),
 epidemiology, surveillance, and control: what have models 
73-86.
contributed. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis, 11(6), 761-771. Epub
Hollidge BS, Gonzalez-Scarano F, and Soldan SS (2010) Arbovi-
May 6,2011.
ral encephalitides: transmission, emergence, and pathogen-
WalterCT and Barr JN (2011) Recent advances in the molecular
esis. / Neuroimmune Pharmacol, 5 (3), 428-442. Epub July 22,
and cellular biology of bunyaviruses. / Gen Virol, 92 (11), 
2010.
2467-2484. Epub August 24, 2011.
 LaBeaud AD, Kazura JW, and King CH (2010) Advances in Rift
Weaver SC and Reisen WK (2010) Present and future arbovi-
Valley fever research: insights for disease prevention Curr
ral threats. Antivir Res, 85 (2), 328-345. Epub October 24,
Opin Infect Dis, 23 (5), 403-408.
2009.
Linthicum K, Anyamba A, Britch SC et al. (2007) A rift val-
Wilson WC, Weingartl H, Drolet BS et al. (2013) Diagnostic
ley fever risk surveillance system for Africa using remotely
 approaches for rift valley fever. In vaccine and diagnostics
sensed data: potential for use on other continents. Vet ftal,
for transboundary and zoonotic diseases. Devel Biol (Basel),
43,663-674.
135,73-78.
60
Paramyxoviridae
Filoviridae, and
Bornaviridae
STEFAN NIEWIESK AND MICHAEL OGLESBEE
The order Mononegavirales includes viruses within the fam-
ilies Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, Bornaviridae, and Rhab-
mately 13-18 nm in diameter (Figure 60.1). At least three
doviridae (Chapter 61). These viruses are ancestrally related
proteins are associated with the nucleocapsid, including an
as reflected by their common characteristics such as a
RNA-binding protein (N or NP), a phosphoprotein (P) that
single-stranded genome of negative-sense RNA, similar
enables transcription, and the viral polymerase (L = large
replication strategy and gene order, and virion morphol.
protein). The nucleocapsid is enclosed by a lipoprotein
ogy that includes an en velope.
envelope derived from the host cell plasma membrane, and
contains two or three transmembrane viral glycoproteins
that form spikes (8-12 nm) projecting from the surface. The
spikes are formed by the receptor-binding attachment pro-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents
    
(HN) in the Paramyxovirinae; G protein in the Pneumoviri-
Mononegavirales can be inactivated by standard physical
nae) and the fusion protein (F) that is essential for virus
infectivity and for cell-to-cell spread. Another protein, the
measures and chemical agents effective against enveloped
viruses. These measures include treatment with heat, ultra-
matrix (M) protein, lines the inner surface of the enve-
violet light, acidic or alkaline solutions, or chemical agents
lope. Various nonstructural viral proteins are also formed
such as lipid solvents, lysol, phenol, quaternary ammo.
in infected cells that usually regulate virus replication.
nium compounds, and butylated hydroxytoluene. Disin-
Paramyxoviridae are monotypic; for example, antibodies
fection is most effective after thorough cleaning of mate-
against one virus strain can neutralize all strains of the same
rials. The rate of viral inactivation varies with the strain
species.
of virus, quantity of virus initially exposed, time of expo-
sure, and presence of organic matter in the environment.
Vaccination
 Infectious virus can survive for long periods in organic and
frozen matter.
All vaccines developed against infection with paramyx-
oviruses are based on live tissue culture attenuated viruses
that do not cause disease but induce a protective immune
response. In same cases, inactivated virus vaccines are being
Paramyxoviridae
used which in general are not as efficient as the live virus
vaccine. For canine distemper (CD) virus, an additional vac-
The Paramyxoviridae family is divided into two subfamilies:
cine has been developed based on a canarypox virus vector.
the Paramyxovirinae and the Pneumovirinae that are further
subdivided into five (Avulavirus, Henipahvinus, Morbilivirus,
Respirovirus, and Rubulavirus) and two genera (Metap-
Paramyxovirinae
neumovirus and Pneumovirus), respectively (Table 60.1).
Viruses in this family cause a number of serious respiratory
Avulaviruses
and/or systemic diseases of humans, animals, and birds.
  s    s
Newcastle Disease
imately 150 nm or more in diameter), and contain a
Disease.
Newcastle disease (ND) is a highly contagious
genome of linear, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA. The
disease of chickens that is characterized by respiratory
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
438
Chapter 60
Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae
439
Table 60.1.
 Order: Mononegavirales
Host-Virus Relationship
Genus
Geographic Distribution and Transmission.
Family
Species
Newcastle dis-
ease virus (NDV) infects chickens, guinea fowls, turkeys,
Bornaviridae
Bornavirus
Borna disease virus
and a large number of species of domestic and wild birds.
Filoviridae
Ebolavirus
Zaire ebolavirus
Sea birds are less susceptible but may actas carriers. Humans
Marburgvirus
Lake Victoria marburgvirus
accidentally infected with NDV when exposed to infected
Paramyxoviridae
 birds or live viral vaccines may develop a self-limiting con-
 Paramyxovirinae
Avulavirus
 Newcastle disease virus
junctivitis.
Henipavirus
Hendra virus
Nipah virus
ND occurs worldwide and domestic birds are the major
Morbillivirus
 Canine distemper virus 
reservoi1 for NDV. Although NDV has been isolated from a
 Peste-des-petits-ruminants 
large number of wild birds such as sparrows, crows, ducks,
virus
 n n p    r  ' 
 Phocine distemper virus 
mitting this disease. The epizootic outbreak of the exotic
 Rinderpest virus 
velogenic strain of NDV in North America (California) in 
Respirovirus
 Bovine parainfluenza virus 3
1971 has been attributed to the introduction of caged birds.
 Human parainfluenza virus 3
 Aerosol respiratory infection is the most common route
Rubutavirus
Mumps virus
for transmission of NDV. Infected birds begin to shed virus 
Parainfluenza virus 5 (Canine)
 2-3 days after exposure from their respiratory tracts and
Pneumovirinae
Metapneumovirus
 Avian metapneumovirus 
 Human metapneumovirus 
continue to shed virus for several weeks. The virus is also
Pneumovirus
Bovine respiratory syncytial
readily spread by fomites.
virus
 Human respiratory syncytial
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Initial replication of NDV
virus
 occurs in the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract fol-
 Murine pneumonia virus
lowing aerosol infection. Viremia then disseminates the
virus throughout the body, and widespread multiplica-
tion of virus in cells of parenchymal organs leads to a
secondary viremia, which in some instances leads to the
distress, diarrhea, and neurological signs. The severity of
infection of the cells of the CNs. Disease takes several dif-
the disease is dependent upon the age and immune sta-
ferent forms in chickens, depending on the virulence of
tus of the birds, and on the virulence of the strain of ND
the strain involved. Differences in the virulence of individ-
virus that is responsible for the in fection. The most virulent
ual strains of NDV are due to differences in the proteases
strains are designated as velogenic and produce mortality
used to cleave the fusion protein. Less virulent strains use
rates in affected birds as high as 90% or more. The disease
typsin-like proteases that are present in the respiratory and
 caused by mesogenic strains is less severe and the mortal-
gastrointestinal tract, only, whereas more virulent strains
ity rate is often less than 25%. The lentogenic strains are
use the more ubiquitously expressed furin-like proteases.
relatively avirulent and are often used as vaccines.
The very virulent (velogenic) strains cause very rapidly fatal
FIGURE 60.1.
CDV infection of dog fung.(A) The initial infection of airway epithelium is noncytopathic and results in extensive
viral shedding into the airway lumens. Numerous eosinophilic (pink) cytoplasmic incfusions are present within the infected cells. (B)
aunww! panpui-sna pue Auntu! jesonw au ot janbas e s! eiuownaudououaig jeaieg Aepuosas (o) anejins jesonw papnuap e u!
of these airways are filled with neutrophis and alveolar macrophages. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained tissue sections.
440
PART III
Viruses
infections involving the visceral organs or the CNs. Meso-
Singapore, Bangladesh, and India since 1998. The virus
genic strains of NDV cause respiratory and, occasionally,
reservoirs are bats of (mostly) the Pteropus species that
 neurologic disease in infected chickens with low mortality,
are subclinically infected and excrete virus through urine.
 while lentogenicstrains produce a mild or often inapparent
When pigs become in fected (presumably through infected
disease.
feed) the illness presents with pneumonia and encephalitis.
 Lesions in ND vary greatly. Inapparent infections cause
Close contact with infected pigs and food-borne (contam-
few, if any, lesions whereas hemorrhagic necrosis that
inated palm sap) transmission have been shown to lead to
affects the intestinal tract, respiratory tract, and visceral
human illnesses with the same clinical symptoms observed
Organs is characteristic of more severe forms. In chickens
 in in fected pigs. The case fatality rate in humans is high due
with CNS involvement, necrosis of the glial cells, neu-
to encephalitis. In humans, ribavirin treatment has been
ronal degeneration, perivascular cuffing, and hypertrophy
demonstrated to reduce fatalities.
of endothelial cells are often present.
Morbilliviruses
Host Response to Infection. Chickens infected with NDV
produce antibodies 6-10 days after infection. Antibodies to
Although the various morbilliviruses are all closely related
the envelope glycoprotein, HN, exhibit viral neutralizing
as evidenced by extensive serological cross-reactivity
and hemagglutination inhibition activities and are respon-
between them, they are distinguished on the basis of their
sible for host immunity to the disease.
individual host range, genome sequence, and antigenic
differences. These viruses all have a hemagglutin (H) sur-
Laboratory Diagnosis. As the clinical signs and patho-
face protein, but only rinderpest virus has a neuraminidase
logic lesions of ND are variable and nonspecific, definitive
(HN). The receptor for wild-type morbilliviruses is the
diagnosis of the disease must depend on laboratory meth-
CD150 molecule of the respective species (Figure 60.1).
ods to identify NDV. This now is best accomplished using
PCR, and sequence and /or nucleic acid hybridization anal-
ysis to distinguish whether the virus is a velogenic field
Canine Distemper Virus
strain or a live vaccine strain. Alternatively, NDV can be iso-
Disease. CD is an important viral disease of dogs (Fig-
lated by inoculating embryonated eggs orcellcultures with
ures 60.2, 60.3, and 60.4). Acute CD is characterized by
respiratory exudate or tissue suspensions (spleen, lung, 0r
any combination of diphasic fever, ocular and nasal dis-
brain), and NDV antigen in affected tissues or cell cultures
charges, anorexia, depression, vomiting, diarrhea, dehy.
can be identified by immunofluorescence or immunohis-
dration, leukopenia, pneumonia, and neurologic signs.
The severity of clinical signs exhibited by individual ani-
mals can vary markedly. The disease has an incubation
tion inhibition or neutralization assay, or enzyme-linked
period of 3-5 days. The mortality rate depends largely
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
on the immune status of the infected dog and is high-
est among puppies. Animals that survive the acute disease
Control and Prevention. Sanitary management to pre-
vent exposure of susceptible chickens to NDV is an impor-
footpads (hard pad disease) and neurologic disease that is
tant aspect of control against the disease. Since there is only
characterized by any combination of convulsions, tremor,
one serotype of NDV, vaccination with either inactivated
myoclonus, locomotor disturbances, paralysis, and blind-
or live virus vaccines is also used to prevent ND. The major-
ness. The onset of neurologic signs frequently is delayed
ity of live vaccines incorporate lentogenic strains of NDV
until several weeks after the systemic signs of acute CD are
administered in drinking water or applied as aerosols.
manifest. Old dog encephalitis is a rare form of chronic
neurologic disease caused by defective CD virus.
Henipaviruses
Host-Virus Relationship
Hendra Virus.
 Hendra virus disease is unique to Australia,
where it was first recognized in 1994 as the cause of an out-
Host Range, Geographic Distribution and Transmission. CD
break of severe disease with respiratory and neurological
viruses infect a wide range of animals. In addition to
symptoms that killed a number of horses and their trainer.
dogs, other members of the Canidae (e.g., fox, coyote,
The virus was named after the suburb of Brisbaine in which
wolf, and wild dogs), Ailuridae (red panda), Hyaenidae
the disease was first described. Affected horses develop
(hyena), Mustelidae (e.g., ferret, mink, skunk, and badger),
 a d  d  
Tayassuidae (javelinas (collared peccaries)), Ursidae (bears),
well as neurological symptoms that rapidly are fatal. The
Viverridae (civet, mongoose), and Procyonidae (e.g, rac-
virus is harbored asymptomatically by several species of
coon and panda) are susceptible. Some members of the
fruit bat (flying foxes). Although fruit bats are the reservoir
Felidae (lion, tiger, and leopard) also are susceptible, and
of Hendra virus, the virus is contagious between horses
devastating outbreaks of distemper have occurred among
and to humans by direct contact with nasal secretions o1
lions in Africa.
fomites that contain the virus.
CD occurs worldwide and remains endemic in many
areas despite the widespread use of vaccines that are
Nipah Virus. Nipah viruses are closely related to Hendra
highly effective in preventing the disease. Infected dogs
virus. It has been found in several outbreaks in Malaysia,
secrete virus in their nasal and ocular secretions, and CDV
Chapter 60
 Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae
441
FIGURE 60.2.
CDV cytoplasmic inclusions are theresult
FIGURE 60.3.
CDV forms both intranuclear and
of accumulations of virus core particles (nucieocapsids) during
cytoplasmic incfusion bodies, a feature unique to
replication. (A) Nuclecapsids are formed by a helical
morbilliviruses. (A) Eosinophilic (pink) intranuclear and
arrangement of N protein (inset, blue) that packages the virus'
intracytoplasmic inclusions are present in an astrocyte of an
single-stranded genomic RNA (inset, red). Negative stain
infected raccoon brain (H&E stain). The intranuclear inclusion
transmission electron microscopy ilfustrates the length of these
is contrasted with the basophilic (blue) nucleolus. Cytoplasmic
particles, and the superimposition of N proteins on the sides of
inclusions are aggregates of viral nucleocapsid, often referred
the nucleocapsids creates a herringbone pattern that is typical
to as a viral "factories." (B) intranuclear inclusions are a
of paramyxoviruses. (B) Transmission electron microscopy of an
unique ceff structure known as compiex nuclear bodies, shown
infected cell cytoplasm shows that nucleocapsids tend to form
here by transmission electron microscopy (osmium tetroxide
stain). The nuclear bodies contain coarse filaments surrounded
incfusions.Osmium tetroxide-stained section.
by a fine fibrillar capsule (top) and are readily distinguished
from the compact reticulate nucleolus (bottom). The structures
are induced by intranuclear trafficking of the viral N protein,
contain abundant amounts of N protein, and are though to
influence cellular RNA metabolism in a manner that supports
viral replication.
A)
B
is present in the urine of experimentally infected dogs
6-22 days after infection. Feces of infected dogs may also
contain CDV. Infection usually is transmitted by aerosol
 01 by direct contact, leading to respiratory in fection of sus-
 ceptible animals.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. CDV is pan tropic and has an
especially strong tropism for epithelium and lymphoid tis-
sues. The lungs are also central to the pathogenesis of CDV
infection. Initial replication ofCDV occurs in macrophages
in the bronchial lymph nodes and tonsils immediately
following respiratory infection. The virus then is spread
B
to other lymphoid tissues (lymph nodes, spleen, thymus,
and bone marrow) where further replication occurs prior to
442
PART III
Viruses
monia, reflecting viral replication in airway epithelium.
FIGURE 60.4.
BPIV3 infection of a seronegative calf,
Secondary bacterial bronchopneumonias are common in
7 days postchallenge. (A) immunoperoxidase staining of vira!
dogs as a consequence of virus-induced mucosal dam-
antigen in fung (brown) shows extensive infection of
 age and immune suppression. Characteristic eosinophilic
epithelium in an airway (center). Discrete aggregates of viral
intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies are
antigen in the cytoplasm are the basis for eosinophilic (pink)
often present within respiratory epithelium and in the
inclusion bodies that are readily identified by routine
fo saiebabbe suasaidan pue buuiis uisoa pue uxoieway
epithelium lining the stomach, urinary bladder, and renal
virus core particles. Viral envelop proteins mediate fusion of
pelvis. Extensive necrosis of lymphocytes is characteristic
of acute CD, leading to lymphoid depletion that is one basis 
for immune suppression. Immune suppression may assist
observed (black arrow). (B) Virus-infection precipitates a
the virus in gaining access to the nervous system.
secondary bacterial bronchopneumonia, and aiso collapse of
Dogs that survive acute CD may subsequently develop
 neurologic signs that are associated with virus-induced
cells (atelectasis), illustrated by the brown discoloration of
demyelination. The lesions within the central nervous sys-
lobules in the cranial and ventral aspects of the lung lobe.
tem of these dogs begin as focal areas of demyelination
(llustrations courtesy of John Elfis, University of
Saskatchewan.)
that are accompanied by lymphocytic inflammation and
accumulation of macrophages. Lesions occur within the
cerebellum, brain stem, and cerebrum, and CDV inclusion
bodies may occur in astrocytes and neurons. Although CDV
predominately replicates in astrocytes and microglial cells
within the brains of infected dogs, virus-mediated injury to
oligodendrocytes is proposed to be responsible for much of
the initial virus-induced demyelination.
Old dog encephalitis is a rare disease of mature dogs that
results from very long-term persistent CDV infection of the
central nervous system, leading to dementia. The disease
is characterized by severe lymphocytic encephalitis with
neuronal degeneration and, often, the presence of CDV
inclusion bodies. Demyelination is not a typical feature of
this disease.
Host Response to Infection. CD virus infection induces
（A)
long-lasting immunity in dogs that recover from natural
 infection. Protective neutralizing antibodies first appear in
serum of infected dogs 8-9 days after infection and persist
for years thereafter. Cell-mediated immune responses are
also generated by dogs infected with CDV. Virus-induced
immune suppression contributes to the pathogenesis of
 CDV infection by predisposing affected dogs to secondary
bacterial infections and by facilitating spread of the virus
to the CNS.
Laboratory Diagnosis.
Since the clinical signs of CD are
（B）
variable and sometimes nonspecific, definitive diagnosis
requires identification of CDV by virus isolation or the
 staining of CDV antigen in the cells or tissues of affected
dogs using CDV-specific antibodies and immunohisto-
viremia that disseminates CDV to virtually all organs of the
 chemical or immunocytochemical staining. Routine histo.
body, including the central nervous system (CNS) and eyes.
logical evaluation of postmortem cases allows a presump-
The generalized dissemination of CDV results in infection
tive diagnosis based upon distribution of lesions and the
of the epithelium of the alimentary, respiratory, and uro-
occurrence of cytopathic effects that include formation
 genital tracts; the skin and mucous membranes; endocrine
of intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies and
glands and the CNs, the latter occurring approximately 8 or
formation of virus-induced syncytia. Alternatively, sero-
 9 days after infection and only in dogs that fail to develop
 go uonsuon aq aup aq un sisou p
 sufficient titers of neutralizing antibodies to CDV by that
IgG titers in paired sera by ELISA.
time.
The lesions of CD occur in the organs in which the
Control and Prevention.
 Treatment for CD is supportive,
virus replicates, and the respiratory and alimentary tracts
such as the use of antibiotics to control secondary bacterial
are especially affected, these being the organs primarily
infections and electrolyte solutions to restore fluids and
involved in viral shedding and transmission. The lungs of
electrolytes. Vaccination against CD is the best means of
dogs with acute CD have diffuse bronchointerstitial pneu-
preventing the disease. Both modified live and inactivated
Chapter 60
Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae
443
CD viral vaccines are available, and vaccination has greatly
tis). The disease has an incubation period of 3-8 days and
reduced the incidence of this disease in dogs. Maternally
the virus is extremely contagious, so morbidity rates are
derived antibody to CDV can interfere with the success-
very high. The mortality rate also can be high (up to 100%)
ful vaccination of puppies against CDv. Puppies should be
in cattle that have no immunity, but varies depending on
vaccinated for CD at an age when maternally derived anti-
the virulence of the infecting virus strain.
body has been metabolized. Although both inactivated and
modified live virus CDV vaccines safely have been used
Host-Virus Relationship
to immunize a variety of wild animal species, including
foxes, ferrets, mink, bush dogs, and maned wolves, there
Geographic Distribution and Transmission.
Rinderpest his-
have been reports of vaccine-induced CD in a variety of
torically occurred throughout Europe, Africa, and Asia but
species, including mink, kinkajous, and lesser pandas after
never became established in either the Americas or in Aus-
immunization with modifed live CDV vaccine. For this
tralasia. Until recently, the virus was enzootic in certain
reason, killed vaccines should always be used in species for
regions of Asia, the Middle East, and Africa.
which vaccine safety has not been established. Similarly,
Rinderpest virus is present in high titers in the nasal dis-
instances of vaccine-induced CD have been described in
charges, saliva, ocular secretions, and excretions ofin fected
dogs. In order to provide a safer vaccine, a canarypox virus
animals, and transmission requires direct contact of sus-
vector vaccine has been developed that expresses both the
 ceptible animals with secretions and excretions of infected
hemagglutinin and the fusion protein of CDV.
animals.
Morbilliviruses of Aquatic Mammals (Phocine Distemper
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Rinderpest virus infection
and Cetacean Morbilliviruses)
normally occurs through the upper respiratory tract,
although cattle can be experimentally infected by any par-
A number of epidemics in pinnipeds and cetaceans have
been determined to be due to morbillivirus infections.
enteral route of inoculation. The virus first replicates in the
Phocine distemper is an infectious disease of seals that
resembles CD. The disease first was recognized in the late
lymphocyte-associated viremia then disseminates the virus
1980s when massive die-offs of seals occurred in the Baltic
throughout the body. The virus replicates in lymphoid tis-
and North seas. The lesions and clinical signs in affected
sues (spleen, bone marrow, lymph nodes), and the mucosa
seals were remarkablysimilar to those of CD, and thedisease
of the alimentary and upper respiratory tracts. Nasal and
 of seals subsequently was shown to be caused by phocine
ocular secretions contain high titers of virus at this time.
distemper virus (PDV), a Morbillivirus that is closely related
Fever (up to 107 *F) and leukopenia occur prior to the
appearance of oral ulcers and onset of diarrhea that may
to CD virus. A similar disease caused by dolphin distem-
contain blood (dysentery). Titers of virus in the tissues and
per virus caused extensive mortality among dolphins on
secretions of in fected cattle decline after the appearance of
the Atlantic coast of North America in the early 1990s, and
neutralizing antibodies in serum. The convalescent phase
porpoise morbillivirus was found to be responsible for the
infection of porpoises. The dolphin, porpoise and phocine
begins with the healing of mouth lesions, and complete
distemper viruses are closely related. In addition, infection
recovery from the disease may take 4-5 weeks.
with CD virus was detected in seals leading to the specula-
Lesions of rinderpest occur in the tissues in which the
virus replicates. Oral ulcers are characteristic of severe cases
tion that morbilliviruses infecting aquatic mammals might
be derived from CDV. Like CD in dogs, infection with mor-
of rinderpest in cattle, and these begin as areas of necrosis 
billiviruses in aquatic mammals leads to pneumonia and
with the basal cell layer of the epithelium. Necrosis also
occurs in the mucosa of the abomasum and small intes-
 sometimes manifestation in the CNS.
tine. The presence of syncytial cells within the affected
epithelium is highly characteristic of rinderpest, but not
Rinderpest
other ulcerative diseases like malignant catarrhal fever
Rinderpest virus has been declared eradicated on May 25,
01 bovine viral diarrhea. There also is extensive necro-
2011. After human poxvirus (declared eradicated in 1979),
sis of gut-associated lymphoid tissues as a result of virus-
mediated destruction of lymphocytes, and similar lym-
Rinderpest virus is the second virus to have ever been erad-
icated worldwide and the first virus of veterinary impor-
tance.
spleen, bone marrow).
Disease.j
 Rinderpest (also known as cattle plague) was a
Eradication.
The concerted efforts of a number of inter-
devastating pandemic viral disease of domestic cattle, buf-
national organizations led to the eradication of Rinder-
falo, and some wild ruminant species. Rinderpest virus
 pest that over the last few years resided in pockets in east
infects a number of species of the order Artiodactyla, which
Africa. The following aspects of the eradication program
includes cattle, water buffalo, pigs, warthogs, and many
were seen as essential for eradication: a short infectious
period of infected animals, no persistent infection and no
and goat is now thought to be due to peste de petits rumi-
viral reservoirs, transmission only by close contacts, a safe
nants virus. Rinderpestis characterized by fever, lymphope.
and reliable vaccine protecting against all viral strains, easy
nia, nasal and lacrimal discharges, diarrhea, and erosions
and reliable diagnosis, and an economic incentive to com-
and ulcers throughout the oral cavity (ulcerative stomati-
ply with the program.
444
PART III
Viruses
Peste des Petits Ruminants
lance. As another preventive measure, vaccination with
a live-modified virus should be performed. Vaccination
Disease.
 Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) viruses infect
induces immunity for at least three years and has been used
goats and sheep. Clinical symptoms are similar to Rinder-
to control outbreaks.
pest in cattle although both viruses are clearly distinct. Cat-
tle and pigs can be infected and develop antibodies but
no clinical symptoms. The infection leads to high fever
Pneumovirinae
 in goats and sheep after an incubation period of 3-9 days
with subsequent pneumonia and diarrhea. The severity of
Viruses in the subfamily Pneumovirinae differ antigenet-
symptoms depends on species, breed, age and the presence
ically and in their replication strategy from those in the
of secondary in fectious agents.
subfamily Paramyxovirinae. Most viruses utilize a G pro-
tein as receptor-binding protein and lack a hemagglutinin
Host-Virus Relationship.
and neuraminidase.
Geographic Distribution and Transmission.
The PPR virus
is found in both Africa and Asia and is one of the
Respiroviruses
fastest spreading infections of veterinary importance. It has
recently been found in China and African countries bor-
Bovine Parainfluenza Virus Type 3
dering Europe. Its economic impact is particularly impor-
Disease.
. Clinical disease due to infection with bovine
    n s  p n n
parainfluenza virus (BPIV) type 3 is most common in calves
small ruminants for their livelihoods. The virus induces an
with poor passive transfer of or decayed maternal antibod-
acute infection so that there is not persistently in fected ani-
ies (Figure 60.2). It is usually a mild disease with fever, nasal
 mal reservoir. It is passed through direct contact between
discharge, and dry cough. Disease can be more severe in
animals or contact with respiratory secretions or feces of
seronegative calves with high fever for up to 7 days and clin -
infected animals.
 ical signs ranging from tracheitis to pneumonia. BPIV type
3 infection is often part of the bovine respiratory disease
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Pest des petits ruminants
virus infection occurs through the upper respiratory tract.
The virus frst replicates in the tonsils and regional
Host-Virus Relationship.
lymph nodes, and a predominantly lymphocyte-associated
viremia then disseminates the virus throughout the body.
Geographic Distribution and Transmission. BPIV3 was first
With the onset of fever, respiratory symptoms such as con-
isolated in the United States but has been found to be
gestion of the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose and
 endemic in cattle populations worldwide. It is transmitted
mouth, and ocular and nasal discharge are seen. Many
 through the respiratory route via nasal mucus and ocular
animals show labored breathing, and a productive cough.
secretions. The severity of disease is promoted by poor ven-
 Necrotic lesions begin to appear as white/gray spots that
tilation, close contact due to overcrowding and stressed
 spread throughout the mucosa of the mouth, eventually
feedlots. Although antibodies reactive with BPIV3 have
turn yellow and become encrusted with exudate. Animals
been found in a number of species (mostly ungulate), the
drink a lot but stop eating. Some animals develop diar-
importance of cross-species transmission is not resolved.
rhea 1-3 days late1 due to infection of the gastrointestinal
mucosa. In fatal cases, animals will die 8-12 days after the
Pathogenesis and Pathology. After gaining access to the
onset of disease. During in fection and recovery, animals are 
respiratory system, BPIV3 infects epithelia cells. This leads
immunosuppressed that is indicated by low white blood
to loss of ciliary function of epithelia cells. In addition,
cell counts and susceptibility to secondary infections. At
the virus infects pulmonary macrophages leading to a
postmortem examination, congestion of lung tissue is seen
weakened immune response. The inhibitory effect on the
with marked infiltration of macrophages and proliferation
clearance function of the mucociliary apparatus, and on
of pneumocytes. In contrast to RPV infection, syncytia are
the local and systemic immune responses contribute to
 seen in lung epithelium.
the establishment of secondary bacterial infections that
are commonly associated with the bovine respiratory dis-
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 PPR virus infection can often not
ease complex. The histological hallma1k of BPIV3 infection
easily be distinguished from other infectious diseases of
are bronchitis/bronchiolitis and alveolitis. During acute
goats and sheep due to similarities of clinical symptoms.
infection, typical eosinophilic inclusion bodies are seen 
The laboratory diagnosis of acute infection is based on
in epithelium. During the repair phase beginning 14 days
the presence of virus as detected by PCR or capture ELISA,
 after infection, hyperplasia of airways and alveolar epithe-
 an overcome infection is diagnosed based on antibody by
lium are seen.
ELISA.
Laboratory Diagnosis. During the acute infection virus
Control and Prevention.
 The best prevention of PPR virus
can be cultivated from nasal secretions or be detected by
infection is the separation of in fected and not infected ani-
PCR. To detect antibodies, the hemagglutination inhi-
mals. In consequence, the movement of livestock from
bition assay, the neutralization and (less often) ELISA
endemic areas should be banned. If that is not feasible,
movement has to be controlled by quarantine and surveil-
presence of maternal antibodies or antibodies due to the
Chapter 60
 Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae
445
endemic nature of the virus. To demonstrate acute infec-
hemagglutin protein is designated as G, as compared to H
tion, an increase in antibody has to be observed in paired
 01 HN in members of the subfamily Paramyxovirinae.
serum samples from acutely infected and convalescent ani-
mals.
Bovine Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Control and Prevention.(
 Good husbandry practices that
 Disease. The bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) is
avoid overcrowding, stress and poor ventilation help to
a major cause of respiratory disease in cattle (Figure 60.5). It
control the transmission and severity of disease. Inac-
causes an acute pneumonia in calves, which show such clin-
tivated and modifed live Pl-3 viral vaccines are avail-
ical signs such as coughing, fever, anorexia, nasal discharge,
able, usually combined with other viral or bacterial
and respiratory distress. Infection of cattle with BRsV leads
vaccines.
to major economic losses.
In addition, BRSV is a major contributor to the
 bovine respiratory disease complex that is characterized by
Rubulaviruses
coinfections with BPIV, Mannheimia hemolytica and/or
Parainfluenza Virus type 5 (Canine Parainfluenza Virus)
Canine parainfluenza virus type 5 has been implicated as
FIGURE 60.5.
BRSV infection of a seronegative calf,
a cause of infectious tracheobronchitis (kennel cough) in
8 days postchallenge. (A) immunoperoxidase staining of viral
dogs, along with canine adenovirus and Bordetella bron-
antigen in fung (brown) shows extensive infection of airway
chiseptica. The disease is characterized by sudden onset,
epithelium. Expression of viral membrane proteins causes
mild fever, slight to copious nasal discharge, and a harsh,
extensive fusion of epithelial cells to form large syncytia (white
nonproductive cough. Canine parainfluenza virus is anti-
uuasaid Aeiie ue u! peaidsapian are eouas pue aie
genically related to the Simian virus-5 virus of monkeys,
the lower portion of this field (biack arrow). The more linear
and it appears that the same or very similar viruses infect a
pattern of immunoperoxidase staining reflects viral infection
wide variety of animal species. Live modified viral vaccines
of alveolar epithelium. Cytoplasmic viral inclusion bodies are
are available, usually combined with other canine viral vac-
not conspicuous.(B) Virus-infection precipitates a secondary
cines such as CD and canine hepatitis or with a Bordetella
bacterial bronchopneumonia, and aiso collapse of lobules
bronchiseptica vaccine.
(atelectasis), ilfustrated by the brown discoloration of lobules
in the cranial and ventral aspects of the lung lobe. Airway
Pneumovirinae
obstruction feads to rupture of air spaces during labored
breathing, giving rise to emphysematous change (large
Metapneumoviruses
John Ellis, University of Saskatchewan.)
Metapneumoviruses  are (
distinguished from
 pneu-
moviruses on the basis of their gene order and virion
protein composition. Avian and human metapneu-
 moviruses are assigned to this group.
Four subtypes of avian metapneumovirus exist (A-D)
with differences in host species and geographic distribu-
tion. Subtype C is found in the United States and causes
rhinotracheitis in turkeys. Subtypes A, B, and D are found in 
other parts of the world. In addition to turkeys, they infect
the respiratory tract and the oviduct of chicken resulting
in rhinotracheitis and the loss of egg production. There
are also case reports of ducks and pheasants infected with
avian metapneumovirus. To prevent infection, killed and
live-attenuated vaccines exist.
Pneumoviruses
Viruses within the genus Pneumovirus include respiratory
syncytial viruses that infect humans, cattle, and mice, as
well as those that infect sheep and goats, which are closely
related to bovine respiratory syncytial virus. The viruses
within this genus are distinguished on the basis of their
host range and lack of cross-neutralization. The members
of this group lack neuraminidase and the nucleocapsid has
a diameter of 13-14 nm, which is smaller than the nucle-
ocapsid of the paramyxoviruses (18 nm). All members of
the genus Pneumovirus are antigenically related but are
(B)
antigenically distinct from other paramyxoviruses. Their
446
PART III
Viruses
Mycoplasma species. The resulting clinical syndrome has
ized as "hemorrhagic fevers" because of the spectacular dis-
been labeled bovine respiratory disease complex or "ship-
eases they cause in affected humans. These viruses infect
ping fever." The disease is characterized by high fever, con-
primates and can be adapted to laboratory animals. Out-
junctivitis, respiratory distress, mucopurulent rhinitis, and
 breaks in human populations are rare and geographically
pneumonia, and occurs after cattle are congregated on feed-
restricted to certain parts of Africa. It is hypothesized that
lots. The disease is widespread in the United States and
contact between humans and a rodent virus reservoir is the
remains one of the major causes of economic losses in the
cause of these outbreaks.
cattle industry.
Host-Virus Relationship
Bornaviridae
Geographic Distribution and Transmission. BRsV was first
Viruses within this family are characterized by enveloped
identified in Europe in 1970 but has since been show to be
 spherical virions of 80-140 nm in diameter, and a genome 
present worldwide in cattle population causing respiratory
of single-stranded, negative-sense RNA. In contrast to other
diseases. The virus is transmitted through nasal secretions
viruses of the Mononegavirales family, bornaviridae use
and close contact.
the nucleus of host cells for transcription and replication.
Avian Bornavirus (ABV) and Borna disease virus (BDV) are
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Afterinfection with the virus
members of this family.
through the respiratory route, epithelial cells of the res-
piratory tract are infected. Animals develop fever, cough-
ing, no or low nasal discharge and tachypnea between 3
Avian Bornavirus
 and 9 days after infection. By gross pathology, lungs are
An ABV is the causative agent of proventricular dilata-
red, depressed and firm after uncomplicated BRsV infec-
tion. Histologically, bronchial and bronchiolar epithe-
tion disease (PDD) in psittacine birds. The disease is also
lial necrosis and multinucleated syncytial cells are found.
tion syndrome, neuropathic gastric dilatation of psittaci-
Sometimes intraepithelial inclusion bodies are detected in
forms or myenteric ganglioneuritis. Birds affected by PDD
airways, although their formation is less conspicuous com-
frequently show weight loss with reduced appetite and var-
pared to that associated with bovine parainfluenza virus
ious degrees of gastrointestinal dysfunction. In a number
type 3. Younger animals are more severely infected than
of cases, central nervous disease symptoms like seizures,
older ones, and the complication by secondary infections
 ataxia, and motor deficits can be observed. ABv infection
(see BRD complex) leads to more severe disease and eco-
 in psittacine birds has been documented worldwide. In
nomic losses.
addition, case reports of ABV infection in other species of
bird suggest that the host spectrum of this virus is larger
Laboratory Diagnosis. The detection of BRSV in nasal
than currently defined, and that persistent infection with-
secretion by immunofluorescence and quantitative RT-
out clinical symptoms occurs often.
PCR assays are being used to diagnose BRSV. Paired serum
samples (with a 10-14 days interval) can be used to deter-
mine infection through the increase in antibody titers by
Borna Disease Virus
neutralization assay.
Originally, Borna disease was described as a neurologi-
cal disease of horses in Germany, but since then, BDV
Control and Prevention. Given the high prevalence of
infections have been discovered worldwide. The precise
BRSV worldwide, control of the virus has to be attempted
significance of BDV as a veterinary pathogen remains to
by vaccination. Experimental vaccination using formalin-
be adequately defined. Natural infections with BDV are
 inactivated virus did not result in protection against infec-
most frequently seen in sheep and horses. The natural
tion but lead to an enhanced disease after infection with
reservoir for BDV is suspected to be insectivores. BDV is
wild-type virus. This is very similar to findings with
 neutrotropic and persistently infects neurons in the brain
that may or may not result in result in clinical symp-
ple. Currently, inactivated and modified live vaccines are
toms. Experimentally cattle, rabbits, goats, dogs, cats, and
being used, usually as combination with other viral and
rodents can be infected with BDV. Whether BDV is the
bacterial vaccines.
 cause of neuropsychiatric disorders in humans is fiercely
debated.
Filoviridae
Diagnosis, Control and Prevention. BDV infection can
Viruses within this family are characterized by en veloped,
be determined by the presence of antibodies. ABV infec-
pleomorphic (filamentous) virions and a genome of single-
 tion is currently diagnosed by PCR. No vaccine is available
stranded molecule of negative-sense RNA. There are two
to prevent infection with either virus. To prevent infec-
 major groups of filoviruses: Ebola and related viruses, and
tion, infected animals have to be kept separated from not
Marburg and related viruses. Viruses within these groups
infected animals. Bornaviruses are susceptible to common
cause severe, fatal diseases of humans that are character-
disinfectants against en veloped viruses.
Chapter 60
Paramyxoviridae, Filoviridae, and Bornaviridae
447
Further Reading
Lo MK, PA (20o8) The emergence of Nipah virus, a highly
 pathogenic paramyxovirus. / Clin Virol, 43, 396-400.
 Martella V, Elia G, and Buonavoglia C (2008) Canine distem-
Brodersen BW (2010) Bovine respiratory syncytial virus. Vet
Clin North Am Food Anim Pract, 26, 323-333.
per virus. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 38, 787-
Chatziandreou N, Stock N, Young D et al. (2004) Relationships 
797.
Morens DM, Holmes EC, Davis AS, and Taubenberger JK
and host range of human, canine, simian and porcine iso-
(2011) Global rinderpest eradication: lessons learned and
lates of simian virus 5 (parainfluenza virus 5). /Gen Virol85,
3007-3016.
why humans should celebrate too. / Infect Dis, 204, 502-
Di Guardo G, Marruchella G, Agrimi U, and Kennedy S
505.
(200s) Morbillivirus infections in aquatic mammals: a brief
 Raghav R, Taylor M, DeLay J et al. (2010) Avian Bornavirus is
Overview. / Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med, 52, 88-93.
present inmany tissues of psittacine birds with histopatho-
 Dortmans JC, Koch G, Rottier PJ, and Peeters BP (2011) Viru-
logic evidence of proventricular dilatation disease. / Vet
lence of newcastle disease virus: what is known so far? Vet
Diagn Invest, 22, 495-508.
Res,42,122.
Staeheli P, Rinder M, and Kaspers B (2010) Avian Bornavirus
Associated with Fatal Disease in Psittacine Birds./ Virology,
 Ellis JA (2010) Bovine parainfluenza-3 virus. Vet Clin North Am
Food Anim Pract, 26, 575-593.
84 (13), 6269-6275.
Rhabdoviridae
DEBORAHJ. BRIGGS
Rhabdoviruses are bullet-shaped, nonsegmented, single-
as in humans, the first signs of illness may be nonspecific
 stranded RNA that infect a wide variety of hosts including
and even overlooked. Early signs of rabies may include one
vertebrates, invertebrates, and plants. Viruses in the fam-
01 more of the following: lethargy, fever, vomiting, and
ily Rhabdoviridae are grouped into six assigned and one
 anorexia. These signs progress rapidly to cerebral dysfunc-
unassigned genera (Table 61.1). Many of these viruses are
tion, ataxia, weakness, paralysis, seizures, difficulty breath-
of public health and economic importance causing severe
ing and/or swallowing, hypersalivation, abnormal behav.
infection and even death in both mammals and plants.
ior, aggression, and/or self-mutilation. In dogs, rabies has
For example, rabies virus is almost invariably fatal in both
a relatively short course and they may exhibit one or more
humans and animals once clinical signs are evident. Vesic.
of the following signs: drooping jaw and/or tongue, abnor-
ular stomatitis virus causes a disease similar to foot-and-
mal barking, vomiting, biting and eating unusual objects,
mouth disease (FMD), bovine ephemeral fever virus causes
aggression, biting without provocation, restlessness, 01
a disabling disease in cattle and water buffalo, and spring
stiff gate. In cats, rabies also causes dramatic changes in
viremia of carp virus causes a severe hemorrhagic disease of
behavior. Cats can become very aggressive and exhibit one
 cyprinids. Infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus causes a
o1 more of the following conditions: poor body condition,
serious disease in salmonid fish. Plant rhabdoviruses can
ruffled and dirty coat, high fever, restlessness, and pupil
cause plant diseases that are economically devastating to
food crops including maize mosaic, rice transitory yel-
 sive behavior. Unexpected aggressive or abnormal behav-
lowing, and potato yellow dwarf disease. The best-studied
ior should be considered suspicious in cats that may have
viruses in the Rhabdoviridae family are rabies virus and
vesicular stomatitis virus. Most rhabdoviruses contain five
 horses, clinical signs of rabies include behavior changes
structural genes coding for the nucleoprotein (N), phos-
ranging from aggression, ataxia, paresis, hyperesthesia,
phoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), glycoprotein (G), and
fever, colic, lameness, and recumbency. The disease gener-
large subunit protein (L). Some low-level serological cross-
ally results in death in 4-5 days once clinical signs are evi-
reactivity has been reported to occur between specific
dent. In cattle, initial clinical signs may include depression,
rhabdoviruses.
lack of eating, and seeking isolation. As the disease pro-
gresses, cattle exhibit weakness in legs, straining, and bel.
Rabies
lowing and may be unable toswallow, resultingin excessive
salivation.
Disease
Etiologic Agent
Rabies is a progressive encephalitic disease that almost
always results in the death of the victim although rare cases
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The rabies
of prolonged life and the survivalof one human with out the
virion, approximately 180 nm in length by 80 nm in width,
administration of vaccine has been reported using the Mil.
contains a single-stranded negative-sense genome RNA
waukee protocol. In humans, early symptoms of rabies are
that is encapsidated with the nucleocapsid (N) protein,
indeterminate, flu-like and may include general malaise,
the RNA polymerase (L), and polymerase cofactor phos-
headache, fever, and weakness or discomfort. These signs
phoprotein (P). This ribonucleoprotein (RNP) core, along
progress into more specific symptoms and may include
with the matrix protein (M), is condensed into the typ-
insomnia, anxiety, confusion, partial paralysis, hypersali
ical bullet-shaped particle characteristic of rhabdoviruses.
vation, hydrophobia, hallucination, and painful spasms of
Glycoprotein (G) spikes are anchored into the RNP-M struc-
the pharyngeal muscles. Pain or itching at the site of the
ture and protrude through the virus envelope. Antibodies
initial exposure wound (paresthesia) may also occur. With-
produced against the G protein after vaccination with cell
out intensive medical support, death usually occurs within
culture rabies vaccines induce the production of protective
a few days of the onset of these symptoms. In animals,
antibodies and function to neutralize the virus.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
448
Chapter 61
 Rhabdoviridae
449
Table 61.1.
Genus and Species of Family Rhabdoviridae
For instance, when rabies is detected in animals in a previ-
ously rabies-free zone, the virus can often be traced back to
Genus
Species (Type Species in Bold)
the point of origination.
Cytorhabdovirus
Bartey yellow striate mosaic virus
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents.
Rabies virus
 Broccoti necrotic yellows virus
is readily destroyed through exposure to soap and other
Festuca leaf streak virus
disinfectants, desiccants, and sunlight. The virus is inacti-
Lettuce necrotic yellows virus
Northern cereal mosaic virus
pn snoa Aq 1o u og 1oy . 9g on Sueau Aq paia
Sonchus virus
chemicals and disin fectants including a 0.1% bleach solu-
Strawberry crinkle virus
tion and a 1% formalin solution. Saliva from a rabid animal
Wheat American striate mosaic virus
is no longer considered infective in the en vironment or on
Adelaide River virus
intact skin after it has dried. In the case of human expo-
Ephemerovirus
 sure, all wounds should be washed vigorously with soap
Berimah virus
 Bovine ephemeral fever virus
and water for at least 15 min in order to inactivate the
Lyssavirus
Aravan virus
virus.
Australian bat lyssavirus
Duvenhage virus
Infectivity to Other Species or Culture Systems. Rabies
 European bat lyssavirus 1
virus can theoretically infect all mammals, but each rabies
European bat lyssavirus 2
virus variant tends to circulate in specific species of animals
rkut virus
in each region with occasional spillover into animal species
Khujand virus
that coinhabit the same region. Over 98% of all human
Lagos bat virus
rabies deaths occur in Africa and Asia and are caused by
Mokola virus
Rabies virus
exposure to an infected dog. In the Americas, most human
Western Caucasian bat virus
a sa sr n c oa  p a s
although there are additional rabies virus variants circulat-
Novirhabdovirus
 Hirame rhabdovirus
 Infectious hematopoietic necrotic virus
ing in other species of wildlife including raccoons, skunks,
Snakehead virus
and foxes. Rabies virus can be propagated in many differ-
Vral hemorrhagic septicemia virus
ent mammalian and plant cell lines for research, diagnos-
tic testing, and vaccine production purposes. Virus strains
Nucleorhabdovirus
Datura yellow vein virus
specifically used for diagnostic testing and vaccine produc-
Eggplant mottled dwarf virus
tion have been stabilized or "fixed" to have a predictable
Maize fine streak virus
-oi sens snia aans, o pasoddo se ponad uoenu
Maize mosaic virus
lated directly from infected animals that may have varying
Potato yellow dwarf virus
Rice yellow stunt virus
incubation periods. There are several celllines that are com-
Sonchus yellow net virus
Sowthistle yellow vein virus
toma cells (CCL-131) and baby hamster kidney cells (BHK-
Taro vein chlorosis virus
21). Several celllines have been used to produce human and
Unassigned
Flanders virus
animal vaccines. The most commonly used types include
Ngaingan virus
 embryonated egg cells, Vero cells, human diploid cells, and
 Sigma virus
baby hamster kidney cells.
Tupaia virus
 Wongabe virus
Host-Virus Relationship
Vesiculovirus
Carajas virus
Chandipura virus
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. Rabies is an
Cocat virus
underreported disease that is present on every conti-
Isfahan virus
nent except Antarctica. Human rabies, especially paral-
Maraba virus
lytic rabies, may represent as much as 30% of total clini-
Piry virus
cal rabies presentations and is often misdiagnosed as other
Spring viremia of carp virus
Vesicutar stomattis Alagoas virus
encephalitic diseases such as malaria or Guillain-Barre
Vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus
syndrome, thus masking the true global burden of the
Vesicular stomatitis New Jersey virus
disease. Although all mammals are susceptible to rabies,
the primary reservoirs of the disease belong to the orders
Carnivora and Chiroptera (dogs, foxes, jackals, coyotes, rac-
coon dogs, skunks, raccoons, mongoose, and bats). Main-
The N protein is the most highly conserved of all of the
taining rabies in a susceptible animal population is depen-
viral proteins but actually has a high degree of diversity
pe ndod a un sn aas uodn 
within short segments. As a result, molecular analyses of
ecological characteristics of the host as well as suscepti-
the N protein have provided information on identifying
bility to infection and contact rate. Transmission of rabies
rabies virus genotypes that can be used as a molecular epi-
from one mammal to another generally occurs through the
demiological surveillance tool to explain the evolution of
contamination of tissue with virus-laden saliva inflicted
rabies viruses and to track movement of rabies over time.
during a bite wound. Transmission can also occur when
450
PART III
Viruses
virus-infected saliva or other body fluids enter a mucous
the daytime. Pressing or "head butting" may be observed.
membrane. Rabies virus cannot penetrate intact skin and
 Clinical abies in humans may include paresthesias, and a
therefore, even if infected saliva or body tissues come in
similar clinical sign may be observed in animals as they bite
contact with intact skin, it should not be considered an
o1 scratch at the wound site where virus entered. Infected
exposure. Aerosol transmission has been reported but it is
animals may also attack inanimate objects for no reason.
extremely rare.
The clinical representation of rabies is often categorized
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Rabies virus infection
likely that clinical signs such as these are likely to be a con-
begins with an exposure after which the virus attaches to
tinuum of expressive behavior as the disease progresses to
the cell surface and penetration occurs. A specific rabies
coma and death. Recovery from rabies is extremely rare
virus receptor site has not been reported, but various lipids,
although at least one human has been confirmed to have
gangliosides, carbohydrates, and proteins have been impli-
survived rabies with out postexposure prophylaxis reported
cated. After en tering the peripheral nerves, rabies virus trav-
after administration of the Milwaukee protocol.
to the central nervous system (CNS). Evidence indicates
Laboratory Diagnosis
that the virus can travel at a rate of 50-100 mm/day. The
virus crosses the synapse of one dendriticprocess to another
 Bites or other exposures from suspected rabid animals and
eventually reaching the CNS and continually moving
the disposition and testing of the animals in question
toward the brain. Once the virus reaches the brain, it moves
should in volve contacting and working with the appropri-
centrifugally back through the peripheral nerves to various
ate public health departments. The decision whether ani-
body organs including the salivary glands. In spite of the
mals that are exposed to humans or other animals should
severe clinical neurological signs, the neuropathological
be isolated and observed, or humanely euthanized and sub-
findings in rabies-infected humans and animals are rela-
mitted for testing, is ultimately the decision of profession-
tively mild, suggesting that neuronal dysfunction occurs
als in the health department. If an animal is submitted for
in rabies without detectable morphologic changes. There
testing, it should be humanely euthanized and the head
may be some congestion of leptomeningeal and parenchy-
removed without damage. Tissue should be kept refriger-
mal blood vessels, perivascular cuffing, microglial activa-
ated to retard decomposition and provide reliable results
tion with formation of “Babes' nodules,” and neuronopha-
because autolyzed samples can reduce the sensitivity and
gia, but subarachnoid or parenchymal hemorrhage is not a
specificity of the test. Multiple regions of the brain are
reported feature of rabies. Negri bodies, identified as neu-
examined to ensure that if the virus is present, it will be
ronal intracytoplasmic bodies, may be found in brain tissue
detected. The fluorescent antibody test (FAT) is the “gold
from animals or humans infected with “street" rabies virus
standard" assay, which confirms the presence of rabies
strains as opposed to "fixed" viruses. However, Negri bod-
virus in animal tissues. The FAT detects the virus in tis-
ies are infrequently seen with “fixed" virus strains. Negri
sues through the binding of rabies virus-specific antibodies
bodies are identified as dense, well-defined, oval or round,
labeled with a fluorescent dye to rabies virus. Confirmatory
eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions that are typically 2-
testing on negative tissue samples often includes the use
10 μm in diameter.
of the mouse inoculation test or the rabies tissue culture
infection test. The use of the direct rapid immunohisto-
Host Response to Infection.
Rabies virus synchronously
chemical test (dRIT) has been extensively evaluated in the
infects the limbic system causing organically induced fury
United States and abroad and is currently being expanded
while the virus is being secreted into the saliva for transmis-
th rough out the world. The dRIT is less expensive touse than 
sion to the next victim through an inflicted bite. Human
the FAT and can be used in field conditions. Increased usage
rabies patients experience episodes of arousal or hyperex-
of the dRIT in resource-poor countries is a valuable tool to
citability, aggression, confusion, and hallucinations inter-
help increase surveillance and better evaluate the global
rupted by periods of lucidity when they are able to under-
 epidemiology of rabies. Real-time polymerase chain reac-
stand their condition. After an exposure occurs, the highly
tion (RT-PCR) assays can assist in the detection and iden-
neurotropic virus initially replicates at the entry site, enters
tification of specific lyssaviruses and are also useful tools
and moves along the peripheral nervous system to the
 to elucidate the global epidemiology of specific virus vari-
spinal cord eventually reaching the brain. Once rabies virus
ants, but presently these tests require expensive equipment
reaches the brain, the virus continues to replicate and is
and well-equipped laboratories and are not cost-effective
disseminated centrifugally through the nerves to the body
 for routine diagnoses of animal tissues. Implementation of
organs including the salivary glands where it is emitted in to
rapid laboratory diagnoses by a reliable laboratory after a
the saliva and is passed on to the next victim.
bite incident from a suspected rabid animal can aid in sig-
Hydrophobia, or “fear of water," is present only in
 nificantly reducing the cost of post-exposure prophylaxis
humans. As with humans, initial signs of rabies in animals
(PEP) for humans. PEP, consisting of washing the wound
are nonspecific and may include anorexia, lethargy, fever,
inflicted from a rabid animal and administration of rabies
dysphagia, vomiting, stranguria, straining to defecate, and
immunoglobulin and an injection series of rabies vaccine,
diarrhea. As the disease progresses, the behavior of animals
is costly but must be administered to prevent rabies after
changes and normally friendly animals may become more
an exposure has occurred. If the suspected animal is con-
aggressive and vice versa. Wildlife may lose their fear of
firmed to be uninfected with rabies, PEP can be avoided o1
humans and normally nocturnal animals may be active in
halted if it has already been initiated.
Chapter 61
Rhabdoviridae
451
Treatment and Control
FIGURE 61.1.
This negatively stained transmission
Rabies is virtually 100% fatal, and there are no treatment
electron micrograph revealed the presence of numerous
protocols for animals once clinical signs are evident. How-
negative-sense, single-stranded RNA VSV virions. (Courtesy of
ever, rabies can be prevented in domestic animals through 
Dr Fred Murphy, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
effective vaccination. Animal rabies vaccines that are cur-
located in public health image fibrary domain,
rently available include inactivated and recombinant vac-
http:/phil.cdc.gov, accessed January 30, 2013; photo ID # 5611.)
cines. Inactivated rabies vaccines that are produced accord-
ing to the OlE requirements protect against all strains of
rabies genotype 1 isolated to date and are administered
parenterally initially at 3 months of age, and then accord-
ing to the recommendations of the manufacturer. Local
and state ordinances may also regulate the timing of rabies
vaccination. Modified live vaccines are not licensed for
-n pue paonpoid aq Ae anq 'saes paun au u asn
lized in other countries. Recombinant vaccines are built
on the backbone of another vector virus, for example,
-    's o  1
coprotein of the rabies virus into the carier virus.
The
recombinant rabies vaccine produced from the canarypox
vector is currently licensed for cats in the United States
and is administered parenterally. The concept of devel-
oping oral rabies vaccines (ORV) to vaccinate wildlife to
overcome the need of catching and vaccinating individ-
ual animals involved years of research. ORV was initially
utilized in 1969 as a strategy in Switzerland to successfully
eliminate rabies in red foxes and was a modifed live vac-
cine (SAD Berne strain) imbedded in chicken heads and
distributed throughout fox habitat. Newer, and safer, ORVs
are manufactured as recombinant vaccines that have incor-
porated the rabies glycoprotein into the vaccinia virus
vector. These ORVs have successfully eliminated rabies
in foxes in Western Europe and in coyotes in the south-
ern United States and continue to be an important com-
ponent of the national strategy in both Europe and the
United States.
 In humans, Vs causes flu-like symptoms and can cause
severe conjunctivitis when VsV is directly deposited into
the mucous membrane of the eye.
Vesicular Stomatitis
Disease
Etiologic Agent
 Infection of vesicular stomatitis virus (Vsv) causes an acute
Physical,
Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. VSV
febrile disease of horses, cattle, and swine that is currently
closely resembles rabies virus in morphology, genome,
limited to the Americas. In cattle, vesicular stomatitis (VS)
 closely resembles FMD causing vesicles in the mucosal lin-
and protein structure (Figure 61.1). There are two distinct
immunological classes of VsV currently identified includ-
ing of the mouth and tongue. Vesicles can also be found
ing New Jersey (NJ) and Indiana (IND). In addition, the IND
on the teats, sink of the coronary band, and in the inter-
serogroup is divided into three subtypes including IND-1
digital spaces of the hoof. In swine, the disease is similar
(classical IND), IND-2 (Cocal virus), and IND-3 (Alagoas
to vesicular exanthema (VEs) or swine vesicular disease
virus) (ICTV2012).
(SVD). Neither VES nor SVD occurs in horses. Therefore,
horses can serve as a sentinel species for Vs when there is an 
outbreak of disease. Confirmation of Vs is critical in order
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. VSV can
to prevent the potential spread of one of the three exotic
be inactivated using an effective disinfectant including
diseases mentioned earlier and to limit spread within the
formaldehyde, ether and other organic solvents, chlo-
Americas. Vs is a self-limiting disease with infected ani-
rine dioxide, 1% formalin, 1% sodium hypochlorite,
mals generally recovering without residual disease impact.
70% ethanol, 2% glutaraldehyde, 2% sodium carbonate,
During outbreaks, milk production can be reduced in dairy
4% sodium hydroxide, and 2% iodophor disinfectants.
cattle and the painful lesions can cause infected animals to
Although the virus can survive for long periods at low tem-
reduce feed uptake or stop eating altogether thus impacting
peratures, it is readily inactivated by direct sunlight or heat-
production.
ing to 58 *C for 30 min. VSV can remain stable between pH
452
PART III
Viruses
4 and 10 and is resistant to lye (2-3% NaOH will not fully
outbreaks of Vs are common in the warmer months and
inactivate Vsv).
 are identified along rivers and in valleys.
Infectivity to Other Species or Culture Systems. VSV can
Host Response to Infection. It has been reported that
infect domestic animals including cattle, swine, horses,
humoral-specific antibodies do not always prevent infec-
donkeys, and mules. Natural infection in sheep and goats
tion. Morbidity rate is 5-90% with deaths being rare in
 is rarely reported, but both species can be infected experi-
 cattle and horses, but higher mortality rates are reported in
mentally. Wild animal hosts include white-tailed deer and
 some pigs infected with the NJ strain. Sick animals recover
 many species of small mammals. Humans can be infected
 in approximately 2 weeks, and the most common compli-
from handling infected livestock. In the laboratory, exper-
cations during infection are mastitis and loss of produc-
imental infection has been confirmed in mice, rats, guinea
tion in dairy cattle. Disease incidence varies according to
pigs, deer, raccoons, bobcats, and monkeys. VsV is used as
the serotype and species involved. Usually 10-15% of the
 a laboratory model for studies in viral morphology, repli-
adult animals in infected herds present with clinical signs.
cation, and genetics.
Cattle and horses less than 1 year of age are rarely reported
affected and mortality is close to 0% in horses and cattle.
Host-Virus Relationship
Laboratory Diagnosis
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. Although
VSV was historically described in France in 1915 and in
If VS infection is suspected, the proper authorities should
South Africa in the late 1800s, its current distribution
be immediately notified. Sample collection should also
appears to be limited to the Americas. The NJ and sub-
comply with the required samples for FMD, VES, and SVD
type IND-1 are endemic causing more than 80% of all
in order to facilitate ruleout of these diseases. To prevent
infections in regions of southern Mexico, Central Amer-
 spreading of VsV, all samples should be collected and sent
ica, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru. Sporadic out-
under secured conditions to an authorized laboratory. Due
breaks ofNJ and IND-1 VSV have been reported in northern 
to the painful nature of the vesicles and animal welfare
Mexico and the western United States. IND-2 is currently
concerns, sedation of the animal is highly recommended.
only reported in horses in Argentina and Brazil. IND-3 sub-
Samples to be submitted should include vesicular fluid, the
type has also been identified sporadically in Brazil mostly
epithelium covering of unruptured vesicles or the epithe-
in horses but to a lesser degree in cattle. Virus transmis-
lial flaps of ruptured vesicles from mouth, feet, and other
sion is not fully understood, but VsV has been isolated
sites of vesicle eruption. If epithelial tissue is not avail-
from sandflies, mosquitoes, and other insects indicating
able, samples of esophageal/pharyngeal liquid should be
that they may be involved in virus transmission although
collected. Samples from pigs should include throat swabs.
disease transmission through direct contact has also been
All samples should be sent under refrigeration or frozen
confirmed.
if the transport takes longer than 2 days. Paired serum
samples taken 2 weeks apart may also be collected. In the
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis of VS is
United States, paired serum samples are only required for
not entirely clear, but clinically, it is indistinguishable from
the index case. Once an outbreak has been confirmed, a sin-
FMD, SVD, and VES. Other diseases to be considered in the
gle serum sample is all that is required to confirm infection.
 differential diagnosis include infectious bovine rhinotra-
Assays to detect antigens include virus isolation, enzyme-
cheitis, bovine viral diarrhea, malignant catarrhal fever,
linked immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA), complement fixa-
bovine popular stomatitis, rinderpest (eradicated in 2011),
tion, and PCR. The indirect ELISA is the diagnostic method 
bluetongue, epizootic hemorrhagic disease, foot rot, and
of choice to identify viral serotypes. Serological tests to
chemical or thermal burns.
confirm antibodies to VsV for international trade concerns
The incubation period for Vs is 2-8 days after exposure
include liquid-phase blocking ELISA or competitive ELISA,
with the first sign usually presenting as fever and exces-
virus neutralization, and complement fixation for detec-
sive salivation followed by blisters and eruption of vesicles,
tion of IgM.
ulcerous erosions, and crusting of muzzle and lips. The dis-
ease is limited to the epithelial tissues of the mouth, nos-
Treatment and Control
trils, teats, and feet. The size of the vesicles is highly variable
and can be as small as the size of a pea or large enough to
There is no treatment for Vs, but antibiotics may prevent
cover the entire surface area of the tongue. In cattle, vesi-
secondary bacterial in fection in abraded tissues. Suspicion
cles are usually found on the hard palate, lips, and gums
of VS includes quarantine of infected herds pending con-
and may extend to the nostrils and muzzle, whereas in
firmatory testing. Vehicles and fomites should be disin-
 horses, the first vesicles may go unnoticed until crusting
fected, and subclinically infected animals should be kept
scabs appear on the muzzle, lips, or ventral abdomen. In
indoors in isolation. Humans should use precautions when
pigs, vesicles generally appear on the feet and frequently
 handling infected or suspected infected animals including
on the muzzle. Vesicles on the feet often cause lameness.
gloves to prevent contamination and spreading of the dis-
 Dairy cattle with lesions on the teats may develop mas
ease. Cattle should not be moved from in fected areas before
titis from secondary infection. Vs occurs throughout the
21 days after alllesions are healed with the exception of ani-
year in Latin America but is particularly common at the
 mals sent to slaughter. Insect control may help to prevent
end of the rainy season. In the Southwestern United States,
disease spread, and all breeding areas sh ould be eliminated.
Chapter 61
 Rhabdoviridae
453
VSV-killed vaccines are currently sold in Venezuela and
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Experimentally, the aver-
Columbia.
age incubation period is 2-4 days although as much as
 ai no s i   s s e
tion occur as a result of a vascular inflammatory response.
Bovine Ephemeral Fever
The onset of fever and other clinical signs is accompa-
nied by a marked leucopoenia, relative neutrophilia, ele-
Disease
vated plasma fibrinogen, biochemical imbalance includ-
ing hypocalcemia and elevated levels of cytokines. There
Bovine ephemeral fever (BEF) is a noncontagious epizootic
have been reports of prolonged paralysis or ataxia in ani-
arthropod-borne disease of cattle and water buffaloes com-
mals recovering from acute infection. Lesions include a
sis  , 'sss , s o o
small amount of fibrin-rich fluid in the pleural, peritoneal,
and pericardial cavities. Fluid may also be found in the
disease in cattle due to the impact that it has on milk pro-
joint capsules. Serofibrinous polysynovitis, polyarthritis,
duction, abortion, temporary infertility in bulls, and pro-
polytendovaginitis, and cellulitis have also been reported.
longed recovery in some animals. Mortality rates are low in
Patchy edema may be seen in the lungs and lymphadenitis
cattle in good condition but can be more severe, with rates
is often observed. Petechial hemorrhages or edema occurs
as high as 30%, in fat cattle. Ruleout diseases include Rift
Valley fever, heartwater, bluetongue, botulism, babesiosis,
in the lymph nodes. Areas of focal necrosis are seen in the
major muscle groups.
and blackleg. Excess salivation may resemble FMD, but no
vesicles are observed.
Host Response to Infection.
 Clinical signs of BEF are short
lived but severe with infected cattle exhibiting a biphasic
Etiologic Agent
01 triphasic fever. Morbidity rates range from 1 to 100%
depending upon the epidemiological factors with mor-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. BEF is
tality rates rarely reaching higher than 1%. Temperature
caused by bovine ephemeral fever virus (BEFV), a rhab-
peaks are approximately 12-i8 h apart. The first indica-
dovirus that is antigenically related to several other non-
 e a pe p a  aas go 
pathogenic viruses, for example Adelaide River virus, as
reduction in milk production that may not return to nor-
well as rhabdoviruses that cause similar diseases to BEF
 mal until the next lactation. Clinical signs are more severe
including Kotonkan and Puchong viruses.
during the second fever with animals exhibiting increased
heart rate, tachypnea, depression, anorexia, ruminal atony,
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. F
BEFV is
serous or mucoid discharge from nose and eyes, salivation,
destroyed by disinfectants like sodium hypochlorite.
muscle twitching, shivering, joint pain, stiffness, and shift-
ing lameness. Additionally, there may be submandibular
 edema or patchy edema on the head. Animals may become
Infectivity to Other Species or Culture Systems. BEFV is
recumbent for 8 h to days with temporary loss of reflexes.
Aisnouaaeu peards si inq peuon jenseo Aq peards pou
Some animals will not be able to rise. Within a day or two,
generally through the bite of an infected insect vector.
animals begin to recover. Complications are rare but may
Symptomatic in fections have been reported in hartebeest,
include temporary paralysis, gait impairment, aspiration
waterbuck, wildebeest, and goats. Additionally antibodies
 pneumonia, emphysema, and the subcutaneous accumu-
to BEFV have been detected in Cape buffalo, deer, and ante-
lation of air along the back.
lope in Africa and deer in Australia. BEF impacts trade in
live animals and semen to disease-free zones.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Host-Virus Relationship
If BEF is suspected, notification of the responsible author-
ities should be the first step. All samples collected for lab-
Distribution,
 Reservoir.
and Transmission. BEF is
oratory examination need to be sent securely to prevent
endemic in tropical and subtropical zones in Africa, Asia,
spread of the disease. BEF is confirmed by serological test-
and Australia. Geographically, this includes all countries
ing, and submitted samples should include approximately
south of a line that also includes Israel, Iraq, Iran, Syria,
20 ml of clotted blood and 5 ml ofuncoagulated blood using
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, southern and central China,
an anticoagulant other than EDTA (ethylenediaminete-
and southern Japan that extends through Southeast Asia
traacetic acid). Paired serum samples, to demonstrate a ris-
to Australia. In Australia, the estimated economic impact
ing titer, are tested by virus neutralization tests or ELISA.
of BEF is estimated to exceed US$100 million. The disease
Cross-reactivity to related rhabdoviruses may occur. Virus
is spread by arthropods and has been isolated from the
isolation from blood samples is difficult. BEF has been con-
-   siu p x p sads oo
firmed by inoculating susceptible cattle or weaned mice
coides biting midges in Africa and Australia. The disease can
with uncoagulated whole blood.
also be spread through intravenous inoculation of blood
from an infected animal. BEFV is not spread by close con-
Treatment and Control
tact, body secretions including semen, or aerosol droplets.
Sodium hypochlorite and other disinfectants will destroy
spread by consumption.
BEFV, but generally disinfection is unimportant since the
454
PART III
Viruses
virus is transmitted through mosquitoes or midges rather
infected farms that raise young trout or salmon. Epizootics
  s     
have also been reported in wild salmon. Susceptible species
cium borogluconate injections are recommended in some
to IHNV include members of the trout and salmon fam-
cases to treat fever, anorexia, muscle stiffness, ocular and
ily. Experimental infections have also been reported in
nasal discharge, ruminal stasis, and sternal recumbency.
pike fry, sea bream, and turbot. Transmission occurs hori-
Immunity after infection has been reported and vaccina-
zontally from clinically ill fish and asymptomatic carriers
 tion has an important role in the managementof BEF. There
through infected feces, urine, sexual fluids, and external
are killed and live vaccines currently being sold in Asia and
mucous either by direct contact or through the water. Ver-
Africa.
tical transmission has also been reported. The incubation
 period is between 5 and 45 days, and clinical signs include
abdominal distension, exophthalmia, darkened skin, and
Diseases of Fish Caused by Rhabdoviruses
pale gills. Infected fish are lethargic exhibiting bouts of
hyperexcitability and frenzy. Petechial hemorrhages are
Several rhabdoviruses in the genus Vesiculovirus and
commonly seen at the base of the pectoral fins, mouth,
Novirhabdovirus cause serious diseases and economic losses
skin behind the lateral line, muscles near the anus, and the
in wild and farmed fish. Two specific viruses that have a
yolk sac in sac fry. Surviving fish often have scoliosis. Post-
high economic impact on farmed and wild fish are men-
 mortem lesions include lack of food in the digestive tract,
tioned here: spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV), classified
pale kidney spleen, and focal necrosis of the liver. Petechiae
within the genus Vesiculovirus, and infectious hematopoi-
are often seen in the internal organs. Hemorrhages may
etic necrosis virus (IHNV), classified within the genus
Novirhabdovirus.
ical disease occurs when water temperatures are between
8 *C and 15 *C although outbreaks have been reported in
Spring Viremia of Carp
warmer water. Young fish, less than 2 months old, are most
susceptible to disease. Fish that survive usually develop
 SVCV causes a fatal disease in cyprinid fsh. Common carp,
 good immunity to IHNV, but they may also become viral
including the variety called koi carp, are the main species
carriers. Diagnosis is confirmed through virus isolation,
infected by SVCV alth ough many species of fish in the min-
FAT, and PCR. Serological tests have not been validated
now family are also susceptible to the disease. The disease
for international trade. If IHNV is suspected, appropriate
has been reported in Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and
authorities should be contacted. Outbreaks are controlled
North and South America. First signs of the disease include
by culling, disinfection, and quarantines. Eggs should be
a change in behavior, and fish may begin to congregate
disinfected with an iodophor solution, and virus-free water
in slow-moving water or lie on the bottom of ponds and
should be used to incubate eggs and raise fry. IHNV is inacti-
streams. As the disease progresses, fish lie on their sides,
vated by most common disinfectants including iodophors.
become sluggish, and their rate of respiration decreases.
A plasmid-based vaccine against IHNV has been devel-
Externally, fish may exhibit physical signs of darkening
oped and is applied one time intramuscularly to fry at the
of the skin, swollen abdomen, exophthalmia, skin or gill
hatchery.
hemorrhages, and a protruding vent. Internally infected
fish exhibit edema in body organs, hemorrhages in the
swim bladder, and inflammation of the bladder. Most out-
breaks occur in the spring in cooler temperatures. When
Reference
water temperatures rise to 15-18 *C, the immune system
of carp can develop neutralizing antibodies and suppress
ICTV (2012) Virus Taxonomy. International Committee on Tax-
virus replication. Viral transmission of SVCV occurs hori-
onomy of Viruses, www.ictvdb.org (accessed January 15,
zontally through contact with virus-infected feces, urine,
2012).
and gill mucous. Vertical transmission is also a possibility
 since SVCV has been identified in ovarian fluids, but the
lack of confirmed outbreaks in fry and fingerlings indicates
Further Reading
that it may not be an important route of infection. Diag-
nosis of SVCV is confirmed through virus isolation, FAT, o1
ELISA. Prevention of SVCV includes using a source of water
Frymus T, Addie D, and Belak S (2009) Feline rabies: ABCD
that is free from disease, especially in an endemic region,
11, 585-593.
Guleria A, Kiranmayi M, and Sreejith R (2011) Reviewing host
ical and chemical disinfection of ponds and equipment,
 proteins of Rhabdodoviridae: Possible leads for lesser stud-
 and proper disposal of infected fish.
ied viruses. / Biosci, 36, 929-937.
Hemachudha T, Laothamatas J, and Rupprecht CE (2002)
Infectious Hematopoietic Necrosis
Human rabies: a disease of complex neuropathogenetic
mechanisms and diagnostic challenges. Lancet Neurol, 1,
 IHNV infection results in a serious viral disease of salmonid
101-109.
fish. IHNV is present in North America, Europe, and some
Hudson LC, Weinstock D, Jordan T, and Bold-Fletcher NO
Asian countries. Clinical infections are most common in
(1996a) Clinical features of experimentally induced rabies
 young fish. IHNV can cause major financial losses for
in cattle and sheep. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B, 43, 85-95.
Chapter 61
 Rhabdoviridae
455
Hudson LC, Weinstock D, Jordan T, and Bold-Fletcher NO
OIE (2009) Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animais, OIE.
(1996b) Clinical presentation of experimentally induced
Rodriguez LL (2002) Emergence and re-emergence of vesicular
rabies in horses. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B, 43, 277-285.
stomatitis in the United States. Virus Res, 85, 211-219.
Jackson AC and Wunner W (2007) Rabies, 2nd edn, Elsevier.
Slate D, Algeo TP, Nelson KM et al. (2009) Oral rabies vacci-
Meat and Livestock Australia (2006) Assessing the economic
nation in North America: Opportunities, complexities and
cost of endemic disease on the profitability of Australian
challenges. PLoS NTD, 3, e549.
beef cattle and sheep producers, Final Report, pp. 1-119,
Spickler AR and Roth JA (2006) Emerging and Exotic Diseases of
Meat and Livestock Australia.
Animals, 4th edn, lowa State University.
 Nandi S and Negi BS (1999) Bovine ephemeral fever: a review.
WHO Expert Consultation on Rabies
(2004)2005
Comp Immunol Microbiol, 22, 81-91.
WHO Tech Rep Series 931. First Report. pp. 1-121.
 National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc.
www.who.int/rabies/trs931_%2006_05.pdf (accessed Jan-
(201l) Compendium of animal rabies prevention and con-
uary 30, 2013).
trol. MMWR Recomm Rep, 60 (RR-6), 1-17.
Willoughby RE Jr, Tieves KS, Hoffman GM et al. (200s) Survival 
OIE (2008) OfE Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Ter-
after treatment of rabies with induction of coma. N Engl /
restrial Animals, 6th edn, OIE.
Med, 352,2508-2514.
62
Coronaviridae
UDENI B.R. BALASURIYA
Introduction and Classification
respiratory and enteric tracts, as well as macrophages of
some animals. Coronaviruses cause a remarkably diverse
The virus families Coronaviridae, Arteriviridae, and
spectrum of different diseases in different hosts (Table
Roniviridae are included in the order Nidovirales (Figure
 62.1). They typically have a restricted host range, infecting
62.1). All members of the order Nidovirales are enveloped 
only their natural host and closely related animal species.
viruses with linear, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA
However, they have the capacity to cross the species barrier
(ssRNA) genomes. They share a strikingly similar genome
 (species jumping) and infect new hosts.
organization and replication strategy, but differ consider-
Avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) was the first
ably in their genetic complexity and virion architecture
coronavirus to be isolated from chicken embryos in 1937.
(Figure 62.2). “Nido" derives from the Latin word nidus fo1
This was followed by mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) in the
nest, which refers to the 3' co-terminal nested subgenomic
1940s and other mammalian coronaviruses in the 1970s.
These include several animal coronaviruses (e.g., porcine
viral mRNA that is produced during replication of these
viruses. This chapter focuses on viruses of the family Coro-
transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), bovine coron-
naviridae that is further divided into two subfamilies, Coro-
avirus (BCoV), and feline coronavirus (FeCoV)), as well
navirinae and Torovirinae (Figure 62.1). The subfamily
as human coronaviruses (HuCoV; e.g., HuCoV-OC43 and
Coronavirinae consists of three genera (Alphacoronavirus,
HuCoV-229E). Since the emergence of the human SARS-
Betacoronavinus, and Gammacoronavinus), whereas the sub-
CoV that was responsible for the SARS in the spring of
family Torovirinae consists of two genera (Bafinivinus and
 2003, coronaviruses became more recognized and gen-
Torovirus). Coronaviruses cause acute and chronic infec-
erated a significant interest among researchers. Follow-
tions in humans and a wide variety of animals, resulting in
ing the SARS outbreak, the number of full-length genome
respiratory, enteric, hepatic, and neurologicdisease of vary-
sequences deposited in public databases has almost tripled.
ing degrees of severity. The toroviruses infect humans and
These include two human coronaviruses (HuCoV-NL63
 animals (horses, cattle, and pigs) and are predominantly
and HuCoV-HKU1), 10 other mammalian coronaviruses
associated with enteric disease. The viruses belonging to
(bat SARS coronavirus, bat coronavirus (bat-CoV)-HKU2,
the families Arteriviridae and Roniviridae will be discussed
bat-CoV-HKU4, bat-CoV-HKU5, bat-CoV-HKU8, bat-CoV-
in Chapter 63.
HKU9,bat-CoV-512/2005,bat-CoV1A,equine coronavirus
Coronaviruses are well-known agents of respiratory,
(ECoV), and beluga whale coronavirus (BWCoV)), and four 
enteric, and neurologic disease in humans and domestic
avian coronaviruses (turkey coronavirus (TCoV), bulbul
animals and are the only nidovirus group that has been
coronavirus-HKU11 (BuCoV-HKU11), thrush coronavirus-
reported to cause disease in humans. In spring 2003, severe
HKU12 (ThCoV-HKU12), and munia coronavirus-HKU13
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) emerged from China as
(MunCoV-HKU13)). The genus Coronavirus is divided into
 a potentially fatal and untreatable human respiratory dis-
three groups (1-3) based on their serologic cross-reactivity.
 a   n S  
Groups 1 and 2 are composed of mammalian coronaviruses
(CoV) strain. Discovery of severe acute respiratory syn-
and group 3 consists of avian coronaviruses. The appli-
drome coronavirus (SARs-CoV) triggered a search for the
cation of molecular biology techniques has generated a
reservoir species. After extensive investigative studies over
large amount of sequence data for these coronaviruses.
a number of years, certain species of bats were identified as
Phylogenetic analysis of these coronavirus sequences has
reservoir hosts of the virus. In addition, these studies led to
 grouped them along the same boundaries of the tradi-
the discovery of many novel human, bat, and avian coron-
tional antigenic classification (groups 1-3). However, these
aviruses. In 2008, a highly divergent coronavirus was iden-
phylogenetic analyses have also identified two additional
tified from a deceased captive beluga whale and grouped as
subgroups in both groups 2 (2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d) and 3
a gammacoronavirus. Coronaviruses in fect a wide range of
(3a, 3b, and 3c). Recently, the Coronavirus Study Group
mammals (including humans, bats, and a whale) and birds.
of the International Committee for Taxonomy of Viruses
They exhibit a marked tropism for epithelial cells of the
has assigned the three traditional groups 1, 2, and 3 of
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
456
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
457
coronaviruses genera status and named them as
FlGURE 62.1.
Taxonomic sequence of the order
Alphacoronavinus, Betacoronavinus, and Gammacoronavinus,
Nidovirales.
respectively:
(Figure 62.1; http://www.ictvonline.org/
Order: Nidovirales
virusTaxonomy.asp, accessed February 27, 2013). A fourth
genus, Deltacoronavinus, to include newly identified bird
coronaviruses, has been proposed. The genus Alphacoro-
Family: Arteriviridae
Family: Roniviridae
navirus includes several human, feline, canine, porcine,
ferret, rabbit, and bat coronaviruses. The genus Betacoro-
Genus: Arterivirus
Genus: Okavirtus
navirus includes human, bovine, porcine, equine, rat,
Family: Coronaviridae
mouse, and bat coronaviruses. Extensive homologous
and heterologous recombination events have been docu-
mented in both human and animal coronaviruses in this
Subfamily: Coronavirinae
Subfamily: Torovirinae
genus, and this may have led to the generation of various
subgroups and strains within the coronavirus species. This
Genera: Alphacoronavirus
Genera: Torovirus
genus is further divided into four subgroups (A-D). All the
Betacoronavirus (Subgroups A-D)
Bafinivirus
animal coronaviruses in this genus are included in sub-
Gammacoronavirus
group A,whereas SARs-CoV is included in subgroupB.The
Deltacoronavirus*
newly identified bat coronaviruses are included in groups
C and D. The genus Gammacoronavirus includes old avian
FIGURE 62.2.
The members of order Nidovirales differ in their virion architecture. (Schematic diagrams and electron
micrograph pictures were reproduced from Gorbalenya et al. 2006 (arterivirus, coronavirus, torovirus and okavirus), Schutze et al.
Family
Subfamily
Genus
GP
GP
Arteriviridae
Arterivirus
GPs
NA
Alphacoronavirus
Betacoronavirus
Coronavirinae
Gammacoronavirus
 Deltacoronavirus*
p.io
Coronaviridae
Torovirus
NA
Torovirinae
Bafinivirus
Roniviridae
Okavirus
*Proposed new genus
NRNA
458
PART III
Viruses
coronaviruses (IBV and TCoV) and the newly identified
The members of the subfamily Torovirinae (Genera
beluga whale coronavirus.
Bafinivirus and Torovinuses) resemble coronaviruses in thei1
 The human SARS outbreak followed by the discovery
genome organization and replication strategy but differ
of bat-SARs-CoV marked the beginning of the hunt for
in virion morphology. Thus far, only four species have
coronaviruses in humans, bats, birds, and other animals.
been recognized as members of the genus Torovinuses in
Since then, several new coronaviruses have been identi-
the subfamily Torovirinae: equine torovirus (EToV), previ-
fied in humans, bats, beluga whale, Asian leopard cats, and
ously known as Bern virus; bovine torovirus (BToV), for-
birds (Table 62.1). Since most of the new viruses have been
merly known as Breda virus; porcine torovirus (PToV); and
identified in bats and wild birds, it has been hypothesized 
human torovirus (HuToV). Torovirus-like (TVL) particles
that human and animal coronaviruses had evolved from
have been detected by electron microscopy (EM) in feces
a diverse population of coronaviruses present in bats and
from dogs, cats, and turkeys. HuToV has been identified as
wild birds (Figure 62.3). The increased diversity of coron-
aviruses in bats and birds could be due to several reasons:
ically in young and/or immunocompromised individu-
als. Interestingly, close genetic and antigenic relationships
between BToV and HuToV have been demonstrated. In
i. Bats and birds are highly diverse species. Bats repre-
addition, antibodies against toroviruses have been demon-
sent 20% of the 5742 mammalian species and there
strated in horses, sheep, goats, and pigs. Toroviruses are
are about 10 000 bird species around the world.
distributed throughout the world.
 ii. Bats and birds can fly far distances. Bats have been
The recently isolated white bream virus (WBV) is the
found as high as 5000 meters, and some birds can
only member of the genus Bafinivirus in the subfamily
fly for over 10 000 km during migration. This would
Torovirinae. The virus was isolated from fish in Germany by
allow bats and birds to exchange viruses with differ-
inoculating tissue homogenate (heart, spleen, kidney, and 
ent species that come in close contact.
swim-bladder) obtained from a white bream (Blicca bjoerkna
ii. Different environmental pressures (climate, food,
L.; Teleostei, order Cypriniformes) into epithelioma papu-
shelter, and predators) would provide different selec-
losum cyprini (EPC) cell cultures. Until now, WBV has not
tive pressures on establishment of different coron
been implicated in any fish disease and was first detected by
aviruses in different species of bats and birds.
EM and isolated in tissue culture during routine laboratory
iv. The habit of roosting (bats) and flocking (birds)
disease diagnostic investigation.
in large numbers will facilitate exchange of viruses
among individual bats and birds.
Virion Properties and Virus Replication
Recently, it has been proposed that the ancestor of the
Coronaviruses
present coronavirus infected a bat and it jumped from a bat
to a bird, or alternatively, it infected a bird and it jumped
 Coronaviruses have a unique morphologic appearance of
from a bird to a bat and evolved dichotomously. Conse-
a crown and the name “coronavirus” was derived from the
quently, the bat coronavirus jumped into other species
Latin word corona (Greek xooovα), meaning crown. They are
of bats, giving rise to group 1 and group 2 coronaviruses
spherical, enveloped virions with large club-shaped surface
(genera Alphacoronavirus and Betacoronavirus according to
projections (peplomers) extending from the viral envelope
the new classification), and these evolved dichotomously.
(Figure 62.2). Virion size ranges from 100 nm to 160 nm
These bat coronaviruses in turn jumped to other bat
in diameter. The coronavirus genome is a single-stranded,
species and other mammals, including humans, with each
positive-sense RNA molecule that ranges in size from 26.4
interspecies jump evolving dichotomously. On the other
to 31.7 kb and it is associated with the N phosphopro-
hand, bird coronaviruses jumped to other species of birds,
tein to form a long, flexible, helical nucleocapsid. How-
and occasionally to some specific mammalian species,
ever, in at least two coronaviruses (TGEV and MHV), the
such as whale and Asian leopard cat. These coronaviruses
helical nucleocapsid is enclosed within an "internal core
have evolved dichotomously, giving rise to group 3 coro-
structure,” 65 nm in diameter, that is spherical, or pos-
naviruses (Gammacoronavirus). Furthermore, the genetic
sibly icosahedral, in form. The virus core is surrounded
diversity of the coronaviruses results from the high error
by a lipoprotein envelope that is derived from the intra-
rate in the viral RdRp enzyme (high mutation rates in
cellular membranes during virus budding from the cell.
the order of one per 1,000- 10 000 nucleotides replicated),
The envelope is studded with 3-4 viral proteins depend-
homologous and heterologous recombination mainly due
ing on the coronavirus. These include the long spikes (20
to their large genome size that gives plasticity in accom-
nm), which consist of the S (spike) glycoprotein and the
modation and modification of genes. The evolutionary
 short spikes consisting of the hemagglutinin-esterase (HE)
history of coronaviruses along with the identification of
glycoprotein that are present in only some coronaviruses.
increasing numbers of more and more closely related coro-
The envelope also contains the glycoprotein M, a trans-
naviruses from distantly related animal species clearly indi-
membrane protein that is more deeply embedded in the
cates their ability for interspecies jumping. Therefore, the
envelope. As indicated above, the M and N proteins form
coronaviruses have the potential to give rise to new veteri-
an internal core structure in at least two coronaviruses.
nary and zoonotic pathogens that can pose a major threat
The small envelope protein E is present in much smaller
to animal and public health.
amounts than the other viral envelope proteins. The E
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
459
Table 62.1.
Important Animal and Human Viruses in the Family Coronaviridae (subfamilies Coronavirinae and Torovirinae)
Family/Genus/Species
Abbreviation
Natural Host
Disease/Tissue Affected
Family: Coronaviridae
Subfamily: Coronavirinae
Genus: Aiphacoronavirus (Group 1)
 Transmissible gastroenteritis virus
TGEV
Pig
Enteric infection
Porcine respiratory coronavirus
PRCoV
Pig
 Respiratory infection 
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
PEDY
Pig
Enteric infection
 Canine coronavirus (Canine enteric
CCoV
Dog
 Enteric and systemic infection
coronavirus)
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus
FIPV
Cat
 Peritonitis, respiratory, enteric and 
neurologic infection 
Feline coronavirus
FCoV
Cat
Enteric infection
Ferret enteric coronavirus
FRECY
Ferret.
Enteric infection
 Ferret systemic coronavirus
FRSCV
Ferret
 Peritonitis and enteric infection 
Rabbit coronavirus
RbCoy
Rabbit 
Human coronavirus 229E
HCoV-229E
Humans 
 Respiratory infection 
Human coronavirus NL63 
HCoV-NL263
 sueunh
 Respiratory infection 
 Scotophilus bat coronavirus 512
Sc-BatCov-512
Lesser Asiatic yellow house bats
No clinical disease
Rhinolophus bat coronavirus HKU2
Rh-BatCov-HKU2
Chinese horseshoe bats 
No clinical disease
Miniopterus bat coronavirus HKU8
Mi-BatCoV-HKU8
Bent-winged bats 
 No clinical disease
Miniopterus bat coronavirus 1A
Mi-BatCoV-1A
 Bent-winged bats 
 No clinical disease
Miniopterus bat coronavirus 1B
Mi-BatCoV-1B
 Bent-winged bats 
No clinical disease
Genus: Betacoronavirus (Group 2)
Subgroup A
 Porcine hemagglutinating
PHEY
Pig
 Enteric, respiratory and neurological
 encephalomyelitis virus
infection
Bovine coronavirus
BCoV
Cattle
 Enteric and respiratory infection
 Enteric bovine coronavirus
EBCoV
Respiratory bovine coronavirus
RBCoV
 Canine respiratory coronavirus
CRCoV
Dog
 Respiratory infection 
Equine coronavirus
ECov
Horse
Enteric infection
Mouse hepatitis virus
MHV
Mouse
 Hepatitis, enteric and neurological
infection
Rat coronavirus
RCOV
Rat
 Sialodacryadentis - salivary and
 Sialodacryadentis virus
SDAV
lacrimal glands, and eyes
 Parker's rat coronavirus 
RCoV-P
 Respiratory infection 
Human coronavirus OC43 
HCoV-0C43
Humans
 Respiratory infection 
Human coronavirus HKU1 
HCoV-HKU1
Humans
 Respiratory infection 
Subgroup B
SARS coronavirus
SARS-COV
suewnh
 Respiratory infection 
SARS-related Rhinolopus bat coronavirus
SARSr-Rh-Bat-CoV
 Chinese horseshoe bats
No clinical disease
Subgroup C
Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4
Ty-BatCoV HKU4
Lesser bamboo bats
 No clinical disease
Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5
 Pi-BatCov HKU5
 Japanese pipistrelle bats
 No clinical disease
Subgroup D
 Rousettus bat coronavirus HKU9
Ro-BatCoV HKU9
Leschenault's rousette bats 
 No clinical disease
Genus: Gammacoronavirus (Group 3)
Infectious bronchitis virus 
IBV
Chicken
Respiratory, reproductive and kidney
infection
Turkey coronavirus
TCoV
Turkey
 Enteric infection 
Beluga whale coronavirus SWw1
BWCoV
 Beluga whales
No clinical disease
Genus: Deitacoronavirus?
 Bulbul coronavirus-HKU11
BuCoV-HKU11
Chinese bulbuls
No clinical disease
Thrush coronavirus-HKU12
ThCov-HKU12
Gray-backed thrushes 
No clinical disease
Munia coronavirus-HKU13
MunCov-HKU13
 White-rumped munias 
 No clinical disease
Subfamily: Torovirinae
Genus: Torovirus
Equine torovirus
ETov
Horse
Enteric infection
Bovine torovirus
BTov
Cattle
Enteric infection
 Porcine torovirus
PToy
Pig
 Enteric infection 
Human torovirus
HuToy
Humans 
Enteric infection
Genus: Bafinivirus
White bream virus
WBV
Fish
No clinical disease
Proposed new genus.
460
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 62.3.
A proposed model of coronavirus evolution. Coronaviruses of bats and birds may have evoived from a common
ancestor. Subsequently, coronaviruses from bats would have given rise to alphacoronavirus and betacoronaviruses (group 1 and 2),
whereas coronaviruses from birds would have given rise to gammacoronaviruses (group 3).
Common coronavirus ancestor
Alphacoronavirus(Group 1)
Betacoronavirus(Group 2）
Gammacoronavirus(Group3)
protein, together with the M protein, plays an essential
the C-terminal extension of ppla with the ORF1b-encoded
role in coronavirus particle assembly. Coronaviruses have
 polypeptide, pplab. The ppia and pplab are co- and post-
a buoyant density in sucrose of 1.15-1.20 g/cm?. The
 translationally processed by two virus-encoded proteases
buoyant density in CsCl is 1.23-1.24 g/cm? and the sed-
(papain-like protease (nsp3) and picornaviral 3C-like cys-
imentation coefficient (S20, w) is 300-500. Coronaviruses
teine protease (nsp5) to produce 16 nsps. The nsp14 has the
are sensitive to heat, lipid solvents, nonionic detergents,
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity. These products
formaldehyde, oxidizing agents, and UV irradiation. Some
of the large replicase protein, possibly with other viral and
coronaviruses are resistant to acid pH and/or desiccation.
cellular proteins, assemble into a replication/transcription 
The genome organization of the family Coronaviri-
complex bound to modified intracellular membranes.
dae (subfamilies: Coronavirinae and Torovirinae) resem-
The structural proteins encoding ORFs are located in
bles the other members of the order Nidovirales (Fig-
the 3' one-third of the genome, for all coronaviruses, in the
ure 62.4). The coronavirus and torovirus genomic RNAs
order 5'-S-E-M-N-3'. The ORFs encoding these proteins are
are 5'-capped, 3'-polyadenylated and can function as an
interspersed with several ORFs encoding nsps (accessory
mRNA. Thus, the purified genomic RNAs of these viruses are
proteins) and HE glycoprotein, which differ significantly
infectious. The coronavirus genomes consist of a 5'-leader
among coronaviruses in number, nucleotide sequence,
sequence (65-98 nucleotides [nts]) followed by untrans-
 gene order, and method of expression (Figure 62.4). How-
lated region (5'UTR; 200-400 nts). At the 3'-end of the
ever, they are conserved within the same group of coron-
viral genome there is another UTR of 200-500 nts (3'-
aviruses, thus they are called the group-specific proteins.
UTR), followed by a poly A tail of variable length. The 5
When the HE protein is expressed, it is encoded 5' to S pro-
and 3'-UTRs flank an array of multiple genes (open-reading
tein. The structural and accessory proteins are expressed
frames [ORFs] whose number may vary among the mem-
from a 3' co-terminal nested set of subgenomic mRNAs
bers of the subfamily Coronavirinae. The coronaviruses
(sgmRNAs). The coronavirus lifecycle (attachment, entry,
have 9-14 ORFs that encode viral nonstructural and struc-
replication of genome, transcription mRNAs, assembly,
tural proteins. The 5'-proximal two-thirds (~20-22 kb) of
and release) is very similar to other members of the order
the genome is occupied by the two largest ORFs (ORFla and
Nidovirales (e.g., equine arteritis virus [EAV]). The genome
ORF1b) that encode for the nonstructural proteins (nsps).
replication, sgmRNA synthesis, and virus life cycle of EAV is
The ORFla and ORF1b are connected by a -1 ribosomal
depicted in Chapter 63. Briefly, replication of the genomic
frameshift site(RFS). The translation of genomic RNA starts
RNA involves synthesis of a full-length negative-stranded
at the start codon of ORFla resulting in the production
 RNA that serves as template for full-length genomic RNA.
 of a polyprotein, ppla. In some cases, specific RNA sig-
The structural and accessory proteins are expressed from
nals promote ribosomal frameshifting at a -1 RFs or "slip-
multiple overlapping 3-co-terminal sgmRNAs. Each sgm-
 pery” sequence between ORFla and ORF1b that results in
RNA has a common leader sequence at its 5'-end that is
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
461
FIGURE 62.4.
Genome organization of selected members of genus Coronavirinae (HCoV-229E, TGEV, BCoV, SARS-CoV, and IBV)
and Torovirinae (EToV and WBV).
Coronavirinae
ORFs
5'
E
M
5
E
TGEV (27.9 kb)
amp
An
E
3
BCoV (31.0 kb)
C
5
An
β
3
SARS-CoV (29.7 kb)
An
5'
RFS
IBV (27.9 kb)
Torovirinae
5
seORFI
RFS
EToV (28.4 kb)
WBV (26.6 kb)
MN
An
derived from the 5'-end of the genomic RNA. The sgm-
(e.g, SARs-CoV), S protein cleavage occurs as part of the
RNAs are synthesized from sg-negative-strand RNAs with
viral entry process. The S proteins of alphacoronaviruses
the anti-leader sequences being added onto the 3'-ends of
(Group 1) are not cleaved, but they still could induce cell-
negative-stranded RNAs that then serve as templates for
cell fusion (e.g., feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV)).
synthesis of sgmRNAs (discontinuous extension of minus-
The S protein of coronaviruses has several biological prop-
strand RNA synthesis; see Chapter 63). Most of the time,
erties that include binding to specific cellular receptor(s),
one viral structural protein is translated from individual
inducing neutralizing antibodies, eliciting cell-mediated
sgmRNAs. However, in some cases, there may be two ORFs
immune response, inducing fusion of the viral envelope
carried on and translated from one sgmRNA.
with host cell membranes, inducing cell-cell fusion, and
 The S glycoprotein forms the large peplomers on the
binding the Fc fragment of immunoglobulin (MHV and
virion surface, giving the virus its corona or crown-like
TGEV). The cellular receptors for many coronavirus S pro-
morphology when examined under the electron micro-
teins have been identified.
scope. The S protein is a heavily glycosylated type I mem-
The HE glycoprotein is found in all subgroup A betacoro-
brane glycoprotein that can be divided into three struc-
naviruses and one member of the gammacoronaviruses
tural domains: a large N-terminal external domain further
(TCoV) as a disulfide-linked dimer that forms short spikes
divided into two domains, S and S2; a transmembrane
on the virion surface. The HE protein is not present on the
domain; and a short carboxyterminal cytoplasmic domain.
virion of betacoronavirus members of subgroups B, C, and
The S domain forms the globular portion of the spike
D. The absence of HE protein in some coronaviruses, and
and there is considerable sequence variation due to various
the frequent tendency of its structure to get mutated o1
deletions and substitutions within this region in different
completely deleted during serial cell culture passage sug-
coronavirus strains. Thus, mutations in Si sequences have
gest that this protein is not essential for viral replication.
 been associated with altered antigenicity, pathogenicity,
The HE gene of coronaviruses is believed to be acquired
and cellular tropism of the virus. In contrast, the S2 domain
from influenza C virus by heterologous recombination. The
is more conserved and constitutes the stalk of the spikes.
HE protein of coronaviruses has several biological proper-
There is evidence that mature S protein of some coron-
ties and these include hemagglutination, hemadsorption,
aviruses forms an oligomer, most probably assembled into
the esterase activity that cleaves acetyl groups from 9-0-
a trimmer. In some coronaviruses (e.g., MHV and BCoV),
  i o     n 
the S protein gets cleaved by the cellular proteases during
adsorption and entry or release from the infected cells.
or after virus maturation and the S and S2 domains remain
The M protein of coronaviruses is glycosylated with
noncovalently associated in the viral spikes. The extent of
a short aminoterminal domain that is exposed
1to
S cleavage varies among coronaviruses and it also depends
the exterior surface, followed by a triple-membrane-
on host cell types. However, in some other coronaviruses
spanning domain, an α-helical domain, and a large
462
PART III
Viruses
carboxyterminal domain inside the viral envelope. The gly.
bodies to TGEV can antigenically cross-react with porcine
cosylation of theaminoterminal of the Mprotein either can
respiratory coronavirus (PRCoV). However, some antigenic
be O-linked (MHV) or N-linked (IBV, TGEV, and SARS-CoV)
sites of TGEV are absent from PRCoV because of a deletion
and in some coronaviruses, the carboxyterminal of the M
 in the amino terminus of the S protein in PRCoV. TGEV and
protein is exposed on the virion surface (TGEV). In MHV,
   as r    
monoclonal antibodies against M protein neutralize the
form), sodium hypochlorite, quaternary ammonium com-
virus. The M protein of coronaviruses interacts with both
pounds, iodines, heating at 56*C for 45 min, and exposure
the N and S proteins and may play a key role in virus assem-
to sunlight. Both viruses are stable when frozen but some
bly. It may also play a major role in packaging viral RNA
what labile at room temperature. TGEV is stable for long
into nucleocapsids during virus assembly.
 periods when frozen at -80 *C, but when held at 37 *C for
The E protein of coronaviruses acts synergistically with
4 days, there is total loss of infectivity. In liquid manure,
the M protein during virus bud ding from the infected cells.
infectious virus persists for more than 8 weeks at 5 *C, 2
 In addition to this, E protein also functions as an ion chan-
weeks at 20 *C, and 24 h at 35 *C. TGEV resists inactivation 
nel. The N protein interacts with the viral genomic RNA to
form the viral nucleocapsid. The N protein has three rela-
in pig bile. These properties allow the virus to survive in the
tively conserved structural domains and it interacts with M
stomach and small intestine.
protein, leading to the incorporation of the nucleocapsid 
 TGEV is characterized by severe diarrhea, vomiting,
into the virus particle.
dehydration, and high mortality in young piglets (less
than 2 weeks of age). Mortality in older pigs (greater than 
5 weeks) is usually low. Older growing and finishing pigs
Toroviruses
develop transient watery diarrhea but vomiting is uncom-
Toroviruses are pleomorphic and measure 120-140 nm
mon. Most of the time TGEV infection of adult swine
in diameter. Spherical, oval elongated, and kidney-shaped
is asymptomatic, but sometimes infected sows exhibit
particles have been visualized under EM. Toroviruses are
anorexia, diarrhea, fever, vomiting, and agalactia.
enveloped with a tubular nucleocapsid of helical sym-
 More than 25 years ago, PRCoV was detected in swine
metry. The nucleocapsid forms a doughnut-shaped struc-
 herds with minor respiratory symptoms that are closely
ture and the envelope contains a large number of small
related to TGEV. A major difference between the two
spikes (15-20 nm) that resemble the peplomeres of coro-
 porcine coronaviruses is alarge deletion in the spike protein
naviruses. Torovirus particles consist of at least four struc-
S gene (deletion of nucleotides 621-681) of PRCoV. PRCoV
tural proteins: nucleocapsid protein (N), unglycosylated
is a natural deletion mutant of TGEV and has changed
membrane protein (M), spike glycoprotein (S), and HE pro-
the tropism from porcine enteric epithelium to respira-
tein. The torovirus genome consists of a polyadenylated,
 tory epithelium and alveolar macrophages. Because of this
positive-sense, linear molecule of ssRNA, which is esti-
 structural difference, TGEV but not PRCoV has a sialic acid
mated to be 20-30 kb in length. Toroviruses have a buoyant
binding activity that allows the attachment to mucins and
density of 1.14- 1.18 g/cm? in sucroseand an estimated sed-
mucin-type glycoproteins. The sialic acid binding activity
imentation coefficient (S20, w) of 400-500. Virus infectiv-
may allow TGEV to overcome the mucus barrier in the gut
ity is stable between pH 2.5 and 9.7 but rapidly inactivated
and to get access to the intestinal epithelium for initia-
by heat, organic solvents, and irradiation.
tion of infection. As PRCoV shares some epitopes for neu-
tralizing antibodies with TGEV, it acts like a nature-made
vaccine against TGEV resulting in a drastic reduction of
Bafinivirus
TGE outbreaks in Europe. Thus, PRCoV can infect pigs of
The WBV has a bacilliform shape (170-200 x 75-88
infections are generally subclinical, but strains of the virus
nm) with an envelope containing coronavirus-like spikes
(20-25 nm). The virion consists of a rod-shaped nucleocap-
differ in the severity of the clinical signs they induce. Clin-
sid (120-150 × 19-22 nm) surrounded an envelope that
ical signs include moderate to severe respiratory disease
consists of glycosylated S protein and integral membrane
with interstitial pneumonia. In addition, PRCoV infection
protein M. The virus replicates in various fish cell lines. The
can be concurrently associated with other respiratory virus
 infections such as with porcine reproductive and respira.
buoyant density of the virus in sucrose is 1.17-1.19 g/cm?
and sensitive to lipid solvents.
tory syndrome virus (PRRSV), which can alter the severity
 of disease and associated clinical signs.
Animal Diseases Caused by Members of the
Host-Virus Relationship
Genus Alphacoronavirus
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. TGE has only
been described in swine; however, TGEV has been isolated
 Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus and Porcine Respiratory
from the feces of experimentally infected cats, dogs, foxes,
Coronavirus
os 'sp og 0n dn nog (s snus) ss pue
Disease.
 Transmissible gastroenteritis (TGE) is a highly
studies have also suggested natural infection of skunks,
contagious enteric disease of swine caused by TGEV. TGEV
opossums, muskrats, and humans. Virus has also been
is antigenically related to coronaviruses of humans, dogs,
demonstrated in house flies (Musca domesfica Linneaus) fol-
lowing experimental and natural infection.
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
463
TGEV infection of swine occurs worldwide, and has been
a humoral IgG response but not protective immunity. Con-
 documented in North, Central and South America, Europe,
versely, pigs immunized orally with TGEV develop protec-
and Asia. Epizootics of TGE are often seasonal in the United
tive virus-specific IgA in their intestinal mucosal secretions.
States, occurring in the winter months. The primary mode
Infection of sows with TGEV results in the secretion of pro-
 of TGEV transmission appears to be ingestion of feed con-
tective IgA in colostrum (so-called lactogenic immunity),
taminated with infected feces (fecal-oral). Persistence of
which is protective in suckling pigs. Cell-mediated immu-
TGEV in nature is likely via the fecal carrier/shedding state
nity is also likely important in the immune response to
in recovered swine, thus the virus is maintained in endemi-
TGEV infection, as passive transfer of mononuclear leuko-
cally in fected herds through ongoing fecal-oral infection of
cytes from immune donor pigs to susceptible histocom-
susceptible pigs. Infection of swine in endemically in fected
patible piglets results in reduced disease expression. High
herds is often subclinical or mild, whereas the virus spreads
levels of type I interferon are produced by infected intesti-
rapidly in nonimmune herds and can cause devastating
nal cells, which also may play a role in controlling viral
outbreaks of disease. In addition to movement by infected
replication. Pigs infected with PRCoV develop neutralizing
swine, TGEV is potentially transmitted between herds by
antibodies to the virus. Antibodies against PRCoV provide
fomites and other animals.
partial protection against TGEV, and therefore, the inci-
PRCoV has been isolated in North America and Europe.
dence and severity of TGE may decline in swine herds with
Infected pigs shed virus in their respiratory secretions,
endemic PRCoV infection.
and PRCoV may persist in herds by continuous infection
of newly weaned pigs. Although this is not an enteric
Laboratory Diagnosis. TGEV infection of young pigs is
pathogen, the virus has been demonstrated in feces by
usually diagnosed through the demonstration of viral anti-
virus isolation and nested reverse transcription polymerase
 gen in mucosal scrapings or frozen sections of jejunum and
chain reaction (nRT-PCR) that may suggest the possibility
ileum by immunohistochemical (IHC) or immunofluores-
of fecal-oral transmission.
cent (IF) staining with virus-specific antibodies. Definitive
diagnosis of TGEV can be done by viral isolation through
 Pathogenesis and Pathology. TGEV survives in the gas-
inoculation of animals (pigs 2-7 days old) or cell cultures
trointestinal tract after ingestion because of its resistance
(pig kidney, testis, or thyroid). EM or immuno-EM can also
to low pH and trypsin, thus it passes through the stom-
be used on fecal contents or intestine for diagnosis. Stan-
ach without inactivation. Six to twelve hours following
dard and real-time RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) assays for the detec-
intragastric inoculation, viral replication occurs in villus
tion and differentiation of TGEV and PRCoV have been
epithelial cells of the small intestine with highest titers of
described.
virus in the jejunum. TGEV in fects and destroys the colum-
-s a n snoa u pd aaq su ai
nar epithelial cells lining the intestinal villi, resulting in
tems, including pig kidney, testis, salivary gland, and thy-
atrophy of the villi. Villous blunting and increased crypt
roid; organ cultures of esophagus, intestine, and nasal
depth (as a consequence of replication of the progenitor
epithelium; canine kidney cell cultures; and embryonated
cells in the crypts in an effort to repopulate the denuded
chicken eggs (amniotic cavity). Pig kidney (PK) and swine
villi) occurs 24-40 h postinfection and coincides with the
testicle (ST) cell lines have been the choice of cells for virus 
occurrence ofsevere diarrhea. The loss of enterocytes lining
isolation from the feces or gut contents of infected pigs.
the villi results in malabsorption and maldigestion, which
Development of cytopathic effect may require multiple
in turn results in diarrhea and dehydration. Undigested
passages in cellculture. PRCoV replicates in PK and ST cells,
lactose in the intestinal contents passes to the large bowel
as well as a cat fetus cell line.
where it exerts an osmotic effect that further exacerbates
Serologic diagnosis is appropriate when acute and con-
the diarrhea in TGEV-infected swine. Affected piglets are
valescent sera are available. However, serologic diagno-
dehydrated with fecal staining around the perineum. The
sis is complicated by the finding that both PRCoV and
typical lesions include thinning of the intestinal wall, vil-
TGEV induce neutralizing antibodies that cross-neutralize
lous atrophy, and gastrointestinal distension with yellow
each other. Therefore, TGEV strains are not distinguished
fluid containing curds of undigested milk.
from its nonenteropathogenic variant PRCoV by the virus
The PRCoV is transmitted via respiratory aerosols and
 neutralization test but can be distinguished by blocking
droplets to susceptible in-contact animals. The virus repli-
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
cates in the tonsils, mucosalepithelium of the nasal passage
 and the airways of the lungs, and the type I and the type II
Treatment and Control. Treatment of TGEV-infected
pneumocytes in the alveolar lining. This cause inflamma-
pigs is usually unrewarding. Replacement of fluids and
tion and necrosis of terminal airways of the lungs leading
antibacterial drugs to reduce complications associated with
to diffuse bronchointerstitial pneumonia. The severity of
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli may be of benefit. Inacti-
clinical signs and lesions may vary and subclinicalinfection
vated and modified live attenuated virus vaccines are avail-
can occur in herds.
able for vaccination of pigs to prevent TGE. These can be
used for vaccination of newborn piglets or immunization
Host Response to Infection. Neutralizing antibodies
of sows, or both. Vaccination ofpregnantsows provides lac-
togenic immunity that is passively transferred to piglets via
of swine. The presence of secretory IgA plays a major role
colostrum. Vaccines have been variably successful in pre-
in protective immunity and viral clearance. Intramuscular
venting TGE. Oral immunization provides optimal stimu-
immunization ofpigs with TGEV results in development of
lation of local immunity (secretory IgA) in the intestine.
464
PART III
Viruses
The practice of infecting sows with virulent TGEV at least 3
Based on genetic, antigenic and biological properties,
weeks prior to furrowing to induce an immune response by
the canine enteric coronaviruses can be broadly classified
providing colostral immunity to piglets is complicated by
into two types: CCoV type I (CCoV-I) and CCoV type II
the fact that this practice contaminates the environment
%96 0 dn as s0 1I ad pu I ad a (1-A0)
with virulent TGEV that subsequently can spread infection
nucleotide identity. Recently, CCoV-lI was divided into
to susceptible pigs.
two subtypes, CCoV-lla and CCoV-lIb, with the second
of these arising as a result of a putative double recombina-
tion event between CCoV-lI and TGEV (TGEV-like CCoV).
Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus
In contrast to CCoV-I strains, the CCoV-lla strains are
highly virulent and cause systemic fatal disease in pups.
Coronavirus-like viruses have been isolated from swine
CCoV-lla strains include a pantropic variant causing sys-
with diarrhea, thus their designation as porcine epi-
temic disease in pups that was identified in 2005 (CCoV
demic diarrhea viruses (PEDV). These viruses are antigeni-
cally distinct from TGEV and porcine hemagglutinating
CB/05). The virus was isolated from feces, as well as var-
ious paranchymatous organs of effected puppies. Subse-
encephalomyelitis virus (PHEV), and cause diarrhea, vom-
iting, and dehydration in inoculated swine. Pathogenesis
quently, the disease was reproduced after experimental
infection ofdogs, with youngpuppies showing more severe
studies indicate that PEDV replicates in both the small and
clinical signs. Pantropic CCoV-1la (e.g, CB/05 and NA/09
large intestines, but lesions are confined to small intestines.
strains) cause severe systemic disease in dogs, characterized
Affected pigs have small intestines that are distended with 
by fever, lethargy, anorexia, depression, vomiting, hemor-
yellow fluid; the lesions are similar to those of TGE.
rhagic diarhea, severe leukopenia, and neurologic signs
PEDV particles can be demonstrated in the feces of
 infected pigs by direct EM, and the virus can be propa-
(seizures and ataxia) followed by death 48 h after the onset
of symptoms.
gated in some African green monkey (Vero) cell lines but
 not in others. Viral growth depends on the presence of
 In addition, various recombinants between CCoV-I and
CCoV-lI strains, as well as TGEV spike protein gene have
trypsin in the cell culture medium. Generally, field strains
been reported. Although TGEV-like CCoVs were detected
of PEDV need to be adapted to grow in cell culture before
in the internal organs of naturally infected dogs, experi-
they can be used as a routine diagnostic assay. Virus can be
mental infection failed to cause systemic involvement or
adapted to grow in primary porcine cell culture or Vero cells
virus dissemination through the blood. CCoVs are inac-
(African green monkey cells). A directimmunofluorescence
assay (IFA) and IHC technique applied on a section of small
tivated by lipid solvents and are heat-labile. The viruses
 are acid-stable (pH of 3.0) and retain infectivity under cool
intestine are the most sensitive, rapid, and reliable meth-
conditions.
ods of diagnosis of PEDV in pigs. A serologic diagnosis can 
be made by demonstration of PEDV antibodies by IF and
Host-Virus Relationship
ELISA. A multiplex rRT-PCR procedure developed for the
simultaneous detection of PEDV and TGEV in preweaning
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. CCoV was first
pigs with diarrhea has been described.
isolated in 1971 from an epidemic of diarrhea in dogs in
 Attenuated vaccines are available in some Asian coun-
Germany. The virus has since been recognized virtually
tries for the prevention of PEDV in fection in pigs. However,
worldwide, including North America, Europe, Australia,
control of disease is dependent on management and hus-
and Asia. Infected dogs excrete virus in their feces for 2
bandry practices.
weeks or longer and fecal contamination of the environ-
 ment is the primary source for its transmission via fecal-oral
infection.
Canine Enteric Coronavirus
Disease.
 Canine coronavirus (CCoV) infects domestic
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Following an incubation
and wild canine species and the first CCoV was isolated
period of 1-4 days, the virus causes infection of intesti-
from dogs with acute enteritis. CCoV infection of dogs is
nal epithelial cells that progressively passes through the
highly contagious and generally causes inapparent or mild
 gastrointestinal tract. Diarrhea occurs 1-7 days postinfec-
 gastroenteritis. CCoV is an important enteropathogen of
 tion, virus being present in feces within 1-2 days following
- u aue 'suonendod sop ul peaidsapim si pue son
the appearance of clinical signs. Viral replication in the
nels and animal shelters. Clinical signs include anorexia,
intestinal epithelium results in desquamation and short-
lethargy, vomiting, fluid diarrhea, and dehydration. The
ening of the villi. The diarrhea associated with CCoV infec-
virus is shed at high titers in the feces of infected dogs
tion occurs as a consequence of intestinal maldigestion and
leading to typical fecal-oral route of transmission charac-
malabsorption. While CCoV infection is widespread, mor-
n   a     
tality is typically very low.
tion usually occurs as a consequence of mixed infections
with CCoV together with canine parvovirus type-2, canine
Host Response to Infection. Mucosal immunity appears
adenovirus type-1, or canine distemper virus. CCoV is anti-
 to be protective as dogs orally infected with CCoV become
genically related to other coronaviruses, including TGEV,
immune while those immunized parenterally do not. It
feline enteric coronavirus, and FIPV. Multiple antigenically
has been reported that immunity after natural exposure to
and genetically distinct strains of CCoV have been recog-
nized, including a novel respiratory coronavirus.
infection with the new pantropic CCoV infections.
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
465
Laboratory Diagnosis. Virus or viral antigens can be visu
protein 3c and spike appear to correlate with development
alized by EM or fluorescent antibody (FA) staining of feces
of FIP.
 Or necropsy tissues. Antiserum specific for CCoV is com-
monly used to aggregate virus prior to negative staining
Etiologic Agent
for EM. Virus can be isolated from feces or intestinal tissue
on cell culture. Several primary (kidney and thymus) and
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Based on
continuous canine lines of thymus, embryo, synovium,
serological differences, FCoV strains have been separated
and kidney (line A-72) are susceptible to infection. The
into two types (more common FCoV type 1 and less com-
virus also infects feline kidney and embryo fibroblast cell
mon FCoV type 2), both being able to cause two forms of
lines. RT-PCR assays have been developed to detect CCoVs
FIP (dry and wet form). The FCoV type 2 is genetically more
in feces. CCoV-1 can be distinguished from CCoV-1I by
closely related to canine coronavirus. FCoVs and FIPV are
means of genotype specific conventional RT-PCR or rRT-
resistant to acid and trypsin but are readily inactivated by
PCR assays. Serum virus neutralization and ELISA tests for
most disin fectants, includ ing lipid solvents.
detection of CCoV antibodies have been developed. An
ELISA based on recombinant spike protein S for the detec-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. In
tion and differentiation of antibodies to TGEV-like CCoV
addition to infecting domestic cats, FIPV has been associ-
from other CCoV-lI strains has recently been described.
ated with disease in wild Felidae such as lions, mountain
lions, leopards, jaguar, lynx, caracal, sand cats, and pal-
Treatment and Control. Treatment of CCoV-associated
las's cats. Young pigs can be experimentally infected with
gastroenteritis is limited to relief of dehydration and elec-
FIPV, resulting in development of lesions similar to those
trolyte loss in severe cases. Inactivated and modified live
induced by TGEV. Suckling mice are susceptible to infec-
virus (MLV) vaccines are available for parental administra-
tion, with virus replicating in the brain. FIPV primarily
tion for protection against CCoV infection. However, their
replicates in macrophages, but virus can be propagated in
use is questionable due to the apparent importance of local
vitro in feline organ cultures, cell lines, and mononuclear
immunity at the level of the intestinal mucosa.
phagocytes.
Host-Virus Relationship
Feline Infectios Peritonitis and Feline Enteric Coronaviurus
Disease. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) isa contagious,
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.F
FCoV and FIPV
progressive, and highly fatal disease of domestic and some
occur worldwide. FCoV spreads efficiently via the fecal-oral
wild feline species. The signs are highly variable and reflect
route but in contrast, FIPV is not well transmitted. FCoV
the tissues affected by the disease, but persistent fever,
pe rui o 1eA e on dn ion Anuqns iiad Ae
weight loss, lethargy, dyspnea, and abdominal distension
these persistently infected cats serve as the virus reservoir
are all common clinical signs. The disease can occur in cats
that allows horizontal spread between cats.
o Aa pue snoa un uoo Aadsa si nnq sse le jo
cats. Two distinct forms of FIP are recognized: (1) an effusive
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis of FIP is
(wet) and (2) a noneffusive (dry) form. The effusive form,
complex, and much remains to be resolved. Initial FCoV
which is two to three times as common as the dry form,
infection is rarely characterized by obvious disease, but
is characterized by accumulation of protein-rich fluid (exu-
results in persistent, low-level infection of macrophages
date) in the peritoneal cavity. The noneffusive form is char-
in many tissues. The development of clinical FIP is asso-
acterized by formation of granulomas in internal organs,
ciated with increased viral replication, usually secondary
central nervous system (CNS), and eyes. Mortality rates are
to some immunosuppressive event that suppresses cellular
high. FIP has an unusual and highly complex pathogen-
immunity. Increased virus replication results in the emer-
esis that involves the mutation of relatively apathogenic
gence of viral variants (FIpv) that replicate with increas-
feline enteric coronavirus (FCoV) into FIPV that replicates
ing efficiency in macrophages where they persist, safe
in macrophages to produce an immune-mediated disease
from immune clearance. Antibody exacerbates the disease,
in affected cats. FCoV seems to be confined to the intesti-
which suggests that FIP is at least in part an “immune
nal tract and causes mild, often unapparent enteritis espe-
mediated" disease. Virus-specific antibody actually facili-
cially in kittens. Comparative sequence analysis of FCoVs
d   sod a Ae o n s
and FIpvs has shown that these viruses are genetically
strains of the virus replicate.
closely related but differ in their pathogenic potential (dif-
a paze are d go s ap, p am, og
ferent pathotypes of the same virus). The FIPV efficiently
the appearance of granulomas (or pyogranulomas) around
infects macrophages and monocytes that escape from the
blood vessels. It is proposed that deposition of complexes
intestine to cause lethal systemic disease with multiorgan
of FIPV and specific antibody (immune complexes) in the
involvement, in classical cases accompanied by accumula-
walls of blood vessels is responsible for the characteristic
tion of abdominal exudate (ascites). One of the hypothe-
perivascular location of these lesions. These perivascular
ses is that FIPV pathotype results from a mutation(s) in
granulomas can occur in the bowel, kidneys, liver, lungs,
the FCoV genome. However, viral virulence determinants
CNS, eyes and lymph nodes of affected cats, and are espe-
specifically associated with FIPV pathogenesis have not yet
cially common on the serosa of the abdominal viscera in
been identified. Some of the mutations in nonstructural
cats with the wet form of FIP.
466
PART III
Viruses
Host Response to Infection. The basis of immunity to
avirus (FRSCV) characterized by FIP-like clinical signs and
 FIPV is poorly understood. Cats develop humoral and cel-
lesions. Common clinical signs include anorexia, weight
lular immune responses soon after FCov infection, and 
loss, diarrhea, and the presence of large palpable intra-
these responses hold the infection in check until some
abdominal masses. Gross lesions are characterized by the
stress or concurrent infection causes immune suppression.
presence of widespread granulomas on serosal surfaces and
Antibodies to FCoV cross-react with FIPV and these cause
within the parenchyma of the abdominal thoracic organs.
disease expression rather than protection; this antibody
Histopathologic examination shows a systemic pyogranul-
facilitates viral uptake by phagocytic cells where the
matous inflammation in volving the liver, kidney, spleen,
virus effectively replicates, and viral antigens complexed
pancreas, adrenal glands, mesenteric adipose tissue, lymph
with specific antibodies (and complement) contribute to
nodes, and lungs. Comparative nucleotide sequence anal-
immune-mediated vasculitis.
ysis has demonstrated that FRECV and FRSCV differ signif-
icantly in their S genes (79.5% identity). Phylogenetically,
Laboratory Diagnosis. FIP is a common disease of cats
FRSCV is more closely related to FRECV than to the other
that often can be diagnosed based upon the characteristic
alphacoronaviruses.
clinical signs coupled with serology and hematology. Fluid
Diagnosis of ferret coronaviruses can be achieved by
accumulation in the peritoneal or pleural cavity, as deter-
 demonstration of coronaviruses-like particles in clinical
samples (e.g., feces and visceral organs) by EM or stain-
Or fluid antibody titer, is indicative of effusive FIP. Noneffu-
ing with anti-CoV monoclonal antibodies (e.g., FIPV3-
sive FIP is more difficult to diagnose and must be differenti-
 70). Viral antigen can also be demonstrated in formalin
ated from other infectious, granulomatous, and neoplastic
fixed tissues by IHC. Microscopically, pyogranulomatous
conditions. Histologic examination for pyogranulomatous
lesions can be observed in many visceral organs. The two
o1 fibronecrotic inflammatory lesions and vasculitis, in
ferret coronaviruses can be detected and distinguished by
association with serology, facilitates diagnosis. RT-PCR
both conventional and rRT-PCR assays. Virus isolation in 
techniques have been developed for identification of FIPV
Madin-Darby canine kidney, Crandell feline kidney, Vero
sequences in clinical material, as has IHC staining for FIPV.
and rabbit kidney (RK-13b) cells has been unsuccessful.
 Serologic diagnosis may be determined by viral neutral-
ization, ELISA, or indirect FA techniques. A serum titer of
greater than 1 : 3200 supports the diagnosis of FIP although
Rabbit Coronavirus
cats with FIP can have low titers of virus-specific antibody
Rabbit coronavirus (RbCoV) infection was first reported in
and, conversely, unaffected cats may have high titers of
1961 by Scandinavian researchers who observed 50-75%
antibody to the virus.
mortality among laboratory rabbits. It was established that
acute RbCoV infection targets the heart and results in virus-
Treatment and Control.
. No treatment for FIP has been
induced myocarditis and congestive heart failure in rabbits.
described that consistently reverses the disease process.
RbCoV was demonstrated by EM examination of heart tis-
A temperature-sensitive mutant FIPV is available for vac-
sues of affected rabbits, and also by demonstrating comple.
cination of cats. Its use is not recommended in seropos-
ment fixing antibodies to the human coronaviruses 229E
itive cats. Control of FIP is best realized by decontami-
and 0C43 in surviving rabbits. Furthermore, immunoflu-
nating (with quaternary ammonium compounds) infected
orescence staining with anti-229E serum localized fluores.
premises, isolating serologically positive cats from those
cence in the interstitial tissue of the myocardium of affected
with no titer, and screening newly acquired cats for serum
rabbits. Antiserum to RbCoV cross-reacts with FIPV, CCoV,
antibody.
and TGEV by radioimmunoassay.
Ferret Coronavirus
Animal Diseases Caused by Members of the
Recently a novel ferret enteric coronavirus (FRECV) was
Genus--Betacoronavirus
identified in domesticated ferrets (Mustela putorius fiuro)
associated with epizootic catarrhal enteritis (ECE). ECE, a
 Porcine Hemagglutinating Encepahlitis Viurs
relatively new disease of domestic ferrets, was first described
in the spring of 1993 on the east coast of the United States.
Disease. PHEV is the cause of vomiting and wasting
Since then, FRECV has spread across the United States and
disease (VWD) of young swine that is characterized by
to other countries. The disease is characterized by anorexia,
encephalomyelitis, vomiting and wasting. PHEV is anti-
lethargy, vomiting, and foul-smelling bright green diar-
genically related to BCoV. The virus hemagglutinates
rhea with high mucous content. The morbidity gener-
chicken, rat, mouse, hamster, and turkey erythrocytes.
ally approaches 100% but the overall mortality rate is
PHEV is sensitive to lipid solvents, including sodium deoxy-
low (<5%), with juvenile ferrets often developing only
cholate; it is also heat labile and relatively stable when
mild or subclinical disease. Clinical signs are more severe
frozen. VWD occurs in pigs less than 3 weeks of age,
in older ferrets and the mortality rate is often is higher.
although older swine may exhibit milder signs of the dis-
Phylogenetic analysis showed that FRECV is very closely
ease. VWD in young piglets is characterized by anorexia,
related to the Alphacoronaviurses (Group 1). Another coro-
lethargy, vomiting, constipation, and signs of CNs dis-
navirus has emerged in ferrets in the United States and
 turbance (hyperesthesia, muscle tremors, paddling of the
Europe causing systemic disease (ferret systemic coron-
legs). Mortality is high, up to 100%; pigs also may develop
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
467
chronic infections and eventually die from starvation 01
Bovine Coronavirus
secondary infections.
 Disease. BCoV is a pneumoenteric virus that infect upper
and lower respiratory tracts, as well as the intestine of cattle
Host-Virus Relationship
and wild ruminants. In cattle, BCoV can cause three dif-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
PHEV was first
ferent disease syndromes: neonatal diarrhea in newborn
isolated and associated with VWD in Canadian swine in
calves (1-3 weeks, calf diarrhea (CD) and winter dysen-
1958. Subsequently, the virus has been identified in swine
tery (WD) in adult cattle with hemorrhagic diarrhea and
in many areas of the world. Pigs are the only known host
respiratory infections in cattle of various ages. The respira-
 Of PHEV, and subclinical or inapparent carrier states likely
tory infections in cattle include shipping fever or bovine
exist. Nasal secretions contain virus and horizontal aerosol
respiratory disease complex (BRDC) in feedlot cattle.
and direct animal contact are mechanisms of transmission.
The CD in newborn calves (1-3 weeks) is characterized
by anorexia and a liquid, yellow diarrhea that persists for 4-
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The pathogenesis of PHEV
5 days. WD is a sporadic acute disease in adult cattle that is
 infection has been characterized by experimental inoc-
characterized by explosive bloody diarrhea accompanied
ulation of colostrum-deprived day-old pigs. Following
by decreased milk production, depression, and anorexia.
oronasal inoculation, primary viral replication occurs in
The BCoV strains that are isolated from diarrheal fluid
the epithelial cells of the nasal mucosa, tonsils, lungs, and
0r intestinal fluid are now identified as enteropathogenic
smali intestine. Virus subsequently spreads along periph-
bovine coronaviruses (EBCoV). Other strains of BCoV have
eral nerves to the CNs. Prior to disease expression, viralanti-
more recently been identified as respiratory pathogens in
gen is present in the trigeminal, inferior vagal, and superio1
cattle; these strains of coronavirus have been isolated from
cervical ganglia, solar and dorsal root ganglia of the lower
the nasal secretions and lungs of cattle with severe ship-
thoracicregion, and theintestinal nerve plexuses. In fection
ping fever pneumonia, and are designated as respiratory
in the brain stem is initiated in the trigeminal and vagal
bovine coronaviruses (RBCoV). Respiratory disease caused
sensory nuclei and subsequently spreads to other nuclei
by RBCoV typically occurs in calves aged 6-9 months, and
and the rostral portion of the brain stem. Later stages of
is characterized by fever, nasal discharge, and respiratory
the infection may be characterized by viral replication in
distress. The BRDC can be precipitated by RBCoV alone
the cerebrum, cerebellum, and spinal cord; virus is typi-
or in combination with several other respiratory viruses
cally found in the nervous plexuses of the stomach late in
(e.g., bovine respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza-3
infection.
virus, bovine herpesvirus) and viruses capable of mediating
There are few characteristic gross lesions in natural PHEV
immunosuppression (e.g., bovine viral diarrhea virus). Fur-
infections; a mild catarrhal rhinitis is sometimes evident
thermore, there are other predisposing factors that allow
commensal bacteria of the nasal cavity (e.g., Mannheimia
in encephalomyelitis cases, and gastroenteritis is some-
times observed in VWD. Lesions in the CNS are of a non-
haemolytica, Pasteurella sp, Mycoplasma sp.) to infect the
suppurative encephalomyelitis characterized by perivascu-
lungs leading to a fatal fibrinous pneumonia associated
lar cuffs of mononuclear cells, formation of glial nodes,
with BRDC.
neuronal degeneration, and meningitis. Respiratory tract
lesions consist of focal or diffuse interstitial peribronchio-
Etiologic Agent
lar pneumonia with cellular infiltrates composed of mono-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. BCoV is acid
cytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils.
stable (pH of 3.0), but is inactivated by lipid solvents,
detergents, and high temperatures. Although there are
Host Response to Infection. 
 Humoral immune responses
significant phenotypic, antigenic and genetic differences
may be quantitated by viral neutralization, hemagglutina-
between EBCoV and RBCoV strains, the precise relation-
 tion inhibition (HI), and agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID).
ship between enteric and respiratory strains of BCoV is
The clinical disease isself-limiting in pigpopulations due to
uncertain. There is only one known serotype of BCoVs
the rapid development of maternal antibodies and transfer
and as of now, no consistent antigenic or genetic mark-
via colostrum.
ers have been identified to discriminate BCoV isolates from
the three different clinical syndromes. BCoV is antigeni-
Laboratory
Diagnois. Diagnosis
of
PHEV
 cally related to coronaviruses of other species. BCoV parti-
encephalomyelitis or VWD in piglets requires IHC
cles hemagglutinate erythrocytes from hamsters, mice,and
staining of viral antigens in the tissues of affected pigs,
rats.
virus isolation on primary pig kidney (PK) or pig thyroid
(PT) cells, or demonstration of a rising antibody titer.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. The
PHEV grows in primary PK or PT cells with formation of
 BCoV has been propagated in suckling mice, and following
characteristic syncytia.
such passage will infect suckling rats and hamsters by both 
intracerebral and subcutaneous routes. EBCoV has been
Treatment and Control. No effective treatment has been
propagated in Madin-Darby bovine kidney, African green
described for HEV-induced encephalomyelitis or VWD.
monkey kidney (Vero), bovine fetal thyroid, and bovine
Clinical outbreaks are self-limiting. No vaccines are avail-
fetal brain cells. Trypsin treatment of the latter two fetal
able and good animal husbandry practices are essential for
cell cultures enhances plaque formation and cell fusion.
the prevention and control of the disease.
468
PART III
Viruses
require passage in the natural host. In contrast, only a
tal ingestion of colostral IgA protects the intestinal lumen
human rectal tumor cell line (HRT-18) is permissive for
against EBCoV infection for a limited period of time.
 initial isolation of RBCoV.
Laboratory Diagnosis. BCoV infections can be diagnosed
Host-Virus Relationship
by detection of infectious virus, viral antigen, or viral
 RNA in clinical specimens {e.g., feces, respiratory secre-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. The distribu-
tions, tissues). Diagnosis of EBCoV-induced neonatal diar-
tion of BCoV is worldwide, and transmission of EBCoV
rhea requires identification of the virus in fecal samples
is likely fecal-oral by ingestion of virus from contami-
 01 intestinal sections. This can be achieved by viral isola-
nated feed, teats, and fomites. RBCoV is shed in respi-
tion, EM, or fluorescent antibody or IHC staining. Nasal
ratory tract secretions of infected animals, and thus is
swabs collected during the acute stage of upper respiratory
 spread horizontally by aerosol. However, RBCoV also can
tract disease are the specimens of choice for the diagnosis
be found in feces leading to fecal-oral transmission of
of RBCoV. Respiratory epithelial cells present in the nasal
the virus. Bovine-like CoVs have also been identified in
swabs are spotted onto slides for examination by direct flu-
water buffalo calves and alpacas. Serological surveys using
orescent antibody test.
indirect IF tests have demonstrated circulation of CoVs
BCoV RNA in feces, nasal secretions or tissues can be
antigenically closely related to BCoV circulating in cap-
detected by conventional RT-PCR, nRT-PCR, and 1RT-PCR
tive and wild ruminants. Some of the CoVs from captive
assays. Because of BCoV antibodies are widespread in cattle,
ruminants (sambar deer, white-tailed deer, elk, waterbuck,
and giraffe) are biologically, genetically and antigenically
samples for serologic diagnosis of BCoV infections.
(cross-neutralizing) very closely related to BCoVs. Sequenc-
Treatment and Control. Treatment is dictated by the
ing of these closely related CoVs from captive ruminants
have shown very close amino acid identity (93-99%) in
 severity and type of disease. Electrolyte solutions can
some viral proteins to enteric and respiratory BCoV strains,
be administered for dehydration in calves with diarrhea
 caused by EBCoV infections, and antibiotic therapy may
further confirming their close genetic relationship. Thus,
the possibility exists that wild and captive ruminants could
be used to control secondary infections. All BCoV infec.
transmit bovine-like CoVs to cattle or vice versa. Such inter-
 tions are best controlled by good management practices to
species transmission (species jumping) of BCoVs combined
minimize exposure to these viruses, such as avoiding intro-
 ducing new (infected) animals into an intensive calving
with their ability to recombine would lead to emergence of
more genetically divergent CoVs. Sequence analysis has
 operation. It is diffcult to control enteric disease by vacci-
revealed that porcine HEV and HCoV-OC43 likely may
 nation because very young calves are most affected before
have evolved from ancestral BCoV strains. Furthermore,
they have the opportunity to respond to vaccination. The
genetic and antigenic similarity between canine respiratory
alternative is to immunize the dam to increase antibody
coronavirus (CRCoV) and BCoV has been demonstrated.
levels in colostrum. However, there are no BCoV-vaccines
have been developed to prevent BCoV associated respira-
tory disease in young calves or BRDC of feedlot cattle.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Diarrhea develops within
24-30 h following oralinfection of calves with EBCoV. Four
hours after onset of diarrhea, viral antigen is detectable in
Canine Respiratory Coronavirus
the epithelium of the small intestine and colonic crypts.
 In 2003, a new coronavirus was identified in the respiratory
 Initiation of infection is facilitated by proteolytic enzymes
tract of dogs housed in a rehoming kennel in the United
in the intestinal tract since trypsin treatment of coron-
Kingdom. This virus was referred to as CRCoV. Nucleotide
aviruses in cell culture results in enhanced viral growth.
sequence analysis of CRCoV spike protein gene demon-
The virus also infects theadjacent mesenteric lymph nodes.
strated 97.3% and 96.9% identity to the betacoronaviruses
Destruction of the mature enterocytes that line the intesti-
(Group 2) BCoV and HCoV-OC43, respectively. It has been 
nal villi leads to atrophy and fusion of affected villi, with
recently demonstrated that HCoV-OC43 has emerged after
subsequent intestinal maldigestion and malabsorption,
viral transmission from cattle to people. Interestingly, the
rapid loss of fluids and electrolytes, and, in severe cases,
dehydration, acidosis, shock and death.
gests that the virus was probably transmitted to dogs from
 RBCoV infection in calves causes interstitial pneumonia
cattle. The CRCoV shares only 21.2% amino acid identity
with congestion, hemorrhage and edema of the interlob-
 to CCoV-1 in the spike protein. CRCoV is responsible for
ular septa of the lung. Histologically, there is interstitial
mild respiratory disease in dogs. However, in most of the
pneumonia with infltration of mononuclear inflamma-
cases it contributes to the development of canine infectious
tory cells and thickenings of alveolar septa.
respiratory disease (CIRD) together with other canine res.
piratory pathogens (e.g., Bordetella bronchiseptica, canine
Host Response to Infection. Both EBCoV and RBCoV
adenovirus type 1 and type 2, canine parainfleunza virus,
infections in calves result in a humoral immune response
canine herpesvirus, reoviruses, and influenza viruses).
that can readily be quantitated by viral neutralization, H1,
Serological studies have shown antibodies to CRCoV
hemadsorption inhibition (HAI), and ELISA tests. Local
in dog serum samples surveyed in the United Kingdom,
immune responses play an important role as circulating
Canada, Ireland, Italy, United States, and Japan. CRCoV
antibodies do not protect calves from infection. Neona-
infection associated with CIRD in kennels can occur
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
469
throughout the year, but it can be more common in the
IRT-PCR assays targeting the conserved nucleocapsid pro-
winter months of the year. Isolation of CRCoV in canine
tein gene have been described. Antibodies to ECoV cross-
cell lines is difficult, but it can be isolated in human rectal
react with the BcoV, and therefore, demonstration of rising
tumor cell line (HRT-18) and its clone HRT-18G. However,
neutralizing antibody titers (fourfold or more) to BCoV in
not all strains of CRCoV can be isolated in HRT-18 or HRT-
paired serum samples indicates exposure to ECoV.
18G cells. Hemagglutination assay using chicken RBCs at
4 *C can be used to detect CRCoV-infected cell cultures.
Mouse Hepatitis Virus
CRCoV nucleic acids can be detected in clinical samples
by standard RT-PCR or real-time RT-PCR. CRCoV can also
MHV is highly contagious and causes explosive outbreaks
be detected by immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed
of disease in mouse colonies throughout the world. The
tissues using anti-BCoV cross-reactive antibody. Several
severity of the clinical disease depends on several factors.
ELISAs either using BCoV antigen or CCRoV antigen have
These factors can be broadly classifed into viral (strain,
been developed. However, an ELISA assay using CRCoV
dose, and route of infection) and host factors (strain of
antigen was found to have higher sensitivity and speci-
mice, age, and immune status). There are many different
ficity compared with an assay based on BCoV. Antibodies
strains of MHV, each with characteristic tissue tropism and
to CRCoV can also be detected by using an IFA on CRCoV-
associated clinical manifestations. Infection of mice with 
infected HRT-18 cells. Antibodies to CRCoV do not cross-
different virus strains can cause enteritis, hepatitis, nephri-
react with enteric CCoVs. There is no specific treatment
tis, and demyelinating encephalomyelitis. For example the
for infections caused by CRCoV but dogs should be treated
A59 strain of MHV induces moderate to severe hepatitis,
for other bacterial causes of CIRD. There are no vaccines
whereas the MHV-4 strain does not. The enteropathogenic
      e o 
strains of MHV cause severe diairhea in suckling mice with
protect against CRCoV because of low antigenic similarity
nearly 100% mortality. The intestines are distended and
in the spike protein of these viruses.
filled with yellowish fluid. Older mice develop jaundice,
lose weight, and cease breeding. Characteristic histological
lesions include blunted (club-shaped) intestinal villi with
Equine Coronavirus
extensive syncytium formation. All mice develop acute
Coronavirus-like agents have been identified by EM exam-
hepatitis with focal hepatocellular necrosis and inflamma-
ination of fecal samples from foals and adult horses having
tory cell infiltration. Other strains of MHV are the cause
enteric disease and fever. First isolation and characteriza-
 of respiratory and CNS disease in mouse colonies. A59 and
tion of ECoV (NC99 strain) from feces of a diarrheic foal
JHM strains of MHV are the most commonly studied neu-
was described in 2000. Phylogenetic analysis has demon-
10tropic strains of this virus. A59 causes moderate to severe
strated that ECoV NC99 strain is most closely related to
hepatitis and in the brain, mild encephalitis and demyeli-
BCoV, HCoV-OC43, and PHEV. In 2011, isolation of ECoV
nation. A59 is a tissue culture adapted dualtropic strain
(Tokachio9 strain) from adult horses with fever and enteric
that infects the liver as well as the brain. CNS infection
disease was described from Japan. Comparative nucleotide
with neurotropic strains of MHV causes paralysis due to
and amino acid analyses of nucleocapsid and spike protein
demyelination (used as a model of chronic demyelinating
genes showed that the Tokachi09 strain is very similar to
diseases of humans like multiple sclerosis).
the NC99 strain from North America (98.0% and 99.0%
MHV infection in mouse colonies is diagnosed with the
at the nucleotides, 97.3% and 99.0% at the amino acids,
 detection of characteristic gross and histological lesions
respectively). However, the Tokachi09 strain had a 185-
in the intestines and liver, although some strains of MHV
nucleotide deletion from four bases after the stop codon of
are highly attenuated and cause little pathology or disease.
the spike gene, resulting in the absence of the open reading
The diagnosis is confirmed by immunohistochemistry and
frame predicted to encode a 4.7-kDa nonstructural protein
serology using an enzyme immunoassay. Virus can be iso-
in strain NC99. Nevertheless, the pathogenicity of these
lated using any of several mouse cell lines.
equine coronaviruses, as well as their role in enteric disease,
The virus persists following epidemics in persistently
has not been examined in detail. ECoV has been implicated
in fected mice that continually in fect susceptible mice that
in an increasing number of enteric disease outbreaks in
are introduced into the colony. Control is achieved by
foals and adult horses in the United States in recent years.
 breaking this cycle of transmission through the use of strict
Further studies are needed to determine the prevalence of
quarantine measures.
ECoV infection in healthy and sick horses, the occurrence
 of mixed infections with other enteric equine pathogens,
Rat Coronavirus
and relative importance of ECoV as a cause of enteric dis-
ease in horses.
Two prototype strains of rat coronavirus (RCoV) with dif-
The diagnosis of ECoV can be achieved by demonstra-
ferent tissue tropism and disease associations have been
tion of coronavirus particles in feces under electron micro-
described. The first, sialodacryadentis virus (SDAV) is the
scopic examination. However, it may be difficult to find
etiologic agent of sialodacryadenitis in laboratory rats. It
a sufficient number of ECoV particles in diagnostic fecal
is a severe, self-limiting inflammatory disease of the upper
specimens and thus, it may be less rewarding. ECoV can be
respiratory tract, salivary and lacrimal glands, and eyes of
difficult to isolate and propagate in cell culture. Neverthe-
rats. SDAV has also been isolated from the lower respira-
less, ECoV has been successfully isolated from feces by inoc-
tory tract and can cause mild interstitial pneumonia in
ulating HRT-18 cells. Recently, conventional RT-PCR and
young rats. The virus is highly contagious and causes high
470
PART III
Viruses
morbidity and low mortality in infected colonies. Clinical
IBV serotype-specific antibodies has become less practical
signs of infection include swelling of the face and neck,
due to the emergence of an increasing number of antigenic
excessive lacrimation, blinking, squinting, and exoph-
variants with new neutralization phenotypes. A small per-
thalmia. Lesions in the lacrimal duct may lead to corneal
centage of amino acid changes in the S1 protein can result
 drying. Lesions typically resolve within 2 weeks. The virus
in a change in virus neutralizing epitopes leading to emer-
is transmitted by aerosol, direct contact, and fomites.
gence of new antigenic variants and serotypes. Thus, IBV
The second prototype, Parker's RCoV (RCoV-P) has only
variants may belong to over a hundred serotypes. Geno-
been isolated from the respiratory tract and causes fatal
typing of IBV strains has been achieved primarily by RT-
pneumonia in suckling rats. Following intranasal exper-
PCR implication and sequencing of the S1 subunit of the
imental infection, RCoV-P replicates in both upper and
spike glycoprotein, which is the major inducer of protec-
lower respiratory tract leading to interstitial pneumonia
tive immunity and expresses most of the virus-neutralizing
and focal edema in the alveoli, which resolves by day 8
epitopes, including the serotype specific epitopes. In gen-
after infection.
eral, the IBV strains with high level of homology in the S1
gene will provide a good level of cross-protection which is
not seen with strains with a low homology in this region.
Animal Diseases Caused by Members of the
Genus Gammacoronavirus
Resistance to Physical and Chenical Agents. Most strains
of IBV are inactivated within 15 min at 56 *C. The virus is
Avian Infectious Bronchitis Virus
quite stable at cold temperatures. Stability at acidic pH is
Disease. Avian bronchitis virus (IBV) is one of the most
strain-variable; with some strains surviving at pH 3.0 for
3 h at 4 *C. Lipid solvents inactivate the virus.
significant causes of economic losses within the poultry
industry, affecting the performance of both egg-laying and
meat-style (broiler) birds. Avian IBV causes respiratory dis-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systens. The
ease in chicks 10 days to 4 weeks of age; however, all ages,
chicken is the only known natural host of IBv. However,
sexes, and breeds are susceptible to infection although mor.
quail and sea gulls have been experimentally infected.
tality is low in birds greater than 6 weeks of age. The virus
Suckling mice can be in fected by intracerebral inoculation.
replicates not only in the upper and lower respiratory tract
The virus can be cultivated in developing avian embryos,
but also in the alimentary tract (e.g., esophagus, proven-
cell cultures, and organ cultures. Turkey embryos have also
triculus, duodenum, jejunum, cecal tonsils, rectum, cloaca,
been successfully infected with IBV, but less efficiently.
and bursa of Fabricious) and other tissues such as repro-
IBV can be grown in chick embryo cells (kidney, lung, and
ductive tract (e.g., oviduct and testes) and kidneys. The
 liver), embryonic turkey kidney cells, and mon key kidney
(Vero) cells. Organ cultures have been used to propagate
respiratory disease is characterized by respiratory distress,
rales, coughing, nasal discharge, and depression. The clin-
 IBV including tracheal and oviduct cultures.
ical course lasts 6-18 days. Morbidity is 100% and mortal-
 s  a     
Host-Virus Relationship
 may experience permanent oviduct damage and fail to
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
A large number
lay eggs when mature. Infection of the alimentary tract
of IBV variants exist around the world. Interestingly, some
tissues does not manifest clinically. However, nephritis is
of the IBV variants are unique to a particular area, whereas
not uncommon among some of the IBV infected broilers.
others have a more general distribution. The virus likely
 IBV-associated renal disease is dependent upon viral strain.
persists in persistently infected birds and/or continuous
Many viral strains with an affinity for the kidneys cause
cycles of transmission. Virus has been recovered for up to
 n q 'sis Ads n no  
49 days from infected chickens held in isolation and for
substantial mortality in susceptible birds. Infection of lay.
even longer periods in those held under natural conditions.
ing flocks results in a drop of egg production and hatchabil-
Viral transmission occurs by inhalation, with the respira-
ity. Pullets in good condition return to normal production
tory tract being the primary site of infection. Virus is shed
within a few weeks. Oviduct infection of is believed to con-
in respiratory and fecal materials, with subsequent spread
tribute to diminished egg production.
by contaminated fomites and aerosol.
Etiologic Agent
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The incubation period of
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. IBV is anti-
IBV infection is 18-36 h. Virus gains entry via the respi-
 genically distinct from other coronaviruses, and multiple
ratory tract, and the respiratory form of IBV results in tra-
distinct virus strains have been identifed and grouped
 cheitis and bronchitis. Mortality may be as high as 25%
in young chicks. Strains exhibiting an affinity for the kid-
lamide gelelectrophoresis, oligonucleotide fingerprinting,
neys damage the renal tubules, resulting in renal failure.
and nucleotide sequencing. Strain-specific epitopes for
Chickens in fected with nephrotropic viral strains develop
viral neutralization and hemagglutination have been iden-
renal tubular necrosis characterized by swollen and pale
tified on the S1 protein (S protein is cleaved to generate
kidneys with accumulation of uric acid crystals causing
two subunits, aminoterminal S1 and carboxyterminal S2)
distenision of the tubules and ureters. Infection produces
with monoclonal antibodies. However, serotyping based
primarily a serous, catarrhal, or caseous exudate in the tra-
on the reaction between an IBV strain and chicken-induced
chea, nasal passages, and sinuses. The air sacs may contain
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
471
a caseous exudate, and small foci of bronchopneumonia
kept for a year or more should be vaccinated several times
may be apparent. Young chicks may experience a more
with MLV vaccines, perhaps with more than one serotype.
severe infection, with lesions developing in the oviduct.
Vaccines may be administered via aerosol or in drink-
Microscopic lesions of the respiratory tract include cellu
ing water. High passage vaccine viruses apparently have a
lar infltration, mucosal edema, vascular congestion, and
reduced invasiveness and generally require aerosol admin-
hemorrhage.
istration.
The multiplicity of IBV strains and serotypes has made
Host Response to Infection. IBV elicits humoral and
it difficult to develop efficacious vaccines. No single strain
cellular immune responses. Humoral responses can be
has been identified as capable of inducing more than
measured by ELISA, viral neutralization, and HI tests.
limited protection to heterologous viruses. Multivalent
Following infection with IBV, chickens first develop ELISA
vaccines are available, but in certain instances prolonged
antibodies, followed by virus neutralizing, and Hl anti-
reactions to vaccination and some interference between
bodies. Titers of passively transferred maternal antibody
vaccine strains have been reported . Vaccines have not been
decrease to negligible levels within 4 weeks of hatching.
developed commercially with nephropathogenic strains of
Chickens recovered from natural infection are resistant to
IBV. Inactivated and subunit vaccines have been developed
homologous viral challenge. The duration of immunity is
againstIBV but they do notprovide good protection against
variable and difficult to determine due to the multiplic-
infection.
ity of IBV strains. Passive transfer of maternal antibody
does not confer total protection to the chick but reduces
disease severity and mortality. Local tracheal immunity
Turkey Coronavirus
appears to play a major role in resistance to IBV. The rel-
Disease. TCoV is the causative agent of coronavirus
ative importance of humoral versus cellular immunity is
enteritis (CE) of turkeys. It is an acute and highly conta-
unclear. However, it has been demonstrated that cytotoxic
gious disease of turkeys of all ages and is of major economic
T-cellresponses to IBV infection in chickens correlated with
importance to the turkey industry. Synonyms of the disease
initial decrease in infection and clinical signs. The obser-
include bluecomb disease, mud fever, transmissible enteri-
vation that chickens may be protected in the absence of
tis, and infectious enteritis. The disease affects primarily the
demonstrable antibody would suggest an important role
for cell-mediated immunity.
alimentary tract and is characterized by depression, subnor-
mal body temperature, anorexia, inappetence, loss of body
weight, and wet droppings. Darkening of the head and skin
Laboratory Diagnosis. Diagnosis of infectious bronchitis
and tucking of the skin over the crop are characteristics of
tracheal smears using IHC or fluorescent antibody staining,
infected growing turkeys. A rapid drop in egg production
with formation of chalky eggshells occurs in producing
viral isolation, 0r serology. Infectious bronchitis must be
breeder hens. Morbidity is essentially 100%, and mortality
differentiated from other acute respiratory diseases of birds,
varies with age and environmental conditions.
such as Newcastle disease, laryngotracheitis, and infectious
coryza.
Viral isolation is conducted by inoculation of tracheal
Etiologic Agent
0r respiratory exudates into the chorioallantoic sac of 10-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. TCoV is inac-
to 11-day-old embryonated chicken eggs (ECE). Serial pas-
sage in ECEs may be required before embryo dwarfing or
tivated by lipid solvents and detergents, but is resistant to
mortality occurs. Recently, real-time RT-PCR assays for the
acidic pH (pH of 3.0 at 20 *C for 30 min). The virus is resis-
 tant to 50 C for 1 h. TCoV is apparently unrelated antigeni-
detection ofIBV nucleic acid have been described. Serologic
cally to other coronaviruses and is readily distinguished
diagnosis of IBV infection requires paired serum samples
from IBV based on antigenic and biological differences.
and the use of IBV-specific viral neutralization, HI, AGID,
or ELISA assays.
However, phylogenetic analysis based on the nucleocapsid
gene has demonstrated that TCoV is more closely related to
IBV than to other mammalian coronaviruses. TCoV agglu-
Treatment and Control. No specific treatment for infec-
tious bronchitis is available. Proper husbandry practices
tinates rabbit and guinea pig erythrocytes, but not those
that reduce environmental stress are logical. Control of
from cattle, horse, sheep, mouse, goose, monkey, rooster,
infectious bronchitis may be approached through man-
or chickens.
agement procedures and vaccination. Spread of the virus
may be reduced by strict isolation of an affected flock and
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. TCoV
restocking with day-old chicks reared in isolation. Atten-
in fection is confined to turkeys and virus replication occurs
uated and inactivated vaccines have been developed for
exclusively in the intestinal epithelium and the epithelium
the control of IB. Inactivated vaccines induce neutraliz-
of the bursa of Fabricious. Using IHC, TCoV antigens can
ing antibodies, but their efficacy has been questioned.
be demonstrated in these tissues. Experimental infection
MLV vaccines attenuated by serial passage in embryonated
of chickens, pheasants, sea gulls, and coturnix quail were
chicken eggs have not only reduced pathogenicity but also
shown to be refractory to infection. Laboratory propaga-
decreased immunogenicity. Vaccination with MLV vac-
tion of the virus has been limited to turkey and chicken
cines produce short-lived protection and start to decline
embryos, and attempts to grow TCoV in cell cultures have
after 9 weeks. Consequently, commercial layers which are
been unsuccessful.
472
PART III
Viruses
Host-Virus Relationship
Animal Diseases Caused by Members of the
Genus Torovirus
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. CE has been
 described in North America and Australia. The virus persists
Four species of toroviruses have recently been identified:
in turkeys for life following recovery from the disease. It is
BToV, PToV, EToV, and HuToV (Table 62.1). TVL particles
 stable in frozen feces and survives throughout the winter
have been observed in fecal samples of horses, cattle, pigs,
months in infected droppings, thus transmission of TCoV
cats, dogs, and humans. In addition, serological evidence
is principally fecal-oral from the infected feces of carrier
for torovirus infections has been demonstrated in horses,
birds. Introduction of virus onto a premise may occur via
cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, rabbits, rats, and two species of
calrier turkeys, feces-contaminated fomites such as person-
wild mice. It has been speculated that toroviruses are asso-
nel and equipment, and possibly mechanical transmission 
ciated with enteric disease in many animal species, but as
by free-flying birds.
yet, only the BToV (also known as bovine enteric torovirus)
has been definitely ascribed to be associated with gastroen-
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The incubation period of CE
teritis in animals.
varies from 1 to 5 days. Gross lesions are largely confined to
 Seroepidemiological studies indicate that BToV infec-
the intestinal tract, with petechial hemorrhages sometimes
tion of cattle seems to be common throughout the world.
apparent on the serosal surface. Lesions are most distinct in
Diarrhea due to BToV infections has been reported both
the jejunum but may also occur in the duodenum, ileum,
in young and old cattle. The clinical manifestations of
and cecum. Gas and fluid typically distend the small intes-
BToV infections include watery diarrhea with dehydra-
tine and ceca. The breast muscles are typically dehydrated
tion, weakness, and depression. Predominantly affected are
 and the carcass generally appears emaciated. Microscopic
2-3-week-old calves and they tend to have only mild diar-
lesions include destruction of enterocytes lining the intesti-
rhea by 3-4 months of age but continue to shed the virus.
nal villi, leading to their shortening, loss of microvilli, and
Diarrhea outbreaks associated with BToV in adult cattle
mononuclear cell infltration of the lamina propria of the
have been described. Most of the affected cattle develop
affected bowel.
watery diarrhea, anorexia, and decreased milk produc.
tion. BToV infections are usually limited to the intestine,
but there is some evidence for respiratory tract involve-
Host Response to Infection. Turkeys respond to TCoV
ment in adult cattle leading to pneumonia in older cattle.
infection with a humoral and cellular immune response.
Recently, BToV nucleic acid has been detected by RT-PCR
 Serum antibodies (IgM, IgA, and IgG) develop following
 in nasal swabs collected from Japanese calves with respira-
infection, but only IgG is present by 21 days. Local IgA
tory symptoms, suggesting that this virus may be a predis-
 antibody appears in intestinalsecretions and bile for atleast
posing factor and/or causative agent for bovine respiratory
6 months. Passive transfer of maternal immunity has not
disease. Toroviruses infect the epithelial cells of the small
 been observed and administration of antiserum to young
and large intestine extending from mid-jejunum to colon.
poults does not afford protection.
Transmission of BToV probably occurs via oral and respira-
tory routes. Following infection, cattle develop neutraliz-
ing antibodies to BToV and these antibodies can cross-react
Laboratory Diagnosis. Definitive diagnosisofCErequires
with toroviruses from other animal species. Diagnosis of
identification of viral antigen in intestinal tissue sections
BToV infection is achieved by demonstration of virus par-
by IHC staining, viral isolation, or demonstration of serum
ticles with a doughnut-shaped nucleocapsid surrounded
antibody. Virus may be isolated by inoculation of embry-
         
onated turkey eggs or young poults and its presence con-
that resemble the peplomeres of coronaviruses. Although
firmed by fluorescent antibody staining of infected tissues.
isolation of EToV from a rectal swab has been previously
Attempts to propagate TCoV in a variety of avian and mam-
reported, attempts to isolate the other members of this
 malian cell cultures generally have been unsuccessful. Sero-
genus have proved to be difficult. However recently, BToV
logic diagnosis can be conducted on paired serum samples
from fecal samples of diarrheic cows in Japan has been iso.
by viral neutralization or indirect FA tests.
lated in HRT-18 cells. The diagnosis of BToV infection is
mainly achieved by demonstration of antigen or demon-
Treatment and Control. No specific treatment is effective
stration of antibodies to the virus by immunological meth.
in reducing morbidity of CE, although various treatments
ods. Virus in fecal samples can be detected by indirect
may be used to prevent other intestinal infections. TCoV
S    
vaccines are not available, but prevention of infection is
Antibodies to BToV can be demonstrated by neutralization
possible. The disease has been eliminated in some areas by
assay or ELISA. Recently, standard and real-time RT-PCR
depopulation and decontamination of affected premises.
assays have been described for the detection of both BToV
 An alternative to viral elimination is exposing poults (5--
and PToV nucleic acid in fecal samples.
6 weeks of age) to recovered carrier birds under ideal envi-
PToV was originally isolated in 1998 from the feces of
ronmental conditions for the purpose of inducing protec-
piglets that did not show any signs of enteritis or diarrhea,
tive immunity. Such a program is recommended only on
but it since has been isolated from pigs with diarrhea at the
farms with continued problems and when all other meth-
time of weaning. In recent years, PToV has been identified 
ods of control have failed.
from piglets in many countries in the world butits potential
Chapter 62
Coronaviridae
473
to cause diarrhea in pigs remains unclear. EToV (Bern virus)
Carters, and EJ Lefkowitz), Elsevier Academic Press, London,
was originally isolated from the rectal swab of a diarrheic
Nidovirales, pp. 806-828.
horse. This is the only EToV isolate that has been reported
de Groot RJ, Cowley JA, Enjuanes L et al. (2012) Order Nidovi-
to date. Limited seroepidemiological studies indicate that
rales, in Virus Taxonomy, Ninth Report of the International
the virus is present in the United States and Europe. Much
Commiftee on Taxonomy of Viruses (edsAMQ King, MJ Adams,
 EB Carters, and EJ Lefkowitz), Elsevier Academic Press, Lon-
tance of torovirus infections of animals.
don, Nidovirales, pp. 785-795.
Faaberg KS, Balasuriya UBR, and Brinton MA (2012) Family
Arteriviridae, in Virus Taxonomy, Ninth Report of the Interna-
References
tional Commiftee on Taxonomy of Viruses (eds AMQ King,
MJ Adams, EB Carters, and EJ Lefkowitz), Elsevier Academic
Press, London, Nidovirales, pp. 796-805.
Enjuanes L, Gorbalenya AE, de Groot RJ et al. (2008) Nidovi-
Lai MMC, Perlman S, and Anderson LJ (2007) Coronaviridae,
rales, in Encyclopedia of Virology (eds BWJ Mahy and MHV
in Fields Virology, Sth edn (eds DM Knipe and PM Howley),
Regenmortel), Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 419-430.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 1305-
Gorbalenya AE, Enjuanes L, Ziebuhr J, and Snijder EJ (2006)
1335.
Nidovirales: Evolving the largest RNA virus genome. Virus
Perlman S, Gallagher T, and Snijder EJ (ed.) (2008) Nidoviruses,
Res,117,17-37.
ASM Press, Washington DC.
Schitze H, Ulferts R, Schelle B et al. (2006) Characteriza-
 Saif L (2010) Bovine respiratory coronaviruses. Vet Clin Food
tion of White Bream virus reveals a novel genetic cluster of
Anim, 26, 349-364.
Nidoviruses. / Virol, 80 (23), 11598-11609.
Siddell SG, Ziebuhr J, and Snijder EJ (200s) Coron-
aviruses, toroviruses and arteriviruses, in, Topley & Wil-
son's Microbiology and Microbial Infections, Virology (eds
Further Reading
BWJ Mahy and V ter Meulen), Hodder Arnold. London,
pp.823-856.
Decaro N and Buonavoglia C (2008) An update on canine coro-
Woo PCY, Lau SKP, Huang Y, and Yuen KY. (2009) Coronavirus
naviruses: Viral evolution and pathobiology. Vet Microbiol,
diversity, phylogeny and interspeciesjumping. Exp Biol Med,
132,221-234.
234,1117-1127.
de Groot RJ, Baker SC, Baric R et al. (2012) Order Nidovirales,
Woo PCY, Huang Y, Lau SKP, and Yuen KY. (2010). Coro-
in Virus Taxonomy, Ninth Report of the International Commit-
navirus genomics and bioinformatics analysis. Viruses, 2,
tee on Taxonomy of Viruses (eds AMQ King, MJ Adams, EB
1804-1820.
Arteriviridae and
Roniviridae
UDENI B.R. BALASURIYA
Introduction and Classification
Virion Properties and Virus Replication
The virus families Arteriviridae and Roniviridae are
Genus Arterivirus
included in the order Nidovirales along with Coron-
Arterivirus virions are spherical, 45-60 nm in diameter,
aviridae. The members of Arteriviridae and Roniviri-
and consist of an isometric nucleocapsid of 25-39 nm
dae are enveloped viruses with linear, positive-senise,
in diameter, surrounded by a lipid envelope. The enve-
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) genomes. The genome of
lope includes 12-15 nm diameter ring-like surface projec-
arteriviruses and roniviruses contains a 5'-cap structure and
tions. The large spikes that are typical of coronaviruses
a 3'-poly (A) tail and includes untranslated regions (UTR)
and roniviruses are absent from the arterivirus enve-
at their 5'- and 3'-termini. They share a strikingly simi-
lope. The buoyant density of arteriviruses ranges from
lar genome organization and replication strategy to that of
1.13 to 1.17 g/cm? in sucrose, whereas the sedimentation
coronaviruses, but differ considerably in their genetic com-
 plexity and virion architecture (Figures 63.1 and 63.2 and
coeffcient is 214-230s. The arterivirus genome is a lin-
ear, positive-sense, ssRNA molecule of 12.7-15.7 kb and
Tables 63.1, 63.2, and 63.3). The family Arteriviridae (genus
includes 10-14 open reading frames (ORFs) (Table 63.2 and
Arterivirus) contains four species-specific viruses that infect
     s ( a
as follows: (i) horses, donkeys, mules and zebras (mem-
solvents (ether and chloroform) and by common disinfec-
bers of the family Equidae), equine arteritis virus (EAV); (ii)
tants and detergents (e.g., 0.01% Np-40 or Titron X-100).
pigs, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
Arteriviruses are also highly heat labile, and their half-life
(PRRSV); (i) monkeys, simian hemorrhagic fever virus
progressively decreases with increasing temperature. EAV
(SHFV); and (iv) mice, lactate dehydrogenase-elevating
survives 75 days at 4 °C, 2-3 days at 37 *C, and 20-30 min at
virus (LDV). The arteriviruses primarily target macrophages
 56 °C. Tissue culture fluid or organ samples containing EAV
in thei1 respective hosts, and the disease outcome is highly
can be stored at -70 *C for years without significant loss
variable and includes persistent asymptomatic infections,
respiratory disease, reproductive failure (abortion), and
of the infectivity. PRRSV infectivity is lost within 1 week at
4 °C, but is stable for a long time (months to years) when 
lethal hemorrhagic fever. All four members of the fam-
frozen (- 70 or -20 *C). PRRSV is rapidly inactivated by low
ily Arteriviridae are capable of establishing asymptomatic,
and high pH (<6and >7.5). LDV is not stable at -20 *C and 
long-term infection or persistent infection in their respec-
rapidly loses its in fectivity.
tive natural hosts. The family Roniviridae (genus Okavinus)
The virions of EAV and PRRSV consist of a nucleocap-
contains a number of closely related viruses that in fect crus-
taceans (shrimp, prawns, and crabs). The name Okavirus is
sid protein (N) and seven envelope proteins (E, GP2, GP3,
GP4, ORF5a protein, GP5, M; Figure 63.1A and Table 63.2).
derived from the observation that these viruses have the
The GP5 (glycosylated) and M (unglycosylated) are the
ability to infect the shrimp lymphoid or "Oka" organ. Mem-
major enivelope proteins of EAV and PRRSV, and they form
bers of this genus include yellow-head virus (YHV) and gill-
a disulfide-linked heterodimer in the mature virus parti-
associated virus (GAV), both of which infect and cause high
cles. In addition, the arterivirus envelope contains a het-
mortalities in farmed black tiger prawns (Penaeus monodon)
erotrimer of three minor membrane glycoproteins (GP2,
in Asia and Australia, respectively.
 GP3, and GP4) and two unglycosylated envelope proteins
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
474
Chapter 63
Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
475
FIGURE 63.1.
Structure and morphology of arteriviruses and roniviruses. (A) Schematic representation of arteriviruses (e.g.,
EAV); (B) electron micrographs of arteriviruses: (a) EAV, (b) PRRSV, (c) SHFV, and (d) LDV; (C) schematic representation of ronivirus; and
(PRRSV), Gravell et al. 1980 (SHFV), Brinton-Darnell and Plagemann 1975 (LDV), and Zhang and Bonami 2007 (EsRNV) with permission.)
gp116
Envelope
9da
N
RNA
GP3
Heterotrimer
Envelope
GP4
ORF5dprotein
RNA
(A)
(C)
(D)
(B)
(E and ORF5a protein). It has been shown that all major
modification (glycosylation) and conformational matura-
structural proteins (N, GP5, and M) and four of the minor
tion of neutralization determinants in GP5 of both EAV and
envelope proteins (E, GP2, GP3, and GP4) are essential for
PRRSV. The M protein may act as an essential scaffold on
the production of infectious progeny virus. It has been
which the GP5 protein folds from the epitopes that induce
shown by reverse genetics that the elimination of ORF5a
neutralizing antibodies in mice, horses, and pigs.
protein expression will cripple the EAV virus, which leads
In addition, it has been shown that the GP4 of the Euro-
pean prototype PRRSV strain leylystad virus (LV) contains
cantly reduced virus titer. In LDV the proteins encoded by
a highly immunogenic linea1 neutralizing epitope (amino
ORF2a, ORF2b, ORF3, ORF4, and ORF5a have not been con-
acids 57-68). Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) against this
firmed as structural proteins of the virus. The cells infected
neutralizing epitope on GP4 of LV do not recognize or
with the North American PRRSV (type 2) and LDV have
neutralize other European field isolates that differ in the
been shown to produce a non-virion-associated form of
corresponding region, indicating that porcine neutraliz-
the GP3 that is released into the culture medium. The GP5
ing antibodies might be responsible for the selection of
protein contains the known neutralization determinants
neutralization-resistant variants with amino acid substitu-
of EAV, PRRSV, and LDV (Figure 63.3), and it has been
tions in the neutralization epitope in GP4. The GP2, GP3,
clearly demonstrated that heterodimerization of GP5 and
and GP4 heterodimer is in volved in virus attachment and
M proteins is critical for the authentic posttranslational
receptor binding. Recently, it has been shown that GP2 and
476
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 63.2.
Schematic representation of genome organization of arteriviruses and roniviruses. The genomic RNA of
representative viruses of the families Arteriviridae (EAV, PRRSV-NA, and SHFV) and Roniviridae (GAV) is shown to the same scale. The
open reading frames (ORFs) encoding replicase proteins andviral structural proteins are depicted.The duplicated SHFV structural
ORF1a/1b, and the 3' poly A tail (An) are indicated. (Modified from Gorbalenya et al 2006.)
(A)Arteriviridae
E4V (12.7 kh)
RF
PRRSV-NA (15.4 kh)
Cap
ORF1b
RFS
LDV (14.0 kh)
RFS
ORF1b
ORF2a2 ORF2b
SHFV (15.7 kh)
Cap
ORF1b
RFS
ORF
(B)Roniviridae
ORF4
GAV (26.2 kb) L
ORF
Table 63.1.
Viruses in the Families Arteriviridae (Genus Arterivirus) and Roniviridae (Genus Okavirus)
Year of
 Family/Genus/Species
Isolation
Natural Host
 Disease/Tissue Affected
Transmission
 Family Arteriviridae, Genus 
Arterivirus
 Equine arteritis virus?
1953
Horse, donkey.
Equine viral arteritis-respiratory disease
Aerosol, contact, fomites.
 and mule 
(influenza-like disease), abortion.
venereal (breeding), embryo
interstital pneumonia in young foals 
transfer, and congenital
infection 
 Porcine reproductive and 
1990
Pig
 Porcine reproductive and respiratory
 Aerosol, contact, fomites.
 respiratory syndrome virust
 Syndrome—-respiratory distress,
venereal (breeding)
abortion, stillbirths, mummified fetuses
Lactate dehydrogenase-elevating
1960
Mice
 No clinical disease, but elevated lactate
 Biting and coprophagy
virusc
 dehydrogenase-elevating enzyme in 
blood
 Simian hemorrhagic fever virusd
1964
Monkeys
Systemic hemorrhagic disease
Aerosol, contact, fomites,
biting, and iatrogenic
 Family Roniviridae, Genus 
Okavirus
Yellow-head viruse
1990
 Shrimp and 
Yellowing of the hepatopancreas
Horizontal (water-borne).
 prawns
 cannibalism, and vertical
 Gill-associated virusf
1993
 Shrimp and 
 Gills and lymphoid organs 
Horizontal (water-borne).
prawns 
 Gannibalism, and vertical
Eriocheir sinensis ronivirus {EsRNy)
1996
Crabs
 Affect bymphoid organs, gills and 
Horizontal (water-borne)
hepatopancreas, and cause "sighs 
disease"
GenBank accession numbers for the full-length genome sequente of each of the Arterivirus speties:
EAV virulent Bucyrus strain (EAv-vBS)—DQ846750; cell culture-adapted Bucyrus strain—-X53459 (=NC_001639).
bPRRSV type 1 (PRRSV-1 or PRRSV EU [Lelystad virus])--M96262; PRRSV type 2 (PRRSV-2 or PRRSV-NA [VR-2332])—U87392.
CLDV Plageman (LDV-P)—U15146 (=NC_001639); LDV-C (L1 3298).
dSHFV—AF180391 (=NC_003092).
eYHV(YHV1 992)--FI848673.
fGAV——NC_010306.
Chapter 63
Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
477
Table 63.2.
 Molecular Properties of Arteriviruses 
Replicase Proteins
 Structural Proteins
Virus (Genome Size; bp)
ORFS
Nsp Name
Size (aa)
ORFS
Protein Name
Size (aa)
EAV
ORF1a
8/9
1727
2a
EGP2
67
{12 704-12 731}
ORF1ab
11
3175
2h
GP3
227
3
GP4
163
4
ORF5a
152
5a
GP5
59
5h
M
255
6
N
162
7
110
PRRSV-NA
ORF1a
9/10
2504
2a
GP2
256
(15 047-15 465)
ORF1ab
12
3962
2b
E
73
3
GP3
2254
GP4
178
5a
ORF5a
513
5h
GP5
200
6
hp
174
N
123
PRRSV-EU
ORF1a
9/10
2397
2a
GP2
249
(15 111)
ORF1ab
12
3854
2h
E
70
3
GP3
265
4
GP4
183
5a
ORF5a
43
5h
GP5
201
6
M
173
7
N
128
LDV
ORF1a
9
2206
2a
70
(14104)
ORF1ab
12
3616
2h
GP2
227
3
GP3
191
4
GP4
175
5a
ORF5a
47
5b
GP5
199
6
M
171
7
N
115
SHFV
ORF1a
9/10
2105
2a
GP2a
281
(15 717)
ORF1ab
12/13
3594
2a2
E
94
2h
GP2'
204
3
GP3
205
4a
E
80
4h
GP4
214
5
GP3'
179
6
GP4
182
7a
ORF7a
64
GP7
278
8
M
162
N
111
Molecular data are based onthe follwing GenBank sequences: DQ846750 (EAV virulent Bucyrus strain), U87392 (PRRSV-NA [VR-2332]) M96262 (PRRSV-EU [Lelystad virus]) U15146
(LDV-P), and AF180391 (SHFV).
e5ize varies between 46 and 51 amino atids among North American PRRSy strains.
GP4 proteins of North American PRRSV interact with allthe
tein genes of the virus. The interaction among the GP2,
other envelope GPs to form a multiprotein complex. The
GP3, GP4, GP5, and M envelope proteins plays a major
 interaction between GP4 and GP5 is suggested to be much
role in determining the CD14+ monocyte tropism, while
stronger than interactions among the other envelope gly-
the tropism for CD3+ T lymphocytes is determined by
coproteins.
the GP2, GP4, GP5, and M envelope proteins but not the
 Using the reverse genetics approach, the virulence deter-
GP3 protein. Using an in vitro cell culture model of per-
 minants of EAV have been mapped to both nonstructural
sistent EAV infection, it has been demonstrated that com-
(nspl, nsp2, nsp7,and nsp10)and structural proteins (GP2,
bined amino acid substitutions in E, GP2, GP3, and GP4
GP4, GP5, and M). However, it appears that the major
proteins or a single amino acid substitution in the GP5
virulence determinants are located in the structural pro-
 protein could establish persistent infection in HeLa cells.
478
PART III
Viruses
Table 63.3.
 Molecular Properties of Roniviruses
Replicase Proteins
 Structural Proteins
Virus (Genome Size; bp)
ORFS
Size (aa)
ORFS
Protein Name
Size (aa)
YHV
1a
4074
N
146
(26 652-26 673)
1ab
6692
gp116
1666?
gp64
p20
 Polypeptide
20
GAV
1a
4060
N
144
(26 253)
1ab
6706
gp116
1640?
gp64
p20
Polypeptide 
83
Molecular data are based on the following GenBank sequentes: YHv (YHv1992)-FI848673 and GAv (NC_010306).
apolyprotein entoded by ORF3.
However, no specific viral proteins involved in establish
minants have also been identified in nspl-nsp3, nsp10-
ment in persistent infection in the stallion reproductive
nsp12, and ORF2. Thus, the virulence determinants of EAV
 tract yet have been identified. Using reverse genetics, the
major virulence determinants of PRRsV were mapped to
genes encoding both envelope and nonstructural proteins
nsp3-nsp8 and ORF5, whereas other minor virulence deter-
(multigenic).
FIGURE 63.3.
Comparison of the putative neutralization determinants located in the N-terminal ectodomain of the GP5
as welf as putative major neutralization sites (brown boxes) and nonneutralization epitopes (hatched box) are depicted. Recently
Balasuriya and Maciachian 2004.)
A (aa 49) B (aa 61)
C (aa 67-90)
D (aa 98 -106)
EAV GP5
aa 1-18 
8a 19-116
A (aa 27-30)
A5n-56
Asn-73
AsnB1
ANW
8a 24
029-35 B (aa 37-45)
PRRSV GP5
88 1-32
Asn-30 Asn-33
Asn-44 Asn-5l
88 37-44
LDV GP5
88 1-28
a 29-60
SHFV GP7
88 1-36
 Signal sequence
N-terminal ectodomain
Chapter 63  Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
479
The structural proteins of SHFV are not well charac
molecule), and heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans. It has
terized. However, in contrast to other arteriviruses, the
been shown that GP4 and GP2 of PRRSV interact with the
SHFV genome contains four additional ORFs due to the
CD163 molecule and play a critical role in viral attach-
duplication of ORF2a, ORF2a2, ORF3, and ORF4 (identi-
ment. For EAV it has been demonstrated that heparan sul-
fied as ORF2b, ORF4a, ORF5, and ORF6, respectively; Table
fate may play a critical role in cellular attachment. It has
63.2 and Figure 63.2A). ORF2b, ORF4a, ORF5, and ORF6
been shown that interaction among all minor (GP2, GP3,
are predicted to encode four additional duplicated pro-
and GP4) and major (GP5 and M) envelope proteins of EAV
teins (E', GP2', GP3', and GP4). ORF2a2 and ORF4a of
plays a major role in determining the CD14+ monocyte
SHFV encode two proteins that are homologous to the E
tropism, while the tropism for CD3+ T lymphocytes was
protein of other arteriviruses. However, unlike the E pro-
determined by GP2, GP4, GP5, and M envelope proteins but
tein, E' is not predicted to be myristylated. The E proteins
not the GP3 protein. EAV and other arteriviruses appear
of other arteriviruses have been shown to be fatty acid-
to enter susceptible cells by a low-pH-dependent endo-
acylated, ion channel proteins that function in the uncoat-
cytic pathway. Following uncoating of the viral genome,
e ed s a a a  sd 
arterivirus replication starts with the translation of the
GP7 major envelope glycoprotein are the counterparts of
two large replicase polyprotein genes (ORFla and ORF1b)
GP5a and GP5 proteins of other arteriviruses (Table 63.2).
located in the 5' three quarters of the genome through a
The GP7 protein has structural features common to other
ribosomal frameshifting (Figure 63.5). These two replicase
arteriviruses and is predicted to express the major neutral-
polyproteins are processed into 13 or 14 cleavage prod-
ization epitopes of the virus (Figure 63.3).
ucts or “nonstructural proteins" (nsps) and a variety of pro-
 Arteriviruses primarily replicate in the macrophages of
cessing intermediates by three viral proteases (Figure 63.5).
their natural hosts. EAV can infect horses, don keys, mules,
Both the 5'-leader sequence (5'-UTR) and transcription reg-
and zebras, and replicates primarily in macrophages and
ulatory sequences (TRSs) located upstream of each ORF play
endothelial cells; but it also replicates in selected epithelia,
a critical role in genome replication and transcription of
mesothelium, and smooth muscle cells of the tunica media
viral proteins. The TRSs are short-conserved sequence ele-
of smaller arteries, venules, and the myometrium. Unlike
 ments (5'-UCAAC-3) thatdeterminea base-pairing interac-
tion between positive and nascent minus-strand RNA and
cultures, including equine pulmonary artery endothelial
are essential for leader-body joining. Arterivirus replica-
Cells, horse kidney, rabbit kidney, and hamster kidney cells.
tion occurs in the cytoplasm of the infected cells, and host
It also replicates in cell lines such as baby hamster kidney
cell membranes are modifed into typical vesicular double.
(BHK-21), rabbit kidney-13 (RK-13), African green mon-
membrane vesicles that are thought to carry the viral repli-
key kidney (VERO), rhesus monkey kidney (LLC-MK2),
cation/transcription complex. However, some of the viral
hamster lung (HmLu), SV-40-transformed equine ovary,
proteins (nspl and N) are translocated to the nucleus dur-
and canine hepatitis virus-transformed hamster tumor cells
ing viral replication. The viral structural protein-encoding
(HS and HT-7). PRRSV primarily infects pigs, but recently,
 genes are overlapping and located in the 3' one fourth of
chickens and ducks that were exposed to PRRSV in drink-
the genome (Figure 63.2). These structural protein genes
ing water shed the virus in their feces, suggesting that they
are expressed from a 3'-co-terminal nested set of subge-
are susceptible to infection with the virus. American PRRSV
nomic mRNAs (sgmRNAs). All sgmRNAs have a common
5'-leader sequence derived from the 5'-UTR of the viral
(PAM), CRL-11171 and an African green monkey cell line
genome. The arterivirus replication and transcription are
(MA-104), and derivatives thereof (CL2621 or MARC-145).
processed through different minus-strand intermediates
Most, if not all, European PRRSV (type 1) isolates replicate
(Figure 63.6): a full-length minus-strand template is used
best or exclusively in PAMs. However, European PRRSV
for replication, while subgenome-sized minus strands pro-
isolates have been adapted to grow in the CL2621 cell line.
duced during a process of discontinuous RNA synthesis are
Vaccine strains of PRRSV replicate much more efficiently
used to synthesize sgmRNAs. The initiation of full-length 
(100-1000 times) in derivatives of monkey kidney cell lines
minus-strand RNA (or antigenome) synthesis, which is also
than in PAMs. LDV primarily replicates in primary cul-
used as a template for new genome RNA replication, occurs 
tures of mouse macrophages from 1- to 2-week-old mice
after recognition of RNA signals near the 3' end of the viral
and other mouse macrophage cell lines, but not other cell
genome by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)
lines. SHFV infects and replicates in primary cultures of
complex. For production of new genomic RNA, recogni-
peritoneal macrophages from rhesus and patas monkeys
tion of signals present close to the 3' end of the antigenome
and also replicates in the MA-104 cell line.
is used. The N protein encapsidates the newly synthesized
Similar to other enveloped viruses, arteriviruses bind
viral genomic RNA, and arteriviruses acquire their en velope
to cell surface receptor(s) using their envelope proteins,
during budding through the endoplasmic reticulum and/or
which mediate the process of cell attachment and mem-
the Golgi complex. After budding, progeny virus particles
brane fusion with the host cell membrane (Figure 63.4).
are transported in intracellular vesicles to the plasma mem-
Except for PRRsV, the specific cellular receptors for other
brane forrelease.
arteriviruses have not been identifed yet. Potential cellular
molecules involved in PRRSV virus attachment and inter-
Genus Ronivirus
nalization have recently been identified. These include
CD163 (a member of the macrophage scavenger recep-
Roniviruses are en veloped, bacilliform (40-60 nm × 150-
to1 family), sialoadhesin (a macrophage-restricted surface
200 nm) virions with rounded ends (Figure 63.1C and D).
480
PART III
Viruses
FlGurE 63.4.
Schematic overview of EAV life cycle. DMV, double-membrane vesicle; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERGiC,
ER-Goigi intermediate compartment; NC, nucleocapsid.
ORF1a
ORF1b
genome
Replication &
translation
transcription
subgenomic
replicase
comple
mRNA
polyproteins
RNA
genomic
synthesis
 ppla and pplab
membrane
translation
RNA
proteins
nonstructural
uncoating
?
proteins
NC
Nprotein
proteolysis
assembly
Golgi
Receptor
complex
budding
Nucleus
EAV
maturation
ER
attachment
ERGIC
release
FIGURE 63.5.
Schematic presentation of arterivirus genome expression. The 5'-leader sequence (blue box) and the body TRSs
(pink boxes) located upstream of each gene are indicated. Translation of E and GP2 genes, as well as ORF5a and GP5 genes occurs by
helicase; Ne, NendoU; nsp, nonstructural protein.
EAV
Cap
eORFs1a11
EAV genon
Irans] alion 
PCPβ CP
SP
pplab
RdRp
ZF Hel Ne
nsp
1β
567.
PRRSV
SmRNATN
PCPa PCPβCP
EAV subgenornic rnRNA
nsp 1α1β
2
synlhesis
Chapter 63
 Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
481
FlGURE 63.6.
Illustration of arterivirus replication (genome synthesis; top panel) and transcription (sgmRNA synthesis; bottom
minus-strand RNA (antigenome) that serves as the template for synthesis of new genomic RNA. Transcription modethe minus-strand
RNA synthesis is proposed to be discontinuous and regulated by TRSs. The antibody TRS serves as a "jump" signal of the nascent
with an antibody TRS at its 3' end, would be redirected to the 5'-proximal region of the genomic template by a base-pairing
interaction with the TRS at the 3’ end of the leader (+i). After the addition of the antileader (-L) to the nascent minus strands, the
modified from Balasuriya and Snijder 2008 with permission.)
Replication
Minus-strand full-length genome
-L
Leader
Continuous minus-strand synthesis
Body
TRS
TRS
 Plus-strand full-length genome
 Discontinuous minus-strand synthesis
3
-L
sg-length minus strand
Antibody
 Nascent minus strand
Body jump
TRS
sgmRNA
Transcription
The nucleocapsid has helical symmetry and is comprised of
infected cells at extremely low level, but its function is
coiled filament of 16-30 nm diameter. The nucleocapsid is
unknown.
(approximately 8 nm thick and 11 nm in length) extending
Arteriviruses
from the surface. The most economically important and
well-studied roniviruses include the YHV and GAV of
Equine Arteritis Virus
black tiger shrimp. YHV virions have a buoyant density
of 1.18-1.20 g/ml in sucrose. Like other nidoviruses,
Disease.
 There is only one known serotype of EAv; how-
the ronivirus genome is a positive-sense, single-strand
ever, field strains differ in their virulence and neutral-
RNA molecule of 26.2-26.6 kb that contains a 5'-cap
ization phenotype. Phylogenetic analysis based on ORF5
segregates EAV strains into North American and European
reading
frames(5'-ORF1a-ORF1b-ORF2-ORF3-ORF4-
lineages with the European lineage further subdivided into
polyA-3'; Figure 63.2B). YHV can remain infectious for at
two subgroups. EAV is the causative agent of equine viral
least 72 hr in seawater, and the virus can be effectively
arteritis (EVA) in horses, a respiratory and reproductive dis-
disinfected with 30 ppm calcium hypochlorite.
ease that occurs throughout the world. The clinical signs
Like the other members of the order Nidovirales, these
  e  da s ai  
viruses encode two large replicase polyproteins (pp) from
factors including the genetics, age and physical condition 
their genomic RNA: ORF1a (ppla) and ORFlab fusion prod-
of the horse(s), challenge dose and route ofinfection, strain 
uct (pplab). The ppla and pplab are processed into a
of virus, and environmental conditions. The vast major-
number of nsps, which include viral proteases, RdRp, heli-
ity of EAV infections are inapparent (or subclinical), but
case, and other conserved enzymic domains. Full-length
acutely infected animals may develop a wide range of clin-
genomic RNA (RNA1) and two sgmRNAs (sgmRNA2 and
ical signs including pyrexia, depression, anorexia, depen-
sgmRNA3) are produced during replication. Similar to
dent edema (scrotum, ventral trunk, and limbs), stiffness
arteriviruses, viral structural protein genes are expressed
of gait, conjunctivitis, lacrimation and swelling around the
from the two nested sets of 3'-coterminal sgmRNAs (sgm-
 dr '(a ps p d) a
RNA2 and sgmRNA3). Unlike the other nidoviruses, the N
tress, urticaria, and leukopenia. The incubation period of
protein of okaviruses is encoded by ORF2, which resides
3-14 days (usually 6-8 days following venereal exposure) is
immediately downstream of the 5'-terminal ORFla/ab
followed by pyrexia of up to 41 oC that may persist for
replicase gene (Table 63.3). The ORF3 encodes a polypro-
 2-9 days. The virus causes abortion in pregnant mares,
tein that is cleaved to produce two en velope glycoproteins
and abortion rates during natural outbreaks of EVA can
vary from 10 to 60% of infected mares. EAV-induced abor-
triple-membrane-span ning protein of un known function.
tions can occur at any time between 3 and 10 months of
The ORF4-encoded polypeptide may be expressed in
gestation. EAV infection can cause a severe fulminating
482
PART III
Viruses
 interstitial pneumonia in neonatal foals, and a progressive
during embryo transfer from mares inseminated with in fec-
 pneumoenteric syndrome in older foals. A high propor-
tive semen. EAV can also be transmitted through indirect
tion of acutely infected stallions (10-70%) become per-
contact with fomites or personnel. Congenital infection
 sistently infected and shed the virus in semen; however,
results from transplacental transmission (vertical transmis-
 there is no evidence of any analogous persistent infection
sion) of the virus when pregnant mares are infected late in
of mares, geldings, or foals. The virus persists in the ampulla
gestation.
of the male reproductive tract, and the establishment and
 maintenance of the carrier state in stallions is testosterone
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Most information on the
dependent.
pathogenesis of EAV infection is derived from experimen-
tal studies in horses inoculated intranasally with various
Host-Virus Relationship
strains of EAV. It is to be stressed that with the notable
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. EAV is dis-
exception of fetal and neonatal infections, EAV infection
tributed throughout the world, although the seropreva-
of horses is very seldom fatal. The numerous publications
lence of EAV infection varies between countries and horses
 describing lesions caused by the highly virulent horse-
 n o as a i e  s  jo
adapted virulent Bucyrus strain of EAV reflect a severe fatal
United States, about 70-90% of adult Standardbred horses
infection that is not representative of the disease caused by
are seropositive for EAV, as compared to only 1-3% of the
field strains of the virus. Most of the field strains of EAV
Thoroughbred population. Similarly, a high percentage
cause only mild to moderate clinical disease in infected
of European Warmblood horses are seropositive for EAV.
horses; however, some strains of EAV can cause severe dis-
Seroprevalence to EAV increases with age, indicating that
ease. Initial multiplication of the virus takes place in the
a se sna a ot pasodxa Aipaiedai aq Ae saso
 alveolar macrophages in the lung after respiratory infec-
age. Persistently infected carrier stallions function as the
tion, and the virus soon appears in the regional lymph
natural reservoi1 of EAV and disseminate the virus to sus-
nodes, especially the bronchial nodes. Within 3 days the
ceptible mares at breeding (Figure 63.7). The two principal
virus is present in virtually all organs and tissues (viremia),
modes of EAV transmission are horizontal transmission
where it replicates in macrophages and endothelial cells.
by aerosolization of infectious respiratory tract secretions
The clinical manifestations of EVA reflect endothelial
from acutely infected horses and venereal transmission
cell injury and increased vascular permeability. In viro
 during natural or artificial insemination with infective
and in vivo studies have demonstrated increased tran-
semen from persistently in fected stallions. Recently, it has
scription of genes encoding proinflammatory mediators
been demonstrated that the virus can also be transmitted
interleukin (IL)-13, IL-6, IL-8, and tumo1 necrosis factor
FIGURE 63.7.
Transmission of EAV, depicting the central role of the carrier stalion in maintenance and spread of the virus.
Carrier Stallion-Natural
EVA outbreak
Reservoir of EAV
Breeding farms
Horizontal transmission
Aerosolization/respiratory
Infective sermen 
Virus in secretions and fetal
and ermbryo
tissues
 Personnel
Fomites
ersistent
infection in
nfected
stallions
10-70%
No carrier state in
mares, geldings, and
Horizontal transmission.
foals (<6 months)
Venereal trunsmission
 Natural breeding
 Artificial insemination with raw,
chilled, or frozen infective semen
Embryo transfer
Vertical
Aerosolization/respiratory
transmission
 Semen collection—con taminated
Congenital infection
 artificial vagina and phantom
of late-term fetuses-
?
Masturbation
interstitial pneumonia
Movement of horses,
Teaser
in newborn foal
 shipment of
 Personnel
contaminated semen
foal
 Fomites
 and embryos
Chapter 63  Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
483
(TNF)-α—following EAV infection suggesting that these
nsp12. However, horses vaccinated with the current mod-
cytokine mediators are critical in determining the outcome
ified live virus vaccine did not react with nsp5 and reacted
ofin fection and severity of the disease. Furthermore, recent
weakly with nsp4. The innate immune response to EAV
studies have demonstrated that clinical outcome of EAV
infection is not fully characterized, but studies have shown
infection is determined by host genetic factors. Specifically,
that the virus inhibits type I interferon (IFN) production in
based on the in viro susceptibility of CD3+ T lympho-
infected cells. Recent studies have demonstrated that nsp1,
cytes to EAV infection, horses were divided into suscep-
nsp2, and nsp11 are capable of inhibiting type I IFN activ-
tible and resistant groups. Subsequently, a genome-wide
ity. Of these three nsps, nspl has the strongest inhibitory
effect by inhibitingIFN synthesis. The failure to induce type
nant haplotype, associated with the invitro susceptible phe-
IIFN in EAV-infected cells may allow the virus to subvert the
notype in the region of equine chromosome 11 (ECA11;
equine innate immune response. There is very little work
49572804-49643932). Experimentalin0culation with EAV
done on the equine cellular immune response to EAV infec.
into horses with in viro CD3+ susceptibility or resistance
tion, and the specific viral protein that is targeted by the
showed a significant difference between the two groups of
cytotoxic T lymphocyte response of EAV-infected horses
horses in terms of proinflammatory and immunomodula
remains to be thoroughly characterized.
tory cytokine mRNA expression and evidence of increased
clinical signs in horses possessing the in viro CD3+ T cell-
resistant phenotype. These studies provided a direct evi-
Laboratory Diagnosis. It is to be stressed that EVA is sub-
dence for a correlation between variation in host geno-
 clinical or mild in horses, and that other, more important,
type and phenotypic differences in terms of the extent of
viral respiratory infections clinically resemble EVA. Con-
viral replication, presence, and severity of clinical signs and
firmation of a diagnosis of EVA is currently based on virus
cytokine gene expression caused by infection with EAV.
isolation (Vl) and/or serological demonstration of rising
 EAV infection of pregnant mares can result in the abor-
neutralizing antibody titers (fourfold or greater) in paired
tion of fetuses, which are usually partially autolyzed at the
serum samples taken at a 21- to 28-day interval using the
time of expulsion. Aborted fetuses may exhibit interlobu-
virus neutralization test (VNT). The VNT is the principal
lar pulmonary edema, pleural and pericardial effusion, and
serological assay used to detect evidence of EAV infection 
petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages on the serosal and
by most laboratories around the world, and it continues to
mucosal surfaces of the small intestine. Neonatal foals occa-
be the current World Organization fo1 Animal Health (OIE)
sionally develop a very severe, acute interstitial pneumo-
prescribed standard test for EVA (gold standard). Several
nia. The characteristic histologic feature of EVA is a severe
laboratories have developed and evaluated enzyme-linked
necrotizing panvasculitis of small vessels. Affected muscu-
immunosorbentassays (ELISAs) to detect antibodies to EAV
lar arteries show foci of intimal, subintimal, and medial
using whole virus, synthetic peptides, or recombinant viral
necrosis, with edema and infiltration of lymphocytes and
proteins (e.g., GP5, M, and N) as antigens. Various stud-
neutrophils. Prominent vascular lesions are also seen in
ies have shown that the source of antigen as well as the
the placenta, brain, liver, and spleen of the aborted fetuses.
sera evaluated can markedly influence the results obtained
Lungs of affected neonatal foals have severe interstitial
with EAV protein-specific ELISAs and competitive ELISA.
pneumonia.
However, none of these ELISAs or recently described micro-
sphere immunoassay (Luminex) has yet been shown to be
Host Response to Infection.
.Animals that recover from
 of equivalent sensitivity and specificity to the VNT.
EAV infection or those that are vaccinated with either inac-
EAV can be isolated from nasal swabs or anticoagulated
tivated or attenuated strains of EAV develop neutralizing
blood collected from adult horses with signs of EVA, or
antibodies and are resistant to subsequent challenge with
the tissues of aborted equine fetuses (lung, spleen, lymph
EAV. Neutralizing antibodies are detected within 1-2 weeks
nodes, and placenta). Carrier stallions are first identified by
following exposure to the virus, reach maximum titers from
serological tests as they are always seropositive, and persis-
2 to 4 months, and persist for 3 years or more. With the
tent infection is confirmed by VI from semen in cell cul-
exception of persistently infected stallions, EAV is elimi-
ture, by test breeding using seronegative mares (and mon-
nated from the tissues of infected horses by 28 days after
itoring these for seroconversion to EAV after breeding),
the exposure. Foals born to immune mares are protected
01 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-
against clinical EVA by passive transfer of neutralizing anti-
PCR)—standard RT-PCR o1 real-time RT-PCR (rRT-PCR)—
to identify viral nucleic acid in semen. Identification of the
a few hours after colostrum feeding, peak at 1 week of age,
and gradually decline to extinction from 2 to 7 months
the prevention and control ofEAVinfection. VIiscurrently
of age. The serologic response of horses to the individual
the OIE-approved gold standard for the detection of EAV
- s i r sd   s
in semen and is the prescribed test for international trade.
nificantly. Immunoblotting studies have confirmed that
However, it has been demonstrated that at least one of
infected horses respond to a number of viral structural
the rRT-PCR assays described in literature has equal to or
proteins (GP5, M, and N) and that sera from horses other
higher sensitivity than VI for the detection of EAV nucleic
than carrier stallions most consistently recognized the con-
acid in semen samples. Histopathologic examination
served carboxy-terminal region of the M protein. Similarly,
coupled with immunohistochemical staining is also use-
sera from horses experimentally or persistently infected
with EAV strongly reacted with nsp2, nsp4, nsp5, and
RT-PCR or rRT-PCR assays.
484
PART III
Viruses
Treatment and Control. Currently there are no means
Western European countries, some strains from the United 
 available for eliminating the carrier state in stallions per-
 States and Thailand. Type 1 PRRSVs have been introduced
sistently infected with EAV other than surgical castration.
into five non-European countries in North America (the
There is no specific treatment for horses infected with EAV.
United States and Canada) and Asia (Thailand, China, and
 However, there are preliminary data to support that GnRH
 South Korea). Similar phylogenetic analysis of type 2 PRRSV
(gonadotropin-releasing hormone) vaccines or antagonists
strains has identified nine lineages. Seven of the nine lin-
can temporarily limit the shed ding of the virus in the semen
eages have most of the PRRSV strains isolated in North
of carier stallions. Furthermore, peptide-conjugated phos-
America, whereas two lineages (3 and 4) contained strains
 phorodiamidate morpholino oligomer (PPMO) targeting
Only isolated from Asia. Numerous Asian isolates of PRRSV
the genomic 5'-terminus of EAV has been capable of curing
were found within the seven North American lineages (1,
HeLa cells persistently infected with EAV under in vitro con-
2, and 5-9) indicating the introduction of North American 
ditions. The PPMO-cured HeLa cells were free of infectious
strains to Asian countries.
virus, viral antigens, and EAV nucleic acid as measured by
Clinical signs of porcine reproductive and respiratory
plaque assay, indirect immunofluorescence assay, and rRT-
syndrome (PRRS) are extremely variable and influenced by
PCR, respectively. While these findings demonstrate that
strains of the virus, immune status of the herd, and man-
PPMOs can be used to eliminate persistent EAV infection
agement practices. Low-virulence strains of PRRSV may
in cell culture, the efficacy of PPMO against EAV in vivo
result in widespread infection of swine with minimal occur-
remains to be addressed.
rence of disease, whereas highly virulent strains can cause
There are currently two commercial vaccines that are
severe clinical disease in susceptible herds. All ages of pigs
widely used for protective immunization of horses against
are susceptible to infection with PRRSV in immunologi-
EAV infection: a live attenuated—modified live virus
cally naive herds. Acute PRRSV infection of susceptible
(MLV)—and an inactivated (killed). The MLV vaccine is
pigs is characterized by anorexia, fever (39-41 *C), dyspnea,
administered intramuscularly to horses, but this vaccine
 and lethargy. Affected swine are lymphopenic, and exhibit
is not recommended for use in pregnant mares, especially
transient cutaneous hyperemia or cyanosis of extremities
during the last 2 months of gestation, or in foals less than
that is most visible on the ears, snouts, mammary glands,
6 weeks of age. It is recommended that foals be vaccinated 
and vulvas. Transplacental transmission of PRRSV occurs
at 6 months of age. Colts should be vaccinated prior to the
most efficiently in the third trimester of pregnancy (usually
 onset of puberty as this prevents them from becoming per-
after 100 days of gestation),and the abortion rate in affected
sistently infected carriers. Thus, protective immunization
sows can range from 10 to 50%. Sow mortality is consid-
of prepubertal colts is central to control of the spread of
erably lower. Affected litters contain a variable mixture of
EAV infection. Experimental EAV vaccines have also been
normal pigs, weak small pigs, stillborn pigs, and partially
developed recently using recombinant DNA technology,
O1 completely mummified fetuses (so-called SMEDl; still-
but none of them have made to the market.
birth, mummification, embryonic death, and infertility).
Outbreaks of EVA can be prevented by the identifica-
Infected sows can also exhibit nervous signs such as ataxia
tion of persistently infected stallions and the institution of
and circling. PRRSV-infected boars may continue to shed
management practices to prevent the introduction of EAV.
viruses in their semen for prolonged periods of time.
infected horses. Carrier stallions should be kept physically
In 2006, a highly virulent strain of PRRSV emerged
isolated and bred only to mares that are seropositive from
in China (also designated as porcine high fever disease)
 previous natural exposure or vaccination. Mares should be
 and spread into other countries in Asia. The pigs infected
kept isolated from other seronegative horses after being
with this highly virulent strain of PRRSV developed
bred by carrier stallions.
 prolonged high fever (41-42 *C), severe respiratory signs,
red discoloration of the body, blue ears associated with
high m0rtality (20-100%), and morbidity (50-100%). The
Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus
 full-length genomic sequence analysis of the virus revealed
Disease. The European—type 1, prototype LV—and
two distinct deletions in the nonstructural protein 2 (nsp2)
American—type 2, prototype VR-2332 virus—isolates of
in comparison to all previously reported North American
PRRSV represent genetically and antigenically distinct
 genotype PRRSVs. The whole-genome-based phylogenetic
 groups of the same virus. Both viruses are associated with
analysis of Chinese PRRsV strains and representative
outbreaks of simila1 reproductive and respiratory disease in 
North American and European strains suggests that the
pigs although there is only 55-70% nucieotide identity in
newly emerged highly virulent virus has evolved from a
the various genes of viruses of the two types. Recent phylo-
Chinese strain that circulated in 1996 (PRRSV CH-1a).
 genetic analysis based on ORF5 sequences from GenBank
has identified three subtypes of type 1 PRRSV circulating
Host-Virus Relationship
 around the world. Subtype I includes PRRSV strains from
Western European countries, Thailand, and the United
 Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. PRRSV appears
States. Subtype II includes PRRSV strains form Eastern Euro-
to be endemic in virtually all swine-producing countries
pean countries (Lithuania, Russia, and some strains from
of the world and PRRS has now emerged as the most
Belarus), and subtype Ill includes strains only from Belarus.
 prevalent swine disease in the world. The original source
The subtype I is further subdivided into 12 clades (A-L).
of the virus and the circumstances under which it was
Clade Aincludes the LV that was first isolated in the Nether-
introduced into the domestic swine population are
lands in 1990, as well as other PRRSV strains from many
unknown. The PRRSV has been demonstrated in samples
Chapter 63  Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
485
collected from wild boars in Europe and North America
ing host genetics, management practices, and virulence
by RT-PCR. Transmission of PRRSV usually occurs by close
phenotype of the infecting PRRsV strain. The clinical
contact between infected and uninfected animals. Swine
signs and pathological lesions due to PRRSV are caused
are susceptible to PRRSV by a number of routes of expo-
 by a number of mechanisms. These include the apopto-
sure, including oral, intranasal, vaginal, intramuscular, and
sis of PRRSV-infected macrophages and surrounding cells
intraperitoneal. PRRSV is shed in respiratory tract secre-
(indirect apoptosis), induction of proinflammatory and
tions, saliva, semen, mammary secretions, urine, and feces
immunomodulatory cytokine production (IL-1, IL-6, IL-
10, IL-12, TNF-α, and IFN-y), polyclonal B cell activa-
by inhalation of infectious aerosols or ingestion of PRRSV-
tion and decrease in bacterial phagocytosis, and killing
contaminated food (horizontal transmission). Congenital
by macrophages leading to increase in bacterial respira-
infection results from transplacental transmission (ver-
tory disease and septicemia. Recently, it has been demon-
tical transmission) of the virus. Transmission of PRRSV
strated that PRRSV infection modifies the porcine innate
to females has been demonstrated during breeding with
immune response and alters disease outcome in pigs
semen from persistently infected carrier boars. PRRSV can
coinfected with other respiratory viral pathogens such as
also be transmitted through indirect contact with fomites
porcine respiratory coronavirus. Variation in genetic resis-
0r personnel, and some pigs harbor the virus in their tonsils
tance/susceptibility to PRRS has been reported among dif-
long after the virus is cleared from other tissues. There is evi-
ferent breeds of pigs. The breeds that show more resistance
dence that flies and mosquitoes might serve as mechanical
to PRRS have increased cell-mediated immune response
vectors of PRRSV. PRRSV could establish a chronic, persis-
with the increased number of IFN-y -secreting cells. Sim-
tent infection in lymph nodes (e.g., inguinal and sternal),
ilarly, reduced or delayed PRRSV replication in some pig
tonsils, and the male reproductive tract. The virus has been
breeds was associated with high level of TNF-α and IL-8
isolated from tonsils and lymph nodes of pigs for up to
mRNA expression. In addition, specific swine major his-
157 days postinfection (DPi). Low-level replication of the
tocompatibility complex—swine leukocyte antigen class I,
virus occurs in the lymphoid tissues, and thus, the shed-
II, and III (SLA I, II, and III)—alleles influence the suscepti-
ding of PRRSV in oropharyngeal secretions is considered
bility/resistance to PRRS, and studies have shown that SLA
to be long lasting. PRRSV has been detected in semen sam-
class I and 1I alleles regulate the level of circulating virus
ples of experimentally infected boars for variable periods
and antiviral immune responses in pigs.
from 4 to 92 DP1. The longest period of time where PRRSV
nucleic acid in semen has been detected by RT-nested PCR
Host Response to Jnfection. The humoral immune
is up to 92 DP1. However, by using VI and swine bioassay, it
has been only possible to detect the virus in semen samples
there are reports that suggest that protective immunity is
lasting from 4 to 42 DP1. The presence of PRRSV in semen
strain specific with some degree of heterologous protection
of infected boars could be either due to virus replication
against other strains of PRRSV. It has been shown that pas-
and shedding from the reproductive tract (epididymis and
sive transfer of PRRsV antibodies fully protected pregnant
bulbourethral glands) or direct dissemination (via mono-
sows against challenge with virulent PRRSV. Piglets born
the reproductive tract. Shedding of the virus in semen is
tion of colostrum, and these maternal antibodies persist in
of particularly concern because of the widespread use of
piglets up to 6-8 weeks of age. Pigs infected with PRRSV
artificial insemination in swine breeding.
also develop antibodies to the GP3, GP4, and the M and N
proteins, as well as nonstructural proteins (e.g., nspl, nsp2,
Pathogenesis and Pathology. PRRSV
 replicates  in
and nsp7), and multiple antigenic sites on these proteins
macrophages and dendritic cells, especially those in the
have been described. Pigs infected with PRRSV produce
lungs and lymphoid tissues. Viremia occurs soon after
a variety of virus-specific antibodies; virus-specific IgM
infection, and can last for 1-2 weeks in mature animals
appears by 5-7 days after infection and IgG by 7-14 days.
and 8 weeks in young pigs. The duration of viremia is n0
 ELISA antibody titers peak by 5-6 weeks after infection and
longer than 28 DPl, but viral RNA has been detected in
persist thereafter. However, PRRSV-neutralizing antibod-
serum by RT-PCR up to 251 DP1. Gross lesions are usually
ies appear slowly, usually between 4 and 5 weeks postin-
 observed in only a few organ systems (e.g., respiratory
and lymphoid). Microscopic lesions of PRRS include
after infection. The appearance of neutralizing antibodies
diffuse interstitial pneumonia, myocarditis, vasculitis,
is associated with the clearance of PRRsV from the lungs of
and encephalitis. Lymphoid tissues exhibit lymphoid
infected pigs. Despite the significant role that neutralizing
hyperplasia and follicular necrosis with mixed inflam-
antibodies seem to play in protection, their effectiveness
matory cell infiltration. Clinical outbreaks of PRRSV can
might be limited against heterologous PRRSV strains. The
be complicated by bacterial pneumonia, septicemia, 0r
neutralization determinants (epitopes) of PRRSV have not
enteritis.
been fully characterized although different viral envelope
 The PRRSV primarily replicates in macrophages in lung
proteins, including GP2, GP3, GP4, GP5, and M protein,
and lymphoid tissues and to a lesser extent other tissues.
have been identified as inducers of neutralizing antibodies
The clinical outcome of PRRSV infection is highly vari-
using different techniques. However, specific neutraliza-
able, ranging from mild, subclinical infections to acute
tion epitopes have been identified only in GP3 and GP4 of 
deaths of adult animals. The differences in clinical signs
European PRRSV strains and in GP5 of both North Ameri-
in infected pigs are attributed to numerous factors includ-
can and European PRRSV strains (Figure 63.3).
486
PART III
Viruses
The T cell (CD4+ and CD8+)-mediated immune
and rRT-PCR) have been developed to detect viral nucleic
response is delayed in pigs infected with PRRsV, and
acid in blood, semen, tissue homogenates, pulmonary
IFN-y-producing T cells appear between 4 and 12 weeks
lavage fluid, oropharyngeal scrapings, oral fluid, and other 
after infection. IL-12, one of the key modulators of TH1-
clinical specimens. These assays are highly specific and
type cellular response, produced at a lower level following
sensitive and give a rapid diagnostic turnaround time as
PRRSV infection and along with the increased levels of IL-
compared to the VI in cell culture. While Vl amplifies
 10 may be capable of shifting the immune response toward
infectious virus, PCR detects viral RNA in clinical speci-
a less effective Th2 response. The porcine T cell response
mens. Currently, there are several rRT-PCR assays for the
appears to be directed against GP2, GP3, GP4, GP5, M, and
diagnosis of PRRSV and discriminating between European 
N proteins of the virus, and the M protein may express
and North American PRRSV strains.
some of the important T cell epitopes targeted by the cell.
mediated immune response to PRRSV. Thus, the M protein
Treatment and Control. Both modified live attenuated
is the most potent inducer of T cell proliferation. Two dis-
(MLV) and killed vaccines are available for prevention of
tinct regions on GP5 of the North American PRRSV appear
PRRSV infection in pigs. They can be used to immunize
to contain immunodominant T cell epitopes: amino acids
sows or weanling piglets; however, there is considerable
117-131 and 149-163. How conserved the T cell epitopes
variation in the relative safety and efficacy of ML V vaccines.
are or whether they could provide cross-protection against
MLV vaccines induce long-lasting protection as compared
different PRRsV strains is yet to be determined.
to killed vaccines, but do not completely prevent reinfec-
 In recent years, the innate immune response to PRRSV
tion with wild-type virus and subsequent virus transmis-
infection has been extensively studied, and these stud.
 sion. Furthermore, there have been reports of underatten-
ies have shown that the virus attenuates the innate
uation and reversion of MLV vaccine strains to a more
immune response by blocking the IFN-α production by the
virulent types that can be spread from vaccinated to unvac-
infected cells (e.g., macrophages) and evades the antivi-
cinated swine. The MLV vaccines are used to reduce disease
ral cytokine response. As a result of diminished innate
occurrence and severity, as well as duration of viremia and
immune response, adaptive immune responses are com-
virus shedding. The killed vaccines are used for vaccinat-
promised, leading to weak cell-mediated responses, the
ing sows and gilts to reduce reproductive losses caused by
delayed appearance of the neutralizing antibodies lead-
 PRRSV. There are no specific treatments for PRRS in pigs.
ing to prolonged viremia and persistent infection of the
pigs. However, virus strain differences and cell-type dif-
the 5'-terminal region of the PRRSV genome that inhibits
ferences in respect to response to PRRSV-mediated type I
virus replication in culture has been used as a candidate for
IFN-suppression have been reported. Recent studies have
experimental treatment of young pigs. Prevention and con-
shown that four of the twelve nsps have strong to moderate
trol programs have been developed to eradicate the virus
inhibitory effects (nsp1 > nsp2 > nsp11 > nsp4) on type
from infected herds. The objective of PRRSV prevention
1 IFN production in infected cells. These proteins inhibit
 programs is to stop the introduction of either the virus
into negative herds o1 new strains into PRRSV-infected
more, a recent study has also shown that immunocompe-
 herds. Implementation of strict biosecurity and herd clo.
tent fetuses infected with PRRsV could initiate an antivi-
sure measures whereby the herd is closed to new introduc
ral response by increased expression of cytokines asso-
tions for a period during which the resident virus dies out
ciated with inflammatory and immunomodulatory (TH1
has been effective to control PRRSV infection from sow
and TH2) cytokines. Interestingly, the PRRSV has devel-
herds.
oped strategies to subvert the innate, humoral, and cell-
mediated immunity responses of pigs, which make the
Lactate Dehydrogenase-Elevating Virus
development of vaccine(s) against PRRS extremely difficult
(Table 63.4).
The murine arterivirus LDV was first isolated from tumor-
bearing laboratory mice with elevated levels of plasma
Laboratory Diagnosis.
 Diagnosis of PRRSV may be com-
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) enzyme activity, but was
 plicated by the fact that many infections are inapparent,
later found to be endogenous in house mouse populations
but PRRS should be considered when there are clinical signs
(Mus musculus domesticus) in several countries, although
of respiratory disease associated with reproductive failure in 
the worldwide incidence not known. LDV causes lifelong
 a herd. PRRSV antibodies are detected by using a variety of
asymptomatic, persistent infections in mice that can only
serological
assays,
including
ELISA,
 microsphere
be recognized by elevated levels of plasma LDH. Attempts
immunoassay (Luminex), immunofluorescence assay,
to infect Peromyscus mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rabbits with 
immunoperoxidase monolayer assay, and serum virus
LDV have been unsuccessful. LDV replicates in permissive
neutralization assay. Serological examination of acute and
macrophages in the spleen, lymph nodes, thymus, and
convalescent pig sera may provide evidence of seroconver-
liver of infected mice. The subpopulation of macrophages
 sion. VI from clinical specimens such as bronchioalveolar
that are permissive to LDV infection are also responsible
lavage fluid, lung, lymph node, buffy coat, and serum can
for the normal clearance of the LDH enzyme from circu-
be done in PAM, MA104, and its derivatives and CRL-11171
lation. The continuous destruction of these macrophages
cell lines, although different strains or isolates of PRRSV
by LDV leads to elevated levels of LDH in blood, thus the
vary in their ability to replicate in different cell types.
name of the virus. The persistent infection that character-
Various PCR assays (e.g., standard RT-PCR, RT-nested PCR,
izes LDV infection of mice is maintained by replication
Chapter 63
 Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
487
Table 63.4.
Immune Evasion Mechanisms of PRRSV
Viral Strategies
Mechanism of Immune Evasion
Viral Proteins Involved
Consequences
 Evasion of Innate Immune Response
Downregulation of IFN-oα
Block dsRNA-induced IRF-3 and IFN
Nsp1
Decreased innate immune response
production pathway and
 promoter activation
Nsp1
Minimal IFN-α response in infected lung 
interference with
 Inhibition of STAT1, STAT2, and 
Nsp2
macrophages
IFN-α-signaling pathway
 ISG3 in IFN-signaling pathways
Nsp2
 Delayed humoral and cell-mediated 
 Inhibition of ISG15-dependent 
Nsp11
immune responses
RIG-I and JAK1 pathways
Interfering with NF-B-signaling
pathway
Inhibition of IRF3 phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation
Reduction in NK cell activity
 Reduction in NK cell-mediated 
Failure to kill virus-infected cells and
 cytotoxic function 
decreased IFN-y production leading to 
 decreased innate immune response 
Interference with antigen 
 Apoptosis of infected dendritic and 
Downregulation of antigen presentation 
 presentation by dendritic cells
macrophage cells.
 and induction of IL-10 and 
and macrophages
downregulation of CD11bfc,
downregulation of inflammatory
CD14, CD80/86, SLA class I, and 
cytokine production and T cells 
SLA class Il
Induction of IL-10 and suppression 
 Direct targeting of IL-10 promoter
N
 Suppression of T cel responses leading to 
of IL-12 
by the N protein
decreased IFN-y production
Evasion of Adaptive Immune Response
Genetic and antigenic variation
 Viral quasispecies due to high error
GP3?, GP4?, and GP5
Lack of cross-protection due to variation in
rate of viral RdRp and lack of
Nsp2, GP3 and GP5
 neutralization epitopes(NEs)
 proofreading capability
Nsp2
 Persistence of the virus
Intragenic recombination 
Nsp2, GP2, GP3, and GP5
Lack of conserved B cell epitopes
Variation in other B cell epitopes
Lack of conserved T cell epitopes
Variation of T cell epitopes
 Glycan shielding of neutralizing
 Masking of neutralizing epitopes
GP5
Delayed neutralizing antibody response,
epitopes
 decreased sensitivity of the virus to
neutralization, and persistence of the
virus
"Decoy" epitope
 Masking of neutralizing epitopes
GP5
 Delayed neutalizing antibody response 
 and persistence of the virus
Interference with T cell response 
 Induction of regulatory T cells 
2
Delayed T cell response 
(Treg; CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+)
?variation in NEs of PRRSV-EU strains only.
byariation in NEs of PRRSV-EU and PRRSV-NA strains.
7, not known.
 of LDv in new permissive macrophages that are contin-
by resisting neutralization due to the presence of large N-
uously regenerated from apparently nonpermissive pre-
linked polygalactosaminoglycan chains on the short N-
cursor cells. Other than the elevated LDH level and sub-
terminal ectodomain of the GPs (VP-3P envelope glyco-
tle changes in host immunity, persistent LDV infection of
protein according to old nomenclature; Figure 63.3). In
mice is generally asymptomatic and infection of laboratory
addition to carrying the neutralization determinants, the
mice is now very uncommon.
N-terminalectodomain ofLDV, GP5 is also involved in host
cell receptor binding. Neuropathogenic LDV-C and LDV-v
fection and peak at 3-4 weeks. Antibodies that neutralize
variants lack two N-terminal N-glycosylation sites on their
GP5 (Asn-36 and Asn-45), which permits them to interact
these antibodies are directed against the GP5 protein of
with an alternative receptor on motor neurons and also
the virus. The replication of LDV in macrophages allows
it to avoid host defense mechanisms, although the precise
ization. Therefore, neuropathogenic variants are strongly
mechanism of immune evasion and persistent infection
suppressed in immunocompetent mice because of their
is still unclear. It has been shown that most virus stocks
sensitivity to neutralization, and at the same time, the non -
contain both neuropathogenic (LDV-C and LDV-v) and
neuropathogenic, neutralizing antibod y-resistant variants
nonneuropathogenic (LDV-P and LDV-vx) variants. LDV-P
predominate in persistently infected mice. The infection
and LDV-vx variants establish persistent infection in mice
of mice of certain strains (C58, AKR, PL/J, and C3H/FgBoy)
488
PART III
Viruses
  n   t  s h 
Simian Hemorrhagic Fever Virus
dependent poliomyelitis (ADPM). ADPM develops only in
aged mice that become spontaneously immunosuppressed
Simian hemorrhagic fever virus (SHFV) was first isolated
 at 6-12 months of age or in younger mice that were exper-
from rhesus macaques suffering from hemorrhagic fever,
in primate research centers in both the Soviet Union
imentally immunosuppressed .
and the United States. African monkeys of three genera-
LDV successfully evades host immune response in a
 number of ways, thereby establishing lifelong persistent
African green monkey (Ceropithecus aethiops), patas (Ery-
-sisad a-(snaun oide) uooqea pue '(sind snaaoi
infection in mice. LDV infection modulates a variety of
tently infected in the wild population with the SHFV, and
immune responses through a number of direct and indi-
they do not exhibit any clinical signs of disease. Acciden-
rect effects, including depression of cellular immunity,
tal transmission of SHFV from African monkeys to any of
cytokine perturbations, and macrophage function. Thus,
three species of Asian macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta,
modulation of the immune response is the major concern
Macaca arctoides, and Macaca fascicularis) results in a gen-
for adventitious infection of laboratory mice with LDV.
Natural killer (NK) cells mediate minimal control of the
erally fatal hemorrhagic fever. Clinical signs of simian
hemorrhagic fever (SHF) in macaques include anorexia,
virus in infected mice. Infection elicits a strong and specific
fever, cyanosis, skin petechia and hemorrhages, nose-
antiviral immune response, but serum antibody and T cell 
bleeds, facial edema, bloody diarrhea, dehydration, adip-
responses are not elicited in time to clear the high titers of
sia, and proteinuria. Death generally occurs 5-25 days
replicating virus during the acute stage of infection, largely
because the virus replicates so rapidly within the first few
hours following infection. The major factor in reducing
100% in macaques. The high lethality observed in macaque
monkeys may be due to an extreme sensitivity of their
virus titers in plasma during the early phase of infection
 macrophages to cytocidal infection by SHFV. Infection
is exhaustion of the target cell population (macrophages),
of captive patas monkeys with SHFV from persistently
rather than any virus-specific immune response. Cytotoxic
infected patas mon keys results in persistent in fection with-
T cells disappear during persistent infection, apparently
out any clinical signs. However, infection of captive patas
through clonal exhaustion. In addition, there is inhibition
monkeys with SHFV from diseased macaque monkeys
of IL-4 production with suppression of helper T cells. The
results in transient mild disease, indicating the selection of
virus isolated during early infection is efficiently neutral-
ized, whereas the virus isolated from persistently infected
more virulent variants during epizootics in macaque mon-
keys. The humoral immune response against SHFV varies
mice is neutralization resistant, suggesting selection for
with the species of monkeys and the infecting virus strain.
neutralization-escape variants within the quasispecies pop-
More virulent strains of SHFV induce neutralizing antibod.
ulation (see earlier). Infection of immunocompetent mice
ies in patas monkeys 7 days after experimental infection.
triggers polyclonal B cell activation, with enhanced spe-
However, only low levels ofanti-SHFV antibodies are found
cific and nonspecific IgG2a-restricted antibody responses.
In infected mice, viremia occurs in the form of infectious
in many persistently infected patas monkeys. Neutralizing
virus-IgG complexes.
 neutralize other strains, indicating that there is variation
LDV transmission between mice is relatively inefficient,
in the neutralization determinants of individual strains of
despite the lifelong viremia that occurs in infected mice
SHFV. Based on the hydrophobicity, membrane topology
and the secretion of the virus in urine, feces, and saliva.
 and putative N-linked glycosylation sites of GP7 encoded
Feces contain high titers of the virus, and thus coprophagic
by ORF7 of SHFV (homologous to GP5 encoded by ORF5
behavior of mice probably plays an important role in trans-
of other arteriviruses), GP7 is predicted to contain the neu-
mission of the virus. LDV transmission from mother to
tralization determinants of the virus (Figure 63.3).
offspring through the placenta or via breast milk is highly
 The prevalence and incidence of SHFV infection among
efficient if the mother is immunologically naive. However,
African monkeys in endemic areas of Africa is not known,
transmission via these routes from persistently infected
but the incidence ofpersistent subclinicalinfections in wild
 mothers is rare because anti-LDV antibodies block transpla-
 patas monkeys appears to be high. The method of transmis-
cental transmission of the virus and its release into milk.
sion ofSHFV among African monkeys in the wild is unclear.
Generally horizontal transmission of LDV between mice is
Infection most likely occurs through wounds and biting,
restricted by mucosal barriers although horizontal trans-
but sexual transmission has not been ruled out. SHFV is
mission of LDV does occur among laboratory mice that
not transmitted transplacentally from persistently in fected
fight and bite one another. The sexual transmission of LDV
mothers to their offspring. Several epizootics of SHF in
among mice has not been demonstrated.
 LDV can only be quantitated by an end-point dilution
captive macaque colonies have originated from accidental
mechanical transmission of SHFV from asymptomatic, per-
assay in mice, which is based on the increase in plasma
 sistently infected African monkeys. Once illness becomes
LDH activity that accompanies LDV infection in mice. The
apparent in the macaque colony, the SHFV spreads rapidly
 presence of LDV in mice or in other materials is readily
throughout the colony, most likely by direct contact and
detected by injecting plasma, tissue homogenates, or other
 aerosols. There are no vaccines to prevent SHFV infection 
materials (e.g., transplantable mouse tumors) into groups
in mon keys.
of two to three mice and assaying their plasma LDH activity
4-5 days later. Transplantable mouse tumors can be readily
Persistently infected monkeys can be identified by the
presence of SHFV that replicates in primary cultures of peri-
toneal macrophages from rhesus and patas monkeys. The
a host animal other than mice.
Chapter 63  Arteriviridae and Roniviridae
489
most sensitive method for detection of persistent in fection
similar and include necrosis of gill lamellae, HP, lymphoid
in mon keys is experimental inoculation of macaque mon-
organ, and heart. Histologically, GAV differs from YHV in
keys, and there are currently no molecular diagnostic assays
that the lesions are limited to the gills and the lymphoid
for detection of SHFV. Indirect immunofluorescent assay,
organ. Moreover, intensely basophilic inclusions found in
ELISA, and neutralization assays are available for serologi-
the lymphoid organ of YHV-infected shrimp are not as evi-
cal diagnosis of SHFV infection. However, these assays are
dent in GAV-infected shrimps.
notreliable because of the low level of anti-SHFV antibodies
The diagnosis of GAV and YHV is achieved by rou-
found in many persistently infected monkeys. Accidental
tine hematoxylin and eosin histopathological examina
transmission of SHFV from persistently infected African
tion and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The
-u n  aa po n aq  sio
 minimized by strict adherence to proper sanitary condi-
tion with virus-specific probe and immunohistochemical
tions and animal care practices.
staining with polyclonal rabbit antiserum or Mabs to either 
of these viruses. A nitrocellulose enzyme assay using rab-
bit polyclonal antibodies and a Western immunoblotting
Roniviruses
assay using Mabs have been described for the detection of
Yellow-Head Virus and Gill-Associated Virus.
Yellow-
YHV in gill tissues and hemolymph samples of P. monodon.
head disease (YHD) virus was first detected in 1990 in
Recently, several RT-PCR and 1RT-PCR assays have been
black tiger shrimp (P. monodon) farmed in Central Thai-
developed for the detection of GAV and YHV in samples.
land, and since then the YHV has spread into Southeast
The Western immunoblotting assay is highly specific and is
Asia and the Indo-Pacifc region. In 1993, a virus mor-
recommended by the OlE as a confirmatory diagnostic test
phologically identical to YHV was detected in wild and
for YHV infection in combination with in situ nucleic acid
farmed P. monodon in Australia, and was given the name
hybridization, TEM, and RT-PCR. The control of YHV and
lymphoid organ virus (LOV) in relation to the lesions in
GAVin P. monodon is mainly achieved byadaptinga variety
the lymphoid organs. Subsequently, in 1995 and 1996, an
apparent pathogenic form of this virus was detected in high
vention through the use of specific pathogen-free and/or
levels in the gills of moribund, farmed P. monodon display-
specific pathogen-resistant shrimp breeding stocks.
ing YHD-like histopathological lesions and named as the
gill-associated virus (GAV). It is now evident that LOV is
same as GAV and causes the mild and/or chronic form of
infection in P. monodona, and the GAV has become the
References
accepted name for both of these viruses. Furthermore, lim-
ited sequence comparisons have indicated that LOV and
Balasuriya UB and MacLachlan NJ (2004) The immune
GAV are minor variants of the same virus, and YHV is a dis-
response to equine arteritis virus: potential lessons for other
tinct but closely related variant (topotype). Recently, phy-
arteriviruses. Vet Immunol Immunopathol, 102, 107-129.
logenetic analysis based on ORF1b sequence of 57 viruses
Balasuriya UB and Snijder EJ (2008) Arterivirus, in Ani-
hasidentified existenceofatleastsix geneticlineages(geno-
mal Viruses: Molecular Biology (eds TC Mettenleiter and F
types 1-6) of YHV. YHV and GAV belong to genotypes 1
Sobrino), Caister Academic Press, Norwich, United King-
and 2, respectively, and cause clinical disease in black tiger
dom, pp. 97-148.
shrimp. In contrast, virus strains belonging to genotypes
Brinton-Darnell M and Plagemann PG (197s) Structure and
3-6 have been detected exclusively as low-level infections
chemical-physical characteristics of lactate dehydrogenase-
in apparently healthy shrimp
elevating virus and its RNA. / Virol, 16 (2), 420-433.
YHV is a major pathogen of farmed P. monodon shrimp
Gorbalenya AE, Enjuanes L, Ziebuhr J, and Snijder EJ (2006)
and is listed by the OlE as causing a notifiable disease in
Nidovirales: evolving the largest RNA virus genome. Virus
Res, 117, 17-37.
eral routes, including exposure to free water-borne virus
Gravell M, London WT, Rodriguez Metal.(1980) Simian haem-
during cohabitation and cannibalism of infected carcasses.
orrhagic fever (SHF): new virus isolate from a chronically
There is no direct evidence of transmission of YHV verti-
infected patas monkey. /Gen Virol, 51, 99-106.
Pasternak AO, Spaan WJ, and Snijder EJ (2006) Nidovirus tran-
cally, but there is substantial evidence of vertical transmis-
scription: how to make sense ... ? / Gen Virol, 87, 1403-
sion of GAV in wild and farmed P. monodon in East Coast
1421.
of Australia. Under experimental conditions, YHV appears
Snijder EJ, Siddell SG, and Gorbalenya AE (200s) The order
to be more virulent than GAV and causes 100% mortality
Nidovirales, in Topley and Wilson's Microbiology and Micro-
within 3-4 days of infection in P. monodon. In contrast,
bial Infections, 10th edn (eds BWJ Mahy and V ter Meulen),
with GAV the mortality occurs 7-14 days postinfection,
Edward Arnold, London.
and similarly, farm outbreaks are presented as a chronic
Spilman MS, Welbon C, Nelson E, and Dokland T (2009) Cryo-
electron tomography of porcine reproductive and respira-
numbers of moribund shrimp.Shrimp with YHD show pale
tory syndrome virus: organization of the nucleocapsid. /
01 bleached appearance of the body with a yellowish discol-
Gen Virol, 90, 527-535.
oration of the cephalothorax due to yellowing of the hep-
Zhang Sand Bonami JR (2007) A roni-like virus associated with
atopancreas (HP). The HP of infected shrimp is swollen and
mortalities of the freshwater crab, Eriocheir sinensis Milne
soft compared to that of normal shrimp. The tissue distri-
Edwards, cultured in China, exhibiting “sighs disease" and 
bution and histopathology seen in YHD infections are very
black gill syndrome. / Fish Dis, 30 (3), 181-186.
490
PART III
Viruses
Further Reading
national Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (eds AMQ King,
MJ Adams, EB Carters, and EJ Lefkowitz), Elsevier Academic
Press, London, pp. 796-805.
Balasuriya UBR (2012) Equine viral arteritis, in Infectious Dis-
eases of the Horse, 3rd edn (eds D Sellon and M Long), Saun-
Gorbalenya AE, Enjuanes L, Ziebuhr J, and Snijder EJ (2006).
ders Elsevier.
Nidovirales: Evolving the largest RNA virus genome. Virus
Balasuriya UBR and Snijder EJ (2007) Arteriviruses, in Animal
Res, 117, 17-37.
Viruses: Molecular Biology (eds TC Mettenleiter and FS Cais-
Lunney JK and Rowland RRR(2010) Progress in porcine respira-
ter), Academic Press, Chapter 3, pp. 97-148.
 tory and reproductive syndrome virus biology and control.
de Groot RJ, Cowley JA, Enjuanes L et al. (2012) Order Nidovi-
Virus Res, 154, 1-224.
rales, in Virus Taxonomy, Ninth Report of the International
 Perlman S, Gallagher T, and Snijder EJ (eds) (2008). Nidoviruses,
Commiftee on Taxonomy of Viruses(edsAMQ King, MJ Adams,
ASM Press, Washington, DC.
Siddell SG, Ziebuhr J, and Snijder EJ (200s) Coronaviruses,
EB Carters, and EJ Lefkowitz), Elsevier Academic Press, Lon-
don, pp. 785-795.
toroviruses and arteriviruses, in Topley and Wilson's Micro-
Enjuanes L, Gorbalenya AE, de Groot RJ et al. (2008) Nidovi-
biology and Microbial Infections (eds BWJ Mahy and V ter
Meulen), Hodder Arnold, London, pp. 823-856.
rales, in Encyclopedia of Virology (eds BWJ Mahy and MHV
Snijder EJ and Spann WJM (2007) Arteriviridae, in Fields Virol-
Regenmortel), Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 419-430.
 Faaberg KS, Balasuriya, UBR, Brinton MA et al. (2012) Family
ogy, Sth edn (eds DM Knipe and PM Howley), Lippincott 
Arteriviridae, in Virus Taxonomy, Ninth Report of the Inter-
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 1337-1355.
Reoviridae
D. SCOTT MCVEy, WILlIAm WILSOn,
AND BARBARA DROLET
Viruses in the Reoviridae family infect a wide range of
Etiologic Agent
species, including mammals, fish and shelfish, insects,
and plants. All of the viruses in this family have a seg-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. There are
three serotypes (1, 2, and 3) and many strains of mam-
mented genome of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), and the
malian reoviruses. Strains of reovirus that vary in viru-
number of individual genome segments varies between
lence have been identified by sequence analysis of indi-
 genera. The family is grouped into nine genera: Orthore-
vidual viral genes and proteins. Mammalian reoviruses
ovinus, Orbivinus, Rotavinus, Aquareovinus, Coltivinus, Oryza-
all possess a genome of ten distinct segments of dsRNA.
vinus, Cypovinus, Phytoreovirus, and Fijivirus. The latter four
The genome segments are of different sizes (grouped as
genera are confined to insects, plants, or both. The Col-
large, medium, and small). Each encodes a single pro-
fivirus genus includes Colorado tick fever virus, which is
tein except the S1 gene, which includes two distinct open
a tick-transmitted human pathogen. Orthoreoviruses and
reading frames. The complete reovirus particle has no
rotaviruses (Figure 64.1— a rotavirus) infect a wide vari-
envelope and exhibits icosahedral morphology with a
ety of vertebrate species. The host range of orbiviruses-
diameter of approximately 85 nm. The reovirus particle
includes both vertebrates and invertebrates, with blue-
consists of eight structural proteins arranged into inner
tongue virus (BTV) serving as the prototype. The Aquare-
and outer protein capsids (coats). The inner protein core
ovirus host range includes fish and shellfish, with golden
contains the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (tran-
shiner virus serving as the prototype. Table 64.1 includes a
scriptase), as well as other enzymes that mediate mRNA
list of genera and species that are important in veterinary
synthesis and capping, helicase activity, and other func-
medicine.
tions that are necessary for virus replication. The predom-
inant outer coat protein, sigma 1, is the primary determi-
Orthoreoviruses
 nant of virus serotype and hemagglutination and also is the
cell attachment protein. Enzymatic digestion of the outer
Mammalian Orthoreoviruses
capsid protein sigma 3 from intact reovirus particles gener-
ates infectious subviral particles, and removal of the outer
 Disease. Reoviruses (genus Orthoreovirus) have been iso-
capsid proteins sigma 1, sigma 3, and mu 1 generates core
lated from the respiratory and/or gastrointestinal tract
particles. All three particles are important in the lifecycle of
of many animal species, including nonhuman primates,
reovirus replication. Genetic diversity of strains of reovirus
rodents, horses, cattle, sheep, swine, cats, and dogs.
occurs through accumulation of mutations within individ-
Reoviruses are usually isolated from healthy animals,
ual viral genes (genetic drift) and by the exchange of entire
thus their designation as “respiratory enteric orphan"
 genome segments (reassortment) between viruses during
viruses because they typically are not associated with
mixed infections with more than one reovirus strain 01
any disease. However, reoviruses are sometimes isolated
serotype.
from animals with mild respiratory and/or enteric dis-
ease, and reovirus infection of infant (neonatal) mice
can cause severe systemic disease. Experimental infec-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. Reoviruses
tion of kittens with reovirus serotype 3 has caused con-
are stable at low temperatures (4 *C to room temperature)
junctivitis, photophobia, gingivitis, serous lacrimation,
and are resistant to high temperature (55 *C) for short
and nasal discharge. All three serotypes of reovirus have
periods of time. Reoviruses are also resistant to detergents,
 been isolated from sheep, and experimental infections
many disinfectants, and stable over a wide pH range (pH
with serotype 1 have been reported to cause enteritis and
2-9). They are inactivated by exposure to 95% ethanol and
pneumonia.
sodium hypochlorite (bleach).
Veterinary Microbiology, Thrd ditir. Editedby D.Scott McVey, Melissa Kery ard MM. Chegap.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Sors, Iric.
491
492
PART III
Viruses
respiratory discharge. Reoviruses infect most mammals and
FlGuRE 64.1.
Negatively stained preparations of porcine
they replicate in a variety of cell cultures.
rotavirus, with coronaviruses on the lower right side of the
figure. (Courtesy of Dr Richard Hesse, Kansas State University.)
Pathogenesis  and
Pathology. In murine studies,
reoviruses have infected either intestinal or respiratory
epithelial cells after oro-fecal enteric or aerosol respiratory
infection, respectively. Initial virus replication occurs
 in regional lymphoid tissues after reovirus infection of
either the gastrointestinal (Peyer's patches) or respira-
tory (bronchus-associated lymphoid tissues) tracts. The
tion in infected neonatal mice, leading to pancreatitis,
myocarditis, myositis, encephalomyletitis, or hepatitis,
with the specific disease process and pathogenesis reflect-
ing the properties of the individual infecting strain of
reovirus as well as the age and resistance of the infected
 mouse. Reoviruses can cause encephalitis and hepatitis in
primates.
Host Response to Infection. Both respiratory and enteric
infection of mice with mammalian reoviruses results in
induction of humoral and cellular immune responses, nat-
ural killer cells, as well as interferons and other cytokines,
n       
infection.
Laboratory Diagnosis. Reovirus infections can be diag-
can be isolated from tissues and from rectal, nasal, and
throat swabs by cell culture techniques, although blind
passage may be required before cytopathic effect (CPE)
becomes visible. Virus isolates can be serotyped by either
   (  
(VN) testing with serotype-specific antisera. Reoviruses can
be identified in tissues or cell culture by immunofluo-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. Mammalian
rescent antibody staining (FA) or immunohistochemistry
reoviruses have a wide geographic distribution and are
 (IHC). Serologic testing is done using paired sera and VN or
commonly present in river water, untreated sewage, and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
stagnant water, likely reflecting fecal contamination by
infected animals and/or humans. The mode of transmis-
Treatment and Control. Since reovirus infection in mam-
sion is apparently by direct contact or exposure to materi-
mals is usually mild, treatment is not required. No vaccines
als contaminated by virus-infected feces (oro-fecal) and/or
 0r control measures have been described and are unlikely to
be developed in the future unless reoviruses are determined
 to be of greater importance as animal pathogens.
Table 64.1.
Genera Within the Reoviradae that Include
Viruses Relevant to Veterinary Medicine
Avian Orthoreoviruses
Disease. Avian reoviruses (genus Orthoreovirus) are of
Minimum Number
Genus
Serogroup
of Serotypes
economic significance to the poultry industry. Systemic
reovirus infections of poultry can cause a variety of clinical
Orthoreovirus
Mammalian
3
syndromes, including gastroenteritis, hepatitis, myocardi-
Avian
11
tis and pericarditis, pneumonia, and failure to thrive.
Orbrvirus
Bluetongue
26
Acute reovirus infections also lead to increased mortal-
 Epizootic hemorrhagic
8 (possibly 9)
ity and carcass condemnations in affected flocks, as well
disease
 African horse sickness
as poor growth and food conversion efficiency (stunting
9
 Equine encephalosis
7
syndrome). Arthritis and tenosynovitis are common in
Palyam
11
birds that survive acute reovirus infection; reoviruses are
Rotavirus
 5 major groups 
 Uncertain 
 a major cause of avian arthritis, and this disease occurs
Aguareovirus
 Not designated
Uncertain
principally in broiler chickens and, less often, in layer birds
and turkeys.
Chapter 64
Reoviridae
493
 Etiologic Agent
proper management procedures and vaccination with
either attenuated or killed viruses.
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The avian
reoviruses largely resemble their mammalian coun terparts
but differ in that they produce cell fusion in cell cultures
Orbiviruses
unable to grow in mammalian cel lines. Avian and mam-
malian reoviruses exhibit varying degrees of antigenic relat-
Orbiviruses are important pathogens of livestock. Four-
edness. At least 11 serotypes of avian reovirus have been
teen serogroups have been described and five are of
described, and strains of avian reoviruses vary significantly
real or potential veterinary significance: (1) BTV, (2) epi-
in their virulence. All share common antigens as deter-
zootic hemorrhagic disease virus (EHDV), (3) Palyam virus,
 n ()     
(4) African horse sickness virus (AHSV), and (5) equine
ment fixation (CF).
encephalosis virus (EEV). Like mammalian reoviruses
(orthoreoviruses), orbiviruses have a double capsid struc-
ture, possess a segmented dsRNA genome (10 segments),
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Avian
reoviruses replicate in embryonated chicken eggs, primary
and replicate in the cytoplasm of in fected cells. Orbiviruses
are distinguished from orthoreoviruses and rotaviruses
avian cell cultures, and, once adapted, certain established
because they replicate in both insects and mammals, and
mammalian cell lines.
by the fact that they are not enteric pathogens of verte-
brates. Orbiviruses replicate within the mid gut epithelium
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
Avianreo-
of the hematophagous (blood sucking) insects that trans-
viruses are prevalent worldwide in chickens, turkeys, and
mit these viruses. Progeny viruses are released and infect
other avian species. Avian reoviruses persist in nature
several secondary organs including salivary glands facili-
through en vironmental contamination and by continued
tating transmission to susceptible mammalian hosts.
transmission of the virus from infected birds, including
those persistently infected with the virus, to susceptible
birds. Transmission occurs both horizontally and verti-
Bluetongue Virus
cally. Horizontal transmission is predominantly by the
oro-fecal route and occurs through both direct and indi-
Disease.
 Bluetongue (BT) is an arthropod-transmitted
rect contact. Vertical transmission has been demonstrated
virus disease of domestic and wild ruminant species caused
following oral, tracheal, and nasal inoculation of breeder
by BTV. BT occurs most commonly in sheep (sore-muzzle,
chickens.
catarrhal fever) and certain species of wildlife, particularly
white-tailed deer. BT in sheep and deer is characterized
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Infection with avian
by congestion, hemorrhage, and ulceration of the mucous
reoviruses is usually inapparent, and the occurrence of dis-
nal tract. Other characteristic lesions include hyperemia of
ease reflects the age of the bird at infection (young birds
are predisposed), the virulence of the infecting virus strain,
the coronary band and necrosis of both cardiac and skele-
and the route of exposure. Reovirus-induced arthritis is ini
tal muscles. BTV infection of sheep and deer is sometimes
tially characterized by acute inflammation within affected
fatal, with terminal occurrence of disseminated intravas-
joints that progresses to pannus formation with erosion of
cular coagulation. Sheep that survive severe bouts of BT
articular cartilage; thus, reovirus-induced arthritis in chick-
are frequently emaciated, weak, and lame, and have a pro-
tracted convalescence during which they are susceptibie to
ens somewhat mimics human rheumatoid arthritis. Gross
lesions in affected chickens often also include extensive
secondary infections. Breaks may occur in the wool fiber
swelling of the digital flexor and metatarsal extensor ten-
of convalescent sheep. Cattle are commonly infected with
dons that can lead to chronic hardening and fusion of the
BTV in endemic areas, but clinical disease is extremely
tendon sheaths.
uncommon for most serotypes. Vaccine strains of BTV, and
those propagated in cell culture, can cross the placenta of
pregnant sheep and cattle to infect the developing fetus,
Host Response to Infection. Antibody responses to avian
leading to fetal death, abortion, stillbirths, or teratogenic
reoviruses have been demonstrated by AGID, CF, and VN
defects in progeny.
tests. The mechanism or mechanisms responsible for pro-
The major economic impact of BT is that it is a reportable
tective immunity are poorly defined, and variable degrees
disease by almost all regulatory authorities, along with
 of cross-strain protection have been reported.
foot-and-mouth disease and at least fourteen other dis-
eases that are considered to have major adverse economic
Laboratory Diagnosis. Reovirus-induced avian arthritis
and societal ramifications. As a consequence, the interna-
must be differentiated from arthritis and synovitis caused
tional movement of ruminants and their germplasm from
by other viruses and bacteria. A definitive diagnosis requires
BTV-endemic countries is regulated and controlled. BTV
demonstration of reovirus infection by direct FA staining
recently was recognized as a potential pathogen of carni-
of tissues (tendon sheaths), virus isolation, or serology.
vores. Inad vertent infection of pregnant dogs with a BTV.
contaminated vaccine caused abortion and death. Sero-
Treatment and Control. There is no treatment for avian
logic evidence of BTV infection has also been demonstrated
viral arthritis, and the infection is best controlled by
in African carnivores.
494
PART III
Viruses
Etiologic Agent
onated chick eggs (ECEs), and a variety of mammalian
and insect cell cultures. Replication of BTV is facilitated by
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The genome
incubation temperatures of 37 *C in mammalian cultures,
of BTV and other orbiviruses includes 10 segments of
33.5 *C in ECEs, and 27-30 *C in insect cultures.
 dsRNA, each of which encodes at least one protein (Table
64.2). The BTV particle is composed of seven structural pro-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. Similar to
teins, two of which form the outer protein capsid, two form
Reoviruses, orbiviruses are stable at low temperatures (4 *C
the outer layer of the inner core that surround the remain-
to room temperature) and are resistant to high temperature
ing three inner core proteins. The outer capsid protein,
(55 *C) for short periods of time. They are inactivated by
VP2, contains the serotype-specific epitopes recognized by
exposure to 95% ethanol, sodium hypochlorite (bleach),
neutralizing and hemagglutination-inhibiting antibodies
  s n  s 
(see Figure 64.5). The other outer capsid protein, VP5, con-
Roccal ROCCAL?-D Plus).
tributes to the conformation of the neutralizing epitopes
on VP2. Four nonstructural (NS) proteins also occur in BTV-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Iransmission. BTV has been
 infected cells, with Ns-1 forming cytoplasmic macrotubu-
    n s  
lar structures that are characteristic of orbivirus-infected
tica. Infection occurs throughout tropical, subtropical, and
temperate regions of the world, coincident with the dis-
 common to all serotypes and strains of BTV, which is the
tribution of susceptible ruminants and competent vec-
basis of group-specific serological assays such as AGID and
tor insects (Culicoides spp.). The virus is not contagious
between ruminants; rather, infection occurs only follow-
competitive ELISA (cELISA).
There is considerable heterogeneity within the BTV
ing the bites of BTV-infected Culicoides insects. Subclinical
serogroup, with 26 distinct virus serotypes, each with
and/or asymptomatic BTV infection of ruminants occurs
potentially distinct biological properties. This genetic
throughout endemic regions of the world. Outbreaks of BT
occur only sporadically, within the vectors'ranges allowing
diversity has arisen as a consequence of both genetic drift
of individual gene segments, as well as the reassortment of
of ruminants.
gene segments during mixed infections of either insect or
ruminant hosts with more than one BTV serotype or strain.
Vector Culicoides insects become persistently infected
 Interestingly, recent sequence and phylogenetic analyses
with BTV after feeding on a viremic ruminant (Figure
64.2). These hematophagous insects are true biologic vec-
have shown that prolonged co-evolution of BTV with the
different species of vector insects that occur in various
tors of BTV. They obtain the virus from blood feeding
regions of the world has resulted in strains of BTV that
on an infected animal and then transmit virus to other
 are unique to each region, so-called virus topotypes.
ruminants after an extrinsic incubation period of 4-20
days. During this period, the virus infects and disseminates
from the midgut of the insect to its salivary glands. Repli-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. BTV
cation of BTV within the insect vector is dependent on
commonly infects domestic (sheep, cattle, and goats) and
 ambient temperature; thus, increased replication of BTV
wild (deer, antelope, wild sheep species, etc.) ruminants.
The viruses can be adapted to grow in suckling mice, embry-
in vector insects occurs at higher temperatures, but the
increased temperature can shorten the lifespan of these
insects. Transmission of BTV can occur year-round in cli-
 mates that permit insect (Culicoides) activity in all seasons,
Table 64.2.
Molecular Constituents of Orbiviruses
Encoded
Gene
Protein
Role
FIGURE 64.2.
Midges acquiring a blood meal.
(Photograph courtesy of the USDA ARS Arthropod-Borne
1
VP1
RNA polymerase; minor component of viral
Animal Diseases Research Unit, Manhattan, KS.)
 core particle
2
VP2
 Receptor binding; serotype determination;
 component of outer capsid 
3
VP3
Interacts with genomic RNA; structural
 component of viral core particle 
4
VP4
 RNA capping enzymes; minor component viral 
 core particle
5
VP5
Structural interactions with vP2; component of 
 outer capsid 
6
NS1
Virus tubules; not a virion component
7
VP7
Group antigen; structural component of viral
core particle
8
NS2
Binds RNA; virus inclusion bodies; nonstructural
9
VP6
 Helicase; binds RNA; minor component of viral
 core particle
10
NS3/3A
Virus egress from infected cells; nonstructural
NS4
Virus egress from infected cells; nonstructural
Chapter 64
Reoviridae
495
with the virus persisting in a perpetual vector-ruminant
contributes to the vascular injury, hemorrhage, and tissue
cycle ofinfection. In contrast, transmission of BTV is highly
infarction that are characteristic of severe cases of BT in
seasonal in regions of the world at the northern and south-
sheep and deer.
ern extremities of the vectors’ range (approximately lati-
Viremia in BTV-infected ruminants is highly cell associ-
tudes of 35°S and 45*N). In these areas, BTV transmission
ated. Virus initially is associated with all blood cell types,
typically occurs only in the late summer and fall when
and titers of virus in each cell fraction reflect the proportion
vector populations peak and when ambient temperatures
of each cell type in blood; thus, BTV initially is most associ-
are highest (likely reflecting the influence of temperature-
ated with platelets and erythrocytes, and less so leukocytes.
dependent virogenesis). The traditional global range of BTV
Late in the course of infection, however, virus appears to be
has recently expanded into Mediterranean Europe after the
exclusively associated with erythrocytes. It is this associa-
northern spread of competent vectors, perhaps as a conse-
tion that facilitates both prolonged infection of ruminants
quence of global warming.
as well as infection of the hematophagous Culicoides insect
vectors that feed upon them. BTV infection of ruminants
Pathogenesis and Pathology. For most BTV serotypes,
sheep and some species of deer are very susceptible, whereas
with the exception of one unconfirmed report, persistent
cattle infections are typically subclinical. The pathogene-
BTV infection of ruminants does not occur.
sis of BTV infection appears to be similar in all ruminant
The gross lesions of BT include facial edema and hyper-
species. The virus multiplies initially in the lymph node(s)
emia, with or without hemorrhage (petechial and ecchy-
draining the site of infection, and viremia occurs as early as
motic) of the oral and nasal mucosa, skin, and coronary
 3 days later with a subsequent febrile response. Upon sys-
band. Ulcerations and erosions also may occur in and
temic distribution, virus replicates in mononuclear phago-
around the mouth, especially on the hard palate. Hem-
cytic cells and the endothelium of small blood vessels
 a    n   n  
resulting in vascular injury, thrombosis, and infarction of
 acteristic of severe cases of BT. Petechial hemorrhages may
the affected tissues including the upper gastrointestinal
 also occur in the myocardium, pericardium, skeletal mus-
and respiratory tracts, coronary bands, heart, and skele-
culature, and the tissues of the upper gastrointestinal tract
tal muscle. Disseminated intravascular coagulation likely
(Figure 64.3 A, B, C, and D).
FIGURE 64.3.
Sheep with bluetongue disease demonstrating depression (A), dyspnea (B), and typical cyanosis of the tongue (B)
and coronary band (C), and ulceration and hemorrhage from the nasal cavity mucosa (D). (Photographs courtesy of the UsDA ARS and
Timothy J. Graham DVM Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research Umnit Unit, Manhattan, KS.)
[A
[B]
[C]
D】
496
PART III
Viruses
Host Response to Infection. BTV-infected ruminants
break in Europe. Recombinant baculovirus-expressed virus-
develop both humoral and cellular immune responses.
like particles and canary pox expressing VP2 antigens have
Virus-neutralizing (serotype-specific) and nonneutralizing
recently been developed as experimental BTV vaccine can-
(group-specific) antibodies develop 7-14 days after infec-
didates, avoiding some of the retained virulence problems
tion. However, virus can coexist in blood with high titers
 inherent to live attenuated virus vaccines.
of neutralizing antibody for several weeks because of the
intimate association of BTV with the cell membrane of
infected erythrocytes. Limited degrees of cross-serotype
Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease and Ibaraki Viruses
viral neutralization may occur following infection of an
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) is an arthropod-
 animal with a single BTV serotype and subsequent expo-
transmitted virus disease of wild ruminants caused by
sures to additional serotypes can generate production of a
 EHDV. EHDV is an important cause of disease and mortality
set of broadly cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies. How-
in white-tailed deer in North America and, to a lesser extent,
ever, immunization of sheep and cattle primarily provides
pronghorn antelope and bighorn sheep. EHDV infection
 homologous, serotype-specific protection.
of domestic ruminants is common in endemic areas, and
 EHDV may be an important pathogen of domestic live-
Laboratory Diagnosis. Initial diagnosis of BT in sheep
stock, especially associated with severe outbreaks in deer.
and deer is based on the characteristic clinical signs of
A notable exception is Ibaraki disease of cattle in Japan
affected animals in known BTV-endemic areas. BT typi-
and Korea; the causative agent, Ibaraki virus, is closely
cally occurs in the late summer and fall. Confirmation of
s  ses AaHa i ads Aa o 
the diagnosis requires virologic testing, usually by either
with BTV, and EHD of white-tailed deer closely resembles
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay or by virus isola-
fulminant BT with hyperemia, hemorrhage and ulceration
tion using inoculation of susceptible sheep, ECEs, suckling
 of the upper gastrointestinal tract, necrosis of cardiac and
 mice, or cell cultures. The cell cultures most often used
skeletal muscle, and terminal disseminated intravascular
 include Vero and BHK; multiple blind passages are often
 coagulation with widespread bleeding (Figure 64.4 A and
required before CPE is observed. Upon adaptation to cell
B). Additional features of Ibaraki disease in cattle include
culture, virus can be identified by fluorescent antibody
 marked dysphagia as a consequence of necrosis of muscles
staining or VN assay. BTV is very commonly detected in
of the larynx, pharynx, esophagus, and tongue.
the blood of healthy ruminants in endemic areas, espe-
Like BTV, EHDV infection occurs throughout tropical
cially if sensitive nested PCR assays are used because these
and temperate regions of the world, and EHDV infection of
shep anou 1o 00z 04 dn 1o1 pie jiaonu Aia 4oatap un
ruminants has been described in Africa, Asia, and the Amer-
after infection. Thus, the mere demonstration of virus o1
icas. EHDV closely resembles BTV in terms of its epidemiol-
nucleic acid in the blood of ruminants certainly is not proof
 ogy, including dissemination by Culicoides insect vectors,
of disease causality.
pathogenesis of infection in ruminants, replication strat-
Serologic diagnosis can be performed using tests for
egy, molecular structure, and methods of diagnosis. There
 group-specifc (AGID, CF, ELISA, IFA) or type-specific (viral
is some discrepancy over the currently recognized eight
neutralization, HI) antibodies. Paired serum samples are
serotypes of EHDv. It has been proposed that Ibaraki virus
required to demonstrate seroconversion or an increase in
be classifed as EHDV serotype 2 resulting in nine serotypes.
titer. A single serological test is often meaningless because
a high proportion of ruminants are seropositive in BTV.
endemic areas, and the vast majority of these animals
 never experience obvious clinical disease following BTV
FIGURE 64.4.
Enzootic hemorrhagic disease. (A)
infection.
experimental infection with EHDV showing edema and
Treatment and Control. There is no specific treatment fo1
congestion of the conjunctiva. (B) Photograph taken of a
BT, although stress appears to exacerbate clinical disease.
white-tailed deer that died 7 days after experimental infection
Furthermore, transmission of BTV to unaffected ruminants
with EHDV showing severe congestion and hemorrhage of the
can be prevented by moving animals indoors (if feasible)
tracheal mucosa. (Photographs courtesy of Dr Mark Ruder of
where insect vectors are not present. Vaccination of sheep
the USDA ARS Arthropod-Borne Animal Diseases Research
Unit,Manhattan,KS.)(A reprinted with permission,Ruder
with attenuated strains of BTV has been practiced for many
(2012).
years in South Africa and North America; the South African
vaccine incorporates fifteen different BTV serotypes, and
requires vaccination on three different occasions. Poten-
tial disadvantages of live attenuated virus vaccines include
 reversion to virulence and their ability to be transmitted in
nature. Furthermore, live attenuated virus vaccines poten-
tially can reassort their genome segments with field strains
of BTV to create novel variant viruses. Finally, live attenu-
 ated vaccine strains of BTV have been repeatedly shown
to be able to cross the placenta to cause fetal death or
injury, whereas field strains of the virus typically cannot.
The exception to this was the recent BTV serotype 8 out-
(A)
(B)
Chapter 64
Reoviridae
497
Others have proposed (based on genetic sequences and
in the late summer and fall in endemic areas, and the dis-
tribution of AHSV is dependent on the presence of compe-
3 proposed to be a type 1. With the exception of Ibaraki
tent insect vectors and ambient temperatures that facilitate
virus vaccines and autogenous vaccines, vaccines are not
temperature-dependent virogenesis within these vectors.
widely available for EHDV.
Zebras have been implicated as potential mammalian reser-
voirs of AHSV in southern Africa, because AHSV infection
is asymptomatic in zebras and AHSV viremia is more pro-
Palyam Virus
longed in zebras than in horses. Dogs may become infected
Palyam viruses are insect-transmitted orbiviruses that cause
with AHsV by eating infected horse meat, and serological
abortion and teratogenesis among cattle in Africa, Asia,
surveys have shown that antibodies to AHsV are common
and Australia. Fetuses that survive infection with Palyam
among large wild carnivores in southern Africa.
-  d   n rd s
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The incubation period of
cephaly. Like the other orbiviruses of veterinary impor-
AHS is generally less than 7 days following the bite of an
tance, Palyam viruses are disseminated by Culicoides -insect
AHSV-infected Culicoides insect. The incubation period is
vectors. There are 1l serotypes of Palyam viruses. The
shortest in horses infected with virulent strains of AHSV,
pathogenesis and teratogenic effects of Chuzan (Kasaba)
and mortality in susceptible horses infected with highly
virus infection of fetal cattle have been especially well
virulent AHSV can reach 95%. AHSV replicates in mononu-
described.
clear cells of the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, and pha-
ryngeal mucosa, and in vascular endothelium. The lesions
African Horse Sickness Virus
of AHS result from vascular injury to small blood vessels,
although it is uncertain whether the vascular injury that
Disease.
 African horse sickness (AHS) is an arthropod-
characterizes AHS is a result only of direct virus-mediated
transmitted Orbivirus disease of equids, including horses,
endothelial injury or if vasoactive mediators released from
mules, and donkeys. The causative agent, AHsV, is
AHSV-infected mononuclear phagocytic cells also con-
zoonotic, although fatal infection of humans is rare. Fatal
tribute. The severe central form of AHS is characterized by
AHSV infection of dogs also has been described. AHS of
pulmonary edema, hydrothorax, and hydropericardium,
horses varies greatly in severity, depending on the infect-
with epicardial and endocardial hemorrhages. Subcuta-
ing strain of virus and the susceptibility of the infected
horse. There are several distinct forms of AHS, including
 neous edema can be extensive in horses that suffer a more
protracted form of the disease.
(1) a peripheral form characterized by edema of the head;
(2) a central form characterized by pulmonary edema, high
Host Response to Infection. All serotypes of AHSV share
fever, severe depression, coughing, discharge of fluid from
-e jo suadoaaap anpu pue sue dnos too
the nostrils, and rapid death of many affected horses; (3) an
bodies that may be recognized by CF, AGID, and indirect
intermediate form that is characterized by fever, edema of
FA. Viral neutralizing antibodies also develop following
the head and subcutis (supraorbital edema is highly char-
infection; these are predominantly serotype-specific, but
acteristic), and significant mortality of affected horses; and
some cross-neutralization activity has been observed.
(4) horse sickness fever, which is a febrile disease with a
more benign course.
Laboratory Diagnosis. Field diagnosis of AHS, especially
Etiologic Agent
in nonendemic areas, should be supported by viral isola-
tion or serology to distinguish other infections that can
Physical,
Chemical, 
 and Antigenic Properties. The
 produce similar clinical signs. PCR tests are available. The
s p e on s S po n 
presence of virus also can be rapidly identifed in tissue
within the genus Orbivinus. Nine serotypes of AHSV have
specimens using an AHSV-specific capture ELISA. Virus iso-
been identified by cross-neutralization studies in mice. All
lation is a slower but accurate method of virus detection.
types share common group-specific antigens.
Intracerebralinoculation of suckling mice with blood or tis-
sue suspension is a very sensitive method of isolating AHSV,
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. AHSV
although time-consuming serial passage may be required
infections have been documented in horses, donkeys,
fo1 viral adaptation. Cell cultures are not as efficient in iso-
mules,zebras,goats, dogs,and large African carnivores such
lating virus as mouse or horse inoculation. Virus can be
as lions. Disease has been described in horses and dogs. The
identified by VN, HI, or FA.
virus can be propagated in suckling mice and adapted to
Serologic diagnosis requires paired serum samples for
grow in ECEs and cell cultures (Vero and BHK).
demonstrating seroconversion or an increase in antibody
titer. Assays routinely used for such purposes include com-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.
AHS OCCurs
petitive ELISA and CF, which are group-specifc tests and
throughout southern Africa, with periodic epizootics in
detect antibodies to AHSV regardless of the infecting virus
northern Africa, the Middle East, Asia (the Indian subconti-
serotype, and VN assay, which is very sensitive but serotype
nent), and, on occasion in the past, Mediterranean Europe
specific.
(the Iberian Peninsula). AHS is not contagious; rather, the
virus is transmitted only by Culicoides insects that serve as
Treatment and Control. No specific treatment of AHS
true biologic vectors. Like BT, AHS occurs most commonly
is available. Hyperimmune horse serum confers transient
498
PART III
Viruses
protection. Stabling of horses in insect-secure facilities is
Table 64.3.
 Serotype and Genotype Determinants among
assumed toreduce exposure of animals to theCulicoides vec-
Rotaviruses
tor. Annual vaccination of horses with attenuated virus vac-
cines that include the nine recognized serotypes of AHsV is
A-E (possible F and G}
PCR or RNA
widely practiced in southern Africa, and to control incur-
Group Typing
Fingerprinting - VP6 
sions of AHSV into Europe. There are severalpotential prob-
G genotypes
PCR - VP7
lems inherent in the use of multivalent modifed live AHSV
vaccines, including lack of protection against all serotypes
P genotypes
PCR -VP4
of the virus, reversion to virulence of vaccine strains of
virus, acquisition and dissemination of vaccine viruses by
vector insects, and reassortment of gene segments between
 animal, the virulence of the infecting strain of Rotavirus,
 different virus strains/serotypes during mixed in fections.
and the presence of other enteropathogenic organisms.
Equine Encephalosis Virus
Etiologic Agent
EEV has been isolated from horses with hepatic lipidosis
Physical.
Chemical,
and
 Antigenic
 Properties.
-d e se aueodn sh inq 'susis jisononau ansea pue
Rotaviruses represent a distinct genus within the family
mary pathogen is uncertain. The virus has also been iso-
Reoviridae. The viruses are nonenveloped, contain a
lated from aborted fetuses. Serologic studies have shown
segmented (11 segments) dsRNA genome, and exhibit
that EEV infection is very widespread and common among
a double-shelled capsid morphology with an overall 
horses in southern Africa. The seven recognized serotypes
 diameter of the mature virion of approximately 100 nm
of EEV share common group antigens and closely resemble
(see Fig 64.2). At least 13 different rotavirus proteins have
AHS viruses. The epidemiology of EEV infection is also like
been identified, with 2 of the 11 gene segments encoding
that of AHSV, with transmission by Culicoides insects.
 two distinct proteins. Of these 13 proteins, 7 are structural
virion components (including enzymes) and 6 are NS
proteins that are produced in Rotavirus-infected cells but
 that are not incorporated into virions.
Rotaviruses
The rotaviruses currently are organized into five major
groups (A-E), with two possible additional species (F,
Disease
G). Many distinct strains and/or serotypes of Rotavirus
 Rotaviruses cause enteritis and diarrhea in many mam-
0ccur within each group (Table 64.3). Rotaviruses within
malian species (including humans) and birds. Rotavirus
each group share common antigens, can reassort their
infections are an important cause of diarrhea in young
 genome segments during mixed infections, have consid-
farm animals, including calves, lambs, foals, and piglets.
erable sequence homology of conserved viral genes, and
The virus infects mature absorptive cells at the tips of the
tend to infect the same species of animals. Neutralizing
 intestinal villi with resulting malabsorption, maldigestion,
 antibodies are induced by the outer capsid proteins VP7
and diarrhea. The clinical severity of the infection depends
and VP4 (Figure 64.5), whereas VP6 expresses determinants
 on factors such as the age and susceptibility of the affected
common to each rotavirus group and subgroup.
FIGURE 64.5.
Diagram demonstrating the structure of a rotavirus, demonstrating outer capsid and the inner core particle.
(From Fayquet (2005). Copyright @ Eisevier (2005), with permission.)
dsRNA
VP1/VP3
RNA
Prote
VP6
/P6
VP6
mRNAtranscrip
CNSP3
VP
VP2
VP1/VP3
Chapter 64 1
Reoviridae
499
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
tissues obtained at necropsy. Electron microscopy (EM),
Although rotaviruses obtained from one species can some-
immune EM, and indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) stain-
times infect other species, strains of Rotavirus are largely
ing of feces and/or intestinal tissue sections all facili-
species specific in their tropism. Rotaviruses are difficult to
tate direct visualization of virus or viral antigens, but
propagate in cell culture. A major advance in the propaga-
Rotavirus in feces is most easily detected by antigen-
tion of rotaviruses was the discovery that low concentra-
capture ELISA. The ELISA is very sensitive and, depend-
tions of trypsin are required to initiate virus infection and
ing on the capture antibody used, can distinguish differ-
replication in cell culture. Trypsin cleaves the viral outer
ent types. Direct examination of the dsRNA genome of
coat protein, VP3, to facilitate infection of cell cultures,
rotaviruses in the feces of animals can be done by polyacry-
and once adapted rotaviruses grow well in cell culture. The
lamide gel electrophoresis, which also identifies the spe-
most common cell lines used are kidney epithelial cells,
cific group of Rotavirus that is present. PCR assays also are
especially the rhesus monkey kidney cell line, MA104.
available.
Virus isolation is usually done on MA104 cells in
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. Rotaviruses
the presence of low concentrations of trypsin. Avian
are distributed worldwide and occur in many different ani-
   d  i  
mal species. High titers of virus are excreted in the feces of
and kidney cells.
infected animals, and the virus is very stable in the envi-
 Serologic diagnosis can be done by ELISA or VN assays;
ronment if associated with feces. Transmission to other ani-
however, the utility of data obtained usually is uncertain
mals occurs by ingestion of virus, following either direct or
because of the widespread distribution of rotavirus infec-
indirect oro-fecal transmission.
tion, which means that a high proportion of animals are
seropositive regardless of disease status.
Pathogenesis and Pathology.  
 The pathogenesis
of
Rotavirus infection is similar regardless of the animal species
affected. After oral infection, the virus infects the mature
Treatment and Control.
 Treatment of clinically ill ani-
adsorptive epithelial cells that line the apical (lumenal)
mals is guided by disease severity, and treatment of severe
aspects of the intestinal villi. The infection progresses from
cases involves replacement fluid therapy to treat dehydra-
the upper to the lower portions of the small intestine,
tion and acidosis, minimization of environmental stress,
and in some species, to the colon. Destruction of these
and treatment of secondary infections.
mature villus enterocytes leads to villus atrophy, and the
Control is often difficult because of the stability of the
mature absorptive cells that line the villi are replaced by
virus in feces leading to long-term environmental contam-
more immature cells from the intestinal crypts, leading
ination. Although often challenging to implement, strin-
to maldigestion, small intestinal malabsorption, and diar-
gent sanitation practices can minimize exposure. Vaccine
rhea. Interestingly, the NSP4 protein of rotavirus alone
strategies are best directed at the dams of suckling neonates
can induce intestinal hypersecretion from crypt cells, sug-
  hrd a oe no s  hn aa o
gesting that both malabsorption and hypersecretion of
colostrum and milk of these animals.
fluid and electrolytes contribute to the diarrhea of rotavi-
ral enteritis. The disease is worst in young animals and
can rapidly lead to fatal acidosis, dehydration, and hypov-
Aquareoviruses
olemic shock.
Animals that die of Rotavirus enteritis are dehydrated
Aquareoviruses are morphologically and physicochemi-
and have very liquid intestinal contents. Diarrhea is fluid
cally similar to orthoreoviruses, but have 11 segments of
and yellow/white (the so-called white scours), which fre-
dsRNA. Seven of the 12 proteins (genome segment 11
quently stains the perineum of affected animals. Histologic
encodes two proteins) are structural, with VP7 represent-
lesions include villus atrophy with loss of mature absorp-
ing the major capsid protein. Six genotypes (A-F) have
tive cells covering the villi, and hyperplasia of the immature
been proposed for Aquareovirus. Viruses in this genus infect
cells within the intestinal crypts.
both fish and shellfish, causingnecrosis in the parenchymal 
Organs of in fected fish and high mortality in fish hatcheries.
Host Response to Infection. Animals infected with
Aquareovirusesreplicatein fish orshelfish cellines at 16°C
Rotavirus develop local and systemic humoral immune
and can induce syncytia formation.
responses that can be identified by various serologic tech
niques. Viral-neutralizing antibody is serotype-specific and
directed at VP4 and VP7. The Rotavirus ELISA detects anti-
bodies to group and subgroup determinants. Local immu-
References
nity within the bowel is very important in preventing
severe rotaviral enteritis in young animals; thus, inges-
Ruder MG, Howerth EW, Stallknecht DE et al. (2012). Vector
tion of colostrum with high titers of Rotavirus-neutralizing
competence of Culicoides sonorensis (Diptera: Ceratopogo-
nidae) for epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus serotype 7.
neonates.
Parasites and Vectors, 5, 236, 1-8.
Fayquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J (eds) et al. (200s) Virus Tax-
Laboratory Diagnosis. Diagnosis of Rotavirus-induced
onomy: Eighth Report ofthe International Committee on Taxon-
diarrhea requires identification of the virus in feces or in
omy of Viruses. Elsevier, San Diego, CA, p. 485.
500
PART III
Viruses
Further Reading
McDonald SM and PattonJT.(2011)Assortmentand packaging
of the segmented rotavirus genome. Trends Microbiol, 19 (3),
 Lazarow PB (2011) Viruses exploiting peroxisomes. Curr Opin
136-144. Epub December 31, 2010.
Microbiol, 14 (4), 458-469. Epub August 6, 2011.
Depaquit J, Grandadam M, Fouque F et al. (2010) Arthropod-
Savini G, Afonso A, Mellor P et al. (20ll) Epizootic hem-
borne viruses transmitted by Phlebotomine sandflies in
orrhagic disease. Res Vet Sci, 91 (1), 1-17. Epub June 12,
Europe: a review. Euro Surveill, 15 (10), 195-207.
2011.
 Randolph SE and Rogers DJ. (2010) The arrival, establishment 
 Maclachlan NJ. (2011) Bluetongue: history, global epidemiol-
and spread of exotic diseases: patterns and predictions. Nat 
 ogy, and pathogenesis. Prev Vet Med, 102 (2), 107-111. Epub
Rev Microbiol, 8 (5), 361-371. Epub April 7, 2010.
May 12, 2011.
Tate JE, Patel MM, Steele AD et al. (2010) Global impact of
Falconi C, Lopez-Olvera JR, and Gortazar C. (2011) BTV infec-
rotavirus vaccines. Expert Rev Vaccines, 9 (4), 395-407.
tion in wild ruminants, with emphasis on red deer: a
Maclachlan NJ and Guthrie AJ. (2010) Re-emergence of blue-
review. Vet Microbiol, 151(3-4), 209-219. Epub February 23,
tongue, African horse sickness, and other orbivirus diseases.
2011.
Vet Res, 41 (6), 35. Epub January 27, 2010.
65
Birnaviridae
MELISSA KENNEDY
The family Binaviridae includes three genera: Avibirnavirus
stranded RNA (dsRNA), designated A and B, that encode
(infects poultry), Aquabimavirus (infects fish), and Entomo-
five proteins. Segment A has two open reading frames and
bimavirus (infects insects). Infectious bursal disease virus
encodes a nonstructural protein (Vp5) as well as a polypro-
(IBDV; genus Avibimavirus) is the best studied. Infectious
tein that is cleaved into two structural proteins (VP2, VP3)
pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV; genus Aquabirnavirus) is a
and the viral protease (VP4). Gene segment B encodes the
significant pathogen of salmonid fish.
viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (VP1). There are two
serotypes of IBDV and marked antigenic and genetic vari-
ation within each type. Strains of IBDV serotype 1 cause
Infectious Bursal Disease
disease in chickens throughout the world, while serotype
2 strains, which primarily infect turkeys, neither cause dis-
Disease
ease nor protect against serotype 1.
Infectious bursal disease (IBD), also known as Gumboro dis-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. IBDV is
ease after the town in Delaware (North America) where it
extremely stable and resists inactivation following acid
was first identified, is an economically important virus dis-
treatment (stable at pH 3), lipid solvents, various disinfec-
ease of young chickens. The IBD virus replicates in imma-
tants, and heat (survives 60 *C for 30 min).
ture B lymphocytes in the bursa of Fabricius (BF), lead-
ing to reduced immunologic responsiveness. The virus can
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. IBDV
cause relatively high mortality in chickens 3-6 weeks of
principally affects chickens, although turkeys, ducks, and
 age, and profound immunosuppression in birds infected
some other species of domestic and wild birds can also be
earlier in life. The clinical disease in birds over 3 weeks of
infected with the virus. The virus can be propagated in
age is characterized by soiled vent feathers (birds often peck
embryonating chicken eggs, with subsequent embryo mor-
at their own vents), diarrhea, depression, anorexia, trem-
tality, as well as in a variety of avian cell cultures.
bling, severe prostration, deh ydration, and eventual death.
In the United States, economic losses are typically due not
so much to bird death but rather to reduced weight gain
Host-Virus Relationship
and carcass condemnation due to hemorrhages in skele-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. IBD occurs
tal muscle. Highly virulent strains of IBD virus that cause
high mortality in affected flocks have become increasingly
worldwide in intensive poultry-raising areas. The virus per-
sists in nature because of its stability. The virus has report-
important in Europe and other regions of the world. While
these strains, referred to as very virulent IBD (vvIBD) are
edly persisted in poultry houses, following depopulation,
antigenically similar to the classical strains, they can infect
for more than 100 days. There is no evidence ofa true carrier
chicks in the face of maternal immunity previously protec-
state in birds.
tive against the classical strains. Infection of birds less than
Transmission of IBDV occurs by ingestion of virus from
3 weeks of age results in economically devastating inap-
feces o1 feces-contaminated fomites, feed, and water.
parent infection. Such birds are extensively immunocom-
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Initial replication of IBDV
occurs in the intestinal tract within hours of ingestion
of other infectious diseases. Further more, affected birds
 respond poorly to vaccination.
of the virus, from where it disseminates to numerous tis-
sues, including the BF. Other lymphoid organs such as thy-
mus, spleen, and tonsils may also be affected, and dissemi-
Etiologic Agent
nated lymphoid atrophy is especially characteristic of birds
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. IBDV par-
in fected with very virulent strains of IBDV.
ticles are nonenveloped with icosahedral symmetry (60 nm
The striking age-dependent nature of the response of
in diameter). The genome includes two segmen ts of double-
chickens to IBDV likely reflects the maturation of the BF
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Edition. dited by D.Scott McVey, Melisa Kerredy ard M.M. Chergapa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
501
502
PART III
Viruses
at the time of infection. Specifically, birds are most sus-
tion (RT-PCR) are being utilized for IBD diagnosis, as well
ceptible to IBD from 3 to 6 weeks of age, whereas bursec-
as strain characterization.
 tomized birds of the same age do not develop disease. Birds
older than 6 weeks also do not develop severe disease, nor
Treatment and Control
do those infected prior to 3 weeks of age. The impaired
immunologic responsiveness that occurs in chicks infected
No treatment has been described for affected birds. Con trol
 early in life has been attributed to bursal injury, which 
 of the disease may be facilitated by proper sanitation prac-
results in failure to seed B lymphocytes to periph-
tices. Vaccination programs are widely used to control IBD.
eral lymphoid organs and diminished humoral immu-
Immunization of breeder flocks is done to facilitate passive
 nity. Cellular immunity is also reduced in IBDV-infected
transfer ofimmunity to chicks. Vaccination of chicks is also
young chicks.
practiced, but to be effective, levels of maternal antibody
 Gross lesions may include dehydration, darkened pec-
must be low at the time of vaccination. Both attenuated
toral muscles, and hemorrhages in the pectoral and leg
and killed virus vaccines are available.
muscles.The appearance ofthe BF is dependent on the state
of disease. The BF initially becomes enlarged due to edema
 and hyperemia, but this rapidly is followed by progressive
Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis
atrophy that is marked by approximately 8 days after in fec.
tion. Bursal necrosis and hemorrhage are characteristic of
IPNV is the cause of a highly contagious and fatal disease
advanced disease.
of salmonid fish (trout and salmon) that is increasingly
Histologically, the epithelial surfaces of the BF have
important to the aquaculture industry worldwide. The dis-
multiple erosions, and there is extensive necrosis of lym-
ease is not only severe in fish that are less than 6 months
phocytes within lymphoid follicles so that these become
old but also occurs in older fish following stresses such as
depleted of lymphocytes. Edema and infiltration of het-
that associated with relocation from fresh to salt water.
erophils occur initially in the affected BF, followed by for-
Affected fingerlings appear dark in color and swim with
mation of cystic cavities bound by columnar epithelial cells
a rotating action (whirling). Petechial hemorrhages may
 be present in the abdominal viscera of affected fish, along
 o    o 
with necrosis of the pancreas. The virus also affects com-
birds infected with very virulent strains of IBDV.
mercially raised yellowtails with high mortality and is clas-
sically referred to as viral ascites due to accumulation of
Host Response to Infection. Following infection, birds
fluid in the abdomen (ascites) and associated abdominal
develop a humoral immune response that is measured
distension. Eels can be infected with resulting clinical dis-
by viral neutralization, agar gel immunodiffusion, and
ease. Fish that survive infection with IPNV become carriers
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests. In birds that
and serve as a source of infection to other fish, especially
 recover, the BF may become repopulated with B lympho-
under hatchery conditions. The virus is very stable in the
cytes. While T lymphocytes are required for protection
environment. The virus can be identified in the tissues of
against IBD and viral clearance, they can cause bursal dam-
affected or carrier fish by virus isolation in fish cell cul-
age and slow recovery through cytokines and cytotoxic
 responses. Adult birds transfer maternal antibody to devel-
have been described, with the neutralizing epitopes being
oping embryos, and if present in sufficient titer, the anti-
 mapped to VP2. Efforts to develop effective vaccines are
body lends protection to the hatched chick for variable
complicated by the multiple serotypes of IPNV and the dif-
periods of time.
 ficulty in immunizing very young fish that are especially
susceptible to the virus. Control is based on husbandry
efforts that maximize hygiene and sanitation and mini-
Laboratory Diagnosis
 mize crowding, stress, and introduction ofinfected replace-
Field diagnosis can usually be made based upon the charac-
mentstock and /or eggs. Vigorous identification and culling
teristicclinicalsignsand high morbidity and rapid recovery
 of carrier fish is advocated as a method of controlling the
of most affected birds. Atrophy of the cloacal bursa is char-
disease.
 acteristic of inapparent IBDV infection in young chicks.
Definitive diagnosis of IBD can be carried out by direct flu-
Orescentantibody (FA) staining of sectioned tissues or viral
Further Reading
isolation from the bursa and spleen. Isolation can be made
by inoculation of embryonated chicken eggs or cell cul-
Muller H, Islam MR, and Raue R (2003) Research on infec-
tious bursal disease—the past, the present and the future.
 and subtypes of IBDVs can only be distinguished through
Vet Microbiol, 97 (1-2), 153-165.
neutralization assays. Increasingly, molecular diagnostic
Essbauer S and Ahne W (20o1) Viruses of lower vertebrates.
assays using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reac-
I Vet Med, 48, 403-475.
Retroviridae
FREDERICKJ. FULLER
Retroviruses (family Retroviridae) are enveloped, single
ically. The endogenous retroviruses persist as integrated
stranded RNA viruses that replicate through a DNA inter-
 DNA proviruses that are passed from generation to gen-
mediate (provirus) using an RNA-dependent DNA poly
eration through the DNA in the gametes of the host ani-
    ( d  
mal species. Thus, the endogenous proviral genome occurs
family includes members that are oncogenic, are associ-
in each cell of the animal. Many vertebrates possess such
ated with a variety of immune system disorders, and cause
endogenous retroviral DNA sequences. These endogenous
degenerative and neurologic syndromes.
retroviruses are usually not pathogenic for their host ani-
mals and are often not expressed. When replication of
endogenous viruses does occur in the host cell of origin, it is
Classification
usually restricted. Cells from animal species other than the
host species are sometimes unrestricted, however, and can
The family Retroviridae (Latin retro, meaning reverse) is
support the replication of the retrovirus in an exogenous
classified into two subfamilies, the Orthoretrovirinae and
manner. The endogenous mode of transmission occurs in
Spumaretrovirinae, and seven genera (Table 66.1). Clas-
many of the oncornaviruses, but is not known to occur
sification is based on genome structure and nucleic acid
in the lentiviruses or the spumaviruses. Endogenous retro-
sequence, in addition to older classification criteria based
viruses may play important roles in protection from related
on morphology, serology, biochemical features, and the
exogenous retroviruses. Endogenous retroviruses account
species of animal from which the retrovirus was isolated.
for a substantial portion of the genetic information ofevery
The genus Lentivirus (Latin lenti, meaning slow) includes
animal species (about 8% of the human genome). Recent
the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) as well as
many important animal retroviruses. Lentiviruses are most
critical role in ovine placental morphogenesis.
often associated with chronic immune dysfunction and
Some members of the oncornaviruses are also classi-
neurologic diseases. The members of the genus Spumavirus
fied by their interaction with cells of different species.
(Latin spuma, meaning foam) are nononcogenic viruses
Ecotropic strains replicate only in cells from animal
found in spontaneously degenerating cell cultures, caus-
species of origin and xenotropic strains replicate only
ing the formation of multinucleated vacuolated (foamy)
in cells of other species. Amphotropic strains replicate
giant cells. No diseases have been directly associated with
in both. Most of the endogenous retroviruses are also
spumaviruses in humans or animals. The remaining retro-
xenotropic.
virus genera are termed the oncornaviruses (Greek onkos,
The morphology of retroviruses in transmission electron
meaning tumor) or the RNA tumor viruses because of
micrograph is also useful in classification (Figure 66.1). The
their ability to induce neoplasia, although they are now
size range of retrovirus particles is from 80 nm to 130 nm.
known to cause other kinds of diseases as well. These gen-
Type A particles occur only inside cells and consist of a
era are the Alpharetrovirus (e.g, avian leukosis virus),
ad-g auenquau e Aq papunoins pioapnu padeus-su
Betaretrovirus (e.g., mouse mammary tumor virus),
virions have an eccentric core and C-type virions a cen-
Gammaretrovirus (e.g., feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
tral core. D-type virions have a morphology intermediate
Deltaretrovirus (e.g., bovine leukemia virus (BLV)), and
between B and C virions with an elongated, dense core. The
Epsilonretrovirus (e.g., walleye dermal sarcoma virus
core of lentiviruses has a shape that resembles an ice-cream
(WDSV)).
cone with a flat base.
Several additional features need to be considered in
the classification and description of the Retroviridae. Exo-
General Features of Retroviruses
nongenetically) from animal to animal, similar to the
mechanism of transmission of other kinds of viruses. In
Many of the features of retroviruses are known in
contrast, endogenous retroviruses are transmitted genet-
great detail because of the extensive work done on the
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
503
504
PART III
Viruses
Table 66.1.
Classification of Retroviruses Indicating the Two Subfamilies and Seven Genera with a Few Virus Examples in Each
Genus. The Oncogenic Retroviruses Include the First Five Genera of the Orthoretrovirinae Subfamily
 Subfamily
Genus
Virus Examples
Orthoretrovirinae
Apharetrovirus
Avian leukosis virus
(Oncogenic)
Avian erythroblastosis virus
 Avian myeloblastosis virus
Avian myelocytomatosis virus
Rous sarcoma virus
Betaretrovirus
Mouse mammary tumor virus 
(Oncogenic)
Simian type D retrovirus (simian AIDs-related virus)
 Ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma virus (Jaagsiekte)
Squirrel monkey retrovirus
Gammaretrovirus
 Murine leukemia virus
(Oncogenic)
 Feline leukemia virus
 Porcine type C oncovirus
 Feline sarcoma viruses
Murine sarcoma virus
Woolly monkey sarcoma virus
Avian reticulendotheliosis virus
Deltaretrovirus
Bovine leukemia virus
(Oncogenic)
Human T-lymphotropic viruses 1 & 2
Simian T-lymphotropic virus
Epsilonretrovirus
Walleye dermal sarcoma virus
(Oncogenic)
 Walleye epidermal hyperplasia virus
Lentivirus
Visna/maedi virus (ovine progressive pneumonia)
Caprine arthritis encephalitis virus
Equine infectious anemia virus
Bovine immunodeficiency virus 
 Feline immunodeficiency virus 
 Primate lentiviruses (HIv 1&2, SIV)
 Spumaretrovirinae
 Spumavirus
Human spumavirus
Simian foam virus
Bovine syncytial virus
 Feline syncytial virus
oncornaviruses in cancer research and the lentiviruses
The genomic RNA has a sedimentation size of 60 to 70S in
in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) research.
 neutral sucrose gradients. Upon denaturation, each RNA
The members of the family Retroviridae share many com-
copy has a sedimentation coefficient of 38s. The molecular
 mon features in their composition, organization, and life
weight of monomer RNA determined by electrophoresis in
cycle, although the details of individual retroviruses vary.
polyacrylamide gels is approximately 2 to 5 × 106 daltons,
0r about 7 to 11 × 103 bases. Host cell transfer RNA (tRNA)
is associated with genomic RNA near the 3' terminus and
Components of Retroviruses
serves as a primer for the synthesis of DNA by the reverse
 A typical retrovirus virion is composed of 2% nucleic acid
polymerase. The type of tRNA packaged in the virion is use-
(RNA), 60% protein, 35% lipid, and 3% (or more) ca1bohy-
ful in the classification of retroviruses. The 3' terminus of
drate. Its buoyant density is 1.16-1.18 g/ml.
each RNA monomer has a poly (A) tract. The 5' terminus
 has a methylated nucleotide cap.
Retroviral Lipids.
 Retroviral lipids are mainly phospho-
lipid and occur in the virion envelope. They form a bilay-
Proviral DNA.
1.Within a cell the retroviral RNA genome is
ered structure similar to the outer cell membrane from
 Ieverse transcribed into a DNA copy, and it is the proviral
which the retrovirus envelope is derived.
 DNA form that serves as the intracellular retroviral genome.
The retroviral DNA is several hundred bases longer than
Retroviral Nucleic Acid
the retroviral RNA genome due to duplication of repeated
and unique terminal sequences present in the RNA genome
Retroviral RNA. Retroviral particles contain RNA as their
during the reverse transcription process. These sequences
 genetic material. This genomic RNA is present in each
form the long terminal repeats (LTR) that flank the genes
viral particle as a dimer of two linear, single-stranded,
in the retroviral DNA (see Figure 66.2B). The proviral
positive-sense copies that are noncovalently joined near
DNA is covalently integrated in the DNA of the infected
their 5' ends (Figure 66.2). Hence, the virion is diploid.
 host cell. This integration is facilitated by a viral enzyme,
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
505
retroviruses often have an oncogene in place of a portion
FIGURE 66.1.
Transmission electron photomicrographs
of the Pol and/or Env gene.
of budding and mature virions of feline immunodeficiency
virus (A, B); feline feukemia virus (C, D); feline
Retroviral Proteins
syncytium-forming virus (E, F); human immunodeficiency virus
(G, H); simian immunodeficiency virus (Il, I); and visna-maedi
Retroviral Structural Proteins. Retroviral structural pro-
virus (K, L). Uranyl acetate and lead citrate stain.
teins are encoded by the Gag gene and the Env gene
(Reproduced with Permission from Yamamoto et al., 1998.))
(Figure 66.4). Gag (group-specific antigen) proteins form
FIV
FeL
FeSFV
the core of the virus and consist of three major proteins.
The nucleocapsid (NC) is a small protein (about 5-10 kd)
that interacts with retroviral RNA. The capsid (CA) pro-
tein (about 25 kd) forms the major structural element of
the retroviral core. The matrix (MA) protein (about 15 kd)
serves to join the retroviral core with the retroviral enve-
lope. In some retroviruses, there are additional small core
proteins.
 The Env (envelope) gene is responsible for the synthesis
of two glycoproteins that are noncovalently linked. These
HIV
two glycoproteins form trimeric multimers in some retro-
viruses. The glycoprotein outside of the retrovirus (SU,
surface) is a knob-like glycoprotein (about 100 kd) that is
responsible for binding the retrovirus to its cellular receptor
during infection. The other glycoprotein (TM, transmem-
brane) is a spike-like structure (about 50 kd) that attaches
the SU protein to the retroviral en velope.
Retroviral Enzymes.
The Pol gene encodes several proteins
H
（L）
with enzymatic activities that are important for the repli-
cation of retroviruses. These enzymatic proteins are found
within the retroviral particle, but in a much lower molar
 appropriately termed integrase, which is encoded in the
concentration than the retroviral structural proteins.
The RT enzyme is responsible for the production of the
polymerase open reading frame.
retroviral DNA genome from the retroviral RNA genome.
To accomplish this, RT possesses several catalytic func-
Retroviral Nucleic Acid Structure and Sequence.T
The
tions, including an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase and
sequence of structural genes of retroviruses, from the 5'
an RNase H activity. RT requires the presence of a divalent
end to the 3' end of genomic RNA, is Gag-Pol-Env. Some
cation to function, and the type of divalent cation (magne-
retroviruses such as the lentiviruses, spumaviruses, and
 sium or manganese) that a particular retrovirus requires is
deltaretroviruses have additional genes (tax and rex) that
useful in retroviral classification. The measurement of RT
regulate expression of the retroviral genome and other
activity is one of the principal laboratory methods for the
accessory functions (see Figure 66.3). Highly oncogenic
detection and assay of retroviruses.
The Pol gene also encodes other enzymes. The retro-
 pe  po s s (d asd p
polyproteins during retroviral assembly and maturation.
The protease of the Human Immunodeficiency virus has
FIGURE 66.2.
The nucleic acid forms ofa retrovirus.
Retroviral RNA structure (A); retroviral DNA (Proviral DNA)
been an important target of antiretroviral drugs. The retro-
after reverse transcription (B).
viral integrase (IN) functions to covalently link the retro-
viral DNA into the hostcell's DNA as an integrated provirus.
(A).Viral RNA
Some retroviruses also encode a deoxyuridine triphos-
cap
Gag
PolEnv
phatase (dUTP) enzyme that is required for virus replica-
5
AAAAAAAAA 3'
tion in nondividing cells.
R
U5
U3R
Other Retroviral Proteins. For many members of the Retro
viridae, only the proteins encoded by the Gag, Pol, and
(B). Proviral DNA
Env genes are present. Other retroviruses (Deltaretrovirus,
Gag
Pol Env
Epsilonretrovirus, Lentivirus, and Spumavirus) contain
additional genes whose products serve functions such as
controlling the level of provirus transcription, facilitating
U3RU5
U3RU5
transport of retroviral mRNA, enhancing retroviral repli-
LTR (long terminal
cation in specific cell types, and interfering with host
LTR
repeat)
immunity.
506
PART III
Viruses
FIGURE 66.3.
The provirat DNA structures of some retroviruses. All retroviruses encode the gag, pro, pol, and env genes. In
addition, some groups of retroviruses encode additional genes that can be of celfuiar origin (V-Onc) or viral genes like tax, orfa (Viral
Cyclin), and orfb (Rank1) that can play a role in oncogenesis. Note that a complex lentivirus like the human immunodeficiency virus
has six additional genes beyond gag, pro, pol, and env.
Genomic Structures of Retroviruses
Avian leukemla virus
Feline leukemla virus
LTR gag propol
env
Replication-defective,potently
LTR gag pro pol| env v-onc LTR
virus)
Deltar
gagpro
pol
vlrus)
env
Epsilonretrovirus (walleye dermal
sarcoma virus)
LTR
Lentivirus(hu
virus)
Retroviral Replication
 modified core is reverse transcribed by RT using the associ-
ated tRNA primer, first to an RNA/DNA hybrid form, then
 A general scheme of retroviral replication is shown in Fig-
to a linear double-stranded DNA form with long terminal
ure 66.5. A retroviral particle binds to a specific receptor
repeats. The newly made retroviral DNA is still associated
on the surface of a target cell via the SU protein. The retro-
with some viral core proteins and enzyme activities in a
virus penetrates the cell and the retroviral core undergoes
 structure termed the integration complex. In some retro-
 specific structural changes. The retroviral RNA within the
viruses, infection must occur within dividing cells so that
FIGURE 66.4.
Schematic drawing of a retrovirus particle including the common structural features. Note the two copies of vira!
approximately 100 nm in diameter.
Surface protein-
viral attachment
Transmembrane
protein
Lipid envelope
Matrix
protein
Integrase
Protease
Capsid protein
Reverse
transcriptase
TransferRNA-
Nucleocapsidprotein and
primer for proviral
viral RNA
DNA synthesis
Chapter 66
Retroviridae
507
FlGURE 66.5.
Overall replication strategy for a retrovirus. Viral DNA synthesis is accomplished by the viral enzyme reverse
transcriptase upon uncoating in the cell cytoplasm. Viral DNA must be integrated into cellular DNA for the cellular enzyme
Specific receptors
Virus particle
for virus
attaching
Reverse transcription
 of viral RNA
Translation
O
of viral RNA
to make
Viral DNA
proteins
Cytoplasm
Viral RNA
packaging
Viral RNA
integration
Cell
provirus
Cell
DNA
DNA
virus
Nucleus
particlesby
the integration complex can access the host DNA, while
are also interspecies antigens that are shared by otherwise
in other retroviruses the integration complex is actively
unrelated viruses derived from different host species. RT is
transported into the nucleus of the cell, allowingsuch retro-
 also antigenic and contains type-, group-, and interspecies-
viruses to replicate in nondividing or terminally differenti-
specific determinants.
ated cells
The retroviral DNA is integrated into the host cell's DNA
 by the activity of the IN enzyme. The integration of retro-
Oncogenic Viruses and Oncogenes
viruses is notata specificsite within the cellular DNA, rather
Oncogenic viruses can produce inappropriate cell growths
integration can occur at many sites. The integrated DNA
in the tissues of susceptible hosts. Cancers are malignant
 provirus behaves very much as a eukaryotic gene. It may be
tumors that are characterized by loss of normal cellular
transcribed into mRNA and genomic RNA using host cell
controls resulting in unregulated growth and ability to
enzymes to produce more virus or it may remain latent for
invade adjacent tissues and to metastasize to other parts
long periods of time and replicate when the cellular DNA
 of the body. Cancers are classified by their tissue of origin:
is replicated by the cell.
sarcomas are malignant tumors of connective tissue (mes-
 New retroviral particles are produced by budding from
enchyme); carcinomas are malignant tumors of epithelial
 cellular membranes. Immature retroviral Gag polyprotein
origin.
and genomic RNA assemble and acquire envelopes as they
The ability of oncogenic viruses to cause cancers under
exit infected cells by budding through the plasma mem-
either natural or experimental con ditions has been the sub-
branes into which retroviral SU and TM en velope proteins
ject of intense study for almost a century and this work
have been inserted.
has made significant contributions to the understanding
 In the final step, the PR cleaves the Gag polyprotein
of viruses, neoplasia, and cell biology. The fundamental 
into the mature structural proteins of matrix, capsid, and
discovery in the field is that oncogenic viruses cause can-
nucleocapsid.
cer via genes they carry or activate. These genes are termed
oncogenes.
Immunologic Characteristics of Retroviruses
Oncogenesis by Retroviruses
Retroviral proteins possess various types of antigenic sites.
Type-specific antigens that define the serologic subgroups
There are several mechanisms by which retroviruses are
are associated with the envelope glycoproteins. Group-
associated with cancer. Highly oncogenic or acutely trans-
specific antigens are shared by related viruses and, in gen-
forming retroviruses cause cancer rapidly and efficiently,
eral, are associated with the virion core proteins. There
often within days or weeks of infection. Such retroviruses
508
PART III
Viruses
are rare in natural animal populations, but are used exten-
ciently than do highly oncogenic retroviruses. Such viruses
sively in the laboratory for the study of cancer. Rous sar-
exist in domestic animals. Weakly oncogenic retroviruses
coma virus (RsV) of chickens, which was discovered in
 do not carry a v-oncogene and do not require a helper
1910, is the prototype highly oncogenic retrovirus.
virus. However, examination of the tumors produced by
 In highly oncogenic retroviruses, all or part of an onco-
the weakly oncogenic viruses usually shows a clonal pro-
 gene exists in the viral genome, usually in place of viral
liferation of cells with a retroviral genome near a cellular
genes. This retroviral oncogene is responsible for the ability
 Oncogene. For example, avian leukosis virus is often inte-
of a highly oncogenic retrovirus to cause oncogenic trans-
grated near or in the c-myc gene. The mechanism by which
formation of a cell. There are more than 20 different retro.
weakly oncogenic retroviruses cause cancer is known as
viral oncogenes known. Each of these has a corresponding
insertional or cis-activational oncogenesis. During retrovi-
 gene that can be found in the genome of normal cells.
ral replication, proviral DNA is inserted into many random
The normal gene that corresponds to a viral oncogene is
locations in the host genome. Occasionally the integration
termed a c-oncogene or proto-oncogene, and the viral ver-
of the provirus occurs close to a cellular proto-oncogene.
 sion is called a v-oncogene. In a normal cellular environ-
This can sometimes produce inappropriate transcription
ment, the gene products of proto-oncogenes usually have
of the oncogene, either by read-through from the retrovi
some function in growth regulatory pathways, such as pro-
 ral promoter, or by enhancer activity by the retroviral LTR.
tein kinases, growth factors or their receptors, GTP binding
Integration of the provirus near a proto-oncogene tends to
proteins, or transcriptional activation factors. When they
be a very rare event and, therefore, occurs much less fre.
are part of a retroviral genome, these proto-oncogenes are
quently and at much lower effciency than when the retro-
under the control of the retroviral LTR rather than being
virus carries its own oncogene. The tumors are clonal in
regulated by normal cellular mechanisms, and are often
origin because, although many cells are infected, only one
 expressed at high levels. The v-oncogene may also be trun-
rare cell has undergone insertional oncogenesis and pro-
cated, contain point mutations, or be fused with another
gresses to a tumor. The level of virus replication is directly
retroviral gene. This aberrant expression of mutant protein
correlated to the incidence of tumor formation. The more
can lead to abnormal growth of the infected cell and the
virus replication that occurs in the host, the more likely a
begin ning of progression to neoplasia.
rare integration event near a proto-oncogene will occur. In
For example, in RsV, the src oncogene is responsible for
 addition, the inappropriate activation of a proto-oncogene
sarcomatous transformation. The v-src gene was originally
 is just one event in a multifactorial process that leads to
acquired from the normal c-src cellular proto-oncogene
cancer.
when illegitimate recombination (a rare event) occurred
 A third mechanism of retroviral oncogenesis occurs in
between retroviral and the cellular genomic sequences for
the bovine leukemia virus-human T lymphotropic virus
c-src. The c-src gene product is a 60 kd protein that has pro-
genus of Retroviridae. These viruses have a regulatory gene
tein kinase activity and is located near the inner surface of
called tax in addition to Gag, Pol, and Env. The protein
the plasma membrane. The kinase activity is part of an intri-
 product of tax functions as a transactivator to upregu-
cate cellular signal transduction pathway that mediates cell
growth. Other examples of v-oncogenes with c-oncogene
 sequences in the LTR of the retrovirus. Under some cir-
counterparts in normal cells are found in other acute trans-
cumstances, the Tax protein can sometimes also bind to
forming retroviruses, for example, myb (avian myeloblas.
transcriptional activator sequences in cellular genes and
tosis virus), erb (avian erythroblastosis virus), myc (avian
 may disrupt regulatory path ways of the in fected cell. Unlike
myelocytomatosis virus), and ras (mouse sarcoma virus).
insertional oncogenesis, the integrated provirus is not nec-
Highly oncogenic retroviruses are usually defective. The
essarily adjacent to a proto-oncogene, since it is the Tax
reason they are defective is that they lack their full comple-
ment of Gag-Pol-Env genes because the v-oncogene takes
rather than the retroviral DNA itself. Like insertional onco.
the place of a portion of the retroviral genome. In order to
 genesis, the transactivation of a proto-oncogene is just one
replicate, these defective retroviruses require a replication-
event in a multifactorial process that leads to cancer.
ucts. The helper retrovirus is usually a closely related
Oncogenesis by DNA Viruses
retrovirus that is not defective and contains the usual
Gag-Pol-Env complement of genes. Since the defective,
Many of the DNA viruses, including the adenoviruses,
highly oncogenic virus is packaged into a virion com-
posed of the envelope proteins of the helper virus, the host
adnaviruses, and poxviruses, have oncogenic potential. In
contrast to highly oncogenic retroviruses, the v-oncogenes
helper virus. In nature, the generation of a defective, highly
of DNA viruses are not cellular derivatives but are true viral
oncogenic sarcoma virus will most likely cause multiclonal
 genes. The normal function of these viral genes is to acti-
tumors in that host within days or weeks, resulting in the
vate cellular pathways for DNA replication. This activation
death of that host. It would be rare that this highly onco-
is required for DNA viruses to multiply in resting cells that
genic virus would be transmitted to another animal. The
lack the enzymes and materials the virus needs for its own
presence of the genome of one retrovirus with the protein 
DNA replication. The mechanism of neoplastic transforma-
 components of another virus is termed a pseudotype.
tion by oncogenic DNA virus is that the viral genes that acti-
Weakly oncogenic (nonacutely transforming) retro-
vate cellular DNA replication are functional, but the genes
viruses cause neoplasia less rapidly and much less effi-
for viral production for some reason are not. This causes the
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
509
infected cell to get inappropriate activation signals without
antigenic properties and host ranges distinct from that of
the subsequent viral production that destroys the cell. The
the viruses in subgroups A-E.
result is inappropriate cell activation and division and is
It is important to note that many of the highly onco-
one of the initial steps that can lead to the development of
genic avian alpharetroviruses (type C) that are used in
a cancer. Like the weakly oncogenic retroviruses, insertion
research studies are defective and require a helper virus to
and transactivation mechanisms are also known for DNA
replicate. These viruses are packaged as pseudotypes using
viruses.
the envelope proteins of a helper virus. They, therefore,
take on the interference and neutralization properties of
their helper virus.
Avian Leukosis/Sarcoma
Complex-Alpharetrovirus
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. In size,
shape, and ultrastructural characteristics, viruses of the
Disease
avian leukosis/sarcoma complex are alpharetroviruses
(type C) and are indistinguishable from one another. ALSVs
The avian leukosis/sarcoma complex of viruses (ALsVs)
within a subgroup cross-neutralize to varying extents.
induces a wide variety of diseases in chickens. These have
Viruses of different subgroups do not cross-neutralize
been of great economic importance to the poultry indus-
try, as well as being important research tools for the under-
B and D.
stan ding of cancer. These diseases include lymphoid leuko-
sis, erythroblastosis, myeloblastosis, myelocytomatoses,
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents.
Theinfec
sarcomas, osteopetrosis, hemangiomas, and nephroblas-
tivity of ALSVs is abolished by treatment with lipid sol-
toma. The signs of disease produced by the ALsVs are not
vents such as ether or detergents (sodium dodecyl sulfate).
specific, and differential diagnosis requires careful his-to-
These viruses are rapidly inactivated at higher tempera-
path-ologic examination and laboratory testing.
  a     s  's
 In lymphoid leukosis, the most common and econom-
long periods at temperatures below 26 oC. The stability
ically important disease caused by ALSVs, the comb may
of viruses of this group changes little between pH 5 and
be pale, shriveled, and occasionally cyanotic. Inappetence,
pH 9. Outside this range, however, inactivation rates are
emaciation, and weakness occur frequently. Enlargement
markedly increased.
of the liver, bursa of Fabricius, kidneys, and the nodular
nature of the tumors can sometimes be detected on palpa-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
tion.
ALSVs occur in chickens and have also been isolated from
ALSV also causes sporadic cases of lymphoid tumors,
pheasants, quail, and partridges. More distantly related re-
such as erythroblastosis, myeloblastosis, and myelocy-
tro viruses occur in turkeys. Experimentally, some of the
tomatoses. Clinical signs of these diseases include lethargy,
ALSVs have a wide host range, especially RsV. Some strains
general weakness, and pallor or cyanosis of the comb. In
of RsV induce neoplasms in other species of birds and
more advanced disease, weakness, emaciation, diarrhea,
even mammals, including monkeys, although only very
and occasionally profuse hemorrhage from feather follicles
are observed.
susceptible.
 Osteopetrosis, in which the long bones of the limbs are
The avian oncornaviruses, like many retroviruses, are
commonly affected, is also caused by ALsV. Thickening
not cytocidal for the cells in which they replicate. In
of the diaphyseal or metaphyseal region can be detected
chicken embryo fibroblast cell culture, RsV and other
by inspection or palpation. Affected chickens are usually
highly oncogenic members of the ALSV group induce rapid
stunted, pale, and walk with a stilted gait or limp.
transformation of cells characterized by alterations in cell
Reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) is a retrovirus found
in chickens and turkeys that is unrelated to the viruses of
erate to produce discrete colonies or foci of transformed
the Alpharetrovirus genus (leukosis/sarcoma group). REV is
cells within a few days. The number of transformed foci is
actually classified in the genus Gammaretrovirus based on
in versely proportional to the viral dilution and can be used
nucleic acid homology and biochemical properties. REV
as a gauge of viral concentration. Various strains ofsarcoma
causes neoplastic disease and nonneoplastic runting in sev-
virus can induce transformation in mouse, rat, and hamster
eral species of poultry.
embryo fibroblasts, as well as in chickens.
 Although members of the weakly oncogenic ALSV group
induce neoplastic disease, they produce no obvious cyto-
Etiologic Agent
pathic effects or detectable levels of transformation in
Classification. ALSVs are classified into five subgroups,
chicken fibroblast culture. Their presence is assessed by
A-E, on the basis of differences in their viral envelope gly-
coprotein antigens that determine virus-serum neutraliza-
chicken antisera or by their ability to induce resistance to
tion properties and viral interference patterns with mem-
transformation by RsV. This resistance occurs when the gly-
bers of the same or different subgroups. Subgroup E viruses
coproteins (attachmentsites) ofan identical or related virus
include ubiquitous endogenous leukemia viruses of low
block the cell receptors for the superinfecting virus. Stocks
pathogenicity. Additional subgroups (F, G, H, I) comprise
of leukosis virus originally detected by interference with
retroviruses from pheasants, quail, and partridges and have
RSV are referred to as resistance-inducing factor strains.
510
PART III
Viruses
FlGurE 66.6.
Transmission of avian leukosisvirus (ALV).Horizontal transmission of ALV (adult to adult) to a susceptible adult
bird typically results in a short-term viremia and the development of immunity and cessation of the viremia. These infections rarely
development of lymphoid leucosis. Endogenous avian retroviruses are transmitted genetically via egg and/or sperm. Gene expression
Exogenous avianleukosisvirus
Endogenousavianretrovirus
Horizontal
transmission
of virus
Immunitydevelops
(adultto
after exposure and
(anpe
shortviremia.
(incidence of lympoid
leukosisis verylow)
Viral DNAis
integrated in
eggand sperm
DNA
Achick that acquires the
infection in ovo will
developa chronic viremia
and shed the virus. Chick
The chick will be immune
has an immune tolerance
to virus (lympoid leukosis
tolerant to endogenous virus.
is commonly seen)
The endogenous virus will be
expressed ata lowleveland
not shed the virus.(lympoid
leukosisis rarely seen)
Host-Virus Relationship
cells in culture, are usually defective, and are most often
products of the research laboratory and occur only spo-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. ALSVs occur
radically in nature, if at all. ALSV strains that contain a
naturally in chickens and most flocks of chickens world-
particular v-oncogene usually cause a rapid and relatively
wide harbor various strains of ALsV, except for those
reproducible type of neoplastic disease in a high percentage
derived from specific pathogen-free birds. Even in infected
of infected chickens.
flocks, the frequency of lymphoid tumors is typically low
 In contrast, naturally occurring ALsVs are weakly onco-
and mortality is usually 2% or less, although sometimes
 genic, cause disease by insertional oncogenesis, do not
losses can be much higher. The reservoir host for ALSV is
transform cells at detectable levels in culture, are usually
the infected chicken.
notdefective, and are naturally transmitted. The oncogenic
 Transmission can be either vertical (from hen through
egg) or horizontal. Vertically infected chicks are immuno-
spectrum of non-oncogene-containing strains of ALSVs
tends to overlap, so that a given strain of ALSV can induce
logically tolerant to the virus and fail to produce neutral-
many kinds of tumors depending on other factors, such
izing antibodies, and remain viremic for life (Figure 66.6).
as the amount of virus, age, and genotype of chicken, and
Horizontal infection is through infected saliva and feces
route of infection. This is consistent with the concept of
and is characterized by transitory viremia followed by the
insertional oncogenesis for these viruses in which the ALSV
development of antibodies. Tumors are more frequent in
 infects and replicates in a variety of cell types, butin order to
vertical than horizontal infections.
 Endogenous leukosis viruses, such as those of subgroup
 produce neoplastic transformation, it must integrate near
 an appropriate cellular proto-oncogene.
E, are usually transmitted genetically in the germ cells in the
Under natural conditions, the most common disease
form of a DNA provirus. Many of these endogenous ALSVs
caused by ALSV is lymphoid leukosis. Transformation of
are defective, but some (RAV-O) are released in an infectious
lymphocytes occurs in the bursa of Fabricius, usually at
form and can be transmitted horizontally, although most
a few months after infection. These early ALSV-induced
chickens are genetically resistant to in fection.
lesions sometimes regress, while others enlarge and even-
tually spread to other visceral organs. Grossly visible neo-
 Pathogenesis and Pathology.
ALSVs induce a wide vari-
plasms are of variable size and organ distribution, almost
ety of neoplasms. The pathogenesis of infection of birds
always involve the liver (a synonym for lymphoid leukosis
with ALSVs depends on whether the particular ALSV in
is big liver disease), spleen, and bursa of Fabricius. Indi-
question carries an oncogene or not. ALsVs containing a
vidual neoplasms are soft, smooth, and glistening and
     
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
511
combination of these forms. These neoplastic masses are
(2) no viremia, antibody; (3) viremia, antibody; and (4)
 s      
viremia, no antibody. Category 1 includes birds that are
immunoglobulin. There are often no consistent or signifi-
genetically resistant. Most exposed chickens are included
cant hematologic changes in circulating blood, and frank
in category 2, and antibody persists throughout the life of
lymphoblastic leukemia is rare. Fully developed lymphoid
these birds and is passed via the yolk to progeny chicks.
leukosis occurs in birds at about 4 months of age and older.
The passive immunity provided by such antibodies gener-
Erythroblastosis occurs sporadically in ALSV-infected
ally lasts for 3-4 weeks. In addition to the neutralizing anti-
chicken flocks. The liver and spleen are enlarged by a
bodies directed against the envelope proteins, antibodies
diffuse infltration of proliferating erythroblasts, and the
are produced to the internal group-specific antigens (Gag
bone marrow is effaced by the same cells. Affected chick-
proteins), which are nonneutralizing and not protective.
ens become anemic and thrombocytopenic. Blood smears
Although virus-neutralizing antibodies restrict the amount
show an erythroblastic leukemia. Induction of erythrob-
of virus, they have little direct effect on growth of the virus-
lastosis by naturally occurring, slowly transforming ALSV
induced neoplasms. Few chickens occur in the third cate-
involves activation of the cellular oncogene c-erbB by inser-
gory, which may represent chickens that are in the process
tional oncogenesis. Highly oncogenic, laboratory strains
of clearing an acute infection with ALsV. Most chickens
of ALsV carry the v-form of this oncogene and are termed
in category 4 acquire ALSV vertically when in the egg and
avian erythroblastosis virus (AEV). Some strains ofAEV can
are immunologically tolerant to the virus. Hens in cate-
kill chickens by erythroblastosis within a week after exper-
 gory 4 transmit virus to a high proportion of their progeny
imental infection.
through the egg.
Myeloblastosis is relatively uncommon under natural
Since there are multiple subgroups (A-D) that com-
conditions and tends to occur in adult chickens. The tar-
monly occur in chicken flocks and are not cross-neutralized
get organ in this disease is bone marrow, and the first
 by antibody, the status of a chicken for one subgroup of
neoplastic alteration is in the form of multiple foci of
ALSV is independent of other viral subgroups.
proliferating myeloblasts, which is followed by leukemia
and invasion of other organs, especially liver, kidney, and
spleen. Microscopic examination reveals massive intravas-
Laboratory Diagnosis
cular and extravascular accumulations of myeloblasts with
ALSV can usually be isolated from plasma, serum, tumor
variable proportions of promyelocytes. The v-myb gene is
tissue, and albumin, or from the embryo of infected eggs.
carried by the highly oncogenic avian myeloblastosis virus
Since ALsV is generally not cytopathogenic, complement
strains. These laboratory strains produce mortality a few
weeks after experimental infection.
fixation, fluorescent antibody, or radioimmunoassay (RIA)
tests must be used to detect and identify the viruses in 
Myelocytomatosis is another form of leukosis that
cell culture. An ELISA test is used for direct detection of
occurs sporadically in chickens. In this disease, tumors
virus in egg albumen or vaginal swabs. These tests have
characteristically occur on the surface of bones in associ-
been used directly on test material (egg albumin) or indi-
ation with the periosteum and near cartilage, and at the
rectly on the cell cultures used for viral isolation. All tests
costochondral junctions, posterior sternum, and cartilagi-
require a source of chicken embryos free from endogenous
nous bones ofthe mandible and nares. They consist of com-
pact masses of uniform myelocytes. Earliest changes occur
ALSV.
 Another means of identifying virus is based on pheno.
in bone marrow in which there is crowding of intersinu-
typic mixing of viruses. Chicken fibroblasts that are trans-
soidal spaces by myelocytes, destruction of sinusoid walls,
formed with envelope-defective strains of RsV are nonpro-
and eventual overgrowth ofthe bone marrow. Tumors may
ducers (NP) ofin fectious RSV. Superinfection of NP cultures
crowd through the bone and extend through the perios-
by another ALsV acting as a helper virus results in produc-
teum. The v-myc oncogene is carried by the highly onco-
 genic avian myelocytomatosis virus.
tion of infectious RsV, which produces transformed foci on
Various benign and malignant connective tissue tumors
susceptible chicken embryo fibroblasts.
occur sporadically in ALSV-infected chickens. There are a
number of laboratory strains of avian sarcoma virus (AsV),
Treatment and Control
the most famous of which is RsV. AsVs induce sarcomas
(tumors of connective tissue), including fibrosarcoma and
Attempts to produce effective vaccines have been largely
fibroma; myxosarcoma and myxoma; histiocytic sarcoma,
unsuccessful. Congenitally infected chicks are most likely
osteoma, and osteogenic sarcoma; and chondrosarcoma.
to develop neoplasms and shed the virus are immunologi-
These highly oncogenic AsVs carry an oncogene such as
cally tolerant to ALSV and can not be immunized.
src (in RsV), fps, ros, or yes.
It is possible to eradicate ALsV from chickens by estab-
Infection with ALSV is important in its own right. ALSV.
lishing breeder flocks that are free of exogenous ALsVs.
infected chickens (compared with specific pathogen-free
Hens are selected that are negative for ALsV antigens in
chickens) exhibit poor growth and egg production even
their eggs. The fertile eggs laid by the selected hens are
in the absence of tumor formation. The pathogenesis of
 hatched and the chicks reared in isolation in small groups.
subclinical ALSV infection of birds is poorly understood.
The birds without leukosis virus antigen or antibody are
used as the breeders for a leukosis virus-free flock. The
Host Response to Infection. Chickens exposed to ALSV
flock must then be maintained in isolation from untested
virus fall into four classes: (1) no viremia, no antibodies;
chickens.
512
PART III
Viruses
Ovine Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma Virus
goats. These endogenous retroviruses may play a role in
(Jaagsiekte)— Betaretrovirus Genus
protection from exogen ous ovine retroviruses in ovine evo-
lution. These endogenous retroviruses are expressed in the
placenta and have been shown to be required for normal
Disease
development of the placenta. As a consequence, no anti-
Ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma or Jaagsiekte (Afrikaner
bodies are developed to an infection with the exogenous
virus. This is one of the explanations for this being an
tory neoplastic disease that progresses slowly. It is world-
invariably fatal disease.
widein distribution (except Australia, New Zealand and Ice-
land) and affects primarily sheep and infrequently found
in goats.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Serologic tests do allow identification of sheep or goats
Etiologic Agent
infected with exogenous virus; therefore, pcr-based tests
for viral nucleic acid in lung exudates (where endogenous
Ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma virus is a betaretro-
   s P i P (s  SI S
used diagnostically.
to be alone sufficient to induce cell transformation and no
 evidence of viral oncogene expression has been demon-
strated.
Treatment and Control
There is no treatment that has proven effective for this
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The lack
disease. Iceland was able to eradicate the disease in the
of a cell culture system to replicate the virus has ham-
early 1950s by identification and severe depopulation mea-
pered efforts to characterize the virus particles. Genomic
sures. There is an age-related resistance and by raising
sequencing of virus from infected sheep lung exudates
 lambs under strict isolation conditions along with culling
o oo  no  n i 5
of infected sheep and exposed cohorts, eradication was
like that of the betaretroviruses including mouse mam-
successful.
 mary tumor and simian type D (Mason-Pfizer monkey virus
(MPMV)) viruses. Antibodies to the capsid protein simian
type D and mouse mammary tumor virus will react with
Simian Type D Retrovirus—Betaretrovirus
Jaagsiekte capsid protein.
Genus
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Sheep
Disease
are the primary hosts for this virus. Goats can be infected
but are less susceptible to both infection and development
Simian type D retrovirus causes a fatal immunosup-
of disease than sheep. It has not been possible to grow the
pressive disease in monkeys. Infected animals show an
virus in cell cultures.
initial generalized lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly
accompanied by fever, weight loss, diarrhea, anemia,
 lymphopenia, granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Host-Virus Relationship
 Profoundly immunosuppressed animals develop diseases
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission.T
The disease is
caused by opportunistic pathogens, the most common of
endemic worldwide (except Australia, New Zealand, and
which is disseminated cytomegalovirus infection.
Iceland) and the incidence varies from 1% to 20% depend-
ing on the country (uncommon in the United States). It is
Etiologic Agent
frequently seen coincident with the ovine lentivirus. Virus
can be transmitted via respiratory droplets.
Classification. Primate retroviruses are represented in
four distinctgenera: (1) Betaretrovirusgenus, which includes
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The virus has a tropism for
the simian type D retrovirus (SRV); (2) the Deltaretrovirus
type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial cells (nonciliated) that
genus, which includes the simian T-lymphotropic viruses
express the cellular receptor hyaluronidase 2. Tumors that
(STLV) and human T-lymphotropic viruses (HTLV); (3) the
develop from proliferation of these two cell types even-
primate lentiviruses, which include the HIV types 1 and
tually compromise lung function and death results from
2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2) and the simian immunodeficiency
asphyxia or secondary bacterial infection (frequently pas-
viruses (SIV); and (4) the simian and human spumaviruses.
teurellosis) of the lower respiratory track resulting in pneu
Although SRV is in a separate genus from the primate
monia. Secretion of substantial quantities of surfactant
 lentiviruses (HIV and SIV) that cause acquired immunod-
spiny suni snoidon pue (sanounaudz ada Aq paonpoid)
eficiency in humans (AIDS) and simians (SAIDS), many
is a characteristic of this disease. Metastatic spread of the
 aspects of the immunodeficiency and associated oppor-
lung tumors can occur to regional lymph nodes and on rare
tunistic infections are similar.
occasions to cardiac or muscle tissues.
The MPMV was the original SRV to be isolated.
Host Response to Infection.
There is a closely related
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. SRV is a
endogenous betaretrovirus in the genome of sheep and
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
513
are characterized by the formation of cytoplasmic type A
Treatment and Control
precursor core particles. Mature type D viruses are pleo-
 morphic in shape, spheroid, enveloped, and 80-100 nm in
It is important to establish and maintain specific retrovirus-
free breeding colonies, both for animal health as well
diameter. The NC is isometric to spherical with an asym-
as improving the quality of nonhuman primates used in
metric, spherical nucleoid.
biomedical research and, potentially in the future, trans-
The RT ofSRV has a preference for Mg2+ and uses tRNALys
plantation. A serial test and removal program can eliminate
 as a primer for negative-strand DNA reverse transcription.
SRV infection in group-housed monkeys.
ization properties of the envelope.
Vaccines against SRV have demonstrated effectiveness
under experimental conditions.
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
SRV
infects several species of monkeys. Serologic surveys have
Feline Leukemia/Sarcoma
shown no conclusive evidence of SRV infection in animal
Virus-
-Gammaretrovirus
handlers who work with monkeys.
SRV isolates replicate in both T and B lymphocytes as
Disease
well as in macrophages. Various human and monkey cell
lines of T and B lymphocyte, macrophage, and fibroblast
The FeLV causes a variety of important diseases of cats.
origin support the growth of SRV. SRV induces syncytia in
The most significant consequence of persistent FeLV
Raji cells, which can be used as a method to quantitate the
infection is severe immunosuppression that results in
virus.
the development of opportunistic secondary infections.
A human counterpart of SRV—a human type D
Clinical syndromes produced by FeLV infection in cats
retrovirus—has been reported. The distribution and clin-
also include tumors of the hemolymphatic system (lym-
ical significance of this virus remains to be determined, as
phoma, leukemia), refractory anemia, ulceration of the
does its relationship to SRV.
oral cavity, a feline panleukopenia-like syndrome, FeLV-
induced neurologic syndrome, and immune-complex
glomerulonephritis.
Host-Virus Relationship
Lymphoma (lymphosarcoma) is the most common neo-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. S
SRV is indige-
plasm in cats, although only about 70% of alllymphomas in 
nous and widespread in Asian macaques but does not nat-
cats are caused by FeLV infection. Multicentric lymphosar-
urally infect African monkey species. In one study, about
coma that affects a variety of tissues (including liver, gas-
 25% of captive macaques in United States primate centers
trointestinal tract, kidneys, spleen, bone marrow, and cen-
were seropositive; however, the prevalence varies widely
tral nervous system (CNs)) is the most common tumor in
based on the location and the species studied.
FeLV-infected cats, whereas thymic and alimentary (gas-
SRV is transmitted primarily in the saliva by biting. Mor-
trointestinal) forms predominate in uninfected cats. Young
tality has been estimated to be 30-50%, and often occurs at
cats with lymphoma tend to be infected with FeLV, whereas
e     s t   
older cats with lymphoma tend not to be. Cats with lym-
body negative may be an important reservoir for SRV.
nied by any combination of respiratory difficulty, diarrhea,
Pathogenesis and Pathology. SRV infects both T and
vomiting, and constipation. FeLV can also cause abnor-
B lymphocytes in vivo and causes a profound deple-
mal proliferation of erythroid and myeloid cells, result-
tion of both of these kinds of lymphocytes leading to
ing in a variety of myeloproliferative disorders including
fatal immunosuppressive disease. The absolute lympho-
leukemias.
cyte count decreases but the CD4/CD8 ratio remains rel-
Transmissible fibrosarcoma in cats is associated with
atively stable. In the lymph nodes, there is a depletion
infection by feline sarcoma virus (FesV) and typically
of lymphocytes and an absence of plasma cells. SRV also
occurs in young cats. The more common fibrosarcomas
infects macrophages, but not granulocytes.
that occur in older cats are not associated with FesV. The
FeSV-induced fibrosarcomas tend to be poorly differenti-
Host Response to Infection. Some infected monkeys
ated and more invasive than non-FeSV-induced tumors.
die acutely 7-20 weeks after experimental inoculation,
whereas some remain persistently infected, and some
Etiologic Agent
develop neutralizing antibody and become nonviremic
and remain healthy.
Classification.
 Three subgroups of exogenous FeLV (A, B,
and C) are distinguished by viral interference tests and anti-
 body neutralization tests. These two properties are associ-
Laboratory Diagnosis
ated with the en velope glycoprotein.
Serologic screening methods include ELISA and West-
FeSVs are replication defective, highly oncogenic (acute
 ern immunoblotting. Because infected monkeys may be
transforming) viruses that have acquired an oncogene
seronegative, however, it is necessary to include virus iso-
through recombination of the FeLV genome with one of
lation as part of the screening process. Techniques based
several cellular oncogenes. FeSVs are thought to develop
   d  a  
de novo in FeLV-infected cats and not to be naturally trans-
have also been developed.
mitted from cat to cat.
514
PART III
Viruses
Cats also have endogenous feline retroviruses such as
tens exposed in utero or before 8 weeks of age become per-
RD-114 that are transmitted genetically. Multiple copies of
sistently viremic.
the RD-114 provirus are found in all cat cells. These endoge-
nous viruses are not associated with any known feline
disease.
Pathogenesis and Pathology.
.Upon penetrating the oral,
ocular, or nasal membranes, the FeLV replicates in lym-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Morpho-
phocytes in the local lymph nodes of the head and neck.
logically, the feline retroviruses are typical mammalian
 Acute FeLV disease, manifested by fever, lymphadenopa-
type C retroviruses of the Gammaretrovinus genus. FeLV is
thy, and malaise, develops 2-4 weeks after infection; how-
composed of two envelope proteins, gp70 (SU) and p15E
ever, these signs are seldom conspicuous. In about one-half
(TM), and three Gag proteins, p10 (NC), p15 (MA), and
of infected cats, the animals recover quickly and become
p27 (CA). The Gag proteins are produced in great excess in
FeLV antibody positive, FeLV antigen negative. Some of
infected cells and are useful in laboratory diagnosis of FeLV
these cats have probably cleared the virus and the virus
infection of cats.
remains latent in others. The long-term significance of
latent FeLV infection has not been determined, and FeLV-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. Like most
viremia may be reactivated under conditions of stress or
enveloped viruses, FeLV is sensitive to inactivation by
corticosteroid therapy in some of these cats.
lipid solvents and detergents. FeLV is rapidly inactivated
In cats that do not mount an adequate immune
at 56 *C, but only minimal inactivation 0ccurs at 37 *C fo1
response, the FeLV replicates in the rapidly dividing cells of
up to 48 h in culture medium. The virus is rapidly inacti-
the bone marrow. These cats are persistently infected with
vated by drying.
FeLV and are positive for FeLV antigen by the IFA test in
peripheral blood leukocytes. The cycle of infection is com-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. FeLV.
plete after viral replication in epithelial cells of the salivary
A replicates exclusively in cat cells, whereas FeLV-B and
 glands, where infectious FeLV is shed in the saliva.
FeLV-C replicate in a variety of cell types, including human
 The time from the onset of viremia to the appearance
cells. The host range specificity of FeLV is associated with 
of the later signs of FeLV infection is termed the induc.
the envelope glycoprotein, gp70. No relationship has been 
tion period. This period ranges from months to years, with
shown between FeLV and human disease, and there is no
an average of about 2 years. Most persistently viremic cats
evidence that FeLV disease is transmissible to humans.
die within 3.5 years of infection. Persistently infected cats
Since the much rarer sarcoma virus, FesV, is defective,
 often develop leukopenia, immune deficiency, and sec-
the host range of this virus is dependent upon the helper
 ondary opportunistic infections. FeLV-induced immune
leukemia virus that supplies the protein for its envelope.
deficiency must be distinguished from that induced by
Most experimental studies have been conducted with the
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), which is a different
FeSV (FeLV-B) pseudotype. FeSV can transform fibroblasts
retrovirus.
from nonfeline species, including dog, mouse, guinea pig.
rat, mink, sheep, monkey, rabbit, and human. FesV has
been found to be oncogenic in many of the animal species
Host Response to Infection. About half of FeLV-infected
tested, although inoculation of fetal or newborn animals is
cats produce protective amounts of neutralizing antibod-
generally required to show oncogenesis of FesV in species
ies to the major envelope glycoproteins while FeLV is con-
other than cats.
fined to cells of the local lymph nodes, and the virus is
eliminated or remains latent. These cats do not become
Host-Virus Relationship
 persistently infected with FeLV, and usually live out a nor-
mal life span. The response to FeLV infection depends on
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. FeLV infec.
the age of the cat, the dose of virus received, and prob-
tion of cats occurs throughout the world, and the cat is
 ably other genetic and virologic factors. Kittens tend to
the only known reservoir of the virus. About 2% of the cats
respond poorly and, as a result, are predisposed topersistent
in the United States are seropositive, indicating either past
FeLV infection.
01 current infection, and some 50% of these seropositive
Laboratory Diagnosis
indicating current infection. FeLV-A occurs in infected
cats either alone (50%) or in combination with FeLV-B
Because some cats are able to clear a FeLV infection, and
0r FeLV-C.
many cats have been vaccinated against FeLV, tests for
 FeLV is excreted in saliva and tears and possibly the
antibody to FeLV are of limited utility. The most useful
urine. Transmission appears to occur during close contact
tests for FeLV diagnosis detect FeLV antigens. An enzyme-
via biting or licking (grooming). It is possible that in fection
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is available for FeLV
may occur via contaminated feeding dishes. Prolonged,
antigens in serum or saliva and is especially useful as a rapid
extensive cat-to-cat contact is required for efficient spread.
screening method. An immunofluorescence antibody test
In environments with multiple cats, the presence of one
(IFA) is used to detect FeLV antigens inside of infected cells,
infected cat greatly increases the risk of infection for other
which is evidence that the virus is replicating in the bone
cats. FeLV is also transmitted congenitally, and most kit-
marrow and that the cat is persistently viremic.
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
515
Treatment and Control
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. The infec-
Vaccines against FeLV are available, although their effi-
tivity of BLV is abolished by lipid solvents, periodate,
phenol, trypsin, and formaldehyde. Infectivity is rapidly
cacy under field conditions is controversial. Current FeLV
destroyed at 56 *C but can be retained for prolonged peri-
vaccines either contain the inactivated ("killed") whole
ods atless than 50°C. Pasteurization destroys the in fectivity
virus or a subunit protein preparation of the virus. Kittens
should be vaccinated twice starting at 9-10 weeks of age,
of this virus, which is of interest because infected lympho-
cytes are found in the milk of infected dairy cattle.
with the second dose of the vaccine given 3-4 weeks later,
and with annual booster vaccinations. Eight-five percent of
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. BLV
cats under 12 weeks of age, if exposed, become persistently
has been shown to be infectious for several animal species
infected, but cats over 6 months of age have only a 10-15%
other than cattle, including sheep, goats, and pigs. Under
chance of becoming persistently infected if exposed. Use of
 FeLV vaccines is thus potentially most beneficial in young
to be expressed only in cattle and sheep. Since there are no
cats.
significant antigenic or genetic differences between bovine
FeLV infection in catteries can be controlled by test and
and ovine isolates, the agent designated ovine leukemia
removal procedures and can be combined with FeLV vac-
virus is regarded as BLV infecting a heterologous host.
cination, since vaccination will not interfere with the lab-
BLV replicates in cell culture from a wide variety of spe-
oratory detection of FeLV antigen in infected cats.
cies, including bovine, human, simian, canine, ca-prine,
A diagnosis of FeLV infection does not necessarily dic-
and equine cells. Although BLV replicates in human cells,
tate euthanasia, since a FeLV-positive healthy cat may live
humans are not known to be infected. Seroepidemic stud-
for years. Because the cat is probably shedding virus that
ies among high-risk humans (veterinarians, farmers, ani-
could in fect other cats; however, precautions to reduce the
mal keepers, and slaughterhouse personnel) revealed no
chance of spreading the virus and contact with opportunis-
infections, and BLV has not been associated with human
tic pathogens should be instituted.
neoplasms.
Bovine Leukemia Virus--Deltaretrovirus
Host-Virus Relationship
Distribution, Reservoir. and Transmission. The geo-
Disease
graphic distribution of BLV is worldwide. The reservoir is
BLV is a cause of lymphoma (lymphosarcoma; lym-
infected cattle. Disease is directly related to BLV prevalence,
phoreticular neoplasia) in older cattle—so-called enzootic
which can vary widely but is highest in intensive dairy
bovine leukosis (EBL), which occurs very sporadically in
onpoid 0 uonppe ul (1aqoiy uaaa 1o %0s 0 dn) sea
BLV-infected cattle. Cattle with EBL are usually older than
losses associated with BLV infection of cattle, additional
3 years, with the peak of tumor incidence between 5 and 8
losses result from exportation restrictions by foreign coun-
years. Affected cattle typically are afebrile with nonpainful
tries that halt export of BLV-positive cattle or semen from
infected bulls.
thy). Depending on the involvement of different organs,
BLV is transmitted horizontally under conditions of
affected cattle can exhibit signs of gastrointestinal dys-
close contact, and most commonly occurs when heifers
function, paralysis, exophthalmos, and cardiac dysfunc-
are introduced into the milking herd. The virus is highly
tion. Neoplastic lymphocytes can invade the blood to cause
cell-associated, and transmission is by blood or tissue con-
lymphoid leukemia in some affected cattle. The forms of
taining lymphocytes between animals, by trauma, contam-
lymphomas that occur in calves (less than 6 months of age)
and juvenile cattle (6-18 months of age) are not associated
Transmission of BLV can occur through the skin and the
with BLV infection.
reproductive, alimentary and reproductive tracts, and is
easily transmitted to susceptible calves or sheep by as few
as 2500 lymphocytes from infected animals. Experimen-
Etiologic Agent
tal transmission has also been accomplished with milk
and colostrum, both of which contain lymphocytes, but
Classification.
Because　 of its
genome
structure,
this route is likely unimportant. In utero transmission of
nucleotide sequence, and size and amino acid sequence
BLV has been documented, but occurs infrequently. The
of the structural and nonstructural viral proteins, BLV has
transmission of BLV by hematophagous flies and ticks has
recently been grouped in a genus (Deltaretrovirus) with the
been demonstrated experimentally; however, field obser-
HTLV-I and HTLV-1I, and the closely related STLV. These
vations do not support a major role for such vectors. BLV-
viruses can induce diseases with similar pathologies, char-
infected cattle with virus-induced persistent lymphocyto-
acterized by low viremia, long latency period, and a lack of
sis are major reservoirs of the virus and pose the greatest
preferred proviral integration sites in the tumors (i.e., the
risk for transmission .
provirus is not necessarily found near an oncogene).
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Most BLV infections are
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. Morpho-
asymptomatic. There is a brief viremia soon after infec-
logically, BLV resembles other type C retroviruses. Anti-
tion of susceptible cattle, followed by a long incubation
body to gp51 is neutralizing.
period when the virus remains quiescent as provirus that is
516
PART III
Viruses
randomly integrated into the genome of infected cells.
with WDS yearly in Oneida Lake. One of the most fasci-
Only a low percentage of BLV-infected animals ever
nating aspects of these proliferative diseases is its seasonal
 develop lymphoma, suggesting that the incubation period
nature. Young walleye will present with the lesions in late
for induction of neoplasia is longer than the lifespan
fall and winter and the lesions will spontaneously regress
of many infected animals. Some cattle develop only a
in the spring. Lesions are rarely observed in the summer
transient viremia without seroconversion, and after 3-4
months.
 months virus can no longer be isolated, whereas others
develop persistent lymphocytosis within months or years
Etiologic Agent
after infection.
 Neoplasms in cattle with EBL typically involve any com-
The epsilonretroviruses include three fish retroviruses:
bination of internal and superficial lymph nodes, heart,
WDSV and walleye epidermal hyperplasia viruses type 1
abomasum, intestines, kidneys, uterus, liver, spleen, epidu-
ral space of the lumbar spinal cord, and retrobulbar fat (of
viruses, which may be added to this group upon comple-
the eye). Distribution of the tumor is unpredictable, but
tion of their genome sequences, perch epidermal hyperpla-
blood is often not involved. Both T lymphocytes and B
sia virus types 1 and 2. The exogenous piscine retroviruses,
lymphocytes can be infected with BLV, but the tumors are
snakehead retrovirus and salmon swim bladder sarcoma-
composed only of proliferating B lymphocytes.
associated virus (SssV), have not yet been assigned to a
specifc genus.
Host Response to Infection. Most BLV-infected cattle
develop antibodies to BLV structural proteins. A greater
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. WDSV was
response is usually detected to the glycosylated proteins
originally cloned from tumor DNA in 1990 and found to
 gp51 and gp30 than to the internal proteins p24, p15,
be 12.7 kb in length. Sequence analysis identified, in addi-
p12, and p10 and to the RT. Whereas most infected cat-
tion to gag, pro, pol and env, three open reading frames,
tle develop high titers of virus-specific antibodies, some
designated orf a, orf b and orf c, that encode viral accessory
remain persistently seronegative.
 proteins related to cellular cyclin (orfa), RACK1 (orfb) and
Antibodies to BLV are also detected in the milk and
a proapoptotic (orfc) protein.
colostrum and are partially protective against infection of
calves. Antibodies do not provide protection against tumor
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Der-
development in infected animals, however, and do not pre-
 mal sarcoma can be experimentally transmitted to several
vent the spread of infectious BLV by carriers.
perch species, sauger (Stizostedion canadense) and yellow
perch (Perca flavescens).
Laboratory Diagnosis
Host-Virus Relationship
A variety of serologic tests (agar gel immunodiffusion
(AGID), immunofluorescence, and ELISA) that detect BLV-
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. The virus and
specific antibody can be used. The animal usually becomes
host have developed a delicate balance that allows signif-
seropositive 4-12 weeks after viral exposure. BLV induces
icant transmission of the virus with minimal mortality in
the host species. Tumors develop in the fall and winter
syncytia in target cells.
months with minimal virus replication and when water
temperatures warm in the spring, virus replication greatly
Treatment and Control
increases in the tumor cells resulting in significant shed-
 Infection, once established, appears to be lifelong in
ding of virus during spawning (highest fish densities) and
regression ofthe tumors. Young fish are more susceptible to
infected cattle. There is no treatment for lymphoma or BLV
the virus and development of tumors. Evidence indicates
infection in cattle. BLV can be eliminated from a herd by
 that one season of tumor development and regression pro-
repeated serologic testing and immediate removal of posi-
vides immunity into adulthood.
tive animals.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The lesions are cutaneous
Walleye Dermal Sarcoma
mesenchymal neoplasms that are found on any portion
Virus-Epsilonretrovirus Genus
of the fish, arise from the superficial surface of the scales
and range in size from 0.1-1.0 cm in diameter (see Fig-
ure 66.7). If extensive, individual skin tumors can merge
Disease
to form large neoplasms with lymphocytic infiltrates. The
 Proliferative skin lesions in walleye fish were first reported
tumors consist of nodular masses of fibroblasts on the epi-
from Oneida Lake in New York State in the late 1960s.
dermis. The tumors are not encapsulated and frequently
Since then these diseases have been reported in the United
become ulcerated when regressing. The ulceration during
States and Canada. Retroviruses from two proliferative skin
regression occurs at a time of maximal virus shedding.
lesions in walleye (Sander vitreus), walleye dermal sarcoma
Spread of the tumor below the dermis is only occasion-
(WDS) and walleye epidermal hyperplasia (WEH), have
ally observed. The timing of the entire process is elegant
been isolated and demonstrated to be responsible. About
 since maximal virus shedding occurs in the spring at a time
10% of walleyes can be affected with WEH and up to 27%
of maximal fish-to-fish contact. The virus induces both the
Chapter 66  Retroviridae
517
cally occur in sheep over 2 years of age, and the clinical
FIGURE 66.7.
Dermal sarcomas on a yearling walleye.
course is protracted.
(lmage courtesy of PR. Bowser, Cornell University.)
Maedi and progressive pneumonia viruses cause a sim-
ilar chronic pneumonia in infected sheep. Early manifes-
tations include progressive loss of condition accompanied
by dyspnea. Eventually, breathing requires the use ofacces-
sory muscles and is accompanied by rhythmic jerks of the
head. There is sometimes a dry cough, but no nasal dis-
charge. The clinical phase is protracted, although affected
animals often die from secondary bacterial pneumonia.
Caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus (CAEV) induces
proliferation of virus-infected cells (fall and winter) as well
several disease syndromes in domestic goats, including
as the regression of those cells (spring) for maximal virus
chronic progressive arthritis, mastitis, and occasionally
production. The orfa (viral cyclin) and orfb (RACK1-like)
interstitial pneumonia in older goats, and an acute para-
proteins are expressed during cellular proliferation consis-
lytic syndrome in kids that is characterized by hind limb
tent with the concept that these proteins in duce that prolif-
ataxia, weakness, and paralysis.
eration during times of low viral gene expression. The orfc
Etiologic Agent
periods of high virus expression and replication consistent
Classification. The agent of visna/maedi/progressive
with tumor regression.
pneumonia and the closely related organism of CAEV are
Host Response to Infection. This is an infection and dis-
lentiviruses. The name designations are largely historical
ease of mostly young walleye. Evidence indicates thatin fec-
and refer to the site of virus isolation or the predomi-
tion, development of tumors and regression of tumors is a
nant pathology in an individual animal. Ovine progressive 
once in a lifetime event. This suggests that host immunity
pneumonia virus is synonymous with maedi virus.
 develops as a result of this cycle. Inflammatory responses
at lesional sites are occasionally observed.
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The virion
is composed of four structural proteins designated gp135,
p30, p16, and p14. Minor structural proteins include a RT,
Laboratory Diagnosis
integrase, and dUTPase. Neutralization tests have shown
that variations in virus strains occur during infection in
Gross lesions along with histopathologic observation can
be utilized. The spontaneous regression upon the arrival of
individual animals. If an animal is inoculated with plaque-
purified virus, many months later viruses can be isolated
warmer temperatures is also an indicator of this disease.
that are not neutralized by antiserum that neutralizes the
original inoculum strain. Both the inoculum strain and the
Treatment and Control
variant strains can be isolated simultaneously, indicating
No treatment or control measures have been applied to
that new strains do not replace parental virus. With time,
neutralizing antibodies are produced to the new strains.
this viral disease. Theoretically, isolation of fish with der-
mal lesions from unaffected fish during the winter mon ths
The RT of these viruses has a preference for Mg?+ and
when there is little virus shedding that occurs through the
uses tRNAlys as a primer for negative-strand DNA reverse
spring when tumors regress (high virus shedding) should
transcription.
prevent the transmission that occurs in the spring months.
Visna/maedi/progressive pneumonia virus and CAEV
Reco vered fish should no longer have the capacity to harbor
show extensive cross-reaction by immunodiffusion assays
and transmit virus.
in volving the major structural protein.
Resistance
to
Physical
and
Chemical
Agents.
Visna/Maedi/Progressive Pneumonia Viruses
Lentiviruses are relatively resistant to ultraviolet irradia-
and Caprine Arthritis Encephalitis
tion. Infectivity is abolished by lipid solvents, periodate,
Virus-—Lentivirus Genus
phenol, trypsin, ribonuclease, formaldehyde, and low pH
(less than 4.2). Infectivity is relatively stable at 0-4 *C in
the presence of serum, but infectivity is rapidly destroyed
Disease
at 56*C.
These viruses cause several different diseases that involve
the lungs, joints, mammary glands, and CNS of affected
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. Visna
sheep and goats. Initial signs of visna are subtle and insidi-
and ovine progressive pneumonia have been described
ous, consistingofa slightaberration of gait, especially of the
re das jo spn aos s pue daus u a
hindquarters; trembling of the lips, unnatural tilting of the
to be more susceptible, especially Icelandic sheep, which
head; and in rare instances, blindness. The signs progress
are highly inbred. The visna virus infects cells derived
to paresis or even total paralysis. Fever is absent. Unat-
from many vertebrate species but replicates efficiently only
tended animals die of inanition, hence the name visna,
in sheep cells. Unadapted virus isolates replicate best in
macrophage cultures.
518
PART III
Viruses
Host-Virus Relationship
course, the absence of fever, and the pleocytosis in the cere.
brospinal fluid (CsF) are all characteristic of visna. Tremor
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. These viruses
of the head, grinding of teeth, and intense itching are more
cause disease in sheep and goats throughout much of the
characteristic of scrapie than visna.
world. The frequency of infection varies widely based on 
Virus can be isolated from CNS, lung, spleen, peripheral
 %5/  1 0 311 1 1q 'sd go
blood leukocytes, and CsF, but because of the limited viral
some flocks in the United States. Infected sheep serve as
 replication can be difficult. Group-specific tests that detect
the reservoir.
Transmission is via respiratory exudates and aerosol.
out the disease are preferred over serum neutralization for
Virus is excreted in the milk, and lambs raised on infected
ewes are infected at a young age. Infection rates are
serologic diagnosis. Neutralization tests are of less value
 n      s i
increased by practices that pool milk. Intrauterine trans-
disease and are strain specific. Thus, serologic tests such
mission is infrequent.
 as AGID are now used to identify lentivirus-infected sheep
and goats.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. The ovine lentiviruses
infect cells of the monocyte-macrophage system. Visna
is a chronic and progressive encephalomyelitis charac-
Treatment and Control
terized by multifocal areas of chronic inflammation with
No effective vaccine currently exists and no useful ther-
accompanying demyelination. The process begins imme
apeutic agents are available. Control of these viruses and
diately beneath the ependyma bordering the ventricles, but
their diseases is by serologic testing and the elimina-
spreads throughout the brain and spinal cord.
tion of infected animals. Visna and maedi were elim-
The lungs of sheep with progressive pneumonia are
inated from Iceland as the result of an eradication
markedly expanded, with as much as a two- or three.
fold increase in lung weight. The histopathologic changes
program.
include thickening of the interalveolar septa as a result of
infiltration oflymphocytes, monocytes, and macrophages.
Equine Infectious Anemia Virus-Lentivirus
The thickening may be so pronounced as to obliterate the
Genus
alveoli. Lymphoid accumulations with the formation of
follicles and germinal centers are scattered throughout the
lung parenchyma.
Disease
Some adult sheep infected with ovine lentiviruses
 Equine infectious anemia virus (ElAV) can cause severe
develop chronic arthritis and/or mastitis.
anemia in horses, but the clinical presentation of ElA is
Caprine arthritis encephalitis virus (CAEV) causes a
 highly variable. In the acute form, signs develop suddenly
  s  n  ds ro r
 7-21 days postinfection. Signs can include fever, anorexia,
months of age. The lesions in affected goats resemble those
thrombocytopenia, and severe anemia. There may also be
of visna. Goats that survive infection with CAEV as kids
profuse sweating and a serous discharge from the nose.
often develop progressive, chronic arthritis, mastitis, and,
Such attacks often last for 3-5 days, after which the animal
occasionally, interstitial pneumonia that resembles ovine
appears to recover. Horses in the early acute stage of the
progressive pneumonia.
disease are seronegative for EIA.
Subacute disease often follows the acute infection after a
Host Response to Infection. Most lentivirus infections of
convalescence of 2-4 weeks. Acute signs are repeated along
ruminants are subclinical, likely because of the prolonged
with weakness, edema, petechiae, lethargy, depression,
incubation period of the diseases these viruses induce.
 anemia, and ataxia. The animal again appears to recover
Lesions in all of these diseases include chronic, ongoing
and the cycle may then recur.
inflammation; thus, the lesions themselves likely result in
Chronic ElA is the classical presentation of so-called
part from the host's immune response.
swamp fever, which resembles the subacute form but is
 In experimental infections, complement-fixing anti
 milder and seldom leads to death. The cycle of fever, weight
 bodies appear a few weeks after inoculation, rise to a max-
loss, anorexia, and clinical signs can recur six or more
imum within 2 months, and remain constant through-
times. Each episode usually lasts 3-5 days, and the inter-
out the course of disease. Neutralizing antibodies appear
val between cycles is irregular (weeks to months). The fre-
later, reach a maximum at about 1 year, and then remain
quency and severity usually decrease after 6-8 episodes,
constant. However, the virus persists despite a vigorous
usually within the first year. Most horses are then without
humoral immune response, possibly because most infected
clinical signs but carry the virus for the remainder of their
cells are not producing viral antigens and are, therefore,
lives. EIA can be induced by stress or immunosuppressive
undetectable by the immune surveillance mechanisms.
'ssnp
EIAV infection in horses generally results in clinical
Laboratory Diagnosis
remain asymptomatic but have antibody to the virus and
 are lifelong carriers of the virus. Asymptomatic but chron-
In its early stages, visna is difficult to distinguish from
ically viremic (low viral load) animals have been observed
other CNS diseases; however, the progressive protracted
for periods in excess of 18 years.
Chapter 66
Retroviridae
519
Etiologic Agent
can transmit the virus by simple mechanical transfer of
infected blood. The transmission ofEIAV via blood can also
Classification.
 EIAV is a Lentivirus, and was the first ani-
be through contaminated needles; thus it is important not
mal disease to be identified as caused by a filterable virus
to share needles or use unsterilized needles in veterinary
(1904).
procedures. Viral transmission to the nursing foal from a
carrier mare is well documented. EIAV can also be transmit-
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. EIAV is
ted in utero but this is probably rare.
06 ds) suaioidooais papooua-adolaaua omi jo pasodo
= SU and gp 45 = TM) and four major nonglycosylated pro-
teins (p26 = CA, p15 = MA, p11 = NC, and p9). The p26 is
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Acute EIA is related to mas-
as  s  d   a
sive viral replication. Anemia reflects reduced life span of
while the en velope-associated glycoproteins demonstrate
red blood cells (RBCs) as a consequence of hemolysis and
hemagglutination activity and are type specific.
The EIAV genome is highly mutable. When the virus is
in complement levels and the presence of complement-
placed under selective pressure by the host immune sys-
coated erythrocytes have been observed in EIAV-infected
tem, individual nucleotide substitutions (mutations) pro-
horses. Decreased erythropoiesis levels and perturbations
duce novel antigenic variants of the gp 45 and gp 90 enve-
in iron metabolism also contribute to anemia in chronic
lope proteins. It is thought that these antigenic variants
cases.
cause EIA's characteristic episodic recurrence. In cell cul-
Lesions of ElA reflect the duration and severity of infec-
ture (where there is no immune selection), antigenic types
tion and disease, and can include widespread hemor-
remain stable and neutralizable by serum antibodies from
rhage and necrosis of lymphatic tissues, anemia, edema,
the horse from which the virus was isolated. When intro-
and emaciation. Microscopic lesions include activation of
duced into a new horse, these same strains produce new
the mononuclear phagocytic system in all lymphoid tis-
antigenic viral variants that no longer are neutralized by
sues, activation of Kupffer cells, and hemosiderin deposi-
the original antibodies.
tion in many organs. Immune complex-mediated glomeru-
lonephritis and hepatic centrolobular necrosis are com-
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. EIAV is
mon, the latter as a consequence of severe, acute-onset ane-
readily inactivated by common disinfectants that con-
mia. Granulomatous ependymitis, meningitis, choroiditis,
tain detergents. The virus is also inactivated by sodium
subependymal encephalitis, and hyd rocephalus are associ-
hydroxide, sodium hypochlorite, most organic solvents,
ated with ataxia.
and chlorhexidine. ElAV heated in horse serum at 58 *C
for 30 min shows no infectivity for horses. However, at
 25 *C, EIAV remains infectious on hypodermic needles
Host Response to Infection. Horses infected with EIAV
fo1 96 h.
develop persisting antibody titers within 45 days. Most
animals become ELISA-positive within 12 days and AGID-
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
positive within 24 days of infection.
Horses, ponies, donkeys, and mules are susceptible to in fec-
tion by ElAV. There is only one report of human infec-
tion, and no cases of ElA-like disease have been identified.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Attempts to propagate the virus in lambs, mice, hamsters,
Laboratory diagnosis depends on the detection of specific
guinea pigs, and rabbits have failed. Primary isolates of
antibody using an AGID test (Coggins test). More sensitive 
 EIAV can be propagated only in equine leukocyte cultures,
 ELISA tests are also now available.
where it grows in cells of the monocyte/macrophage lin-
  dd   A no ss  '
variety of cell lines from several species, including human
fetal lung fibroblasts. These laboratory strains display sig
Treatment and Control
nificant sequence differences from primary isolates, partic-
No specific treatments are available. Supportive therapy is
ularly in the U3 region of the LTR.
the most important factor in recovery.
Affected animals should be either euthanized because
the virus is contagious or physically isolated. Spread ofEIAV
Host-Virus Relationship
can be reduced by control of stable flies and mosquitoes.
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. The distribu-
Repeated use of hypodermic needles and transfusions from
tion of EIAV is worldwide but is most prevalent in warm cli-
untested donors must be avoided.
mates. In fection rates vary widely but the disease is increas-
Infected stallions should not be bred to seronegative
ingly rare in countries such as the United States. Horses,
mares, although the reverse need not be true. Uninfected
donkeys, and mules are the only known reservoirs and nat-
foals can usually be obtained from positive mares and posi-
ural hosts of the virus.
tive stallions if they are isolated from the infected mare and
Mechanicalinoculation of blood isconsidered the major
her milk.
mode of EIAV transmission. EIAV is naturally transmit-
A vaccine against EIAV is used in some countries (Cuba,
ted by hematophagous insects, especially deer and stable
China) but probably does not provide broad protection
flies. EIAV does not replicate in the insect cells, but flies
against all variants of EIAV.
520
PART III
Viruses
Bovine Immunodeficiency Virus-Lentivirus
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus—-Lentivirus
Genus
Genus
Disease
Disease
 Despite its provocative name, the significance of bovine
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection of cats pro-
immunodeficiency virus (BIV) as a cause of immune dys-
 duces acute fever and lymphadenopathy, followed by an
 regulation and chronic inflammation in cattle is uncer-
asymptomatic carrier phase. In some cats, FIV infection
tain. Unsubstantiated reports implicate BIV as a cause
 causes profound immunodeficiency leading to secondary
 of lethargy, mastitis, pneumonia, lymphadenopathy, and
chronic infections. FIV infection of cats shares common
chronic dermatitis, but these reports are viewed with
features with AIDS of humans and FIV infection of cats has
increasing skepticism. A closely related virus, Jembrana dis-
become an important animal model for AIDS research.
ease virus, has been described in Bali cattle (Bos javanicus
in Indonesia). Disease symptoms in these cattle consist of
Etiologic Agent
fever, anorexia, lymphadenopathy and occasionally death.
Classification. FIV is a lentivirus that is not closely related
Etiologic Agent
to any other known lentivirus.
Classification. BlV is a lentivirus that is not closely related
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties.
The mor-
to any other known lentivirus.
phology and physical properties of FIV closely resemble
those of other lentiviruses. FIV has an SU glycoprotein of
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The mor-
95kd and a TM glycoprotein of 41 kd, and Gag proteins,
phology and physical properties of BIV closely resemble
MA, CA, and NC, of 16, 27, and 10 kd, respectively. FIV also
those of other lentiviruses. BIV has an SU glycoprotein of
codes for several nonstructural proteins. The RT of FIV has
100 kd and a TM glycoprotein of 45 kd, and Gag proteins,
a preference for Mg²+.
MA, CA, and NC, of 16, 26, and 7 kd, respectively. BIV also
produces several nonstructural proteins. The RT of BIV has
Resistance to Physical and Chemical Agents. FIV is inac-
a preference for Mg2+.
tivated by appropriate concentrations of disinfectants such
as chlorine, quaternary ammonium compounds, phenolic
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.
compounds, and alcohol. It survives at 60 *C for only a few
Experimental infection of rabbits and sheep with BIV is
minutes.
possible, but these animals do not develop disease. BIV
can be cultured in cells from a variety of species, including
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems.F
FIV
bovine, rabbit, and canine, but not primates or humans.
infects domestic cats, although there is serologic evidence
that FIV-like viruses infect wild Felidae in Africa (lions,
Host-Virus Relationship
 cheetahs) and the Americas (puma, bobcats, jaguars). FIV
 isolates replicate in primary cultures of feline mononu
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. The distribu-
 clear cultures stimulated to divide with mitogen and sup
tion of BIV is probably worldwide. In the United States, the
plemented with interleukin-2 (IL-2; T cell growth factor).
 prevalence of BIV infection is low but may be much higher
Some isolates of FIV are also able to replicate in established
in individual herds. Herds infected with BIV are often also
feline cell lines. FIV does not replicate in nonfeline cell
infected with BLV.
 lines. There is no link between FIV and any human disease,
including AIDS.
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Cells of the mono-
  a n   
Host-Virus Relationship
cattle.
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. FIV is
Host Response to Infection. BIV infection in cattle results
endemic in cats throughout the world, although the virus
in a strong host antibody response. However, like most
is not as contagious as FeLV. FIV is shed in saliva, and the
other lentiviruses, BIV induces a chronic lifelong infection.
 most important route of transmission is probably through
The vast majority of infections are subclinical.
bites. Free-roaming male cats, which are most likely to fight,
are most frequently infected with FIV. The virus is not effi-
ciently spread by casual, nonaggressive contactamong cats.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Sexual contact probably is also not a primary means of
Infected cattle can be detected by serologic tests for anti-
spreading FIV. Transmission from an infected queen to her
bodies to BIV. BIV isolation from blood can also be used to
kittens can occur.
detect infected animals.
Cats remain infected with FIV for life, although the
majority of FIV infections are clinically silent.
Treatment and Control. There is no vaccine or treatment
Dual infection of FIV and FeLV is not uncommon, and
for BIV infection. The importance of BIV infection as a
cats infected with both FIV and FeLV appear to have a more
 pathogen of cattle remains most uncertain.
severe disease course.
Chapter 66
 Retroviridae
521
Pathogenesis and Pathology. There are no definitive
SIV-infected Asian macaques often develop a transient
gross or histologic changes in the tissues of FIV-infected
skin rash soon after infection. Lymph nodes and spleen
cats, even in more advanced stages of disease. Following
may be initially enlarged. The architecture of lymph nodes
initial infection, the virus replicates in regional lymph
becomes disrupted and eventually atrophies. The main
nodes, and then spreads to lymph nodes throughout
clinical features of SAIDS in Asian macaques are wasting
the body, sometimes resulting in a transient general-
and persistentdiarrhea. Opportunistic infections occur and
 ized lymphadenopathy. Mostinfections are asymptomatic,
often persist in the immunocompromised monkey. Virtu-
occur in some cats that are then susceptible to secondary
develop fatal SAIDS within 2 months to 3 years.
 opportunistic infections. FIV appears to infect both CD4
The fatal immunodeficiency disease caused by SIV in
and CD8 lymphocytes, as well as macrophages in vivo.
Asian macaques is the major animal model for AIDs in
Many cats manifest an absolute decrease in the number
humans. Further, an awareness of the biology of SIV is
of CD4 lymphocytes with an inversion of the CD4/CD8
important for the occupational health of animal care-
ratio.
takers, technicians, and veterinarians who handle mon-
keys, as well as use of primates in biomedical research and
Host Response to Infection. Infected cats typically
medicine. Artificially generated simian/human immunod-
respond with vigorous humoral (antibody) and celi-
eficiency virus (SHIV) strains of virus have been constructed
 mediated immune responses. These responses appear to be
that contain HIV-derived envelope genes with SIV-derived
sufficient to limit the initial acute phase of the disease. Like
genomes that have been used extensively in the laboratory
for studying immunity and pathogenesis to HIV en velope
mostlentiviruses, however, FIV is never eliminated. It prob-
ably produces various degrees of subclinical immune dys-
proteins in a nonhuman primate model system.
function in the majority and clinically significant immun-
odeficiency and associated secondary infections in a minor-
ity, of in fected cats.
Etiologic Agent
Classification. The primate lentiviruses exist as a broad
 continuum. For example, the prototype SIV isolate from
Laboratory Diagnosis
os inoqn Auo si (oans pisp) san uis
FIV infection is most easily diagnosed by detecting anti-
related to HIV-1, but is 75% related to HIV-2 based on
bodies in the blood. Antibody to FIV can be detected using
nucleicacid sequence. Other SIVisolates from chimpanzees
ELISA tests, Western immunoblotting, and indirect fluo-
(SIVcpz) are much more closely related to HIV-1 than to
rescent antibody (IFA). The Snap? Test (Idexx) or ELISA is
HIV-2. Further, some SIV isolates from other African pri-
often used as a first screening test, followed by Western blot
    n r   s 
as a confirmatory test. FIV infection can also be diagnosed
Many isolates of SIV and HIV have been made and their
by virus isolation and PCR to detect FIV nucleic acid.
nucleic acids sequenced and classified in phylogenetic trees
Young kittens may be antibody positive (and thus have
of sequence relatedness in an effort to understand the ori-
a positive test result) without actually being infected with
gin of AIDS and the diversity and epidemiologic potentials
FIV due to passive transfer of FIV antibodies from thei1
of the primate lentiviruses.
mother.
Physical, Chemical, and Antigenic Properties. The mor-
Treatment and Control
    s pd  
those of other lentiviruses. SIV has an SU glycoprotein of
Treatment of FIV-associated disease is largely supportive.
120 kd and a TM glycoprotein of 32 kd, and Gag - proteins,
Secondary and opportunistic infections are treated with
MA, CA, and NC of 16, 28, and 8 kd, respectively. SIV also
appropriate antimicrobial therapy. Control of FIV infec-
codes for several nonstructural proteins that - function in
tion is by avoiding contact with stray cats and avoiding cat
regulation of viral expression and accessory functions.
fights. A vaccine isavailable that has been shown to provide
The RT of SIV has a preference for Mg2+ and uses tRNALys
some protection from infection.
as a primer for negative-strand DNA reverse transcription.
On the basis of seroepidemiologic data, as many as 30
distinct SIV strains may be harbored in their African mon-
Simian Immunodeficiency Virus-Lentivirus
key hosts. The prototype SIVmac strain is antigenically
Genus
more closely related to HIV-2 than to HIV-1, in agreement
Disease
chimpanzees, SIVcpz, however, is more closely related to
HIV-1 than to other SIV types.
 The SIV comprises a number of lentiviruses indigenous in
many simian species living in the wild in Africa. In their
natural African simian hosts, these viruses apparently cause
Infectivity for Other Species and Culture Systems. SIV
little or no disease. In contrast, the Asian macaques, which
isolates replicate in primate (including human) lympho-
are not infected with SIV in the wild, are susceptible to
cyte cultures in stimulated cells that have a CD4 receptor.
a fatal immunosuppressive syndrome called SAIDS when
SIV isolates do not replicate in nonprimate cells. Cross-
infected by some strains of SIV.
species transmission of SIV to humans is possible and SIV
522
PART III
Viruses
has infected humans in laboratory accidents. HIV is able to
 infect chimpanzees, although it is not highly pathogenic.
sufficient to limit the initial acute phase of SIV infection.
Like most lentiviruses, however, SIV is never eliminated in
either its natural host or in Asian macaques.
Host-Virus Relationship
Distribution, Reservoir, and Transmission. SIV is carried
Laboratory Diagnosis
 as an apparently harmless infection in its natural hosts,
species of African nonhuman primates (Cercopithecus,
 SIV infection is most easily diagnosed by detecting anti
including African green monkeys, and Cercocebus, includ-
bodies in the blood. Antibody to SIV can be detected using
ing sooty mangabeys). The prevalence of infection in both 
indirect fluorescent antibody, Western blots, and ELISA
 zoos and in the wild is variable, but can be over 50%. In
tests. SIV in fection can also be diagnosed by virus isolation,
Asian macaques, in which the SIV is not found in nature,
detection of viral antigen, and PCR to detect SIV nucleic
SIV produces a fatal immunodeficiency disease that has
acid.
many features in common with AIDS.
-laa 1ood Aq ose pue Suq Aq sI Ais jo uoissisui
Treatment and Control
      
col. Mother-to-infant and sexual transmission is thought
Experimental vaccines and therapies are being evaluated
to occur rather inefficiently in nature.
as part of the current massive efforts in AIDS research and
development. To date, the more effective approaches have
Pathogenesis and Pathology. Asian macaques in the ini-
 involved the use of nef (accessory gene) deleted live viruses.
tial stages of illness tend to have hyperplastic lymphoid tis-
These have provided the bestefficacy for resisting challenge
sues, whereas lymphoid depletion characterizes later stages
with virulent viruses in adult macaques. However, use of
of the disease. The types of lesions vary greatly depending
nef deleted live viruses in juvenile macaques has resulted
on the presence of secondary infections and the stage of
in the development of some disease, likely due to the abil-
disease. SIV persists in both Asian macaques and its nat-
ity to partially restore some nef function(s). Further studies
ural hosts despite a strong humoral and cellular immune
hope to capitalize on the efficacy of these deleted live virus
response; however, fatal immunosuppression soon occurs
vaccines and minimize the potential of reversion to viru-
in infected macaques. Neutralization escape mutants arise
lence.
 and become the dominant phenotype. The kinetics of viral
infection and alteration of CD4 lymphocytes parallel those
observed in human HIV-1 infection and provide reliable
Reference
markers for disease progression.
Yamamoto JK, Sparger E, Ho EW et al. (1988) Pathogenesis
Host Response to Infection. Infected monkeys gener-
of experimentally induced feline immunodeficiency virus
ally respond with vigorous antibody responses and cell-
infection in cats. Am / Vet Res, 49, 1246.
Cransmissible
spongiform
Encephalopathies
DONGSEOB TARK AND JUERGEN A. RICHT
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TsE) is the col-
remainder of this discussion is based on the premise that
the prion is the in fectious etiology for this group of diseases.
formly fatal, degenerative, central nervous system (CNS)
TSEs generally have a limited host range. So far, human
diseases of humans and animals that share a similar pat-
TSEs have been exclusively found in humans (exclud-
tern of clinical disease, neuropathology, pathogenesis, and
ing experimental studies). They include two forms of
etiology. While human TSEs are inherited (15%), sporadic
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), Gerstmann-Straussler-
(80%), and infectious (5%), most animal TsEs are infec-
Scheinker syndrome (GsS), fatal familial insomnia, Kuru,
tious diseases that can be transmitted to susceptible hosts.
and variant CJD (vCJD), which is the exception because of
Fo1 many years the identification of the infectious cause
its relationship with bovine spongiform encephalopathy
remained elusive, but Stanley Prusiner postulated in 1982
(BSE). Some of these human TSEs (familial CJD, GSS, and
that an abnormal host protein called a prion (derived from
fatal familial insomnia) are inherited, while sporadic CJD
"proteinaceous infectious particles"; abbreviated as PrpRes,
occurs spontaneously at a rate of one per million popula-
PrpSs, PrpBsE, or PrpcwD) was the infectious agent and that
tion per year. The animal TSEs are considered to be mainly
 propagation of this protein was a post-translational event,
infectious and, with the notable exception of BsE, they
not requiring nucleic acid or genetic material. Prusiner's
have a narrow host range. The animal TsEs and their respec-
"protein-only" hypothesis suggests that an abnormal prion
tive natural hosts include scrapie in sheep and goats, BSE
protein (Prps as a misfolded scrapie form of the normal
in cattle and other species (exotic ungulate encephalopa-
prion protein) is able to induce the con version of the cellu-
thy in exotic ungulates, feline spongiform encephalopa-
lar prion protein (Prp) to the abnormal Prp$; this mech-
thy in felids, and vCJD in humans), transmissible mink
anism can explain both the heritable and infectious dis-
encephalopathy in mink, and chronic wasting disease in
ease presentations of the TsEs. Since his initial proposal,
deer, elk, and moose. While there are many similarities
a large body of research work by Prusiner and others has
shared by all TSE diseases, there are also salient differences
in the behavior of the various TSEs, most notably related to
Prusiner received the Nobel Prize for his work in 1997. The
their tissue distribution within hosts, their means of trans-
mission, and very importantly the zoonotic potential of
accepted, and a few believe that genetic material associated
 BSE. Additionally, atypical prions have been reported in
with the prion agent still may be found. Counterhypothe-
scrapie and BSE. Interestingly, atypical scrapie ("Nor98" 01
ses include: (i) the virion hypothesis, which suggests that
"Nor98-like” scrapie) cases were detected in sheep having
the infectious organism has a small central core of nucleic
classical scrapie-resistant genotypes. There have been three
acid protected and/or surrounded by protein; and (i) some
sort ofunconventional virus or bacteria that have been pro-
molecular weight or H-type; and (ii) low molecular weight
 posed as critical factors related to pathogenesis and prop-
O1 L-type BSE. Atypical BSE and scrapie agents may be spon-
agation of the TSE pathogen. Given the vast amount of
taneously occurring or genetic forms of prions.
research work supporting the prion hypothesis, and the
apparent lack of data supporting the other hypotheses, the
Scrapie Disease
Scrapie (referred to as “classical scrapie") is the prototype
Original chapter written by Drs. Barr and Zee.
of the prion diseases and is a chronic, progressive, and
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
523
524
PART III
Viruses
uniformly fatal degenerative CNs disease that occurs nat-
placenta and/or contaminated fetal/uterine fluids. There is
urally in only sheep and goats. There is no evidence to
as yet no clear evidence of true vertical transmission (either
indicate that scrapie is a zoonosis. Classical scrapie can be
 true genetic transmission or in utero transmission). Lambs
differentiated from atypical scrapie. The unusual scrapie
 appear to be more susceptible to infection than adults. Epi-
form was first detected in Norwegian sheep in 1998 and was
demiologic studies suggest that indirect transmission of
designated Nor98 scrapie. Thereafter, Nor98-like strains of
scrapie also occurs through exposure to contaminated envi-
 sCrapie or “atypical scrapie” were reported in most of the
ronments where scrapie-infected sheep have previously
European countries, as well as in North America.
been kept. For example, on a previously scrapie-infected
Scrapie is endemic and occurs throughout the world
farm in Iceland, scrapie was diagnosed in lambs about
including Europe, North America, Asia, and Africa with a
 2 years after restocking. This farm had not been disinfected
few exceptions (e.g., Australia and New Zealand). Interest-
after the culling of scrapie-infected sheep 16 years earlier.
ingly, atypical scrapie was detected in Australia and New
This means that infectious scrapie agent could persist for
Zealand. Scrapie prevalence, based on current detection
a long time in the environment. This likely occurs more
methodology, is low with less than 0.05% in endemic coun-
often where there has been previous high-density confine-
tries. Scrapie is caused by an abnormal prion protein des.
 ment of scrapie-in fected animals and especially where pre.
ignated Prps (prion protein, scrapie). Within the world's
vious lambing has taken place. One study suggests that
sheep population, there is a varying degree of susceptibil.
scrapie can be transmitted via hay mites in contaminated
ity and resistance to classical scrapie following exposure to
environments.
PrpSt. The reasons for this diversity in disease susceptibility
The clinical signs of scrapie are progressive and con-
are complex and poorly understood, although sheep breed
sist of one or more of the following CNS signs: behav-
and genotype, as well as the infecting Prps strain, likely all
 ioral changes, locomotor problems (incoordination, pare.
play some role. For scrapie and atypical scrapie, the geno-
 sis, proprioceptive limb deficits, and hypermetria), mild
type of individual sheep at codons 136, 141, 154, and 171
head or neck tremors, hyperesthesia, and pruritus, often
within the prion protein sequence is a major factor in deter-
 resulting in patchy woolloss from rubbing or biting. Behav.
 mining the degree of disease susceptibility and/or resis-
ioral changes include withdrawal from the flock, nervous-
tance. Codons 136 and 171 are critical for classical scrapie,
ness, or aggression. Classical scrapie-infected sheep also
whereas codon 141 of the PrP gene is closely related with
progressively lose body condition. A classic behavior often
susceptibility to atypical scrapie. Like all TsEs, scrapie has a
used to aid in clinical diagnosis of scrapie consists ofupward
rather long incubation period from infection to the onset of
extension of the head and neck with an accompanying
clinical signs, ranging roughly from 18 to 60 months. The
licking, nibbling motion, or teeth grinding in response
progression of clinical signs is directly correlated with the
to rubbing the sheep's rump region. However, it should
progressive accumulation and spread of Prps throughout
be emphasized that the particular clinical signs seen in
the CNS, and is accompanied by a unique pattern of degen-
any individual infected animal are highly variable. On the
erative and vacuolar lesions in the CNS that is shared by all
 contrary, the majority of the atypical scrapie cases includ.
TSEs. Many cases of atypical/Nor98 scrapie have been iden-
 ing Nor98-like scrapie have been found through an active
tified during active surveillance of culled or fallen stock and
  a r   r
stock. Generally, atypical scrapie-infected sheep showed
frequently diagnosed in sheep without neurological find-
 ataxia, poor body condition, but no pruritus or loss of wool
ings and pruritus, which is different from classic scrapie;
in most of the reported cases.
however, ataxia was reported in several cases. In the major-
ity of cases, atypical scrapie has been detected as a single
Etiologic Agent
case in herd tested. Therefore, atypical scrapie is consid-
ered to be a low-contagious or noncontagious prion disease
It is generally accepted that the etiology of scrapie is a
under natural conditions.
prion, an abnormal isoform of a normal host protein of
 Scrapie is spread by direct contact with infected sheep,
sheep called Prpst Prps is very similar in its size and shares
probably through oral infection (i.e., ingestion) of Prps . It
high homology in its amino acid sequence and similar-
is also possible that natural infection could occur infre-
ity in its biochemical and physicochemical properties to
quently through scarified mucous membranes. Scrapie
abnormal prion proteins responsible for other TSEs. Much
can be experimentally transmitted by inoculation, includ-
of the following expanded discussion of Prps (and scrapie)
ing transmission through large volume blood transfusions
 also holds true for other abnormal prions and the respec.
from infected sheep. This suggests that there is a low level
tive disease they cause. In the following discussion, the
of Prps in the blood of scrapie-infected sheep. Indeed, PrpSt
abbreviation PrpRes (referring to “resistant" PrP) is used to
was detected in leukocytes from sheep, clinically infected
 reference all abnormal prion proteins as a group, and Prpst
with scrapie using protein misfolding cyclic amplification
to reference the specific abnormal prions causing scrapie.
(PMCA). A recent study also shows that scrapie infectivity is
associated with various blood components such as periph-
Prion Origin, Structure, and Biochemistry
eral blood mononuclear cells, B cells, platelets, and plasma
cells of classical scrapie-infected sheep.
 PrpRes is derived from normal cellular proteins (*"cellular
n  s s  h
prion protein" or Prp) that are found in multiple tis-
when naive sheep or goats are exposed to infected ewes
 sues of all mammalian species. They are cell membrane.
shedding Prps at, or soon after, lambing, and this trans.
associated proteins attached via a glycosyl phosphatidyli-
mission likely results from the expulsion of Prps -infected
nositol anchor. PrpC is a 35-36 kDa protein that is
Chapter 67
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
525
especially abundant in the CNS (approximately 50 times
Host-Prion Relationship
more than in other tissues) within neurons and glial cells.
It also occurs in cells of the mononuclear phagocytic sys-
The host-prion relationships for scrapie and other TsEs are
complex, as expected with a disease caused by an infectious
tem (macrophages, dendritic cells, and follicular dendritic
agent that actually represents a conformational modifica-
cells). The precise function of PrpC is uncertain. Possible
tion of the host Prpc.
functions include aspects of copper metabolism, interac-
tions with the extracellular matrix, olfactory discrimina-
tion, and apoptosis and signal transduction. Prp does not
cause disease. PrpRes is identical in amino acid sequence
PRNP Polymorphisms
and length to PrpC of the host species, where they have
The susceptibility of sheep to scrapie following Prpst expo-
replicated and differ only in their secondary and tertiary
sure appears to be controlled by the sheep PRNP genotype,
spatial conformation from their originating Prpc. The ter
the strain of the scrapie Prps to which it is exposed, and
tiary conformational change in PrpRes is the putative basis
other poorly understood factors such as sheep breed. One
for transformation into an infectious pathogen that propa-
major factor that affects both the incubation period and
gates and spreads within host tissues to cause disease. PrpRes
the susceptibility of sheep to classical scrapie is the sheep's
has a protease-resistant core (27-30 kDa; approximately
genetic makeup at codons 136, 154, and 171 of the PrP
142 amino acids) designated PrP27-30, which has been
gene. At codon 136, valine (V) is associated with higher
found in brains from humans and animals with prion dis-
susceptibility than alanine (A). At codon 154, histidine (H)
eases. Thissmaller portion ofthe PrpRes also retains infectiv.
is lin ked with higher susceptibility than arginine (R), and at
ity. The PrpC is derived from a single copy gene in humans
codon 171, glutamine (Q) and histidine (H) are associated
and animals, the prion protein gene (PRNP or Prnp gene).
with susceptibility and arginine (R) with resistance. Of the
While the precise nature of the structural changes between
possible polymorphic combinations at these three codons,
 PrPC and PrpRes is still not determined, the central feature
only five have been found frequent in nature, including
thought to be responsible for the physicochemical and
A136 R154R171, A136R154Q171, A136H154 Q171, A136R154H171, and
infectious transformation of PrpRes is a change in the por-
V136R1s4 Qi71 . Codon 171 appears to be the most significant
tion ofthe alpha-helicaland coilstructure ofPrp to alarger
in determining sheep susceptibility or resistance, while
percentage of rigid beta-pleated sheets in PrpRe (the per-
codon 136 is next in importance and codon 154 seems
to be less of a factor. In particular the Q/Q polymorphism
the transformation to PrpRes). Once in a susceptible host,
at codon 171 is linked with a high degree of susceptibil-
the propagation of new PrpRes occurs by apost-translational
ity for classical scrapie, while Q/R and R/R polymorphisms
event that does not involve DNA or RNA, whereby existent
at codon 17l are associated with resistance to classical
host PrpC is transformed to PrpRes. Experimental evidence
scrapie. In North America, scrapie is diagnosed most com-
suggests that the PrpRe actually serves as a physical tem-
monly in sheep with the Q/Qpolymorphism at codon 171.
plate for the conversion of Prpc when the latter interacts
   a   s r piss
with the PrpRes template. The process also appears to require
Suffolk sheep with the Q/R polymorphism at codon 171,
the presence of a second species-specific host protein ("x")
and only one scrapie-positive Suffolk sheep has ever been
that binds to Prpe and facilitates the transformation to new
diagnosed with the R/R polymorphism at codon 171. Fur-
PrpRes. Once completed, the new PrpRes can then serve as a
ther data suggest that when scrapie sheep are found with
new template for further propagation of PrpRes. In the case
the Q/R polymorphism at codon 171, these sheep also are
of inherited TSEs of humans, mutations or insertions in
more likely to have the A/V polymorphism at codon 136.
the human Prnp gene are postulated to cause the resultant
In North America, the United States Department of Agri-
altered PrPC to spontaneously con vert to PrpRes, which then
culture (USDA), National Scrapie Eradication Program has
can act as a template for the conversion of Prpc
used these genetic susceptibility patterns to establish crite-
Biochemically, Prpc is labile and can be inactivated rel-
ria for removal or restricted movement of scrapie-exposed
atively easily by a variety of methods, such as enzyme
sheep. The criteria are based first on determining the PRNP
digestion and heat. In contrast, PrpRes is very resistant to
inactivation with enzymes, heat, ultraviolet light, ionizing
sheep. This helps establish information on the potential
ladiation, acids, bases, certain autoclaving procedures, for-
strain of scrapie present. Once the scrapie-infected PRNP
malin fixation, and disinfectants. Because of the high resis-
genotype pattern is known, criteria are established for
tance of PrpRe to destruction or inactivation, effective pro-
removal or restriction of remaining sheep in the flock with
cedures to inactivate PrpRes are rather limited; they include
susceptible PRNP polymorphisms, as a means for disease
steam autoclaving at 134-138 *C for a minimum of 18 min,
eradication. These criteria are lengthy and complex, but
alkaline hydrolysis, incineration, Environ LpH, and expo-
salient features include the following: If positive-scrapie
sure to 2N NaOH or 2% sodium h ypochlorite for 1 h at room
sheep are Q/Q at codon 171, all remaining Q/Q sheep in
temperature. This resistance to destruction and inactiva-
the flock are removed or under restricted movement. In
tion explains the potential longevity of PrpRes in the envi-
rare instances where scrapie is diagnosed in a Q/R sheep, it
ronment. It also allows for transmission of the TsEs even
has been found almost entirely in sheep with A/Vi36 and
through contaminated feeds that are cooked or processed,
Q/R171 polymorphisms. Therefore, if scrapie infections are
as well as transmission through the use of inadequately
detected in Q/Ri71 sheep, then all Q/Ri71 sheep, in addi-
autoclaved and contaminated surgical instruments, or via
tion to the Q/Qi71 sheep, are targeted for removal or placed
human /veterinary biologicals derived from tissues or fluids
under restricted movement. If an RR7i sheep is found to
harvested from infected animals/humans.
be positive, the whole flock will be removed.
526
PART III
Viruses
Sheep heterozygous or homozygous for VRQ or ARQ are
Scrapie Disease Pathogenesis
highly susceptible to classical scrapie. The PrP genotype of
The pathogenesis of scrapie includes the following: Prp$ is
sheep with atypical scrapie is mainly AHQ and/or AF141 RQ.
first detected in follicular dendritic cells and macrophages
phenylalanine (F) at position 141 instead of leucine (L).
Therefore, F141 and His4 alleles seem to be associated with
within the tonsils and gut-associated lymphoid tissues
(GALT; especially ileal Peyer's Patches) after oral exposure
increased susceptibility to atypical scrapie.
of genetically susceptible sheep. Prps multiplies at these
 PrP genetic polymorphisms are also documented in
 goats, although there is much less known regarding
sites and then spreads through the lymph vascular sys-
tem to peripheral lymph tissues, including the spleen, and
  sd    
numerous lymph nodes where it is detected next. Prps may
resistance of goats to scrapie.
be detected at this time in the retropharyngeallymph nodes
 and in lymph follicles of the third eyelids of sheep. PrpSc
is also found in spinal ganglia of the autonomic nervous
Prion Strains
 system, the adjacent thoracic spinal cord, and in the dorsal
 Data from various animal studies indicate thatstrains of pri
vagal nucleus of the vagus nerve within the caudal brain
 ons can exist within a single prion disease. Different strains
stem. The early CNS invasion with prions likely occurs
 of scrapie are reported. The data supporting different Prpsc
through invasion of nerve endings within the lymph folli-
strains initially came from two observations: experimental
cles of the ileum or elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract,
inoculation of different Prps isolates into susceptible hosts
and they travel through these nerves of the autonomic ner-
resulted in variable incubation times, and the brain lesions
vous system or the vagus nerve to the thoracic cord and
induced by these isolates also differed in both distribution
vagal nucleus of the brain stem, respectively. Once within 
 and severity. Additionally, biochemical Prps typing is now
the CNS, the Prpsc multiplies and spreads. The increased
available, which is based on the degree of proteinase K (PK)
PrPS production within the CNS is directly related to the
resistance, the ratios of PrpRe glycoforms and the site of
progressive development of CNS degenerative lesions and
PK cleavage. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)
the onset of clinical signs.
summarized the criteria to define TsEs in small ruminants
There is no humoral or cellular immune response to
(classical scrapie, atypical scrapie, and BsE in small rumi-
 the Prps because the protein is identical in its amino acid
nants) as presented in Table 67.1.
sequence to the host Prpe and therefore considered a self-
 The strain of prion, which seems to be enciphered in the
antigen. Thus, there is no serum antibody test to allow
conformation of Prps, imprints its conformation on the
 for antemortem detection of exposure. Lesions associated
recruited PrpC This hypothesis infers that each strain has
with scrapie or any other TSE are found only within the
a unique tertiary structure, but also suggests that the effect
CNS (aside from secondary lesions such as hair loss). These
each strain has on a host is dependent to some degree on
lesions are bilateral in distribution and mainly associated
the Prp amino acid sequence of the host, which is dictated
with the gray matter areas. They consist of three basic
by the host genome, and which takes part in determining
changes: (i) spongiform change, which refers to vacuo-
the final conformational structure of the PrpRes.
lation within the neuropil of gray matter that represents
Table 67.1.
Classification of TSEs in Small Ruminants According to EFSA
Experimental Methods
TSE Type
"Stringent" Western Blot
"Mild Proteinase K" Western Blot
 Immunohistochemistry and Histopathology
Classical scrapie
ThreePrpRes bands range of16-30 kDa)
 Same as left 
Vacuolation in gray matter andor
reacting with both N-terminal and 
 immunolabeling in the medulla involving the
core-specific antibodies 
DMNVa
 Atypical 
 Negative or different band patten (range
 Multiple PrpRes band pattern 
Immunostaining in the cerebellum is greater than 
scrapie/Nor98
of 10-35 kDa) from other TSEs
 including an unglycosylated band 
 in the brain stem
at <15 kDa
 DMNV at the level of the obex is not staining
Distribution of Prpsc deposition restrictively in the
 cerebellum, substantia nigra, thalamus, and 
basal nuclei
 BSE in small 
 Three PrpRes bands reacting with
Same as left 
Vacuolation in grey matter and/or
ruminants
 core-specific antibodies but not or 
 immunolabeling in the medulla involving the 
weak reacting with 
DMNV.
 anti-N-terminus-specific antibodies 
Molecular massof unglycosylated Prpes
band lower than that of classical
scrapie
Adapted from the ESA Opinion on Atypical TSEs in Small Ruminants.
? DMNv, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus.
Chapter 67
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
527
intracytoplasmic vacuolation of nerve processes; (ii) neu
2. The strain of prion: As mentioned previously, this is
ronal degeneration/loss, which includes intracytoplasmic
enciphered in the conformation of the PrpRes
vacuolation of neurons, shrun ken, dark, angular neurons,
3.
As a side note, evidence now suggests that the pro-
rare necrotic neurons, and neuronal loss; and (ii) astro.
cess of experimentally adapting the candidate PrpRes
     n  si
across the species barrier in most cases creates mod-
within the gray matter (see Chapter 72). The lesions occur
ifications of the original PrpRes, and thus essentially
first in the caudal brain stem and progress from there to
Creates a new strain of PrpRes.
other regions of the brain stem, cerebellum, and cerebral
cortex. Prps can be illustrated even prior to detection of
Subclinical Carriers of Infection
CNS lesions by the use of immunohistochemistry (IHC).
The Prps deposits around and within neurons and glial
There is some experimental evidence to suggest that, under
cells within the neuropil. In atypical/Nor98-like scrapie,
certain circumstances, and with PrpRes from certain TSEs,
the Prpse detection sites mainly include the cerebellum,
 PrpRes infections can result in subclinical carriers that do
substantia nigra, thalamus, and basal nuclei but exclude
not develop disease. In addition, it may be very difficult to
the brain stem and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus
detect the PrpRes in these carriers except by bioassay. As an
(DMNV) at the level of the obex, which are primary target
example, experimental infection across the species barri-
sites for the diagnosis of classical scrapie. There is also no
obvious vacuolation in brain stem neuroanatomical sites
that rodent species. In such instan ces following initial inoc-
that are generally affected in classical scrapie. Recent stud-
ulation ofthe resistant host, the PrpRes may not be detected,
ies in pregnant scrapie-infected sheep indicate that fetal
and the host may live its entire life without contracting
genetic susceptibility plays a major role regarding both
a TSE. However, when brain material from such a host
maternal transmission of infection to the fetus and the
is subsequently serially passed through the same species,
potential spread of scrapie within a flock. The results indi-
a TSE disease may evenitually result as the cross-species
cate that in utero fetal infection does not occur in infected
barrier adaptation results. Recently, it was demonstrated
ewes. However, the fetal membranes can become infected
that lymphoid tissue was more permissive than brain in
with Prps during gestation, serving as a source forshedding
cross-species transmissions using transgenic mice, indicat-
of Prps into the environment both at and for some time
ing that lymphoid tissue could harbor prions that do not
 after lambing. Whether the placenta becomes infected is
replicate in the CNS.
controlled by the PrP genotype of the fetus. As an example,
Prpsc was found in the placenta of infected ewes when the
Laboratory Diagnosis
fetal genotype was QQ at codon 171 but was not detected
in the placenta if the fetus was a resistant QR genotype
Several diagnostic tests for prion disease have been devel-
at codon 171. At lambing, placental Prps is a high-risk
oped for specific detection of PrpRes in tissues. These tests
source for infection, and very young lambs with suscepti-
 rely on the use of polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies to
ble genetic polymorphisms are at the highest risk for in fec-
the PrP protein. Since these antibodies cannot differenti-
tion. The reason for this increased susceptibility of young
ate between PrpC and PrpRes, the test methodologies utilize
animals is unknown, but it is theorized that the more devel-
the biochemical differences between PrPC and PrpRes to first
oped GALT in young animals (which atrophies in older
destroy PrpC using digestion or denaturing procedures (i.e.,
 animals) may be responsible for this.
proteinase K or formic acid treatment, and/or denaturation
by autoclaving), leaving only PrpRe with its intactantigenic
Cross-species Barriers
epitopes. This group of tests, which includes IHC, West-
ern blot (WB), and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
For most TsEs, the susceptible host species range is rather
(ELISA) methodologies, has been utilized successfully for
limited. The barrier limiting cross-species transmission
detection of PrpRes in a variety of TSE diseases. It should be
is termed the cross-species barrier. Experimentally, these
noted that atypical scrapie Prps is more sensitive to pro-
cross-species barriers can often be overcome, albeit with
teinase K than classical scrapie, and OlE therefore recom-
some difficulty. The factors used to promote transmission
mends to use a reduced concentration of the proteinase
across these barriers are direct intracerebral inoculation
K enzyme in order to detect atypical scrapie by the WB
 of the candidate PrpRes into a different host species and
method. Furthermore, the selection of the brain region
multiple serial passages of infected CNS tissue through the
used in the confirmatory test is critical to detect atypi-
cal scrapie because brain stems might be negative in the
understood and probably very complex, but contributing
majority of atypical/Nor98 scrapie cases; however, atypical
factors known to affect the species barrier include the
scrapie has been detected in the obex of some animals.
following:
 Prpsc can be detected antemortem by IHC in the third
eyelid or in rectal biopsies. The biopsy consists of a small
1.
The degree of homology in the Prpc amino acid
 aggregate of the lymphoid follicles that can be visualized
sequence of the donor and recipient: The geneti-
and excised on the inner surface of the third eyelid. A neg-
cally determined host Prp amino acid sequence is
ative test result does not completely ensure that the animal
important as it is thought to have a direct effect on
is scrapie free for the following reasons: the animal may be
the ability of PrpC to refold in a manner that mimics
in the early incubation stages of infection, or represent one
the PrpRes tertiary conformation.
of the small percentage of clinically affected sheep where
528
PART III
Viruses
Prps is not present/detected in lymph tissue prior to CNS
Within an individual flock, determination of the flock
infection; or there may not be sufficient lymphoid tissue
status and strict limitations on the addition of new ani-
present (this seems to occur more in very aged animals and
mals are the best means for prevention and control. Ini-
possibly in some sheep breeds more than others).
tial determination of the flock status can best be obtained
 PMCA is a new method that can exponentially amplify
through the Scrapie Flock Certification Program. Main-
PrPSt in vitro using normal cellular host PrP (Prp) or recom-
tenance of a disease-free flock is achieved by maintaining
binant prion protein (rPrp) as the amplification substrate.
a closed flock, particularly a closed ewe flock. If new intro-
The principle of PMCA is similar to the polymerase chain
ductions are to be made, care should be taken to ensure
reaction, which is used to amplify DNA, but it uses PrPC
that new additions come from flocks with disease-free sta-
 O1 IPrpC instead of dNTPs, primers, and Taq polymerase.
tus as can best be determined (often difficult). Third eye-
PMCA consists of alternating steps of incubation at 37 *C
lid testing of animals over 14 months of age can be con-
and sonication. The incubation step allows the conversion
sidered in making this assessment but is not foolproof.
of PrPC into Prps and produces de novo PrPs resulting in
Genotype testing to select for new additions with resistant
expansion of Prpst in the presence ofexcess Prpc . The newly
genotypes is also useful, although research has not elim-
aggregated Prps is dissociated into smaller units during the
inated the possibility of a resistant genotype carrier ani-
subsequent sonication step. The incubation and sonication
 mal. The feeding of ruminant meat and bonemeal to rumi-
steps are repeated, and the quantity of de novo formed Prpst
depends on the number of PMCA cycles (incubation and
States.
sonication) carried out. The PMCA technique is now auto-
mated and optimized, and it has been shown that serial
PMCA is able to detect Prps in blood of scrapie-infected
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy Disease
hamsters; similar data were obtained in sheep with preclin.
ical and clinical scrapie infection. Another rapid ultrasen-
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or "mad cow dis-
sitive prion detection test is the quaking-induced conver-
ease") is a chronic, progressive, and uniformly fatal degen-
sion (QulC) reaction test, which enables amplification of
erative CNs disease that occurs naturally in cattle, exotic
prion-seeded amyloid fibrils through alternate incubation
ungulates, and domestic and exotic felids, and is the likely
and shaking (instead of sonication in PMCA). PMCA and
cause of vCJD, a rather newly recognized TSE in humans.
QulC are able to detect subfemtogram levels of Prps in cere-
BSE emerged as a newly recognized TSE in England in 1986.
bral spinal fluid (CsF), brain homogenate, and blood from
The incidence of BsE in cattle rapidly increased, largely in 
scrapie-infected animals. PMCA and QulC technology may
dairy cattle throughout the United Kingdom over the next
be useful future diagnostic tools for ante- and post-mortem
few years. Shortly thereafter, additional new TSE diseases
diagnosis of prion diseases.
were then recognized in both captive exotic ungulates and
The postmortem diagnosis in clinically affected animals
felids from zoos in England, and also in domestic cats in
is often made by histopathologic evaluation of the brain
the United Kingdom. Experimental studies and character-
(see Chapter 72). The extent of the lesions, and there-
ization of the PrpRes from this latter group of prion dis-
fore the accuracy in diagnosis through routine histology, is
eases established that PrpRsE was the cause, indicating that
directly related to the severity of the clinical disease at the
BSE, unlike other TSEs, had an unusually wide suscepti-
time of death.
ble host range. Significantly, vCJD also emerged in a small
number of young human patients in England at the same
Treatment and Control
time. Unlike sporadic CJD, vCJD occurs in humans at a
There is no treatment available for scrapie, so the disease
much younger age and has a different time course, elec-
is handled by prevention, control, or eradication. In North
troencephalogram (EEG) pattern, and pattern of clinical
CNS signs. Sheep, pigs, primates (macaques), marmosets,
America, there is a federally regulated program to eradicate
the disease, which includes the following:
lemurs, and mice are experimentally susceptible to BSE
infection, although natural occurrence of disease has not
1.
AScrapie Flock Certification Program monitors flock
been described in these species, except that BsE-like cases in
disease status over an extended period with the goal
goats have been confirmed or suspected recently. Sheep are
 of assigning status to flocks with no evidence of
susceptible experimentally to oral inoculation with BSE,
scrapie. The program has requirements for individ-
which raises substantial concerns as to how it would be
ual animal identification, record keeping, reporting,
differentiated from scrapie. Because of the association with
and restrictions on flock additions to ensure scrapie
vCJD, BSE is considered a major threat to public health,
is not introduced into flocks free from detectable
which is the basis for national eradication programs in all
scrapie.
countries where it exists, and extensive national surveil-
2. The eradication of scrapie is sought through dis-
 lance and prevention programs in countries where the dis-
ease surveillance, and diagnosis, identification of
ease does not.
infected/exposed flocks, elimination of positive 01
 Following the widespread detection of BSE in the United
susceptible/exposed animals, and monitoring of
Kingdom, cases of BsE occurred in other countries through
sheep movement to control potential spread of
the export of infected meat and bone meal (MBM), infected 
scrapie and to allow for successful trace-back from
 live animals, and possibly other infected animal products.
positively diagnosed animals to their flocks of
As of November 2011, a total of 25 countries (OlE data)
origin.
had reported cases of BsE. These include several countries
Chapter 67
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
529
in Europe, as well as Japan, Israel, the United States, and
tled, and depression), hyperesthesia, hyperreflexia, muscle
Canada.
fasciculations, tremors, myoclonus, ataxia, hypermetria,
Epidemiologic analyses strongly suggest that the pri-
pruritus, and autonomic dysfunctions (reduced rumina-
mary mode of natural BSE transmission is through the
tion and bradycardia).
ingestion of contaminated MBM-containing infected offal.
Horizontal transmission from animal to animal does not
Etiologic Agent
    ta h n n 
susceptible to infection than adults, and there is an
 BSE is caused by the PrpBSE prion with physicochemical
increased risk for BSE among calves born from BSE-affected
properties common to all abnormal prions. The differ-
cows, suggesting a low level of maternally associated trans-
  s   n  n sd 
mission. However, the mechanism responsible for this
biochemically differentiated by the degree of glycosyla-
increased calf risk is unknown (i.e., what role does direct
tion and the molecular mass of the PrpRes fragments in
 cow-to-calf maternal infection vs. genetic predisposition
WB analysis. In recent years, atypical forms of BsE have
vs. feed -borne exposure play?). There is no strong evidence
 been reported in European countries, North America, and
to suggest transmission from a contaminated environ-
Japan. There are two atypical BSEs, called L-type and H-
ment, although the occurrence of a small number of new
type, which can be biochemically differentiated from clas-
BSE cases in the United Kingdom following the enforced
sical BSE. The L-type BSE is characterized by a slightly lower
animal protein feed ban in animals born after August 1,
molecular mass of unglycosylated PrpRes compared to clas-
1996, is disconcerting.
sical BSE, whereas the H-type BSE shows a slightly higher
The initial source of the in fected material responsible for
molecular mass of unglycosylated PrpRes when compared
the emergence of BSE in the United Kingdom may never be
to classical BSE. The majority of atypical BSEs have been
known. Three theories have been offered to explain the
detected through active national surveillance of slaugh-
emergence of BSE: (i) BSE arose from the feeding of MBM
tered animals (e.g., healthy, sick, emergency slaughter,
containing sheep offal contaminated with scrapie to cattle;
downer, and fallen cattle as recommended by the OIE
(i) BSE arose from a single spontaneous or genetic case of
guidelines). In general, these atypical BSEs do not have
BSE in a cow that was then rendered and fed as contami-
distinct clinical signs as described for classical BsE. Impor-
nated MBM to other cattle; or (ii) BSE arose from animal
tantly, about 85% of atypical BSE cases were reported in
feed imported from the Indian subcontinent and contam-
cattle more than 10 years of age. In active surveillanice for
inated with human remains suffering from human prion
BSE in France during 2001-2007, the estimated incidence
diseases. Epidemiologic evidence suggests that a change in
the rendering process in England in the late 1970s may
million adult cattle tested, but 1.9 and 1.7 in cattle more
have allowed for increased survival of PrpRes, regardless
than 8 years of age, respectively. This frequency is similar
of the source (offal from infected sheep, bovine, or other
to that of sporadic CJD, which is about 1 case per million
species), increasing exposure of cattle to this PrpRes. Epi-
inhabitants per year. On the basis of these results, the origin 
demiologic data supporting scrapie as the initial source for
of atypical BSE cases is unknown, but they may represent
BSE include the following: the sheep population increased
spontaneously occurring TsE forms.
significantly in the 1980s, when BSE likely emerged, pos-
Another study on atypical BSE cases revealed an E211K
sibly increasing the prevalence of endemic scrapie in the
(glutamicacid, E tolysine, K) polymorphism atposition 211
United Kingdom; and MBM was a cheap feed source listed
within the bovine PRNP in an animal with H-type BSE; the
for dairy calf starter feeds. However, it is difficult to explain
E211K bovine germline polymorphism is similar to E200K
by these point source theories (whether it arose initially
of humans, which is a known pathological mutation in
from scrapie-infected sheep or a BSE-infected cow) how
humans with a high incidence of inherited CJD.
BSE simultaneously emerged at multiple sites in the United
So far, there are no detectable differences in age sus-
Kingdom, unless this single source was widely distributed.
ceptibility or incubation periods reported for various cattle
 Once BsE infections were established in the cattle popu-
breeds. PrprsE has not been found in sheep and only in
lation, transmission could be easily amplified by repeated
goats, although the potential risk of BSE-infected sheep is
Iecycling of BSE-infected bovine tissue into MBM fed to cat-
recognized.
tle. BSE soon reached epidemic proportions in the United
Kingdom. The epidemic peaked in 1992-1993 with 37 280
 cases diagnosed in 1992. Disease eradication and preven-
Host-Prion Relationship
tion programs that were established (see Section "Treat-
While polymorphisms in the PrP gene of cattle have been
ment and Control," below) have been successful in greatly
rarely identifed, so far there is no evidence suggesting
reducing the numbers of cases. Transmission of BSE to felids
these polymorphisms have a significant effect on disease
and exotic ungulates is thought to have occurred through
susceptibility except for the E211K polymorphism. How-
feeding ofinfected animalprotein, and although the source
ever, it has been reported that two 23- and 12-bp inser-
for vCjD (human) is unclear, ingestion of contaminated
tion/deletion polymorphisms of the putative promoter
bovine products is considered the most likely source.
 region and intron 1 within bovine Prnp are associated with
BSE has a long incubation period with a mean incuba
BSE susceptibility in cattle because these regions modulate
tion period of 4-5 years. Clinical signs include a loss of con-
Prnp expression levels. Unlike scrapie, PrpsE is not readily
dition or weight loss, coupled with one more CNS signs that
detected in lymphoid tissues prior to the onset of CNS infec-
include behavioral changes (apprehension, fear, easily star-
tivity and clinical disease. PrpBsE has been detected only in
530
PART III
Viruses
the CNS (brain and spinal cord), peripheral nervous system,
depending on safety guidelines or regulations of different
and retina of naturally infected cattle. Experimental stud-
countries. While these measures resulted in a significant
ies indicate that it does track through lymph tissues, but it
reduction in new cases, evidence suggested that new feed-
is detected inconsistently and in relatively small amounts
borne cases continued in animals, and in March 1996, the
as compared to scrapie. The following is a brief summary of
feed ban was extended to a total ban on the use of mam-
experimental studies in cattle.
malian proteins in feed produced for any farm animals.
Following oral inoculation (
of cattle, PrpRSE is first
 BSE-like cases have been recently reported in goats. The
detected in lymphoid follicles of the distal ileum at 6
pathogenesis of BsE in small ruminants is distinct from
months postinoculation (Pl). It can occasionally be found
bovine BSE. Experimentally, BSE infectivity on sheep is
in the ileum at later Pl dates. It has also been detected in
detected in nervous and also in various lymphoreticular
the tonsil between 6 and 14 months Pl. It is first detected
tissues, the latter in contrast to bovine BSE. Therefore, it
in the CNS and dorsal root ganglia at 32 months Pl, fol-
is necessary to improve surveillance of small ruminants to
 lowed by trigeminal ganglia at 36 months P1. PrpBsE has not
 prevent the BsE-like agent from entering the human food
been detected in retropharyngeal, mesenteric, 0r popliteal
chain through food products of small ruminants.
lymph nodes of naturally infected cattle. Within the CNS,
it progressively accumulates and is associated with degen-
erative CNS lesions that are generally similar to other TSEs.
Chronic Wasting Disease
As with other TsEs, there is no immunologic response to
the PrpBsE by the host.
Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) is a fatal, chronic, pro-
gressive, degenerative CNS disease of mule deer (Odocoileus
hemionus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), moose
Laboratory Diagnosis
(Alces alces shirasi), and elk (Cervus elaphus nelsoni) found
 There is noantemortem testcurrently available for the diag-
primarily in North America. There are no reported human
nosis of BsE. Postmortem diagnostic tests on the brain are
TSE cases associated with CWD. CWD was first diagnosed
 available that are similar to those for scrapie (IHC, ELISA,
in mule deerin 1967 and identified in 1978as a TSE through
and WB tests on CNS specifically obex, not lymphoid tis-
the examination of brains of affected deer by Dr Elizabeth
sue). These tests are used in BSE-infected countries as part
Williams. The disease was subsequently recognized as an
 of their national surveillance and eradication programs.
endemic disease in deer and elkin an area thatencompassed 
Routine histopathology of the brain of clinically affected
portions of Colorado, Wyoming, and Nebraska. The range
animals will show lesions compatible with BsE, but con-
and incidence of the disease began to increase after 1990.
firmation of the diagnosis requires confirmatory testing by
The reasons for this sudden spread are not clear, but both
IHC or WB. In the United States, a national surveillance
unique features of the disease and the husbandry of captive
program for BSE is conducted by the Animal Plant Health
cervids likely contributed. CWD can spread horizontally
Inspection Service (APHIS) of the USDA. Targeted surveil-
via direct contact transmission, in distinct contrast to BSE
lance samples include field cases of cattle exhibiting neuro-
where contact transmission does not appear to occur. The
logic disease, cattle condemned at slaughter for neurologic
 horizontal transmission of CWD appears to be very effi-
reasons, rabies-negative cattle submitted to public health
cient. Infectious CWD agents have been detected in saliva,
laboratories, neurologic cases submitted to veterinary diag-
blood, urine, velvet, and feces. These findings suggest that
nostic laboratories and teaching hospitals, cattle that are
environmental contamination with infectious body flu-
"nonambulatory" ("downers"), and cattle dying on farms.
ids such as saliva, urine, or feces plays an important role
 in horizontal transmission of CWD in both free-ranging
and captive herds. Modeling studies suggest that horizontal
Treatment and Control
transmission through shedding of PrpcwD probably begins
There is no treatment for BSE. Countries with confirmed
even before the onset of clinical signs in infected cervids.
 BSE cases are attempting to eradicateit, and coun tries where
CWD spreads from infected to uninfected cervids when
it is not present institute preventative/surveillance pro-
comingled in confined surroundings. In addition to direct
 grams to prevent its occurrence. In the United Kingdom,
contact transmission, indirect transmission from contam-
 inated pastures or paddocks occurs, and this indirect trans.
ernment to stop the food-borne transmission of BsE. These
 mission appears to be more efficient than is reported with
measures, coupled with detection, diagnosis, and eradica-
scrapie. This relative ease of both direct and indirect con-
tion programs, have proven to be very successful in stem-
tact transmissions likely explains the very high prevalence
ming the epidemic and drastically reducing the number
of CWD in some in fected captive herds (>90% of mule deer 
of bovine cases. The first of these measures was a ban on
over a 2-year period in one herd). The prevalence of CWD
the use of MBM in ruminant feed in July 1988. This was
in free-ranging cervids from endemic areas can also be high
followed in September 1990 by a further ban on the use of
(up to 30%).
specified bovine offal in feedstuffs of any species including
Aside from the relative ease of transmission, geograph-
humans; these were bovine tissues thought to harbor the
ical spread of the disease has most likely also been facil-
highest concentration of infectious material (also known
itated through transportation of infected deer and elk
as “specified risk material") including skull, brain, trigem-
between farms. In North America (as of March 2012),
inal ganglia, eyes, tonsils, spinal cord, dorsal root ganglia,
the disease had been detected in free-ranging deer and
and the distal ileum of the small intestine. The list may vary
elk in Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska, Wisconsin, South
Chapter 67
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies
531
Dakota, North Dakota, New Mexico, Illinois, Kansas, Mary-
amino acids located at position 96 and 225 in deer PrP and
land, Minnesota, New York, Utah, Virginia, West Vir-
132 in elk PrP are associated with susceptibility to CWD
ginia, and Saskatchewan, Canada, and in farmed cervids
infection. In free-ranging mule deer from Wyoming and
in South Dakota, Nebraska, Colorado, Oklahoma, Kansas,
Colorado, deer with an S225s (serine, S) genotype had a
Minnesota, Montana, Wisconsin, New York, Wyoming,
30 times greater probability of CWD infection than deer
Michigan, and the Canadian provinces of Alberta and
with an S225F (S/phenylalanine, F) genotype. In white-
Saskatchewan. CWD-infected free-ranging moose have
tailed deer, it was suggested that a G96S (G, glycine, and
been identified in Colorado and Wyoming. CWD has also
S, serine) polymorphism might be associated with reduced
been diagnosed in farmed cervids exported to the Republic
susceptibility to CWD, but not with resistance to CWD,
of Korea.
since CWD was detected in some G96S animals. Elk PrP
 Maternal transmission may occur, but there is no direct
is polymorphic at codon 132 (methionine, M/leucine, L),
evidence so far. In the wild, it is possible that transmission
might also occur from decay of CWD-infected carcasses,
codon 129 (M/valine, V). The codon 129 polymorphism
with release of the PrpcwD into the environment. Experi-
in humans is related with susceptibility to CJD including
mental CWD infections have been documented in cattle,
vCJD. In transgenic mice and elk experiments, L 132 poly-
sheep, and goats, but only following intracerebral inoc-
morphism seems to be associated with less susceptibility to
ulation. There appears to be a substantial species barrier
CWD when compared to M132.
between these host species and infection with PrpcwD. Nat-
ural transmission from deer or elk to these species has not
sues throughout the body of infected deer and elk, and the
been documented. There is no evidence of experimental
pathogenesis of tissue distribution shares many similarities
transmission to cattle by either direct contact or oral inoc-
to scrapie.Following oral exposure, PrpcWD is detected frst
 ulation more than 5 years following exposure.
 in lymphoid tissues (GALT and the retropharyngeallymph 
Based on examination of natural cases, CWD is thought
node) prior to detection in the brain. Experimentally, it
to have a minimum incubation period of 16-17 months,
has been found in the Peyer's patches of the ileum, ileoce-
cal lymph node, tonsil, and retropharyngeal lymph node
either scrapie or BSE. The clinical signs in deer or elk with 
by 42 days after infection. It is first detected in the brain
CWD include loss of body condition and one or more ofthe
within the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve located in the
following CNS abnormalities: behavioral changes (changes
caudal brain stem (obex), similar to scrapie. In one study,
in interactions with handlers, walking patterns, depres-
PrpCWD was first detected in the obex 3 months following
sion, and lowered head and ears), polydipsia, polyuria,
first detection in the GALT. Lesions specific for CWD are
increased salivation or drooling, incoordination, ataxia,
confined to the CNS and are similar in overall nature to
head tremors, wide-based stance, and hyperexcitability.
other TSEs.
However, because clinical signs may not be observed in free-
ranging deer, the salient findings at necropsy may include
Laboratory Diagnosis
possibly due to dysphagia, hypersalivation, o1 difficulties
in swallowing.
There is no validated antemortem diagnostic test for
CWD. Severalpotential antemortem diagnostic techniques
 have been developed for surveillance and managing of
Etiology
CWD such as tonsil and rectal biopsies. Tonsil biopsy
 CWD is caused by the PrpcwD prion, which has physic-
has been evaluated to detect preclinical CWD in deer,
ochemical properties similar to other abnormal prions.
but this technique is not easy to apply in the field.
Recently, another antemortem diagnostic test using rec-
toanal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue has been evalu-
 Or cross-species adaptation from scrapie-infected sheep or
ated in captive elk during clinical as well as preclinicalstage.
contaminated feedstuff. Several reports suggested the pos-
This method could detect subclinically CWD-infected elk,
sible existence of different CWD strains similar to sheep
a diagnosis confirmed by postmortem tests.
scrapie. When ferrets were inoculated with two CWD iso-
Postmortem diagnostic tests available are similar to
lates, the results showed different strain-like features such
those used for scrapie and BsE, and some of the mono-
as different clinical courses, survival times, pathological
clonal antibodies used for detection of scrapie or BSE in
lesions, and biochemical properties. In addition, two dis-
the United States are also utilized for detection of PrpCWD
tinct CWD strains were identified in CWD-infected mate-
(Figure 67.1). PMCA has been developed to amplify and
rial using cervidized transgenic mice. These two CWD
detect low concentrations of PrpRes from CWD-infected tis-
strains have different incubation times and neuropatho-
sue and body fluids. This highly sensitive method might
logical profiles, although they show simila1 biochemical
have a good chance to detect asymptomatic animals in
properties.
early stages of prion infection. A presumptive diagnosis
can also be made based on routine histopathology in clini-
Host-Prion Relationship
cally affected animals if sufficient CNS lesion development
has occurred. Confirmation of the diagnosis through addi-
There are species-specific polymorphisms that affect sus-
tional tests as described for scrapie and BsE confirms the
ceptibility to CWD infection. It has been shown that the
diagnosis.
532
PART III
Viruses
ities, there is “concern" to risk of reinfection following
FIGURE 67.1.
Obex from white-tailed deer (O.
placement of new uninfected stock due to possible envi-
virginianus)—the entire DMNV is bright red with minimal
ronmental contamination. There are also concerns for
spoilloverinto theadjacentneurological tissue.HCforPrpWD
 spread from infected farmed to adjacent free-ranging pop-
demonstrates the presence of the pathogenic prion in the
ulations across fence lines or, con versely, from endemic-
brain. (Courtesy of Dr Mark Hall and Dr Aaron Lehmkuhi at
the USDA APHis Nationa! Veterinary Services Laboratory.
free populations to farmed facilities. An active, efficient
Ames, fowa, USA.)
surveillance program is therefore recommended in farmed
facilities, not only to identify and remove infected ani-
mals but also to prevent movement of infected animals to
other farmed facilities. Management of free-ranging pop-
ulations is even more problematic. Current management
involves active surveillance to determine prevalence, cou-
 pled with reduction of prevalence through targeted culling
in endemic areas. Human-facilitated relocation, or feed-
ing of free-ranging cervids, is banned in endemic areas.
Selective culling of clinical animals by itself has not signif-
icantly affected prevalence in endemic areas. A program of
localized population reduction in Colorado has been insti-
tuted, but the effectiveness of this program has yet to be
determined. It is thought that an aggressive program of
 selective culling or general population reduction may be
effective in regions where new cases of free-ranging infec-
tion are detected early, and prior to the establishment of
endemic infections in populations. The potential for trans-
port of hunter-killed infected carcasses to uninfected areas
and subsequent contamination of these new environments
Treatment and Control
via discarded infected offalalso represents a significant con-
 cern for potential spread of CWD to new regions. There is
There is no treatment for CWD. Efforts to control or erad-
 a USDA program currently in place to eradicate CWD from
icate CWD are complicated because of the long incuba-
farmed elk operations in the United States.
tion period, the resistance of the etiologic agent to dis-
infection procedures, the absence of reliable antemortem
diagnostic tests, and the various potential routes of trans-
 Further Reading
 mission including animal-to-animal contact and en viron-
mental contamination. Quarantine and depopulation of
Hornlimann B, Riesner, D, and Kretzschmar, H (2007) Prions
affected herds are primary means for control in farmed
in Humans and Animals, Walter De Gruyter
 facilities. Even with depopulation of infected farmed facil-
Tatzelt, J (2011) Prion Proteins, Springer Publications.
PART IV
ClinicalApplications
68
Circulatorv
svstem and
Lymphoid Tissues
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The circulatory system includes the blood vascular and
following in fectious processes that result in myocardial cell
lymphatic systems. The blood vascula1 system is composed
death. Such injury leads to scar formation. Injuries to small
of the heart, arteries, capillaries, veins, and components
vessels that destroy endothelial cells can result in thrombus
of blood itself. Infections involving the pericardial sac,
formation in those vessels. Unaffected vascular endothelial
which encloses the heart, are also included in this chap-
cells at the periphery of the lesion are able to proliferate and
ter. The lymphatic system includes lymphatic capillaries,
reendothelialize those areas that affected vessels supplied.
afferent lymphatic vessels that drain interstitial fluid and
The lymphoid tissue plays a major role in defense of the
cells from tissues, lymph nodes, and efferent lymphatics
body from infection. It is central to the development of the
that recirculate lymph and cells (primarily lymphocytes)
animal's immune system (primary lymphoid tissues) and
from lymph nodes to the blood vascular system. Because
plays an ongoing role in immune surveillance and defense.
of the functional association with and cellular trafficking
Details on mechanisms of immune defense provided by
through the circulatory system, infections involving other
lymphoid tissues are covered in Chapter 2. Because of the
lymphoid tissues (spleen, bone marrow, and thymus) are
surveillance role it plays, lymphoid tissue is exposed to
included in this chapter. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tis-
numerous potentially pathogenic microbes, which if not
sues, although less organized, are included with other lym-
contained may involve the lymphoid tissue in the disease
phoid tissues. The role of mucosa-associated lymphoid tis.
process or cause a systemic infection.
sues in immune surveillance and as potential entry sites for
some pathogens into the host is specifically discussed in
those chapters on systems where they are found or chap-
Transient and Persistent Microbes
ters covering specific agents involved.
While functionally similar, there are anatomic differ-
As a rule, the circulatory system and lymphoid tissues are
ences in the organization of lymphoid tissues of animals
not recognized to have a normal microbial flora. Transient
and birds. Birds possess a bursa of Fabricius, a lymphoep-
bacteremias do occur, often as a result of traumatic or inva-
ithelial organ, which is dorsal to and communicates with
sive events (e.g., dental extractions, endoscopic procedures
the cloaca. It is a primary lymphoid organ serving as the
of the digestive tract, and urethral catheterization) or sub-
main site of B lymphocyte differentiation. For the most
sequent to treatments that compromise mucosal barriers
part, poultry do not have lymph nodes but rather rely on
(e.g, chemotherapy and radiation therapy). This allows
cecal tonsils, Peyer's patches, and Meckel's diverticulum
normal mucosal inhabitants to enter the bloodstream.
in the intestines; lymphoid follicles in various organs; the
Chronic conditions, such as severe gingival disease, that
spleen; and a special paranasal concentration of lymphoid
compromise the normal host barriers may alsolead to spon-
tissue (Harderian gland) for secondary immune functions.
taneous bacteremia. In some instances, no predisposing
eventor condition is recognized to account for a bacteremic
episode. The resulting bacteremia is usually transient, last-
Antimicrobial Properties
ing only a short period of time (<30 min) before removal
by phagocytes in the liver and spleen.
Phagocytic cells in the spleen and liver provide the pri
Not all microorganisms appear to be removed that
mary defense for the vascular system by removing potential
rapidly and may persist in the vascular system for longer
pathogens from circulation. Depending on the location in
 periods. For example, a persistent but subclinical bacte-
the vascular system and severity of injury caused directly
remia with Bartonella spp. occurs in some cats. Bacteremias
by an infectious agent or its toxin or as a result of the sub-
n s   n    s 
  n    n
tions of the circulatory system (e.g., infectious endocarditis
is variable. Cardiac muscle has little regenerative capability
and bacterial sepsis).
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
535
536
PART IV
 Clinical Applications
 Microscopic and molecular-based studies suggest that
circulatory system and/or lymphoid tissues, many of these
the bloodstream may in fact be colonized with specific
agents also cause systemic, nonspecific signs that include
microbes rather than just being periodically exposed to
fever, anorexia, depression, prostration, and weight loss.
organisms through transient bacteremias, and that these
Some infections of the blood vascular system present as
"residents" persist in the blood in a benign fashion. How-
ever, evidence that a true normal microbial flora of the
(e.g., anthrax and blackleg). Some of the most common
bloodstream exists remains to be conclusively demon-
and/or important infectious agents affecting the circula-
strated.
tory system and lymphoid tissues of domestic animals and
Some viruses, particularly retroviruses, persistently
poultry are listed in Tables 68.1, 68.2, 68.3, 68.4, 68.5,
infect cells in the lymphoid tissue and blood for the life
68.6, and 68.7. Specific chapters on each of these pathogens
of the animal.
should be referred to for more details on pathogenesis, spec-
 trum of clinical signs, and the diseases they cause.
Infections
Bacterial Sepsis
Access of microbial pathogens to the circulatory system
 occurs through a number of mechanisms, including direct
 Bacterial sepsis and septic shock are characterized by vas-
inoculation into the blood (e.g., insect bites, contaminated 
cular collapse and multiorgan failure. In addition to the
needles, and blood transfusions) or by spread from initial
signs specifically related to altered organ perfusion, clini-
site of infection via the vascular system or the lymphatics
cal signs of sepsis include fever, tachypnea, and hypother-
draining that site.
mia. The most common agents involved in sepsis are
Microbial agents that enter via the lymphatic system
gram-negative bacteria belonging to the family Enterobac-
may be eliminated or, at least, arrested at regional lymph
teriaceae, although other gram-negative pathogens (e.g.,
nodes, or, if they avoid containment at the lymph nodes,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, members of the family Pasteurel-
they spread to the bloodstream and can disseminate to
laceae) and gram-positive cocci (e.g., staphylococci and
other sites in the body. The circulatory system, therefore,
streptococci) also cause sepsis and septic shock. Sepsis fre-
provides a means for delivery of many microbial agents
quently occurs in neonates, and is especially important
from their site of entry to their ultimate target organ(s) in
in production animals, horses, and poultry. In veterinary
the body. Depending on the agent involved, the circula-
me-dicine, the increasing level of intensive care-afforded
tory system itself may or may not be affected. For many
animals with debilitating conditions has increased the risk
viral infections, a viremia is the primary means of dissemi-
for acquiring nosocomial infections and thus the potential
nation in the host but is often a clinically inapparent event.
for bacterial sepsis to develop in those patients.
Similarly, some bacteria and fungi in animals reach their
Central to the development of septic
shock is
    s    
lipopolysaccharide in gram-negative organisms or other
tem without obvious or major clinical signs of circulatory
major cell wall components in gram-positive organ-
system involvement.
isms (e.g., peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid). These
The focus of this chapter is on infections in which the
pathogen-associated molecules bind to receptor signal-
circulatory system and/or lymphoid tissues are one of the
ing complexes on monocytes and macrophages. Toli-like
 primary sites affected in the infectious process. In addition 
 receptors, transmembrane signal transducing coreceptors,
to specific lesions or clinical signs directly related to the
play a central role in this process. Exposure of cells to
Table 68.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphaid Tissues of Dogs
Agent
Disease
 Circulatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
Canine adenovirus 1
 Infectious canine hepatitis 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, oral petechial hemorrhages, lymphadenopathy
 Canine distemper virus
 Canine distemper
Leukopenia, myocarditis in neonates 
 Canine herpesvirus 1
Canine herpesvirus disease
Generalized ecchymotic hemorrhages in neonatal puppies, lymphoid necrosis
Canine parvovirus
Canine parvovirus disease
Leukopenia, lymphoid necrosis, myocarditis
Bacteria
Bartonella? spp.
 Infectious valvular endocarditis 
 Heart murmur, valvular endocarditis
 Borrelia burgdorferi
 Canine Lyme borreliosis
 Cardiac arrhythmias, myocarditis
 Ehrlichia canist
 Canine ehrlichiosis
Anemia, bleeding tendencies, limb edema, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly
Erysipelothrix spp.
 Infectious valvular endocarditis
Heart murmur, emboli formation, valvular endocarditis
Leptospira spp.
Leptospirosis
Generalized hemorrhages, icterus, septicemia
Neorickettsia helminthoeca
 Salmon poisoning 
Lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly
Rickettsia rickettsii
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
 Edema, hemorrhages, ymphadenopathy, myocarditis, vascular obstruction
alntludes B. vinsoni sp. berkhoff and 3. claidgeiae.
bother Ehrichia spp. cause clinical signs related to anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Table 68.2.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues of Cats
Agent
Disease
 Girculatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
Feline immunodeficiency virus 
Feline immunodeficiency
Anemia, leukopenia, lymphadenopathy, secondary infections
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus
Feline infectious peritonitis Immune complex vasculitis/perivasculitis, lymphadenopathy, pericardial efusion
Feline leukemia virus 
Feline leukemia
Anemia lymphoid depleion, lymphosarcoma, myeloproliferative disease, secondary infections
Feline panleukopenia virus
Feline panleukopenia 
 Leukopenia, mesenteric lymphadenopathy 
Feline sarcoma virus
Feline sarcoma
Fibrosarcomas
Bacteria
 Mycoplasma haemofelis
 Feline infectious peritonitis Anemia, icterus, splenomegaly 
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Leukopenia, mesenteric lymphadenopathy
Streptococcus canis
Cat strangles
Cervical lymphadenitis, lymph node abscesses
Yersinia pestis
 Plague
Cervicalisubmandibular bymphadenitis, lymph node abscesses, septicemia 
Table 68.3.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues of Horses
Agent
Disease
Circulatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
 African horse sickness virus
African horse sickness
Vasculitis with pulmonary, subcutaneous, and eyelid edema
Equine infectious anemia virus
Equine infectious anemia
Anemia, hemorrhages, icterus, splenomegaly
 Equine viral arteritis virus
Equine viral arteritis
Edema, hemorrhages, leukopenia, vessel infarction 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
 Cellular depletion of lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow 
Bacteria
 Actinomyces spp.
Actinomycosis
 Mandibular lymph node abscesses 
Anaplasma phagocytophila
Equine ehrichiosis
 Anemia, edema of the legs, hemorrhages
Agents of neonatal septicemia?
 Neonatal septicemia
 Septicemia, hypotension, organ failure
Burkholderia mallert
Farcy, glanders
 Lymphangitis, lymphadenitis, splenic abscesses 
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
Ulcerative lymphangitis
Lymphangitis 
Neorickettsia risticif
Potomac horse fever
Leukopenia, mesenteric lymphadenopathy
 Streptococcus equi ssp. equi
 Strangles purpura hemorrhagica
Immune-complex vasculitis, edema 
Fungi
Histoplasma farciminosum
 Epizootic lymphangitis
 Lymphangitis, regional lymphadenitis 
Sporothrix schenckif
Sporotrichosis
 Lymphangitis 
lntludes Actinobacillus equuli Escherichia coli Saimonella, Streptococcus equissp. zooepidemicus.
bClassfied as a foreign animal disease agentin the United States.
Table 68.4.
Agent
Disease
Circulatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
viruses
Alcelaphine herpesvirus 13
Malignant catarrhal fever
 Hemorrhages, leukopenia, lymphoid proliferation, lymphadenopathy 
Bovine leukemia virus 
Bovine leukemia 
Lymphosarcoma 
Ovine herpesvirus 2
Malignant catarrhal fever
Hemorrhages, leukopenia, lymphoid proliferation, lymphadenopathy 
Rift Valley fever virus?
Rift Valley fever
 Splenomegaly, widespread hemorrhages 
Rinderpest?
Rinderpest
 Leukopenia, destruction of lymphoid organs
Bacteria 
Anaptasma marginale
Anaplasmosis
 Anemia, icterus, splenomegaly
 Arcanobacterium pyogenes
 Traumatic reticulopericarditis
 Pericarditis (often polymicrobial)
Infectious valvular endocarditis
Heart murmur, heart failure, valvular endocarditis 
Bacilus anthracis
Anthrax
Edema, septicemia, splenomegaly, bleeding from orifices
Clostridium chauvoei
Blackleg
Myocarditis, pericarditis
Clostridium haemolyticum
Bacillary hemoglobinuria
Icterus, intravascular hemolysis, hemorrhages 
Ehrichia ruminantium?
 African heartwater disease
Edema, hemorrhages, hydropericardium, splenomegaly
Leptospira spp.
Leptospirosis
Anemia, icterus, intravascular hemolysis
Mycobacterium avium ssp. paratuberculosis
Johne's disease
Granulomatous lymphangitis of mesenteric lymph vessels 
Mycobacterium bovis
Bovine tuberculosis
Granulomatous tracheobronchial/mediastinal lymphadenitis
Pasteurella multocida serotypes B : 2 or E : 23
Hemorrhagic septicemia
 Edema, hemorrhages, hemorrhagic lymphadenopathy
 Salmonellasp.t
Salmonellosis
 Septicemia, splenomegaly 
Classfied as a foreign animal disease in the United States.
bCommon serotypes include Dublin and Typhimnurium.
537
Table 68.5.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues of Goats and Sheep
Agent
Disease
Circulatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
 Bluetongue virus 
Bluetongue
Edema of head and neck, hemorrhages, hyperemia
Peste des petits virus?
Peste des petits
 Generalized lymphadenopathy, leukopenia, splenomegaly 
Rift Valley fever virus?
Rift alley fever 
 Splenomegaly, widespread hemorrhages 
Rinderpest virus?
Rinderpest
 Leukopenia, destruction of lymphoid organs 
Bacteria
Anaplasma ovis
Anaplasmosis
Anemia
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
 Edema, septicemia, splenomegaly, bleeding from orifices
 Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
Caseous lymphadenitis
Lymphadenitis, lymph node abscesses
 Mycoplasma haemovis
Eperythrozoonosis
Anemia
 Mannheimia haemolytica (S)
 Septicemic pasteurellosis
 Hemorrhagic septicemia in lambs
Mycoplasma mycoides ssp. mycoides (G) (large colony type)
Septicemic mycoplasmosis 
 Septicemia, pericarditis
 Pasteurella trehalosi (G)
 Septicemic pasteurellosis 
 Hemorrhagic septicemia in kids 
Staphylococcus aureus
Tick pyemia of lambs 
Lymphadenopathy, septicemia 
G, goats; 5, sheep.
Classified as a foreign animal disease in the United States.
Table 68.6.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues of Pigs
Agent
Disease
Circulatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
African swine fever virus?
African swine fever
Generalied edema/hemorrhages/infarctions, hemorrhagic lymph
 nodes, pericarditis, skin cyanosis, splenomegaly
 Encephalomyocarditis virus
Encephalomyocarditis
Hydropericardium, myocarditis, pericarditis
Hog cholera?
Hog cholera, classical swine fever 
Generalized hemorrhages/infarctions, hemorrhagic lymph nodes.
 ymphoid depletions, skin cyanosis, splenic infarcts
Lelystad virus
 Porcine reproductive and respiratory
Secondary infections due to macrophage depletion 
 syndrome
Porcine circovirus 2
 Postweaning multisystemic wasting
Lymphadenopathy, myocarditis, poor growth 
syndrome 
Bacteria 
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Pharyngeal ymphadenopathy and edema, septicemia
Burkholderia pseudomallea
 Melioidosis
Lymph node and splenic abscesses
 Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Erysipelas
Hemorrhages, splenomegaly, skin cyanosis, infectious valvular
endocarditis 
Escherichia colf
Septicemia
 Septicemia in unweaned pigs, skin cyanosis, congested organs.
ymphadenopathy
 Escherichia cof (Shiga-like toxin 
Edema disease
 Edema in subcutaneous tissue/stomach mucosa due to vasculitis
positive)
 Haemophilus parasuis
Glasser's disease
 Pericarditis, septicemia 
Mycobacterium avium
Swine mycobacteriosis
Granulomatous cervical pharyngeal, and mesenteric
ymphadenitis
Mycoplasma spp.c
Mycoplasma polyserositis
 Pericarditis with other serositides
 Mycoplasma haemosuis
Porcine eperythrozoonosis
 Anemia, icterus, splenomegaly 
Satmonellad
 Salmonellosis
Lymphadenopathy, skin cyanosis, septicemia, splenomegaly
 Streptococcus porcinus
Jowl abscess
Cervical lymphadenitis
 Streptococcus suis
Streptococcal septicemia 
 Pericarditis, septicemia 
Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bProposed that swine strains of Mycobacterium avium be intluded in the ssp. hominissuis. Other mycobaterial speties involved intlude M. kansasi M. xenopi and M. fortuitum.
Rhodococcus equi is also occasionally involved.
(ntludes Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae M. hyorhinis and M. hyosynovie.
Most common serotypes are Choleraesuis var. Kunzendorf and Typhimurium.
538
Chapter 68(
 Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues
539
Table 68.7.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues of Poultry
Agent
Disease
Girculatory/Lymphoid-Associated Findings
Viruses
Avian influenza virus H5 or H7?
 Avian influenza, fowwl plague
Generalized hemorrhages; edema of head, wattles, and comb;
(highly pathogenic)
 ymphoid necrosis; myocarditis
Avian leucosis viruses (C)
Lymphoid leucosis
 Anemia, hemangiomas, lymphoid tumors, sarcomas
Chicken anemia virus
Chicken anemia
Anemia, hemorrhages, hydropericardium, hypoplasia of lymphoid.
 and hemopoietic tissues
Exotic Newwcastle disease virus?
Exotic Newcastle disease
Generalized hemorrhages (especially intestinal), edema 
Infectious bursal disease virus (C)
Infectious bursal disease, Gumboro
 Enlarged/hemorrhagic (especially intestinal edema
disease
Marek's disease virus (C)
Marek's disease
Lymphoid tumors of heart, bursa, thymus, spleen
Reticuloendotheliosis virus (T)
 Reticuloendotheliosis
Lymphoreticular neoplasia, lymphomas 
Turkey adenovirus 2 (T)
 Hemorrhagic entenitis of turkeys
Immunosuppression, intestinal hemorrhage, splenomegaly
Bacteria 
Borrelia anserine
 Avian spirochetosis
Anemia, hemorrhages, splenomegaly
Chamydophila psittaci (T)b
 Ornithosis, chlamydiosis
Pericarditis, splenomegaly, fibrin exudates
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Erysipelas
Generalized hemorrhages, pericarditis, septicemia
Escherichia coli
Colisepticemia
Pericarditis, omphalitis, septicemia, splenomegaly
Mycobacterium avium
Avian tuberculosis
Splenic granulomas 
Pasteurella multocida
Fowl cholera
Generalized hemorrhages, pericarditis, septicemia
Saimonella
Salmonellosisc
Myocarditis, omphalitis, pericarditis, splenitis
C, chicken; T, turkey.
?Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States
bIncludes serovars Pullorum, Gallinarum, and Typhimurium.
FIntludes pullorum disease fowl typhoid, and parathyroid.
these microbial products results in a dysregulation of the
either as a result of a systemic infection, from a focus within
immune response and the production of excessive levels of
the heart (e.g., endocarditis), or by extension of an infec-
tious process from adjacent tissues (e.g., pleuropulmonary
leukin 1, and interleukin 6), which are largely responsible
in fections or traumatic reticulopericarditis).
for the systemic effects observed in sepsis. Toll-like recep-
tors are also found on endothelial cells lining blood vessels.
 Some gram-positive organisms produce superantigens
Infectious Valvular Endocarditis
Valvular endocarditis results from bacteria from another
phocytes to produce excessive amounts of proinflamma-
site in the body seeding one of the heart valves. Preexisting
tory cytokines. Coagulation abnormalities, specifically dis-
injury or functional abnormality of the heart valve allows
seminated intravascular coagulation, can also be a conse-
for platelet and fibrin deposition. These deposits provide
quence of sepsis.
sites for attachment for bacteria that are present in the cir-
During a bacterial septicemia, rarely are organisms
culation, often as a result of one of the mechanisms of tran-
 ag pp aq on si yna  u sd
sient bacteremia previously described. Attachment to the
microscopic examination. Some bacteria are, however,
 heart valve is mediated through a number of bacterial sur-
 present in large enough numbers in the blood during the
face adhesins that include surface glucans and fibronectin-
terminal stages of disease to be detected in direct smears.
Bacillus anthracis, the etiologic agent of anthrax, causes an
binding proteins. Exposed extracellular matrix on the valve
 may also serve as a receptor favoring bacteria expressing fib-
overwhelming septicemia, predominately in ruminants,
rinogen or laminin-binding proteins. A preexisting heart
and results in large numbers of organisms being found in
valve lesion is not an absolute requirement for infectious
the blood justprior to death.Pasteurella multocida,the agent
valvular endocarditis to develop. Other cardiac abnormal-
of fowl cholera, and Borelia anserina, the agent of avian
ities (e.g., subaortic stenosis in dogs) or invasive vascular
spirochetosis, can also be found in large numbers in the
procedures, including catheterization, also predispose to
blood of affected birds.
heart valve infections. Sequelae to valvular endocarditis
include embolization, multiorgan infarction, and sudden 
death.
Infections Involving the Heart and
Bacteria involved in infectious endocarditis are pre-
Pericardium
dominantly, but not exclusively, gram-positive organ-
isms and include streptococci, enterococci, staphylo-
The major infectious processes of the heart are infectious
cocci, Corymebacterium, and Arcanobacterium spp. The genus
valvular endocarditis (usually bacterial) and myocarditis
Erysipelothrix is specifically associated with valvular endo-
(bacterial or viral). Infections of the pericardium occur
carditis in some animals (swine, dogs, and poultry). When
540
PARTIV
 Clinical Applications
gram-negative organisms are involved, they are usually
members of the families Enterobacteriaceae and Pseu-
FIGURE 68.1.
The right jugular furrow of a Hoistein cow
domonadaceae. Bartonella, another gram-negative organ-
in right-sided congestive heart failure exhibiting jugular
ism, is increasingly being recognized as a cause ofinfectious
distension. The right-sided congestive heart failure is due to
valvular endocarditis in dogs.
pericardial effusion, in this case, secondary to traumatic
reticulopericarditis.
Myocarditis
Myocarditis, an inflammation of the heart muscle, is usu-
ally the result of systemic infection with foci of infection in
the heart. Damage occurs directly to myocytes or to vascu-
lar endothelial vessels supplying heart muscle. The mech-
anisms of injury to the heart muscle vary and include (i)
direct toxic action of an agent on myocytes, (ii) effects of
circulating toxic products, or (i) immune-mediated mech-
 anisms. A wide variety of infectious agents have potential to
cause myocarditis. Some common microbial agents specifi-
cally associated with myocarditis in animals include canine
parvovirus, encephalomyocarditis virus in pigs, Clostridium
chauvoei in cattle, and Listeria monocytogenes in ruminants
and poultry.
Infections Involving the Pericardium
Hydropericardium or pericardial effusion, a serous fluid
accumulation in the pericardial cavity, in conjunction with
endothelial-leukocyte interaction, procoagulation activ.
other systemic signs is a characteristic of certain infectious
ity, and release of mediators (cytokines and chemokines).
diseases (e.g., heartwater in cattle, African horse sickness,
Microbes that specifically infect endothelial cells of small
and chicken anemia virus infection) and is the result of
vessels and capillaries can cause necrosis with increased vas-
vascular damage. Fluid accumulations in the pericardial
cular permeability resulting from direct vascula1 endothe.
sac also result from damage due to immune-complex depo-
lial injury by an agent or its toxin (e.g., Shiga-like toxin) or
sition in vessels (e.g., feline infectious peritonitis).
by immune-complex deposition and an ensuing inflamma-
Pericarditis denotes an inflammation of the peri-
tory response. Disruption of the endothelial barrier leads
cardium. Like myocarditis, a number of viral and bacterial
to edema and/or hemorrhages in affected organs. Clinical
agents can be involved. Pericarditis is often part of a sys-
signs depend on the agent and vascular site(s) in the body
temicinfection in volving other serosal surfaces and cavities
primarily affected (e.g., African horse sickness and the pul-
(e.g, Glasser's disease in pigs and Mycoplasma septicemia
monary vasculature with an ensuing pulmonary edema).
in goats).
Central nervous system signs in dogs as a result of bleed-
The most common traumatic pericardial infection is
ing into the brain are attributed to Rickettsia rickettsi, the
traumatic reticulopericarditis (hardware disease) in cattle.
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever agent, and the vascular dam-
This is most often associated with the extension of an
age it causes. Similarly, damage to the integrity of vessels
ingested linear metallic object (e.g., wire and nail) through 
walls due to immune-complex deposition in feline infec-
the reticulum and diaphragm into the pericardial sac. It
tious peritonitis in cats results in the fluid accumulations in
provides bacteria the necessary access to the pericardial
serosal cavities, as is found in the "wet form" of the disease.
space in order for infection to establish. Such infections
 In addition to severe hepatic necrosis, Rift Valley fever virus
are usually polymicrobial, with Arcanobacterium pyogenes
causes massive generalized endothelial damage resulting
and Fusobacterium necrophorum frequently involved. The
 in widespread hemorrhages. Loss of endothelial anticoag-
clinical signs associated with pericarditis in cattle are those
ulant activity and plateletactivation may cause thrombosis
of right-sided heart failure, decreased production, exercise
of blood vessels and infarction in some systemic infections,
intolerance, tachycardia secondary to decreased cardiac
ultimately leading to tissue necrosis at the affected site (e.g.,
output, jugular distension (Figure 68.1), jugular pulses, and 
 skin lesions of erysipelas in swine). Details on the patho.
submandibular edema. Muffled heart sounds may also be
genesis of these and other in fectious diseases that affect the
present. There may also be a murmur characterized as a
blood vasculature and associated pathology are covered in
"washing machine” murmur if there is a gas fluid interface
greater detail in chapters on the specific agent or system(s)
within the pericardial sac.
involved.
Omphalitis, an inflammation of the umbilicus of
neonates, deserves special attention. Both the umbilical
Infections Affecting Blood Vessels
arteries and veins can be involved. It is especially impor-
tant in farm animals and horses. The bacteria responsible
In general, the endothelium of blood vessels plays an
are either ofenteric origin, inhabitants of mucosal surfaces,
interactive role in most inflammatory reactions through
 Or environmental contaminants (e.g., Actinobacilus spp.,
Chapter 68
Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues
541
FlGURE 68.2.
Multiple liver abscesses secondary to an
FIGURE 68.3.
A. marginale in blood from an ox stained
ascending umbilical vein infection in a 3-month-old Gelbvieh
with Wright's stain. (Courtesy of Dr Bruce Brodersen.)
heifer.
10um
between antigens of normal RBC proteins and an infec-
A. pyogenes, Escherichia coli, and streptococci). Umbilical
tious agent, or (ii) exposure of usually unexposed RBC
infections can lead to local abscess development or, some-
antigens during the infectious process. Intravascular
times, serve as a site for establishment of Clostridium tetani
and the development of tetanus. When omphalophlebitis,
hemolysis resulting in anemia can be the result of action of
certain bacterial toxins (e.g., phospholipase C). Leptospira
an inflammation of the umbilical vein, becomes infected,
spp. and Clostridium hemolyticum are notable agents that
the infection can extend along the remnants of the fetal
circulation to in volve the liver (Figure 68.2).
destroy RBCs by this mechanism. Anemia in these cases is
A septicemia may also develop from umbilical infec-
often accompanied by hemoglobinuria.
tions (navel ill), which can lead to infections elsewhere in
the body, including polyarthritis and meningitis. Failure of
passive transfer is a common predisposing factor in these
Infections Involving White Blood Cells
cases. In poultry, yolk sac infection and omphalitis are also
a serious problem. A variety of organisms are involved, E.
A number of viruses affect cells of the myeloid and lym-
coli, Salmonella, and Pseudomonas being prominent etio-
phoid series. Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus is a
logic agents.
prominent example of a virus that destroys hemopoietic
and lymphoreticular cells, leading to cellular depletion in
bone marrow, lymph nodes, and the spleen. Many viral
Infections Involving Red Blood Cells
infections that target cells in these series predispose ani-
mals to secondary infections consequent to the immuno-
Anemia is a common finding in many infectious processes.
suppressive effects that occur. One of the main targets of
A number of mechanisms lead to anemia and include sup-
infectious bursal disease virus in chickens is the cloacal
pression of erythropoiesis, sequestration of red blood cells
bursa, which is initially enlarged and edematous but even-
(RBCs), antibody-mediated hemolysis, erythrophagocyto-
tually becomes atrophied . The resulting B lymphocyte defi-
sis, direct lysis of RBCs, and alterations in RBC membranes 
ciency leads to secondary infections. Feline leukemia virus,
that decrease overall lifespan.
feline immunodeficiency virus in cats, and porcine cir-
Anaplasma marginale specifically infects RBCs in cattle
covirus in pigs similarly make animals more susceptible to
(Figure 68.3). Infections elicit an immune response that
secondary infections through immunosuppressive effects.
results in removal of both infected and uninfected RBCs
These effects can be long-term; however, other viral infec-
and may lead to a packed cell volume as low as 6%.
tions(e.g, distemper virus, hog cholera virus,parvoviruses,
Chicken anemia virus disease and FeLV infections in
and bovine viral diarrhea virus) cause temporary leukope-
cats are causes of anemia due, at least in part, to decreased
nias and the immunosuppressive effect is short-term.
erythropoiesis. The bacterial hemoparasite, Mycoplasma
Bacterial agents may also infect white blood cells. Cer-
haemofelis, causes anemia in cats by multiple mecha-
tain members of the genera Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, and
nisms including RBCsequestration and antibody-mediated
 Neorickettsia are pathogens of cells belonging to the mye-
hemolysis. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia is also
loid or megakaryocyte series. Fungal agents are not com-
important in FeLV infections and canine ehrlichiosis.
monly associated with infections of the myeloid or lym-
Immune-mediated hemolysis can be the result of (i) pres-
phoid cell series. However, the systemic fungal agent Histo-
ence of microbial antigens on the RBCs, (ii) cross-reactions
plasma capsulafum specifically infects macrophages and,
542
PARTIV
 Clinical Applications
therefore, histoplasmosis is considered a disease of the
lymphangitis in horses in countries where these agents are
monocyte-macrophage system.
found. Mycobacterium avium ssp. paraluberculosis,the agent
 of Johne's disease in ruminants, causes a granulomatous
lymphangitis in the mesentery of the intestines in con-
Infections of Lymph Nodes, Lymphatics, and
junction with granulomatous enteritis.
Other Lymphoid Tissues
The spleen plays an active rolein antigen trapping as well
as removal of defective erythrocytes. Splenitis commonly
Lymph nodes play a major role in filtering primary sites
occurs as a consequence of generalized infections due to
of infection via the lymphatic vessels and, therefore, act
acute congestion and/or reactive hyperplasia. Salmonella
septicemia is a common cause of splenomegaly in many
Many viral infections are dispersed to other parts of the
animals. In cattle, anthrax and anaplasmosis should also
body (target organs) by this route.
be considered. In pigs, African swine fever and erysipelas,
Lymphadenitis, an inflammation of the lymph node,
along with Salmonella, are potential agents to consider
  n o  s  n o 
when splenomegaly is detected.
nodes draining a common region (regional lymphadeni
The thymus is an uncommon site for infections in
tis) or manifest as a generalized lymphadenitis in sys-
 animals. Viruses that infected T lymphocytes (e.g., feline
temic infections. Depending on the agents involved, the
leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus) cause
 inflammatory response can be nonsuppurative, suppura-
thymic atrophy. A lymphohistiocytic thymusitis with
tive, necrotizing, or granulomatous. In some cases, depend.
depletion of cortical thymocytes is a major pathologic fea-
ing on the agent and the host response, lymph node
ture in epizootic bovine abortion, a disease limited to the
abscessation occurs. Microbial agents causing lymph node
western United States. The suspected etiologic agent is a
abscesses are usually but not exclusively bacterial or fungal.
deltaproteobacterium spread by the Ornithodoros coriaceus
Particular organisms consistently associated with lymph
tick.
node abscesses include Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
in sheep and goats (caseous lymphadenitis) and Streptococ-
 s  (s s n  ss i 
Neoplasias of the Hemopoietic and Lymphoid
mon now, Streptococcus porcinus was an important cause of
Tissues with Infectious Etiologies
cervical lymph node abscesses in swine (jowl abscesses).
 Yersinia pestis should always be considered when mandibu-
Various viral-induced neoplasias involving hemopoietic
lar lymph node abscesses (often bilateral) are detected in
and lymphatic tissues occur in animals. Marek's disease
cats from geographic regions where plague is endemic.
virus, a herpesvirus, causes a lymphoproliferative disease
Francisella fularensis causes lymphadenopathy with absces-
that predominately affects nervous tissues but also causes
sation in cats, along with generalized signs of infection.
lymphoid tumors in a number of other tissues includ-
Streptococcus canis also causes purulent inflammation of
ing the heart, bursa, thymus, and spleen. A number of
lymph nodes on the head and neck in cats. Outbreaks, pre-
animal retroviruses exist and are able to integrate provi-
sumably via oral transmission, have been described in cats
ral v-onc genes into host cellular DNA. The ability of
kept in colonies.
 Generalized or regional lymphadenitis is encoun tered
with the systemic mycotic infections (blastomycosis, coc-
cidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis) and
FIGURE 68.4.
An extradural mass at the fumbar
typically results in a caseous-type necrosis in the affected
intumescence in an 8-year-oid Angus cow. Bovine leukemia
lymph node.
virus infection, a retrovirus, can lead to adult-onset
Lymphangitis is an acute or chronic inflammation of
multicentric BiV (Bovine leukosis virus)-associated
the lymphatic channels that results when infections are
lymphosarcoma.
not contained locally. Infections usually involve subcuta-
mals, but when it occurs the etiologic agents are most often
bacterial or fungal. Parasitic agents should also be con-
sidered as causes of lymphangitis in animals but are not
within the scope of this book. Inflammation of the lym-
phatic walls can result in lymphatic obstruction and per-
sistent lymphedema in sites drained by the affected lym-
phatics. Lymphatic vessels may be swollen (corded), with
 sporadic discharging abscesses occurring along the lym-
phatic tracts. Lymphangitis is most commonly recognized
in horses. Sporothrix schenckii, a dimorphic fungus, and C.
pseudohuberculosis are classical causes of equine lymphan-
gitis. Although considered foreign animal disease agents
in the United States, Burkholderia mallei (agent of glan-
ders) and Histoplasma farciminosum (agent ofepizootic lym-
phangitis) should also be considered as potential causes of
Chapter 68
Circulatory System and Lymphoid Tissues
543
feline leukemia virus to infect different hemopoietic cells
(Figure 68.4). Avian retroviruses of the leukosis/sarcoma
accounts for the variety of disorders of the hemopoietic
group cause various neoplasias of hemopoietic origin
system seen in infected cats. In addition, solid neoplasias
(erythroblastosis, myeloblastosis, and myelocytomatosis),
including lymphosarcoma (e.g., thymic lymphosarcoma)
as well as lymphoid leukosis and endothelial tumors
can occur. The bovine leukemia virus, also a retrovirus,
(hemangiomas). Viruses of reticuloendotheliosis group
causes lymphosarcoma thatcan involve a number of organs
cause lymphoid leukosis and reticu-loendotheliosis in
including heart, kidney, spleen, lymph nodes, and brain
turkeys.
69
Digestive System and
Associated Organs
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The primary function of the digestive system is to process
Gastric Acidity
food in order to provide nutrition for the body. This is
 Acid production in the stomach provides a major protec-
performed by a series of complex physical, secretory, and
absorptive processes. An in-depth description of all of the
varied and interactive functions of the digestive system is
digestive system. The normal acidic environment in the
stomach effectively inactivates some viruses and kills most
well beyond the scope of this chapter. Because the digestive
enteric bacteria. Its importance is evident in humans by the
 system in its simplest term represents an open tube to the
increased risk for en teric infections observed in individuals
with achlorh ydria or in individuals when stomach acid has
system to potential pathogens is great.
been neutralized.
The anatomy of the digestive system varies markedly
among different animals. In carnivorous animals,
it
includes the oral cavity, esophagus, stomach, and smalland
Peristalsis
large intestines. The digestive system of herbivores is sub.
stantially different from carnivores both anatomically and
 Peristaltic activity in the digestive system is a mechanism,
functionally. Among the herbivorous animals there is also
whereby nonadhering microorganisms are swept distally.
great variation in the digestive system makeup depending
In the small intestine, peristaltic activity plays a major
on the digestive mechanisms employed (e.g., rumination
role in host defense. The occurrence of disease is a func-
and cecal digestion). In poultry, further specialization of
tion of a large enough number (relative infective dose)
the digestive system is seen by the presence of a crop (a
of pathogens being in contact with the enterocytes long
diverticulum of the esophagus for storage of food) and the
enough to adhere and establish an infection. The most
division of the stomach into a glandular stomach (proven-
important regulator of the size of this population is peri-
triculus) and muscular stomach (ventriculus or gizzard).
staltic activity, since there are few other regulators such
Some of these anatomic differences selectively predispose
as those that exist in the large bowel (Eh, fatty acids,
to specific infectious processes. Infectious diseases of the
and pH). Peristalsis also has an indirect protective role
accessory organs of the digestive system are also covered in 
by maintaining distribution and numbers of the normal
this chapter and include common diseases of the hepato-
bacterial flora.
biliary system and pancreas.
Mucus and Mucosal Integrity
Antimicrobial Properties of the Digestive
The mucus layer and the integrity of mucosal surface are
System
important factors in providing a barrier to infection in
the digestive system, as well as to systemic infections that
There are a number ofanatomic, physiologic, and immuno
originate through the digestive system. The mucus barrier,
logic mechanisms in place to protect the digestive system
composed of mucin glycoproteins secreted by goblet cells,
binds organisms, thereby blocking interaction with under-
lowing are the major protective features of the digestive
lying epithelial cells and, along with peristalsis, promotes
system.
their removal. The monolayer of epithelial cells lining the
digestive system provides an additional barrier to entry
by luminal organisms. Intestinal enterocytes are zippered
Original chapter written by the late Dr. Richard L.
Walker.
to intestinal epithelium allows for intercellular transloca-
tion of potentially pathogenic microbes. Some microbes are
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
544
Chapter 69
 Digestive System and Associated Organs
545
able to translocate across intestinal mucosa by intracellular
ment of pathogens to mucosal cells or that commen-
means.
sal organisms, being more permanent residents, temper
the immune response directed toward them by blocking
 proinflammatory responses. Inappropriate inflammatory
Bacterial Interference
response to normal commensal bacteria is hypothesized
Once the normal flora is established, it gives an animal
to be an underlying cause for inflammatory bowel disease
a very potent defense against microorganisms that might
in humans.
cause disease, if they establish. An example of the effec-
In parts of the digestive tract, the normal flora is integral
tiveness of this “colonization resistance" is the exclusion
to maintaining an active innate hostsurveillance system. In 
the mouth, for instance, the periodontal microbiota stimu-
tails" containing normal flora microorganisms. Disrupt-
lates the formation of an interleukin-8 (IL-8) gradient that
ing colonization resistance puts the animal at risk by expos-
promotes migration of neutrophils to bacterial/epithelial
ing receptors on potential target cells and eliminating a
interfaces. Thus, these commensal microbial communities
mechanism for regulating the population size of facultative
in the oral cavity provide for an active surveillance in the
organisms, including species or strains with pathogenic
gingival sulci against potential oral pathogens.
potential. Products of normal bacterial flora, especially the
As an associated organ of the digestive system, the liver
anaerobes that make up the majority of the oraland colonic
plays a major role in removal of pathogens from the blood -
flora, are important in controlling pathogen establishment
stream. This innate host defense is accomplished by a com-
(see Section “Microbial Flora of the Digestive System"). The
plex neutrophil-Kupffer cell (resident liver macrophage)
newborn animal is particularly susceptible to enteric dis-
interaction.
ease because, besides being immunologically naive, it is
devoid of established flora. The most vulnerable area is the
Other Antimicrobial Products
mid-jejunum and distal ileum.
Saliva, along with providing an important flushing effect,
Immune Defense
including antibodies, complement, lysozyme, lactoferrin,
Passive protection is afforded in the neonate by colostrum.
peroxidases, and defensins. In the intestines, bile salts and
Immunoglobulins in colostrum, specific for antigenic
antimicrobial peptides contribute to limiting and influenc-
determinants on adhesins used by pathogens for attach-
ing the microbial makeup. Both alpha and beta defensins
ment, combine with these structures to block attachment
are produced by cells of the intestinal tract (e.g., Paneth
of the pathogen to its target cell. Failure of passive transfer
cells). Lactoferrin and peroxidase from the pancreas may
and thus the absence of these protective immunoglobulins
also affect bacterial growth in the intestine. In addition to
is one of the major factors leading to the increased suscep-
the antibodies in colostrum, the presence of other factors
tiblity of neonates to enteric infections.
such as lactoferrin and lysozyme provide additional pro-
The active immune defense mechanisms in the diges-
tection for the digestive system in neonates.
tive system rely on patrolling phagocytes and humoral and
cell-mediated immunity. There is a normal background
Microbial Flora of the Digestive System
of neutrophils, macrophages, plasma cells, and lympho-
cytes found in the lamina propria indicating a contin-
A microbial flora that is part of a complex ecosystem inhab-
uous surveillance activity. When stimulated by poten-
its the digestive tract. In addition to its role in protec-
tial pathogens, inflammatory mediators and chemotactic
tion against the establishment of pathogens, the normal
agents are produced and result in an influx of additional
flora plays an important role in physiological health of the
inflammatory cells. As part of the body's mucosal immune
host through functions that include promoting functional
system, the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) is com-
intestinal villi formation, synthesis of nutrients (e.g., vita-
 posed of lymphoid tissue in Peyer's patches and lympho-
min K and water soluble vitamins (ruminants), and con-
cytes in the lamina propria. The microfold (M) cells overly-
tributing to the establishment of a functional intestinal
ing follicles of Peyer's patch play a role in antigen sampling
mucus consistency by degradation of the secreted glyco-
Jo jeod e apiaod ose ae pnq wss an an o
proteins.
entry for some pathogens. The benefits of GALT and anti-
 gen sampling in the digestive system are not just local but
Establishment
rather benefit theentire host through the common mucosal
immune system. Secretory IgA and associated secretory
The result of interactions between host and microbe is an
component, which provides resistance to luminal degrada-
ecosystem comprised of many thousands of niches, each
tion, has a role in osponization and neutralizing. Specific
inhabited by the species or strains of microbes most aptly
IgM antibodies are also in volved.
suited to that location, to the exclusion of others. The host
Commensal bacteria play an important role in the
contributes to the establishment of a normal flora by fur-
 development of the mucosal immune system of the gas-
nishing receptors for adhesins on the surface of prospective
trointestinal tract by promoting lymphoid follicle devel-
niche dwellers. The niche dweller is the one that has suc-
opment; however, the immune system responds more
cessfully competed for that particular site.
vigorously to pathogenic organisms than it does to com-
The fetus is microbiologically sterile as it starts down
mensal organisms. This is possibly due to the closer attach-
the birth canal. Microorganisms are acquired from the
546
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
birth canal and, after birth, from the environment. The
 enhanced by antibiotics affecting obligate anaerobes living
immediate en vironment of the newborn is populated with
in the bowel.
microorganisms excreted by the dam and other animals.
These microbes are ingested, compete for niches, and with
Composition
time become established as part of the normal flora. Dur-
ing the first days to months after birth, the flora is in
Bacterial species as well as some protozoal and fungal
a state of flux due to the interplay between the various
species constitute the bulk of the microflora in the alimen-
microbes, the niches of the host, and the changing diet.
tary canal of animals. The overwhelming majority of the
 Diet influences the nutritional en vironment at the level of
normal flora is obligate anaerobic bacteria (up to 99.9%).
the niche, which in turn influences the kinds of microbes
Viruses are typically only transient residents of the alimen-
that will successfully compete for these nutrients. Through-
tary canal.
out its life the host's normal flora is influenced by a num-
The microbial flora of the mouth is roughly uniform
ber of other factors (e.g., aging of the host) and adapts
among domestic mammals. No information is available
accordingly.
for fowl. The description that follows is general and
Members of the normal flora establish themselves in
 applies to carnivores and herbivores. The buccal surface,
a particular niche utilizing various bacterial and host
 tongue, and teeth (plaque) are inhabited by facultative
properties in the process. A powerful way for bacteria to
and obligate aerobes. These include streptococci (alpha
secure a particular niche against other species is to secrete
and nonhemolytic), members of the family Pasteurellaceae,
antibiotic-like substances such as bacteriocins (cationic
Actino-myces spp., enterics (Escherichia coli being the most
membrane-active compounds that form pores in the tar-
common), Neisseria spp., CDC group EF-4 ("eugonic fer-
get cells) and microcins (similar to bacteriocins but smaller
menter"), and Simonsiella (a unique oral commensal that
than 10 kDa and active against gram-negative microorgan-
forms characteristic monoseriate filaments). The flora of
isms). Both of these substances are significant, especially in
the gingival sulcus is composed almost entirely of obli
the communities living in the oral cavity. Microcins prob-
gate anaerobes, themost common genera being Bacteroides,
ably play a significant role in regulating the population
Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, Porphyromonas, and Pre-
composition in the gastrointestinal portion of the diges-
votella. Saliva contains a mixture of facultative and obligate
tive system. The role of bacteriocins in this region is less
species of anaerobes and aerobes. The esophagus does not
clear.
possess a normal flora but is contaminated with organisms
 An important mechanism for regulating population
found in saliva.
size and ensuring niche security is fatty acid excretion by
 In ruminants, rumen flora is composed of a complex
 obligate anaerobes. In the gingival sulcus, dental plaque,
microbial community that includes bacteria (eubacteria
and the large bowel, the obligate anaerobes in this man-
and archaea), fungi, and protozoa. The rumen flora is in
ner play a central role in regulating the size and com-
a delicately balanced symbiotic relationship with the host
position of the normal facultative flora, the members of
 that is necessary to maintain rumen health for its proper
which may include potential pathogens. Under the con-
fermentative function. The bulk of the flora are obligate
ditions of the bowel (low Eh (<500 mv) and pH of 5-
anaerobes, with Prevotella spp. and Butyrivibrio spp. being
6), butyric, acetic, and lactic acids are extremely toxic to
among the most common genera found. Also included are
facultative anaerobes, especially members of the family
bacteria (Ruminococcus, Fibrobacter) specifically required for
Enterobacteriaceae. Another way for bacteria to compete
digestion of cellulose-rich forages. Disruptions in the nor-
successfully is to acquire nutrients more successfully than
mal rumen flora can lead to serious metabolic and physi-
competitors.
ological problems (see Section “Infections of the Stomach,
 Ruminant Forestomach, and Abomasum"). The flora of the
rest of the alimentary canal varies substantially among dif-
ferent animals, as is shown in Tables 69.1, 69.2, 69.3, 69.4,
Disruption
and 69.5.
Antimicrobial drugs are the single most efficient agents
 Digestive system-associated organs (liver, gall bladder,
at decreasing colonization resistance. Most antimicrobial
and pancreas) are not generally considered to have a nor-
 agents affect the microbial flora of the oral cavity by deplet-
 mal flora but may be transiently seeded as a result of asymp-
ing the number of streptococci that inhabit the surface of
tomatic bacteremia. Clostridial spores are readily found in
the cheeks and tongue. As a result, these areas are usu-
the liver of many animals but remain dormant unless tis-
ally repopulated with resistant (to the antimicrobial agent
sue oxygen tension becomes low enough to allow spores to
being administered) members of the family Enterobacteri-
 germinate and vegetative cells to proliferate.
aceae within 24-48 h. Resistant members of the environ-
mental flora are also found. Members of the genus Pseu-
Infections of the Digestive System and
domonas are notorious examples of this group.
Antimicrobials also affect the members of the obligate
Associated Organs
anaerobiccommunities thatinhabit thegingivalsulcus and
dental plaque in the mouth and the large bowel. Over-
Infections of the digestive system and associated organs
growth of various members of the family Enterobacteriaceae
 are important in all domestic animals. Some digestive sys-
results because of decreases in levels of fatty acids. Col-
 tem pathogens (e.g., enterotoxigenic E. coli, rotaviruses)
onization by potential pathogens (e.g, Salmonella spp.) is
are specific for a particular animal family, while others
Chapter 69 Digestive System and Associated Organs
547
Table 69.1.
 Microbial Flora of the Chicken
 Number of Viable Microorganisms/Gram of Contentsa
Stomach
Small Intestine 
Crop
Gizzard
Upper
Lower
Cecum
Feces
Total
6
6
8-9
8-9
8-9
8-9
Anaerobes
5-6
<2
≤2
8-9
7-8
Enterbacteriaceaed
≤2
1-2
1-3
5-6
6-7
Streptococci/Enterococci
2
≤2
4
3-5
6-7
6-7
Lactobacillus
5-6
2-3
8-9
8-9
8-9
8-9
?Expressed as logio of the number of organisms cultured.
bMainly E. cof.
affect a wide variety of animals (e.g., Salmonella enter-
Infections of the Oral Cavity
ica serovar Typhimurium). In addition to differences in
The oral cavity of animals is susceptible to infection by a
animal susceptibility—age, immune status, and genetic
various end ogenous (usually bacterial or fungal) and exoge-
  a sd d a   
contagious and may, therefore, affect large populations of
 mostcommon and/or importantpathogens of the digestive
animals at a time. Infections from endogenous microbes
system of major domestic animals and poultry are listed in
tend to involve one or a limited number of animals.
Tables 69.6,69.7,69.8, 69.9,69.10, 69.11, and 69.12.
Table 69.2.
Microbial Flora of the Bovine
 Number of Viable Microorganisms/Gram of Contentsa
Small Intestine
Abomasum
Upper
Lower
Cecum
Feces
Total
6-8
>7
6-7
8-9
Anaerobes
7-8
NAC
5-6
8-9
6-9
 Enterbacteriaceaed
3-4
>7
5-6
4-5
5-6
 Streptococc/Enterococci
6-7
2-3
3-4
4-5
4-5
Yeasts
2-3
<3
2
Expressed as logio of the number of organisms cultured.
bMainly E. coll.
'Not available.
Table 69.3.
Microbial Flora of the Horse
Number of Viable Microorganisms/Gram of Contentsa
Small Intestine
Stomach
Upper
Lower
Cecum
Feces
Total
6-8
NAC
6-7
8-9
8-9
Anaerobes
3-5
3-4
4-6
3-4
3-5
Enterbacteriaceaed
6-7
5-6
5-6
6-7
5-6
Streptococci/Enterococci
3
Yeasts
6-8
NAC
6-7
8-9
8-9
Expressed as logioof the number of organisms cultured.
Mainly E. coli.
Not available.
548
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 69.4.
Microbial Flora of the Pig
Number of Viable Microorganisms/Gram of Contentsa
Small Intestine
Stomach
Upper
Lower
Cecum
Feces
Total
3-8
3-7
4-8
4-11
10-11
Anaerobes
7-8
6-7
7-8
7-11
10-11
 Enterbacteriaceaed
3-5
3-4
4-5
6-9
6-9
 Streptococci/Enterococci
4-6
4-5
6-7
7-10
7-10
Yeasts
4-5
4
4 
4 
4
 Spiral Organisms
NAC
NAC
NAC
NAC
Expressed as logio of the number of organisms cultured.
bMainly E. coli.
 ENot available.
Table 69.5.
Microbial Flora of the Dog
 Number of Viable Microorganisms/Gram of Contentsa
Small Intestine
Stomach
Upper
Lower
Cecum
Feces
Total 
>6
>6
>7
>8
10-11
Anaerobes
1-2
>5
4-5
8
10-11
Enterbacteriaceaed
1-5
2-4
4-6
7-8
7-8
 Streptococci/Enterococci
1-6
5-6
5-7
8-9
9-10
 Spiral Organisms (relative amounts)
1+
1+
1+
4+
?Expressed as logio of the number of organisms cultured.
bMainly E. coli.
Table 69.6.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Dogs 
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
 Age Group(s) Commonly Affected
Viruses
Canine adenovirus 1
Diarrhea, jaundice, vomiting 
Typically less than 6 months 
Canine coronavirus
 Diarrhea, vomiting 
Any age typically in puppies 
 Canine distemper virus
Diarrhea, vomiting, dental enamel hypoplasia (distemper)
Any age, most susceptible at4-6 months 
 Canine oral papillomavirus 
Oral cavity warts (oral papillomatosis)
Typically lss than 1 year
Canine parvovirus
 Diarrhea, vomiting 
Any age, most susceptible at 2-4 months
Bacteria 
Campylobacter jejuni/colf.
 Diarrhea with or without blood
Any age, typically less than 6 months
Leptospira spp.?
Hepatitis, vomiting (leptospirosis)
Any age
Neorickettsia helminthoeca
Diarrhea, vomiting (salmon poisoning)
Any age
 Salmonella spp.
 Diarrhea, vomiting 
Any age young and old most susceptible
Fungi
 Histoplasma capsulatum
Diarrhea with or without blood, oral ulcers, weight loss (histoplasmosis)
Any age, typically less than 4 years
Algae
Prototheca spp.
Bloody Diarrhea (protothecosis)
Any age
 alntludes Leptospira serovars canicola, grippotyphosa, and icterohemorrhagiae.
Chapter 69
 Digestive System and Associated Organs
549
Table 69.7.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Cats
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Age Group(s) Commonly Affected
Viruses
Feline calicivirus 
Ulcerative stomatitis
Typically less than 1 year of age
 Feline immunodeficiency virus
Secondary gingivitisstomatitis, diarrhea
Any age
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
lleal or colonic granulomas with vomiting or consti pation 
Any age typically less than 2 years of age
Feline leukemia virus
 Secondary gingivitis/stomatitis, diarhea, vomiting/diarrhea due to
Any age
 alimentary lymphoma
Feline panleukopenia virus
 Diarrhea, vomiting 
Any age, typically kittens 2-12 months of age
Feline rotavirus 
Diarrhea
1-8 weeks of age
Batteria
Campylobacter jejuni/coli
Diarhea 
Any age, typically less than 6 months
Salmonella sp.
Diarrhea
Any age, young and old most susceptible
Table 69.8.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Horses
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
 Age Group(s) Commonly Affected
Viruses
Equine rotavirus 
Diarrhea
1-8 weeks of age
Vesicular stomatitis virus
Oral ulcersfvesicles
Any age
Bacteria
Clostridium perfringens (Types A, B, C1
 Bloody diarrhea (hemorrhagic enterocolitis
Less than 1 week of age
Clostridium dificile
Diarrhea
Adults and foals less than 2 weeks
Clostridium pilifomme
Diarrhea, hepatitis, sudden death (Tyzzer's disease)
1-8 weeks of age 
Neonickettsia risticif
 Diarrhea (Potomac horse fever)
Typically in adult animals
Rhodococcus equi
 Diarhea, mesenteric lymphadenitis
 2-6 months of age
Saimonella soo.a
Diarrhea
Anv ane
?Common serotypes include Sainonella serotypes Typhimurium, Anatum, and Agona.
Table 69.9.
Agent
 Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Age Group(s) Commonly Affected 
Viruses
Alcelaphine herpesvirus-13 
Oral ulcers (Malignant catarrhal fever)
Any age
Bovine coronavirus
Diarrhea 
1-4 weeks of age
Bovine papular stomatitis virus
Oral ulcers 
Less than 6 months of age
Bovine rotavirus
Diarrhea
1-3 weeks of age
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
 Oralfesophageal ulcers, diarrhea
Any age
Ovine herpesvirus-2
Oral ulcers (Malinant catarhal fever)
Any age
Rin derpest virus?
 Oral ulcers, diarrhea, rinderpest
Any age
Yesicular virusesd
Vesiclesfulcers on tongue, oral mucosa 
Any age
Bacteria
Actinobacitus tignieresif
Oral pyogranulomas (wrooden tongue)
Adult animals 
Actinomyces bovis
Granulomas of mandible or maxilla (lumpy jaw) 
Adult animals 
Arcanobacterum pyogenes
Liver abscesses, weight loss
 Adult animals
Clostridium haemolyticum (C. nowyitype D)
 Hepatic necrosis, sudden death, (bacilary hemoglobinuria red
Any age
Water disease!
Clostridium perringens itypes B, C!
Bloody diarhea (hemorrhagic enterocolitis)
Less than 2 weeks of age
E. coti-enterotoxigenic
Diarrhea (ETEC diarrhea)
Less than 1 week of age
E. coti-attaching and effacing
Diarrhea (AEEC diarrhea)
Calves
Fusobacterum necrophonm
Liver abscesses, weight loss
Adult animals 
Necrotic lesions of oral cavity (necrotic stomatitis)
Calves
Mycobacterium avium ssp. Paratuberculosis
Diarrhea, weight loss (Johne's disease)
2 years of age
Salmonelt spp.d
Cholecystitis, diarrhea with or without blood (salmonellosis)
Any age, calves 2 weeks to 2 months most
suscepti ble
 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Diarrhea, weight loss
 Calves, adults
Fungi
Agents of mycotic rumenitise
Decreased appetite and weight loss (mycotic rumenitis)
Ruminating animals
aConsidered a foreign animal disease in the United States.
Intludes foot and mouth? and vesitular stomatitis virus.
Slntludes fimbrial types K99 (also designated F5) and F41.
dCommon serotypes include Salmonelta serotypes Dublin, Montevideo, Newpot and Typhimurium.
 Flntludes Absidia, Aspergifus, Mucor, and Rhizopus species.
550
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 69.10.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Goats and Sheep
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Age Group(s) Commonly Affected 
Viruses
Bluetongue virus (S)
Cyanosis of mucous membranes, oral ulcers
Any age
Nairobi sheep disease virus? (S)
Bloody diarrhea
Any age
Peste des petits virus?
 Diarrhea, necrotic stomatitis
Any age
Rotavirus
Diarrhea
Typically 1-8 weeks of age
Rift Valley fever virus?
Hepatic necrosis, diarrhea
Any age
Rinderpest virus?
 Oral ulcers, diarrhea, (rinderpest)
Any age
Vesicular virusesd
Vesicles/ulcers on tongue, oral mucosa
Any age
Bacteria
Clostridium haemolyticum (S)
 Hepatic necrosis, sudden death, (bacillary hemoglobinuria.
Any age, usually adults
red water disease)
Clostridium novyi—type B
 Hepatic necrosis, sudden death, (infectious necrotic hepatitis.
Any age, usually adults
Black disease)
Clostridium perfringens (type B)
Bloody diarrhea (lamb dysentery)
Less than 2 weeks of age
Clostridium perfringens (type C)
 Bloody diarrhea (necrotic enteritis)
Lessthan 1 weeks of age
Clostridium perfringens (type D)
 Diarrhea, sudden death (entertoxemia)
Rapidy growing animals
Clostridium septicum (S)
 Hemorrhagic abomasitis (braxy)
Usually young animals 
E. coli-enterotoxigenic
Diarrhea {ETEC diarrhea)
Less than 1 week of age
 Mycobacterium avium ssp. Paratuberculosis
Diarrhea, weight loss (Johne's disease)
2 years of age
 Salmonella spp.
Cholecystitis, diarrhea with or without blood (salmonellosis)
All ages affected 
G, goats; S, sheep.
aConsidered a foreign animal disease in the United States.
 blncludes foot and mouthe and vesicular stomatitis virus.
ncludes fimbrial types K99 (also designated F5) and F41.
Table 69.11.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Pigs
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Age Group(s) Commonly Affected
Viruses
 African swine fever virus?
 Diarrhea, vomiting (African swine fever)
Any age
 Hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus 
Vomiting (vomiting and wasting disease)
Up to 3 weeks of age
Hog cholera virus?
 Diarrhea, vomiting (classical swine fever?
Any age
 Porcine circovirus type 2
Diarrhea, icterus
Nursery and growing pigs
 Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
 Diarrhea, vomiting
Typically postweaning piglets
Swine rotavirus
Diarrhea
1-8 weeks of age
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus
Diarrhea and vomiting, (transmissible gastroenteritis)
 All ages, most severe in piglets 
Vesicular viruses?
Vesicles/ulcers in oral cavity
Any age
Bacteria
 Brachyspira hyodysenteriae
Bloody diarrhea (swine dysentery)
Growers and finishers 
 Brachyspira pilosicolf
Diarrhea (colonic spirochetosis)
Weaners, growers, and finishers 
Clostridium perfringens (type A)
Diarrhea 
 Sucklings, weaners, and growers
Clostridium perfringens (type C)
Bloody diarrhea (necrotic enteritis)
Typically lessthan 1 week of age
E. coli-attaching and effacing
 Diarrhea
1-8 weeks of age
E. coli-enterotoxigenic
Diarrhea (ETEC diarrhea)
1 day to 8 weeks of age
E. coff-Shiga-like toxin positive
Diarrhea, edema of stomach wall (edema disease)
Typically recent postweaning
 Fusobacterium necrophorum
 Necrotic ulcers in oral cavity (oral necrobacilosis)
1-3 weeks of age
Lawsonif intracelfularis
Diarrhea intestinal adenomatosis)
 6-20 weeks of age
 Boody diarrhea (proliferative hemorrhagic enteropathy)
Finishers, breeders 
 Salmonella spp.d
 Diarrhea with or without blood, rectal strictures
Typically postweaning
?Considered a foreign animal disease in the United States.
blncludes foot and mouth?, vesicular stomatitis, swine vesicular disease, and vesicular exanthema of swine viruses.
ncludes fimbrial types K88 K99, 987P(also designated F4, F5, and F6, respectively) and F41. F18 is asociated with postweaning diarrhea and edema disease.
dUsual ser ovars are Typhimurium var Copenhagen or Choleraesuis var kunzendorf.
Chapter 69
 Digestive System and Associated Organs
551
Table 69.12
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Digestive System of Poultry
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Age Group(s) Commonly Affected
Viruses
Hemorrhagic enteritis virus (T)
Bloody droppings
 4-9 weeks of age
Avian rotavirus
Watery droppings
Up to 5 weeks of age
Turkey coronavirus (T)
Watery droppings weight loss, (blue comb disease)
Any age typically 1-6 weeks
Exotic Newcastle disease virus?
 Stomatitis, esophagitis, necrohemorrhagic enteritis 
Any age
Bacteria 
Borrelia anserina
Greenish diarrhea (avian spirochetosis)
Any age
Chiamydophila psittaci (T)
 Green gelatinous droppings, hepatitis (ornithosis)
Any age
Clostridium colinum
Watery droppings, liver necrosis (ulcerative enteritis)
 3-12 weeks of age
Clostridium perfringens (types A and C)
 Diarrhea, sudden death (necrotic enteritis)
2-16 weeks of age
Salmonellaserotype Pullorumt
 Diarrhea, liver necrosis
Typically less than 3 weeks 
Salmoneltaserotype Galinarum
 Diarrhea, liver necrosis
 More common in adult birds
Fungi
Candida albicans
Diphtheritic membrane on crop, esophagus, and mouth (thrush, sour crop)
Young birds more susceptible
C, Chickens T, Turkeys.
Considered a foreign animal disease in the United States.
(ae posyam) pg nudaxawuse Annae suapoed saaseg
A number of viruses cause diseases of the oral cavity.
bacterial species, predominately gram-negative anaerobes,
The viruses that cause the vesicular stomatides variously
  e    s  
 affect ruminants, horses, and swine. Included in this group
of the bacterial population found in gingivitis and peri-
are foot-and-mouth disease virus (picornavirus), vesicu-
odontal diseases, but their role in disease pathogenesis is
lar stomatitis virus (rhabdovirus), swine vesicular disease
unclear. In cats secondary bacterial gingivitis can be the
virus (enterovirus), and vesicular exanthema of swine virus
result of underlying immunosuppressive viral infections
(calicivirus-now believed to be extinct). These are conta-
(FeLV, FIV).
gious viruses. Lesions initially present as vesicles that even-
Mycotic oral infections are uncommon in most animals.
tually rupture and leave pain ful ulcers in oral mucosa. The
Oral candidiasis (thrush) caused by Candida species (usu-
coronary band and heel junctions of the digits may also be
ally C. albicans) is the most common mycotic oral infec-
involved, causing moderate to severe lameness. The exotic
tion encountered. Prior antibiotic treatment, stressful con-
nature of some of the vesicular viruses makes them of sub-
ditions or debilitating diseases that disrupt normal oral
stantial economic importance in countries free of these dis-
flora all predispose to infection. It occurs in all animals
eases. Other viruses are important causes of erosive stom-
but with varying frequency. Candidiasis is especially com-
atitis and include bovine viral diarrhea virus in cattle, feline
mon in poultry, where it frequently also involves other
calicivirus, rinderpest virus in sheep and cattle, bluetongue
virus in sheep, and the malignant catarrhal fever viruses
in cattle. Periodically, orbiviral infections adapted to one
species (e.g., epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD) of white-
FIGURE 69.1
The photograph depicts erosion of the
tailed deer) will infect cattle and cause signs resembling
oral mucosa of an Angus-cross cow infected the orbivius of
other vesicular diseases (Figure 69.1).
epizootic hemorrhagic disease of white-tailed deer (EHD).
Clinical signs and pathogenesis of infections are
described in detail in specific chapters related to these
viruses. Other common viral infections of the oral cavity
are bovine papular stomatitis, which causes papules on var-
ious structures throughout the oral cavity and canine oral
papillomatosis, which in turn presents with cauliflower-
like growths (papillomas) that can be widespread through-
out the oral cavity.
Bacterial causes of oral infections typically originate
endogenously from normal oral flora. Infections such as
actinobacillosis(woody tongue)and actinomycosis (lumpy
jaw) (Figure 69.2) in cattle are initiated by some preced-
ing trauma that breaches the normal mucosal barrier and
allows the introduction of Actinobacillus lignieresii and Acti-
nomyces bovis, respectively.
Gingival and periodontal diseases are more common
problems in dogs and cats than other animals. Multiple
552
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
feed types. ASarcina-like organism has been associated with 
FIGURE 69.2.
The photograph depicts a sagittal section
abomasal tympany in lambs and goats.
of the mandibie of an aged crossbred cow infected with
In ruminants, damage to mucosal surface of the
Actinomyces bovis. Multiple abscesses and "sulfur" granules
forestomach or disruption in the rumen flora can lead to
are observed within the proliferative mass of bone.
serious and potentially fatal consequences. In dairy cattle,
if integrity of the reticulum is penetrated by foreign linear
objects such as ingested wire (hardware disease), peritonitis
and pericarditis may develop. These infections are polymi-
Crobial with Arcanobacterium pyogenes and Fuso-bacterium
necrophorum commonly in volved.
Sudden dietary changes to carbohydrate-rich feeds,
which are easily fermentable, lead to a decrease in rumen
pH. The lower pH kills acid-sensitive rumen flora and
damages rumen mucosa. Bacterial rumenitis may develop
and can serve as a source of organisms for embolic hep-
atitis that eventually result in liver abscessation. Com-
mon agents recovered from liver abscesses are the familiar
abscess producers of ruminants, A. pyogenes and F. necropho-
rum. Mycotic rumenitis also develops subsequent to rumi-
nal acidosis or prior antibiotic treatment that has dis-
rupted rumen flora. The fungal agents involved in mycotic
rumenitis are often angioinvasive, causing a severe vasculi-
tis, which leads to further tissue necrosis. The zygomycetes
 parts of the digestive system. Lesions in the mouth appear
(Mucor, Rhizopus, and Absidia) and Aspergillus spp. are the
 s o    s
as ulcer-like plaques. In dogs, oral granulomas as a result
 also serve as a source for hematogenous dissemination of
of disseminated Histoplasma capsularum infections, one of
fungal elements leading to mycotic abortion.
the systemic mycoses, occur with enough frequency to be
worth noting. Other fungal infections of the oral cavity are
rare.
Infections of the Small and Large Intestines
Microbial infections of the small and large intestines affect
Infections of the Esophagus
all domestic animals. Effective vaccination against many
of the major viral enteric pathogens (e.g., parvoviruses
Infections of the esophagus are relatively uncommon,
ss s s  so n (s nd 
probably due to the rapid passage of material through the
decreased the incidence of contagious enteric diseases in
esophagus and the tough stratified squamous epithelium
companion animals. Holding dogs and cats in close con-
that lines it. Some viral infections, typically as part of a sys-
finement, such as in kennels, shows, and animal shelters,
temic infection, cause esophageal erosions or ulcers. Most
increases the risk for contracting contagious enteric dis-
notable among these are bovine viral diarrhea virus in cat-
eases.
tle and exotic Newcastle disease virus in poultry. Muco-
 Intestinal infections of both bacterial and viral ori-
cutaneous candidiasis in birds most commonly involves
gin remain of great clinical and economic significance in 
the crop (sour crop, crop mycosis) but can also involve the
horses, production animals, and poultry due to intensive
 esophagus proper and proven triculus. A pseudomembrane
rearing conditions, management factors (e.g., failure to
composed of necrotic material overlying mucosal surfaces
 insure adequate passive transfer or proper manure manage.
is the typical presentation.
ment), and the absence of effective vaccines against some
of the major pathogens. Host age susceptibility exists for
some enteric pathogens (e.g., Clostridium perfringens type
Infections of the Stomach, Ruminant Forestomach,
C, enterotoxigenic E. coli, and rotavirus). Neonates, in gen-
and Abomasum 
eral, are the most susceptible.
Because its contractile nature causes relatively rapid tran-
The major clinical manifestations of microbial infec-
sit of ingested material, as well as its mucus coating and
tions of the intestinal tract are diarrhea and vomiting
acidic environment, the stomach does not provide a very
Vomiting often occurs in enteric infections in small ani-
 hospitable environment for pathogens. Recently, much
 mals and swine as part of the enteric defense response and
attention has been paid to Helicobacter species, an organ-
is regulated by the vomition center in the brain. Diarrhea is
ism that has adapted to live in the stomach, as the cause
defined as increase in frequency, fluidity, or volume offeces
of gastritis and gastric ulcers in humans. Many Helicobacter
due to an increase in water content. Insults to the intestines
 species have been identified in animals; however, their role
that cause increased secretion or decreased absorption can
in disease remains to be clearly established, in part due to
result in diarrhea. Severity, duration, and characteristics
their frequent colonization of clinically normal animals.
(watery, bloody, etc.) of diarrhea differ depending on the
In sheep, a severe hemorrhagic abomasitis (braxy) caused
agent involved. Whether diarrhea is actually a benefitto the
by Clostridium septicum occurs and is related to particular
host, pathogen, or both is unclear. Diarrhea not only serves
Chapter 69
 Digestive System and Associated Organs
553
the host as means to eliminate a buildup of pathogens but
FlGURE 69.3.
The photomicrograph depicts a section of
nation and, thereby, maximizes potential for the pathogen
jejunum from an 11-day-old piglet infected with
to infect other hosts.
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC). immunohistochemistry
Viral infections in volving the small and large intestines
was used to demonstrate the bacteria that are adherent to the
may be limited to the digestive tract (e.g., rotaviruses
enterocytes. Rabbit anti-O8 was used as the primary
antiserum. Aikaline phosphatase-labeled goat anti-rabbit
and coronaviruses) or be part of a multisystem infectious
serum and fast red were subsequently used in the staining
process (e.g., African swine fever virus, canine distemper
(xo poy i fo ro) m o = eg 'spnid
virus, and parvoviruses). Intestinal viral infections may be
acquired directly via the oral route or as a result of a viremia
with localization to intestinal epithelial cells. Some viruses
acquired by the oral route are acid resistant, which allows
their passage through the stomach, while others are acid-
sensitive but can be protected by the buffering action and
fats in milk or in feedstuffs with a rapid gastric transit time.
Attachment to intestinalepithelialcellreceptors (e.g., sialic
acid-containingoligosaccharides) via viralattachment pro-
teins is the initial step in establishing infection. This is fol-
lowed by uptake of the virus into the cell, often through
receptor-mediated endocytosis, and replication within the
 cell. Subsequent destruction of epithelial cells resulting in
loss of absorption and resorption capacity and disruption
in osmotic equilibrium is manifest by diarrhea. Rotavirus
and coronavirus are common causes of viral enteritis in
many animals and affect predominantly villus epithelial
cells. The time course from exposure to manifestation of
clinical signs is usually short. Other viruses affect crypt
epithelial cells (e.g., Rinderpest virus in sheep and canine
parvovirus) and cause more severe tissue damage. The spec-
force relative to the host cell surface, since the host cell sur-
trum of clinical signs and details on pathogenesis asso-
face is somewhat hydrophobic. On the other hand, protein
ciated with specific viral agents that affect the intestines
receptors on the surface of some host cells have affinity
of domestic animals are found in the specific chapters on
for these surface carbohydrates. The outcome of the latter
those agents.
interaction is adhesion.
Bacteria are also major pathogens of the small and
After ad herence, the pathogen may produce disease by
large intestines. To produce disease in the intestinal tract,
(1) secretion of an exotoxin, resulting, for example, in dis-
potentially pathogenic bacteria must first adhere to tar-
ruption of fluid and electrolyte regulation of the target cell;
get cells. If the target cell is part of a niche occupied by
(2) invasion of the target cell, causing its death, usually
normal flora, the microorganisms will encounter “colo-
by the action of a toxin (a cytotoxin); or (3) invasion of the
nization resistance," which they must overcome before
target cell and the lymphatics, resulting in a systemic in fec-
adhering. Ad herence results from the interaction (selective 
tion. The mechanisms by which the host is affected by dif-
adsorption) of microbial surface structures (adhesins) with 
ferent bacterial enteric pathogens are varied and complex.
receptors on target cells. Adhesins are considered virulence
In some cases, as in the enterotoxigenic E. coli, the diarrhea
factors because most pathogens cannot produce disease
is solely a result of the production of enterotoxin and little
without first adhering to a target cell. Fimbrial adhesins
to no pathology is observed (Figure 69.3).
are protein in nature and protrude from the surface of the
Other pathogens (e.g., Salmonella) use complex commu-
bacterial cell. They are responsible for adherence of some
nication systems to translocate effector proteins into host
bacteria to carbohydrate moieties that are part of glyco-
cells (e.g., type Ill secretion systems) as well as produce both
proteins on the surface of host cells. The most commonly
enterotoxic and cytotoxic effects. Still other pathogens,
found fimbriae (type 1 fimbriae) on the surface of gram-
such as Mycobacterium avium ssp. parahuberculosis, exert
negative bacteria have affinity for mannose-containing
thei1 effect on the intestinal tract by translocating through
glycoproteins on the surface of cells. Bacteria expressing
mucosal epithelial cells and existing in macrophages in
type 1 fimbriae, when mixed with red blood cells, agglu-
the lamina propria and regional lymph nodes. A gran-
tinate these cells; this agglutination is inhibited by man-
ulomatous enteritis results, however, the severity of the
nose (mannose-sensitive). Intestinal epithelial cells display
lesion does not necessarily correlate with the severity of
structures that serve as receptors for fimbriae expressed by
clinical signs. Specific details on the mechanism of patho-
enteropathogenic strains of bacteria.
genesis and resulting pathology of the important bacterial
 Other structures on the surface of bacterial cells influ-
pathogens of the intestines of domestic animals are covered
ence how the bacterium will interact with host cells. These
in the respective chapters on each agent.
structures are carbohydrates and influence the interaction
Organisms known to be pathogens of the intestinal tract
by rendering the surface of the bacterial cell relatively
in certain animals may be found as normal flora in oth-
hydrophilic. This hyd rophilic property imparts a repulsive
ers. Their role in causing disease in some animals, if any,
554
PARTIV
 Clinical Applications
remains to be established. As an example, Campylobacter
liver of cattle and sheep. They germinate when local liver
jejuni is the most common cause of diarrhea in humans
necrosis results subsequent to immature fluke migration
 and is commonly found in the intestinal tract of compan-
 Or when some other event damages the liver (e.g., liver
ion and domestic animals—but its ability to cause disease
biopsies). Upon germination under this anaerobic envi-
in some animals is unclear. There is a high carriage rate of
ronment, a number of cytolytic toxins are produced that
C. jejuni in chickens with no apparent adverse effects on
further damage the liver. The agent of Tyzzer's disease,
birds greater than 2 weeks of age.
Clostridium piliforme, causes a rare but acute and highly
Various factors predispose or make more likely that
fatal infection in a number of animals. It is most important
 an enteric pathogen will establish and cause disease. The
in laboratory animals. Foals are most commonly affected
importance of antimicrobials on the disruption of normal
among domestic animals. Characteristic spindle-shaped
flora and in allowing pathogens to establish has already
bacilli are found in the liver along the edge of areas of hep-
been discussed. Other factors that create stress for the host
atic necrosis. Clostridium colinum causes hepatic necrosis
will also result in changes in the intestinal flora, mainly
along with ulcerative lesions in the intestines of chickens
resulting in a drop in the anaerobic component. The level
and turkeys (ulcerative enteritis).
of coliform bacteria will be higher after a decrease in con-
Certain serovars of Leptospira will cause a nonspecific
centration of fatty acids produced by anaerobic flora. The
reactive hepatitis. Severity of the lesions can vary from
actual reason for the decrease in the number of obligate
severe chronic hepatitis to mild diffuse hepatocellular vac-
anaerobes is not known. In addition to these changes, the
uolation. Often renal involvement also occurs.
amount of fibronectin (a glycoprotein) coating epithelial
 As already mentioned, rumenitis provides a source of
cells in the oral cavity decreases. Since this glycoprotein
bacteria through the portal system that can result in liver
possesses receptors for gram-positive species in the oral cav-
abscesses. Miliary liver abscesses, most commonly in rumi-
ity, decrease in this population occurs with a correspond-
nants, results from hematogenous seeding by a number
ing increase in gram-negative species, especially members
of different bacteria. Common agents include Yersinia
of the family Enterobacteriaceae.
pseudohuberculosis and Rhodococcus equi. In poultry, liver
Fungal infections of the intestines are not common. Of
granulomas are periodically reported to be caused by a
those encoun tered, granulomatous enteritis in dogs caused
gram-positive anaerobic rod, Eubacterium torhuosum, and
by H. capsulahum is among the most common. Pythium
are thought to be of intestinal origin.
insidiosum, an oomycete, causes granulomas in the submu-
The gall bladder infections can be viral (e.g., canine
cosa or muscularis layer of the small intestine (and some-
infectious hepatitis virus and Rift Valley fever virus in
times stomach) in dogs, and it is manifest by vomiting,
sheep) and bacterial (e.g., Satmonella enterica serotype
diarrhea, and weight loss. Rare algal infections caused by
 Dublin in calves) in etiology. Infections of the pancreas are
Prototheca species result in an intractable diarrhea as part
rarely reported in domestic animals.
of a more generalized process (usually with ocular involve-
ment) in dogs.
Diseases of the Digestive System of Unknown but
Suspected Infectious Etiology
Infections of Digestive System-Associated Organs
It is not uncommon for the cause of diarrhea in domestic
Infections of the liver occur th rough a number of routes and
animals to go undiagnosed. There are a number of impor-
include the (1) portal vein, (2) hepatic artery, (3) ascension
tant conditions of the digestive tract of domestic animals
through the biliary system, and (4) contiguous spread from
that are believed to be infectious in origin; however, no spe.
adjacent infectious processes (e.g., reticulitis).
cific agent has been conclusively demonstrated to be the
The liver may be a target for a number of viruses, often
cause. In some cases, multiple agents are likely involved 
as part of a systemic infection. Liver damage can occur
and/or some interplay between host and environment is
by infection of endothelial cells (e.g., canine adenovirus
necessary for clinical signs to develop. Some major dis-
1), causing vascular stasis and hypoxia as well as through
eases of suspected in fectious etiology, but where the specific
infection of parenchymal cells resulting in hepatocellular
agent(s) has not been conclusively identified, include poult
necrosis.
enteritis mortality syndrome in turkeys, colitis X in horses
 A number of bacterial genera and species can affect the
(possibly caused by a Clostridial infection), hemorrhagic
liver. Clostridial species are among the most important.
Clostridial spores of C. haemolyticum (C. novyi type D) and
caused by bovine corona- virus), and hemorrhagic jejunal
C. novyi type B, the agents of bacillary hemoglobinuria and
syndrome in dairy cattle suspected to be caused by Clostrid-
infectious necrotic hepatitis, respectively, are present in the
ium perfringens type A).
70
Integumentary System
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The integument is the largest organ of the body. It plays
duced by epithelial cells lining the teat canal provide the
a major role in temperature regulation, sensory percep-
primary physical barrier for the mammary gland.
-q e spaod pue 'ssoi p isue uooaod pue 'uo
rier from external insults, including potentially pathogenic
Antimicrobial Properties of the Skin
microorganisms. It is composed of epidermis, dermis, sub-
cutis, hair follicles, and glandular structures. Glandular
structures includesweatand sebaceousglands as well asspe
The skin provides a less favorable environment for micro-
 bial growth than do mucous membranes of the alimentary,
cialized structures such as anal sacs. Hair type and density
vary on the body according to functional need, including
respiratory, and urogenital systems owing to properties pre-
sented in the following sections.
sensory, thermoregulatory, and protective functions. Birds
have evolved feathers, probably originating from scales, in
place of hair. Footpads, horns, hooves, nails, and beaks are
Dryness
 all specialized keratinized structures of the integumentary
The normal dryness of the skin surface limits the ability
system.
of many microbes to survive and establish. Conditions
 The epidermis is in continual contact with the sur-
that interfere with the normal evaporative process cause
rounding environment and provides a home for a resident
proliferation of resident and transient skin flora through
flora. The outer layer of the epidermis, keratinized stratum
corneum, is held together by lipid cement, and together
increased moisture retention and changes in temperature,
they form the major physical barrier of the skin. Epider-
pH, and CO2 tension. Excessive folding of the skin in cer-
tain animal breeds and obese individuals is a prime exam-
different sites on individual animals. The dermis, through
ple of an anatomic condition that increases hydration and
collagen and elastic fibers, provides tensile strength and
temperature of the stratum corneum, providinga more hos-
 pitable en vironment for bacterial proliferation.
elasticity to the integumentary system and also varies sub-
stantially in thickness throughout the body. The hypoder-
mis provides additional flexibility along with insulation
Desquamation
through adipose tissue.
Continuous shedding of superficial skin layers elimi-
 The external ear canal is included in this chapter because
nates transient organisms. Resident flora numbers are also
the external surface is covered with skin (pinna) or epithe-
reduced but are promptly replenished from the residual
lium and glandular structures (external auditory meatus).
Overall, the lesions found in otitis externa are similar to
population.
those found in skin infections, and some of the important
pathogens responsible for otitis externa are the same ones
Secretions and Excretions
that cause infections elsewhere on the skin.
The mammary gland, although technically not part of
Holocrine sebaceous glands secrete lipids, including long-
chain fatty acids, many of which inhibit bacteria. They
the integumentary system, is also included in this chapter
and the apocrine sweat glands contribute to an intercellu-
because of its direct communication with the skin. Mam-
mary gland pathogens, some of which are resident or tran-
la1 seal in superficial epidermal layers, limiting microbial
access. Apocrine and eccrine sweat glands excrete lactate,
sient flora of the skin, primarily enter through the streak
canal of the teat. The teat sphincter and a keratin plug pro-
propionate, acetate, caprylate, and high concentrations of
sodium chloride. Interferon, lysozyme, transferrin, and all 
classes of immunoglobulins are also present. Keratinocytes
synthesize the antimicrobial peptides—cathelicidins and
beta-defensins. All these substances contribute to the self-
Original chapter written by the late Dr. Richard L
Walker.
sterilizing action of the skin—that is, its resistance to colo-
nization by transient microorganisms.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johir1 Wiley & Soris, Iric.
555
556
PART IV
 Clinical Applications
Microbial Interactions
on cator dog skin are usually associated with abnormalcon-
ditions. Members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, particu-
 Resident bacteria exclude intruders by excreting inhibitory
larly Escherichia coli and Proteus mirabilis, and enterococci
metabolites (e.g., volatile fatty acids) and bacteriocins, and
are common transients. The feet of farm animals carry fecal
by occupying available niches.
bacteria, some of which participate in foot infections, most
notably Fusobacterium necrophorum and Prevotella melanino-
Immune System
genica. The agent of ovine footrot, Dichelobacter nodosus,
although hardly a normal commensal, is limited to epider-
A skin immune system responds to local antigenic stim-
mal tissues.
uli, including microbial ones, and comprises cell types cor-
responding functionally to those operating on mucosal
Transient fungal flora of the skin represent contami-
nants ofairborne or soilorigin. Many genera can be isolated
surfaces. Langerhans cells, an antigen-presenting cell, and 
intraepithelial T lymphocytes are prominent constituents
from the skin. Common transient fungal genera found on
the skin include Aspergillus, Chrysosporium, Cladosporium,
of the system. Keratinocytes participate in immune
Penicillium, and Scopulariopsis.
defense by producing immune-modulating substances.
The interaction between these cells constitutes the skin-
Sterilization of the skin is impossible due to the physical
associated lymphoid tissue. Complement, cytokines, and
inaccessibility to much of the skin flora. Thorough cleans-
immunoglobulins are found in the emulsion layer of the
ing ofshaved skin with soap and water, followed by soaking
skin and are important to overall integumentary immuno.
with 70% alcohol, will remove 95% of the flora. More than
 99% removal of skin flora is claimed for repeated povidone
competence.
iodine applications and rinses with chlorhexidine (0.5%)
in alcohol. Following such treatment there is rapid repop-
Microbial Flora of the Skin
ulation, usually by the same organisms.
The microbial flora of the skin plays an important role in
defense and is probably acquired at birth from the dam.
Infections of the Skin
These microorganisms are limited to the superficial epider-
mal layers, where intercellular cohesion is relaxed prior to
Susceptibility of skin to infection is inversely related to
desquamation, and to the distal portions of gland ducts
thickness and compactness of the stratum corneum. Spe-
and hair follicles. The microbial flora exists predominately
cific animal breeds, because of anatomic conformations,
in microcolonies, rather than being evenly distributed over
 physiologic factors, or genetic factors, are more predisposed
the skin. Bacterial adhesion, through lipoteichoic acids in
to skin infections than others.
gram-positive cocci, is critical to the establishment and per-
Integumentary infections are often secondary, requir-
sistence of resident flora. Keratinization defects, as found in
ing a disruption in the host's innate defense mechanisms.
seborrhea, provide additional attachment sites and allow
Factors such as trauma, excessive moisture, irritants, insect
for increased numbers of resident flora, as well as changes
01 animal bites, and burns are all predisposing causes for
in overall flora makeup.
skin infections to develop. Underlying diseases, including
 Bacteria and yeast variably colonize sites on the skin
preexisting skin conditions and immunological disorders
 of animals. The greatest numbers are found in moist, pro.
also predispose to secondary skin infections. Deep dermal
tected areas such as the axilla, inguinal region, interdigital
and subcutaneous infections typically require some form
spaces, and ear canals. Their concentration islower than on
of traumatic implantation that allows for the in troduction
colonized mucous membranes, rarely exceeding 10?/cm2
of microbial pathogens that would otherwise not persist on 
and, in some areas, 102/cm2.
the external epidermal layer.
Gram-positive organisms predominate among resi-
Systemic infections sometimes involve the integumen-
dent flora. Among the gram-positives, coagulase-negative
 tary system. Agents with trophism for vascular endothe.
staphylococci constitute the majority. Certain strains of
lium or epithelial cells can cause focal or generalized lesions
coagulase-positive staphylococci are also considered to be
in the skin.
resident organisms in some animals. Facultatively anaer-
obic diphtheroids (Corynebacterium and Propionibacterium
Viral Infections of the Skin
spp.) are consistently present, as are Micrococcus spp. and
viridans streptococci. Of gram-negatives, only Acinetobac-
A number of viruses gain entry to the host via the skin,
ter spp.are considered a major part of the resident flora. The
either through abrasions, insect or animal bites or by expo-
main fungal resident is a lipophilic yeast, Malassezia, which
sure to contaminated equipment (e.g., needles and har-
resides on the skin and in the external ear canal. Viruses are
nesses). Some of these viruses simply use the in tegumentary
not generally considered part of the normal skin flora. Viral
 system as a route for entry into the host and cause either
agents that directly infect the skin are maintained in ani-
systemic in fections or have primary targets that are organs
 mal populations by persistently infected individuals but
Or systems other than the skin (e.g., rabies virus). Details
 are also capable of surviving for extended periods in the
on mechanisms used for entry, replication, and spread via
environment, which can serve as an alternate source for
the integumentary system for specific viruses are covered
infecting other animals.
in chapters on those individual viruses.
Various transient microbial flora can be encountered.
For some viruses the skin is the primary site of infec.
Beta-hemolytic streptococci (generally Lancefield group G)
tion or is one of the principal sites where clinical signs
Chapter 70 Integumentary System
557
manifest. The papillomaviruses and poxviruses are promi
Dermatophilus congolensis,an actinomycete, also causes a
nent viral pathogens of the integumentary system in ani-
superficial dermatitis, most often in horses and ruminants.
 mals. The papillomaviruses are introduced through skin
Infection stimulates an intense inflammatory response
abrasions and infect epithelial cells. Infected epithelial
that is characterized by alternating waves of inflamma-
cells become hyperplastic. Hyperkeratosis is the result. The
tory cells followed by newly generated epidermis. In con-
lesions (papillomas) are typically raised and filiform, and
trast to the abundance of products produced by coagulase-
positive staphylococci, few virulence factors are recognized
specific, although bovine papillomaviruses 1 and 2 are asso-
in Dermatophilus. It produces an extracellular serine pro-
ciated with equine sarcoids.
tease that may contribute to the overall disease process;
Members of the family Poxviridae also affect a num-
however, environmental factors are key to the develop-
ber of animals and birds. Many viruses in this family have
ment of disease. Persistent wetting of the skin or insect
a limited host range, although some are zoonotic. Trans-
 aan a n s    
fer occurs through contact with skin lesions, scabs from
epidermis. Once invasion occurs, an inflammatory reac-
infected animals, or mechanically by biting insects. The
tion is induced, which results in profuse cellular exudation.
parapox virus that causes sore-mouth in sheep and the
If predisposing conditions remain to promote invasion
fowlpox virus in poultry can be transmitted by respira-
of newly generated epidermis, the infection/inflammatory
tory droplets, as well as by direct contact with lesion mate-
cycle repeats, giving rise to the characteristic histopathol-
rial or contaminated equipment. Depending on the virus
Ogy; otherwise, the infection resolves.
involved, clinical disease can be mild to severe. Generalized
 Deep bacterial pyodermas involve the dermis and some-
signs include fever and anorexia. The skin lesions are typi-
times the subcutaneous tissue. Injury or trauma almost
cally papulonodular and become pustular or proliferative,
always precedes the development of deep pyodermas. In
eventually resulting in the production of scabs that leave
some cases, deep skin infections occur as a result of the
scars.
extension of a superficial pyoderma. Again, coagulase-
Cutaneous manifestations are part of the overall clini-
positive staphylococci are frequently involved, although
cal presentation of some generalized or multisystem viral
other bacteria may be secondarily involved. Furunculosis
infections. Viruses that cause vesicular diseases (foot-and-
(inflammation of the dermis and subcutis) and folliculi-
mouth disease, swine vesicular disease, vesicular exan-
tis (inflammation of the hair follicle) are most commonly
thema of swine, and vesicular stomatitis viruses) produce
vesicles that variably affect the teats, coronary bands, and
horses, goats, and sheep.
interdigital areas of the skin. The vesicles readily rupture
Subcutaneous abscesses are typically the result of a bite
leaving ulcerative lesions that may become secondarily
wound or penetrating foreign body. The bacteria intro-
infected with bacteria. In addition to the lymphoreticular
duced usually represent members of the oral flora and cause
and neurological lesions it produces, the Marek's disease
an accumulation of purulent exudate in the dermis and
virus of chickens causes nodules to develop in the feather
subcutaneous tissue. Subcutaneous abscesses most com-
follicles and uses feather follicle dander as a primary means
monly occur in cats and most frequently involve Pasteurella
of spreading virus to other birds. Canine distemper virus
multocida and obligate anaerobic bacteria. Subcutaneous
 causes nasal and footpad hyperkeratosis in dogs as a late
abscesses are also common in ruminants, with Arcanobac-
clinical manifestation.
terium pyogenes frequently being recovered. Corynebac-
terium pseudofuberculosis causes subcutaneous abscesses in
sheep and horses. In cattle, C. pseudohuberculosis infections
Bacterial Infections of the Skin
manifest as an ulcerative dermatitis rather than forming
Bacteria associated with skin in fections primarily originate
abscesses.
from the environment or direct or indirect contact with
Cellulitis is a loose purulent inflammation of the subcu-
carrier animals, or are resident flora of the skin, oral cavity,
taneous tissue. It is generally poorly contained and extends
genital tract, or lower digestive tract of the affected animal.
rapidly along tissue planes from the site of initiation. A
variety of bacterial agents cause cellulitis. Among the most
mas (e.g., impetigo and superficial bacterial folliculitis) o1
serious forms of cellulitis is the anaerobic cellulitis caused
deep pyodermas (e.g, folliculitis, furunculosis, cellulitis,
by one of a number of histotoxic clostridial species. Under
and subcutaneous abscesses). Coagulase-positive staphy-
anaerobic en vironments these species produce potent and
lococci (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, S. intermedius, and S.
highly destructive toxins. Horses, ruminants, swine, and
hyicus) are the primary agents of superficial pyodermas.
poultry are most commonly affected by clostridial celluli-
They produce a myriad of enzymes and toxins that con-
tis. Infections have a high fatality rate, even in the face
tribute to the disease process. Along with cell wall com-
 of aggressive treatment. An E. coli-associated cellulitis in
ponents, some of these microbial products have potent
broiler chickens is an especially economically important
chemotactic effects that account for the pyogenic inflam-
disease for the poultry industry, accounting for a sub-
matory response observed in staphylococcocal in fections.
S. hyicus, the cause of greasy pig disease, produces an exfo-
S. aureus causes an acute cellulitis in horses that spreads
rapidly and causes necrosis of the overlying skin. Thor-
dermal layers resulting in focal erosions in the epidermis.
oughbred racehorses are most commonly affected.
In neonatal pigs, this generalized epidermitis is associated
 Other bacterial infections of the skin include mycobac-
with substantial mortality.
terial granulomas. Cats are most commonly affected by
558
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
these organisms, although infections also occur in swine,
cattle, and dogs. The saprophytic mycobacteria responsible
FIGURE 70.1.
Photomicrograph of a section of a skin
are introduced by some trauma. If they establish, infections
biopsy stained with PAS depicting hair colonized by funga!
are characterized by chronic, nonhealing wounds with
hyphae (arrow) and spores (arrowhead). (Courtesy of Dr Bruce
draining fstulas. A specific entity in young cats referred to
Brodersen.)
as feline leprosy is caused by Mycobacterium lepraemurium
and presents as cutaneous nodules of the head and extrem-
 ities that sometimes ulcerate. A regional lymphadenopa-
thy is often present. A second, more generalized form of
the disease caused by an unidentified mycobacterium has
been described in older cats. Pyogranulomatous dermati-
tis caused by Actinomyces spp. occurs in dogs (A. viscosus 
 01 A. hordeovulneris associated with plant awns) and cattle
(A. bovis). Draining tracts and the presence of yellow gran-
ules composed of bacterialcolonies, sometimes surroun ded
by a homogenous eosinophilic material, are found in the
draining material.
Some bacterial skin infections involve two or more
bacteria working in concert. In contagious ovine footrot, F.
necrophorum causes an interdigital dermatitis in macerated
skin, which allows D. nodosus to establish by fimbrial
attachment and proliferate. Production of a number
of serine and basic proteases by D. nodosus results in an
undermining of the sole and, thereby, allows for additional
opportunistic bacteria to invade, further aggravating the
 dermatophytes) or be carried inapparently (zoophilic der-
condition.
matophytes).
 A substantial integumentary component is part of cer-
Malassezia, a lipid-dependent yeast, is the other main 
 tain systemic bacterial infections. The urticarial plaques
fungal agent in volved in superficial mycotic infections of
and diffuse erythematous lesions in the skin of swine,
theskin.Itcauses an erythematous, scalylesion.Since itcan
resulting from cutaneous infarctions, are characteristic of
be found in low numbers on normal skin, clinical relevance
erysipelas. The effects on vascular endothelium of bacterial
 of its isolation must be decided based on clinical signs.
toxins or hypersensitivity reactions to bacterial antigens
Abnormal environmental conditions can overwhelm
may also manifest in the skin. Subcutaneous swelling of
the host defense mechanisms and lead to opportunistic
the eyelids, lips, and forehead occur in edema disease in 
mycotic infections of the skin. Skin biopsies and cultures
pigs, caused by Shiga-like toxin producing strains of E. coli.
 are sometimes helpful in the identification these unusual
The dependent edema resulting from the vasculitis that
dermatologic pathogens, as in the case of the Prototheca
occurs in purpura hemorrhagica in horses is a sequelae to
 spp. dermatitis, diagnosed in the skin biopsy of the bat in
infection with Streptococcus equi ssp. equi.
Figure 70.2.
FIGURE 70.2.
Photomicrograph of a section of a skin
Fungal Infections of the Skin
biopsy stained with H&E demonstrating numerous pro totheca!
sporangia in the dermis. (Courtesy of Dr Alan Doster.)
Fungal infections of the skin are classified as superficial
cutaneous mycoses or subcutaneous mycoses. In addition,
fungal agents that cause systemic mycoses (Blastomyces der-
?
matitidis, Coccidioides immitis, Cryptococcus neoformans, and
Histoplasma capsulatum) cause pyogranulomatous lesions
in the integumentary system subsequent to disseminated
infection.
The most important of the superficial mycotic infec.
tions is dermatophytosis or ringworm. It denotes a spe-
s n    sio 
 attack keratinized structures. These fungi (Microsporum spp.
G
 and Trichophyton spp.) produce enzymes (keratinases) that
digest keratin and in fect growing hair and stratum corneum
(Figure 70.1). Lesions are inflamed, crusty, or scaly and
often circular to oval in shape due to the centripetal pro-
 gression of the lesion. Affected hair is brittle, leaving areas
of alopecia. Dermatophytes are not always pathogens and
 can represent transient flora of the skin (usually geophilic
Chapter 70
Integumentary System
559
Table 70.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Integumentary System of Dogs
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Canine distemper virus 
Nasal and footpad hyperkeratosis (distemper?
 Canine papillomavirus
Cutaneous papillomas (canine papilomatosis)
Bacteria
Actinomyces viscosus, A. hordeovuineris
Draining tracts, subcutaneous abscess
Brucella canis
Scrotal dermatitis 
Staphylococcus intermedius?
Cellulits, folliculits furunculosis, impetigo
Fungi
Malassezia pachydermatis
Exfoliative dermatitis
Microsporum canis, M. gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes
Circular, scaly, crusty, alopectic skin lesions (dermatophytosis, ringworm)
Pythrum insidiosum
Ulcerative and pyogranulomatous skin lesions (cutaneous pythiosis)
 Systemic mycotic agentst
Papules, nodules, abscess, draining tracts
Other coagulase-positive Staphylococus sp involved in pyoderma include 5. aureus and 5. schlefer ssp. coagufans.
blntludes Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides inmmitis, Cyptococcus neoformans, and Histoplasma capsulaturt.
The subcutaneous mycoses involve the dermis and sub-
Sporotrichosis is a subcutaneous mycosis caused by the
cutaneous tissues and may be localized lesions or spread
dimorphic fungus, Sporothrix schenckii. Lesions of sporotri-
via the lymphatics. Most of the fungal agents involved are
chosis are ulcerative nodules or recurrent draining tracts in
from an environmentalsource (e.g., soiland plant material)
the skin. Infections may also involve the lymphatics caus-
and gain entry by traumatic in troduction. A number of dif-
ing a lymphangitis, in addition to the skin lesions. Cats,
ferent subcutaneous mycotic infections are recognized and
horses, and dogs are most commonly affected.
classified by their gross and histopathologic characteristics.
Cutaneous pythiosis is caused by an oomycete, Pythium 
These different conditions include chromoblastomycosis,
insidiosum, and therefore is not a true fungal infection. It
phaeohyphomycosis, and eumycotic mycetoma. They are
is found in swamps and ponds, and the disease is asso-
described in more detail in Chapter 46. More than one fun-
ciated with exposure to those environments. Skin infec-
gal agent may be responsible for each of these conditions.
tions are characterized by firm or spongy, ulcerated lesions
For example, eumycotic mycetomas-which are character-
that often have draining fistulous tracts. Necrotic masses
ized by (1) localized swelling at the infection site (tume-
of tissue (kunkers) may be found in the lesion. Although
faction), (2) draining sinus tracts, and (3) the presence of
uncommon, horses and dogs are most frequently affected.
granules or grains composed of colonies of the causative
An additional genus, Lagenidium, has also been reported to
agent—are caused by more than 14 species of dematiaceous
be involved in such lesions.
(pigmented) fungi and more than 9 species of hyaline (col-
When one of the systemic mycotic agents involves
 orless) fungi. They produce dark- and white-grained myce-
the integumentary system, the lesions are typically ulcer-
tomas, respectively.
ative nodules that may develop draining tracts. These
Table 70.2.
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Cowpox virus?
Macules, papules, nodules (cowpox virus infection)
Feline sarcoma virus
Cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules
Bacteria 
Mycobacterum spp.t
Chronic nodular dermatitis, draining tracts, panniculitis (atypical mybacteriosis)
Mycobacterium lepraemurium
 Noduloulcerative skin lesions with lymphadenopathy (feline leprosy)
Obligate anaerobic bacteriar
Subcutaneous abscesses
Pasteurella multocida
Subcutaneous abscesses 
hun'
Cryptococcus neoformans
Draining tracts, nodules, ulcers (crytococcosis)
Microsporum canis
Alopecia annulare skin lesions (dermatophytosis, ringworm), pseudomycetoma
Sporothrix schenckii
Draining tracts, ulcerative nodules (sporotrichosis)
?Not seen in the United States.
bIntludes M. fortuitum, M. chelonei, M. xenopi and M. phier.
FIntludes Peptostreptococcus spp. Fusobacteriurt spp. Porphyromonas spp., and Clostridiurt spp.
560
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 70.3.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Integumentary System of Horses
Agent
Viruses
 Bovine papillomaviruses 1&2
Verrucous, fibroplastic or flat and thickened skin lesions (equine sarcoid)
 Equine papilomavirus
 Cutaneous papillmas of lips and nose (equine papillomatosis)
 Equine viral arteritis virus
Edema of distal limbs, scrotum, and ventrum 
Vesicular stomatitis virus
Vesicules/ulcers on coronary band
Bacteria
Bacillus anthracis
 Diffuse subcutaneous and dermal edema (anthrax)
Burkholderia maller?
 Subcutaneous nodules that ulcerate, ymphangitis (farcy)
Clostridium perfringenst
Cellulitis
 Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
 Pectoral (pigeon breast or inguinal abscesses, lymphangitis (ulcerative bymphangitis)
 Dermatophilus congolensis
Exudative dermatitis (dematophilosis, rain rot)
Rhodococcus equi
Cutaneous abscesses, cellulitis
 Staphylococus aureust
 Cellulitis, folliculitis, furunculosis
Fungi
Histoplasma farciminosuma
Nodules of head, neck, and leg; bymphangitis (histoplasmosis farciminosi)
Pythium insidiosum
Ulcerative pyogranulomatous lesions (cutaneous pythiosis, swamp cancer?
Sporothrix schenckir
Ucerative nodules on legs, lymphangitis (sporotrichosis)
Trichophyton equinum, T. mentagrophytes,
Crusty skin lesions; hair loss often involving head, shoulders, and back (dermatophytosis, ringworm)
M. equinum
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bOther clostridial species intlude C. septicum, C. sordei and C. sporogenes
cOther coagulase-positive species affecting horses include S. intermedius and S. hyicussp. hyicus.
pyogranulomatous skin lesions may be the initial clini-
Otitis Externa
cal manifestation of an infection even though organisms
responsible for the skin lesions almost always originate
Otitis externa in dogs is one of the most common der-
from disseminated respiratory tract in fections.
 matological problems encountered. There is a direct rela-
tion between ear conformation and otitis externa, with
tary system of domestic animals and poultry are listed in 
pendulous-eared dogs being predisposed to infection. The
Tables 70.1, 70.2, 70.3, 70.4, 70.5, 70.6, and 70.7.
L-shaped configuration of the external meatus is a further
Table 70.4.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Integumentary System of Cattle
Agent
Viruses
Bovine herpesvirus 2
Mammary vesicles and ulcers (bovine mammillitis)
 Bovine papillomavirus 
Cutaneous papillomas (bovine papilmatosis, warts)
Lumpy skin disease virus?
Generalized or local papules and nodules that ulcerate (lumpy skin disease)
Pseudocowpox virus
Mammary vesicles, papules, and scabs (pseudocowpox)
Pseudorabies virus
Uncontrolled pruritis (pseudorabies)
Vesicular virusesd
Vesicles and ulcers on coronary band and interdigital areas
Bacteria
 Actinobacilfus fignieresif
Head and neck abscess, draining fistulas
Actinomyces bovis
Draining tracts, subcutaneous abscesses(actinomycosis, lumpy jaw)
 Arcanobacterium pyogenes
Subcutaneous abscesses 
Clostridium septicum
Cellulits (malignant edema)
 Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
Ulcerative dermatitis
 Dermatophilus congolensis
Exudate epidermitis (dermatophilosis)
 Fusobacterium necrophoruml, Prevotella melaninogenicusc
Interdigital dermatitis, cellulitis (interdigital necrobacillosis, footrot)
Salmonella Dublin
Gangrene of distal extremities, ears, and tail due to terminal endarteritis 
Fungi
Trichophyton verrucosum
Round to oval, crusty skin lesions with alopecia (dermatophytosis, ringworm)
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
Includes foot-and-mouth disease virus? and vesicular stomatitis virus.
CAgents act synergistically.
Chapter 70
 Integumentary System
561
Table 70.5.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Integumentary System of Sheep/Goats
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
 Prions
Scrapie prion 
 Pruritus, excoriations, self-mutilation (scraple)
Viruses
Bluetongue virus 
Erythema, edema of ears and muzle, coronitis (bluetongue)
Goat pox, sheep pox viruses?
Papules, vesicles, pustules (goat pox, sheep pox)
Parapoxvirus
Crusting proliferative muco9cutaneous lesions, teat lesions (contagious ecthyma, soremouth?
Vesicular virusest
Vesicles and ulcers on teats, coronary bands, and interdigital areas
Bacteria
Clostridium novyi
Edema of the head, neck, and thorax (big head in rams)
 Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis
Skin abscesses (caseous lymphadenitis)
 Dermatophilus congolensis
Exudative dermatitis (dermatophilosis, lumpy wool disease, strawberry footrot)
 Dichelobacter nodosus/ Fusobacterium
Interdigital dermatitis, underrunning of the sole (contagious footrot)
necrophorumc
Staphylococcus aureusd
 Pustular dermatitis of face, udder, teats and ventral abdomen (staphylococcal dermatitis)
Fungi
Trichophyton verucosum, T. mentagrophytes
(snhuny quel gnp uomhuu sisoraydoiewan enadae yi suoisal uys ienn bunsn
?Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bIntludes foot-and-mouth disease virus and vesicular stomatitis virus.
CAgents act synergistically.
dStaphylococcus aureus ssp. anaerobiusis associated with subcutaneous abscesss in sheep.
complicating factor because it limits aeration and drain-
Table 70.7.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Integumentary System of Poultry
age. An abundance of lipid-rich earwax and heavy ear
canal hair additionally contribute to development of oti-
tis externa. A breed predilection (e.g., cocker spaniels) for
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease 
development of otitis externa is also evident.
Agent
Name)
 The agents of canine otitis externa are endogenous in
Viruses
origin and are not thought to play the initiating role in the
Fowlpox
Papules and nodules of beak, comb, and wattles (avian
disease process, but rather act as opportunists once other
pox}
factors are in place. Infections are frequently polymicrobial.
Commonly recovered agents from canine otitis externa are
listed in Table 70.8.
Table 70.6.
Agent
Major Clinical Manifestations (Common Disease Name)
Viruses
African swine fever virus?
Reddish-purple discoloration of skin (African swine fever)
Hog Cholera virus?
Erythema, purple discoloration of skin, necrosis of ears and tail (hog cholera)
Swinepox virus 
Macules, papules, pustules (swinepox)
Vesicular virusest
seane ieybip.au! pue pueg Aeuouon uo shanin pue sapisan
Bacteria
Bacillus anthracis
 Diffuse subcutaneous and dermal edema of neck and thorax (anthrax)
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Congested raised skin lesions, rhomboidal-shaped necrotic skin lesions (erysipelas)
Escherichia col (Shiga-like toxin positive)
Subcutaneous edema of lips and eyelids (edema disease)
 Saimonella choleraesuis
Reddish-purple discoloration of the skin
Streptococcus equi ssp. zooepidemicus, S. dysgalactiae
 Pustular dermatitis, subcutaneous abscesses
ssp. equisimitus
Staphylococcus hyicus
Generalized exudative dermatitis (exudative epidermitis, greasy pig disease)
Fungi
 Microsporum nanum, Trichophyton spp.
Reddish circular skin lesions with crusting at periphery (dermatophytosis, ringworm)
Considered aforeign animal disease agent in the United States.
blntludes ft-andmouth, vesicular stomatitis virus, swine vesicular disease, and vesicular exanthema of swine viruses.
562
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 70.8.
Common Agents of Canine Otitis Externa and Key Organism Characteristics
 Typical Colonies On
Ancillary Tests
Agent
Blood Agar (24-48 h)
MacConkey Agar
Gram Stain 
Oxidase
Catalase
Staphylococcus
White or off-white, often 
No Growth
 Positive cocci
NA
Positive
intermediate
with double-zone
hemolysis
 Staphylococcus schleiferi
 White, hemolytic
No Growth
Positive cocci
NA
Positive
ssp. coagulans
Proteus mirabilis
Swarms, no discrete
Colorless
Negative rods 
Negative
NA
 colonies
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Gray to greenish, fruity
 Colorless, sometime
Negative rods
 Positive
NA
 odor, hemolytic
 pigment detected 
Streptococcus canis
Gray to greenish, fruity
No growth
Positive cocci
NA
Negative
odor, hemolytic 
Escherichia coli
 Smooth, gray, some 
Pink to red with red
Negative rods
Negative
NA
strains are hemolytic
haze
Klebsiella pneumonia
 Mucoid, whitish-gray
 Mucoid, pink without 
Negative rods
Negative
NA
red haze
Malassezia?
No growth or tiny colonies
No growth 
Variable staining.
NA
NA
budding yeast
NA, not applicable.
'suonipuos sydojaeo japuny fele Jebe asonxap spnenoges uo faaozalisag 'uonegnsu pabuood anbalAeNe
Mastitis
tory cytokines and chemokines result in rapid recruitment
 Mastitis, an inflammation of the mammary gland, occurs
on inflammatory cells in an effort to control the infection.
Most of the clinical signs associated with mastitis are a con-
 in all animal species. It is most common in dairy cattle and
sequence of the inflammatory response.
is of greatest economic significance to the dairy industry.
Bacteria are the main infectious agents of mastitis,
For mastitis to develop, the in nate physical barriers must be
 although viruses are important mammary pathogens in
breached. Once that occurs, both innate immunity (lacto-
 some animals (Maedi-visna, sheep; CAE, goats). Fungi (e.g.,
ferrin, complement, resident immune cells) and specific
Candida, Aspergillus, and Pseudallescheria) and an achloro-
immunity play a role in preventing microbial pathogens
phyllous algae, Prototheca, are rare causes of mastitis in cat-
from establishing. If a pathogen does establish in the mam-
tle but can occasionally cause herd outbreaks.
mary gland, chemotactic gradients formed by inflamma-
Table 70.9.
Agents of Bovine Mastitis
Agenta
Frequency
Specific Features
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
Occasional
Associated with teat injury or cannula/dilator use, poor treatment response
Clostridium perfringens
Rare
Causes gangrenous mastitis
Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus spp.
Frequent
Source is skin, many infections transient
Escherichia coli
 Frequent 
Environmental source, acute infections, may cause systemic illness
 Kiebsiella pneumoniae
Occasional
Severe mastitis, associated with sawdust/wood shaving bedding
Mycoplasma spp.c.c
Frequent 
Cow is source, spread by milking, destructive mastitis, cow not usually
 systemically ill, can be eradicated
Mycobacterium spp.
Rare
Spread by contaminated treatment equipment or materials
Nocardia spp.
Rare
Spread by contaminated treatment equipment or materials
 Pasteurella multocida
Rare
 Sporadic infections, suggests cross-contamination during treatment
Prototheca spp.
Rare
Achloric algae, associated with poor environmental hygiene, not treatable
Staphylococcus aureust
Frequent
Source is infected udder, spread by milking, rare cause of gangrenous mastitis, can 
be eradicated
Streptococcus agalactiaet
Occasional
 Causes high bulk tank somatic cell count, can be eradicated 
S. dysgalactiae ssp. dysgalactiae
Frequent
Bovine origin, survives in environment 
 Streptococcus uberis
 Frequent 
Found on bovine skin and environment 
Also consider Coynebacterium bovis, Seratia Bacius, Pseudomonas, and various other Enterobacteriaceae.
bContagious pathogens.
EMost common speties recovered are M. bovis, M. californicum, and M. canadense
Chapter 70 Integumentary System
563
Different organisms predominate as mastitis pathogens
where the mammary gland is the source or as “environ-
depending on the animal involved. Coliforms (dogs,
mental" pathogens when they originate from transient
skin flora or environmental reservoirs. Cow age, parity,
(horses), Mannheimia haemolytica (sheep), and Mycoplasma
stage of lactation, milking operation management meth-
species (sheep, goats) are the most commonly encoun tered
ods, and environmental sanitation control (housing and
bacteria.
bedding) are underlying factors in most cases of mas-
The agents associated with mastitis in cattle are exten-
titis. Common agents of bovine mastitis are listed in
 sive and are classified as either “contagious" pathogens
Table 70.9.
71
Musculoskeletal System
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The musculoskeletal system provides a structural frame-
synovial joints by stimulating production of catabolic met.
work for the body, protects vital organs, and provides the
alloproteinases and inhibiting synthesis of collagen and
capacity for locomotion. It is composed of the axial and
proteoglycans. As inflammation resolves, fibrosis may lead
 appendicular skeleton and associated ligaments, muscles,
 to decreased functionality.
 membranes are included in this system.
The musculoskeletal system does not have a nor-
Infections of the Musculoskeletal System
mal flora per se, although seeding from transient bac-
teremias or "trafficking” through supposed sterile sites may
 Infections of the musculoskeletal system are initiated by
o n q e (ds us) saods peeg 
introduction of microbial agents through (i) direct inoc-
mant in muscle, particularly in ruminants, subsequent
ulation from traumatic or iatrogenic events, (i) exten-
to entry through the digestive tract and hematogenous
sion of infectious processes from contiguous focuses, 0r
distribution.
(ii) hematogenous seeding from distantly infected sites
01 during septicemia. Within the musculoskeletal sys-
tem sites of traumatic injury, areas of active growth with
Antimicrobial Defenses of the
increased vascularity or sites with specific vascular features
Musculoskeletal System
(e.g., discontinuous epithelium in capillaries in vertebral
end plates and metaphyses) are predisposed to infection.
The antimicrobial defenses of the musculoskeletal system
Viral, bacterial, and fungal agents can be involved. Par-
predominately rely on the circulating immune defenses.
asite infections of muscle are also important but are not
 Normal healthy bone is considered fairly resistant to
within the context of this book. As a rule, bacteria are the
 infection. Even direct inoculation of bone with pathogenic
 most common microbial agents in volved among the three
bacteria does not usually lead to infection unless pre-
 groups of agents discussed here. Specific bacterial factors
disposing factors are present. Bone undergoes constant
are important for infection to develop. Adherence factors
remodeling, and injured /infected bone can be resorbed and 
(e.g, fibrinogen or fibronectin-binding proteins), toxins
replaced with new bone.
that promote inflammatory response and tissue damage
 Muscle has a rich blood supply and, therefore, bene-
(e.g, superantigens and cytotoxins), and factors that aid
fits from its intimate association with circulating innate
in evasion of the immune system (e.g., capsules and pro-
immune defenses. Skeletal muscle also has great ability to
tein A)—all provide an advantage to establishment and
regenerate necrotic muscle segments resulting from inflam-
persistence.
matory/infectious processes.
The major infectious processes in the musculoskele-
 In synovial membrane-lined sites (synovial joints, bur-
tal system are (i) infections of bone including vertebral
sas, and tendon sheaths), the synovium is composed of a
body and associated intervertebral disk infections; (ii)
thin cellular surface layer of predominately macrophages
infections involving articular surfaces or bursas includ-
and fbroblast-like synoviocytes and an underlying rich
 ing their synovial membranes; and (ii) infections of skele.
vascular layer. Production of proinflammatory cytokines
tal muscle, tendons, and surrounding fascia. These infec-
by cells at these sites (chondrocytes, synoviocytes, and
tious processes do not necessarily occur as distinct entities
synovial macrophages) promotes a strong inflammatory
(e.g, infection of metaphyseal bone and associated joint
response in the face of infection. The rich blood supply
infections in neonatal septicemia in some animals). Dis-
to synovial membranes not only predisposes to localiza-
eases of neurologic origin that affect muscle activity as a
tion of microbial agents but also allows for rapid recruit-
result of inhibition of neurotransmitter release (tetanus
ment of vascular immune defenses. While the inflamma-
and botulism) are covered in Chapter 72. Microbial agents
tory response is important for controlling infection, it can
causing cellulitis may overlap with musculoskeletal infec-
also lead to degradative changes to articular cartilage in
tions and are also covered in Chapter 69. Common and/o1
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
564
Chapter 71
 Musculoskeletal System
565
Table 71.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
Table 71.3.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Musculoskeletal System of Dogs and Cats
of the Musculoskeletal System of Cattle
 Major Clinical Manifestations
 Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Bacteria
 Feline syncytium-forming
Arthritis
Actinobacilus tignieresi
Myositis
virus (C)
Actinomyces bovis
Osteomyelits (lumpy jaw)
Bacteria
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
Arthritis, diskospondylitis, fascitis.
Actinomyces spp.?
 Diskospondylitis, osteomyelitis 
myositis, osteomyelits
 β-Hemolytic Streptococcus
Arthritis, diskospondylitis.
Clostridium chauvoei
Myositis (blackleg)
spp. (D)
 myositis, necrotizing fascitis
Escherichia coli
Arthritis, osteomyelitis 
Borrelia burgdorferi (D)
Arthritis (lyme disease)
Fusobacterium necrophorum
Arthritis, diskospondylitis.
Brucella canis (D)
Diskospondylitis, osteomyelitis
osteomyelitis
Leptospira spp.
Polymyositis
Histotoxic Clostridium spp.?
Myositis (malignant edema)
 Obligate anaerobesd
Myositis
Mycoplasma spp.t
Arthritis, bursitis, tenosynovitis
 Pasteurella multocida (C)
Myositis
Salmonella spp.
Arthritis, osteomyelitis 
Staphylococcus intermedius
Arthritis, diskospondylitis.
 nyositis, osteomyelitis
Flntludes C. pefringens, C. novyi C. septicumt, and C. sordeli.
Fungi
bIntludes M. bovis M. califonicum, M. akalescens, and M arginine.
Aspergillus sp D)
Diskospondyitis, osteomyelitis
Blastomyces dermatitidis D)
Osteomyelitis
Coccidioides immitis D)
Osteomyelitis
and periosteum, respectively. Osteomyelitis can be further
C, cats; D, dogs.
tis. Most bone infections are bacterial in nature. While a
PIntludes A. viscosus and A. hordeovuineris.
bIntludes Fusobacterium, Bacteroides, Porphyromonas and Peptostreptocous.
variety of bacteria can cause bone infections, a select num-
 ber of them predominate within animal groups. In com-
panion animals and poultry, coagulase-positive Staphylo-
coccus species (S. intermedius, S. aureus, and S. hyicus) are
important agents associated with musculoskeletal infec-
frequently involved. Other organisms encountered include
tions of domestic animals and poultry are listed in Tables
enterics (Escherichia coli and Proteus spp.) and obligate
71.1, 71.2, 71.3, 71.4, 71.5,and 71.6.
anaerobes. In horses, the agents most commonly isolated
from osteomyelitis in neonates are Actinobacillus equuli
Infections of Bone (Including Vertebral Body and
ssp. equuli, E. coli, Streptococcus equi ssp. zooepidemicus,
Intervertebral Disk Infections)
and Salmonella, while coagulase-positivestaphylococcipre-
dominate in adults.In ruminants and pigs, Arcanobacterium
Osteitis is an inflammation of the bone. Osteomyelitis
pyogenes and Salmonella are major causes of osteomyelitis.
 and periostitis denote involvement of the medullary cavity
Table 71.4.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
Table 71.2.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
 of the Musculoskeletal System of Horses
of the Musculoskeletal System of Sheep and Goats
Major Clinical Manifestations
 Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Bacteria
Viruses
Bluetongue virus (S)
 Muscle infarction 
Actinobacillus equuli ssp.
Arthritis, osteomyelitis (joint ill)
 Caprine arthritis-encephalitis
Arthritis
equuli
virus (G)
Brucella abortus
Atlantal or supraspinous bursitis (poll 
 evilfistulous withers), osteomyelitis
Bacteria
Escherichia coli
Arthritis, osteomyelitis (joint ill)
Arcanobacterium pyogenes (S)
Diskospondylitis, myositis
Histotoxic Clostridium spp.?
Myositis (clostridial myositis)
Chlamydophila percorum
Arthritis
Salmonella spp.
Arthritis, osteomyelitis (joint ill)
Corynebacterium
Myositis
Staphylococcus aureus
Myositis
pseudotuberculosis
Streptococcus equi ssp. equf
 Atlantal or supraspinous bursitis (poll 
Erysipelothrx rhusiopathiae (S)
Arthritis (erysipelas)
evilfistulous withers), osteomyelitis.
Histotoxic Costridium spp.?
Myositis
myositis, tenosynovitis 
Mycoplasma spp. (G)
Arthritis, tenosynovitis
 Streptococcus equi ssp.
Arthritis, osteomyelitis (joint ill)
zooepidemicus
5, sheep; G, goats.
ZIntludes C. perfingens, C. novyi C. septicum, and C. sordelfi.
bIntludes M. mycoides ssp. mycoides (large colony type), M capricolum ssp.
Flntludes C. perringens, C sordei and C septicum.
capricolum, and M. putrefaciens.
566
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table71.5.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
refractory to antibiotic treatment. Host cellular products,
of the Musculoskeletal System of Pigs
and perhaps some bacterial products, stimulate monocytes
and fibroblast to produce osteolytic cytokines and stimu-
Major Clinical Manifestations
  as r    a
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
ing from dead bone.
 Use of synthetic material in reconstructive or replace.
Bacteria
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
ment surgeries (e.g., hip replacements) may also disrupt
Arthritis, osteomyelitis
 β-Hemolytic Streptococcus spp.
the innate resistance of bone to infection by providing an
Arthritis
Brucella suis
 Arthritis, diskospondylitis 
avascular surface and protection from immune defenses.
(brucellosis)
 Bone cement used in some replacement surgeries may
Clostridium septicum
Myosiis (malignant edema)
 itself inhibit phagocytosis and complement activity. Host
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae
Arthritis, diskospondylitis
fibronectin deposited on implant material allows for
[erysipelas)
bacterial attachment, which is followed by production of
Haemophilus parasuis
Arthritis (Glasser's disease)
exopolysaccharides (glycocalyx) by bacteria. Along with
Mycoplasma hyorhinis
Arthritis
host products, the glycocalyx forms biofilms that provide
Mycoplasma hyosynoviae
Arthritis
bacteria protection from host defenses and killing by
 Pasteurella multocida
 Atrophy of nasal turbinate bones 
(atrophic rhinitis)
antibiotics.
Bite wounds,penetrating foreign bodies, orthopedicsur-
Streptococcus suis (type 2)
Arthritis
gical procedures, and traumatic injuries are possible ini-
tiating events for development of osteomyelitis in com-
panion animals. The long bones are most commonly
affected.
Others of note in production animals are E. coli and Fusobac-
 In production animals, hematogenous osteomyelitis is
terium necrophorum.
 The microvasculature (discontinuous epithelium and
ruminants is associated with failure of passive transfer.
lack of basement membrane) and possibly the slow blood
Infections begin at the metaphysis or the epiphysis
flow through capillaries in areas of active growth favor the
beneath articular cartilage and often occur in conjunction
establishment of infections (hematogenous osteomyelitis).
with or subsequent to infectious synovitis. In neonatal
Macrophages associated with vascular endothelium are the
 infections, vessels that cross the growth plates are impor-
main defense in these areas. Infections also occur in areas
tant for spreading infection to the metaphysis from joints.
of bone with poor or interrupted vascular supply from
Epiphyseal osteomyelitis in conjunction with arthritis
trauma (posttraumatic osteomyelitis) or when adjacent tis-
in calves is commonly caused by Salmonella serovar
sue infections result in ischemic injury. If the medullary
Dublin. A. pyogenes osteomyelitis in older calves and adults
as well as periosteal vascular supply to bone becomes com-
        
promised during an infectious process, a sequestration of
growth plate. A pyogenes also causes a hematogenous
necrotic bone mayresult.In some cases,persistent drainage
vertebral osteomyelitis in pigs associated with tail biting
from sinus tracts develops. Under these conditions, bacteria
01 foot lesions. Commercial turkeys develop focal areas of
are better able to establish and more difficult to eliminate
osteomyelitis caused by S. aureus or E. coli. The proximal
because they become inaccessible to immune defenses and
tibiotarsus and proximal femur are most often affected,
and infections are associated with a green discoloration
 of the liver in adolescent male turkeys (turkey green-liver
Table 71.6.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
osteomyelitis complex). Hematogenous osteomyelitis is
of the Musculoskeletal System of Poultry
uncommon in dogs and cats.
Posttraumatic osteomyelitis is also common in produc-
Major Clinical Manifestations
tion animals, usually in adults. In cattle a chronic pyogran-
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
ulomatous inflammation involving the mandible (*lumpy
Viruses
jaw") or maxilla is caused by Actinomyces bovis (see Fig-
 Arthritis, bursitis, tenosynovitis
ure 69.2).
Reovirus
Viral agents rarely cause inflammatory bone disease. Dis-
Bacteria
 Arcanobacterium pyogenes (T)
temper virus in dogs may damage osteoblasts and cause
Osteomyelitis
 growth retardation. Canine hepatitis virus can cause meta-
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae (T)
Arthritis (erysipelas)
Escherichia coli
 Arthritis, bursitis, osteomyelitis.
 physeal hemorrhage and necrosis.
 tenosynovitis
 Fungal bone infections occur but at a low frequency.
Mycoplasma meleagridis (T)
Bowing of tibiotarsal bone.
Fungal osteomyelitis is usually the result of dissemina-
 cervical vertebrae deformation 
tion from another site, most often the lung. Many of
Mycoplasma synoviae
Arthritis, bursitis, tenosynovitis
infectious synovitis)
osteomyelitis. Coccidioides immitis is notable for dissemi-
Staphylococcus aureus, S. hyicus
Arthritis, bursitis, osteomyelitis.
 nating to the appendicular skeleton in dogs. Disseminated
tenosynovitis
Blastomyces dermatitidis infections in dogs can involve the
T, turkeys.
bones in up to 30% of the cases with vertebrae, and long
bones are most commonly affected.
Chapter 71
 Musculoskeletal System
567
Diskospondylitis, an inflammatory process of the
intervertebral disk and adjacent vertebrae, is a particularly
FIGURE 71.2.
A swollen left carpal joint from a calf with
common site for bone infections to occur. It usually begins
septic arthritis secondary to, failure of passive transfer, an
at the vertebral end plates. The discontinuous capillary
umbilical infection, and septicemia.
epithelium and slow-flowing venous channels predispose
this area to bacterial seeding. Diskospondylitis is most
common in dogs and ruminants and often results via
hematogenous dissemination. The L7-S1 region is a
commonly affected site in the dog, but any vertebral body
can be affected. Staphylococcus intermedius is the most
common agent identified.
Vertebral infections of T13-L3 in the dog are associated
with migration of foreign bodies (e.g., plant awns). Actino-
 myces spp. are the usual agents involved. Diskospondylitis
associated with Brucella species deserves particular atten-
tion. The persistent bacteremia that occurs with some Bru-
cella species predisposes to infection at extragenital sites,
and Brucella should always be considered as a potential
agent in diskospondylitis in dogs (B.canis) and pigs (B. suis).
Calves with diskospondylitis caused by hematogenous dis-
semination of either A. pyogenes or F. necrophorum present
with paresis or paralysis.
 German shepherd dogs are particularly prone to devel-
caused by Aspergillus spp. Aspergillus terreus and A. deflectus
are the most common species recovered.
Hematogenous infections frequently result in pol-
yarthropathies. In neonates, the umbilicus 0r gastrointesti-
Infections Involving Articular Surfaces, Bursas,
nal tract are common entry points. Arthritis is a common
and Synovial Membranes
sequela to septicemia, especially in young animals and
especially where there is failure of passive transfer (Fig-
Arthritis denotes an inflammatory process of a joint space.
ure 71.2). In adult animals, joint abnormalities, immuno-
suppressive diseases, infections at other sites in the body,
infections do occu1. Monoarticular infections typically
intra-articular injections, surgery, and joint prostheses all
arise from direct inoculation or spread from a contiguous
predispose to joint infections.
site (e.g., distal interphalangeal joint infection in cattle fol-
Infection of the joint usually begins in synovial tis-
lowing sole abscessation) (Figure 71.1).
sue, in part, because of the rich vascular supply and lack
 of basement membrane. Infection results in expression
of a cascade of inflammatory mediators (tumor necrosis
factor, interleukin 1, interleukin 6, and nitric oxide) that
FIGURE 71.1.
A swolfenfateral digitofabulf with septic
result in increased blood flow to the area, increased capil-
arthritis of the distal interphalangeal joint secondary to
lary permeability, and an influx of inflammatory cells. The
agent involved dictates the type and intensity of inflam-
(sole ulcer).
 matory response. Synovitis in unchecked infections results
in increased synovial fluid containing cellular exudates
that subsequently progresses to involve the articular sur-
faces. Alone or in combination, bacterial products, prod-
ucts resulting from the inflammatory response, and pro-
teases already present or produced by cells in the joint
damage articular cartilage. Once damaged, the articular car-
tilage has limited capacity for repair.
Current evidence suggests that when viable bacteria are
no longer detectable in cases of septic arthritis, the inflam-
matory response continues and further destruction to artic-
ular cartilage ensues. This is likely due to residual bacte-
rial products such as peptidoglycan-polysaccharide com-
plexes that continue topromote an inflammatory response.
Even bacterial DNA, specifically unmethylated CpG motifs,
appears to stimulate a variety of cell types to produce proin-
flammatory cytokines leading to further tissue destruction.
Joint functionality may be further affected by fibrosis that
568
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
results during resolution of the inflammatory process. In 
Although bacteria are responsible for most cases of in fec
 some cases ankylosis of the joint occurs.
tious arthritis, viral agents are sometimes involved. Feline
Postinfective arthritis, which is associated with micro-
syncytium-forming virus infections cause both prolifera-
bial fragments localizing in the joint during a septicemia
tive and erosive forms ofjoint involvement in cats. Caprine
but without microbial replication in the joint itself, is less
arthritis-encephalitis virus is of substantial importance in
well recognized in veterinary medicine than it is in human
 goats causing a hyperplastic polysynovitis, usually in goats
medicine. When it occurs, joint damage results solely from
older than 12 months. Avian reovirus causes arthritis and
immune mechanisms.
tenosynovitis in turkeys and chickens. The digital flexor
 Morphologic variants of bacteria have also been associ-
and metatarsal extensor tendons and hock joints are most
ated with jointinfections. Bacterial L-forms, which are wall-
commonly affected. The stability of the virus, potential
less bacteria, which have "turned off" the genes responsible
for horizontal and vertical transmission, and high-density
for cell wall synthesis, and small colony variants of bac-
teria, which have decreased growth rates presumably due
 flock problem.
to defective respiratory metabolism, have been associated
with persistent joint in fections.
 In species where transphyseal vessels provide a direct
Infections of Skeletal Muscle, Tendons, and Fascia
connection between the metaphyses and the epiphy-
Infections of skeletal muscles are uncommon. While viral
seal cartilage (e.g, ruminants and horses), both acute
 and fungal agents occasionally cause muscle infections,
osteomyelitis and joint infections are common. This is
bacteria again are the most frequent of the three groups
also true when metaphyseal bone is included within the
involved. Myositis can be in the form of a localized abscess,
joint capsule. Sometimes synovitis represents only one of
granuloma, or diffuse inflammatory process that spreads
a number of clinical manifestations of systemic infectious
along fascial planes. Preceding events include trauma,
processes (e.g., polyserositis in pigs caused by Mycoplasma
injections, bite wounds, or a contiguous infectious pro-
hyorhinis or Haemophitus parasuis).
cess (e.g., cellulitis, subcutaneous abscess, and osteomyeli-
 Bacterial arthritis is uncommon in companion animals.
tis). Pyogenic bacteria cause localized abscesses (e.g., Pas-
When it occurs, coagulase-positive Staphylococcus species
teurella multocida in cats). Granulomatous and pyogranulo-
and Streptococcus species are the most common agents
matous myositis is associated with bacterial species known
involved. Infections result from direct inoculation from
to evoke granulomatous pyogranulomatous inflammatory
trauma or surgery. The canine stifle joint appears par-
responses (e.g., Mycobacterium bovis, Actinomyces spp., Acti-
ticularly predisposed to postsurgical infections. Recurrent
nobacillus lignieresi).Clostridial myositis istypically amore
lameness, sometimes involving multiple joints, is associ-
diffuse infectious process and spreads rapidly along fas-
 ated with a chronic and progressive arthritis due to Borrelia
cial planes. It is the most severe and aggressive form of
burgdorferi, the Lyme disease agent.
the infectious myositides due to the production of potent
 Arthritis is common in production animals and horses,
histotoxins. Myositis may occur subsequent to or in con-
and a variety of organisms can be involved. In neonates,
 junction with clostridial cellulitis. Most animal species are
Salmonella and E.coli are the main agents.Mycoplasma
affected; however, clostridial myositis is most common
 arthritis in ruminants is also an important entity in feed-
in ruminants and horses. Clostridial agents usually reach
lot cattle and dairy calves. In addition to arthritis, which
affected sites by directpenetration (e.g., penetrating wound
usually in volves carpal and hock joints, tenosynovitis and
and injections) or, in the case of Clostridium chauvoei, the
bursitis occur. Mycoplasma bovis is the usual species recov-
agent of blackleg, are already present in muscle as dor-
ered. In goats, mycoplasma arthritis affects both kids and
 mant spores. When tissue becomes devitalized, producing
adults. Mycoplasma mycoides ssp. mycoides (large colony
isolated. Mycoplasma arthritis is also important in pigs.
Chlamydial joint infections (Chlamydophila percorum) are
FIGURE 71.3.
Necrotic and emphysematous muscle due
commonly recognized in goats and sheep (*stiff lamb dis-
to C. chauvoei infection. (Courtesy of Dr Bruce Brodersen.)
ease"). Infections can presentin conjunction with con junc-
tivitis. The chlamydial species involved is different from
the species associated with goat and sheep abortions. In
horses, jointinfections in neonates are caused by organisms
also associated with neonatal osteomyelitis and include
E. coli, Salmonella, Actinobacillus, and Streptococcus spp. In
involved.
 Bursitis refers to an inflammation of the synovial
lined bursas and can be affected in a manner simi-
la1 to synovial membranes in joints. Of specific impor-
tance are Bnucella abortus and S. aureus infections of the
atlantal and supraspinous bursas in horses. These infec-
vertebrae.
Chapter 71 Musculoskeletal System
569
an anaerobic environment, the spores germinate and vege-
Tendon sheaths have an inner synovial membrane and
tative cells proliferate. Numerous cytotoxic exotoxins pro-
may become infected as a result of hematogenous dissemi-
duced by these clostridial species contribute coagulative
nation, trauma (e.g., bite wounds), treatments (e.g., sheath
muscle necrosis (Figure 71.3).
injections in horses), or spread from a contiguous focus.
Hemolytic Streptococcus spp. have been associated with
Tenosynovitis is especially important in horses, most com-
severe necrotizing fasciitis in dogs. In horses, immune com-
monly involving digital tendons. Infections typically result
plex vasculitis is the supposed mechanism by which mus-
from a wound with a variety of bacteria being involved or
cle damage due to vessel infarction and hemorrhage results
subsequent to sheath injection, where S. aureus is usually
post-S. equi ssp. equi infections.
the cause.
72
Nervous System
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The nervous system is divided into the central and periph-
tight intercellular junctions that prevent movement of
eral nervous systems. The central nervous system includes
blood constituents into the central nervous system. Move-
the brain and spinal cord, the cerebrospinal fluid that
ment of substances across the endothelial cells is further
bathes it, and the meningeallayers that cover it. The periph.
controlled by specialized carrier transport systems. Astro.
eral nervous system is comprised of nerves that arise from
cyte processes and pericytes, a subclass of microglial cells,
the central nervous system (cranial or spinal nerves) and
which surround capillaries and an extracellular matrix,
innervate muscles or effector organs. The peripheral ner-
con tribute to the overall makeup of the blood-brain barrier.
 aos os o  s si ss s
Not all areas are protected by the blood-brain barrier (e.g.,
autonomic divisions.
pituitary and choroid plexus). The secretory selectivity of
 Nervous system infections most commonly involve the
choroid plexus epithelial cells and ependymal cells con-
central nervous system. In some cases, peripheral nerves are
tributes to a barrier between the blood and cerebrospinal
the targeted site for in fectious or immunological processes
fluid. Nerves of the peripheral nervous system are protected
or microbial toxin action, or serve as the site for entry of
infectious agents or toxic products that act on the central
blood nerve barrier, although it is not as restrictive as the
nervous system. The nervous system does not have a nor-
blood-brain barrier.
mal microbial flora. Some viruses (e.g., herpesviruses and
distemper virus) can cause latent infections, and in some
cases viruses integrate into the host genome as proviruses
Immunological Defenses
(e.g., visna virus).
Much of our knowledge of immune defense of the ner-
vous system is based on studies in rodents and humans.
The central nervous system has long been considered an
Antimicrobial Defenses
       
Sensitivity of the nervous system to injury makes exclu-
nodes and normally has greatly reduced expression of
sion of microbial pathogens or their toxins of paramount
major histocompatibility complex determinants. Current
importance. Anatomic and immunological defenses are the
evidence indicates that the nervous system has a much
primary defense mechanisms available; the following sec.
more advanced immunological defense system than was
tions present these defenses.
previously thought. Antigens from the cerebrospinal fluid
Anatomic Defenses
drain-age along cranial nerves. Major histocompatibility
antigens are expressed by cells in the central nervous system
The skull and vertebrae provide rigid coverings that pro-
parenchyma (e.g., astrocytes and microglial cells) under
tect the brain and spinal cord from traumatic or penetrat-
proper conditions. The blood-brain barrier contributes to
ing injuries that might lead to introduction of microbial
the relative immune privilege of the healthy central ner-
 pathogens. The meningeallayers (pia, arachnoid, and dura)
vous system by excluding entry of large molecules from the
provide further anatomic barriers that act to contain or pre-
blood and by restricting immune cell entry. This restric-
vent infectious processes from progressing into the nervous
tion is not absolute and, although few immune cells are
system parenchyma.
normally found, both activated and naive T lymphocytes
 The blood-brain barrier provides the major anatomical
can penetrate the blood-brain barrier and are present in 
 separation between the nervous system parenchyma and
the absence of inflammation, suggesting a “patrolling'
components of the vascular system. It protects the central
function. While an active immune system is in place,
nervous system from agents disseminated via the blood-
it is geared to provide a degree of protection and yet
stream from other sites in the body. Central to the blood-
brain barrier are the capillary endothelial cells, which form
avoid inflammatory responses that lead to profound or
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
570
Chapter 72  Nervous System
571
irreversible disturbances in neuronal function. Local
spinal cord. Lesions in the spinal cord are sometimes the
inflammatory responses are regulated by immunosuppres-
source for the predominant clinical signs. Peripheral nerve
sive mechanisms. Subclasses of glial cells express cytokines
involvement is less frequent but is the site for important
(e.g, interleukin 6 and transforming growth factor 82)
neurological diseases (e.g., Marek's disease in chickens).
that help restrict the inflammatory response. An ability to
The presence or growth of a microbial agent in the ner-
induce T lymphocyte apoptosis is also present.
-  n S    S  
 The central nervous system possesses certain innate
bial toxins ingested or produced at another site in the host
immune capabilities. Complement plays an essential role
(e.g., Clostridium perfringens e-toxin, botulinum toxin, and
in innate immune defense. Both neuronal cells and
tetanus toxin) and immune-mediated events affecting ves-
astrocytes have ability to produce complement compo-
sels supplying the central nervous system (e.g., feline infec-
nents. A number of nervous system pathogens will induce
tious peritonitis virus and equine herpesvirus 1) are respon-
complement component synthesis (e.g., exotic Newcas-
sible for important nervous system diseases.
tle disease virus and Listeria monocytogenes), which plays
The role of infectious agents in autoimmune dis-
   d   o  e
eases is still poorly understood. In humans, cross-reacting
attack complex formation and in recruitment of leuko-
pathogens and host antigens results in molecular mimicry
cytes. Uncontrolled complement activation, resulting from
and has been associated with certain nervous system
progressing infectious processes, contributes to pathol-
diseases. Notable is the mimicry between lipopolysac-
 ogy when host cell membrane complement inhibitors are
charide structures of selected serotypes of Campylobacter
overwhelmed.
jejuni and gangliosides (e.g., GM1 and GDla) of motor
Various cell types are also critical to central ner-
neurons. This is thought to account for the association
vous system defense. Microglia cells are myeloid bone
between antecedent Campylobacter infections and some
marrow-derived cells. When activated, they produce var-
cases of Guillain-Barre syndrome, an acute demyelinating
ious chemokines and cytokines, act as macrophages, and
poly-neuropathy, in humans. Some cases of acute canine
potentially have a role in antigen presentation. Den-
polyradiculoneuritis (coonhound paralysis) may similarly
dritic cells, which are potent antigen-presenting cells, have
be associated with immune reactions to viral or bacterial
also been demonstrated in the brain. Astrocytes have
infections.
been shown to be involved in antigen presentation and
 Some of the most common and/or important microbial
chemokine/cytokine production. In the face of an inflam-
 agents associated with nervous system in fections in domes-
matory response, astrocytes become activated and can
tic animals and poultry are listed in Tables 72.1, 72.2, 72.3,
form glial scars to insulate damaged areas of the brain
72.4,72.5,72.6,and 72.7.
parenchyma. Nerve cells, themselves, are capable of pro-
ducing certain cytokines (interferon y).
During infectious processes, migration of inflammatory
Routes of Infection
cells from the vascular system to affected sites is important
The hematogenous route is the most common route of
for controlling progressing in fectious processes. Inflamma-
entry for microbial pathogens. Other important routes
tory cell migration is mediated, as elsewhere in the body,
include retrograde movement within neurons or exten-
th rough production of chemokines and expression of adhe-
sion ligands (selectins and integrins).
sion of the infectious processes from contiguous sites. Some
routes (e.g., Listeria).
Infections of the Nervous System
Hematogenous Route. Systemic infections or infectious
Fo1 microbial pathogens to affect the nervous system, they
processes that involve multiple organ systems typically
or their products must reach the nervous system (route of
reach the nervous system by this route. Infection occurs
infection), be able to penetrate or interrupt anatomic bar-
when pathogens enter through vessels of the choroid
riers, and establish and persist by evading or subverting
plexus, meninges, 0r parenchyma, or from septic emboli
immune defenses. Clinical signs resulting from infection
that lodge in vessels and result in direct damage to vascular
depend on whether and where the infection is localized,
endothelial cells. Some viruses are able to cross the blood-
what agent is involved, and the type and degree of inflam-
brain barrier themselves o1 are carried across in infected
matory response induced. Most nervous system infectious
immune cells, while others directly infect the endothelium
processes have a rapid progression, requiring timely inter-
of capillaries or cells of the choroid plexus or ependyma.
vention. Most infections involve the brain or meninges;
Studies with Escherichia coli show that (i) a high degree of
however, other areas can be involved concomitantly 01
bacteremia, (ii) invasion of brain microvascula1 endothe-
serve as the principal targeted site. The decreased frequency
lial cells, (ii) hostcell actin cytoskeletal rearrangement, and
of spinal cord involvement is most likely due to reduced
(iv) specific signaling mechanisms promote translocation
blood flow to the spinal cord rather than some greater
of E. coli across the blood-brain barrier. Different bacteria
inherent resistance to infection than the brain. In some
use different signaling mechanisms. Cytokines produced
cases, the major or sole clinical manifestation is related
by astrocytes and microglial cells and nitric oxides from
to spinal cord lesions. For example, equine herpesvirus 
inflammatory cells in response to insults contribute to dis-
1 infections may result in immune complex-related vas-
ruption of vascular barrier and further loss of ability to
culitis causing necrosis that affects both the brain and the
exclude entry of pathogens.
572
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 72.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Dogs
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
Viruses
 Canine adenovirus 1
Infectious canine hepatitis
Seizures
 Canine distemper virus
 Canine distemper
Ataxia, seizures
Canine herpesvirus
Canine herpesvirus disease
Depression, opisthotonus, seizures 
Pseudorabies virus
Pseudorabies
Intense pruritus, seizures 
Rabies virus
Rabies
Temperature change, aggressive behavior paralysis
Bacteria
 Agents of otitis externa?
 Otitis media and interna
Vestibular dysfunction 
Ehrlichia canis
Ehrichiosis
Ataxia, cerebellar and vestibular dysfunction, seizures
Clostridium boturinum
Botulism 
Flaccid paralysis, paresis
Costridium tetani
Tetanus
 Opisthotonus, seizures, tremors 
Rickettsia rickettsif
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Ataxia, depression, seizures, vestibular dysfunctions 
Fungi
 Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococcosis
Ataxia, head tilt, paresis, seizures 
 alntludes E coli, Proteus spp. Pseudomonas spp., and Streptococcus spp.
Table 72.2.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Cats
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
 Prions
BSE prion?
Feline spongiform encephalopathy 
Ataxia, behavioral changes, muscular tremors
Viruses
 Feline panleukopenia virus
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Ataxia
Feline immunodeficiency vrus
Feline acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Aggressve or psychtic behavior seizures
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Ataxia, paresis, seizures
 Feline leukemia virus 
Epidural lymphoma
Posterior paresis
Feline leukemia
Abnormal vocalization, hyperesthesia, paresis
 Pseudorabies virus
Pseudorabies
Hyperexcitabilty, paralysis, paresis
Rabies virus
Rabies
Aggressive behavior paralysis 
Fungi
 Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococcosis 
Ataxia, paresis, cranial nerve deficits, seizures
Classified as a foreign animal disease in the United States.
bCongenital infection.
Table 72.3.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Horses
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
Viruses
 Equine encephalomyelitis viruses (WEE, EEE.
 Equine encephalomyelitides 
Ataxia, drowsiness, head pressing, paralysis
VEE?!
 Equine herpesvirus 1
Myeloencephalitis
Ataxia, tetra- or paraplegia
Rabies virus
Rabies
Ascending paralysis, ataxia, depression, vocalization
West Nile virus
West Nile encephalitis
Ataxia, muscle tremor, paresis, seizures, somnolence 
Bacteria
Clostridium botutinumt
Botulism 
Flaccid paralysis, muscle fasciculation, paresis
Costridium tetani
Tetanus 
.as.oy-Mes, pibu 'pyaka puut pasdejod 'suseds apsny
 stance, seizures
 Streptococcus equi sp. equi
 Brain abscess, meningitis
Ataxia, depression, seizures, vestibular dysfunctions
 Guttural pouch infection 
Dysphagia, head shaking
Fungi
Aspergiltusfumigatus
 Guttural pouch mycosis
Dysphagia, head shaking
?Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bMost commonly types B and c.
Chapter 72
 Nervous System
573
Table 72.4.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Cattle
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
 Prions
BSE prion?
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
Aggressive or apprehensive behavior, ataxia, ear
twitching
Viruses
Akabane virusa,t
Hydranencephaly, neurogenic
Sensory and motor deficits at birth 
arthrogryposis (Akabane disease)
Alcelaphine herpesvirus 13
Malignant catarrhal fever (wildebeest)
 Ataxia, head pressing, paralysis, tremors, seizures
 Bovine viral diarrhea virust
Cerebellar hypoplasia 
 Head tremors, incoordination 
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
Bovine herpesvirus-1 encephalitis
Ataxia, hyperexcitability, tremors
Ovine herpesvirus 2
 Malignant catarrhal fever (sheep)
Ataxia, head pressing, paralysis, tremors, seizures
 Pseudorabies virus
 Pseudorabies
Intense pruritus, salivation, seizures, vocalization
Rabies vinus
Rabies
 Ataxia, paralysis
Bacteria
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
 Brainypituitary abscess
 Ataxia, blindness, depression, facial paralysis
Histophilus somni
 Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis.
 Ataxia, blindness, opisthotonus, stupor
 otitis media and interna
Clostridium botulinum
Botulism
 Flaccid paralysis, loss of tongue withdrawal and 
 palpebral reflex, muscle fasciculation, paresis 
Costridium tetani
Tetanus
 Opisthotonus, seizures, tremors 
Escherichia coli
 Meningitis
 Blindness, head pressing, seizures, somnolence 
 Fusobacterium necrophorum
Brain/pituitary abscess
 Ataxia, blindness, depression, facial paralysis 
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeriosis
Ataxia, circling, facial paralysis, head tilt
Mycoplasma bovis
 Otitis media and interna
Ataxia, droopy ear, head tilt
Pasteurella multocida
 Otitis media and interna
 Aaxia, droopy ear, head tilt
Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bCongenital infection.
EMost commonly types B, C, and D.
Table 72.5.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Sheep and Goats
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
Prions
Scrapie prion 
Scrapie
 Ataxia, exaggerated nibbling reflex, intense pruritus,.
muscle tremors
Viruses
Akabane virusa,t
Hydranencephaly, neurogenic 
Sensory and motor deficits at birth 
arthrogryposis (Akabane disease)
Bluetongue virus?
Cerebellar hypoplasia, hydranencephaly
 Blindness at birth, inability to walk
Border disease virus?
Hypomyelinogenesis
Atxia, tremors
Caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus
 Caprine arthritis-encephalitis
 Paralysis, paresis, tremors
Louping il virust
Louping ill 
 Ataxia, head pressing paralysis, tremors seizures
Rabies virus
Rabies
 Aaxia, constipation, paralysis
Visna virus (S)
Visna
 Abnormal gait, ataxia, paralysis, paresis
Bacteria
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
 Brain/pituitary abscess 
 Ataxia, blindness, head pressing, head tilt 
Clostridium botutinum
Botulism
Ataxia, flaccid paralysis
Clostridium perfringens type D
 Focal symmetrical encephalomalacia
Coma, depression, head pressing, opisthotonus
Costridium tetani
Tetanus
Opisthotonus, seizures, tremors
Escherichia colf
 Meningitis
Blindness head pressing, seizures, somnolence
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeriosis
 Ataxia, circling, facial paralysis, head tilt 
5, sheep.
Congenital infection.
bClasied as aforeign anmal isease agentin theUniteStae.
574
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 72.6.
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
Viruses
 Hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus 
Vomiting and wasting disease
Sensory and motor deficits at birth
 Encephalomyocarditis virus
 Encephalomyocarditis
Blindness at birth, inability to walk
 Porcine enterovirus 1
Porcine plioencephalomalacia (TalfanTeschen?
Ataxia, tremors
Hog cholera viruse,t
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Paralysis, paresis, tremors
Nipah virus?
 Nonsuppurative meningitis
Ataxia, head pressing paralysis, tremors seizures
Pseudorabies virus
 Pseudorabies
Rabies virus
Rabies
 Ataxia, constipation, paralysis
Bacteria
Costridium tetani
Tetanus 
Opisthotonus, muscle rigidity, seizures, stiff gait, tremors
Escherichia colf (Shiga toxin-positive)
Edema disease
Ataxia, edema of face, paralysis, stiffness 
 Haemophilus parasuis
Meningitis (Glasser's disease)
Ataxia, paddling tremors 
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeriosis
Ataxia, hyperexcitability, trembling
Streptococcus suis (type 2)
 Meningitis
Ataxia, depression, paralysis, seizures, tremors
Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bCongenital infections cause congenital tremors in piglets.
Retrograde Movement within Neurons.
 Some infections
interna in calves). Infections of the epidural and subdural
result when an agent infects peripheral nerves and moves
spaces usually result by direct invasion of pathogens sub-
in a retrograde fashion to reach the central nervous system
sequent to trauma or surgery (e.g., tail-docking in sheep).
(e.g., rabies virus, pseudorabies virus). Binding to specific
Bacterial infections of vertebrae or intervertebral disks can
cell receptors is necessary for entry. For example, rabies
involve the spinal cord by direct extension or as a result of
viruses use nicotinic acetylcholine and low-affinity nerve
pressure from epidural abscessation.
 growth factor receptors to attach and penetrate cells. In
some cases cell-to-cell junctions, including synaptic junc-
tions, are crossed. Some herpesviruses latently infect sen-
Infections of the Central Nervous System
 sory ganglia and are later activated and may extend into
the central nervous system. Tetanus toxin moves in a retro-
Once a pathogen establishes, injury results from either
 grade fashion in the peripheral nerves to reach the central
direct cytotoxic effects by the pathogen or due to the
nervous system.
 inflammatory response directed at the pathogen, or a
combination of both. Clinical signs associated with infec-
Extension of Infectious Process from Contiguous Sites.
 tions are varied and typically progressive. Specific clinical
 Parenchymal or meningeal infections may result from
signs may aid in localizing the infections to the meninges
extension of infectious processes involving paranasal
(nuchal rigidity and depressed mental status), cerebrum
sinuses, tooth roots, or the middle ear (e.g., otitis media and
(circling, behavioral changes, and seizures), brain stem
Table 72.7.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents of the Nervous System of Poultry
Agent
Disease(s)
Neurologic Signs
Viruses
 Avian encephalomyelitis virus
 Avian encephalomyelitis
 Ataxia, paralysis, tremors
Avian influenza virus?
Avian influenza
Ataxia, depression
 Eastern equine encephalitis virus (T)
 Eastern equine encephalitis
Ataxia, depression, paralysis 
 Exotic Newcastle disease virus?
 Exotic Newcastle disease
Depression, paresis, torticollis, tremors 
Marek's disease virus (C)
Marek's disease
Ataxia, leg or wing paresis/paralysis 
Bacteria
Costridium botutinume
 Botulism (limberneck)
Flaccid paralysis, inability to support head 
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeriosis
Ataxia, paralysis, seizures
 Saimonella enterica ssp. arizonae (T)
Meningitis/encephalitis (arizonosis)
Ataxia, paralysis, seizures
un
 Aspergillus fumigatus
Mycotic encephalitis
Loss of equilibrium, torticollis
 Ochroconis gallopavum
 Mycotic encephalitis
Loss of equilibrium, torticollis
C, chickens; T, turkeys.
?Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States
bMost commonly type C.
cDactylaria galopava is the obsolete name for this organism.
Chapter 72
 Nervous System
575
(cranial nerve deficits and head tilt), cerebellum (ataxia and
leukopenia virus), hydranencephaly (bluetongue virus),
tremors), or spinal cord (tetra- or paraplegia).
and hypomyelinogenesis (Border disease virus).
Bacterial Infections. Bacterial meningitis in dogs and cats
Mechanism of Central Nervous System Injury
is relatively uncommon and often associated with pri-
Vascular Damage. Damage to blood vessels may be the
mary infections at other sites (e.g., urinary tract infec-
initiating factor in disease. Microbial toxins can cause vaso-
tion and endocarditis). Involvement of the nervous sys-
genic cerebral edema through effects on the blood-brain
tem may also arise from local extension of infectious
barrier and resultant leakage of proteins into extracellular
processes (e.g., ear infections, tooth root abscesses, and
spaces. This is the proposed mechanism of action of C. per-
sinus infections). Organisms involved are usually endoge-
fringens type D e-toxin, which produces a focal symmetrical
nous and include aerobes (Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Pas-
encephalomalacia, especially involving the thalamus, hip-
teurella, and Actinomyces) and anaerobes (Bacteroides, Por-
pocampus, and midbrain in sheep and the Shiga-like toxin
phyromonas, Fusobacterium, and Peptostreptococcus).
of toxigenic E. coli strains associated with edema disease in
Bacterial meningitis is more common in neonates, with
swine. Viraleffects on the vascular system include immune
horses and production animals most commonly affected.
mediated vasculitis and perivascular inflammation (e.g.,
In these animals, the etiology agent is often an enteric
feline infectious peritonitis, equine herpesvirus 1). Rick-
organism (e.g., E. coli) and is associated with failure of pas-
ettsial agents (Ehrlichia and Rickettsia) induce endothe-
sive transfer of maternal immunoglobulins. Haemophilus,
lial damage and vasculitis that lead to bleeding in the
Pasteurella, Salmonella, and Streptococcus are other genera
brain. Thrombosis of vessels may cause malacia of brain
encountered with some frequency in bacterial meningi-
parenchyma (e.g., Histophilus somni in calves, Salmonella
tis. Prolonged bacteremia and the total bacterial numbers
enterica ssp. arizonae in turkeys). Septic emboli may result
appear directly related to the likelihood that the blood-
in brain abscesses.
brain barrier will be crossed. In bacterial meningitis, a fib-
rinopurulent response typically results.
Injury to Brain Parenchyma or Meninges. Injury to cells
Brain abscesses are also more common in horses and
in the central nervous system is by direct action of the
ruminants than in companion animals and develop as
pathogen or from the resultinginflammatory response. The
a result of bacteremia, trauma (direct implantation), 01
inflammatory response can be suppurative, nonsuppura-
spread from a contiguous site. Streptococcus equi ssp. equi
tive, granulomatous, or some combination of these and is
is the most common cause of brain abscesses in horses, a
predominately influenced by the agent involved. Inflam-
form of the so-called bastard strangles, and is related to
matory processes of the brain parenchyma (encephalitis),
a bacteremic event subsequent to rhinopharyngitis and
meninges (meningitis), or spinal cord (myelitis) occur -
lymph node abscessation (strangles). Brain abscesses in
independently or in combination. Disorders in myelin for-
cattle are also associated with primary extraneural infec-
mation result in some cases (e.g., distemper and visna).
tions (e.g, hardware disease). The pituitary gland is an
Movement of in fectious agents may occur within the cere-
especially common site in ruminants, possibly due to the
brospinal fluid or interstitium, or within different cell
anatomy and close association of the rete mirabilis with
types.
the pituitary gland. Common ruminant pyogenic agents
(Arcanobacterium pyogenes and Fusobacterium necrophorum)
Viral Infections.
 Viruses with neurotrophic properties
are the usual suspects in these cases. Infections involving
affect all animal species (see Tables 72.1, 72.2, 72.3, 72.4,
vertebrae and intervertebral disks, especially in dogs, rumi-
72.5, 72.6, and 72.7). Some viruses specifically affect the
nants, and swine, may in volve the spinal cord and manifest
nervous system (e.g., rabies virus in all species and pseu-
as posterior paralysis/paresis. Some bacterial species exhibit 
dorabies virus in most species), and other viruses involve
a greater degree of neurotropism than others (e.g., Listeria
the nervous system as part of a multisystem disease pro-
in ruminants and H. somni in beef cattle). Lesions associ-
cess (e.g., malignant catarrhal fever virus in cattle, exotic
ated with Listeria encephalitis typically are in the form of
Newcastle disease virus in poultry, and distemper virus in
microabscesses in the brain stem (pons and medulla oblon-
dogs). Viruses usually reach the central nervous system via
gata) and are almost pathognomonic for Listeria encephali-
the bloodstream, often as the result of a secondary viremia.
tis. Histophilosis results in thrombotic meningoencephali-
Entry is via one of the methods described previously (see
tis (formerly TEME) (Figure 72.1).
Section "Routes of Infection). Effects on specific cell types
As already mentioned, bacterial toxins rather than the
in the nervous system are either due to direct viral cytoci-
 agentitself may be responsible for clinical signs and pathol-
dal effects or damage resulting from the ensuing inflamma-
Ogy. Some bacterial toxins directly affect the vasculature of
tory response. Gliosis, perivascular cuffing, and neuronal
the central nervous system (e.g., e-toxin of C. perfringens in 
degeneration typically characterize viral encephalitis. Viral
enterotoxemia and Shiga-like toxin of E. coli in edema dis-
infections in the central nervous system only rarely serve
ease). On the other hand, tetanospasmin (tetanus toxin),
as the primary mechanism for transmission between hosts.
the toxin produced by Clostridium tetani, binds to periph-
Typically transmission relies on infection at other sites in
eral nerves and travels to the central nervous system where
the body.
it blocks the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters from
 Some viral infections in the dam affect the fetal nervous
presynaptic inhibitory motor nerve endings. Clinical signs
system and lead to developmental problems, including
of tetanus in cattle commonly include a stiff gait, failure to
cerebellar hypoplasia (bovine viral diarrhea virus and pan-
eructate, limb extensor rigidity, raised tail head, and tetany
576
PARTIV
 Clinical Applications
tial to be involved in nervous system disease, but this
FIGURE 72.1.
Foci of necrosis with hemorrhage in
usually occurs secondarily and late in the course of the
cerebrum due to H. somni infection. Thrombosed meningeal
infection. Most fungal infections result from hematoge-
blood vessels with suppurative inflammation in the meninges
nous dissemination. Cryptococcus neoformans is the most
and neuropil are present (inset). (Courtesy of Dr Bruce
common fungus encountered in nervous system disease
Brodersen.)
and most commonly affects dogs and cats. It produces
a number of virulence factors, including a large polysac-
charide capsule, which allows it to persist. Evidence sug-
gests that it uses monocytes and endothelial cells to cross
the blood-brain barrier. Granulomatous encephalitis with
Metric
focal caseonecrotic lesions caused by Aspergillus sp. has
been described in poultry. Outbreaks of mycotic encephali-
tis in poultry flocks caused by a thermophilic fungus, Ochro-
conis gallopavum (Dactylaria gallopava—obsolete name),
have also been reported.
Prion Diseases.
 Transmissible spongiform encephalo-
pathies
01
prion
diseases-bovine
spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE), scrapie, and feline spongiform
     
diseases because they are largely untreatable, may cross
species barriers, and can have substantial economic impact
because of public health concerns. An abnormal con-
former of normally present prion protein (PrP') designated
FIGURE 72.2.
A recently fresh, adult crossbred cow
of normal Prpr into the pathological isoform. Acquired
presented with clinical signs consistent with tetanus. Note the
principally through ingestion of PrpRes-contaminated
mouthful of long-stemmed grass that sheis unable to
masticate or swallow. She has a "saw-horse" stance, her tail is
material (e.g., meat and bonemeal in BSE and possibly
elevated, and her nictitating membrane is partially prolapsed.
infected placenta or feces in scrapie), prions are able to pass
from the digestive tract and are potentially amplified in the
lymphoreticular system before moving up the peripheral
is responsible for the pathology (neuronal intracellular
spongiosis)  associated  with  transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies.
Infections of the Peripheral Nervous System
As noted previously, the peripheral nervous system is less
frequently involved in infectious processes than the cen-
tral nervous system; however, some important diseases
specifically or predominantly involve the peripheral ner-
vous system. The toxin of Closiridium bohulinum affects
peripheral nerves, specifically components of the synap
tic vesicle docking and fusion complex at peripheral motor
of facial muscles. Passive prolapse of the nictitating mem-
nerve terminals. This blocks the release of acetylcholine
brane may occur due to spasm of the retractor muscles of
resulting in the flaccid paralysis characteristic of the dis.
the ocular globe. Spasm of the masseter muscles may pro-
ease. Involvement of peripheral nerves, usually sciatic and
duce the classic sign of “lockjaw." (Figure 72.2)
brachial nerve plexuses, is a characteristic feature of Marek's
disease virus. Grossly enlarged nerves with both inflam-
Fungal Infections. As a general rule, fungal infections
matory and neoplastic histologic characteristics, as well
of the central nervous system are infrequent. When they
as myelin degeneration, are found. Mycotic and bacterial
occur, the inflammatory response is typically granuloma.
infections of the guttural pouch of horses may involve the
tous. Most of the systemic mycotic agents (Blastomyces, Coc.
glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, resulting in swallow-
cidioides, Cryptococcus, and Histoplasma) have the poten-
ing difficulties or laryngeal hemiplegia.
73
Ocular Infections
DoUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The primary function of the eye is vision. Factors that affect
composed of tight junctions of endothelial cells of retinal
vision impact overall animal well-being. In this chapter, the
capillaries and cells of the pigmented retinal epithelium.
ocular system includes the eyelids, lacrimal apparatus, con-
These barriers afford protection to intraocular structures
junctiva, the eye itself, and the surrounding fascia. The eye
of the eye from microbes of hematogenous origin. When
includes the cornea, sclera, lens, uveal tract, retina, optic
microbes from systemic infections do involve intraocular
nerve, and aqueous and vitreous chambers. The major sites
sites, it is these areas where infection typically initiates.
for infectious ocular disease to develop are the conjunctiva,
Breakdown of blood-ocular barriers is largely the result of
 cornea, and uveal tract.
inflammatory processes that disrupt tight junctions.
Antimicrobial Properties of the Eye
Antimicrobial Factors
In addition to serving as an interface to ameliorate the
Considering the frequent exposure to environmental ele-
effects ofexternal stimuli, tears contain nonspecific antimi-
 crobial substances that include the following:
ments, the eye is remarkably resistant to infection. Mechan
ical, anatomical, antimicrobial, and immunological factors
1. Lactoferrin: Lactoferrin is a substantial protein com-
all play roles in protecting the eye from infection. The fol-
 lowing sections detail these specific factors.
ponent of tears (up to 25%). By binding free iron,
lactoferrin makes this essential enzyme component
unavailable to bacteria, thereby limiting bacterial
Mechanical and Anatomic Factors
growth. In addition, lactoferrin may have a role in
enhancing natural killer cell function and inhibiting
The eyelids, including the cilia, and blink (menace) and
formation of C3 convertase.
corneal reflexes provide a barrier to external insults that
2.1
Lysozyme: Tears are rich in lysozyme (up to 40%
may traumatize the eye and predispose to infection by
of tear protein). The enzymatic action of lysozyme
endogenous or exogenous microbes. Intact conjunctiva
on the glycan chain of the peptidoglycan of bac-
and cornea epithelium provide additional barriers to in fec-
terial cell walls provides nonspecific protection
tion. Precorneal tear film, a complex multilayered fluid,
from exogenous and resident bacteria. Variation in
continuously coats exposed surfaces of the eye without
lysozyme concentration occurs among different ani-
impairing vision. The tear film has a number of functions
mals and may, in part, account for variation in sus-
including lubrication, retarding evaporation, and nutrient
ceptibility of different animals to external ocular
transport. Meibomian and lacrimal glands, the conjunc-
infections. Decrease in the lysozyme concentration
tiva, and cornea all contribute to the composition of the
in tears correlates with increased ocular infections.
tear film. Tears provide overall protection for the eye sur-
3.
Antimicrobial peptides: Broad-spectrum cationic
face through the uniform coating effect and by mechani-
antimicrobial peptides are innately produced by
cally rinsing the eye of noxious materials and microbes.
ocular surface tissues. These peptides act as natural
Protection for internal structures of the eye comes from
antibiotics through interactions with bacterial cell
tight junctions of endothelial and epithelial cells that form
surfaces. They may also play a role in signaling that
the blood-aqueous and blood-retinal barriers. The blood
activates host cell processes involved in immune
aqueous barrier is formed by ciliary epithelial cells between
defense. Antimicrobial peptides can be detected in
capillaries in the ciliary stroma and aqueous fluid in the
the conjunctiva, cornea, and tears.
posterior chamber of the eye. The blood-retinal barrier is
Immunological Factors
Original chapter written by the late Dr. Richard L.
The conjunctiva is part of the common mucosal
immune system, which includes gastrointestinal, respira-
Walker.
tory, urogenital, and mammary mucosa. It is unclear if
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
577
578
PARTIV
 Clinical Applications
 antigen-presenting capabilities exist in the conjunctiva or
ation, immunosuppressing diseases, trauma or penetrat-
lacrimal gland lymphoid tissue. It is plausible that ocu-
ing injuries, anatomic defects (e.g., entropions), or surgical
ynoi uae jo aessd Aq sno uoneziun r
interventions. In such situations, normally benign ocular
the nasal lacrimal duct to gut-associated lymphoid tissue
O1 other endogenous flora can cause serious in fections once
01 bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue sites. Plasma cells
they gain entry to unprotected sites. A number of systemic
 in the lacrimal glands are derived by clonal expansion
infectious diseases also include ocular manifestations as
and differentiation of IgA committed B lymphocytes that
a consequence of dissemination from the initial focus of
localize in the lacrimal gland. IgA is produced, which in
infection.
turn combines with secretory component. Secretory IgA is
 Depending on the microbial agent involved, the agent's
resistant to proteolytic enzymes in tears and constitutes
 tissue trophism, route of exposure, and the host's ability to
the major immunoglobulin in tears. Its role in microbial
contain infection, ocular in fections may or may not be lim-
defense includes preventing bacterial attachment and neu-
ited to specific parts of the eye. The inflammatory process
tralization of viruses. A functional complement system is
can and frequently does involve structures in the eye adja-
also present in tears.
cent to the site of initial infection or, especially in uncon-
Because of its rich vascular supply, an aggressive inflam-
trolled infections, becomes widespread to involve intraoc-
matory response, predominately composed of neutrophils,
ular cavities and surrounding structures (endophthalmitis,
occurs in the conjunctiva. The cornea, due to its avascu-
panophthalmitis). Route of exposure of the eye to infec.
lar nature, is suppressed or delayed in its inflammatory
tious agents is through surface contact with endogenous or
response.
 exogenous microbes or via the blood stream or lymphatic
The intraocular immune response is programmed to pre-
system and, perhaps, by extension from nervous tissues.
vent an overexuberant response that may irreparably dam-
Common and/or important infectious agents of the ocu-
age intraocular structures and ultimately vision. Subsets of
lar system in domestic mammals and poultry are listed in
T lymphocytes that cause substantial bystander injury are
Tables 73.1, 73.2, 73.3, 73.4, 73.5,73.6 and 73.7.
suppressed, and the immune response is more localized.
 Infectious processes of the eye frequently include those
presented in the following sections.
Competitive Inhibition Effect of Microbial Flora
It is possible that the normal flora, as elsewhere in the body,
Eyelid and Lacrimal Apparatus Infections
plays a protective role in the ocular system by inhibiting
establishment of more pathogenic species.
Bacteria are the most common cause of infections of eye-
lid margins (blepharitis) and lacrimal glands. The source
Microbial Flora of the Eye
Table 73.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
A normal conjunctival flora is present but varies by ani-
of the Ocular System of Dogs
mal, breed, geography, housing conditions, and time
of year. The most commonly recovered flora are gram-
Major Clinical Manifestations
 positive organisms and include staphylococci, micrococci,
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
streptococci, diphtheroids, and Bacillus spp. Less fre-
quently nonenteric, gram-negative bacteria are isolated
Viruses
Canine adenovirus 1
 Corneal edema, immune-complex uveitis.
and include predominately Moraxella, Neisseria, and Pseu-
keratitis (blue eye)
domonas species. In ruminants, Moraxella species may be
Canine distemper virus
 Chorioretinitis, conjunctivitis, optic neuritis 
the predominant bacterial type in normaleyes. Mycoplasma
(distemper)
species are also found as conjunctival flora in some animals.
 Canine papillomavirus 
 Papillomas of eyelids and conjunctiva
Few studies have been done to actually quantitate the rela-
Bacteria
tive numbers of each of the different species that constitute
Beta-hemotytic
 Conjunctivitis, dacryocystitis
normal flora. Not all conjunctival specimens from normal
streptococci
animals yield microbial growth, indicating that the con-
Brucella canis
 Anterior uveitis, endophthalmitis
junctiva is not heavily populated by normal flora. Internal
Coagulase- positive
 Bepharitis, conjunctivitis, dacryocystitis
structures of the eye are normally sterile.
staphylococci
Ehrlichia spp.
 Anterior uveitis, conjunctival hyperemia.
 chorioretinitis
Ocular Infections
Leptospira spp.
Anterior uveitis
Rickettsia rickettsif
 Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, conjunctival
 hyperemia, retinal hemorrhage
Ocular infections can be primary infections or part of
Fungi
multisystem infectious processes (e.g., upper respiratory
Blastomyces
 Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis.
tract infections). The organisms involved are often con-
dermatitidis
 endophthalmitis
tagious and may affect populations of animals rather
Cryptococcus
 Chorioretinitis, optic neuritis 
than individuals. In other cases, ocular infections are sec-
 neoformans
n     n sn o 
Algae
defenses of the eye. Compromising factors in these cases
Prototheca spp.
Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis
include decreased tear production, excess ultraviolet radi-
Chapter 73 Ocular Infections
579
Table 73.2.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
Table 73.4.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Ocular System of Cats
of the Ocular System of Cattle
Major Clinical Manifestations
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Viruses
 Feline herpesvirus 1
 Conjunctivitis, cormeal ulcer, stromal
 Alcelaphine herpesvirus
 Anterior uveitis, conjunctivitis, corneal
 keratitis (feline viral rhinotracheitis)
1a
edema, eyelid edema, keratitis
Feline
 Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis
(malignant catarrhal fever)
immunodeficiency
 Bovine herpesvirus 1
Conjunctivitis, corneal edema/opacity
virus
(infectious bovine rhinotracheitis)
Feline infectious
Anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, keratic
 Bovine papilomavirus
Papillomas of eyelid and conjunctiva
peritonitis virus
 precipitates, keratitis (feline infectious
 Bovine viral diarrhea
 Cataracts, retinal atrophy, optic neuritis
 peritonitis)
virus
(bovine virus diarrhea-in utero infection)
Feline leukemia virus
 Anterior uveitis, uveal lymphosarcoma.
 Ovine herpesvirus 2
Anterior uveitis, conjunctivitis, corneal
 retinal hemorrhage
edema, eyelid edema, keratitis
 Feline panleukopenia 
 Retinal degeneration, retinal dysplasia
(malignant catarrhal fever!
virus
(feline panleukopenia—in utero 
Bacteria
infection?
Arcanobacterium
 Orbital cellulitis
Bacteria
pyogenes
Chlamydophila felis
Conjunctivitis(fline pneumonitis)
Histophilus somnit
 Retinal hemorrhages, retinitis
Mycoplasma felis?a
 Conjunctivitis 
(thromboembolic meningoencephalitis 
Fungi
Listeria monocytogenes
 Conjunctivitis, keratitis, uveitis
Cryptococcus
 Chorioretinitis, optic neuritis
Moraxella bovis
Conjunctivitis, keratitis, corneal ulcer.
neoformans
(cryptococcosis)
 panophthalmitis (infectious bovine
keratoconjunctivitis or pinkeye?
Role as an ocular pathogen is uncertain.
 Mycoplasma bovoculi
 Conjunctivitis 
Classfied as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States
b" Haemophilus somnus" is the obsolete name for this organism.
for bacteria is endogenous, with staphylococci and strepto-
cocci being the most common agents. In dogs, a purulent
blepharitis occurs in conjunction with juvenile pyoderma.
lular exudate. Conjunctivitis occurs both as a local infec-
Dermatophyte infections may extend to involve eyelids.
tion (e.g., Chlamydophila infections in cats) or as part of a
systemic disease (e.g., distemper in dogs).
Viral-induced conjunctivitis (e.g., alphaherpesviruses
Conjunctival Infections
Infections of the conjunctiva induce an inflammatory
piratory or digestive tract in fections when virus specifically
response characterized by hyperemia, chemosis, and cel-
attaches to and replicates in surface epithelial cells. Cyto-
pathic effects caused by viruses and induction of an inflam-
-  s     
Table 73.3.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
junctival infections may spread to or concurrently involve
of the Ocular System of Horses
the conea (keratoconjunctivitis).
 Major Clinical Manifestations
Table 73.5.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
of the Ocular System of Sheep and Goats
viruses
 African Horse Sickness
 Conjunctivitis, eyelid and periorbital edema 
Major Clinical Manifestations
virus?
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
 Equine arteritis virus
Conjunctivitis, periorbital edema
Equine herpesvirus 2
Conjunctivitis, keratitis 
 Prions
Equine influenza virus
Conjunctivitis 
 Scrapie prion 
Retinal Detachment 
Bacteria
Bacteria
Leptospira spp.
Panuveitis (equine recurrent uveitis)
Chamydophila pecorum?
Conjunctivitis keratitis
Pseudomonas
Keratitis, corneal ulcer 
Listeria monocytogenes
Conjunctivitis keratitis, uveitis
aeruginosa
Moraxela spp. Branhamella
Conjunctivitis keratitis 
Fungi
Ovis?
Aspergillus spp.
Keratitis, corneal ulcer 
 Mycoplasma conjunctivae
Conjunctivitis keratitis (infectious
 Fusarium spp.
Keratitis, corneal ulcer
keratoconjunctivitis)
aClassified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
?Role as an otular pathogen is uncertain.
580
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 73.6.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
Corneal Infections
of the Ocular System of Pigs
Cornealinflammation (keratitis) with or without loss of the
epithelium and part of the stroma (corneal ulcer) is a com-
Major Clinical Manifestations
mon condition in most animals. Keratitis can begin exter-
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
 nally on the epithelial surface or internally at the level of the
Viruses
endothelium. Because it is avascular, the initial inflamma-
 African swine fever
 Conjunctivitis (African swine fever)
tory response in the cornea results from migration of neu-
virus?
trophils from the conjunctiva or limbic sclera. In chronic
 Classical swine fever
 Conjunctivitis (Classical swine fever, hog
disease the cornea becomes vascularized and directly par-
virus?
cholera!
ticipates in the inflammatory response.
 Porcine rubelavirus
 Corneal opacity/edema, keratitis (blue eye
Among the most common causes of viral keratitis are
disease)
members of the herpesviruses. Cats and cattle are most
Pseudorabies virus
 Conjunctivitis, keratitis 
 Swine influenza virus 
Conjunctivitis
frequently affected. In some herpesvirus infections, recur-
Bacteria
rence sometimes results from reactivation of latent infec-
Chlanmydia suis
 Conjunctivitis
tions in sensory ganglia (e.g., trigeminal ganglia) following
Escherichia coli (Shiga
 Palpebral edema (edema disease)
stress.
toxin positive!
 Primary bacterial keratitis is rare. However, once the
 Pasteurela mutocida
Conjunctivitis, nasolacrimal duct occlusion
cornea is breached a number of bacterial species will readily
(atrophic rhinitis
establish and spread to involve the corneal stroma. These
3 Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
opportunistic bacteria include staphylococci, streptococci,
 and Pseudomonas species. Damage to the cornea due to bac-
terial toxins and enzymes (e.g., proteolyticenzymes of Pseu-
domonas) is further exacerbated by enzymes from recruited
 Bacterial infections of the conjunctiva may begin in
neutrophils (e.g., collagenases and elastases). Pseudomonas
the conjunctiva or may result from extension of eyelid or
aeruginosa can be an especially virulent corneal pathogen
lacrimal gland infections. Chlamydia/Chlamydophila con-
once it is established and is associated with so-called melt-
 junctivitis occurs in a number of animal species and can be
 ing ulcers but still requires a break in the corneal epithelial
a primary conjunctivitis or, in addition, involve other sites.
barrier in order to establish. Moraxella bovis is one of the few
Bacterial conjunctivitis may develop secondary to primary
bacteria in veterinary medicine that cause a primary bacte-
viral conjunctival infections. As with viral conjunctivitis,
rial keratitis. Itproduces specific virulence factors including
concurrent corneal in volvement may occur. Fungal in fec-
adhesins (fimbria) for ad herence to epithelial cells and tox-
tions of the con junctiva are rare.
ins that cause necrosis of epithelial cells (Figure 73.1).
Mycotic keratitis (keratomycosis) is of greatest signifi-
cance in horses. Exposure of the eye to plant material often
Table 73.7.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
introduces the fungus, although some studies have found
of the Ocular System of Poultry
various fungi on the conjunctiva from normal equine eyes.
These most likely represent transient flora as a result of
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
 Avian encephalomyelitis
Cataracts, uveitis
virus (C)
FIGURE 73.1.
The photograph depicts a calf with a deep
Infectious laryngotracheitis
 Conjunctivitis, keratitis 
corneal ulcer attributable to infectious bovine
keratoconjunctivitis caused by a Moraxella bovis infection.
virus
Marek's disease virus (C)
 Loss of iris pigmentation, panuveitis
Newcastle disease virus?
 Conjunctival edema, hemorrhage
Bacteria
Bordetella avium (T)
 Conjunctivitis
Chlamydophila psittaci
Conjunctivitis
Escherichia coli
Conjunctivitis, endophthalmitis 
Haemophilus
Conjunctivitis, periorbital edema
paragallinarum
 Mycopiasma galisepticum
Conjunctivitis
 Pasteurella multocida
 Conjunctivitis, eyelid edema, orbital
cellulitis
 Salmonella spp.d
 Endophthalmitis 
Fungi
 Aspergilltus spp.
 Endophthalmitis, keratitis
C, Chicken; T, Turkey.
Classified as a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bIntludes Saimoneft arizonae.
Chapter 73  0Ocular Infections
581
random environmental exposure. The intact corneal
epithelium provides an excellent barrier to fungal infec-
tions, thus requiring trauma to the corneal epithelial as a
sitivity reactions. Likewise, bacterial uveitis occurs subse-
preceding event to the development of keratomycosis. Cor-
quent to bacterial (e.g., Bnucella) localization to the uveal 
ticosteroid use enhances the likelihood of fungal infections
tract or in some cases from immune complex deposi-
of the equine cornea and exacerbates the condition once
tion (e.g., Leptospira). Nonspecific bacterial uveitis can 
 present. Typically, mycotic infections of the cornea do not
have a concurrent conjunctivitis.
tions (e.g., gingivitis and prostatitis). All of the systemic
mycoses agents (Blastomyces, Histoplasma, Coccidioides, and
Cryptococcus) have the capability of causing a panuveitis.
Intraocular Infections
Most present clinically as a chorioretinitis, with dogs
Intraocular infections are frequently the consequence of a
and cats predominately affected. In dogs, Prototheca, an
systemic in fection with exogenous organisms that localize
achlorophyllous alga, causes a granulomatous choriore-
in the uveal tract (iris, ciliary body, choroid). The infec-
tinitis in conjunction with other systemic manifestations
tion may initiate and/or predominate at a particular site
(e.g., bloody diarrhea and paresis).
in the uveal tract; however, involvement of other sites
Congenital defects of ocular structures in utero infec-
in the tract is common. At some level, at least histologi-
tions, usually viral in origin, occur in some animal species.
cally, widespread involvement of the uveal tract occurs in
Bovine viral diarrhea virus infections in pregnant cows
most infections. Uveitis can be divided on the basis of the
have been linked to retinal atrophy and cataracts in calves.
anatomic site most prominently involved in the inflamma-
 Panleukopenia in cats is associated with dysplastic ocular
development in kittens.
sites are also involved (e.g., chorioretinitis). In intraocular
infections, extension to other parts of the eye occurs due
Infections of the Orbit
to proximity of other structures (e.g., retinal in volvement),
the fluid nature inside the eye, and the open communi-
 Infections in the orbit can be the result of a foreign body,
cation between intraocular chambers. Depending on the
agent, stage of the inflammatory response and even the
dissemination. Purulent infections in the form of orbital
animal involved, the inflammatory response in the uveal
cellulitis and retrobulbar abscesses most often result. All
 tract can be suppurative, lymphoplasmacytic, granuloma-
animal species can develop orbital infections, although
tous, or some combination of these responses.
most occur in dogs and cats. The etiology is usually a
The pathogenesis of viral-induced uveitis is either by
mixture of bacterial agents, often including Pasteurella
 direct infection of the uveal tract and subsequent inflam-
species.
74
Respiratory
System
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The primary function of the respiratory system is gaseous
The mucus lining covering airway epithelium contains
exchange. The structure of the respiratory tract is such
that noxious substances, particulate material, and micro-
provide protective effects. Lysozyme, which is selectively
bial pathogens are prevented from entering and compro.
bactericidal by its action on peptidoglycan, is present in
mising the distal portions of respiratory tract where gaseous
varying quantities throughout the respiratory tract. Broad-
exchange occurs. Innate protective properties are present
spectrumantimicrobialpeptides, beta-defensins,produced
at all levels of the respiratory tract.
by ciliated epithelial cells are active against viruses, bacte-
 In most vertebrates, the respiratory system is com-
ria, and fungi. Their expression is increased upon expo-
posed of the nasal cavity, sinuses, larynx, pharynx, trachea,
sure to microbial components (e.g., lipopolysaccharide).
bronchi and bronchioles, and lungs. In birds, the respira-
The antimicrobial reactive nitrogen species, nitric oxide,
 tory system is more complex and markedly different from
is also produced by ciliated epithelial cells, primarily by
other vertebrates. Most notably, birds possess large, sub-
inducible nitric oxide synthetase (iNOS). Bacterial prod-
cutaneous, infraorbital sinuses that communicate with the
ucts modulate the expression of iNOs. Nitric oxide plays an 
nasal cavity and are especially predisposed to infection-in
important role as a biological mediator in the regulation of
part, because of poor drainage. The lungs of birds are fairly
host defense and inflammation, producing both pro- and
rigid compared with other vertebrates. Air sacs are present
anti-inflammatory effects. Also present in the mucus are
that communicate with the lungs and are located in the
immunoglobulins and interferon and lactoferrin, which
coelom and medullary cavity of some bones.
by binding iron, makes it unavailable to most bacteria.
Alpha-1 antitrypsin, an enzyme inhibitor that reduces the
destructive effect of inflammatory reactions, plays a pro-
Antimicrobial Properties of the
tective role.
Respiratory System
Nasopharyngeal Compartment
The act of breathing exposes the respiratory tract to air-
borne microorganisms, including potentially pathogenic
 Protective mechanisms in the nasopharyngeal compart-
ones. Resident microorganisms are present in most
ment include vibrissae (guard hairs) around the nostrils
upper parts of the tract, while various defense mecha-
of some animals that arrest the largest inhaled particles
nisms operate to exclude or eliminate them from other
(15 μm in diameter) and the nasal conchae. The nasal con-
sites.
chal arrangement creates a turbulent airflow that increases
Different protective mechanisms operate in the
the chances that particles will impact mucosal surfaces.
 nasopharyngeal, tracheobronchial, and pulmonary por
Once impinged on the mucus-lined nasal turbinates or the
tions of the respiratory tract. Aerodynamic filtration oper-
nasopharyngeal wall, they encounter mucociliary action
ates through different forces at these levels in depositing
(see Section “Mucociliary Apparatus") and are transported
variously sized airborne particles. Inertial forces deposit
to the caudal pharynx to be swallowed and eliminated via
larger particles (>5 μm in diameter) in the nasopharyngeal
the digestive tract.
 and upper tracheobronchial sections through impaction.
In the humid, warm nasal passages, particles swell
 In small bronchi and beyond, where air velocity is reduced,
through hydration, becoming more likely to impinge on
gravity acts to sediment particles 5 to 10 μm in size. In the
a mucous membrane. Warming of air in the nasal pas-
smallest bronchioles and alveoli, particles measuring less
sages also benefits cold-sensitive clearance mechanisms in
than 1 μm gain contact with membranes through Brown-
the lower tract. Pharyngeal lymphoid tissues act in the fil-
ian movement.
tration of microorganisms and initiation of the immune
responses as a constituent of the mucosa-associated lym-
phoid tissue.
Original chapter written by the late Dr. Richard L.
The resident flora provides colonization resistance
Walker.
as well as production of antibacterial substances. The
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editior1. Edited by D. Scott McVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Cherigappa.
@ 2013 Jobiri Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 201 3 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
582
Chapter 74 Respiratory System
583
sneeze reflex aids in clearing infectious particles from this
nose, trachea, and larger bronchi, submucosal serous and
area.
mucous glands. Serous fluid bathes the cilia, while a viscid
mucus layer engages their tips. Mucus is propelled, along
with particles trapped in it, caudally in the nasopharynx
Tracheobronchial Compartment
and cranially in the tracheobronchialcompartment toward
The tracheobronchial compartment includes the larynx,
the pharynx by cilia beating at a rate of up to 20 mm/min.
trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. Closure of the glot-
The particle clearance rate is fastest in the trachea and slow-
tis during swallowing protects this area from contami
est in the smallest airways, where goblet cells are absent,
nation. Coughing removes gross accumulations of fluid.
mucus is sparse, and cilia beat more slowly—-an arrange-
The tracheobronchial compartment is lined by mucocil-
ment that prevents logjams in the large airways. The tra-
iary epithelium, which traps particles and transports them
chea (e.g.,cat) can becleared withinan hour, and allairways
within a day.
ratus"). Deposition of particles on airway membranes is
Mucociliary  clearance  is  inhibited  by temperature
favored by bronchial branching due to directional airflow
extremes, respiratory viruses, some bacteria (e.g., Borde-
changes.
tella), dryness, general anesthetics, dust, noxious gases (sul.
 Bronchiolar-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) is dis-
fur dioxide, carbon dioxide, ammonia, tobacco smoke),
tributed along the airways and is concentrated at bronchial
and hypoxia. Mucus production through disruption of gob-
bifurcations, which corresponds to sites where the greatest
let cell integrity increases in response to irritant exposure.
trapping of inhaled particles occurs. BALT includes both
 cellular and humoral immune responses. Epithelial cells
Pulmonary Alveolar Macrophage
mediate the active transport of IgA from the lamina pro-
pria to the airway lumen.
The PAM is a monocyte adapted to the lung environ-
ment and is located in the alveolar space. It is recruited
Pulmonary Compartment
from the blood when needed. The pulmonary alveolar
macrophage is a pleomorphic cell, 20-40 μm in diame-
Clearance mechanisms of the pulmonary compartment
ter, with many lysosomal granules containing numerous
(alveoli) consist of pulmonary alveolar macrophages
bioactive substances. Also produced by PAMs are media-
(PAMs), neutrophils, and monocytes recruited from the
to1 substances—complement components, interleukin 1,
blood. Particles are disposed of by phagocytosis. Suscep-
and tumor necrosis factor—which enable additional cel-
tible microorganisms are killed and digested. Phagocytes
 lular and humoral defenses to be mobilized. Complement
migrate to sites where mucociliary transport occurs or via
and IgG receptors on PAMs enhance its phagocytic capa-
the lymphatics to remove other engulfed particles. The
bility. PAMs are motile and usually exist in the alveolus
same protective substances as in tracheobronchial secre-
less than a week. Energy is obtained mainly by oxidative
a pns 'aa end an e ado s
phosphorylation. The absence of ciliated epithelial cells
those derived from alveolar macrophages.
and mucus-producing cells in the alveolus requires that
PAMs remove particles that reach the alveoli.
Particles ingested by PAMs—other than susceptible bac-
Mechanisms
teria killed upon ingestion—are removed via the mucocil.
  p p    
Overall, the mucociliary apparatus and PAMs constitute the
lymphatics. The centripetal route leads directly to the hilar
main clearance mechanisms of the respiratory tract and are
lymph nodes and may require 2 weeks. The centrifugal
described in greater detail in the following sections.
route goes via the pleura and may take months. Agents
that cannot be removed are sequestered by inflammatory
Mucociliary Apparatus
processes (abscesses, granulomas).
PAM activities are inhibited by sulfur dioxide, ozone,
The mucociliary apparatus is composed of ciliated and
nitrogen oxides, and respiratory viruses. Bacterialleukotox-
secretory cells. Ciliated cells are pseudostratified in the
ins and hemolysins destroy PAMs and are major virulence
nasal and cranial tracheobronchial portions of the tract,
factors produced by some important bacterial respiratory
simple columnar in the smaller bronchi, and simple
pathogens (e.g., Mannheimia haemotytica in cattle and Acti-
cuboidal in the smallest bronchioles. The cilia, some
nobacillus pleuropneumoniae in swine).
250 per cell, measuring 5.0 x 0.3 μm, resemble eukary-
otic flagella and beat up to 10o0 times a minute. The den-
sity of ciliated cells decreases gradually from the proximal
Microbial Flora
to distal bronchioles. Alterations in cilia activity or decil-
iation of the epithelial cells hinder clearance activity and
The density and constituency of the microbial flora of the
promote invasion by opportunistic pathogens. In addition,
respiratory tract varies among animals and within the respi-
loss of ciliated epithelial cell function results in decreased
ratory tract itself. The resident flora are limited to the nasal 
production of antimicrobial substances and cytokines that
cavity and pharynx where a highly diverse flora can be
mediate the inflammatory response.
found. For example, more than 30 different gram-positive
bacterial species alone can be recovered from the nasal con-
are goblet cells, interspersed with ciliated cells, and, in the
chae and tonsils of unweaned and weaned piglets. Overall,
584
PART IV
 Clinical Applications
the nasal flora consistently includes viridans streptococci
Table 74.1.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Respiratory System of Dogs
pathogens that vary with the animal host. Although not
usually considered a respiratory tract pathogen, coagulase-
Major Clinical Manifestations
positive staphylococci can colonize the nose and be carried
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
at a high rate in some populations. There they serve as
a source for infections elsewhere in the body (e.g., integu-
Viruses
 Canine adenovirus 2
 Nasal discharge, tracheobronchitis (kennel
 mentary in fections). Some of the resident flora of the upper 
 cough syndrome) bronchointerstitial
respiratory tract and oropharynx represent major respira-
 pneumonia 
tory bacterial pathogens (e.g., members of the Pasteurel-
 Canine distemper virus
Nasopharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis.
laceae and Streptococcus and Mycoplasma species) if they are
 bronchointerstitial pneumonia 
able to establish in lower parts of the tract. Many poten-
[distemper)
tially pathogenic mycoplasmas are normal residents of the
 Canine parainfluenza 
 Nasal discharge, tracheobronchitis (canine
upper respiratory tract of the host they affect or are car-
virus 2
kennel cough syndrome?
ried there by persistently infected individuals. They play a
Bacteria
Actinomyces spp.
prominent role as pathogens at most levels in the respira-
 Pyogranulomatous pneumonia, pleuritis 
tory tract, contributing to “respiratory disease complexes,"
Bordetella
 Tracheobronchits (infectious 
bronchiseptica
 tracheobronchitis, kennel coughy.
Or under the proper circumstances are by themselves sig-
 bronchopneumonia 
nificant pathogens.
Escherichia coli
Bronchopneumonia
As with the digestive tract, the resident flora of the
Nocardia spp.
 Pyogranulomatous pleuritis 
respiratory system confers colonization resistance that
Obligate anaerobes?
 Bronchopneumonia
is reduced by antibiotic treatment and environmental
 Pasteurella multocida
 Bronchopneumonia
changes that alter its composition.
Fungi
Nonresident
organisms
include
both
potential
Agents of systemic
 Granulomatous pneumonia 
pathogens and  l
 harmless transients.
Transient flora
mycosesd
are comprised of microbes that enter during the breathing
 Aspergillus fumigatus
Rhinitis, sinusitis (nasal aspergillosis)
process and, therefore, reflect the environment in which
Cryptococcus
 Granulomatous nasal masses
the animal is maintained. Environmental factors, such
neoformans
(cryptococcosis)
 Protist
as dry, dusty environments or confined environments
 Rhinosporidium seeberf
Nasal granulomas (rare)
where ventilation is poor, increase the microbial load and
types of transient flora an animal is exposed to. It is not
lntludes Bacteroides, Peptostreptococus Fusobacterium, and Porphyromonas
uncommon to isolate Escherichia coli and other enteric
species.
bacteria from the upper respiratory tract as transient flora.
bintludes Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis Cyptococcus neofor-
The significance of their presence in the nasopharynx
mans and Histoplasma capsulatum.
is difficult to assess without corresponding clinical and
pathologic information.
 The larynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs lack a resident
flora. However, the lower portion of the respiratory tract
Table 74.2.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
is continually being exposed to microbes that are present
of the Respiratory System of Cats
 in the upper portion. In the uncompromised respiratory
tract, these organisms are quickly removed by the natural
host defense mechanisms. Fluid from the distal tract may
Major Clinical Manifestations
contain up to 10? bacteria/ml in normal animals (e.g., cats).
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Feline calicivirus
 Rhinitis, interstitial pneumonia, tracheitis 
Infections of the Respiratory System
(feline calicivirus disease)
Feline herpesvirus 1
Rhinotracheitis (feline viral rhinotracheitis)
 Feline infectious
 Respiratory tract infections are of substantialimportance in
 Pleural effusion, pyogranulomatous
all animals. Some of the most common and/or important
 peritonitis virus 
pleuritis
Bacteria 
agents responsible for respiratory tract diseases in major
Bordetella
Tracheobronchitis, bronchopneumonia
domestic animals and poultry are listed in Tables 74.1,
bronchiseptica
(feline bordetellosis)
74.2, 74.3, 74.4, 74.5, 74.6, and 74.7.Agent characteristics,
Chlamydophila felis
 Pneumonia (feline pneumonitis), rhinitis 
route of infection, host susceptibility, and host immune
Obligate anaerobic
 Pleural empyema (pyothorax)
response determine the location(s) in the respiratory tract
bacteria
affected, severity of the infection, and associated pathol-
 Pasteurella multocida
 Pleural empyema (pyothorax)
Fungi
ter include viral, bacterial, and fungal agents, as well as one
Cryptococcus
 Rhinitis, granulomatous nasal masses.
aquatic protistan parasite, Rhinosporidium.
neoformans
 sinusitis, pneumonia 
 Potential respiratory viral pathogens belong to a range
of families (e.g., Adenoviridae, Caliciviridae, Coronaviridae,
Herpesviridae, Paramyxoviridae, and Orthomyxoviridae). The
Chapter 74 Respiratory System
585
Table 74.3.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
Table74.4.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Respiratory System of Horses
of the Respiratory System of Cattle
Major Clinical Manifestations
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Viruses
 African Horse Sickness
 Pulmonary edema (African horse sickness)
 Bovine herpesvirus 1
Rhinotracheitis (infectious bovine
virus?
rhinotracheitis)
 Equine adenovirus 1
Bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonia
 Bovine respiratory
 Interstitial pneumonia
{equine adenovirus disease)
 coronavirus
Equine herpesvirus 1
 Rhinitis, pneumonitis (equine
 Bovine respiratory
 Interstitial pneumonia (bovine respiratory 
rhinopneumonitis)
syncytial virus
 syncytial virus disease?
Equine herpesvirus 4
 Rhinitis, pneumonitis 
 Parainfluenza virus 3
 Rhinitis, interstitial pneumonia
Equine influenza virus
 Rhinitis, tracheobronchitis, interstitial
(parainfluenza virus 3 infection)
 pneumonia (equine influenza)
Bacteria
 Equine viral arteritis 
 Rhinitis, interstitial pneumonia
Arcanobacterium
 Embolic pneumonia, lung abscesses 
virus
pyogenes
Hendra virus?
 Pulmonary edema with respiratory distress 
Fusobacterium
 Necrotic laryngitis (calf diphtheria)
Bacteria 
 necrophorum
Actinobacillus equuli
 Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis 
Histophilus somnia
 Bronchopneumonia, otitis media
 ssp. haemolytica
Mannheimia
 Bronchopneumonia (enzootic pneumonia.
Burkholderia maller?
 Rhinitis, pyogranulomatous nasal nodules
haemotytica
shipping fever?
[glanders)
 Mycobacterium bovis
 Granulomatous pneumonia, pleuritis
Burkholderia
 Abscesses in nasal mucosa, embolic
(bovine tuberculosis)
pseudomallei
 pneumonia, pulmonary abscesses
Mycoplasma bovis
 Bronchopneumonia, otitis media 
Escherichia coli
 Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis 
Mycoplasma dispar
 Pneumonia-alveolitis
Mycoplasma felis
 Pleuritis
 Mycoplasma mycoides 
 Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis (contagious
 Cbligate anaerobest
 Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis
ssp. mycoides-small 
 bovine pleuropneumonia?
Rhodococcus equi
 Pyogranulomatous pneumonia
colony typeb
Streptococcus equi ssp.
 Guttural pouch empyema, rhinopharyngitis.
 Pasteurella multocida
 Bronchopneumonia (enzootic pneumonia,
equi
retropharyngeal lymph nodes abscesses 
 shipping fever), otitis media
(strangles), sinusitis
Salmonella Dubiin
 Interstitial pneumonia
Streptococcus equi ssp.
Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis, sinusitis
Fungi
zooepidemicus
 Mortierella wotfi
 Embolic pneumonia
Fungi
Aspergillus species
 Guttural pouch mycosis
3"Haemophilus somnus" is the obsolete name of this organism.
Protist
bConsidered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
Rhinosporidium seeberi
Nasal granulomas (rare)
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bIntludes Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, and Prevotella.
play. Respiratory in fections commonly involve sequential
infection with different pathogens (e.g., viral pneumo-
nia leading to secondary bacterial pneumonia). Respira-
tory tract infections can initiate either by the aerogenous
 Or hematogenous route. A factor predisposing to infec-
majority of the bacterial respiratory tract pathogens belong
to the family Pasteurellaceae or to the genera Bordetella,
tion of hematogenous origin, especially in cats, pigs, and
Mycoplasma, and Streptococcus. Some important respiratory
ruminants, is the role played by pulmonary intravascular
tract pathogens are associated with specific, well-defined
macrophages in removing blood-borne pathogens.
clinical entities (e.g., Rhodococcus equi and pyogranuloma-
tous pneumonia in foals). Under the proper conditions, a
number of opportunistic bacteria (e.g., Actinomyces spp.,
Infections of the Nasopharyngeal Compartment
members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, obligate anaer-
The major infectious diseases of the nasopharyngeal com-
obes) from the oral cavity and lower digestive tract can
 partment are rhinitis and sinusitis, which can occur inde-
cause or contribute to respiratory disease (e.g, aspiration
pendently or concomitantly. Rhinitis is an inflammation
pneumonia). Fungal agents of the respiratory tract are pre-
of the nasal mucosa. Common signs ofrhinitis are sneezing
dominately the agents of systemic mycoses (Blastomyces
and nasal discharges of varying composition. The charac-
dermatitidis,Coccidioides immitis, Cryptococcus neoformans,
teristic of the exudate in rhinitis is the result of serous or
and Histoplasma capsulahum) and Aspergillus spp. Individual
mucus secretions, alterations in vascular permeability (fib-
chapters on particular respiratory tract pathogens should
 be consulted for details on pathogenesis and pathology
cells.
specific to a particular agent.
Viral rhinitis can be caused by a number of viruses (e.g.,
Many infectious respiratory diseases are multifactorial,
herpesviruses, adenoviruses, and influenza viruses) and
requiring en vironmental, host, and agent factors to be in
occurs, to some degree, in mostanimals. In general, ciliated
586
PART IV
Clinical Applications
Table 74.5
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
Table 74.6.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
of the Respiratory System of Sheep and Goats
 of the Respiratory System of Pigs
Major Clinical Manifestations
 Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Viruses
Caprine
 Interstitial pneumonia
Lelystad virus 
 Interstitial pneumonia (porcine
 arthritis/encephalitis
reproductive and respiratory syndrome?
virus (G)
Nipah virus?
 Aveolitis, bronchointerstitial pneumonia 
Jaagsiekte sheep
Interstitial pneumonia, pulmonary
 Porcine herpesvirus 1
 Rhinopharyngitis, tracheitis (pseudorabies.
retrovirus ($)
 carcinoma (ovine pulmonary
Aujeszky's disease)
adenocarcinoma)
 Porcine herpesvirus 2
 Rhinitis (inclusion body rhinitis)
Maedivisna virus (S)
Interstitial pneumonia (ovine progressive
 Swine influenza virus
 Rhinitis, tracheobronchitis,
 pneumonia, maedij
 bronchointerstitial pneumonia (swine 
 Parainfluenza virus 3
Interstitial pneumonia 
influenza)
Bacteria
Bacteria
Arcanobacterium
 Pulmonary abscesses, traumatic pharyngitis
Actinobacillus
 Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis (porcine
pyogenes
pleuropneumoniae
 pleuropneumonia)
Fusobacterium
Necrotic laryngitis, traumatic pharyngitis
Bordetella
Rhinitis (atrophic rhinitis).
necrophorum
bronchiseptica
 bronchopneumonia
Mannheimia
Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis (pneumonic
Fusobacterium 
 Necrotic nasal cellulitis (necrotic rhinitis.
haemolytica
pasteurellosis)
necrophorum 
bull nose)
Mycoplasma
Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis (contagious
 Haemophius parasuis
 Bronchopneumonia, polyserositis (Glasser's
capricotum sp.
caprine pleuropneumonia)
disease!
Gaprijpneumoniae
Mycoplasma
Bronchopneumonia (enzootic pneumonia)
2(9)
hyopneumoniae
 Mycopiasma mycoides
 Pneumonia, pleuritis 
Mycoplasma hyorhinis
Polyserositis
 55p. mycoides-large
Pasteurella multocidad
Rhinitis (atrophic rhinitis).
colony type (G)
 bronchopneumonia 
Mycoplasma
Interstitial pneumonia (ovine
Salmonella species
 Bronchointerstitial pneumonia
ovipneumoniae (S)
 nonprogressive pneumonia?
Streptococcus suis
Bronchopneumonia, pleuritis, embolic
 Pasteurella trehalosi
 Bronchopneumonia
pneumonia
5, sheep; G, goats.
?Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
bB. bronchiseptica and P. muftocida sometimes act synergistically.
epithelial cells are infected, sloughed, and subsequently
Streptococcus equi ssp. equi, the cause of contagious
replaced. Clinical signs reflect the associated inflamma-
rhinopharyngitis (strangles) in horses, typically also
tory response. Secondary bacterial infections can be a com-
involves submandibular and/or retropharyngeal lymph
plication of a primary viral rhinitis (e.g, rhinotracheitis
 nodes. The resulting intense inflammatory response pro-
virus and calicivirus infections in cats predispose to bacte-
duces a thick, bilateral, purulent nasal discharge. Strangles
rial rhinitis and sinusitis). Latently infected animals that
periodically shed virus (e.g., infectious bovine rhinotra-
result from strangles infections including guttural pouch 
cheitis virus) are a common source for infections in naive
empyema (see discussion below on sites that communicate
 animals.
with the upper respiratory tract), "bastard strangles,” and
 Bacterial infections of the nasopharyngeal compart-
purpura hemorrhagica.
ment, while not as frequent as viral infections, are still
Sinusitis is an inflammation of one of the nasal sinuses.
significant. Notable among these are atrophic rhinitis in
 It can result from extension of a nasal cavity infection into
pigs, contagious rhinopharyngitis (strangles) in horses, and 
sinuses or be related to other problems of the oral-nasal cav-
sinus infections in poultry (see discussion on sinusitis, 2nd
ities (e.g., extension of infection from an infected tooth).
paragraph following). In atrophic rhinitis in pigs, the der-
 It is an occasional occurrence in most animals. Agents
monecrotic toxin of Pasteurella multocida (type D) induces
involved are typically resident flora of the nasal cavity 01
osteolysis of nasal turbinates and distortion of the nasal
those in volved in rhinitis.
cavity (Figure 74.1). To a lesser extent, the dermonecrotic
 In poultry, sinusitis is an especially common problem
toxin of Bordetella bronchiseptica is also involved. Pigs
that has major economic consequences due to the conta-
present with sneezing and a clear to cloudy nasal dis-
gious nature of some of the agents involved and potential
charge. The disease can be a mild, nonprogressive, or more
for large numbers of birds to be affected. A number of micro-
 active, progressive form. Reduced weight gain, poor feed
bial agents can infect the sinuses of birds, and typically
conversion, and increased susceptibility to other respi-
sinusitis is found in conjunction with clinical signsin other
ratory infections are the main consequences of atrophic
areas of the respiratory system (e.g., Gallid herpesvirus
rhinitis.
1 in chickens, avian influenza viruses). Mycoplasma
Chapter 74 Respiratory System
587
Table 74.7.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
healing process and overwhelms the clearance mecha-
of the Respiratory System of Poultry
nisms.
 Fungal infections of the nasopharyngeal compartment
Major Clinical Manifestations
are infrequent and when they occur they evoke a gran-
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
ulomatous inflammatory response. Aspergillus rhinitis and
sinusitis in dogs and nasal cryptococcosis in cats are among
Viruses
the most important fungal infections of the nasal cavity.
Avian infectious
Air sacculitis, tracheobronchitis (avian
 infectious bronchitis?
Rhinosporidium seeberi, a protist in the class Mesomyce-
 bronchitis virus {C)
Avian influenza virus 
 Air sacculitis, sinusitis, tracheitis (avian 
fozoea, is a rare cause of granulomatous nasal masses con-
influenza)
taining large spherules and endospores of Rhinosporidium.
 Avian paramyxovirus
 Hemorrhagic tracheitis (exotic Newcastle
Grossly the nasal lesions resemble multilobed granular
13
disease)
polyps. Although any animal including poultry can be
 Avian pneumovirus
 Rhinotracheitis, sinusitis (turkey
infected, most cases are reported in dogs and horses. Infec-
rhinotracheitis), periorbital and
tions are associated with exposure to freshwater ponds,
 infraorbital sinus swelling in chickens
lakes, or rivers.
[swollen head syndrome)
Sites that communicate with the upper respiratory tract
Avian poxvirus
 Diphtheritic lesions of nares, pharynx,
larynx and trachea (pox-diphtheritic
may be affected by the direct extension of an infectious
form!
process in the nasopharyngeal compartment or become
Gallid herpesvirus 1 (C)
Laryngotracheitis tinfectious
infected independent of other nasopharyngeal disease by
laryngotracheitis)
residents of the nasopharyngeal compartment. Guttural
Bacteria
pouch empyema in horses, caused by S. equi ssp. equi, devel-
Bordetella avium
Rhinotracheitis, sinusitis (bordetellosis
 ops as a sequel to primary rhinopharyngitis or rupture of
turkey coryza)
 an abscessed retropharyngeal lymph node (strangles). Uni-
Escherichia coli
 Colisepticemia, secondary pneumonia
lateral nasal discharge, especially when the head is down,
Haemophilus
Rhinitis, sinusitis (fowl coryza)
is a common way for guttural pouch infections to present.
paragallinarum(C)
Incomplete drainage from the guttural pouch, scarring of
Mycoplasma
Air sacculitis (chronic respiratory disease).
the pharyngeal opening, and development of concretions
gallisepticum
rhinitis, sinusitis (infectious sinusitis) (T)
 Mycoplasma synoviae
Air sacculitis, sinusitis
(chondroids) on the floor of the guttural pouch interfere
Ornithobacterium
Air sacculitis, bronchopneumonia, sinusitis
with resolution of the infection. Fungal infections also
mhinotracheale
occur in the guttural pouch of horses (guttural pouch myco-
Pasteurella multocida
 Air sacculitis, pneumonia
sis), typically involving the dorsal wall of the medial com-
Fungi
partment. Aspergillus species (especially A. nidulans) are the
Aspergillus fumigatus 
 Tracheitis, air sacculitis, pneumonia 
most common etiologic agents. The initiating factor(s) for
[brooder pneumonia)
guttural pouch mycosis has not been clearly elucidated.
C, chickens only T, Turkeys.
When guttural pouch infections involve neural or vascular
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
structures, serious (dysphagia, laryngeal hemiplegia, and
Horner's syndrome due to nerve injury) or even fatal (rup-
ture of the internal carotid artery) consequences may result.
gallisepticuminturkeys
Otitis media in calves is commonly caused by respira-
(infectious sinusitis) and
Haemophitus paragallinarum in chickens (fowl coryza)
tory pathogens (e.g., Mycoplasma bovis, Pasteurella multo-
are among the most economically important causes
cida, and Histophilus somni) harbored as residents of the
 of sinusitis in poultry. Poor growth performance and
upper respiratory tract. The likely route of infection is via
decreased egg production are among the main reasons for
the auditory tube into the middle ear. Calves present with
economic losses.
a head tilt, rystagmus, and droopy ear(s) (Figure 74.2). The
Sinusitis in cattle can occur following dehorning if for-
eign material enters the open frontal sinuses during the
with caseous debris and serosanguineous fluid. In some
cases, the disease progresses and results in otitis interna
and meningitis, where calves may exhibit severe neuro-
logic signs. Other species of animals are similarly but less
FIGURE 74.1.
Severe turbinate atrophy due to
commonly affected.
Bordetella bronchiseptica and toxigenic Pasteurella multocida
type D infection. Center is normal. (Courtesy Dr Bruce
Infections of the Tracheobronchial Compartment
Brodersen.)
The major diseases of the tracheobronchial compartment
are laryngitis, tracheitis, and bronchitis. Viral and bacte-
rial agents are the primary causes of infectious diseases of
the tracheobronchial compartment. Aspergillus infections
in poultry can, however, involve the trachea and bronchi.
Viral infections of the trachea and bronchi (e.g, equine
influenza, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, and infec-
tious laryngotracheitis in chickens) damage respiratory
588
PART IV
Clinical Applications
in preexisting contact ulcers found on the laryngeal
FIGURE 74.2.
The photograph depicts a Hoistein calf
 mucosa, which are suspected to originate from some pre-
with a head tit secondary to otitis media-interna. Mycoplasma
ceding trauma (e.g., reflex coughing). Once established, F.
bovis was cultured from this calf's inner ear.
necrophorum causes a severe necrotic laryngitis that can be
 fatal if untreated. Other ruminants are affected but less fre-
quently.
 In dogs, the kennel cough syndrome, an infectious
tracheobronchitis, involves multiple potential etiologic
agents, sometimes working in concert. Kennel cough in
dogs is considered contagious and is associated with dogs
maintained in confined, close-contact environments (e.g,
kennels and animal shelters). Viral agents include canine
adenovirus 2 and parainfluenza virus 2. Mycoplasma species
have been implicated, but their in volvement is unproven.
The bacterium, B. bronchiseptica, is also associated with 
the kennel cough syndrome. It is considered a primary
pathogen of the respiratory tract because of its ability to
adhere to ciliated epithelial cells and affect epithelial cell
functions. Infections involving B. bronchiseptica tend to be
more productive than those caused by viral agents. Evi-
dence is growing that B. bronchisepfica is also a significant
respiratory pathogen in cats.
In poultry, Bordetella avium is a common cause of upper
respiratory infections (rhinitis, sinusitis, and tracheitis) in
turkeys and to a lesser extent in chickens. Sneezing is the
most common sign, along with an oculonasal discharge.
After colonization, damage to ciliated respiratory epithelial
cells and ciliostatic effects occur. Collapse of the trachea
epithelial cells and interrupt the mucociliary apparatus.
due to softening of tracheal rings may also result. Infections
Tracheal lesions caused by many different viruses may not
with B. avium predispose birds to other infections, such as
have particularly distinguishing features; however, inclu-
colibacillosis.
Some microorganisms that affect the tracheobronchial
sions in some infections assist in identifying the particular
virus in volved (e.g., infectious laryngotracheitis in chick-
ens and avian pox viruses). Viral tracheitis is often suf-
piratory system (e.g., feline viral rhinotracheitis, infectious
ficiently destructive to predispose to secondary bacterial
bovine rhinotracheititis, and B. avium in turkeys). Addi-
tionally, systemic infections may involve epithelial cells
infections.
 Necrotic laryngitis in young feedlot cattle is one of the
in the tracheobronchial compartment (e.g., fibrinohemor-
most common bacterial laryngeal diseases (Figure 74.3).
rhagic tracheitis in exotic Newcastle disease in poultry),
Fusobacterium necrophorum, the etiologic agent, establishes
along with sites in the host outside the respiratory system.
Infections of the Pulmonary Compartment
The major infectious disease of the pulmonary compart-
FIGURE 74.3.
Necrotic laryngitis in a calf.
 ment is pneumonia. Pneumonia can be classified morpho-
Fibrinonecrotic diphtheric membrane is covering the arytenoid
cartilages and anterior trachea. (Courtesy of Dr Alan Doster.)
logically as a(n) bronchopneumonia, interstitial pneumo-
nia, granulomatous pneumonia, embolic pneumonia, 0r
a mixture of these types. The agent, route of infection,
 and immune response determine the type of preumonia
that develops. Viruses, bacteria, and fungi are all poten-
tially important pathogens of the pulmonary compart-
 ment. Chapters on specific pathogens should be consulted
that particular agent.
Infections of the pulmonary compartment often require
a preceding event(s) that impairs the innate antimicrobial
factors. Confined housing environment, ammonia build-
up (noxious gas), and transportation stress would typify
the type of factors that sufficiently impair defenses and
allow pathogens that would otherwise be rapidly cleared by
 innate host defense mechanisms to establish in the lower
respiratory tract.
Chapter 74 Respiratory System
589
Some of the same viruses found in the upper respira-
tory tract cause mild lower respiratory tract disease (e.g,
FIGURE 74.4.
Bronchopneumonia in a calf caused by
 parainfluenza virus and adenoviruses). Serologic evidence
 Mannheimia haemolytica. Cranioventral fung lobes are
indicates that a large percent of populations are inappar-
predominantly involved. (Courtesy Dr Alan Doster.)
ently or subclinically infected by these organisms. Other
viruses are substantial pathogens of the pulmonary com-
partment in their own right, sometimes causing fatal in fec-
tions (e.g, African Horse Sickness virus and Hendra virus).
Viral respiratory pathogens in animals with the potential
to be transmitted from animal to humans (e.g., influenza
viruses, Hendra virus, and Nipah virus) are of substantial 
 public health concern.
While some bacterial pathogens are considered primary
pathogens of the pulmonary compartment (e.g., R. equi
in horses and A. pleuropneumoniae in pigs), viral infec-
tions often precede bacterial infections and create an envi-
ronment that allows bacteria to establish by damaging
the mucociliary escalator system or altering the immune
response by impairing phagocytic function. Once predis-
posing factors are in play, it is not uncommon to find mul-
tiple bacterial pathogens involved in lower respiratory tract
infections.
The bovine respiratory disease complex is an exam-
ple of the complex and, as yet, incompletely understood
respiratory tract leads to disseminated infections involv-
interactions of environmental factors along with specific
ing other systems in the body. Other than the systemic
infectious agents and host response. It constitutes one
mycoses, fungal pneumonias are not common in animals.
of the most economically significant disease complexes
The exception is aspergillosis in poultry where pneumonia,
of cattle. Environmental or management-related stresses
often with concurrent tracheitis and air sacculitis, is a major 
 (weather and transportation) and/or viral infections (e.g.,
respiratory tract disease. This is a disease of substantial
adenovirus, bovine respiratory syncytial virus, infectious
 n d    
bovine rhinotracheitis virus, and parainfluenza virus 3) are
the turkey industry. Closed environments that allow for
believed to alter respiratory tract epithelium and innate
increased concentration of aerosolized asexual reproduc-
defenses. Possible immunosuppressive effects related to
tive structures (conidia) and/or moldy feeds are common
bovine viral diarrhea virus may also contribute to increas-
 predisposing factors. Growth in aerated air sacs, bronchi,
ing susceptibility to bacterial infections. These factors
and trachea permit the production of large numbers of
allow one of the primary bacterial agents in bovine res-
conidia that are not typically produced in solid tissues.
piratory disease complex, M haemolytica, to establish in
the pulmonary compartment. Armed with a number of
virulence factors, M. haemolytica is able to engage the
host defenses. Endotoxin activates pulmonary intravascu-
FIGURE 74.5
Chronic bronchopneumonia in a calif. This
lar macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes, and pre-
calf had abscesses in the cranioventral lung lobes consistent
with Arcanobacterium pyogenes.
cipitates an inflammatory response that ultimately deter-
mines the degree of pulmonary injury and whether the
pathogen is contained. In addition, leukotoxin from M.
haemolytica destroys phagocytic cells and, at lower con-
centrations, further enhances the inflammatory response
(Figure 74.4).
If pulmonary defenses are compromised sufficiently,
further aggravate the condition. It is common to recover
Arcanobacterium pyogenes, a major abscess-former of rumi-
nants, from more chronic bovine respiratory disease com-
plex lesions (Figure 74.5).
The systemic mycoses (coccidioidomycosis, cryptococ-
cosis, blastomycosis, and histoplasmosis), for the mostpart,
begin in the lower respiratory tract causing a granulo-
Severity of respiratory infection varies based on individual
animal immune status, breed, and animal species. Dogs,
horses, and cats most commonly develop clinical disease.
Inability of the animal to contain these infections to the
590
PART IV Clinical Applications
Aspiration pneumonias in most cases are polymicro-
ryngeal tube feeding, choke, or aspiration of gastric or
bial in nature, and bacteria are usually the microbial
 rumen fluids that might occur during the anesthesia recov-
 agents in volved. Aspiration pneumonia in animals results 
ery period. In newborns, aspiration of meconium may
 when impaired airway protection allows fluids or mate-
also lead to aspiration pneumonia. The bacteria most fre-
rial to enter the lower respiratory tract, initially causing a
quently involved in aspiration pneumonia typically reflect
chemical pneumonia. Common events leading to aspira-
 organisms found in the upper respiratory or digestive tracts
and include E. coli, Bordetella, Klebsiella, Pasteurella, Pseu-
drenching and improper stomach tubing), bottle or bucket
domonas, Streptococcus, and obligate anaerobes (Fusobac-
feeding of young animals, poor sucking reflexes, nasopha-
terium, Peptostreptococcus, Prevotella, and Porphyromonas).
75
Urogenital System
DOUGLAS E. HOSTETLER
The urinary and genital tracts are included together in
Glycoprotein Slime Layer. Mucin covering the epithe-
this chapter because of their anatomical proximity, shared
lium may inhibit bacterial ad hesion.
structures (urethra in males), and some overlapping dis-
ease processes. Common and /or important urogenital tract
Epithelial Desquamation.  Exfoliating epithelial cells pro-
agents of domestic animals and poultry are listed in
mote shedding of uropathogens.
Tables 75.1,75.2,75.3, 75.4,75.5,75.6, and 75.7.
Local and Systemic Immune Defenses.(
Cysteine-rich
antimicrobial peptides play a role in inhibiting bacteria
Urinary Tract
from establishing. Immune response to UTIs has been stud-
ied mostly in humans and laboratory animals. Studies indi-
The urinary tract has a number of important functions,
cate that serum and urinary antibody titers tend to be
including elimination of metabolic wastes, acid-base reg-
low in cystitis and asymptomatic infections and high in
ulation, maintenance of the extracellular potassium ion
pyelonephritis. Secretory immunoglobulin A (sIgA) tends
concentration, and endocrine functions (vitamin D con-
to be most prominent in urine, but IgG and IgM antibodies
version and production of erythropoietin and renin). The
also occur regularly. Serum IgA, IgG, IgM, and sIgA antibod-
mammalian urinary system includes the kidneys, ureters,
ies are produced in renalin fections. The protective function
bladder, and urethra. The functional filtration unit of the
of these antibodies is unclear. The ability to readily mobi-
kidney is the nephron, which includes the glomerulus,
lize leukocytes promotes rapid clearance of uropathogens
proximal and distal tubules, loop of Henle, and collecting
from the urinary system.
duct. In birds, the urinary tract differs from mammals. Kid-
neys are divided into lobes. A bladder is absent and ureters
Antimicrobial Properties of Urine. Urine itself has prop-
enter the cloaca, medial to the deferent ductin the male and
erties that may play a role in limiting bacterial growth and
dorsal to the oviduct in the female. Urine, concentrated as
include the following:
a slurry, is voided with feces.
High 0smolality. Urine osmolality (1000 mOsm/kg)
reduces growth, particularly of rod-shaped bacteria. It may,
Antimicrobial Defenses
Because it is primarily an excretory system, the urinary
tract is not subject to massive microbial exposure but has
therapy. Combined with high concentrations of ammo-
developed specific antimicrobial defenses to counter occa
nia, which is anticomplementary, urine osmolality may
sional exposure to potential pathogens. Protective features
contribute to the susceptibility of the renal medulla to
include the following:
in fection.
Washout by Urine. The flow of urine, its direction, dilut-
Urine pH.  While extremes in pH discourage multiplication
ing effect, and frequent periodic removal discourages the
of some bacteria, ranges bactericidal to common urinary
establishment of microorganisms in the normally sterile
tract pathogens are unlikely to be reached.
portions of the tract, that is, the kidneys, ureters, bladder,
and proximal male urethra. Urine retention is correlated
Urine Constituents. Urea imparts to urine an unexplained
with increased urinary tract infections (UTI).
bacteriostatic effect, which is diminished by removal of
urea from urine and enhanced by dietary supplementa-
Bacterial Interference. Colonization of the distal urethra
tion. Methionine and hippuric and ascorbic acids pro-
by normal flora may block attachment sites for coloniza-
       
tion of the lower urinary tract by potentially pathogenic
 urine. Urinary ammonium nitrogen also has antibacterial
organisms.
properties.
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
591
592
PART IV
 Clinical Applications
Table 75.1.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
Table 75.3.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
of the Urogenital System of Dogs
of the Urogenital System of Horses
 Major Clinical Manifestations
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Viruses
 Canine adenovirus 1
 Immune-complex glomerulonephritis
 Equine herpesvirus 1
 Abortion (equine viral rhinopneumonitis)
(infectious canine hepatitis)
 Equine herpesvirus 3
Vesicles/erosions on external genitalia
Canine herpesvirus
Abortion, balanoposthis, infertility in females
 Equine infectious anemia
 Immune-complex glomerulonephritis 
Bacteria
 Equine viral arteritis virus
 Abortion (equine viral arteritis)
Brucella canis
 Abortion, epididymitis (canine brucellosis)
Bacteria
Escherichia coli
Cystitis, epididymitis, orchitis, prostatitis.
Actinobacillus equulissp.
Glomerulonephritis (sleepy foal disease)
 pyometra, vaginitis 
equuli
Leptospira spp.
Interstitial nephritis, renal failure (leptospirosis)
Escherichia coli
Abortion
 Other agents of UTI
Cystitis
Leptospira spp.
Abortion 
(see Table 75.8)
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pyometra
Staphylococcus aureus
 Postcastration spermatic cord infection 
(scirrhous cord)
Streptococcus equi ssp.
Abortion, endometritis 
Normal Flora
zooepidemicus
Taylorella equigenitalis?
 Cervicitis, endometritis (contagious
 For most of the urinary tract there is no resident flora. The
 equine metritis)
distal urethra does have a resident flora and is colonized by
hung
bacteria that are generally not associated with UTI. The flora
Aspergillus spp.
Abortion 
is predominantly gram-positive and includes coagulase-
Candida spp.
 Endometritis 
negative Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Corynebac-
terium spp., and Enterococcus spp., but varies according to
BConsidered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
animal, housing, and hygiene. Small numbers of bacteria
may enter the bladder via the urethra, especially in the
female, but are normally removed during urination. The
significance of asymptomatic bacteriuria is unclear; how-
 nutritional, and metabolic factors have been implicated
ever, when detected, investigation into potential underly-
in the etiology, particularly of obstructive forms. How-
ing diseases is warran ted.
ever, bacterial involvement in feline urinary tract dis-
Certain viruses that persistently in fect tubular epithelial
ease is uncommon. Infections, particularly cystitis and
cells, although not normal flora, may cause a prolonged
 pyelonephritis, are important in cattle and swine. UTis are
viruria (e.g., equine rhinitis A virus and arenaviruses).
less common in goats, sheep, poultry, and horses.
Diseases
Anatomic and Physiologic Factors. Interference with the
free flow of urine and with complete emptying of the
Host Factors.
 A number of host factors can predispose an
bladder predisposes to UTI. This can be due to tumors,
 animal to UTIs:
polyps, calculi, anatomic anomalies (e.g., ectopic ureters
and patent urachus), and neural defects. Vesicoureteral
Animal Susceptibility.
 UTIs are most common and of
reflux, the reentry of urine into the ureters during urina-
 greatest significance in dogs. In cats, idiopathic lower
tion, causes bladder urine to reach the renal pelvis, pos-
urinary tract disorders are frequently encountered. Viral,
sibly carrying bacteria into a susceptible area. Reflux is
 aggravated (perhaps initiated) by infection and compli-
cates existing infections by increasing the likelihood of
Table 75.2.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
renal in volvement.
of the Urogenital System of Cats
Othher Host Factors.
 Other host factors include endocrine
Major Clinical Manifestations
disturbances such as diabetes mellitus and hyperadreno-
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
corticism (Cushing's disease). Long-term use of corticos-
Viruses
 teroids appears to predispose dogs to UTI.
Feline infectious
Immune-mediated pyogranulomas of
 peritonitis virus
kidney
Routes of Infection.
The primary means by which
 Feline leukemia virus 
Immune-complex glomerulonephritis, fetal
uropathogens reach the urinary tract are the ascending and
absorption, abortion, renal lymphoma
 Feline panleukopenia 
 Abortion, congenital abnormalities 
hematogenous routes. The ascending route via the urethra
(panleukopenia)
is most common. The presence of potential pathogens near
virus
 Feline rhinotracheitis
Abortion 
 the urethral orifice and the usual localization of infection
virus
 in the bladder point to the urethral orifice as the portal of
entry of bacteria to the urinary tract. Pyelonephritis is a
Chapter 75
 Urogenital System
593
Table 75.4.
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
Table75.5.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents
 of the Urogenital System of Cattle
of the Urogenital System of Sheep and Goats
Major Clinical Manifestations
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
Viruses
 Bovine papillomavirus
 Penile and vaginal fibropapillomas 
Akabane virus?
 Abortion, dystocia due to
Bovine viral diarrhea virus
Abortion, congenital abnormalities
 arthrogryposis of fetus 
Infectious bovine
Abortion, infectious pustular
Bluetongue virus (S)
Abortion, congenital abnormalities
 rhinotracheitis virus
vulvovaginitis, balanoposthitis
(bluetongue)
Rift Valley fever virus?
 Abortion (Rift Valley fever)
Border disease and bovine
Congenital abnormalities, stillbirths 
Bacteria 
viral diarrhea viruses
(Border disease, hairy shaker
 Arcanobacterium pyogenes
 Abortion, metritis, pyometra,
disease!
 seminal vesiculitis
Cache Valley virus 
Abortion, congenital abnormalities 
Brucella abortus
 Abortion, epididymitis, orchitis.
Rift Valley fever virus?
 Abortion
 seminal vesiculitis
Bacteria
Campylobacter fetus ssp.
 Early embryonic death (bovine
Actinobacillus seminis (S)
Epididymitis
venerealis
venereal campylobacteriosis.
Brucella abortus, B.
 Abortion, orchitis 
vibriosis)
melitensis?
Corynebacterium renale group
Pyelonephritis
Brucella ovis (S)
Epididymitis, rare abortions
Epizootic bovine abortion 
Abortion (foothill abortion)
Campylobacter fetus ssp.
Abortion
agent (unidentified)
fetus
Escherichia coli
Interstitial nephritis (white-spotted 
Campylobacter jejuni
Abortion
kidney disease), pyelonephritis.
 Chlamydophila abortus
Abortion (enzootic abortion of ewes)
pyometra
 Corynebacterium renale
 Balanoposthitis (ulcerative posthitis.
Fusobacterium necrophorum.
 Postparturient metritis
group
pizzle rot), pyelonephritis
 other anaerobes
Coxiella burnetif
Abortion {Q-fever)
Leptospira spp.
 Abortion 
Histophilus somnib (S)
Epididymitis
Listeria monocytogenes, L.
Abortion
Leptospira spp.
Abortion 
ivanovif
Listeria monocytogenes, L
 Abortion
Mycoplasma spp., Ureapiasma
 Granular vulvitis
jivanovii
spp.
Salmonella spp.
Abortion, metritis
Fungi
Aspergillus spp.
 Abortion
5, sheep predominately.
Mortierela wolfi
 Abortion 
Considered aforeign animal disease agent in the United States.
bH. ovisis the obsolete name.
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
Table 75.6.
Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
consequence of retrograde extension of infection from the
of the Urogenital System of Pigs
bladder.
Infection of the urinary tract via the hematogenous
 Major Clinical Manifestations
route occurs secondary to bacteremia/viremia and primar-
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
ily affects the kidney, causing glomerulonephritis or inter-
Viruses
stitial nephritis. It occurs less commonly than lower UTIs,
African swine fever
Abortion, immune-complex
probably due to the high resistance of the renal cortex,
virus?
 glomerulonephritis (African swine fever)
where infection begins. Young animals are especially at risk
 Classical swine fever
 Abortion, embryonic death.
 because of the greater likelihood for septicemia to occur in
virus?
 immune-complex glomerulonephritis
that age group.
(classical swine fever, hog cholera)
Lelystad virus
 Abortion (porcine reproductive and
Glomerulonephritis and Interstitial Nephritis.
Glomeru-
respiratory syndrome?
lonephritis is an inflammation of the glomerulus due
Pseudorabies virus
Abortion (pseudorabies)
to localization of an infectious agent in the glomeru-
Swine parvovirus
Embryonic death, mummification 
Bacteria
-d   ss   n s
Actinobacurum suis
 Cystitis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis
tion of immune complexes. Viral glomerulonephritis is
Brucella suis
Abortion, orchitis
the result of selected viruses (e.g., infectious canine hep-
Escherichia colf
Vaginitis (discharging sows)
atitis virus, equine arteritis virus, and nephrotoxic infec-
Leptospira spp.
 Abortion (leptospirosis)
tious bronchitis virus in chickens) replicating in glomeru-
lar capillary endothelial cells, usually as a consequence of a
systemic viral infection. In bacterial glomerulonephri-
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States
tis, bacteria from a septicemia/bacteremia settle in the
glomerulus (e.g., Actinobacillus equuli ssp. equuli in foals).
594
PART IV
 Clinical Applications
Table 75.7
 Common and/or Important Infectious Agents 
 of the Urogenital System of Poultry
FIGURE 75.1.
Embolic nephritis in a foal caused by A.
equuli ssp. equuli. (Courtesy of Dr Alan Doster.)
Major Clinical Manifestations
Agent
(Common Disease Name)
Viruses
 Avian adenovirus (C)
 Soft-shelled or shell-less eggs (egg drop
syndrome)
Avian
 Decreased egg production
encephalomyelitis
virus
 Avian influenza virus
Decreased egg production ophoritis
Avian leukosis virus (C)
 Nephroblastoma, renal carcinoma
 Avian pneumovirus 
 Decreased egg production
Infectious bronchitis
Decreased egg production, decreased 
virus (C)
hatchability, nephritis (infectious
bronchitis-nephrotoxic strains)
Newcastle disease
 Decreased egg production 
virus?
Bacteria
Escherichia coli(C)
 Salpingitis
Gallibactenum anatis
 Oophoritis, salpingitis 
(C)
Haemophius
 Decreased egg production (infectious
tion through active motility o1 random movement. The
paragallinarum (C)
coryza)
resulting infection, after further multiplication, is marked
Mycoplasma
 Decreased egg production, salpingitis
by bacteriuria. Pyuria and low-grade proteinuria may be
gallisepticum
present. Inflammation is triggered by the interaction of
Mycoplasma iowae (T)
 Reduced hatchability, increased embryo
mortality
lipopolysaccharide (gram-negative bacteria) or muramyl
Saimonella pullorum
 Oophoritis, salpingitis (pullorum disease)
dipeptides (gram-positive bacteria) with transitional cells
Salmonella gallinarum
 Oophoritis, salpingitis (fowl typhoid)
of the bladder that secrete proinflammatory mediators,
Saimonella enteritidis
Oophoritis, salpingitis
which attract polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes.
(phage type 4)
Signs, when present, include dysuria or urinary frequency
s       
C, chickens predominately; T, turkeys predominately.
Common agents implicated in canine UTIs and character-
Considered a foreign animal disease agent in the United States.
istic features are summarized in Table 75.8.
blntludes organisms previously identified as Actinobacilus salpingitidis Pas
teurella haemoyticalike or Pasteurelfa haenoytica-Actinobacilus salpingitidis
complex.
Pyelonephritis.
 The most serious complication of lower
UTI is pyelonephritis, which is caused by an ascending
infection via the ureters. Pyelonephritis is essentially an
The ensuing inflammatory response is typically suppura
inflammation of the renal pelvis and renal parenchyma.
Once bacteria reach the renal pelvis, they are hard to
tive. The result is an embolic nephritis (Figure 75.1).
 In some hematogenous infections, the renal tubules
rather than the glomeruli are the primary target. Interstitial
nephritis is commonly seen with Escherichia coli septicemia
FIGURE 75.2.
White-spotted kidney in a neonatal
in neonatal ruminan ts (white-spotted kid ney) (Figure 75.2)
and leptospirosis in a number of different animals.
coli septicemia. (Courtesy of Dr Alan Doster.)
 Deposition of immune complexes in the glomeruli in
the case ofpersistent viral infections (e.g., infectious canine
hepatitis, equine infectious anemia, and feline infectious
peritonitis), specific bacterial infections (e.g., Borrelia spp.),
or chronic bacterial infections at other sites in the body
may result in immune-complex glomerulonephritis.
Cystitis.
 Bacterial cystitis (inflammation of the urinary
bladder), especially in dogs, is the most common UTI
encountered by veterinarians. The ability of bacteria to
 adhere to epithelium is considered a prerequisite to estab-
lishment of cystitis. The infection may begin with colo-
nization of the urethral orifce by a potential pathogen
that subsequently reaches the bladder through multipli-
cation, extension along the epithelial surface, or migra-
Chapter 75
Urogenital System
595
Table 75.8.
 Leading Bacterial Causes of UTls in Dogs
Typical Colonies
Confirmatory Tests
Species
Prevalence (%)
Blood Agar
MacConkey Agar
 Gram Stain 
Oxidase
Catalase
Escherichia coli
42-46
Smooth gray; often 
Red discrete, surrounded by
 Negative rods
Negative
NA
hemolytic
red haze
Enterococcus
11-14
Very small (<1 mm)
No growth
 Positive cocci
NA
Negative
Coagulase-positive
12
White or off-white (often
No growth 
 Positive cocci
NA
Positive
Staphylococcus
hemolytic)
Proteus mirabilis
6-12
 Swarms; no discrete
Colorless 
 Negative rods
Negative
NA
colonies
Klebsiella
8-12
Large, wet mucoid,
Pink, slimy coalescing; not
 Negative rods
Negative
NA
whitish-gray
 surrounded by red haze
Pseudomonas
<5
 Gray to greenish-gray:
 Colorless, surrounded by 
Negative rods
 Positive
NA
 fruity or ammonia odor:
 blue-green pigment 
 often hemolytic
NA, not applicable
eliminate due to the poor vascular supply and inhibitory
attachment of E. coli to surface slime glycoproteins by
effects of urine osmolarity and ammonia on immune
type 1 (mannose-sensitive) pili is probably of less signif-
defenses, as mentioned previously. Signs of pyelonephritis
icance than that mediated by several mannose-resistant
are vague. Fever is transient even during the acute phase.
adhesins, one of which is Pap, which attach to cell mem-
Pain in the thoracolumbar area is not specific unless directly
brane glycolipids. E. coli isolates from different animals
 associated with kidney palpation. Urinalysis may reveal
appear to maintain the same Pap alleles. Mannose-resistant
lowered specific gravity and casts. In advanced cases, blood
adhesins occur commonly in uropathogenic E. coli, but
urea nitrogen is elevated. E. coli is the most common cause
irregularlyin other strains. Other properties associated with
uropathogenic E. coli include resistance to serum bacterici-
cause cystitis have the potential to cause pyelonephritis, if
dal action; hemolytic activity; and possession of certain
they reach the renal pelvis.
O-antigens, iron-scavenging proteins, and bacteriocins.
Diphtheroid bacteria, belonging to the Corynebacterium
These properties are rare in rand om E. coli strains, suggest-
ing that agents of UTls represent a select subpopulation
tis in cattle. They colonize the lower genital tract and
within their species.
pass between animals by direct and indirect contact. Many
Pili-mediated attachment to urothelium and urea
 d  so d   
hydrolysis are considered critical virulence factors in patho-
an ascending UTl, beginning with cystitis, which pro-
genesis of the C. renale group infections. Urea breakdown
with production of ammonia initiates an inflammatory
theroid, Actinobaculum suis, causes UTI of sows. Like bovine
-sns pe (e Hd) an u aie y 'ssd
pyelonephritis, the disease is apparently an ascending
sion of antibacterial defenses, possibly through comple-
infection caused by a urealytic diphtheroid agent, limited
ment inactivation by ammonia.
 to females and often related to breeding operations, preg-
nancy, and parturition.
Miscellaneous Urinary Tract-Associated Infectious
Uroliths and UTls. Uroliths of dogs are predominantly
Processes
(70%) the result of infection and consist of struvite 0r
Fungi are rarely involved in UTls. Fungal hyphae can be
apatite, or various combinations, and are often referred to
detected in the urine of dogs with disseminated Aspergillus
as triple phosphate stones. Urease-producing bacteria are
infections. Mycotic cystitis is rarely identified. The yeast
implicated—in dogs, chiefly coagulase-positive staphylo-
Candida albicans is sometimes isolated from the urine of
cocci, and to a lesser extent Proteus mirabilis. Inhibition
dogs with diabetes mellitus.
Kidney tumors are associated with infections with the
acid) can suppress infectious stone formation. Uroliths
avian leukosis/sarcoma complex of viruses. Renal lym-
in ruminants are related to nutritional factors rather that
phoma is associated with feline leukemia virus infections
infectious ones.
in cats.
Virulence Factors of Bacterial Uropathogens
Genital Tract
Bacteria capable of initiating UTI require virulence deter-
minants, the most firmly established of which are ad hesins
The primary function of the genital tract is reproduc-
(e.g, the pyelonephritis-associated pilus, Pap). Fimbrial
tion. The genital tract in mammals includes the ovaries,
596
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
oviducts, uterus, cervix, vagina, and external genitalia
lation density of in dividual flora members is less well un der-
in females and the testes, ductus deferens, accessory sex
organs, penis, and prepuce in males. In poultry, the geni-
 particular flora makeup in the overall ecology and stability
tal tract differs substantially from mammals. In males the
of the microbial population of the genital tract.
testes are internal and, lacking accessory sex glands and a
In general, the female genital tract possesses a resi-
distinct copulatory organ, the ductus deferens parallels the
dent microbial flora caudal to the external cervical os. The
ureter into the cloaca. Females typically have only a sin-
uterus is normally sterile or transiently contaminated with
gle functional ovary (left) and oviduct with the shell gland
small numbers of microorganisms. The vagina contains a
(uterus), which empties into the cloaca.
flora that is mainly composed of species of obligate anaer-
obic bacteria, including both gram-negative and gram-
Antimicrobial Defenses
positive species. The aerobic and facultative anaerobic
organisms, about one-tenth the number of obligate anaer-
Antimicrobial defenses are in place at alllevels of the genital
 obes, include gram-positive and gram-negative species, as
tract and include the following:
well as Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma.
As is the case with other mucosal surfaces, the flora
Anatomic Defenses. S
 Stratified squamous epithelium in
should be thought of as protective insofar as other, perhaps
the vagina and vulva provides for resistance to infection.
more pathogenic, strains are excluded through coloniza-
The cervix provides a physical barrier to infections of the
tion resistance. Mechanisms for exclusion include block-
ing attachment, efficient use of available substrates, and
urethra in males provides a barrier to retrograde in fections.
production of antimicrobial substances. In a more practi-
cal sense, the normal or transient flora does include some
Hormonal Defenses. Hormones play a part in protecting
 species that will contaminate the uterus should it become
the genital tract from disease. Estrogens increase the blood
compromised. Some examples include Streptococcus equi
supply to the vagina and uterus, the number of polymor-
ssp. zooepidemicus in mares with endometritis, Arcanobac-
phonuclear neutrophil leukocytes in the cervix and uterus,
terium pyogenes along with Fusobacterium necrophorum in
and the myeloperoxidase activity of phagocytic cells in the
cows with pyometra, and E. coli in bitches with pyome-
tract. These activities are important because the vagina and
tra. All of the organisms mentioned here are part of the
perhaps the uterus may become contaminated with poten-
normal or transient vaginal flora of the affected animals.
tially harmful agents during coitus.
The potential for these organisms to cause disease does
not simply result from their presence but requires a crit-
Immune Defenses.
The immune system of the genital
ical level of replicative dominance over other flora before
 tract appears to be similar in structure and function to
 disease can occur. If the normal flora is disturbed, as during
other mucosal surfaces. There are lymphoid follicles in the
 antibiotic treatment of bacterial endometritis in the mare,
 submucosa from the cervix caudally. These follicles sup-
the vagina will be repopulated with other, more resistant,
ply cells that will ultimately secrete IgA. IgG and IgM will
strains, which may ultimately infect the uterus if the un der-
 lying compromising condition goes uncorrected.
arrive through transudation. In the uterus, IgG, IgM, and
The resident flora of the external genitalia includes
some slgA are found. In the prepuce, mainly slgA is found; 
commensal anaerobes, which are largely gram-negative,
it is probably secreted by the accessory glands or locally
nonspore formers; Mycoplasma spp.; α-hemolytic and β-
from cells arising from the lymphoid follicles in this area.
hemolytic streptococci; lactobacilli; Haemophilus spp. (par-
The defensive potential of these antibodies depends upon
ticularly H. haemoglobinophilus in dogs); corynebacteria;
the isotype. Antibodies of the IgA isotype make particles
propionibacteria; and coagulase-negative staphylococci.
more hydrophilic, thereby negating any surface attraction
Taylorella equigenitalis, a venereally transmitted pathogen
an organism might have for usually hydrophobic host cell
of mares, may be carried inapparently in the clitoral
surfaces as well as sterically hindering attachment. IgG
fossa.
and IgM, on the other hand, will opsonize, trigger the
The prepuce and the distal urethra of the male genital
complement cascade, and sterically hinder attachment. All
tract possess a resident flora that plays a role similar to that
immunoglobulins, if specific for epitopes comprising flag-
played by the flora in the vagina. The origin of organisms
ella, immobilize bacteria thatuse motility as a way to ascend
 responsible for bacterial disease in these areas is almost
the tract from the more caudal regions.
always endogenous. Some venereally transmitted organ-
isms reside in the prepuce (e.g., Campylobacter fetus ssp.
venerealis in cattle and T. equigenitalis in stallions) causing
Normal Flora
no ad verse effects at thesesites. Thepreputialcavity, includ-
Lower portions of the genital tract in all animals possess
ing the preputial diverticulum of swine, is home for agents
a normal flora. The flora varies by animal and within an
of pyelonephritis in cattle (C. renale group) and swine
 individual is dynamic over time. Factors including age,par-
(A. suis).
ity, and hormones affect flora makeup. The actual micro-
bial flora of the genital tract is likely to be more complex
Diseases
than presently recognized because optimal culture meth-
ods for highly fastidious organisms have not always been
Host and Environmental Factors. For disease to occur in
employed in past studies on normal flora prevalence. Popu-
the genital tract frequently, some predisposing host and
Chapter 75
Urogenital System
597
environmental factors must be in place and include the
the endometrium (endometritis) or the entire wall of the
following:
uterus (metritis). Endometritis occurs in all animals but is
most common and of greatest consequence in the horse.
Anatomic Factors.
Vulvar conformation of mares is a well-
Inability of some horses with endometritis to resolve in fec-
known predisposing factor to infection of the vagina and
tions is in part due to defects in migration of neutrophils
uterus. The more horizontally positioned the vulva, the
to the site of infection as well as decreased phagocytic
greater the tendency for fecal contamination of the vagina
ability of the neutrophils. S. equi ssp. zooepidemicus is the
to occur. Urine pooling in the vagina predisposes to cervici-
pathogen most commonly associated with endometritis in
tis and endometritis. Phimosis in males can lead to nonspe-
mares, although other organisms (enterics, other strepto-
cific inflammation and infection of the prepuce and penis.
cocci, Pseudomonas) can be in volved.
 If prior to resolution of a uterine infection the cervix
Hormonal Factors. Hormones play a role in making the
closes and pus accumulates, a pyometra develops. Pyome-
genital tract more susceptible to disease. In general, under
tras occur in allanimals but are most frequent in dogs, cats,
the influence of progesterone, the uterus is more prone to
and cattle. Overall, E. coli is the organism most often associ-
infection. Neutrophil activity in the genital tract is sup-
ated with pyometra. A number of other organisms, includ.
pressed under the influence of progesterone, including
ing Streptococcus sp. and Pseudomonas, can also be involved.
decreased migration and phagocytic ability. At least in
In cattle, A. pyogenes and obligately anaerobic bacteria are
bitches, during the luteal phase, receptors for E. coli are
frequently found.
expressed. Colonization by E. coli expressing appropriate
adhesins allows for establishment and can ultimately lead
Fetus. Abortion, especially in farm animals and horses, is
to development of pyometra. Whether the same occurs in
one of the mostcommon and economically significantgen -
other species is unknown.
ital tract diseases. Abortion is essentially expulsion of the
fetus before full development. A number of viral, bacterial,
Other Factors. Trauma that may occur during parturition
and fungal agents can trigger this process (see Tables 75.1,
can compromise integrity of the epithelial barrier lead-
75.2, 75.3, 75.4, 75.5, 75.6, and 75.7). During pregnancy,
ing to infection. Dystocias and retained fetal membranes
the placenta and/or fetus are infected predominately by
increase chances for postparturient infections. Nutritional
the hematogenous route. Mares are an exception; bacte-
factors sometimes influence genital tract disease develop-
rial and fungal placental infections most often originate
ment. For example, posthitis in sheep occurs typically in
th rough the cervical os.
animals on rich legume pastures that are high in proteins,
A number of viruses can cause abortion in animals. The
which increase urea excretion, and estrogens. This leads to
 herpesviruses are prominent among the viruses involved
 preputial swelling and urine retention in the sheath.
and affect a number of different animals, most notably
horses (equine herpesvirus 1). Viral-induced abortions
Infectious Processes. For most genital tract pathogens,
result subsequent to fetal inflammatory lesions with necro-
the routes of exposure are venereal or by ingestion.
sis, fetal anoxia, or endometrial lesions.
Localization to the genital tract occurs by ascending or
 Bacteria responsible for abortion often cause a placenti-
hematogenous routes. In some diseases, although venere-
tis or placental edema. If the fetus becomes infected, typ-
ally transmitted, pathogens localize to areas in the gen-
ically large numbers of organisms are found in the fetal
ital tract by a hematogenous means. Some genital tract
stomach fluid. In some bacterial abortions, lesions in the
pathogens reside in the digestive tract and become blood.
fetus may suggest the likely agent. As an example, the focal
borne to cause disease in the genital tract (e.g., C. fetus ssp.
areas of hepatic necrosis in the fetus are suggestive of-
fetus in sheep).
however, not exclusive to—abortions in sheep caused by
C. fehus ssp. fehus (Figure 75.3).
Female Reproductive Tract. The most common infec-
While most bacterial abortions occur in the last
tions of the female reproductive tract involve the vulva,
trimester, early fetal death and resorption occurs with some
vagina, cervix, and uterus. Vulvitis in cattle is associated
agents. In those cases, the infection presents clinically as
with Ureaplasma and Mycoplasma spp., but a solid etiolog-
an infertility problem (e.g., C. fetus ssp. venerealis in cattle).
ical link remains to be shown. Infectious bovine rhinotra-
Fungal abortions are most common in horses and cat-
cheitis virus causes vulvovaginitis in cattle. Various col-
tle and typically are the result of a placentitis. The por-
iforms, especially E. coli, cause vaginal-vulvar discharge
tal of entry in cattle is either the respiratory or gastroin-
in sows. Such infections are often related to hygiene and
testinal tract with subsequent hematogenous spread to the
managementpractices. Vaginitis in dogsis mostcommonly
placenta. In horses, an ascending infection through the
associated with Staphylococcus spp, Streptococcus spp., 01 E.
cervix is the most common route. Fetal lesions in cattle, if
coli. In prepubertal females, vaginitis tends to resolve on its
present, are for the most part limited to focal, hyperkera-
own as the dog matures. In older bitches, there is usually
totic lesions on the skin; in horses fetal lesions are uncom-
an underlying factor in volved .
mon. Mortierella wolff, azygomycete, causes a fulminating
Uterine infections are typically related to breeding,
pneumonia with a high mortality rate in about 25% of
pregnancy, or parturition, the nonpregnant uterus being
affected cows as a result of a lung-uterus-lung infection
fairly resistant to infection. During breeding or parturi-
cycle. Fungal elements absorbed from the uterus cause a
tion when the cervix is open, infections of the uterus are
fulminating embolic pneumonia in the cow that typically
most often ascending. Infections of the uterus can in volve
follows the abortion.
598
PARTIV
Clinical Applications
name)—is the rule. In adult rams, Brucella ovis is the main
FIGURE 75.3.
Areas of acute hepatic coagulative
agent involved. It localizes to the epididymal ductules via
necrosis in the liver of an aborted ovine fetus. C. fetus ssp.
the hematogenous route. Inflammation and extravasation 
fetus was isolated. (Courtesy of Dr Alan Doster.)
of sperm lead to development of a spermatic granuloma.
 Bacterial prostatitis most commonly occurs in dogs and
is, in fact, the most common cause of prostatic disease
in dogs. Infections are mostly ascending in origin and
can be acute or chronic. Consequences include prostatic
abscesses, which can rupture and cause peritonitis. Semi-
nal vesiculitis occurs most commonly in bulls and is the
most common cause for inflammatory cells detected dur-
ing semen examination. Many potential agents have been
 implicated, with A. pyogenes the most frequently recovered.
Infections of the penis or prepuce can be transmit-
ted from endogenous or exogenous sources. Various her-
pesviruses cause balanoposthitis in animals. Members of
the C. renale group cause a necrotizing inflammation of the
 prepuce and adjacent tissues in wethers or rams. The dis-
area constantly irrigated with urine. Ammonia is thought
 Some viral infections of the fetus result in congenital
to initiate the inflammatory process. A similar condition
abnormalities. Factors influencing whether abnormalities
 occurs occasionally in goats and bulls.
develop are dependent on the stage of fetal development,
immune competence of the fetus, and the particular viral
Genital Tract of Poultry.  Infections of the oviduct (salpin-
strains responsible (e.g., feline panleukopenia virus; bovine
gitis) in poultry can be the result of an ascending in fection
viral diarrhea virus; and Akabane, Cache Valley, Border dis-
from the cloaca or occur in conjunction with colibacillosis
ease, and bluetongue viruses in sheep).
when the left abdominal air sac is involved. E. coli is the
Details on the pathogenesis and pathology as it relates to
most common pathogen recovered. Although pullorum
individual abortifacient agents are found in specific chap-
disease and fowl typhoid have become uncommon diseases
ters on those agents.
in developed countries, oophoritis, salpingitis, and orchitis
are all possible consequences of the septicemia associated
Male Reproductive Tract. In males, the predominant
with infections by Salmonella serovars Pullorum and Galli-
genital tract infections are orchitis, epididymitis, and in fec-
narum, respectively.
tions of the accessory sex glands (prostatitis and semi-
 Decreased egg production and/or hatchability can result
 nal vesiculitis). Orchitis can develop by an ascending or
from a number of systemic infections in poultry. A num-
 hematogenous route. Occasionally periorchitis develops
ber of viruses (e.g., avian adenovirus, infectious bronchi-
from descending peritonitis, which subsequently involves
tis virus, and avian influenza virus) and bacteria (e.g.,
the testes. Epididymitis affects all animal species but is most
Mycoplasma, Haemophilus paragallinarum, and Salmonella)
common in rams. In younger rams, an ascending infection 
 can affect overall egg production and hatchability. Some
by age-dependent preputial residents-
—"
"Actinobacillus sem-
poultry pathogens (e.g., Mycoplasma, Salmonella) are trans-
inis," Histophilus somni ("Histophilus ovis" is the obsolete
mitted vertically in eggs.
Note: Page number followed by f and t indicate figure and table respectively.
Abiotrophia, 202
pathogenesis, 111-112
pathogenesis, 264
abortion, 92, 112, 118, 129, 130,
reservoir, 111
reservoir, 263
179-182, 210, 223, 280, 319,
resistance, 111
resistance, 263
422,435,597
ruminants, 112
ruminants, 264
bacterial, 597
staining, 108
staining, 263
bovine, 341
structure and composition,
structure,263
Campylobacter, 167, 170, 171
108-109
swine, 264
fungal, 597
swine, 112
transmission, 263
Leptospira, 179, 180
transmission, 111
treatment, 265
Listeria, 225
treatment, 113-114
Actinomyces bovis, 264, 551, 566
mares,372-373
variability, 111
Actinomyces israelii, 264
viral-induced, 597
wooden tongue, 113
adaptive immunity, 11-14
abscesses, subcutaneous, 557
Actinobacillus lignieresii, 108, 109t,
Adenoviridae, 369-371, see ais0
Acanthamoeba, 314
112, 551
adenoviruses
Acinetobacter spp., 556
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae,
adenoviruses, 369
actinobacillosis, 112, 113
108, 109t, 583, see also
avian, 371
Actinobacillus, 108-114
Actinobacillus
bovine, 370-371
avian species, 113
Actinobacillus suis, 108, 109t
canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1),
cell products of medical interest
Actinobaculum suis, 217, 595
369-370
adhesins, 109-110
biochemical activities, 217
deer,371
biofilms, 110
cellular products of medical
 diseases of domestic animals,
capsule,110
interest, 217
370t
cell wall, 110
disease patterns, 217
equine,371
 IgA proteases, 111
 growth characteristics, 217
genome, 369
IgG proteases, 111
morphology, 217
ovine, 371
iron, 111
pathogenesis, 217
adenovirus virions, 369
nickel, 111
staining, 217
 adenylyl cyclase toxin, 123
 periplasmic superoxide
transmission, 217
adherent-invasiveE.coli (AIEC),72
dismutase, 111
Actinomyces, 263-265, 264t, 567
adhesins
 RTX-type toxin, 110
cats, 264
Actinobacillus, 109-110
toxins, 110
cattle, 264
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 338
urease,110
control, 265
Bordetella, 120-122, 121t
control, 113
disease pattern, 264
Campylobacter, 169
disease patterns, 112-113
dogs, 264
Candida albicans, 318
epidemiology, 113
 epidemiology, 264
Clostridium difficile, 251
 growth characteristics, 111
growth characteristics, 263
Clostridium perfringens, 246
horses, 112-113
horses, 264
Coccidioides, 333
immunity, 113
immunity, 264
enterobacteriaceae, 54
laboratory diagnosis, 113
laboratory diagnosis, 264
Escherichia, 62-64
morphology, 108
lumpy jaw, 264, 265
Haemophilus and Histophilus,
overview, 108, 109t
morphology, 263
115-116
Veterinary Microbiology, Third Editiori. Edited by D. Scott MeVey, Melissa Keririedy arid M.M. Chierigappa.
@ 2013 Johir Wiley & Soris, Iric. Publishied 2013 by Johiri Wiley & Soris, Iric.
599
600
Index
adhesins (Continued)
infectivity, 357-358
Anaplasma marginale, 302, 303,
Helicobacter, 175
laboratory diagnosis, 358
303f, 541
Listeria, 223
pathogenesis and pathology.
control, 304
Moraxella, 145
358
immunity, 303
Pasteurellaceae, 101-102
physical, chemical, and
laboratory diagnosis, 303
Pseudomonas, 148
antigenic properties, 357
pathogenesis, 303
Salmonella,75-76
reservoir,358
reservoir, 303
Sporothrix schenckii,326-327
transmission, 358
transmission, 303
Streptococcus, 195
treatment, 358
treatment, 304
Yersinia enterocolitica, 91, 93
Alpharetrovirus, 503, 509-511
Anaplasma ovis,302
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 91
alphaviruses, 408-414
Anaplasma phagocytophilum,302,
adjuvants, 46
eastern equine encephalitis
304
afimbrial adhesins
(EEE), 408, 410-412
control, 305
E. coli, 64
infectivity, 408, 410
descriptive features, 304
enterobacteriaceae, 57
properties, 408
immunity, 304-305
African horse sickness (AHS) virus,
salmonid alphaviruses (SAVs),
 laboratory diagnosis, 305
497-498
408, 412-413
pathogenesis, 304
control, 497-498
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
reservoir, 304
disease, 497
(VEE), 408, 410-412
transmission, 304
distribution, 497
virion structure and genomic
treatment, 305
host response, 497
organization of, 409f
Anaplasma platys, 302
infectivity, 497
western equine encephalitis
Anaplasmataceae, 297-298, 302
laboratory diagnosis, 497
(WEE), 408, 410-412, 410f
anemia, 541
 pathogenesis and pathology, 497
Amblyomma americanum, 140, 298
 animal borrelioses, 155-156
properties, 497
Amblyomma variegatum, 267
anthrax, 210
reservoir, 497
aminocyclitols, 34
anthrolysins, 208
transmission, 497
aminoglycosides, 33-34
 antibacterial drugs
treatment, 497-498
 absorption, 34
aminoglycosides, 33-35
African swine fever virus, 363-365,
adverse effects, 34
classification, 26
364f
antimicrobial activity, 33-34
drug combinations, 37-38
control, 364-365
distribution, 34
mechanism of action, 26, 27f
disease, 363
excretion, 34
cell wall synthesis, 27-30
distribution, 364
resistance, 34
damage to cell membrane 30
host response, 364
amphotericin B, 38
nucleic acid function, 30-32
infectivity, 363
 amphotropic strains, 503
protein synthesis, 32-33
laboratory diagnosis, 364
 anaerobes, gram-negative,
resistance, 38-41
pathogenesis and pathology, 364
 non-spore-forming, 234-243
acquired,39
properties, 363
cell products of medical interest,
bacteriophages, 41
reservoir, 364
234-235
constitutive,39
resistance, 363
capsule, 235
genomic resistance islands, 41
transmission, 364
cell wall, 235
horizontal drug resistance
treatment, 364-365
extracellular products, 235
transfer, 39
Aggregatibacter
fimbriae, 235
integrons, 41
actinomycetemcomitans, 108
control, 236
mutation to, 39
Aino virus, 433
growth characteristics,235
plasmid-mediated, 39-40
airsacculitis, 287
laboratory diagnosis, 235-236
transformation, 41
Ajellomyces capsulatus, 335
direct examination, 236
routes of administration, 36-37
Ajellomyces dermatitidis, 338
identification, 236
antibodies, 12-13
Akabane virus, 433
isolation, 236
antibody-based serology, 14-16
 Alcaligenaceae, 120
sample collection, 236
antibody-dependent cellular
Alcephaline herpesvirus 1
morphology, 234
cytotoxicity (ADCC), 13, 14
(AIHV-1), 377,379
pathogenesis, 235
antifungal agents
Aleutian disease virus (ADV),
reservoir, 235
for systemic use, 38
357-358
structure and composition, 234
for topical use, 38
control, 358
transmission, 235
antimicrobial drugs, 26-44,
distribution, 358
treatment, 236
see also antibacterial drugs
host response, 358
 anaerobic flesh-eater, 247
antibacterial activity, 26
host-virus relationship, 358
Anaplasma centrale, 302
bacteriostatic/bactericidal, 26
Index
601
classification, 26
reservoir, 173
prevention, 342
dosage and pharmacodynamic
species, 173
reservoir, 340
properties, 36-38
transmission, 174
ruminant, 341
mechanism of action, 26
treatment, 174
transmission, 340
resistance, 38-44
Arcobacter butzleri, 173
treatment, 342
acquired,39
Arcobacter cibarius, 173
Aspergillus terreus, 341
 clinical importance, 41-42
Arcobacter cryaerophilus, 173
aspiration pneumonia, 590
constitutive, 39
Arcobacter thereius, 173
astrocytes, 571
control of, 44
Arcobacter tropharium, 173
Atadenovirus, 369,371
 public health aspects of, 42-44
Argas persicus, 156
atrophic rhinitis, 105, 106, 125
spectrum of activity, 26
Arteriviridae, 456, 474, 476t
Aujeszky's disease virus, 380-381
susceptibility testing, 35-36
arterivirus
Aviadenovirus, 369
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), 8
 genome organization, 476f
 avian
Aphthovirus,396-399
lactate dehydrogenase-elevating
adenoviruses, 371
aquareoviruses,499
virus, 486-488
arizonosis, 84
Arcanobacteriumbernardiae,203
 molecular properties, 477t
aspergillosis, 341
Arcanobacterium haemolyticum,203
 porcine reproductive and
cholera, 106
Arcanobacterium hippocoleae, 203
respiratory syndrome virus,
crop mycosis, 319
Arcanobacterium phocae,203
484-486, 487t
Mycoplasma, 287
Arcanobacteriumpluranimalium,
simian hemorrhagic fever virus,
polyomavirus, 367-368
203
488-489
reovirus, 568
Arcanobacterium pyogenes, 203,
 structure and morphology, 475f
spirochetosis, 158
214, 540, 552, 557,575, 589
virion properties and virus
avian bornavirus (ABV), 446
biochemical activities, 204
replication, 474-479
avian encephalomyelitis virus
cattle, 204
arthritis, 567-568
(AEV), 401
cellular products of medical
in calves, 288
avian infectious bronchitis virus,
interest
Artiodactyla, 443
470-471
cell wall, 203
Asfarviridae, 363-365
control, 471
extracellular matrix-binding
Aspergillus deflectus, 341
disease, 470
proteins, 203-204
Aspergillus rhinitis, 587
distribution, 470
 neuraminidases, 203
Aspergillus spp., 340-342, 552, 567,
host response, 471
proteases, 204
576
infectivity, 470
pyolysin O, 203
avian, 341
laboratory diagnosis, 471
control, 205
cats, 341
 pathogenesis and pathology.
cows, 204
cellular products of medical
470-471
 disease patterns, 204-205
interest, 340
properties, 470
epidemiology, 205
adhesins, 340
reservoir,470
growth characteristics, 204
cell wall, 340
resistance, 470
immunity, 205
extracellular enzymes, 340
transmission, 470
laboratory diagnosis, 205
iron, 340
treatment, 471
morphology, 203
melanin, 340
avian infectious bronchitis virus
 pathogenesis, 204
disease pattern, 341
(IBV), 456
 pathology, 204
dogs,341
avian influenza, 430-431
reservoir, 204
epidemiology, 341
control, 431
resistance, 204
growth characteristics, 340
disease, 430
staining, 203
horses, 341
distribution, 430-431
structure,203
humans, 341
laboratory diagnosis, 431
swine, 204
immunity, 341
pathogenesis and pathology, 431
transmission, 204
laboratory diagnosis, 341-342
reservoir, 430-431
treatment, 205
direct examination, 341-342
transmission, 430-431
Arcobacter, 173
immunodiagnosis, 342
treatment, 431
cellular products of medical
isolation and identification,
avian leukosis/sarcoma complex
interest, 173
342
of viruses (ALSVs), 509-511
epidemiology, 174
molecular methods, 342
classification, 509
growth characteristics, 173
morphology and composition,
control, 511
immunity, 174
340, 340f
disease, 509
laboratory diagnosis, 174
pathogenesis, 340
distribution, 510
pathogenesis, 174
pathology, 340-341
host response, 511
602
Index
 avian leukosis/sarcoma complex of
humans, 209
 BhuR (Bordetella heme uptake
viruses (ALSVs) (Continued)
immunity, 209
receptor), 123
infectivity, 509
laboratory diagnosis, 209-210
Bibersteinia, 10l, see also
laboratory diagnosis, 511
morphology, 206
Pasteurellaceae
pathogenesis and pathology.
pathogenesis, 208-209
bile esculin agar test, 199
510-511
pathology, 209
biofilms, 110, 122
properties, 509
 prevention and control, 210
Bipolaris spicifera, 330
reservoir, 510
reservoir, 208
birds, see aiso avian
resistance, 509
resistance, 208
candidiasis, 319
transmission, 510, 510f
ruminants, 209
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
treatment, 511
staining, 206, 207f
egg drop syndrome, 371
avian orthoreoviruses, 492-493
swine, 209
Erysipelothrix, 220
control, 493
transmission, 208
lymphoid tissues, 535
disease, 492
treatment, 210
Mycobacterium, 273
distribution, 492
variability, 208
respiratory system, 582
host response, 493
Bacillus cereus, 206, 210
Birnaviridae, 501-502
infectivity, 492
Bacillus subtilis, 211
black disease, 256
laboratory diagnosis, 493
Bacillus thuringiensis, 206
blackleg, in cattle, 254, 255
 pathogenesis and pathology, 493
bacitracin sensitivity, 199
β-lactam antibiotics, 27-30,
properties, 492
bacterial conjunctivitis, 580
see aiso cephalosporins;
reservoir, 492
bacterial keratitis, 580
penicillins
transmission, 492
bacterial meningitis, 575
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 338-340,
treatment, 493
bacterial prostatitis, 598
566
avian-pathogenic E. coli (APEC),
bacterial rumenitis, 552
cellular products of medical
72
bacterial sepsis, 536, 539
interest, 338
Avibacterium, 101, see also
bacterins, 50
control, 340
Pasteurellaceae
bacteriocins, 546
epidemiology, 338-339
Avihepatovirus, 401
bacterioferritin, 58
growth characteristics, 338
avipoxviruses, 393-394
Bacteroides, 243
immunity, 339
as vaccine vectors, 393-394
Bacteroides fragilis, 243
laboratory diagnosis, 339
Avulavirus, 438-440
Bafinivirus, 458, 462
culture,339
azithromycin, 367
Bartonellaceae, 306-312
direct examination, 339
bacillary angiomatosis, 309-310
 immunodiagnosis, 339
bacillary angiomatosis (BA), 306,
cats, 310, 312
molecular methods, 339
309-310
cat scratch disease, 309
morphology, 338
bacillary hemoglobinuria, 255,
cellular composition, 307
pathogenesis, 338
255f
disease patterns, 309-310
reservoir,338
Bacillus, 206-211
dogs, 310, 312
structure and composition, 338
Bacillus anthracis, 206, 539
endocarditis, 309
transmission, 338
carnivores, 209
growth characteristics, 307
treatment, 340
cellular composition, 206
humans, 309-310
variability, 338
cellular products of medical
immunity, 310-311
blastomycosis, 338
interest, 206
 laboratory diagnosis, 311
blood-brain barrier, 570
AcpA, 208
mice, 310
blood-retinal barrier, 577
anthrolysins, 208
morphology, 306
bluetongue virus (BTV), 493-497
AtxA,208
pathogenesis, 307, 309
control, 496
capsule,207
 prevention, 312
disease, 493
edema toxin, 207
reservoir, 307, 308t
distribution, 494-495
InhA, 208
species, 306, 308t
host response, 496
LeTx, 206-207
staining, 306
infectivity, 494
MprF, 208
treatment, 311-312
 pathogenesis and pathology.
nitric oxide synthase, 208
Bartonella henselae, 306
495, 495f
virulence-associated products,
Bartonella, valvular endocarditis,
properties, 494
207-208
540
reservoir, 494-495
 disease pattern, 209
Basidiobolus spp., 342
resistance, 494
epidemiology, 209
BCG (bacillus Calmette-Guerin),
transmission, 494-495
growth characteristics, 208
271,275
treatment, 496
horses, 209
Betaretrovirus, 503, 512-513
Bollinger's bodies, 393
Index
603
border disease virus (BDV), 419,
Bordetella hinzii, 120
bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1),
423
Bordetella parapertussis, 120
377-378
control, 423
Bordetella pertussis, 120
control, 378
disease, 423
Bordetella petrii, 120
disease, 377
epidemiology, 423
Borna disease virus (BDV), 446
distribution, 377
host response, 423
bornaviridae, 446
eradication, 378
laboratory diagnosis, 423
Borrelia, 155-157
host response, 378
 pathogenesis and pathology.
anatomy and composition, 155
infectivity, 377
423
growth characteristics, 155
 laboratory diagnosis, 378
treatment, 423
morphology, 155
 pathogenesis and pathology.
Bordetella, 120-126
reservoir, 155
377-378
biochemical activities, 124
staining, 155
reservoir, 377
cats, 125
transmission, 155
rhinotracheitis, 377
cellular products of medical
variability, 155
transmission, 377
interest, 120, 121t
Borrelia anserina, 155-156, 539
treatment, 378
adenylyl cyclase toxin, 123
Borrelia burgdorferi, 156-157
bovine herpesvirus-5 (BHV-5),
adhesins, 120-122, 121t
diagnosis, 156
378-379
biofilms, 122
distribution, 156
bovine immunodeficiency virus
capsule, 122
immunity, 156
(BIV), 520
cell wall, 122
prevention, 156-157
classification, 520
dermonecrotic toxin, 122-123
transmission, 156
disease, 520
exotoxins,122-123
treatment and control, 156
distribution, 520
flamentous hemagglutinin,
Borrelia theileri, 156
host response, 520
121
botulinum toxins (BoNT), 259
infectivity, 520
fimbriae, 120-121
bovine
laboratory diagnosis, 520
iron, 123
abortion, 341
pathogenesis and pathology, 520
osteotoxin, 123
 adenoviruses, 370-371
properties, 520
pertactin, 121-122
anaplasmosis, 303
reservoir,520
pertussis toxin,122,123
microbial flora, 547t
transmission, 520
regulation of, 123-124
Mycoplasma, 287-288
treatment, 520
 tracheal colonization factor,
bovine coronaviruses (BCoV),
bovine leukemia virus (BLV),
122
467-468
515-516,543
tracheal cytotoxin, 122
control, 468
classification, 515
type II secretion system, 123
disease, 467
control, 516
composition,120
distribution, 468
disease, 515
control, 126
host response, 468
distribution, 515
 disease patterns, 125-126
infectivity, 467-468
host response, 516
dogs, 125
laboratory diagnosis, 468
infectivity, 515
 epidemiology, 126
pathogenesis, 468
laboratory diagnosis, 516
growth characteristics, 124
properties, 467
 pathogenesis and pathology.
immunity, 126
reservoir,468
515-516
laboratory diagnosis, 126
transmission, 468
properties, 515
morphology, 120
treatment,468
reservoir,515
overview, 120,121t
bovine encephalitis virus, 377
resistance, 515
pathogenesis, 124-125
bovine ephemeral fever (BEF),
transmission, 515
poultry, 125
453-454
treatment, 516
rabbit, 125
control, 453-454
bovine mammillitis virus, 377,
reservoir,124
disease, 453
see also bovine herpesvirus-2
resistance, 124
distribution, 453
(BHV-2)
structure, 120
host response, 453
bovine mastitis, 74, 266
swine,125
infectivity, 453
bovine papillomaviruses, 366-367
transmission, 124
laboratory diagnosis, 453
bovine papular stomatitis, 391
treatment, 126
pathogenesis, 453
bovine parainfluenza virus (BPIV)
variability, 124
properties,452
type 3, 444-445
wild birds, 126
reservoir, 453
 control and prevention, 445
Bordetella avium, 120, 588
resistance, 453
disease, 444
Bordetella bronchiseptica, 120,
transmission, 453
distribution, 444
586
treatment, 453-454
laboratory diagnosis, 444-445
604
Index
bovine parainfluenza virus (BPIV)
laboratory diagnosis
Brucella ovis, 598
type 3 (Continued)
direct examination, 162, 162f
Brucella species, 567
 pathogenesis and pathology, 444
identification, 162-163, 163t
bubonic plague, 85-86, 86f, 87f,
transmission, 444
isolation, 162
 90, see also Yersinia pestis
bovine pyelonephritis, 216
sample collection, 161-162
 budgerigar fledgling disease, 367
bovine respiratory disease
morphology, 159
buffalopox virus, 389
complex, 589
pathogenesis, 161, 161f
bundle-forming pilus (Bfp), 64
bovine respiratory syncytial virus
prevention, 163
Bunyaviridae, 433-436, 434t
(BRSV), 445-446
reservoir, 160-161
Hantavirus, 433, 436
control, 446
species, 158-159, 159t
Nairovirus, 433, 436
disease, 445-446
staining, 159, 159f
Orthobunyavirus, 433-434
distribution, 446
transmission, 160-161
Phlebovirus, 434-435
laboratory diagnosis, 446
treatment, 163
Tospovirus, 433
 pathogenesis and pathology, 446
variability, 160
bunyaviruses, 433-436, 434f,
prevention, 446
Brachyspira alvinipulli, 158
434t
transmission, 446
Brachyspira canis, 158
Burkholderia, 134-137
bovine spongiform
Brachyspira hyodysenteriae,158
Burkholderia mallei, 134, 542
encephalopathy (BSE),
Brachyspira intermedia, 158
biochemical characteristics, 135
528-530
Brachyspira pilosicoli, 158
 cellular products of medical
cattle, 528
Brachyspira suanatina, 158
interest
clinical signs, 529
brain abscesses, 575
capsule,134
control, 530
Braun's lipoproteins, 53
cell wall, 134
emergence of, 529
breast bone fever, 214
type III secretion apparatus,
epidemiology, 528-529
Brk (Bordetella resistance to
134-135
etiology, 529
killing), 122
control, 136
host-prion relationship.
bronchiolar-associated lymphoid
disease patterns, 135
529-530
tissue (BALT), 583
epidemiology, 135
laboratory diagnosis, 530
brooder pneumonia, 341
glanders, 134, 135
treatment, 530
Brucella, 127-133
growth characteristics, 135
bovine torovirus (BToV), 458,
 cellular products of medical
immunity, 136
472-473
interest, 128
laboratory diagnosis, 136
bovine tuberculosis, 275
cellular structure and
morphology, 134
bovine vaccinia viruses, 389
composition,127-128
pathology, 135, 135f
bovine venereal
control, 133
reservoir, 135
campylobacteriosis, 167
diversity, 128
resistance, 135
bovine viral diarrhea virus
epidemiology, 130
structure, 134
(BVDV), 419, 421-423
growth characteristics, 128
transmission, 135
control, 423
immunity, 131
treatment, 136
disease, 421-422, 422f
infection in animal, 130-131
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 136
epidemiology, 422
laboratory diagnosis
biochemical characteristics, 137
host response, 422
direct examination, 132
cellular products of medical
laboratory diagnosis, 422-423
identification, 132
interest
pathogenesis and pathology, 422
isolation,132
adhesin, 136
treatment, 423
molecular-based tests, 132-133
capsule,136
Brachyspira, 158-163
serologic test, 132
cell wall, 136
anatomy and composition, 159
 specimens, 131-132
type II secretion system, 136
cellular products of medical
morphology, 127
disease patterns, 137
interest
pathogenesis, 129-130
epidemiology, 137
cell wall, 159
recovery mechanisms, 131
growth characteristics, 137
flagella, 159
reservoir, 128-129
immunity, 137
hemolysin/cytotoxin, 159
resistance, 128
laboratory diagnosis, 137
NADH oxidase, 159-160
species,127
melioidosis, 136, 137
plasmid, 160
staining, 127
morphology, 136
VSH-1, 160
transmission, 129
pathogenesis, 137
clinical signs, 161
treatment, 133
reservoir, 137
control, 163
vaccination, 131
resistance,137
 growth characteristics, 160, 160f
Brucella abortus, 568
staining, 136
immunity, 161
Brucella melitensis, 127
structure and composition, 136
Index
605
transmission, 137
 pathogenesis, 170-171
pathogenesis and pathology, 381
treatment and control, 137
reproductive disorders, 170-173
prevention, 382
bursitis, 568
reservoir, 169-170
properties, 381
B-virus of macaques, 383-384
sheep, 167, 170-173
reservoir, 381
species, 167-168,168t
transmission, 381
Cache Valley virus, 433
staining, 167, 168f
canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1), 369
calf diarrhea (CD), 467, see aiso
swine,167
control, 370
bovine coronaviruses (BCoV)
transmission, 170
disease, 369
Caliciviridae, 403-407
treatment, 173
distribution, 369-370
caliciviruses, 403
variability, 169
host response, 370
enteric caliciviruses, 407
Campylobacter coli, 167
infectivity, 369
 European brown hare syndrome
Campylobacter fetus, 167
laboratory diagnosis, 370
virus, 406
Campylobacter fetus ssp. fetus,
 pathogenesis and pathology, 370
feline calicivirus (FCV), 405-406
167-169
properties, 369
lagoviruses, 406
Campylobacter fetus ssp. venerealis,
reservoir, 370
noroviruses, 406-407
167
resistance, 369
rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus,
Campylobacter helveticus, 167
transmission, 370
406
Campylobacter hyointestinalis, 168
treatment, 370
vesicular exanthema of swine
Campylobacter jejuni, 167, 554
canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV-2),
virus, 403-405
Campylobacter lari, 168
370
vesivirus, 403-406
Campylobacter mucosalis, 168
canine coronavirus (CCoV),
 California encephalitis serogroup
Campylobacter sputorum,168
464-465
viruses, 434
Campylobacter upsaliensis, 168
control,465
camelpox virus, 389
Candida albicans, 317-319
disease, 464
CAMP (Christie Atkins
birds, 319
distribution, 464
Munch-Petersen) test, 229
cats,319
host response, 464
CAMP phenomenon, 198-199
cattle, 319
laboratory diagnosis, 465
Campylobacter,163,167-173
cellular composition, 317-318,
pathogenesis and pathology, 464
abortion, 167, 170, 171
318f
reservoir, 464
cats, 167, 168, 171
cellular products of medical
transmission, 464
cattle, 167, 170-173
interest
treatment, 465
cellular products of medical
adhesins, 318
type I, 464
interest
proteases, 318
type II, 464
adhesins, 169
control, 319
canine distemper (CD) virus,
CadF, 169
disease pattern, 319
440-443
CapA, 169
dogs, 319
control, 442-443
capsule, 168-169
epidemiology, 319
disease, 440, 441f
CDT, 169
equine,319
 geographic distribution,
cell wall, 168
growth characteristics, 318
440-441
flagella, 169
immunity, 319
host range, 440-441
microcapsule, 169
laboratory diagnosis, 319
host response, 442
Peb 1, 169
morphology, 317-318
laboratory diagnosis, 442
type II secretion system, 169
pathogenesis, 318
 pathogenesis and pathology.
type IV secretion system, 169
pathology, 319
441-442
dogs, 167, 168, 171
reservoir,318
prevention,442-443
enteric disease, 170-173
staining, 318
transmission, 440-441
epidemiology, 171
swine, 319
canine distemper virus, 348, 349f,
goats, 167, 170, 173
transmission, 318
557
growth characteristics, 169
treatment, 319
 canine infectious respiratory
immunity, 171
candidiasis, 317-319,551-552
disease (CIRD), 288, 468
laboratory diagnosis, 171-173,
canid herpesvirus 1(CHV-1),
canine infectious
172t
381-382
tracheobronchitis, 125
direct examination, 171-172
control, 382
canine leproid granuloma
identification, 172
disease, 381
syndrome, 277
isolation, 172
distribution, 381
canine leptospirosis, 179
sample collection, 171
host response, 381-382
canine papillomavirus, 367
serodiagnosis, 173
infectivity, 381
 canine parainfluenza virus, see
morphology, 167
laboratory diagnosis, 382
 parainfluenza virus type 5
606
Index
canine parvovirus
 integumentary system, 559t
respiratory system, 585t
control, 356
musculoskeletal system, 565t
urogenital tract, 593t
distribution, 355
ocular infections, 579t
Leptospira, 179,180-181
host response, 354-356
respiratory system, 584t
lumpy skin disease, 392
host-virus relationship, 355-356
urogenital tract, 592t
lymphoma, 515
infectivity, 355
lymphoma, 513
mastitis, 562-563, 562t
laboratory diagnosis, 356
mycobacterial granulomas,
Mycobacterium, 273
pathogenesis and pathology, 355
557-558
myocarditis,540
reservoir,355
Mycobacterium,273,277-278
pericarditis,118,540,540f
resistance, 355
Mycoplasma, 288
peritonitis and pericarditis, 552
transmission, 355
nasal cryptococcosis, 587
pneumonia,105,118
treatment, 356
Nocardia, 266
pseudocowpox, 391
type 1 (CPV1), 355
Pasteurellaceae, 106
pyelonephritis, 595
type 2 (CPV2), 355
plaque, 90
 pyogran-ulomatous dermatitis,
canine parvovirus disease (CPD),
rabies, 448
558
354
respiratory tract infection, 125
rabies, 448
canine respiratory coronavirus
salmonellosis, 81
Rhodococcus equi, 231
(CRCoV), 468-469
sporotrichosis, 559
Rinderpest virus infection, 443
caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus
Streptococcus, 198
salmonellosis, 81
(CAEV), 517-518, 568
subcutaneous abscesses, 557
sinusitis, 587
caprine herpes virus1(CpHV-1),
viral keratitis, 580
vesicular stomatitis, 451
379-380
cat scratch disease (CSD), 306,
viral keratitis, 580
capripoxviruses, 391-392
309
vulvitis, 597
goatpox virus, 391-392
cattle
vulvovaginitis, 597
lumpy skin disease virus, 392
Actinomyces, 264
CD4 T lymphocytes, 12, 13
sheeppox virus, 391-392
Actinomyces bovis, 566, 567f
cell-mediated immunity-based
carbadox, 163
Anaplasma marginale, 304
diagnostics, 16-17
carbapenems, 30
Arcanobacterium pyogenes, 204
 cell-mediated immunity (CMI),
Cardiovirus, 401
BHV-1 infection, 377
13, 45
caseous lymphadenitis, 214
bovine mastitis, 74
cellular immunity, 351
cathelicidins, 8
 bovine papular stomatitis, 391
cellulitis, 557
cats
brain abscesses, 575
central nervous system, infections
Actinomyces, 264
Brucella, 128, 129
of, see nervous system
anemia, 541
Campylobacter, 167, 170-173
cephalosporins, 29-30
aspergillosis, 341
candidiasis, 319
absorption, 30
bacterial meningitis, 575
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
adverse effects, 30
Bartonellaceae, 310, 312
Clostridium chauvoei, 254, 255
antimicrobial activity, 29-30
Bordetella, 125
Clostridium novyi, 256
distribution, 30
Brucella, 129
Clostridium septicum, 257
excretion, 30
Campylobacter, 167, 168, 171
Coccidioides, 334
resistance, 30
Candida albicans, 319
Corynebacterium
chaperone-usher pathway, 62
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
pseudotuberculosis,214,557
chauveolysin, 254
Chlamydophila infections, 579
Cryptococcus neoformans, 316
 chicken anemia virus, 358
chorioretinitis, 581
dermatophyte infections, 323t
chicken anemia virus (CAV), 359
Coccidioides, 334
Enterococcus, 201
control, 360
cowpox virus infections,
fungal abortions, 597
distribution, 360
388-389
Fusobacterium necrophorum,
host response, 360
Cryptococcus neoformans, 316
241-242
host-virus relationship, 360
dermatophyte infections, 323t
hemorrhagic septicemia, 105
infectivity, 359-360
Enterococus, 200-201
herpesviruses, 377
laboratory diagnosis, 360
 feline panleukopenia, 353-355
Ibaraki disease, 496
pathogenesis and pathology, 360
gingival and periodontal
infectious agents
reservoir, 360
diseases, 551
circulatory system and
transmission, 360
Haemophilus felis, 118
lymphoid tissue, 537t
treatment, 360
infectious agents
digestive system, 549t
chicken anemia virus disease, 54 1
circulatory system and
integumentary system, 560t
chicken infectious anemia (CIA),
lymphoid tissue, 537t
musculoskeletal system, 565t
359, see aiso chicken anemia
digestive system, 549t
ocular infections, 579t
virus (CAV)
Index
607
chickens
infections, 536
 cellular products of medical
Clostridium septicum, 257
 bacterial sepsis, 536, 539
interest,259
dermatophyte infections, 323t
blood vessels, 540-541, 541f
botulinum toxins (BoNT),
infectious coryza, 106
heart, 539-540
259
Mycoplasma, 287
infectious valvular
C3 exoenzyme, 259
Newcastle disease, 438-440
endocarditis, 539-540
C2toxin,259
sinusitis, 587
lymph nodes, 542
control, 260-261
ulcerative enteritis, 554
lymphoid tissues, 542
description, 258-259, 259t
Chlamydiaceae, 279-281
myocarditis,540
epidemiology, 260
chlamydial infections, 280-281
 neoplasias of hemopoietic and
human botulism, 260
control, 280
lymphatic tissues, 542-543,
immunity, 260
C. pecorum infections, 281
542f
laboratory diagnosis, 260
C. pneumoniae infections, 281
pericarditis, 540
pathogenesis,259-260
C. psittaci/C. abortus infections,
pericardium,540
reservoir, 259
280-281
red blood cells, 541
resistance, 259
C. trachomatis infections, 281
septic shock,536,539
transmission, 259
diagnosis, 279
traumatic reticulopericarditis,
treatment, 260-261
immunity,279
540
type B botulism, 260
 life cycle and growth
white blood cells, 541-542
type C botulism, 260
characteristics, 279
infectious agents
type D botulism, 260
morphology, 279
cats, 537t
type E botulism, 260
 pathogenicity and toxins, 280
cattle, 537t
Clostridium chauvoei, 254-255
staining, 279
dogs, 536t
blackleg, 254, 255
zoonotic disease, 281
goats,538t
cattle, 254,255
Chlamydia pneumoniae, 279, 281
horses, 537t
cellular products of medical
Chlamydia trachomatis, 279,281
pigs, 538t
interest, 254
Chlamydophila pecorum, 279, 281
poultry, 539t
alpha-toxin, 254
Chlamydophila psittaci,279-282
sheep,538t
DNAase, 254
chloramphenicol, 33
 lymphatic system, 535
sialidase, 254
chordopoxviruses, 387, see also
transient and persistent
control, 255
poxviruses
microbes, 535-536
epidemiology, 254
chromoblastomycosis, 330
Citrobacter, 74,74t
immunity, 254
chronic wasting disease (CWD),
Cladophialophora bantiana, 330
laboratory diagnosis, 254-255
530-535
Clarithromycin, 233
myocarditis, 540
clinical signs, 531
classic swine fever virus (CsFV),
pathogenesis, 254, 254f
control, 532
419, 423-424
reservoir, 254
etiology, 531
control, 424
sheep,254
 host-prion relationship, 531
disease, 423
transmission, 254
laboratory diagnosis, 531
epidemiology, 423-424
treatment, 255
transmission, 530-531
host response, 424
Clostridium colinum, 251, 554
treatment, 532
laboratory diagnosis, 424
Clostridium difficile, 251-253
ciliary dyskinesis, 7
 pathogenesis and pathology.
cellular products of medical
circling disease, 225
424
interest, 251
circoviridae, 358-361
treatment, 424
adhesins, 251
beak and feather disease, 359
clindamycin, 35
capsule, 251
chicken infectious anemia (CIA),
clostridial myositis, 568
Cdt, 251
359-360
clostridial spores, 546
Cdta, 251
Circovirus, 358
Clostridium,245-262
toxin A (TcdA), 251
Gyrovirus, 358
biochemical activities, 245
toxin B (TcdB), 251
physical and chemical
clostridial infections, 245
toxins, 251
properties, 359
growth characteristics, 245
control, 252-253
 porcine circovirus-associated
morphology, 245
diarrheal disease, 251, 252
disease, 360-361
resistance, 245, 246f
epidemiology, 252
Circovirus, 358, see also circoviridae
species, 245, 246t
fatal necrotizing colitis, 252f
circulatory system and lymphoid
staining,245
immunity, 252
tissue, 535-543
structure,245
laboratory diagnosis, 252
antimicrobial properties, 535
Clostridium botulinum, 258-261,
pathogenesis, 251-252
blood vascular system, 535
576
reservoir, 251
608
Index
Clostridium difficile (Continued)
descriptive features, 246
Clostridium tetani, 13, 258,
transmission, 251
disease pattern, 248-250
261-262, 541, 575
treatment, 252-253
enterotoxemias and enteric
active immunization, 262
Clostridium diffcile colitis, 29
disease, 248-249
 cellular products of medical
Clostridium haemolyticum, 255
epidemiology, 250
interest, 261
control, 255
histotoxic infections, 249-250
tetanolysin, 261
 epidemiology,255
immunity, 250
tetanus toxin (TeNT), 261
immunity, 255
laboratory diagnosis, 250
control, 262
laboratory diagnosis, 255
lambs, 248, 249
disease pattern, 261-262
pathogenesis, 255
nonenterotoxemic diarrhea, 249
epidemiology, 262
red water disease, 255
pathogenesis, 248-250
growth characteristics, 261
reservoir, 255
reservoir, 247
horses, 261-262
ruminants, 255
toxinotypes, 246t
immunity, 262
transmission, 255
transmission, 247
laboratory diagnosis, 262
treatment, 255
treatment, 250-251
morphology, 261
Clostridium hemolyticum, 541
type A, 248
pathogenesis, 261
Clostridium novyi, 255-256
type B, 248
reservoir, 261
black disease, 256
type C, 248-249
ruminants, 261-262
blackleg, 256
type D, 249
transmission, 261
cattle, 256
type E, 249
treatment, 262
 cellular products of medical
Clostridium piliforme, 253, 554
coagulase, 184
interest
control,253
Coccidioides, 332-335,334
 alpha-toxins, 256
description, 253
cats, 334
beta-toxins, 256
epidemiology, 253
cattle, 334
novyilysin, 256
laboratory diagnosis, 253
cellular products of medical
toxins, 256
pathogenesis, 253
interest
control, 256
reservoir, 253
adhesin, 333
description, 255-256
transmission, 253
Bgl2, 333
epidemiology, 256
treatment, 253
chitinase 1, 333
gas gangrene, 256
Tyzzer's disease, 253, 253f
Gel, 333
immunity, 256
Clostridium septicum, 257-258, 552
serine proteases, 333
laboratory diagnosis, 256
cattle, 257
urease (Ure), 333
pathogenesis, 256
cellular products of medical
control, 335
reservoir, 256
interest, 257
disease patterns, 334
transmission, 256
alpha-toxin,257
dogs,334
treatment, 256
beta-toxin, 257
epidemiology, 334
Clostridium perfringens, 246-251
hyaluronidase, 257
growth characteristics, 333
cattle, 249
septicolysin O, 257
horses, 334
 cellular products of medical
chickens, 257
humans, 334
interest, 246-247
control, 258
immunity, 334
adhesins, 246
epidemiology, 257
laboratory diagnosis, 334-335
 alpha toxin (Cpa, Plc), 247
fatal abomasitis, 257
culture, 334-335
beta toxin (Cpb), 247
gangrenous dermatitis, 257
direct examination, 334
beta2 toxin (Cpb2), 247
gas gangrene,257
 immunodiagnosis, 335
capsule, 246-247
human wound infections, 257
molecular methods, 335
enterotoxin (Cpe), 247
immunity, 257
mechanisms and pathology, 334
epsilon toxin (Etx), 247
laboratory diagnosis, 258
morphology and composition,
iota toxin (Itx), 247
malignant edema, 257
332-333
kappa toxin (collagenase), 247
pathogenesis, 257
reservoir,333
mu toxin (Nag), 247
 pseudoblackleg, 257
sheep,334
 necrotic enteritis toxin B
reservoir, 257
swine, 334
(NetB),247
sheep, 257
transmission,333
 perfringolysin O (Pfo), 247
transmission, 257
treatment, 335
regulation of toxin genes, 247
treatment, 258
Coccidioides immitis, 3, 332, 566
sialidase, 247
turkeys, 257
Coccidioides posadasii, 332
toxins, 247
Clostridium sordelli, 258
coccobacilli, 127
chickens, 248
Clostridium spiroforme, 253
Cochliobolus spiciferus, 330
control, 250-251
Clostridium spiroforme colitis, 29
Coggins test, 14-15
Index
609
colonization factor antigens
Corynebacterium renale group,
disease patterns, 315
(CFA), 62
215-217
dogs,316
colonization resistance, 8, 545
biochemical activities, 215
epidemiology, 315
commensalism, 3
cattle, 216
growth characteristics, 314
 complement fixation (CF) tests, 25
cellular products of medical
horses, 316
congo red agar (CRA), 186
interest
immunity, 315
Conidiobolus spp., 342
cell wall, 215
laboratory diagnosis, 315-316
conjugation, 39-40
pili, 215
culture,315
conjunctivalinfections,579-580
urease,215
 direct examination, 315
conjunctivitis, 377
control, 216-217
immunodiagnosis, 315-316
contagious bovine
disease patterns, 216
morphology, 313, 314f
 pleuropneumonia (CBPP),
epidemiology, 216
pathogenesis, 314-315
287
growth characteristics, 215
reservoir,314
contagious ecthyma, 390-391
immunity, 216
resistance, 314
goats, 390-391
laboratory diagnosis, 216, 216f
transmission, 314
sheep, 390-391
morphology, 215
treatment, 316
contagious equine metritis (CEM),
pathogenesis, 216
variability, 314
151
pathology, 216
Culex melanoconion, 411
corneal infections, 580-581
reservoir, 216
Culex tarsalis, 411
Coronaviridae, 456-473, 459t
resistance, 215
Culiseta melanura, 411
Coronavirinae, 456, 459t
sheep and goats, 216
curli fimbriae, 64
coronaviruses, 456-458
staining, 215
Curvularia geniculata,330
Alphacoronavirus,462-466
structure, 215
cycle-inhibiting factor (Cif), 68
Betacoronavirus, 466-470
transmission, 216
cyclomodulins, 68
Gammacoronavirus, 470-472
treatment, 216-217
cystitis,594
virion properties and virus
Corynebacterium ulcerans,217
cytokines, 7
replication, 458-462
Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus,
cytolethal distending toxin
Corynebacterium, 212-217
366
(CDTs), 68, 169
Corynebacterium auriscanis, 217
cowpox virus infections, 388-389
 cytotoxic Tlymphocytes, 14, 45
Corynebacterium cystitidis,216
COWS
Corynebacterium diphtheriae,212
 Arcanobacterium pyogenes, 204
deer adenoviruses, 371
Corynebacterium pilosum, 216
pneumonia, 287-288
defensins, 8
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis,
Coxiella burneti, 294-295, see also
Deltapapillomavirus, 366
212,213f,542, 557
Rickettsiales
Deltaretrovirus, 503, 515-516
biochemical activities, 213
control,295
dendritic cells, 7, 571
cattle, 214
immunity, 295
Dengue virus (DV), 414, 418
 cellular products of medical
laboratory diagnosis, 295
Dermacentor andersoni, 140
interest, 212
pathogenesis, 295
Dermacentor variabilis, 140, 303
cell wall lipids, 212-213
reservoir, 294-295
Dermatophilus, 264t, 267-268
phospholipase D (PLD), 212
transmission, 294-295
composition,267
control, 215
treatment, 295
control, 268
disease patterns, 214
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
epidemiology, 267
epidemiology, 214
fever, 436
growth characteristics, 267
 growth characteristics, 213
Crossiella equi, 266
immunity, 267
horses, 214
cryptococcosis, 315
laboratory diagnosis, 268
human beings, 214
Cryptococcus gattii, 314
morphology,267
immunity, 214
Cryptococcus neoformans, 313-316,
pathogenesis, 267
laboratory diagnosis, 214-215
576
reservoir, 267
morphology, 212
biochemical reactions, 314
transmission, 267
pathogenesis, 213
cats,316
treatment, 268
pathology,213
cattle, 316
Dermatophilus congolensis, 7,
reservoir,213
cell products of medical interest,
267-268,557
resistance, 213
313-314
dermatophytes, 321-325
sheep and goats, 214
capsule, 313
control, 324-325
staining,212
melanin, 313
disease pattern, 322, 323t
structure,212
phospholipase, 313
epidemiology, 322-323
transmission, 213
sialic acids, 314
genera of, features of, 322t
treatment, 215
control, 316
 growth characteristics, 321
610
Index
dermatophytes (Continued)
diseases of suspected infectious
furunculosis, 557
immunity, 323
etiology, 554
gingival and periodontal
infections in domestic animals,
esophagus, 552
diseases, 551
323t
gall bladder, 554
granulomatous enteritis, 554
laboratory diagnosis, 323-324
liver, 554
Haemophilus haemoglobinophilus,
culture, 324
oral cavity,547,551-552
118
direct examination, 323
small and large intestines,
infectious agents
microscopic examination, 323
552-554
circulatory system and
molecular techniques, 324
stomach, 552
lymphoid tissue, 536t
morphology, 321
infectious agents
digestive system, 548t
pathogenesis, 322
cats, 549t
integumentary system, 559t
pathology, 322
cattle, 549t
musculoskeletal system, 565t
reservoir,322
dog,548t
ocular infections, 578t
resistance, 321
goats,550t
respiratory system, 584t
transmission, 321
horses, 549t
urogenital tract, 592t
treatment, 324-325
pigs,550t
infectious canine hepatitis,
variability, 321
poultry, 551t
369-370
dermatophytosis, 558
sheep, 550t
kennel cough syndrome, 588
dermonecrotic toxin (DNT), 105,
microbial flora, 545
Leptospira,180
122-123
bovine, 547t
Malassezia pachydermatis, 316,
desiccation, protective role of, 7
chicken, 547t
317
diarrhea, in animals, 552-553
dog,548t
microbial flora, 548t
Dichelobacter nodosus, 237-239,
horse, 547t
Mycobacterium, 273,277-278
556
pig,548t
Mycoplasma,288
cell products of medical interest,
dilution antimicrobial tests,
necrotizing fasciitis, 569
237
35-36, 35t
Nocardia, 266
cell wall, 237
dimorphic fungi, 313, 326, 332
otitis externa, 560-561, 562t
fimbriae, 237
diphtheric fowlpox, 393
Pasteurellaceae, 106
 outer membrane protein, 237
Diplorhinotricum gallopavum, 342
pneumonia, 125
serine proteases, 237
direct immunofluorescence, 15-16
prostatic disease, 598
control, 238-239
diskospondylitis, 567
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 149
disease pattern, 238
dissemination of viruses, 347-348,
 pyogran-ulomatous dermatitis,
epidemiology, 238
348f
558
growth characteristics, 237-238
DNA vaccines, 46
pythiosis, 329-330
immunity, 238
dogs
rabies, 448
 laboratory diagnosis, 238
Actinomyces, 264
salmonellosis, 81
pathogenesis, 238
aspergillosis, 341
salmon poisoning, 300-301
reservoir, 238
bacterial meningitis, 575
sinusitis,587
resistance, 238
Bartonellaceae, 310, 312
skin warts, 367
structure, 237,237f
blastomycosis, 338-339
sporotrichosis, 559
transmission, 238
blepharitis, 579
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 268
treatment, 238-239
Bordetella, 125
Streptococcus, 198
variability, 238
Brucella, 129
urine infection, 595
diffusion antimicrobial tests, 36
Campylobacter, 167, 168, 171
uroliths, 595
digestive system, 544-554
Candida albicans, 319
vaginitis,597
antimicrobial properties,
canine distemper virus infection,
valvular endocarditis, 540
544-546
348, 349f, 440-443
 dolphin distemper virus, 443
 antimicrobial products, 545
chorioretinitis, 581
donkeys, alphaherpesviruses, 372
bacterial interference, 545
Coccidioides, 334
dragon boat disease, 453, see also
composition, 546
Cryptococcus neoformans, 316
bovine ephemeral fever (BEF)
disruption, 546
dermatophyte infections, 322,
duck hepatitis A virus (DHAV), 401
establishment, 545-546
323t
gastric acidity, 544
diskospondylitis, 567
eastern equine encephalitis (EEE),
immune defense, 545
distemper, 579
408, 410-412
mucus and mucosal integrity,
Ehrlichia, 299
control, 412
544-545
Enterococcus, 200-201
disease, 410
peristaltic activity, 544
Erysipelothrix, 220
epidemiology, 410-412
infections, 546-547
fungal osteomyelitis, 566
host response, 412
Index
611
laboratory diagnosis, 412
 xylose lysine deoxycholate
enteropathogenic bovine
pathogenesis and pathology.
agar, 60
coronaviruses (EBCoV), 467,
412
growth characteristics, 58
see aiso bovine coronaviruses
treatment, 412
laboratory diagnosis, 58
(BCoV)
Eastern equine encephalitis virus,
morphology and staining, 53,
 enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC),
352
54f,55f
64,71,72,73
Ebola and related viruses, 446
overview, 53
enterotoxigenic B. fragilis (ETBF),
E. coli secreted protein (Esp), 69
resistance, 58
243
ecotropic strains, 503
taxa of,54t
enterotoxigenic colibacillosis,
edema disease, 72-73
variability, 58
62-63
edema toxin (EdTx), 207
Enterobacteriaceae, 546, 556
enterotoxigenic diarrhea, 70, 72
egg drop syndrome, 371
 enterobacterial common antigen
 enterotoxigenic E. coli(ETEC), 62,
Ehrlichia,297-298
(ECA), 53
65
control, 300
enterobacterin, 57
enterotoxins
 immunity, 299
 enterochelin, see enterobacterin
Escherichia, 65-67
laboratory diagnosis, 299-300
Enterococcus, 199-201
Salmonella, 78
pathogenesis, 299
biochemical activities, 200
Enterovirus, 399-400
reservoir,298-299
cats, 200-201
enzootic bovine leukosis (EBL),
transmission, 298-299
cattle, 201
515
treatment, 300
cellular products of medical
enzyme-linked immunosorbent
Ehrlichia canis, 297,298
interest, 199-200
assay (ELISA), 14-15, 24, 25,
Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 298
aggregation substance, 200
173
Ehrlichia ewingii, 298
capsule, 200
epidemic typhus fever, 294
Ehrlichia ruminantium, 297, 298
cell wall, 200
Epidermophyton, 321, 322t, see also
Ehrlich, Paul, 26
cytolysin, 200
dermatophytes
Embden-Meyerhof pathway, 58
enterococcal surface protein
epididymitis, 598
encephalomyocarditis virus
(esp), 200
 epiphyseal osteomyelitis, 566
(EMCV), 401
gelatinase,200
epizootic catarrhal enteritis (ECE),
endometritis, 597
iron, 200
466
endospores, 206
MSCRAMMs, 200
epizootic hemorrhagic disease
endotoxins, 5
pili, 200
(EHD), 496-497, 496f
enterobacteriaceae, 56f, 57
superoxide,200
of white-tailed deer, 551
enteric redmouth, 94
control, 201
Epsilonpapillomavirus, 366
enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC),
disease patterns, 200-201
Epsilonretrovirus, 503, 516-517
64,70
dogs, 200-201
equid herpesvirus 1 (EHV-1), 372
enteroaggregative E. coli
epidemiology, 201
control, 374-375
heat-stable toxin-1 (EAST1),
growth characteristics, 200
disease, 372-373
67
horse, 201
distribution, 373
Enterobacter, 74,74t
laboratory diagnosis, 201
host response, 374
Enterobacteriaceae, 53-61
morphology, 199
infectivity, 373
cellular products of medical
otitis externa, 200
laboratory diagnosis, 374
interest, 57
pathogenesis, 200
 pathogenesis and pathology.
endotoxins, 57
reservoir, 200
373-374
siderophores, 57-58
resistance, 200
properties, 373
cellular structure and
staining, 199
reservoir,373
 composition, 53-57, 55f
structure, 199
resistance, 373
culture characteristics, 58-61,
swine, 201
transmission, 373
59f
transmission, 200
treatment, 374-375
brilliant green agar, 59
treatment, 201
equid herpesvirus 2 (EHV-2), 372
 cefsulodin-irgasan-
Enterococcus durans, 199
disease, 375
novobiocin,
Enterococcus faecalis,199
distribution, 375
59
Enterococcus faecium, 199
laboratory diagnosis, 375
 hektoen enteric agar, 59
Enterococcus hirae, 199
pathogenesis and pathology, 375
MacConkey agar, 60
Enterococcus villorum, 199
properties, 375
sorbitol MacConkey agar, 60
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC),
reservoir, 375
 sorbitol MacConkey agar
71
resistance, 375
BCIG, cefixime, and
enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC),
transmission, 375
potassium tellurite, 60
95
treatment and control, 375
612
Index
equid herpesvirus 3 (EHV-3), 372
properties, 519
treatment, 222
control, 376
reservoir, 519
turkeys, 220, 222
disease, 375-376
resistance, 519
valvular endocarditis, 539
distribution, 376
transmission, 519
variability, 219
host response, 376
treatment, 519
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, 218
infectivity, 376
equine influenza,428-429
Erysipelothrix tonsillarum, 218
laboratory diagnosis, 376
control, 429
erythromycin, 34-35
properties, 376
disease, 428
Escherichia, 62-74
reservoir,376
infectivity, 428
acid tolerance, 69
resistance, 376
laboratory diagnosis, 428-429
cattle, 70, 71
transmission, 376
 pathogenesis and pathology, 428
cellular products of medical
treatment, 376
resistance, 428
interest
equid herpesvirus 4 (EHV-4), 372,
treatment, 429
adhesins, 62-64
376
equine multinodular pulmonary
capsule, 65
equid herpesvirus 5 (EHV-5),
fibrosis (EMPF), 377
cell wall, 65
376-377
equine papillomavirus, 367
cellular structure and
equid herpesviruses, 372-377
equine rhinitis virus A (ERVA), 399
composition, 62, 63f
EHV-1, 372-375
equine rhinopneumonitis virus,
E. coli secreted protein (Esp), 69
EHV-2, 375
see equid herpesvirus 4
enterotoxins, 65-67
EHV-3, 375-376
(EHV-4)
enteroaggregative E. coli
EHV-4, 376
equine sarcoids, 367
heat-stable toxin-1 (EAST1),
EHV-5,376-377
equine torovirus (EToV), 458,
67
equine
472-473
heat-labile enterotoxin (LT),
candidiasis, 319
equine viral arteritis (EVA), 481
65-66
Pasteurellaceae, 106
Erbovirus, 399
heat-stable enterotoxin-a
Rhodococcus equi, 230-231
Erysipelas, 218
(STa), 66
Streptococcus, 197
Erysipelothrix, 218-222
heat-stable enterotoxin-b
equine abortion virus, see equid
birds, 220
(STb), 66-67
herpesvirus 1 (EHV-1)
 cellular products of medical
immunologic aspects, 72
equine adenoviruses, 371
interest, 218
edema disease, 72-73
equine arteritis virus (EAV),
adhesion, 218
enterotoxigenic diarrhea, 72
481-484
capsule, 218
EPEC and STEC infections, 72
control, 484
cell wall, 218
extraintestinal disease, 72
disease, 481-482
hyaluronidase, 218
intimin, 69
distribution, 482
neuraminidases, 218
 iron acquisition, 69
host response, 483
 control and prevention, 222
laboratory diagnosis, 73
laboratory diagnosis, 483-484
disease patterns, 220
lambs, 70
pathogenesis and pathology.
dogs,220
locus of enterocyte effacement
482-483
epidemiology, 220-221
(LEE),69
reservoir, 482
growth characteristics, 218-219
mechanisms and disease
 transmission, 482, 482f
human beings, 220
patterns, 70
treatment, 484
immunity, 221
adherent-invasive E. coli
equine coronavirus (ECoV), 469
laboratory diagnosis, 221-222
(AIEC),72
equine encephalitis viruses (EEV),
culture and isolation, 221
 avian-pathogenic E. coli
408, 410-412
direct examination, 221
(APEC), 72
equine herpesvirus
molecular identification, 222
edema disease, 72
myeloencephalopathy
serological tests, 221
enteroaggregative E. coli, 70
(EHM), 373
specimens, 221
enteropathogenic E. coli, 71
equine infectious anemia virus
morphology, 218
enterotoxigenic diarrhea, 70
(EIAV), 518-519
pathogenesis, 219
extraintestinal E. coli, 70-71
classification, 519
 pathology, 219-220
shiga toxin-producing E. coli,
control,519
reservoir,219
71-72
disease, 518
resistance, 219
other toxins
distribution, 519
sheep, 220,221
cycle-inhibiting factor (Cif), 68
host response, 519
staining, 218
cyclomodulins, 68
infectivity, 519
 structure and composition, 218
cytolethal distending toxin
laboratory diagnosis, 519
swine, 220
(CDTs), 68
pathogenesis and pathology, 519
transmission, 219
cytolysin A (Cly), 69
Index
613
cytotoxic necrotizing factor
reservoir, 382
feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
(CNFs), 68
sensitivity, 382
513-515
enterohemolysin (Ehx), 69
transmission, 382
classification, 513-514
α-hemolysin (Hly), 69
feline calicivirus (FCV), 405-406
control, 515
 plasmid-encoded toxin (Pet),
control, 406
disease, 513
68
disease, 405
distribution, 514
 protein involved in
distribution, 405
host response, 514
colonization (Pic), 68-69
host response, 405
infectivity, 514
Shiga toxin (Stx), 67-68
infectivity, 405
laboratory diagnosis, 514
SPATEs, 68
laboratory diagnosis, 405-406
pathogenesis and pathology, 514
pig,70,72
pathogenesis and pathology, 405
properties, 514
prevention and control, 74
properties, 405
reservoir, 514
 reservoir and transmission, 70
reservoir, 405
resistance, 514
translocated intimin receptor, 69
resistance, 405
transmission, 514
treatment of animal, 73-74
transmission, 405
treatment, 515
type II secretion system, 69
treatment, 406
 feline panleukopenia, 353, see aiso
variability, 69-70
feline enteric coronavirus (FCoV),
feline panleukopenia virus
Escherichia coli, 19, 20f, 41-42, 54f,
465-466
(FPV)
55f, 62, 556, 571
control, 466
feline panleukopenia virus (FPV),
 membranes of, molecular model
disease, 465
353-354
of, 55f
distribution, 465
cats, 353
ESKAPE bacteria, 42
host response, 466
control, 354-355
esophagus, infections of, 552
infectivity, 465
distribution, 354
Eubacterium tortuosum, 554
laboratory diagnosis, 466
host response, 354
eumycotic mycetoma, 330
pathogenesis and pathology, 465
host-virus relationship, 354
 European brown hare syndrome
properties, 465
laboratory diagnosis, 354
(EBHS), 406
reservoir, 465
pathogenesis and pathology, 354
 European brown hare syndrome
transmission, 465
reservoir, 354
virus, 406
treatment, 466
transmission, 354
control, 406
Feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), 349
treatment, 354-355
distribution, 406
feline immunodeficiency virus
feline papillomavirus, 367
infectivity, 406
(FIV), 520-521
feline syncytium-forming virus
laboratory diagnosis, 406
control, 521
infections, 568
pathogenesis and pathology, 406
disease, 520
feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR),
properties, 406
distribution, 520
 382, see also felid herpesvirus
reservoir, 406
host response, 521
1 (FHV-1)
transmission, 406
infectivity, 520
 Felis domesticus papillomaviruses
treatment, 406
laboratory diagnosis, 521
(FdPV), 367
exotoxins,5
 pathogenesis and pathology, 521
 ferret enteric coronavirus (FRECV),
Bordetella, 122-123
properties, 520
466
Moraxella, 145
reservoir,520
ferritin, 58
Pseudomonas, 148
resistance, 520
fibropapilloma, 366
extraintestinalE. coli, 70-72
transmission, 520
filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA),
treatment, 521
121
 F4ab/ac receptor, 62-63
feline infectious peritonitis virus
filoviridae, 446
fading pig syndrome, 197
(FIPV), 465-466
fimbriae
Fascioia hepatica, 256
control, 466
E. coli, 62
felid herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1),
disease, 465
enterobacteriaceae, 54-57
382-383
distribution, 465
fish, Nocardia, 266
control,383
host response, 466
Flaviviridae,414-424,414t
disease,382
infectivity, 465
description, 414
distribution, 382
laboratory diagnosis, 466
Flavivirus, 414-419, 415f
host response, 383
pathogenesis and pathology, 465
Hepacivirus, 414
 infectivity, 382
properties, 465
Pestivirus, 419-424
laboratory diagnosis, 383
reservoir,465
properties, 414
pathogenesis and pathology, 382
transmission, 465
Flavivirus, 414-419, 415f
prevention, 383
treatment, 466
Fleming, Alexander, 28
properties, 382
feline leprosy syndrome, 277
flora, normal, in gut, 8
614
Index
florfenicol, 33
biotypes, 239
 infectious processes, 597
 5-flucytosine, 38
cattle, 241-242
male reproductive tract, 598
fluoroquinolones, 31
 cellular products of medical
microbial flora, 596
foot-and-mouth disease virus
interest, 240
genomic island, 169
(FMDV), 396-399
control, 242-243
geotrichosis, 319
control and recovery, 398
disease pattern, 241-242
Geotrichum candidum, 319-320
disease, 396-397
growth characteristics, 239-240
Getah virus, 414
 interference with host immune
immunity, 242
gill-associated virus (GAV), 474,
response,398
interdigital necrobacillosis,
489
molecular pathogenesis, 398
241-242
gingival sulcus, 546
on-farm control and
laboratory diagnosis, 242
glanders, 134, 135
disinfection, 399
leukotoxin, 240
glomerulonephritis, 593-594
outbreaks, 397
liver abscesses, 241, 24 1f
goatpox virus, 391-392
pathogenesis, 397-398
morphology, 239
goats
vaccination, 399
necrobacillosis, 241
Brucella, 129
foot rot, 241-242
 necrotic laryngitis, 241, 242
Campylobacter, 167, 170, 173
fowlpox, 393
pathogenesis, 241-242
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
fowlpox virus, 393
reservoir,240
Corynebacterium
fowl typhoid, 84
staining, 239
pseudotuberculosis, 214
Francisella tularensis, 139-144, 542
transmission, 240
Ehrlichia, 299
 as biological weapon, 143-144
treatment, 242-243
infectious agents
classification, 139, 140t
Fuso-bacterium necrophorum, 552
circulatory system and
clinical manifestations, 140
Fusobacterium nucleatum, 239
lymphoid tissue, 538t
epidemiology, 139-140
digestive system, 550t
glandular disease, 140
gall bladder infections, 554
integumentary system, 561t
immunity, 141
Gallibacterium, 108, 109t, 113
musculoskeletal system, 565t
 intestinal disease, 140
gallid herpesvirus 1 (GaHV-1),
ocular infections, 579t
laboratory diagnosis, 141-143
384
respiratory system, 586t
antigen detection methods,
 gallid herpesvirus 2 (GaHV-2),
urogenital tract, 593t
143
384-385
lymph node abscesses, 542
biochemical reactions, 142
control, 385
Mycobacterium, 274
culture isolation, 142, 142f
disease, 384-385
Mycoplasma, 288, 540
 laboratory response network,
distribution, 385
PPR virus infection, 444
141-142
host response, 385
Rhodococcus equi, 231
limitations of culture, 142-143
infectivity, 385
scrapie disease, 523-528
molecular methods, 143
 laboratory diagnosis, 385
Granulicatella,202
morphology and staining, 142
 pathogenesis and pathology.
granulomatous encephalitis, 576
serological methods, 142
385
griseofulvin,38
 oropharyngeal form, 140
prevention, 385
Gumboro disease, see infectious
pathogenesis, 140-141
properties, 385
bursal disease (IBD)
pneumonic/ respiratory
reservoir, 385
gut-associated lymphoid tissue
tularemia, 140
resistance, 385
(GALT), 545
safety measures, 143
transmission, 385
Gyrovirus, see circoviridae
treatment, 143
Gammaretrovirus, 503, 513-515
tularemia, 139
gas gangrene, 256
Haematobia irritans, 214
typhoidal tularemia, 140
 gastroenteritis, in humans, 167,
Haematopinus suis, 394
ulceroglandular, 140
see also Campylobacter
Haemophilus and Histophilus,
vaccination, 141
genital tract, 595-598
115-119
fungal infections, of skin, 558-560
antimicrobial defenses, 596
cats, 118
fungal osteomyelitis, 566
 anatomic defenses, 596
cellular products of medical
fungi, laboratory diagnosis, 18-20
hormonal defenses, 596
interest
furunculosis, 557
 immune defenses, 596
adhesins, 115-116
Fusobacterium, 239
diseases
capsule,116
Fusobacterium equinum, 239,243
 female reproductive tract,
cell wall, 116
Fusobacterium necrophorum,
597-598
immunoglobulin-binding
239-243, 240t, 540, 556,575,
genital tract of poultry, 598
 proteins, 116
588
host and environmental
iron, 116
antimicrobial susceptibility, 242
factors, 596-597
control, 119
Index
615
disease patterns, 118
hemadsorption inhibition test,
pathogenesis, 329
dogs, 118
24-25
reservoir, 329
growth characteristics, 116-117
hemagglutination inhibition test,
resistance, 328
immunity, 118
16,24
staining, 328
laboratory diagnosis, 119
hemagglutinin (HA), 426
transmission, 329
morphology, 115
hematogenous osteomyelitis, 565
treatment, 329
overview, 115, 116t
hemolysins, 69, 159
Histoplasma farciminosum, 542
pathogenesis, 117
hemolytic anemia, 291
histoplasmins, 335
pathology, 117-118
hemolytic uremic syndrome
histotoxic clostridia, 253-254
reservoirs, 117
(HUS), 97, 99
horses, see aiso equine
resistance, 117
hemoplasmas, 283
Actinobacillus, 112-113
ruminants, 118
hemotrophic mollicutes, 291
Actinomyces, 264
structure and composition, 115
Hendra virus, 440
adenoviruses, 371
swine, 118
henipaviruses, 440
alphaherpesviruses, 372
transmission, 117
hepatitis E virus, 403
Aspergillus infection, 341
treatment, 119
herpesviruses, 372-385
Bacillus anthracis, 209
vaccination, 118-119
equid,372-377
bacterial meningitis, 575
variability, 117
ruminant, 377-385
brain abscesses, 575
Haemophilus paragallinarum, 587
Highlands J virus, 413-414
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
Haemophilus parasuis, 115, see also
 highly pathogenic avian influenza
clostridial cellulitis, 557
Haemophilus and Histophilus
(HPAI), 430
Clostridium tetani,261-262
Hantavirus, 433, 436
Histophilus somni, 115, see also
Coccidioides, 334
Haverhill fever, 268
Haemophilus and Histophilus
contagious rhinopharyngitis
heartwater disease, 299
Histoplasma capsulatum, 328, 552
(strangles), 586
heat-labile enterotoxin (LT), 65-66
Histoplasma capsulatum var.
Corynebacterium
heat-stable enterotoxin-a (STa), 66
capsulatum,335-338
pseudotuberculosis,214
heat-stable enterotoxin-b (STb),
cellular products of medical
Cryptococcus neoformans, 316
66-67
interest, 335-336
dermatitis, 557
Helicobacter, 175-178
adhesins, 335
 dermatophyte infections, 322,
control, 178
 calcium-binding protein
323t
 growth characteristics, 176
(Cbp), 335
EAV infection, 481-484
immunity, 177
H-antigen, 335-336
encephalitis, 410-412
laboratory diagnosis, 177-178
 iron acquisition, 336
Enterococcus, 201
direct examination, 177-178
M-antigen, 336
fatal necrotizing colitis, 252f
identification, 178
melanin, 336
fungal abortions, 597
isolation, 178
phagolysosome acidification,
 guttural pouch empyema, 587
molecular methods, 178
336
infectious agents
morphology, 175
control, 337-338
circulatory system and
pathogenesis, 177
disease pattern, 336-337
lymphoid tissue, 537t
reservoir, 176-177
epidemiology, 337
digestive system, 549t
species, 175, 176t
growth characteristics, 336
integumentary system, 560t
staining, 175
immunity,337
musculoskeletal system, 565t
transmission, 177
laboratory diagnosis, 337
ocular infections, 579t
treatment, 178
morphology, 335
respiratory system, 585t
variability, 176
pathogenesis, 336
urogenital tract,592t
virulence factors, 175
reservoir, 336
influenza, 428-429
adhesins, 175
structure and composition, 335
JEV infection, 414-415
cag PAI, 176
transmission, 336
joint infections, 568
cytolethal distending toxin
treatment, 337-338
Leptospira, 181
(CDT), 176
variability, 336
Listeria, 225
flagella, 175
Histoplasma capsulatum var.
lymphangitis, 542
lipopolysaccharide, 175-176
farciminosum, 328-329
microbial flora, 547t
 periplasmic fibrils, 175
control, 329
Mycobacterium, 274
urease,175
epidemiology, 329
Mycoplasma,288
vacuolating cytotoxin (vac),
growth characteristics, 328
mycotic keratitis, 580-581
176
immunity,329
Nocardia, 266
zoonotic potential, 177
laboratory diagnosis, 329
omphalitis, 540
Helicobacter pylori, 175
morphology, 328
osteomyelitis, 565
616
Index
horses (Continued)
infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
dryness, 555
pneumonia, 112
(IBR), 377
immune system, 556
poxviral infections, 394
infectious bursal disease (IBD),
microbial interactions, 556
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 149
501-502
secretions and excretions, 555
pythiosis, 329-330
infectious bursal disease virus
infections, 556
Rhodococcus equi, 230-231
(IBDV), 501-502
bacterial, 557-558
salmonellosis, 81
control, 502
fungal, 558-560
sarcoids, 367
disease, 501
mastitis, 562-563
septicemia, 112-113
distribution, 501
otitis externa, 560-561
skin warts, 367
host response, 502
viral, 556-557
sporotrichosis, 559
infectivity, 501
infectious agents
Streptococcus, 197
 laboratory diagnosis, 502
cats, 559t
tenosynovitis, 569
pathogenesis and pathology.
cattle, 560t
tick-transmitted encephalitis,
501-502
dogs, 559t
419
properties, 501
goats,561t
hospital-acquired resistant
reservoir, 501
horses, 560t
infections, 42
resistance, 501
pigs, 561t
host-parasite relationships, 3
 transmission, 501
poultry, 561t
human brucellosis, 127, 130
treatment,502
sheep,561t
human coronaviruses, 456
 infectious canine hepatitis (ICH),
microbial flora of skin, 556
 human intestinal spirochetosis,
369-370, see aiso canine
interdigital necrobacillosis,
158
adenovirus 1 (CAV-1)
241-242
human torovirus (HuToV), 458
 infectious disease, production of,
interferons, 350
humoral immune responses,
4-5
internalins, 223
350-351
infectious hematopoietic necrosis
intestines, infections of, 552-554
humoral immunity, 12, 45
virus (IHNV), 454
intimin, 69
hyaluronidase, 218
infectious laryngotracheitis virus
Iridoviridae, 365
hydrophobia, 450
(ILTV), 384
Iridoviruses, 365
infectious pancreatic necrosis
iron transport systems, in E. coli, 58
Ibaraki virus, 496-497
virus (IPNV), 502
Isavirus, 425
IgA, 13
infectious pustular vulvovaginitis
Ixodes pacificus, 304
imidazoles, 38
(IPV),377
Ixodes scapularis, 303
immune electron microscopy
infectious valvular endocarditis,
(IEM), 23
539-540
Jamestown Canyon virus, 434
immune inhibitor A (InhA), 208
influenza viruses, 425
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV),
immune-mediated hemolytic
avian influenza, 430-431
414-415
anemia, 541
B viruses, 425
control, 415
immune response
classification, 425
disease, 414-415
generation of, 45-46
C viruses, 425
epidemiology, 415, 416f
to infectious agents, 7-17
equine influenza, 428-429
host response, 415
adaptive immunity, 11-14
genome,426
laboratory diagnosis, 415
evaluation of, 14-17
morphology, 425-426, 426f
pathogenesis and pathology, 415
innate immunity, 7-11
proteins
transmission, 416f
immunity
hemagglutinin, 426
treatment, 415
adaptive, 11-14
matrix protein, 427
innate, 7-11
neuraminidase, 426-427
K antigen, 54
immunodiffusion, 25
nonstructural protein, 427
kennel cough, 125, 588
immunoglobulin-binding
nucleoprotein, 427
keratinocytes, 387
proteins (IgBPs), 116
polymerase protein, 427
keratitis, 580
inclusion bodies, poxviral, 387
swine influenza, 429-430
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 13, 29
indirect immunofluorescence, 15,
A viruses, 425
Klebsiella spp., 74, 74t
15f
zoonotic significance of,
Kobuvirus, 400
infection, 3
431-432
Koch, Robert, 4
infectious agents, immune
innate immunity, 7-11
Koch's postulates, 4
response to, 7-17
 integrase, retroviral, 505
infectious bovine
integumentary system, 555-563
laboratory diagnosis, 18-25
keratoconjunctivitis (IBK),
antimicrobial properties, 555
bacteria and fungi, 18-20
145, 147
desquamation, 555
 aerobic bacteria, 19, 20f
Index
617
anaerobic bacteria, 19
transmission, 164
phospholipase C, 223
 culture techniques, 19
treatment, 165
p60 protein, 223
direct smears, 18-19
Lawsonia surface antigen A (LsaA),
chinchillas, 225
infectious agent,
163
conjunctivitis, 225
demonstration of, 18-20
Lemierre's syndrome, 239
control, 227
molecular/immunological
Lentivirus, 503, 517-522
disease patterns, 225
methods, 19-20
Lepidophthirus macrorhini,414
epidemiology, 225-226
 sample collection, 18
Leptospira,179-182,554
growth characteristics, 223-224
transport of samples, 18
abortion, 179, 180
horses, 225
virus, 20-25,21t-22t
artificial immunization, 181
humans, 225
animal inoculation, 23
biochemical reactions, 180
immunity, 226
complement fixation (CF)
California sea lions, 179
laboratory diagnosis, 226-227
tests, 25
cattle, 179, 180-181
direct examination, 226,
 cultivation in tissue culture,
control,182
226f
22,23f
disease patterns, 180-181
identification, 226
electron microscopy, 23
dogs,180
isolation, 226
ELISA,24, 25
epidemiology, 181
specimens, 226
 embryonated eggs, 22-23, 23f
growth characteristics, 179-180
 meningoencephalitis, 225
 general considerations, 20-22
horses, 181
morphology, 223
hemadsorption inhibition test,
humans, 181
pathogenesis, 224
24-25
immunity, 181
pathology, 224
 hemagglutination inhibition
laboratory diagnosis
reservoir, 224
test, 24
direct examination, 182
ruminants, 225
identification of, 23-24
identification, 182
structure and composition,
immune electron microscopy.
isolation, 182
223
23
sample collection, 181-182
transmission, 224
 immunodiffusion procedure,
serology,182
treatment, 227
25
morphology, 179
variability, 224
immunofluorescence, 23
pathogenesis, 180
Listeria ivanovii, 223
isolation of, 22-23
recovery, 181
Listeria monocytogenes, 13, 223
 nucleic acid hybridization,
reservoir, 180
myocarditis, 540
23-24
resistance, 180
listeriolysin O, 223
polymerase chain reaction, 24
species, 179
liver abscesses (hepatic
radioimmunoassay (RIA), 25
staining, 179
necrobacillosis), 241, 241f
serologic detection, 24-25
structure,179
liver, infections of, 554
Western immunoblot assay, 25
swine, 179, 181
locus of enterocyte effacement
La Crosse virus, 434
transmission, 180
(LEE),69
lactate dehydrogenase-elevating
treatment, 182
louping ill virus, 418-419
virus, 486-488
variability, 180
control, 419
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 82
Leptospira spp., 541
disease, 418
Lagenidium,559
Lepus europaeus, 406, see also
epidemiology, 418
lamb dysentery, 248
 European brown hare
laboratory diagnosis, 418-419
Lawsonia intracellularis, 158, 163
syndrome (EBHS)
lumpy skin disease virus, 392
cellular products of medical
lethal toxin (LeTx), 206-207
lung lesions, 112
interest
leukotoxin, 103
Lyme borrelioses, 156-157
cell wall, 163
"limberneck", 260
lymphadenitis, 542
LsaA, 163
lincomycin, 35
lymphangitis, 542
type III secretion systems, 163
lipoarabinomannan (LAM), 229,
lymph node abscesses, 542
clinical features and lesions,
271
lymphocystis disease virus
164-165, 164f
Listeria, 223-227
(LCDV),365
epidemiology, 165
abortion, 225
lymphoid tissues, 535, see also
growth characteristics, 164
cellular products of medical
circulatory system and
immunity, 165
interest
lymphoid tissue
laboratory diagnosis, 165, 165f
ActA protein, 223
lysogenic conversion, 58
morphology and cellular
adhesins, 223
lysozyme, 582
anatomy, 163
cell wall, 223
 pathogenesis, 164
internalins, 223
Macacine herpesvirus 1, 383-384
reservoir, 164
listeriolysin O, 223
MacConkey agar, 19
618
Index
macrolide antibiotics, 34-35
Mannose-resistant fimbriae, 62
control, 147
absorption,35
M antigen, enterobacteriaceae, 54
 epidemiology, 147
adverse effects, 35
Mantoux tuberculin skin test, 275
 growth characteristics, 146
 antimicrobial activity, 34
Marburg and related viruses, 446
immunity, 147
distribution, 35
Marek's disease (MD), 384-385
infectious bovine
excretion, 35
Marek's disease virus, of chickens,
keratoconjunctivitis, 147,
resistance, 34
557
147f
macrophages, 10, 13
Mastadenovirus, 369
laboratory diagnosis, 147
mad cow disease, see bovine
mastitis,562-563, 562t
morphology, 145, 146f
 spongiform encephalopathy
Megalocytivirus, 365
pathogenesis, 146-147
(BSE)
melanin,313
reservoir, 146
maedi virus, 517-518
 Metachromatic granules, 212
resistance, 146
Main Drain virus, 434
 metapneumoviruses, 445
staining, 145
major histocompatibility complex
metronidazole, 163
structure,145
(MHC), 10-12
mice, Mycoplasma, 288-289
transmission, 146
Malassezia, 556, 558
microbe-host interaction, 8
treatment, 147
Malassezia pachydermatis, 316-317
microbial flora
variability, 146
biochemical reactions, 316
eye,578
Moraxella bovis, 145, 580
control, 317
genital tract, 596
morbilliviruses, 440
epidemiology, 317
mouth, 546
Mortierella wolff, 597
growth characteristics, 316
respiratory tract, 583-584
mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), 456,
immunity, 317
skin, 556
469
laboratory diagnosis
microbial surface components
mousepox virus, 390
culture,317
recognizing adhesive matrix
MSCRAMMs, 195
direct examination, 317
molecules (MSCRAMM), 187
mucociliary apparatus, 583
molecular techniques, 317
microcins, 546
mucosa-associated lymphoid
morphology and composition,
microglia cells, 571
tissues, 535, see also
316
Microsporum, 321, 322t, see also
circulatory system and
pathogenesis, 317
dermatophytes
lymphoid tissue
reservoir, 316-317
Microsporum canis, 321, 324f
mucosal disease (MD), 422
resistance, 316
Microsporum nanum, 324f
multicidin, 103
shoe print morphology, 316f,
Microsporum spp., 558
multilocus sequence typing
317
Microtus californicus, 89
(MLST), 184
transmission, 317
milker's nodules, 391
multiple peptide resistance factor
treatment, 317
modified live virus (MLV) vaccine,
(MprF), 208
variability, 316
484
Murray Valley encephalitis virus,
malignant catarrhal fever (MCF),
molds, 321
418
377,379
mollicutes, 283-291, see also
musculoskeletal system, 564-569
mammalian orthoreoviruses,
Mycoplasma;Ureaplasma
 antimicrobial defenses,
491-492
hemotrophic, 291, 291t
564
control, 492
morphology, 283
infections, 564-565
disease, 491
nonhemotrophic, 283-291
articular surfaces, bursas, and
distribution, 492
staining,283
 synovial membranes,
host response, 492
structure and composition, 283
567-568
 laboratory diagnosis, 492
Mononegavirales, 438, 439t
bone, 565-567
pathogenesis and pathology, 492
Bornaviridae, 446
 skeletal muscle, tendons, and
properties, 491
Filoviridae, 446
fascia, 568-569
reservoir, 492
Paramyxoviridae, 438-445
infectious agents
resistance, 491
resistance, 438
cats, 565t
transmission, 492
Moraxella, 145-147
cattle, 565t
treatment, 492
biochemical characteristics, 146
dogs, 565t
mammary gland, 555, see aiso
cellular products of medical
goats,565t
mastitis
interest, 145-146
horses,565t
mammillitis, 378
adhesins, 145
pigs, 566t
Mannheimia, 101, see aiso
capsule, 145
poultry, 566t
Pasteurellaceae
cell wall, 145
sheep,565t
Mannheimia haemolytica, 583
exotoxins, 145
Mustela putorius furo, 466
 mannose-containing receptors, 56
iron, 145
mutualism, 3
Index
619
mycobacterial granulomas,
growth characteristics, 275
Mycoplasma canadense, 287
557-558
Johne's disease, 275, 276f
Mycoplasma canis, 288
Mycobacterium, 270-278
laboratory diagnosis, 276
Mycoplasma conjunctivae, 288
birds, 273
pathogenesis, 276
Mycoplasma cynos, 288
canine leproid granuloma
reservoir, 275-276
Mycoplasma dispar, 288
syndrome, 277
treatment, 276-277
Mycoplasma equigenitalium,288
cats, 273, 277-278
Mycobacterium bovis, 16, 271
Mycoplasma equirhinis,288
cattle, 273
Mycobacterium canettii, 271
Mycoplasma fastidiosum,288
cervidae, 273
Mycobacterium caprae, 271
Mycopiasma felis,288
classification, 270
Mycobacterium fortuitum, 270
Mycopiasma gallisepticum, 285,
control, 275
Mycobacterium kansasi, 272
286, 586-587
description, 270
Mycobacterium leprae, 271-272
Mycoplasma gatae, 288
disease patterns, 273-274
Mycobacterium lepraemurium,277,
Mycoplasma haemofelis, 541
dogs, 273,277-278
558
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae,285
effects on age, breed, and sex,
Mycobacterium marinum, 272
Mycoplasma hyorhinis, 285
274
Mycobacterium microti, 271
Mycoplasma hyosynoviae, 289
epidemiology, 271-272
Mycobacterium pinnipedi, 271
Mycoplasma iowae,287
feline leprosy syndrome, 277
Mycobacterium smegmatis, 270,
mycoplasma mastitis, 287
goats, 274
272
Mycopiasma meleagridis,287
horses, 274
Mycobacterium sp. strain Tarwin,
Mycoplasma mycoides ssp. mycoides,
immune response to infections,
277
285
272-273
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 11,
Mycoplasma neurolyticum, 289
immunodiagnosis
270,271
Mycoplasma ovipneumoniae, 289
y-interferon assays, 275
Mycobacterium ulcerans, 272
Mycoplasma pulmonis, 288
serologic tests, 275
Mycobacterium visibile, 277
Mycoplasma spumans, 288
tuberculin test, 275
Mycoplasma, 283, 284t
Mycoplasma subdolum, 288
interaction with phagocytic cells
avians, 287
Mycoplasma synoviae,287
and disease onset, 272
bovine, 287-288
mycoplasmosis, in poultry, 287
laboratory diagnosis
cats, 288
mycotic infections, subcutaneous,
culture and identification,
control, 291
559
274-275
disease patterns, 287-289
mycotic rumenitis,552
direct examination, 274
dogs, 288
myocarditis, 540
 sample collection, 274
epidemiology,285
myositis,568
M. avium ssp. paratuberculosis,
fried egg morphology, 284,
275-277
285f
 Nairobi sheep disease (NSD), 436
morphology, 270
goats,288
Nairovirus, 433, 436
M. tuberculosis complex, 271
growth characteristics, 284-285,
Nanophyetus salmincola, 300
 pathogenic species, 271-272
285f
natural killer (NK) cells, 10-11
primates, 274
horses, 288
 necrotic laryngitis (calf
reservoirs, 274
immunity, 286-287
diphtheria), 241, 242, 588
ruminants, 275
laboratory diagnosis, 289-290
necrotizing fasciitis (NF), 198
sheep, 274
direct examination, 289
Neorickettsia, 297-298
staining, 270, 271f
identification, 290
Neorickettsia helminthoeca, 298
structure and composition,
isolation, 289-290
control, 301
270-271
sample collection, 289
immunity, 301
swine,274
mice, 288-289
laboratory diagnosis, 301
treatment, 275
pathogenesis, 285-287
pathogenesis, 301
ulcerative dermatitis, 277-278
prevention, 291
reservoir, 300
Mycobacterium africanum, 271
reservoir, 285
transmission, 300
Mycobacterium aurum,272
sheep, 289
treatment, 301
Mycobacterium avium, 16, 270
swine, 289
Neorickettsia risticii, 298,300
Mycobacterium avium complex
transmission, 285
control,300
(MAC) infections, 272
treatment, 290-291
immunity, 300
Mycobacterium avium ssp.
turkeys, 287
 laboratory diagnosis, 300
paratuberculosis,542
Mycoplasma alkalescens, 287
pathogenesis, 300
Mycobacterium avium ssp.
mycoplasma arthritis, 568
reservoir,300
paratuberculosis (MAP),
Mycoplasma bovigenitalium, 287
transmission, 300
275-277
Mycoplasma californicum, 287
treatment, 300
620
Index
 nervous system, 570-576
 growth characteristics, 265
optochin sensitivity, 199
 antimicrobial defenses, 570
horses, 266
oral cavity, infections of, 547,
anatomic defenses, 570
immunity, 266
551-552
immunological defenses,
laboratory diagnosis, 266
 oral rabies vaccines (ORV), 451
570-571
morphology, 265
orchitis, 598
central, 570, 574-576
pathogenesis, 265-266
Ornithobacteriumrhinotracheale,
infections, 571,574-575
reservoir,265
101, 107, see also
bacterial infections, 575-576
resistance, 265
Pasteurellaceae
fungal infections, 576
ruminants, 266
Ornithodoros coriaceus, 542
injury to cells, 575
staining, 265
Oroya fever, 306
prion diseases, 576
structure, 265
Orthobunyavirus,433-434
vascular damage, 575
swine, 266
Orthomyxoviridae, 425-432
viral infections, 575
transmission, 265
Orthomyxovirus, 425
 infectious agents, 571
treatment, 266-267
orthopoxviruses, 388
cats,572t
Nocardia asteroides, 265
camelpox virus, 389
cattle,573t
Nocardia farcinica, 265
cowpox virus, 388-389
dogs,572t
Norwegian salmonid alphavirus,
mousepox virus, 390
goats,573t
408
vaccinia virus, 389
horses, 572t
Novirhabdovirus, 454
Orthoretrovirinae, 503, 504f
pigs,574t
Oryctolagus cuniculus, 406, see also
poultry, 574t
ocular infections, 577-581
 Rabbit hemorrhagic disease
sheep, 573t
antimicrobial properties of eye,
(RHD)
peripheral, 570, 576
577
osteitis, 565
routes of infection, 571
 antimicrobial factors, 577
osteomyelitis, 565-566
extension of infectious
antimicrobial peptides, 577
osteotoxin, 123
processes, 574
immunological factors,
otitis externa, 560-561, 562t
hematogenous route, 571
577-578
otitis media, in calves, 587
retrograde movement within
lactoferrin, 577
ovine adenoviruses, 371
neuron, 574
lysozyme, 577
ovine herpesvirus 2 (OHV-2), 377,
neuraminidases (NA), 203, 204,
mechanical and anatomic
379
218,219, 426-427
factors, 577
ovine posthitis, 216, 217
neutrophil, 8-10, 9f
conjunctival infections, 579-580
ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma
Newcastle disease virus (NDV),
corneal infections, 580-581
viru
438-440
eyelid and lacrimal apparatus
reservoir,512
control, 440
infections, 578-579
resistance, 449
disease, 438-439
infectious agents, 578
transmission, 449-450
distribution, 439
cats,579t
treatment, 451
host response, 440
cattle, 579t
ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma
 laboratory diagnosis, 440
dogs,578t
virus, 512
 pathogenesis and pathology.
goats,579t
control, 512
439-440
horses, 579t
disease, 512
prevention, 440
pigs, 580t
distribution, 512
transmission, 439
poultry, 580t
host response, 512
nicotinamide adenine
sheep, 579t
infectivity,512
dinucleotide phosphate
intraocular infections, 581
laboratory diagnosis, 512
(NADH) oxidase., 159-160
 microbial flora of eye, 578
pathogenesis and pathology, 512
Nidovirales, 456, 457f, 474
orbit infections, 581
properties, 512
Nipah viruses, 440
Okavirus, 474
transmission, 512
nitric oxide synthase, 208
old dog encephalitis, 442
 nitrofurans, 31
omphalitis, 540
Paecilomyces spp., 342
nitroimidazoles, 30-31
omphalophlebitis, 541,541f
Palyam viruses, 497
Nocardia, 264t, 265-267
oncogenes, 507
pancreas disease (PD), 412-413
cats, 266
oncogenesis
papillomaviruses, 366-367
control, 266-267
by DNA viruses, 508-509
bovine, 366-367
disease pattern, 266
by retroviruses, 507-508
canine, 367
dogs, 266
oncogenic viruses, 507
equine,367
epidemiology, 266
Oncorhynchus mykiss, 412
feline, 367
fish, 266
comycosis, 329
types, 366
Index
621
 parainfluenza virus type 5, 445
vaccination, 107
phenol-soluble modulins (PSMs),
Paramyxovirinae, 438-444
variability, 104
187, 188
parapoxviruses, 390
Pasteurella multocida, 539, 557,586
Phlebovirus, 434-435
bovine papular stomatitis, 391
pasteurization, 277
phocine distemper virus (PDV).
contagious ecthyma, 390-391
pathogen-associated molecular
443
 pseudocowpox, 391
patterns (PAMPs), 7, 11
phospholipase, 313
parasites, 3
 pathogenesis of viral infections,
Picornaviridae, 396-401, 397t
paratyphoid, of poultry, 83-84
see viral infections,
characteristics, 396
Parvoviridae, 353-358
pathogenesis of
 genome characteristics, 396
parvoviruses, 353
pathogenic action, 5
replication, 396
canine parvovirus, 355-356
direct damage, 5
virion structure, 396, 397f
feline parvovirus, 353-355
immune-mediated damage, 5
pigeon fever, 214
mink parvovirus, 357-358
pathogenicity
piglets, F4ab/ac receptor, 62-63
 porcine parvovirus, 356-357
criteria of, 4
pigs, see also swine
Pasteurella, 10l, see aiso
degrees of, 4t
African swine fever, 363-365
Pasteurellaceae
pathogenicity islands (PAIs).
atrophic rhinitis, 586
Pasteurellaceae, 101-107, 108,
Salmonella, 76
Glasser's disease in, 540
115
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID),
infectious agents
avian, 106
281
circulatory system and
cats, 106
Penaeus monodon, 474
lymphoid tissue, 538t
cattle, 105
 penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs),
digestive system, 550t
 cellular products of medical
27-28
integumentary system, 561t
interest, 101-103
penicillin G, 28
musculoskeletal system, 566t
adhesins, 101-102
penicillins, 28-29, 199, 222
ocular infections, 580t
capsule, 102-103
absorption, 29
respiratory system, 586t
cell wall, 103
adverse effects, 29
urogenital tract,593t
hyaluronidase, 103
antimicrobial activity, 28
microbial flora, 548t
iron,103
distribution, 29
myocarditis, 540
neuraminidase,103
excretion, 29
osteomyelitis, 565, 566
 Rho-activating toxin, 103
groups, 28
proliferative enteropathy, 164,
RTX, 103
resistance, 28-29
164f
toxins, 103
Penicillium notatum, 28
salmonellosis, 81
disease patterns, 105-106
 pericardial effusion, 540
Streptococcus, 197
dogs,106
pericarditis, 540
plague, 85, see also Yersinia pestis
equine,106
periodontal disease, 243
plague bacillus, see Yersinia pestis
genera in, 101
 periplasmic fibrils, 175
plasmid-encoded toxin (Pet), 68
goats, 105-106
pertactin (Prn), 121-122
plasmids, 39-40
growth characteristics, 103-104
pertussis toxin (Ptx), 122
Pneumocystis, 342-343
immunity, 106
Peste des petits ruminants (PPR)
Pneumocystis carinii, 342
laboratory diagnosis, 107
viruses, 444
pneumonia, 588-590
morphology, 101
Pestivirus, 419
Pneumovirinae, 444-446
overview, 101, 102t
pestiviruses, 419
pneumoviruses, 445-446
pathogenesis, 104
border disease virus (BDV), 419,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
 respiratory tract disease,
423
20,24,162,374
104-105
bovine viral diarrhea virus
 polymyxins, 30
septicemia,105
(BVDV), 419, 421-423
polyomaviruses, 367-368
trauma-associated conditions,
classic swine fever virus (CsFV),
polysaccharide intercellular
105
419,423-424
adhesin (PIA), 186
pathology, 105
infectivity
 porcine circovirus-associated
rabbits, 106
for host species and culture
disease (PCVAD), 360,
reservoirs, 104
systems, 420-421
 see aiso porcine circoviruses
resistance, 104
for other species and culture
(PCV)
sheep, 105-106
systems, 420
porcine circoviruses (PCV), 360
staining, 101
 properties, 419-420, 420f, 421f
control, 361
structure and composition, 101
virion structure and genomic
distribution, 360
swine, 106
organization, 420f
 host response, 361
transmission, 104
phaeohyphomycosis, 330
host-virus relationship, 360-361
treatment and control, 107
phage typing, 58
infectivity, 360
622
Index
porcine circoviruses (PCV)
porcine respiratory disease
Pseudomonas, 148-150, 546
(Continued)
complex (PRDC), 289
bovine, 149
laboratory diagnosis, 361
 porcine sapelovirus, 400
cat, 149
 pathogenesis and pathology.
 porcine teschovirus (PTV)
 cellular anatomy and
360-361
infection, 400
composition, 148
reservoir, 360
porcine torovirus (PToV), 458,
cellular products of medical
transmission, 360
472-473
interest, 148-149
treatment, 361
 porin proteins, 53
adhesins, 148
porcine enzootic pneumonia,
Porphyromonas, 243
capsule,148
289
poultry
cell wall, 148
porcine epidemic diarrhea viruses
 adenoviruses, 371
exotoxins, 148
(PEDV), 464
 avian infectious bronchitis virus,
iron, 148
porcine hemagglutinating
470-471
 product regulation, 149
encepahlitis viurs (PHEV),
Bordetella, 125
pyocins, 148-149
466-467
Campylobacter,167
pyocyanin, 149
control, 467
clostridial cellulitis, 557
control, 150
disease, 466-467
genital tract,598
disease patterns, 149
distribution, 467
infectious agents
dog,149
host response, 467
circulatory system and
epidemiology, 149
laboratory diagnosis, 467
lymphoid tissue, 539t
growth characteristics, 149
 pathogenesis and pathology, 467
digestive system, 551t
horse, 149
reservoir, 467
 integumentary system, 56 1t
immunity, 149
transmission, 467
musculoskeletal system, 566t
laboratory diagnosis, 150
treatment, 467
ocular infections, 580t
morphology, 148
porcine intestinal spirochetosis,
respiratory system, 587t
pathogenesis, 149
158
urogenital tract,594t
reservoir, 149
porcine parvovirus (PPV), 356-357
mycotic encephalitis, 576
transmission, 149
control, 357
myocarditis, 540
treatment, 150
distribution, 356-357
salmonellosis of, 83-84
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 148, 536
host response, 357
sinusitis, 586-587
pseudorabies virus (PRV), 348,
host-virus relationship, 356-357
Powassan virus, 419
380-381
infectivity, 356
Poxviridae, 387-394
control, 381
laboratory diagnosis, 357
poxviruses, 387-394, 388t
distribution, 380
pathogenesis and pathology, 357
avipoxviruses, 393-394
host response, 381
physical, chemical, and
capripoxviruses, 391-392
infectivity, 380
 antigenic properties, 356
orthopoxvirus, 388-390
laboratory diagnosis, 381
reservoir, 356-357
 parapoxviruses, 390-391
 pathogenesis and pathology.
transmission,356-357
poxviral infections of horses,
380-381
treatment, 357
394
prevention, 381
porcine proliferative enteropathy.
swinepox, 394
properties, 380
163, see aiso Lawsonia
Prevotella, 243
reservoir, 380
intracellularis
Prevotella melaninogenica, 556
sensitivity, 380
porcine reproductive and
prion diseases, 576
transmission, 380
respiratory syndrome virus
"professional antigen-presenting
psittacine beak and feather disease
(PRRSV), 484-486
cell", 11
(PBFD), 359
control, 486
progressive atrophic rhinitis, in
control, 359
disease, 484
swine, 105
etiologic agent, 359
distribution, 484-485
progressive pneumonia viruses,
host-virus relationship, 359
host response, 485-486
517-518
laboratory diagnosis, 359
immune evasion mechanisms,
 protease, retroviral, 505
treatment, 359
487t
protein involved in colonization
psittacosis, 281
laboratory diagnosis, 486
(Pic), 68-69
pullorum disease, 84
pathogenesis and pathology, 485
Proteus mirabilis, 556, 595
pulmonary alveolar macrophages
reservoir, 484-485
Prototheca spp., 343
(PAMs), 583
transmission, 484-485
dermatitis, 558
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
treatment, 486
protothecosis,343
(PFGE), 184
porcine respiratory coronavirus
Pseudallescheria boydii, 330
putative colonization factors
(PRC0V), 462-464
pseudocowpox, 391
(PCF), 62
Index
623
pyelonephritis, 594-595
Reoviridae, 491-499, 492t
proteins, 505
pyocins, 148-149
aquareoviruses, 499
proviral DNA, 504-505, 504f
pyocyanin, 149
orbiviruses, 493-498
features, 503-504
pyolysin O (PLO), 203
orthoreoviruses, 491-493
immunologic characteristics,
pyometra, 597
rotaviruses, 498-499
507
pythiosis, cutaneous, 329-330,
 respiratory bovine coronaviruses
morphology, 503, 505f
559
(RBCoV), 467, see aiso bovine
oncogenesis by, 507-508
Pythium insidiosum, 329-330, 554,
coronaviruses (BCoV)
ovine pulmonary
559
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),
adenocarcinoma virus, 512
11
replication, 506-507, 507f
rabbit bordetellosis, 125-126
respiratory system, 582-590
simian type D retrovirus,
rabbit coronavirus (RbCoV)
 antimicrobial properties, 582
512-513
infection, 466
nasopharyngeal compartment,
rhabdoviridae, 448-454, 449t
rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD),
582-583
rhabdoviruses, 448-454
406
pulmonary compartment, 583
bovine ephemeral fever virus
 rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus,
tracheobronchial
(BEFV), 453-454
406
compartment, 583
diseases of fish by, 454
control, 406
infections, 584-585
 general description, 448
disease, 406
laryngitis, 588
rabies virus, 448-451
distribution, 406
nasopharyngeal compartment,
vesicular stomatitis virus (VsV),
infectivity, 406
585-587
451-453
laboratory diagnosis, 370
otitis media, 587
rhinitis, 585-586
 pathogenesis and pathology.
pneumonia,588-590
rhinosporidiosis, 330-331
406
pulmonary compartment,
Rhinosporidium seeberi, 330, 587
properties, 406
588-590
rhinoviruses, 349
reservoir, 406
rhinitis, 585-586
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 298
transmission, 406
sinusitis, 586-587
 Rho-activating toxin, 103
treatment, 406
tracheitis, 588
 rhodococcal pneumonia, 232
rabbitpox virus, 389
tracheobronchial
Rhodococcus, 228
rabbits
compartment, 587-588
Rhodococcus equi, 228-233, 554
genital tract disease, 106
infectious agents
biochemical characteristics, 229
snuffles, 106
cats, 584t
cattle, 231
rabies virus, 448-451
cattle,585t
cellular products of medical
cat, 448
dogs, 584t
interest
cattle, 448
goats,586t
cell wall lipids, 229
control, 451
horses, 585t
 lipoarabinomannan, 229
disease, 448
pigs, 586t
virulence-associated proteins,
distribution, 449
poultry, 587t
228-229
dogs,448
sheep, 586t
control, 233
host response, 450
mechanisms, 583
disease patterns, 230-231
humans, 448, 450
mucociliary apparatus, 583
epidemiology, 231
infectivity, 449
pulmonary alveolar
equine, 230-231
laboratory diagnosis, 450
macrophage, 583
foal, 230-233
 pathogenesis and pathology.
microbial flora, 583-584
goats, 231
450
reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV),
growth characteristics, 229
properties, 448-449
509
horses, 230-231
reservoir, 449
reticulopericarditis, traumatic, 540
humans, 231
resistance, 449
Retroviridae, 503-522
immunity, 231-232
transmission, 449-450
retroviruses, 503, 536, 542-543
laboratory diagnosis, 232-233
treatment, 451
avian leukosis/sarcoma complex
morphology, 228, 229f
radioimmunoassay (RIA), 25
of viruses, 509-511
 pathogenesis, 230
Ranavirus,365
classification, 503, 504t
pathology,230
rat coronavirus (RCoV), 469-470
components, 504
reservoir, 230
Parker's RCoV (RCoV-P), 470
enzymes, 505
resistance, 229-230
sialodacryadentis virus (SDAV),
genomic RNA, 504
staining,228
469-470
lipids, 504
 structure and composition, 228
reiculoendotheliosis viruses, 393
nucleic acid structure and
swine, 231
Reiter's syndrome, 99
sequence, 505, 506f
transmission, 230
624
Index
Rhodococcus equi (Continued)
 ruminant herpesviruses, 377
disease patterns, 81
treatment,233
ruminants
dogs and cat, 81
variability, 230
abortion,118
epidemiology, 81-82
Rickettsiales, 293-294, 297, 302
Actinobacillus, 112
horses, 81
C. burneti, 294-295
Actinomyces, 264
immunity, 82
R. rickettsii, 294
Bacillus anthracis, 209
laboratory diagnosis, 82-83, 82f,
Rickettsia prowazekii, 294
bacteremia, 118
83f
Rickettsia rickettsii, 294, 294f, 540,
brain abscesses, 575
nomenclature, 75
see also Rickettsiales
clostridial cellulitis, 557
overview, 75
control, 294
Clostridium haemolyticum, 255
 pathogenesis, 80-81
ecology, 294
Clostridium tetani, 261-262
 pathology, 81
laboratory diagnosis, 294
dermatitis, 557
poultry, 83-84
pathogenesis, 294
epizootic hemorrhagic disease,
reservoir, 80
treatment, 294
496-497
ruminants, 81
rifampin, 31
Johne's disease, 542
swine, 81
Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV),
Listeria, 225
transmission, 80
434-435, 434f
mastitis, 118
treatment, 83
control, 435-436
miliary liver abscesses, 554
Vi capsule, 76
diagnosis, 435
mycoplasma arthritis, 568
 Salmonella genomic island 1
disease, 434-435,434t
myocarditis, 118
(SGI1), 83
distribution, 435
Nocardia, 266
Salmonella typhimurium, 11
host response, 435
osteomyelitis, 565
Salmonella Typhimurium DT104,
pathogenesis, 435
pericarditis, 118
81,83
properties, 435
pleuropneumonia, 118
salmonid alphaviruses, 412-413
reservoir,435
pneumonia,118
control,413
structure, 435
reproductive infections, 118
disease, 412-413
transmission, 435
rumen flora, 546, 552
epidemiology, 413
Rinderpest virus, 443
salmonellosis, 81
host response, 413
disease, 443
septicemia,118
laboratory diagnosis, 413
eradication, 443
Streptococcus, 197-198
 pathogenesis and pathology.
pathogenesis and pathology, 443
subcutaneous abscesses, 557
413
transmission, 443
thrombotic
treatment, 413
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
meningoencephalitis, 118
salmonid alphaviruses (SAVs), 408
(RMSF), 294
uroliths, 595
salmon pancreas disease virus
Roniviridae, 456, 474, 476t
(SPDV), 408
roniviruses
Saccharomyces boulardii, 252
Salmo salar L., 412
genome organization, 476f
saliva, 545, 546
San Miguel sea lion virus (SMSV),
 molecular properties, 478t
Salmonella, 42,75-84
404
structure and morphology, 475f
cellular description and
Sapelovirus, 400
 virion properties and virus
composition, 75
satellitism, 117
replication, 479-481
cellular products of medical
Scedosporium apiospermum, 330
rotaviruses, 498-499, 498f, 498t
interest
scrapie disease
control, 499
adhesins, 75-76
clinical signs, 524
disease,498
capsule, 76
control,528
distribution, 499
cell wall, 76
Cross-species barriers, 527
host response, 499
effector proteins, 76-78
epidemiology, 524
infectivity, 499
enterotoxin (Stn), 78
etiology, 524
laboratory diagnosis, 499
flagella, 76
goats,523
pathogenesis and pathology, 499
pathogenicity islands (SPIs),
host-prion relationships, 525
properties, 498
76-78, 77f
laboratory diagnosis, 527-528
reservoir,499
PhoP/PhoQ, 79-80
pathogenesis, 526-527
transmission, 499
siderophores, 78
prion origin, structure, and
treatment, 499
SlyA, 79
biochemistry, 524-525
 Rous sarcoma virus (RsV), 508
stress proteins, 78-79
prion strains, 526
rubulaviruses, 445
type II secretion systems,
PRNP polymorphisms, 525-526
rumen flora, 546
76-78
sheep, 523
rumenitis-liver abscess complex,
virulence plasmids, 79
subclinical carriers of infection,
241
control and prevention, 83
527
Index
625
transmission, 524
 invasion proteins, 96
host response, 513
treatment, 528
 Ipg proteins, 96
infectivity, 513
Semliki Forest virus, 414
Mxi-Spa T3SS, 96
laboratory diagnosis, 513
seneca valley virus, 401
regulatory genes, 98
pathogenesis and pathology, 513
Senecavirus, 401
ShET-2, 97
properties, 512-513
sentinel cells, 7, 11
SHI, 97
reservoir, 513
septic arthritis, in swine, 204
Stx, 97
transmission, 513
septic shock,536,539
type II secretion system, 96,
treatment, 513
serine protease autotransporters of
98f
sinusitis, 586-587
Enterobacteriaceae (SPATEs),
virulence A (VirA) proteins, 97
sleeping disease (SD), 413
68
cellular structure and
 sleeping disease virus (SDV), 408
serum virus neutralization (SVN)
composition, 95
smallpox, 388
assay, 14
clinical disease, 99
snowshoe hare virus, 434
severe acute respiratory syndrome
control and prevention, 100
somatic antigens (O-antigens),
(SARS),456
epidemiology, 99-100
53-54
severe combined
immunity, 100
southern elephant seal virus
immunodeficiency (SCID),
laboratory diagnosis, 100, 100f
(SESV), 408
371
overview, 95
 spectinomycin, 33, 34
sheep
pathogenesis, 99
splenitis,542
Brucella, 129
reservoir, 98-99
splenomegaly, 542
Campylobacter, 167, 170-173
serogroups, species, and
spores, 206
Chlamydia psittaci, 280
serotypes, 95, 96t
Sporothrix schenckii, 326, 559
Clostridium septicum, 257
transmission, 99
cellular products of medical
Coccidioides, 334
treatment, 100
interest
Corynebacterium
variability, 98
adhesins, 326-327
pseudotuberculosis, 214
Shigella boydii, 95,96t
cell wall, 327
Ehrlichia, 299
Shigella dysenteriae, 67, 95, 96t
lipid, 327
Erysipelothrix, 220
Shigella flexneri, 95, 96t
melanin, 327
hemorrhagic abomasitis, 552
 Shigella pathogenicity islands
peptide-rhamnomannan, 327
infectious agents
(SHI), 97
proteinases, 327
 circulatory system and
Shigella sonnei, 95, 96t
sialic acid, 327
lymphoid tissue, 538t
shigellosis, 95, 96f, see also Shigella
control, 328
digestive system, 550t
Siadenovirus, 369
epidemiology, 328
integumentary system, 561t
sialic acids, 314
growth characteristics, 327
musculoskeletal system, 565t
siderophores
immunity, 328
ocular infections, 579t
enterobacteriaceae, 57-58
laboratory diagnosis, 328
 respiratory system, 586t
Salmonella,78
lymphangitis, 542
urogenital tract, 593t
simian hemorrhagic fever virus
 morphology, 326
 lymph node abscesses, 542
(SHFV), 488-489
pathogenesis, 327-328
mastitis, 106
simian immunodeficiency virus
reservoir,327
Mycobacterium,274
(SIV),521-522
staining, 326
Mycoplasma,289
classification, 521
transmission, 327
 pneumonia, 105-106
control,522
treatment, 328
posthitis,597
disease, 521
variability, 327
PPR virus infection, 444
distribution, 522
sporotrichosis, 326,559, see also
scrapie disease,523-528
host response, 522
Sporothrix schenckii
septicemia, 105
infectivity, 521-522
spring viremia of carp virus
sheeppox virus, 391-392
laboratory diagnosis, 522
(SVCV),454
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli
pathogenesis and pathology, 522
Spumaretrovirinae, 503, 504f
(STEC), 62, 71-73, 97
properties, 521
Spumavirus,503
Shiga toxin (Stx), 67-68
reservoir, 522
Spv plasmids, 79
Shigella, 95-100
transmission, 522
Staphylococcus, 184-192
cellular products of medical
treatment, 522
biochemical characteristics, 186
interest
 simian type D retrovirus, 512-513
bovine mastitis, 184, 185
cell wall, 96
classification, 512
cattle, 185
Ics proteins, 96-97
control, 513
iron acquisition, 190-191
invasion plasmid antigen (Ipa)
disease, 512
morphology, 185-186
 protein, 96
distribution, 513
pathogenesis, 188-190
626
Index
Staphylococcus (Continued)
y-streptococci, 194
JEV infection, 414-415
resistance, 191-192
guinea pigs, 198
Leptospira, 179
small-colony variants (SCVs),
α-hemolytic streptococci, 194
lymph node abscesses, 542
185
immunity, 198
Mycobacterium, 274
species, 184-185
laboratory diagnosis, 198-199,
Mycoplasma, 289
staining, 185-186
199f
Nocardia, 266
structure and composition,
 Lancefield serological grouping.
pneumonia,106,112,125
186-187
194
pseudorabies, 380-381
toxins, 187-188
morphology, 194
Rhodococcus equi, 231
treatment, 191-192
pathogenesis, 197
salmonellosis, 81
Staphylococcus aureus, 184
pathology, 197
septicemia, 112
Staphylococcus hyicus, 184, 557
primates, 198
Streptococcus,197
Staphylococcus intermedius, 567
recovery and resistance, 198
transmissible gastroenteritis,
Staphylococcus intermedius group
reservoir, 196
462-464
(SIG), 184
resistance, 196
vesicular stomatitis, 451
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius,
ruminants, 197-198
vomiting and wasting disease
184
species, 194, 195t
(VWD), 466-467
St. Louis encephalitis virus, 418
staining, 194
swine dysentery, 158, 161, see aiso
stomatitis, 378
strangles, 197,199
Brachyspira
strangles, 197, 199
structure, 194
swine influenza, 429-430
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 264t,
swine, 197
control, 430
268-269
transmission, 196
disease, 429
control, 268-269
treatment, 199
laboratory diagnosis, 429-430
descriptive features, 268
Streptococcus agalactiae, 185
 pathogenesis and pathology.
dogs,268
Streptococcus canis, 542
429
humans, 268
Streptococcus equi sp. equi, 3, 575,
treatment, 430
 laboratory diagnosis, 268
586
swinepox, 394
reservoir,268
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 11, 194
swine proliferative enteropathy.
treatment, 268-269
Streptococcus pyogenes, 194
164, 164f
streptococcal mastitis, 197
streptomycin, 33
swine vesicular disease virus
 streptococcal pyrogenic toxin
stress proteins, Salmonella, 78-79
(SVDV), 400
 superantigens (SPEs), 196
Suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1),
symbiosis, 3
streptococcal toxic shock
380-381
syndrome (STSS), 198
sulfonamides, 31-32
Taylorella, 151-153
Streptococcus, 194-199
absorbtion, 32
Taylorella asinigenitalis, 153
artificial immunization, 198
 adverse effects, 32
Taylorella equigenitalis, 151-153,
 β-hemolytic streptococci, 194
antimicrobial activity, 31
152f
biochemical characteristics,
distribution, 32
contagious equine metritis, 151
195
excretion, 32
control, 153
cats, 198
resistance, 31-32
diagnosis, 153
cellular products of medical
 sulfur granules, 264
epidemiology, 152
interest
summer mastitis, 204
growth characteristics, 151
adhesins, 195
swine
immunity, 152-153
capsule,195
Actinobacillus, 112
morphology, 151
cell wall, 195-196
Actinomyces, 264
pathogenesis, 152
MSCRAMMs, 195
Arcanobacterium pyogenes, 204
reservoir, 151-152
regulation of, 196
atrophic rhinitis, 106, 125
resistance, 151
SPEs, 196
Bacillus anthracis, 209
staining, 151
 streptokinase, 196
bacteremia/septicemia, 118
structure, 151
 streptolysin O, 196
Bordetella, 125
transmission, 152
 streptolysin S, 196
bronchopneumonia, 118
treatment, 153
control, 199
Campylobacter, 167
variability, 151
disease patterns, 197
candidiasis, 319
y8 Tcell, 11
dogs,198
clostridial cellulitis, 557
tenosynovitis, 569
epidemiology, 198
Coccidioides, 334
Teschovirus, 400
equine,197
 dermatophyte infections, 323t
tetanus, cattle, 575-576
fish, 198
Enterococcus, 201
tetanus neurotoxin (TeNT), 261,
 growth characteristics, 194
Erysipelothrix, 220
262
Index
627
tetracyclines, 32-33
trimethoprim-sulfonamide
pyelonephritis, 594-595
 adverse effects, 33
combinations
routes of infection, 592-593
antimicrobial activity, 33
absorption, 32
uroliths, 595
resistance, 33
adverse effects, 32
normal flora, 592
Thogotovirus, 425
 antimicrobial activity, 32
urinary tract infections, see urinary
3-day sickness, 453, see also bovine
distribution, 32
tract
ephemeral fever (BEF)
excretion, 32
urogenital tract, 591-598, see also
thrombotic meningoencephalitis,
resistance,32
 genital tract; urinary tract
118, 575
tropism, 348-349
infectious agents
thymus, 542
tuberculosis therapy, 275
cats, 592t
tick-borne encephalidities, of
tularemia, 139, see aiso Francisella
cattle, 593t
humans, 419
ularensis
dogs,592t
tick-borne encephalitis group,
turkey coronavirus (TCoV),
goats,593t
418-419
471-473
horses, 592t
T lymphocytes, 7, 11
control, 472
pigs,593t
Togaviridae, 408-414
disease, 471
poultry, 594t
Alphavirus, 408-414
distribution, 472
sheep, 593t
Rubivirus, 408
host response, 472
uterine infections, 597
toll-like receptors (TLRs), 7
infectivity, 471
uveitis, 581
Torovirinae, 456, 458, 459t
laboratory diagnosis, 472
Toroviruses, 458, 462, 472-473
pathogenesis and pathology.
vaccination
toxins, 45
472
BCG,275
toxoids, 49-50
properties, 471
Bordetella, 126
Toxoplasma gondii, 16
reservoir,472
bronchopneumonia, 107
tracheal colonization factor (Tcf),
transmission, 472
Campylobacter, 173
122
treatment, 472
canine distemper (CD) virus,
tracheal cytotoxin, 122
turkey coryza, 125
442-443
 transmissible gastroenteritis virus
turkeys
chlamydial infections, 280
(TGEV), 462-464
Clostridium septicum, 257
Dichelobacter nodosus, 239
control, 463-464
coronavirus enteritis (CE),
EAV infection, 484
disease, 462
471-473
 equine encephalitis virus
distribution, 462-463
Erysipelothrix, 220
infections, 412
host response, 463
Mycoplasma,287
equine influenza, 429
laboratory diagnosis, 463
sinusitis, 287, 586-587
foot-and-mouth disease virus,
 pathogenesis and pathology.
ulcerative enteritis, 554
399
463
Tyzzer's disease, 253, 253f
Francisella tularensis, 141
reservoir, 462-463
Haemophilus and Histophilus,
transmission, 462-463
Uasin Gishu, 394
118-119
treatment, 463-464
ulcerative dermatitis, 277-278
JEV infection, 415
transmissible spongiform
Ureaplasma, 283, see also
Lawsonia intracellularis, 165
encephalopathies (TSE),
Mycoplasma
Mycoplasma, 280-291
523-532,576
Ureaplasma diversum, 288
paramyxoviruses, 438
animal, 523
urease,110
Rift Valley fever virus, 435
bovine spongiform
Helicobacter, 175
swine influenza, 430
encephalopathy, 528-530
urinary tract, 591-595
vaccines, 45, see aiso vaccination
chronic wasting disease,
 antimicrobial defenses, 591
bacterial, 50
530-532
bacterial interference, 591
bacterins, 50
human, 523
epithelial desquamation,
DNA, 46
prion protein, 523
591
toxoids, 49-50
scrapie disease, 523-528
glycoprotein slime layer, 591
viral, 46-49
Tremovirus,401
immune defenses, 591
vaccinia virus, 389
Trichophyton, 321, 322t, see also
urine,591
valvular endocarditis, 219, 220f
dermatophytes
washout by urine, 591
vancomycin, 201
Trichophyton spp., 558
 bacterial uropathogens, 595
vancomycin-intermediate S.
Trichophyton verrucosum, 324f
diseases, 592-595
aureus (VISA), 192
Trichosporon beigeli, 320
cystitis, 594
vancomycin-resistant S. aureus
trichosporonosis, 320
glomerulonephritis, 593-594
(VRSA), 192
trimethoprim, 31
host factors, 592
VapA lipoprotein, 228
628
Index
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
of skin, 556-557
West Nile virus (WNV), 416-418
(VIP), 66
 persistent and latent infections,
control, 418
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
351
disease, 416
(VEE), 408, 410-412
shedding of virus, 351-352
epidemiology, 416-417, 417f,
control, 412
tropism, 348-349
417t
disease, 410
viral keratitis, 580
host response, 418
 epidemiology, 410-412
viral rhinitis, 585-586
laboratory diagnosis, 418
host response, 412
viral shedding, 351-352
 pathogenesis and pathology.
 laboratory diagnosis, 412
viral vaccines, 46-47
417
pathogenesis and pathology, 412
inactivated, 48-49
treatment, 418
treatment, 412
live attenuated, 47-48, 48t
white bream virus (WBV), 458,
verocytotoxins, 67
types of, 47t
462
vesicular exanthema of swine
viridans streptococci, 194
Whitmore's disease, 137
(VES), 403-405
viroplasm, 387
winter dysentery (WD), cattle,
vesicular exanthema of swine virus
virulence plasmids, Salmonella, 79
467, see also bovine
(VESV), 403-405
virus factories, 387
coronaviruses (BCoV)
control, 405
virus-host relationships, 347
wooden tongue, 112, 113
disease, 403
virus-induced papillomas (warts),
wool-sorter's disease, 209
distribution, 404
366
host response, 404
virus, laboratory diagnosis, 20-25
xenotropic strains, 503
infectivity, 403-404
virus neutralization assay, 15f
Xipapillomavirus, 366
laboratory diagnosis, 404, 405t
visna virus, 517-518
pathogenesis and pathology, 404
Volucribacter, 108, 109t
Yeast, 313
properties, 403
Candida albicans, 317-319
reservoir, 404
walleye dermal sarcoma virus
Cryptococcus neoformans,
resistance, 403
(WDSV), 516-517
313-316
transmission, 404
control, 517
Geotrichum candidum, 319-320
treatment, 405
disease, 516
Malassezia pachydermatis,
vesicular stomatitis virus (VsV),
distribution, 516
316-317
400, 451-453
host response, 517
Trichosporon beigeli, 320
control, 452-453
infectivity, 516
Yellow Fever (YF) virus, 414, 418
disease, 451
laboratory diagnosis, 517
yellow-head virus (YHV), 474, 489
distribution, 452
 pathogenesis and pathology.
Yersinia, 85-94
host response, 452
516-517
 growth characteristics, 85, 86f
infectivity, 452
properties, 516
morphology, 85, 86f
laboratory diagnosis, 452
reservoir, 516
staining,85,86f
 pathogenesis and pathology, 452
 transmission, 516
Yersinia enterocolitica, 66, 85, 92
properties, 451
treatment, 517
cellular products of medical
reservoir, 452
weak calf syndrome, 180, 422
interest, 92-93
resistance, 451-452
Wesselsbron virus, 414, 418
adhesins, 91, 93
transmission, 452
control, 418
cell wall, 91, 93
treatment, 452-453
disease, 418
Gsr, 89,93
Vesiculovirus,454
epidemiology, 418
 high-pathogenicity island, 88,
viral exanthema of swine virus
host response, 418
93
(VESV), 400
 laboratory diagnosis, 418
iron,91-92
viral-induced abortions, 597
 pathogenesis and pathology.
LcrV, 89, 93
viral-induced conjunctivitis, 579
418
toxins, 93
viral infections, pathogenesis of,
treatment, 418
type III secretion system, 88, 93
347-352
western equine encephalitis
Yops, 88-89, 93
host relationships, 347
(WEE), 408, 410-412,410f
Yst, 93
host response, 349-350
control, 412
 epidemiology, 94
humoral and cellular immunity.
disease, 410
immunity, 94
350-351
epidemiology, 410-412
laboratory diagnosis, 94
immunity, 350-351
host response, 412
pathogenesis, 94
immunosuppression, 351
 laboratory diagnosis, 412
reservoir, 94
interferon, 350
 pathogenesis and pathology, 412
transmission, 94
modes of dissemination,
treatment, 412
treatment and control, 94
347-348
Western immunoblot assay, 25
variability, 93
Index
629
Yersinia pestis, 3, 57, 85-88
Yops, 88-89
cell wall, 91
 Black Death pandemic, 86
Ypk, 89
Gsr,92
bubonic plague, 85-86, 86f, 87f,
control, 91
high-pathogenicity island, 88,
90
epidemiology, 90-91
91
cat, 90
human plague, 87, 87f, 90
Inv, 91
cellular composition, 88
immunity, 91
iron, 91-92
cellular products of medical
 laboratory diagnosis, 91
LcrV, 89,92
interest, 88-89
necropsy of animals, 87-88
toxins, 92
capsule, 88
pathogenesis, 90
type III secretion system, 88, 92
cell wall, 88
 pneumonic plague, 87, 87f 
Yad, 91
coagulase, 89
reservoir, 89
Yops, 88-89, 92
Gsr, 89
 septicemic plague, 87, 87f
epidemiology, 92
high-pathogenicity island,
transmission, 89-90, 90f
immunity, 92
88
treatment, 91
laboratory diagnosis, 92
Hms phenotype, 88
variability, 89
pathogenesis, 92, 93f
iron,88
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 85,
reservoir,92
LcrV,89
91-92,554
transmission, 92
pesticin,89
cellular composition, 91
treatment and control, 92
Pla, 89
cellular products of medical
variability, 92
PsaA, 89
interest, 91-92
Yersinia ruckeri, 85, 94
type II secretion system, 88
adhesins, 91
Yersinia stable toxin (Yst), 93
Ymt, 89
Ail, 91
yersinioses,85
Keep up with
critical fields
Would you like to receive up-to-date information
on our books, journals and databases in the areas
that interest you, direct to your mailbox?
 Join the Wiley e-mail service - a convenient way
to receive updates and exclusive discount offers
on products from us.
Simply visit www.wiley.com/email
and register online
We won't bombard you with emails
and we'll only email you with
information that's relevant to you.
We will ALWAYS respect your e-mail
WILEY
privacy and NEVER sell, rent, or
exchange your e-mail address to any
outside company. Full details on our
privacy policy can be found online.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
www.wiley.com/email