K.W.CLARKE
C.M.TRIM
L.W.HALI
VETERINARY
ANAESTHESIA
ELEVENTH
EDITION
SAUNDERS
ILEKIR
Veterinary Anaesthesia
Content Strategist: Robert Edwards
Content Development Specialists: Nicola Lally and Alison McMurdo
Project Manager: Julie Taylor
Designer/Design Directiom: Miles Hitchen
fllustration Manager:Jennifer Rose
fllustrator: Antbits Ltd
Veterinary
Anaesthesia
Eleventh Edition
K. W. Clarke MA, VetMB, DVA, DVetMed, DipECVAA, FHEA, MRCA. FRCVS
Hon Professor of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Royal Veterinary College, University of London, UK
C. M. Trim BVSc, DVA, DipACVAA, DipECVAA, MRCVS
Professor Emeritus of Anesthesiology, Josiah Meigs Distinguished Teaching Professor, College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
L. W. Hall MA, BSc, PhD, DVA, Dr (Hons Causa) Utrecht, DipECVAA, DipACVA (Hon), FRCA, FRCVS
(deceased)
Reader in Comparative Anaesthesia, University of Cambridge, UK
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh  London  New York Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis Sydney  Toronto 2014
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
cal, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher's permis-
sions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright
Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other
than as may be noted herein).
First edition 1941
Second edition 1947
Third edition 1948
Fourth edition 1957
Fifth edition 1961
Sixth edition 1966
Seventh edition 1971
Eight edition 1983
Ninth edition 1991
Tenth edition 2001
Eleventh edition 2014
ISBN: 9780702027932
E-ISBN: 9780702054235
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notices
  x    s         
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any
should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most current infor-
mation provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify
the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety
precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability
from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
The
pubisher's
Working together to grow
policy is to use
peper manufectured
libraries in developing countries
from sustalnable forests 
www.celsevier.com | www.bookaid.otg | www.sabte.otg
ELSEVIER
ROOK AID
Sabre loundation
Printed in China
Contributors
Jennifer G. Adams DVM, DipAcviM, DipAcVAA
Leslie W. Hall MA, BSc, PhD, DVA, Dr (Hons Causa)
Hull, Georgia, USA
Utrecht, DipECVAA, DipACVA (Hon), FRCA, FRCVS
(deceased)
Kate Borer-Weir BVSc, PhD, DVA, DipECVAA, FHEA,
Reader in Comparative Anaesthesia,
MRCVS
University of Cambridge, UK
Lecturer in Anaesthesia
Royal Veterinary College
Sonia M.Hernandez DVM,PhD,DipACzM
Hatfield, Hertfordshire, UK
Assistant Professor of Wildlife Disease
Daniel B. Warnell School of Forestry and Natural Resources and
K. W. Clarke MA, VetMB, DVA, DVetMed, DipECVAA,
Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study
FHEA, MRCA, FRCvs
College of Veterinary Medicine
Hon Professor of Veterinary Anaesthesia
University of Georgia
Royal Veterinary College
Athens, Georgia, USA
University of London, UK 
Cynthia M. Trim BVSc, DVA, DipAcVAA,
Stephen J. Divers BVetMed, DZooMed, DipACZM,
DipECVAA, MRCvs
DipECzM (Herpetology), MRCVS
Professor Emeritus of Anesthesiology
Professor of Zoological Medicine
Josiah Meigs Distinguished Teaching Professor
Department of Small Animal Medicine & Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia, USA
Athens, Georgia, USA
vii
Preface
In this eleventh edition of Veterinary Anaesthesia we have attempted to continue Dr Leslie Hall's
tradition of providing 'how to' advice on anaesthetizing animals. In addition, our goal has been to
expand the evidence-based theme and provide published justification for most of our conclusions,
 particularly in relation to clinical advice, while also including information based on our own experi-
ences. There are now hundreds of relevant published papers, and we have to acknowledge that in
the space available we cannot cite all.
The aim of the book has always been to provide a text for veterinary students, a reference work
for veterinarians in practice or working with laboratory animals, and a stimulating introduction to
the subject for those wishing to specialize in veterinary anaesthesia. While following the format of
previous editions, we have made several major changes in this edition. We have invited other
authors to contribute chapters, and are grateful for their excellent reviews which provide added
 dimensions to the book. A chapter specifically devoted to analgesia recognizes the importance of
 pain relief and the major advances in the physiology and practice in this area. A new chapter is
devoted to wild animal anaesthesia and another discusses anaesthetic management of small
mammals, exotic pets and small wildlife. A chapter has been added to provide current information
on cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation. We would also like to acknowledge valuable contribu-
tions to Chapter l by Craig Johnson (electroencephalography) and Daniel Pang (mechanisms of
suiouepe isey pue pazileioads asaul ul Aoeinooe ansua on (siuaae sauisaeue leiauag jo uoie
areas.
We would wish to express our appreciation to David Gunn (AlIP) and to Charlotte Hall for many
of the fgures re-used from previous editions, and to those who have provided new fgures for this
edition and are acknowledged in the text. We also thank Kim Stevens and Flint Buchanan for their
expert assistance with some of the figures. Our warmest thanks are due to the publishers for their
patience, and in particular to Nicola Lally and Alison McMurdo for their constant encouragement.
Finally, we must thank our families, who tolerated our constant 'absence', and carried out our day.
to-day duties for us enabling us to concentrate on writing. Without them, the book would never
have been completed.
K. W. Clarke
C. M. Trim
ix
memoriam
Leslie W. Hall (1927-2010)
MA, BSc, PhD, DVA, Dr (Hons Causa) Utrecht, DipECvAA, DipACvA (Hon).
FRCA, FRCVS
Dr Leslie Hall's foresight and drive led to the development of veterinary anaesthesia as a speciality.
 His contributions to the veterinary profession as a scientist, clinician, teacher and author have been 
matched by very few.
 Dr Hall qualifed as a veterinary surgeon at the Royal Veterinary College, London in 1950, remain-
ing there to obtain his PhD. At that time, anaesthesia was produced in most animals by administer-
ing large doses of the few dnugs available, with no specific perianaesthetic care. He recognized that
animals needed better care under anaesthesia and set out to address their most pressing needs.
xi
In memoriam
Dr Hall developed suitable dosage regimens, promoted the use of endotracheal intubation, oxygen
administration, and artificial ventilation. He also instituted the practice of monitoring the animals
Ue Kianeiadonsod sisasleue suaise uesaq ueou pue eisausaeue iae pue su
approach that was not considered necessary for animals at that time.
Dr Hall then moved to Cambridge where he excelled as a scientist, a clinician and as a teacher
and worked tirelessly to promote veterinary anaesthesia as a speciality. He developed liaisons with
the human medical (physician) anaesthetists, and became an active member of their national and
local associations. In 1977, he was honoured with the Faculty Medal of the Faculty of Anaesthesia
of the Royal College of Surgeons and, in 200l, was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of the Royal
College of Anaesthetists.
 Of the many highlights in Dr Halls career, we believe the following deserve specific mention. In
1964, with six of his colleagues, Dr Hall founded the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists (AVA).
This association now has members world-wide, and is the base society' for the European College
of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia (ECVAA). On his retirement, Dr Hall was made an Honor-
ary Fellow of AVA. Working with his colleague, Dr Barbara Weaver, Dr Hall helped develop the
Diploma of Veterinary Anaesthesia (DVA) of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, the first
'specialist' veterinary qualification in anaesthesia. For the frst examination in 1968, they organized
a syllabus, created a robust examination, and included a medical (physician) anaesthetist on the
served as a model for the Diploma of the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
(ACVAA). Dr Hall was awarded an Honorary Diploma from the ACVAA in 1985.
While teaching at Cambridge Dr Hall provided postgraduate training in veterinary anaesthesia
through research scholarships and through a clinical position of University Assistant Anaesthetist,
a post equivalent to what is now termed a 'Residency: He also used his influence to establish a
career structure for those who entered the speciality. For example, he convinced surgeons that their
clinical practice and the outcomes of their patients would be improved by including a trained
anaesthetist He also promoted the concept to veterinary school administrators that future veteri-
nary surgeons needed a high standard of anaesthesia training before venturing into practice As a
result, university positions of Lecturer [and later, Professorships) in Veterinary and Comparative
Anaesthesia started to appear.
In 1982, under Dr Hall's guidance, the frst International (now World) Congress of Veterinary
Anaesthesia was held at Cambridge. Due to the overwhelming success of that meeting, Congresses
have been held, in several continents, every three years since that time In the mid-1990s, Dr Hall
 served as one of the founding members of the ECVAA, the authority that grants certifcation for the
speciality of veterinary anaesthesia and analgesia in Europe.
Leslie Hall was not just a clinician - but a brilliant scientist - indeed, he believed strongly in
what is now called 'evidence-based medicine: He authored more than 80 papers now cited in
PubMed, and many more in other veterinary journals. Much of his work focused on the physiologi-
cal responses to anaesthesia, particularly in horses and many of his publications are now considered
'classics: Examples ofthe latter include an investigation of muscle relaxants in dogs (1953), recogni-
tion of malignant hyperthermia in pigs (1966), and the first demonstration of ventilation/perfusion
mismatch in the anaesthetized horse (1968). Many anaesthetic agents were introduced into veteri-
nary practice as a direct result of his experimental work and clinical trials. Classical examples include
the introduction of halothane (1957), xylazine (1969), alphaxalone (as Saffan) (1972, 1975), and
propofol (1985, 1987). Dr Hall's vision was far-reaching and involved research students from all
over the world.
 In addition to his scientifc publications, Leslie was author/joint author of many review articles
and several books. For more than 50 years he served as the primary author of this book. However.
he also published a small book 'Fluid balance in canine surgery' in 1967, which includes informa-
tion from some otherwise unpublished research studies, and 'Anaesthesia of the cat' in 1994 in
collaboration with Dr Polly Taylor.
Leslie Hall was a knowledgeable and enthusiastic teacher of anaesthesia to veterinary and post
graduate clinical and research students. His enthusiasm for his subject was infectious, and post
graduate students were impressed by his unique ability to link clinical care with evidence-based
research, and with his integrity within his research, always looking for the reason for an unexpected
  e i  r e ' sss e 'i s e s a i
xii
In memoriam
He imparted knowledge regardless of the venue, whether it was the surgery theatre or the local pub.
 Furthermore, he did all this with loving support of his family.
Although Leslie Hall had many opportunities to move elsewhere and upwards in rank, he pre-
ferred to remain Reader in Comparative Anaesthesia at Cambridge Despite this reticence he
received many honours in the UK and elsewhere, including honorary degrees from Utrecht and the
RCVS, the Francis Hogg Prize for advancing small animal practice, the Livesey Medal for alleviating
pain and fear in animals, the Blaine award from the British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
and Fellowship from the RCVS by election.
A fitting summation of his influence and impact comes from a note from one of his previous
 postgraduate students, now a Professor:
'Leslie was responsible for setting clinical standards that were rigorous and science-based and
those of us lucky enough to be taught by him were the fortunate beneficiaries. Of course, Leslie's
home-made beer was also legendary!'
K. W. Clarke
Cynthia Trim
Parts of this Eulogy, and the picture, were published as an 'Obituary to Dr L.W. Hall', in Veterinary
Anaesthesia and Analgesia 2010 (37): 387-389, published by Wiley-Blackwell.
xilli
Appendix
IV
ABBREVIATIONS
intravenous, intravenously
kPa
 kilopascal (1 kPa =approximately
7.5 mmHg)
ABG
arterial blood gas
L
litre
ABP
arterial blood pressure
MAP
 mean arterial pressure
AC
alternating current
mg
milligramme, milligram
ADH
antidiuretic hormone
Mg++ or Mg?t
magnesium, magnesium ion
AFib
atrial fbrillation
mg/kg
 milligrammes per kilogramme body
AV
atrioventricular
weight
BAR
standard atmospheric pressure
mL
millilitre
BMR
basal metabolic rate
mL/kg
 millilitres per kilogramme body weight
BP
blood pressure
mmHO
millimetres of water
Catt or Ca2+
calcium, calcium ion
mmHg
millimetres of mercury
CI
cardiac index
N2
nitrogen
CNS
 central nervous system
N2O
nitrous oxide
CO
cardiac output
NO
nitric oxide
COPD
chronic obstructive airways disease
O2
oxygen
CPAP
continuous positive airway pressure
'C
degree Celsius
CPCR
cardiopulmonary cerebral
"F
degree Fahrenheit
resuscitation
PAWP
pulmonary artery wedge pressure
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
PACO2
alveolar carbon dioxide tension
CVC
caudal vena cava
PaCO2
arterial carbon dioxide tension
CVP
central venous pressure
PAO2
 alveolar oxygen tension
DAP
diastolic arterial pressure
PaO2
arterial oxygen tension
DC
direct current
PCO2
carbon dioxide tension
ECG
 electrocardiogram, electrocardiograph
PEEP
 positive end-expiratory pressure 
ETCO2
end-tidal carbon dioxide tension or
PiO2
inspired oxygen tension
concentration
PO2
oxygen tension
FiO2
fractional inspired oxygen percent
psi
pounds per square inch
FRC
functional residual capacity
PVC
premature ventricular complex
名
gramme gram
PVCO2
mixed venous carbon dioxide tension
Hb
haemoglobin
PvO2
 mixed venous oxygen tension
HCO
bicarbonate bicarbonate ion
PVR
(1) pulmonary vascular resistance,
Hct
haematocrit, packed cell volume
(2) peripheral vascular resistance
HR
heart rate
SAP
 systolic arterial pressure
IM
intramuscular, intramuscularly
SC
subcutaneous, subcutaneously
10
intraosseous, intraosseously
SVR
 systemic vascular resistance
IP
 intraperitoneal, intraperitoneally
swg
standard wire gauge
IPPV
intermittent positive pressure
TLC
 total lung capacity
ventilation
UK
United Kingdom
IT
intratracheal
USA
United States of America
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
671
Appendix
VD
respiratory dead space volume
VIC
vaporizer in the (breathing) circuit
WEIGHTS
VOC
vaporizer outside the (breathing) circuit
V/Q
ventilation: perfusion ratio
. 1 1a  1 jo 1am = () w 1
microgramme microgram
1 kilogram (kg) = 1000 g (grams)
μg/kg
microgrammes per kilogramme body
1 gram (g) = 1000 mg (milligrams)
weight
1 milligram (mg) = 1000 μg (micrograms)
μL
microlitre
CONVERSIONS
Conversion factors
Measurement
Sl unit
Old unit
Old to Sl (exact)
SIl to old (approx.)
PCO2
kPa
mmHg
0.133
7.5
PO2
kPa
mmHg
0.133
7.5
Standard bicarbonate
mmol/L
mEq/L
 Equivalent 
Base excess
mmol/L
mEq/L
 Equivalent 
Haematocrit (packed cell volume)
 Decimal fraction
%
0.01
100
Total protein
g/L
 g/100 mL
10.0
0.1
Glucose
mmol/L
mg/100 mL
0.0555
18
Creatinine
μmol/L
mg/100 mL
88
0.01
Urea
mmol/L
mg/100 mL
0.166
6.0
Pressure
mmHg
cmHzO
0.73554
1.36
Weight
kg
Ib
0.4545
2.2
Endotracheal tube sizes: The French number is divided by four for conversion to approximate internal diameter in millimetres
be given in psi or BAR. Relevant conversions of the most
UNITS OF PRESSURE
common are as follows:
The 'Standard Atmosphere' at sea level = 760 mmHg
Atmospheric pressure is important in relation to uptake
29.92 inchesHg
冏=1
101.3 kPa=1013.25 millibar
of gases (oxygen and anaesthetic gases). Many different
(hectapascals).
units are used in weather forecasts. Cylinder pressures may
1 BAR = 100 kPa = (approx) 14.5038 psi
672
Chapter
An introduction to anaesthesia and
general considerations
 Introduction
Influence of pre-existing drug therapy
16
Veterinary anaesthesia
4
Pharmacogenetics
17
General anaesthesia
4
Mechanisms of action of general
anaesthetic agents
4
INTRODUCTION
Depth of anaesthesia
6
Electroencephalography (EEG)
6
Anaesthesia is one of the greatest 'discoveries' there has
The'classic' signs of anaesthesia
ever been - there are few scientific advances which have
7
reduced pain and suffering in so many people and animals.
Computer control in anaesthesia
8
It is difficult to remember that the first anaesthetic was
Minimum Alveolar Concentration
administered only in the 1840s (there is argument as to
(MAC) and Minimum Infusion
who was first to administer it clinically). although analge-
Rate (MIR)
sics (for example opiates) have been available for many
9
Anaesthetic risk
10
centuries. The term mnaesthesia was coined by Oliver
Wendell Holmes in 1846 to describe using ether to
General considerations in the selection
produce insensibility in a single word and it comes from
of the anaesthetic method
11
the Greek 'without feeling: The term 'analgesia' is Greek
 Evaluation of the patient before
for 'without pain.
 anaesthesia
11
While anaesthesia has precisely the same meaning as
Biochemical tests prior to anaesthesia
12
when it was frst coined, i.e the state in which an animal
 Significance of conditions found by
is insensible to pain resulting from the trauma of surgery.
preanaestheticexamination
13
it is now used much more widely. Starting with the premise
that 'pain is the conscious perception of a noxious stimu-
Cardiovascular and respiratory disease
13
lus', two conditions may be envisaged: general anaesthesia
Drug metabolism and disease states
where the animal is unconscious and apparently unaware
Factors affecting transport of drugs in
of its surroundings, and mnalgesia or local anaesthesia where
the body
14
the animal, although seemingly aware of its surroundings.
Renal disease
14
shows diminished or no perception of pain. Perioperative
 Preparation of the patient
15
analgesia, a subject once much neglected by veterinarians,
15
is now recognized as an essential component of the
Food and water
process, and the physiology of pain and mechanisms of
Huid and electrolytes
15
how it can be controlled and treated are discussed in
Haemoglobin level
15
Chapter 5, Analgesia.
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
3
Section
1
Principles and procedures
 in which the patient neither perceives nor recalls noxious
VETERINARY ANAESTHESIA
 Or painful stimuli. Professors Rees and Grey (1950) intro-
duced the concept that the requirements from general
The clinical discipline of veterinary anaesthesia is essen-
anaesthesia were analgesia, muscle relaxation and 'narco-
tially a practical subject based on science. In addition to
sis', these being known as the 'Liverpool Triad: This idea
the scientific base for human anaesthesia, the veterinarian
has been expanded to add suppression of reflexes (motor
 a sa saais r   s
and autonomic) and unconsciousness or at least amnesia
anatomy and in metabolism that effects the actions and
and, most importantly, that these requirerments should be
elimination of drugs.
achieved without causing harm to the patient. For over 100
 In clinical veterinary anaesthesia, the major require-
years anaesthesia was achieved mainly with a single drug.
ments of the anaesthetist are:
most commonly ether. Now, as well as a number of anaes-
thetic drugs which are administered by inhalation as is
·Humane treatment of the animal
ether (see Chapter 7), single-agent drugs that are given by
 This includes prevention of awareness of pain,
injection (see Chapter 6) are also employed. However, in
relief of anxiety and sympathetic animal handling
clinical practice, it is now usual to use many different
● Provision of adequate conditions for the procedure
agents, which act at multiple receptors, in the CNS and
 This includes adequate immobility and relaxation
peripherally, in order to achieve the goals required to
■ Ensuring neither the animal, nor the personnel
provide good anaesthesia.
 are injured in any way.
Currently, when considering single-agent anaesthetics,
 All patients require an adequate standard of monitoring
many authorities now believe that the state of general
(Chapter 2), and of general care throughout the anaes-
anaesthesia requires only two features: immobility in
thetic process. However, other than this, there is a myriad
response to noxious stimulation and amnesia (the latter
of acceptable methods from which the anaesthetist can
often taken as unconsciousness) (Eger et al., 1997: Urban
choose to satisfy the above aims. Certain dnugs and/or
& Bleckwenn, 2002). The argument is that the immobility
systems may be put forward as best practice' but, in vet-
is required for surgery; if the patient is unconscious they
erinary anaesthesia, there is rarely the 'evidence base' to
cannot perceive pain (although the autonomic system may
prove that they are so. Choice of methods used may be
still react to noxious stimuli), and if they don't remember
limited by a number of factors. Legal requirements, which
the pain, it is similar to lack of perception. This theory
will depend on the country concerned, need to be
ignores evidence and theories relating to pain and hyper-
observed. Examples include laws involving the control of
sensitization as described in Chapter 5. However, it con-
dangerous drugs, or the choice of drugs in animals des-
siders that analgesia is desirable but is not an essential
tined for human consumption. In the European Union,
feature of the state of 'general anaesthesia: Thus the 'defi-
currently, the 'cascade' is a major barrier to anaesthetists?
nition' of a single-agent anaesthetic drug, such as the
choice. This law implies that if there is a drug licensed for
injectable agent, propofol or the volatile anaesthetic
a species, it is criminal to use another unlicensed agent for
agents is that they have these two actions of preventing
the same purpose, unless the veterinary surgeon can prove
movement and causing amnesia (Franks, 2006). Some
that their alternative choice was justifed for welfare of the
compounds which from structure and lipophility might
specifc individual animal concerned. Facilities may be
 be expected to be anaesthetics can cause amnesia without
limited, and while expense should not be the governing
immobility: these are sometimes termed 'non-anaesthetics'
factor, it does need to be considered; animals throughout
(Johansson & Zou, 2001), their major interest being
the world require anaesthesia and if the owners cannot
related to studies of mechanism of anaesthetic action.
afford the cost, the animal will be denied treatment The
objective of this book is to give the reader the information
Mechanisms of action of general
enabling them to make an informed choice of the best
method of anaesthesia and care for their patient in their
anaesthetic agents
circumstances.
 The central nervous system control of the functions altered
Sherrington in 1906 pointed out the importance of the
synapse in the CNS in providing connections between
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
multiple neuronal systems (Fig. 1.1). At synapses, trans-
, l in r n an s riss
General anaesthesia is and has been given many different
the action of the next neuron. Receptors sensitive to the
definitions (reviewed by Urban & Bleckwenn, 2002), but
transmitter may be postsynaptic, or presynaptic feeding
a simple practical one that has been used in the previous
back on the original nerve terminal and modulating
editions of this book is ‘the reversible controlled dnug
further action. Transmitters act through two main types of
induced intoxication of the central nervous system (CNS)
receptor: ionotropic and metabotropic. With inotropic or
4
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
Presynaptic
changing the lipid bilayer of nerve cells. There are excep-
inhibitory axon
tions which disprove the hypothesis but, nevertheless, for
Afferent axon
most the correlation is amazing, and this theory, with
modifcations, held sway until Franks and Lieb (1984)
showed that inhalational general anaesthetics inhibited
protein activity in the absence of lipids. This fnding led
Terminal
arborization
Excitatory
to the explosion of studies on (a) where in the CNS anaes-
thetics act, (b) differences between motor and amnesic
synapses
actions and, fnally. (c) the molecular targets for action.
Dendritic tree
Inhibitory
(Franks [2006) quotes a review that cites 30 possible such
synapse
 targets.) All these three points are inextricably interlinked.
Inhibitory
A full discussion is beyond the remit of this book, but the
interneurone
following very simplified summary is based on reviews by
Cellbody
Urban & Bleckwenn (2002), Sonner et al. (2003), Rudolph
& Antikowiak (2004). Franks (2006) and Perouansky
et al. (2012).
 All anaesthetic agents do not act in the same way or in
the same place Classified by their mode and place of
actions, there appear to be four main types of anaesthetic
agent: (l) injectable agents such as propofol, etomidate
and alfaxalone; (2) volatile anaesthetic agents such as
Axoncolateral
halothane, isoflurane and sevoflurane: (3) the injectable
Figure 1.1 Schematic diagram of the organization of a
dissociative agents such as ketamine; and (4) the gaseous
synaptic relay within the CNS.
agents, nitrous oxide and xenon.
t is now considered that the inhibition of motor actions
occurs at the spinal cord, at least for the volatile anaes-
thetic agents, while amnesia and unconsciousness are
ligand-gated' receptors, the transmitter binds directly with
the remit of the higher centres in the brain (Eger et al.,
the ion-channel proteins, allowing the channel to open
1997) - these two aspects of anaesthesia being separate.
and the ions to pass. Binding of a transmitter to metabo-
Most anaesthetics can cause amnesia at subhypnotic
tropic receptors involves G-proteins as secondary messen-
doses, although the relative dose for amnesia in relation-
ship to that required for unconsciousness varies between
changes in cellular mermbrane potential triggers a response,
dnugs. The area of brain critical for amnesia appears to be
such as two-pore potassium channels have also been
the hippocampus and basal nucleus of the amygdala.
identifed.
Other centres are involved in the production of sedation
 In the CNS, three major transmitters are considered
 and unconsciousness. For example functional neuroimag-
most directly relevant to general anaesthesia. Gamma-
 ing demonstrated that when propofol was administered at
amino-butyric acid (GABA) is inhibitory and decreases the
 sedative doses and a noxious stimulus applied, evoked
excitability of neurons. Glycine is inhibitory in most cir-
responses were attenuated only in the somatosensory
cumstances and is the most important inhibitory transmit-
cortex, but once doses reached hypnotic levels, thalamic
ter at the spinal cord. The main excitatory transmitter in
and cortical responses ceased. Ketamine, a dissociative
the CNS is glutamate. Anaesthetic drugs that are thought
anaestheticl
however, did not depress sensory inflow
to act at the N-methyl d-aspartate [NMDA) receptor, one
through the thalamus. Perouansky et al. (20l2) summa-
 of at least three types of ligand-gated glutamate receptor.
rize by pointing out that anaesthesia is a very complex
inhibit the effect of glutamate, thus again inhibiting the
state, and that current evidence shows that general anaes-
CNS. However, there are many other relevant transmitters,
-eqoid 'saleisqns pyiads juase, aleiedas aonpoid soiau
for example acetylcholine, dopamine, norepinephrine,
bly at different areas of the CNS.
endogenous opioids and others (Sonner et al., 2003) and
Three very differing molecular targets have been sug-
their resultant actions may infuence (modulate) the
 gested as the major sites of anaesthetic actions: GABAA
actions, directly or indirectly, of the GABA, glycine and
receptors, NmDA receptors and glycine receptors. Anaes-
glutamate pathways.
thetic drugs that act at the GABAA receptors are the classi-
In the 1900s, for the inhalation agents (no injectable
cal IV anaesthetics; these potentiate the action of GABA,
had been discovered), Meyer and Overton independently 
hence increase overall CNS inhibition. The volatile anaes-
noted the correlation between anaesthetic potency and
thetic agents have similar actions at GABAA receptors in
solubility in oil, which led to the 'lipid theory' that general
addition to actions at other targets, and their mode of
 anaesthetics acted through a non-specific mechanism by
action is more complex. Dissociative anaesthetics such as
5
Section
1
Principles and procedures
ketamine and the gaseous anaesthetic agents are thought
to be antagonistic at the NMDA receptor, thus blocking
DEPTH OF ANAESTHESIA
the action of the excitatory glutamate but again, this does
 not explain all their actions.
Many authorities consider that 'depth of anaesthesia' is
A great deal is known about the GABAA receptor [there
impossible to define, but anaesthesiologists need some
are also GABAs and GABAc). It is a polymeric receptor
 guidelines to ensure that the patient comes to no harm.
with five subunits; there have been at least 30 types of
Only two years after the frst demonstration of general
subunit cloned so the potential for heterogenicity is enor-
anaesthesia, John Snow (1847) stated, quite emphatically.
mous. Different arrangements of subunits are sensitive to
that the point requiring most skill in the administration
different anaesthetic agents. For example, genetically engi-
of anaesthetics is to determine when it has been carried
neered 'knock-out mice' in which one particular subunit 
far enough. Snow described five stages of anaesthesia pro-
was missing were insensitive to the anaesthetic effects of
duced by diethyl ether, the last stage in his experiments
the steroid anaesthetic, alfaxalone, but not to propofol
with animals being characterized by feeble and irregular
 suggesting that these two apparently similar IV anaesthet-
respiratory movements heralding death - clearly a stage
ics were working through different configurations of
too far. A major problem faced by all anaesthetists since
GABAA receptor. The mode of action of the volatile anaes-
that time is to avoid both 'too light' anaesthesia with the
thetic agents, in particular in the brain, is less proven (and
 risk of sudden violent movement, and the dangerous 'too
more complex) than for the IV agents; the volatile anaes-
deep' stage. Snow suggested guidelines whereby anaesthet-
thetic agents do have some actions at the GABAA receptor
ists could reduce the risk of either too light or too deep
but at a much lower potency. Subunits of GABAA essential
ether anaesthesia. Guedel, in l9l8, devised a scheme
for efficacy differ between the volatile and IV agents. It is
involving observation of changes in respiratory rate, limb
thought that glycine receptors are involved in the actions
movement and eye signs which formed the basis of his
of the volatile agents, in particular those in the spinal cord
celebrated 'Signs and Stages of Ether Anaesthesia' which
which inhibit movement. The reason for giving these
has been included until very recently in all text books
examples (there are very many more) of differing modes
of anaesthesia, and is the basis for that described in
of actions between apparently similar types of anaesthetics
Chapter 2.
is to point out that to say 'an anaesthetic acts at the GABAA
The introduction of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
receptor' is certainly not the whole story.
which remove all the somatic responses on which Guedel's
Knowledge of the mode of action of the anaesthetics
scheme is based, completely changed the picture and the
that work at the NmDA receptor is less well developed.
 emphasis swung from the danger of too deep anaesthesia
The anaesthetics (ketamine and the gaseous agents) are
to that of too light anaesthesia with the risk of conscious
thought to cause their effects on memory and conscious-
awareness and perception of pain. Cullen et al. (1972), in
ness at least partly through these receptors. Sonner et al.
an attempt to produce new guidelines indicating depth of
[2003) consider that NMDA receptors in the spinal cord
 anaesthesia, were forced to conclude that it was diffcult
might be a target for all inhalation anaesthetic agents (not
to categorize the clinical signs of anaesthesia for any one
just those those termed 'gaseous') in the production of
 inhalation anaesthetic let alone for inhalation agents in
immobility. However, once again, action at the NMDA
general. The signs also differed markedly when the dis-
receptor does not explain all the actions seen.
 The methods of investigation used to study anaesthetic
 Today a very much broader range of different dnugs are
actions are multiple, and readers are referred to the reviews
employed during anaesthesia. These include agents to give
cited above. All reviews point out the number of other
 analgesia, amnesia, unconsciousness and relaxation of
potential molecular, ion or voltage-gated possible sites
skeletal muscles as well as suppression of somatic, cardio-
which might be the target for anaesthetic action. Other
routes of investigation have examined the modulating
stimulation. All may influence the classical sigms of 'depth'
influence of alternative CNS pathways. Following the find-
of anaesthesia
ings of Franks and Lieb (1984), it was anticipated that a
(relatively) simple pharmacological pathway for anaes-
Electroencephalography (EEG)
thetic action might be found to explain anaestheticactions,
as has been for many other systems (eg. opioids, see
It is only possible to describe the EEG changes related to
Chapter 5, O2-adrenoceptor agonists, see Chapter 4). This
anaesthesia in the most general terms. The responsive
has not happened, although our knowledge is greatly
alpha rhythm associated with awareness changes on
expanded. However, we have yet really to know how
induction of anaesthesia in terms of frequency and ampli-
general anaesthetics work, and indeed Sonner et al. (2003)
tude The most common pattern seen with light general
raise a question that, at least for volatile agents, some
anaesthesia has low amplitude and is dominated by high
variant of the Overton-Meyer lipid theory may yet play a
frequency activity: it is often referred to as desynchronized.
partial role.
Increasing concentrations of anaesthetics tend to produce
6
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
increasing amplitude and decreasing frequency. a phe-
Evoked responses
nomenon known as synchronization. In addition, some
Evoked responses are changes in the EEG produced by
anaesthetics produce periods of burst suppression where
the EEG is isoelectric, repetitive high amplitude spikes and
external stimuli, surgical or otherwise Anaesthetic depth
is a balance between cerebral depression and surgical (or
Other) stimulation. Thus, cerebral function during anaes-
the anaesthetic ethers.
thesia is most easily assessed by putting in a stimulus 
The majority of attempts to monitor the depth of anaes-
auditory or somatic or visual - and observing the EEG
thesia objectively have focused on the EEG, but the raw
response That response can then be compared for ampli-
data are of limited practical value to the clinical anaesthet-
 tude and latency with the response to the same stimulus
ist. To simplify the extraction of useful information from
in the presence of differing brain concentrations of any
complex waveforms, a number of methods of compress-
 anaesthetic. Evoked responses can be used as monitors of
ing. processing and displaying EEG signals have been
 anaesthetic depth when agents acting at the NMDA recep-
 developed and these techniques have, in many cases, been
applied to a limited number of channels of EEG rather
tor are being employed.
than the 16 channels normally studied.
The 'classic' signs of anaesthesia
Power spectrum anafysis
 Use of the term 'depth of anaesthesia' is now so ingrained
In this technique, the EEG signal, after being digitalized,
is subjected to Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) in which
in common usage that it must be accepted since it prob-
ably cannot be eradicated. It is important, however, to
it is separated into a series of sine waves. The sum of these
realize that it commonly refers to depression of brain
sine waves represents the original integrated signal. Break-
function beyond that necessary for the production of
ing up the original waveform in this way makes it possible
t0 compare one non-standard wave form with another
general anaesthesia'.
The so-called 'classic signs' of anaesthesia, such as
and, in particular, to extract the distribution of compo-
described in Chapter 2 for convenience of newcomers to
nents of different frequency within the EEG signal. The
the subject, were provided by the presence or absence of
 power in each frequency band is derived from the sum of
 response of the anaesthetized subject to stimuli provided
the squares of the amplitude of the sine waves into which
the FFT has separated the original signal. Power spectrum 
by the anaesthetist or surgeon. Particular signs of anaes-
thesia were, therefore, equated with particular anatomical
analysis has been used in a number of experimental situ-
levels or ‘planes' of depression of the central nervous
ations related to veterinary anaesthesia (e.g. Otto & Short,
system. These signs were often likened to a series of land-
1991; Murrell et al., 2003: Johnson et al., 2005, 2009).
marks used to assess the progress made on a jourmey. Such
empirical, traditional methods of assessing the progress of
Cerebral function monitors
anaesthesia and the anatomical implications that went
A number of monitors, including the Bispectral Index
with these methods incorporated a fallacy, because they
(BIS), the Cerebral Function Monitor (CFM) and the
took no account of the fact that the changing function of
Patient State Index (PSI) feed the EEG signals from a
 any biological systerm can only be made in terms of mag-
limited number of leads into a 'black box' which, on the 1
 nitude and time. A depth of unconsciousness is really a
basis of an algorithm derived from analysis of EEGs from
 particular moment in a continuous temporal stream of
a large number of human patients, produces a number 
 biological or neurological phenomena to be interpreted
which is related to depth of anaesthesia. All these moni-
 by the magnitude and quality of these phenomena obtain-
tors have a number of limitations in clinical use They may
ing to that moment.
be influenced by other electrical 'noise' such as the elec-
In general, the volatile anaesthetic agents halothane.
tromyogram (EMG). The algorithms are based mainly on
 enflurane, isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane produce
anaesthetic drugs that have their hypnotic effect through
 a dose-dependent decrease in arterial blood pressure and
actions at the GABAA receptors. The monitors are ineffec-
 many veterinary anaesthetists use this depression to assess
tive for the anaesthetic agents that act at the NMDA recep-
the depth of anaesthesia. The effect is not so marked
tors such as nitrous oxide, xenon or ketamine. Of great
during anaesthetic techniques involving the administra-
concerm is the fact that when neuromuscular blocking
tion of opioid analgesics and nitrous oxide. If the depth
drugs were given to conscious human volunteers, BIS
 of unconsciousness is adequate surgical stimulation does
reduced to values suggestive of very deep anaesthesia
 not cause any change in arterial blood pressure There are,
(Messner et al., 2003). The use of these monitors may
however, many other factors which influence the arterial
reduce the incidence of awareness under anaesthesia but
blood pressure during surgery such as the circulating
has not eliminated it. The most common of these moni-
 blood volume, cardiac output and the influence of drug
tors is the BIS; its use and limitations in veterinary anaes-
therapy given before anaesthesia. If ketamine or high
thesia are described in Chapter 2.
doses of opioids are given, arterial blood pressure may
7
Section
1
Principles and procedures
change very little if the depth of unconsciousness is
should be smooth although its rate and depth may alter
increased by the administration of higher concentrations
depending on the prevailing severity of the surgical stimu-
of inhalation anaesthetics.
lation. Rapid nystagmus is usually a sign that anaesthesia
Changes in heart rate alone are a poor guide to changes
is light but it is a common feature of ketamine anaesthesia
in the depth of unconsciousnes. The heart rate may
and it also seen sometimes seen in horses just before
increase under isoflurane and desflurane anaesthesia due
death. Absence of the lash or palpebral reflex [closure of
to the agents' effects. Arrhythmias are common during
(usaa au jo us su oi assi u spaa a
light levels of unconsciousness induced by halothane,
is another reasonably reliable guide to satisfactory anaes-
when they are usually due to increased sympathetic activ-
thesia. In dogs and cats, it is safe to assume that if the
ity. In general, however, tachycardia in the absence of any
mouth can be opened without provoking yawning or
other cause may be taken to represent inadequate anaes-
curling of the tongue, central depression is adequate. In
thesia for the procedure being undertaken.
all animals, salivation and excessive lacrimation usually
Anaesthetic agents affect respiration in a dose-dependent
indicate a returning awareness.
manner and this was responsible for the original classifica-
 Disappearance of head shaking or whisker twitching in
tion of the 'depth of anaesthesia: In deeply anaesthetized
 response to gentle scratching of the inside of the ear pinna
animals, tidal and minute volumes are decreased but,
is a good sign of unawareness in pigs, cats, rabbits and
depending on the species of animal and on the anaesthetic
 guinea pigs. Pupil size is a most unreliable guide to anaes-
 agents used, respiratory rate may increase before breathing
thetic depth as various ancillary agents (e.g. opioids, atro-
eventually ceases once the animal is close to death. As
pine) may influence it. The pupils do, however, dilate
inadequate anaesthesia also is often indicated by an
when an overdose of an anaesthetic has been given or
 increase in the rate and/or depth of breathing the unwary
when awareness is imminent.
may be tempted to administer more anaesthetic agent to
The experienced anaesthetist relies most of the time on
the deeply anaesthetized animal in the mistaken impres-
 an animal's responseto stimuli produced by the surgeon Or
 sion that awareness is imminent. Laryngospasm, coughing
procedure to indicate adequate depth of unconsciousness.
or breath-holding can indicate excessive airway stimula-
The most effective depth is taken to be that which oblit-
tion or inadequate depth of unconsciousness.
erates the animal's response to pain and/or discomfort
All anaesthetic agents, other than the dissociative drugs
without depressing respiratory and circulatory function.
such as ketamine cause a dose-related reduction in
muscle tone and overdosage produces complete respira-
tory muscle paralysis. In the absence of complete neu-
Computer control in anaesthesia
romuscular block produced by neuromuscular blocking
dnugs, the degree of muscle relaxation may, therefore,
With the current sophistication of computers, there have
usually be used as a measure of the depth of anaesthetic-
been many attempts to obtain a method of anaesthesia
induced unconsciousness. However, even in the presence
totally controlled by the computer; various parameters
of muscular paralysis due to clinically effective doses of
being monitored, results fed back into the system, and the 
neuromuscular blockers, it is not uncommon to observe
system then altering the dose of anaesthetic administered
movements of facial muscles, swallowing or chewing
accordingly - i.e a closed-loop system.
movements in response to surgical stimulation if the
The use of computers [including microprocessors) has
depth of unconsciousness becomes inadequate.
When animals are breathing spontaneously, there are
be more sophisticated, and give more accurate results.
several signs which are generally recognized as indicating
Ventilators can be programmed to provide very specific
that the depth of unconsciousness is adequate for the
requirements of, for example, tidal volume, or respiratory
performance of painful procedures, i.e the animal is
pressures. Constant infusion pumps provide a very accu-
unaware of the environment and of the infliction of
rate flow rate which is useful for fluid administration, but
 pain - it is anaesthetized.
also can be utilized to provide targeted plasma levels of
Unfortunately, there are many differences between the
intravenous anaesthetic agents [this is known as Target
various species of animal in the signs which are usually
Controlled Infusion or TCl). The most validated versions
used to estimate the depth of unconsciousness. One fairly
 of this are the Propofusor?@ and the Remifusor@, which
reliable sign is that of eyeball movement, especially in
will deliver infusions to achieve set plasma levels of pro-
horses and cattle, although even this may be modifed in
pofol and remifentanil respectively. Their programming is
the presence of certain other drugs. such as the Q2-
based on a very accurate knowledge of the pharmacokinet-
adrenoceptor agents (see Chapter ll). Unless neuromus-
ics in humans of these drugs so their algorithms are not
cular blocking dnugs are in use, very slow nystagmus in
necessarily correct for other animals, although the Propo-
both horses and cattle and downward inclination of the
fusor has been modified successfully for use in dogs [Beths
eyeballs in pigs and dogs usually indicates a satisfactory
et al., 200l; Musk et al., 2006). There is computer-software
level of unconsciousness and, at this level, breathing
available to use with other agents (Rugloopll); it can be
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
used for research projects (Ribeiro et al., 2009) but, as it
in animals and is usually measured in triplicate, concen-
classifes as a 'medical device', there may be legal limita-
tration of anaesthetic being lowered until there is a
tions (country specific) to its clinical use in humans. It is
response then raised again until the response is lost In
-saeue uoneieuul palonuos jasiel aney ol alqissod osie
humans, the most common stimulus is a single surgical
thesia; the volatile anaesthetic is injected into the circuit
incision; if the patient responds the next patient gets a
so as to maintain a targeted end-tidal anaesthetic concen-
higher dose and so on, until the EDso is found. A single
tration. The anaesthetic machine named 'Zeus' from
stimulus of this type is certainly not supramaximal, and
Draeger has this facility as well as programmable infusion
the difference in measurement techniques may explain
syringes and the advertisement talks of target controlled
 why MAC in humans usually is less than in experimental
anaesthesia. However, neither of these systems involves a
 animals. End-tidal anaesthetic gas concentration is taken
feedback loop within the computer; the feedback loop is
 as an approximation of alveolar gas. With a forced expira-
the anaesthetist who asks it for a different target, 'up or
tion (as is requested when similar technology is used for
 down' according to the patient requirements.
the alcohol breathalyser'), this is reasonable, but under
 In order to have a feedback loop. there have to be
anaesthesia a forced breath cannot be obtained. For really
patient data measured and returned to the computer. To
accurate experimental results, sampling should be via a
date, the most common parameter used for this purpose
 catheter passed down the trachea but, in the clinical situ-
is the ‘anaesthetic depth monitor', BIS (see Electroen-
ation, sampling at the ET tube suffces.
cephalography). As has been discussed, this is a monitor
A number of factors affect MAC. It is not affected by the
based on the 'hypnosis' resulting from the anaesthetic
duration of anaesthesia, hyperkalaemia, hypokalaemia.
agents that act primarily on the GABAA receptor, and there-
hypercarbia or metabolic acid-base changes, but is reduced
fore is most accurate with propofol anaesthesia. Not sur-
D。 Aiaaa ioy %g Aq panpai s! Dv 'eiuaeneuody Aq
prisingly, computer-controlled anaesthesia has been most
reduction in body temperature and similarly, raised by
effective with systems involving propofol infusions
hyperthermia. Young animals have high MAC values, but
(Hemmerling et al., 20l0). Recently, Liu et al. (20ll) used
MAC decreases with age (Mapleson, 1996: Eger, 200l).
MAC is measured as vol%o, and so is dependent on atmos-
remifentanil, and found it more effective in maintaining
pheric pressure, thus explaining the increased doses of vola-
 a steady BIS target than was manual control. However, as
tileagentsrequiredto maintain anaesthesia at high altitudes
discussed previously, in any one individual, steady BIS
(Quasha et al., 1980). MAC is reduced by many other
does not always represent the ideal 'depth' of anaesthesia
anaesthetic related agents which add to neuronal depres-
so the anaesthetist is still needed to assess the patient's
sion. The MACs oftwo volatileand/or inhalation agents are
overall response, in particular cardiopulmonary changes
themselves additive (Eger et al., 2003), hence the use of
and autonomic responses to stimulation. Absalom et al.
 nitrous oxide as part of the carrier gas for volatile agents.
(20ll) have reviewed the current status of computer-
I is now considered that MAC is a measurement that
controlled anaesthesia and consider that the limitations
relates to the spinal cord, and not to the brain (Eger et al.,
are such that it is a goal not yet achieved.
1997). Its end-point is movement and, as discussed above
(mode of action), it is movement that is considered to be
 prevented by the actions at the spinal cord. Interestingly.
Minimum Alveolar Concentration
in relation to analgesia, volatile anaesthetic agents do
(MAC) and Minimum Infusion
 prevent 'wind-up' of nociceptive neurons in the cord, and
Rate (MlR)
Buuaaad ui led e Aeid Keu siun ieui paisasns si 1
movement.
Minimum afveolar concentration
Despite its limitations, however, the concept of MAC
 In 1963, Merkel & Eger proposed the concept of MAC, and
has now been used for more than five decades to enable
Eger et al. (1965) expanded the idea further, suggesting
the relative potencies of anaesthetics to be compared
that it would be useful as a measurement of volatile anaes-
[Antognini & Carstens, 2005). This reproducible method
thetic potency. MAC is defined as the alveolar concentra-
may be contrasted with the difficulty in using physiologi-
tion of an anaesthetic that prevents muscular movement
cal parameters as an indication of anaesthetic depth, or
-qns isat aui yo %os ul snins [nyued e oi asuodsan ui
the EEG, which varies according to the agent used.
jects. It is therefore what is known in pharmacology as the
Although the MAC value represents the anaesthetizing
EDso (effective dose). If adequate time is allowed for the
dose for only 50% of subjects, the anaesthetist can be
anaesthetic in the brain to equilibrate with the anaesthetic
reasonably certain that increasing the alveolar concentra-
agent in the blood, the alveolar partial pressure of the
tion to between 1.1 or 1.2 times MAC will ensure satisfac
anaesthetic (which can be measured) is a reasonably accu-
tory anaesthesia in the vast majority of individuals because
rate expression of the anaesthetic state. The stimulus,
the dose-response curve is relatively steep. In veterinary
standardized as far as possible to be 'supramaximal'.
practice, it is also important to note that, according to
usually consists of tail clamping or an electrical stimulus
Eger, the variability of MAC is remarkably low between
9
Section
1
Principles and procedures
mammalian species and, as long as conditions remain the
same, is quite constant in any one animal. Finally, it is
Table 1.1 American Society of Anesthesiologists'
physical status classification system
important to remember that MAC is determined in healthy
animals under laboratory conditions in the absence of
Category 1
Normal healthy pa tient
other drugs and circumstances encountered during
clinical anaesthesia which may alter the requirement for
Category 2
A patient with mild systemic disease
anaesthesia.
Category 3
A patient with severe systemic disease
Minimum infusion rate
Category 4
 A patient with severe systemic disease
that is a constant threat to life
The accurate control of depth of unconsciousness is more
difficult to achieve with intravenous anaesthetic agents. To
Category 5
A moribund patient who is not expected 
obtain unconsciousness, they must be administered at a
 to survive without the operation
rate which produces a concentration of drug in the blood-
American Society of Anesthesiologists (2010).
stream suffcient to result in the required depth of depres-
sion of the central nervous system. The concept of
minimum infusion rate (MIR) was introduced by Sears
in 1970 to define the median EDso of an intravenous
anaesthetic agent which would prevent movement in
immediate attention for obstetrical crises, intractable
response to surgical incision (or in experimental animals,
haemorrhage or thoracic injuries. In the USA, the
a supramaximal stimulus). Unlike MAC, in which alveolar
American Society of Anesthesiologists [ASA) has
concentrations can be considered to equate to arterial,
adopted a classification of physical status into
blood cannot be analysed rapidly for injectable anaes-
categories, 'E' being added after the number when
thetic concentrations. MIR is therefore measured similarly
the case is presented as an emergency (Table 1.1).
to MAC using movement as an end-point However, MIR
This is a useful classification but, most importantly.
may change with time if the drug is cumulative; a lower
it refers only to the physical status of the patient
infusion rate being required as the tissues become satu-
and is not necessarily a classification of risk
rated. The term 'context sensitive MIR' is used to describe
because additional factors such as its species,
these changes with duration of infusion. As changes with
 breed and temperament contribute to the risk
context depend on pharmacokinetic parameters, MIR may
involved for any particular animal. Moreover, the
differ markedly between species depending on rate of drug
assessment of a patient's 'correct' ASA classification
 metabolism and elimination. In veterinary anaesthesia, to
varies between different anaesthetists (Haynes &
Lawler, 1995; Wolters et al., 1996; McMillan &
been with propofol infusions (Beths et al., 200l; Bettschart-
Brearley, 2013).
Wolfensberger et al., 200l; Oku et al., 2005; Boscan et al.,
2. The influence of the surgeon. Inexperienced
2010; Rezende et al., 2010), but the same concept (using
Ue wuojad ol laguol yonu ayel Aeu suoagns
different end-points) has been employed for choosing
operation and by rough technique produce intense
suitable infusion rates of sedative drugs (see Chapter 4).
and extensive trauma to tissues, thereby causing
a greater metabolic disturbance (and increased
postoperative pain). Increased danger can also arise
when the surgeon is working in the mouth or
ANAESTHETIC RISK
pharynx in such a way as to make the maintenance
of a clear airway diffcult, or is working on structures
poune guo pue xuel io aa a s qns
General anaesthesia and local analgesia do not occur natu.
reflexes.
rally and their induction with dnugs that even today are
3.
 The influence of available facilities. Crises arising
never completely devoid of toxicity must constitute a
during anaesthesia are usually more easily overcome
threat to the life of the patient. This can be a major or
aun ueu iedsoy Aieuaa padnba-lam e u
trivial threat depending on the circumstances, but no
the primitive conditions which may be encountered
owner must ever be assured that anaesthesia does not
on farms.
constitute a risk. When an animal owner raises the ques-
4. The influence of the anaesthetist The competence,
tion of risk involved in any anaesthetic procedure the
experience and judgement of the anaesthetist have a
veterinarian needs, before replying. to consider:
profound bearing on the degree of risk to which the
1. The state of health of the animal. Animals presented
patient is exposed. Familiarity with anaesthetic
for anaesthesia may be fit and healthy or suffering
Jo je aut pue Aouaiyya ianeaig oi speal sanbiuual
from disease; they may be presented for elective
anaesthetic administration is only developed by
Suspaau saseo Aouasiaua se 1o AiaBins (plos.)
experience.
10
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
General considerations in the
anaesthetists will also infuence the choice of anaesthetic
selection of the anaesthetic method
technique In addition, factors causing increased suscepti-
bility to the toxic actions of anaesthetic agents must be
The first consideration will be the nature of the operation
borne in mind. These include:
to be performed, its magnitude, site and duration. In
1. Prolonged fasting. This, by depleting the glycogen
general, the use of local infltration analgesia may suffce
reserves of the liver, greatly reduces its detoxicating
for simple operations such as the incision of superficial
 power and when using parenterally administered
abscesses, the excision of small neoplasms, biopsies and
 agents in computed doses, allowance must be made
the castration of immature animals. Nevertheless, what
for increased susceptibility to them.
seems to be a simple interference may have special anaes-
2.
. Diseased conditions. Toxaemia causes degenerative
thetic requirements. Subdermal fibrosis may make local
 changes in parenchymatous organs, particularly the
infiltration impossible to effect Again, the site of the
liver and the heart, and great care must be taken in
operation in relation to the complexity of the structures
giving computed doses of agents to toxaemic
in its vicinity may render operation under local analgesia
subjects. Quite often it is found that a toxaermic
dangerous because of possible movement by the con-
scious animal, e.g. operations in the vicinity of the eyes.
dose Toxaemia may also be associated with a
When adopting general anaesthesia, the likely duration
slowing of the circulation and unless this is
of the procedure to be performed will influence the selec-
recognized it may lead to gross overdosing of IV
tion of the anaesthetic. Minor, very short operations may
anaesthetics.
be performed after IV administration of a small dose of an
agent such as propofol or thiopental sodium. For longer
operations, anaesthesia may be induced with an ultra-
short acting agent and maintained with an inhalation
EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT
agent with or without endotracheal intubation. However,
the ability to perform endotracheal intubation, to admin-
BEFORE ANAESTHESIA
ister oxygen and to apply some form of ventilation must
always be available and to hand for use should an emer-
It is probable that most veterinary operations are per-
gency arise. Similarly, the fact that anaesthesia is brief does
formed on normal, healthy animals. The subjects are
not remove the need for minimal monitoring. For most
 oausaeue, poo juasaidan pue guno Aleiauag
operations under general anaesthesia, preanaesthetic med-
Nevertheless, enquiry should be made to ensure that they
ication ('premedication') will need to be considered, par-
are normal and healthy - bright, vigorous and of hearty
ticularly when they are of long duration and the animal
appetite. Should there be any doubt, operations are best
must remain quiet and pain-free for several hours after the
delayed until there is assurance on this point. Many a
operation. Undesirable effects of certain agents (e.g. keta-
reputation has been damaged by performing simple oper-
 mine) may need to be countered by the administration of
ations on young animals which are in the early stages of
'correcting’ agents (e.g. Qz-adrenoceptor agonists, atro-
some acute infectious disease or which possess some con-
 pine). Although sedative premedication may significantly
genital abnormality.
reduce the amount of general anaesthetic required, it may
When an operation is to be performed for the relief of
also increase the duration of recovery from anaesthesia.
disease considerable care must be exercised in assessing
 The species of animal involved is a pre-eminent consid-
the factors which may influence the choice or course of
eration in the selection of the anaesthetic method (see
 the anaesthetic Once these are recognized, the appropri-
later chapters). The anaesthetist will be influenced not
 ate type of anaesthesia can be chosen and preoperative
only by size and temperament but also by any anatomical
 measures adopted to diminish or, where possible, prevent
Or physiological features peculiar to a particular species or
 complications. The commonest conditions affecting the
breed. Experience indicates that the larger the animal, the
course of anaesthesia are those involving the cardiovascu-
greater are the diffculties and dangers associated with the
lar and respiratory systems, but the state of the liver and
induction and maintenance of general anaesthesia.
kidneys cannot be ignored.
Methods which are safe and satisfactory for the dog and
The owner or attendant should always be asked
cat may be quite unsuitable for horses and cattle. In vigor-
         n 
ous and heavy creatures the mere upset of locomotor
associated with airway secretions that may give rise to
coordination may entail risks, as also may prolonged
respiratory obstruction and lung collapse when the cough
recumbency.
reflex is suppressed by general anaesthesia. Severe cardio-
vascular disease may be almost unnoticed by the owner
Individual animals
and enquiry should be made to determine whether the
The variable reaction of the different species of animals,
animal appears to suffer from respiratory distress after
 and of individuals, to the various agents administered by
exertion, or indeed appears unwilling to take exercise,
11
Section
1
Principles and procedures
since these signs may precede other signs of cardiac and
Pulmonary disorders provide particular hazards for an
respiratory failure by many months or even years. Dysp-
 animal undergoing operation and any examination, no
noea is generally the first sign of left ventricular failure and
matter how brief, must be designed to disclose their pres-
a history of excessive thirst may indicate the existence of
ence or absence On auscultation, attention should be
advanced renal disease diabetes mellitus or diabetes
directed towards the length of the expiratory sounds and
insipidus.
the discovery of any rhonchi or crepitations. If rhonchi or
The actual examination may be restricted to one which
crepitations are heard, excessive sputum is present, and the
is informative yet will not consume too much time nor
animal is either suffering from, or has recently suffered,
unduly disturb the animal. While a more complete exami-
a pulmonary infection. Prolongation of the expiratory
nation may sometimes be necessary, attention should
 sounds, especially when accompanied by high-pitched
always be paid to the pulse, the position of the apex beat
rhonchi, indicate narrowing of the airways or broncho-
of the heart, the presence of cardiac thrills, the heart
 spasm. Respiratory sounds may be absent in animals with
sounds and the jugular venous pressure. Examination of
 pneumothorax, extensive lung consolidation, or severe
the urine for the presence of albumin and reducing sub-
emphysema; they are usually faint in moribund animals.
stances may also be useful.
Uneven movement between the two sides of the chest
Tachycardia is to be expected in all febrile and in many
is a reliable sign of pulmonary disease and one which is
wasting diseases and, under these circumstances, is indica-
easily and quickly observed. The animal should be posi-
tive of some myocardial weakness. It can, however, also be
tioned squarely while the examiner stands directly in front
due to nervousness and where this is so it is often associ-
of it and then directly behind it. In small animals, uneven
ated with rather cold ears and/or feet. Bradycardia may be
movement of the two sides of the chest is often better
physiological or it may indicate complete atrioventricular
 appreciated by palpation rather than by inspection.
block. In horses, atrioventricular block that disappears
The mouth should be examined for the presence of
with exercise is probably of no clinical significance. In all
loose teeth which might become dislodged during general
animals, the electrocardiogram may be the only way of
 anaesthesia and enter the tracheobronchial tree. Other
determining whether bradycardia is physiological or is due
mucous membranes should be inspected for evidence of
to conduction block in the heart.
anaemia, denoted by paleness.
The jugular venous pressure is also important. When the
animal is standing and the head is held so that the neck
is at an angle of about 45° to the horizontal, distension
Biochemical tests prior to anaesthesia
of the jugular veins should, in normal animals, be just
The question as to whether preanaesthetic urine and
visible at the base of the neck. When the distension rises
blood analysis should be performed routinely before every
above this level, even in the absence of other signs, it
elective anaesthetic is, and has always been, controversial.
indicates an obstnuction to the cranial vena cava or a rise
While targeted tests are essential to confirm or exclude
in right atrial or ventricular pressures. The commonest
disease conditions suspected as a result of clinical history
cause of a rise in pressure in these chambers is probably
and examination, the cost/benefit of their use in animals
right ventricular hypertrophy associated with chronic lung
which appear perfectly healthy can be argued on the basis
disease although congenital conditions such as atrial
that the results rarely would alter the anaesthetic protocol
septal defects may also be indicated by this sign and it
to be employed. Urine testing is simple, inexpensive and
should be remembered that cattle suffering from constric-
is particularly important in dogs for, in these animals,
tive pericarditis, or bacterial endocarditis, may have a
renal disease and previously undiagnosed diabetes melli-
marked increase in venous pressure.
us are common. Urine samples may be less readily
 The presence of a thrill over the heart is always a sign of
obtainable from other species of animal. The Association
cardiovascular disease and suggests an increased risk of
 of Veterinary Anaesthetists [AVA) debated (Spring Meeting
complications arising during anaesthesia. More detailed
1998) the question as to the need for routine preanaes
cardiological examination is warranted when a cardiac
thetic checks on haematological and biochemical profles
thrill is detected during the preoperative examination.
and voted that they were unnecessary if the clinical exami-
 Auscultation of the heart should never be omitted, par-
nation was adequate. In a more recent AVA debate led by
ticularly when the animal's owner is present because
medical anaesthetists, they pointed out that a major dis-
 Owners expect this to be carried out. Accurate location of
advantage of non-targeted screening was 'over-diagnosis'
the apex beat is an important observation in assessing the
when an apparent abnormality of no significance was
state of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. It is
found. An advantage of prescreening, however, is that
displaced in many abnormal conditions of the lungs (eg.
abnormalities occurring early in the course of a disease
pleural effusion, pneumothorax, lung collapse) and in the
without current clinical symptoms may be identified.
presence of enlargement ofthe left ventricle In theabsence
These values then become the baseline for comparison if
of any pulmonary disorder, a displaced apex beat indicates
abnormalities occur following anaesthesia and surgery.
cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation.
There may well be a place for routine screening older
12
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
animals. Although in a very occasional case (e.g. the detec.
body tissues. If all three variables are reduced the effect is,
tion of a partial hepato-portal shunt in a young dog)
of course, even more dramatic.
biochemical tests may detect an unsuspected disease state,
Aueay ny Auanedde sunon jo Aiou isea aun ui
Drug metabolism and disease states
animals, they constitute an unnecessary expense and,
indeed, the extra cost involved may prevent an owner from
shemuied ieiaas yanonun pazoqenau Alensn aie sand
agreeing to continuation of treatment necessary for the
so that they are changed from fat-soluble, active, unexcret-
well-being of the patient.
able drugs into water-soluble, inactive drugs that can be
Provided a brief examination such as that described
excreted by the kidneys and in the bile. Since the mam-
is carried out thoroughly. and that the examiner has
malian body metabolizes many thousands of compounds
suffcient skill and experience to recognize the significance
every day and has far fewer enzymes, each enzyme metab-
or lack of significance of the findings, most of the condi-
tions that have a bearing on the well-being of an animal
enzyme metabolize only one substrate. Many things
in the perioperative period will be brought to light so
change enzyme function. Mechanisms for enzyme induc-
that appropriate measures can be taken to protect it
tion are poorly understood, unlike inhibition, which has
from harm.
been much more extensively studied. Enzyme induction
is a slow process involving an increased amount of enzyme
in the cell over about 24 to 48 hours, whereas inhibition
is quick and sometimes occurs after only one dose of
 an inhibitor. Since enzymes are proteins their concentra-
SIGNIFICANCE OF CONDITIONS
tions inside cells may be changed by a variety of factors
FOUND BY PREANAESTHETIC
(Fig. 1.2).
EXAMINATION
There is now an increasing amount of information
about how enzymes change in response to one stressful
stimulus but it is important to recognize that usually
Cardiovascular and respiratory disease
several stimuli exist at the same time in each critically ill
The cardiovascular and respiratory systems arethose which
animal. Most chemical reactions are sensitive to tempera-
govern the rate at which oxygen can be made available to
 ture, speeding up as the temperature increases and slowing
the tissues of the body. Oxygen supply is equal to the
product of the cardiac output and the oxygen content of
the arterial blood. Since the arterial oxygen content
Lack of co-factors
approximates to the product of the oxygen saturation and
(e.g. oxygen)
the quantity of oxygen which can be carried by the hae-
moglobin (about 1.34 mL/g of haemoglobin when fully
saturated), the oxygen made available to the body can be
expressed by a simple equation:
Environmental
changes
Available oxygen (mL/min) = cardiac output (mL/min)
Inducers
(e.g. hypoxia,
X arterial saturation (%) × haemoglobin (g/mL) x 1.34
(e.g.phenobarbitone)
inflammation)
This equation makes no allowance for the small quan-
tity of oxygen which is carried in physical solution in the
plasma, but it serves to illustrate the way in which three
Enzyme
variables combine to produce an effect which is often
greater than is commonly supposed. If any one ofthe three
determining variables on the right-hand side of the equa-
tion is changed, the rate at which oxygen is made available
to the tissues of the body is altered proportionately. Thus.
Inhibitors
if the cardiac output is halved, the available oxygen is also
halved. If two determinants are lowered simultaneously
while the third remains constant the effect on the avail-
able oxygen is the product of the individual changes. For
Direct effect on
Substrate
example, if the cardiac output and the haemoglobin con-
the enzyme
competition
centration are both halved while the arterial oxygen satu-
(e.g propofol)
(e.g. midazolam)
ration remains at about the normal 95%, only one-quarter
of the normal amount of oxygen is made available to the
Figure 1.2 Factors which may change enzyme function.
13
Section
1
Principles and procedures
with a decrease in temperature but, in spite of this, all
needed. A rapid intravenous injection of an albumin-
fevers do not increase the rate of metabolism of drugs: the
bound drug may also lead to increased pharmacological
cause of the fever is important. Infections and pyrogens
activity because the binding capacity of the albumin in the
cause the release of inflammatory mediators which reduce
limited volume of blood with which the dnug initially
the expression and activity of many enzymes.
.Non-
mixes is exceeded and more free (active) drug is presented
traumatic stress has been shown to reduce enzyme func-
to the receptor sites. Plasma protein binding enhances
tion, possibly by decreased hepatic blood flow resulting in
alimentary absorption of dnugs by lowering the free
hypoxaemic-induced reduction in metabolizing enzymes.
Endogenous corticosteroid secretion as part of the stress 
tion gradient for diffusion from the gut lumen.
response or exogenous steroid given to treat disease will
 Not surprisingly,. for a protein with a molecular weight
change the expression of drug metabolizing enymes, and
of about 65 ooo, there are several genetically acquired vari-
metabolic activity also varies with age The anaesthetist
ants of albumin. Furthermore, the confguration of the
must be aware of these factors so that any increase or
albumin molecule also changes during illness and, for
decrease in the duration of dnug action may be
example, in renal failure. These changes can be demon-
anticipated.
strated by electrophoresis but their significance for the
binding of drugs in vivo is not known.
Factors affecting transport
of drugs in the body
Renal disease
'punoq Aed ueanspooiq aul u paues aie sanp ison
Chronic renal disease is common in dogs and cats, and
usually by electrostatic bonds, to the proteins of the
affected animals cannot produce concentrated urine.
plasma, albumin being far the most important for the
Dehydration from any cause deprives the kidneys of suf-
 majority of agents. Light or moderate protein binding has
ficient water for excretory purposes. To ensure that these
relatively little effect on drug pharmacokinetics or phar-
animals receive an adequate fluid intake over the anaes-
macodynamics. Heavy protein binding with drugs such as
thetic period, it is usually necessary to administer fluid by
thiopental results in a low free plasma concentration of
intravenous infusion. A uraemic circle can also be set up
the drug. which may become progressively augmented as
in animals suffering from chronic renal disease if the arte-
the available binding sites become saturated. The bound
rial blood pressure is allowed to decrease because of anaes-
dnug is, of course in dynamic equilibrium with free
thetic overdose or haemorrhage and renal ischaemia
(active) drug in the plasma water. The bonds are generally
ensues. The maintenance of the circulating fluid volume
reversible and conform to the law of mass action:
is most important in all animals with chronic renal disease
The association and dissociation processes take place
and it is important that adequate venous access is assured
very quickly, and can generally be taken to be instantane-
before anaesthesia and operation.
ous. The equilibrium association constant KA is defned as
Acute renal failure can be defined as an abrupt decline
the ratio of rate constants, and of bound to the product of
in renal function with a decrease in glomerular filtration
unbound concentrations.
rate (GFR) resulting in the retention of nitrogenous waste
This simple relationship is often obscured by the fact
 products. Acute renal failure is classified into:
that one protein molecule may possess several binding
1. Pre-renal failure, denoting a disorder in the systemic
sites for any particular drug, which may or may not have
circulation that causes renal hypoperfusion. Implicit
the same association constant. It can generally be assumed,
here is that correction of the underlying circulatory
however, that so long as the plasma proteins remain
disturbance (e.g. by improvement in cardiac function
unchanged, the ratio of 'free' to bound' drug will remain
Or repletion of volume) restores the GFR. However,
constant This ratio depends on the nature of the dnug
 pre-renal failure is often followed by transition to:
molecule. Small, neutral, water-soluble drugs will not
2. Intrinsic renal failure, where correction of the
 bind to protein at all but larger lipophilic molecules may
underlying circulatory impairment does not restore
exhibit very high binding ratios.
the GFR to normal levels. Intrinsic renal failure
Anaemia is often associated with hypoproteinaemia and
 generally includes tubular necrosis or the blocking of
this can have marked effects in anaesthesia. In conditions
tubules by cell debris or precipitated proteins and
where there is anaemia and hypoalbuminaemia, a greater
there is no question of unaffected nephrons
fraction of a given dose of a drug will be unbound and
 compensating for failing nephrons as there is in
this will be even greater if other bound drugs have already
chronic renal failure Instead, all are involved in a
occupied many of the binding sites. This can result in an
massive disturbance of renal function with diversion
increased peak activity ofthe drug. Liver disease giving rise
of blood flow away from the renal cortex towards the
to hypoalbuminaemia can result in reduced binding of
medulla and an overall reduction in renal perfusion.
dnugs such as morphine so that smaller than normal doses
There is, however, a potential for complete recovery
of this analgesic will be effective when pain relief is
whereas chronic renal failure invariably progresses
14
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
over a variable period of time with no hope of
not result in an appreciable reduction in the volume of
recovery of renal function.
the fluid content of the rumen but it seems to reduce the
3. Post-renal failure (obstructive) is a third possibility
rate of fermentation within this organ, thus delaying the
 and urethral obstruction is not uncommon in some
 development of tympany when eructation is prevented by
 species, becoming a cause for emergency anaesthesia
recumbency.
and surgery.
Excessive fasting exposes the patient to risks almost as
Excessive reliance on blood pressure maintenance to
great as those associated with lack of preparation and
between the 'autoregulatory range' by infusion or the use of
should not be adopted. Any fasting of birds and small
vasoactive drugs overlooks the fact that renal blood flow is
 mammals is actually life threatening. Many clinicians are
labile since the kidneys contribute to the regulation of
of the opinion that prolonged fasting in horses predis-
blood pressure The incidence of acute renal failure is high
 poses to postanaesthetic colic by encouraging gut stasis. In
after the use of intravenous contrast radiological media, or
horses, it is now usual practice to allow free access to water
of nephrotoxic drugs (eg. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
until right up to the time premedication is given.
drugs. gentamycin, amphotericin).
Fluid and electrolytes
The water and electrolyte balance of an animal is a most
PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT
important factor in determining uncomplicated recovery
Or otherwise after operation. The repair of existing deficits
Certain operations are performed as emergencies when it
of body fluid, or of one of its components, is complex
is imperative that there shall be no delay and little prepara-
because of the interrelations between the different electro-
tion of the patient is possible Among these operations are
lytes and the difficulties imposed by the effects of severe
repair of thoracic injuries, the control of severe, persistent
sodium depletion on the circulation and renal function.
haemorrhage, and certain obstetrical interferences where
 An anaesthetic should not be administered to an animal
the delivery of a live, healthy neonate is of paramount
which has a depleted circulating blood volume for the
importance For all other operations, time and care spent
vasodilatation caused by anaesthetic agents may lead to
in preoperative preparation are well worthwhile since
acute circulatory failure, and every effort should be made
proper preparation not only improves the patient's chances
to repair this deficit by the infusion of crystalloid or
of survival, but also prevents the complications which
 colloid solutions, blood, or plasma, as appropriate, before
might otherwise occur during and after operation. When
 anaesthesia is induced. In many instances, anaesthesia and
operations are to be performed on normal, healthy
 surgery may be safely postponed until the total fluid deficit
animals, only the minimum of preparation is required
is made good and an adequate renal output is achieved
before the administration of a general anaesthetic but
 but, in cases of intestinal obstruction, operation should be
operations on dehydrated, anaemic, hypovolaemic or
 carried out as soon as the blood volume has been restored.
toxic patients should only be undertaken after careful
Attempts to restore the complete extracellular deficit
preoperative assessment and preparation.
before the intestinal obstruction is relieved result in further
loss of fluid into the lumen of the obstructed bowel and,
Food and water
especially in horses, make subsequent operation more dif-
ficult. When in doubt about the nature and volume of
The time for which food should be withheld from the
fluid to be administered, it is as well to remermber that,
animal on the day it is to undergo an elective operation
with the exception of toxic conditions and where severe
under general anaesthesia is species dependent. A dis-
hypotension due to hypovolaemia is present, an animal's
  a ae  a a is an
 condition should not deteriorate further if sufficient fluid
the diaphragm and hinder breathing. In dogs, cats and
 is given to cover current losses. These current losses include
 pigs, a full stomach predisposes to vomiting under anaes-
the inevitable loss of water through the skin and respira-
thesia but, in dogs, it has now been shown that prolonged
tory tract (approximately 20-60mL/kg/day depending on
starvation increases the incidence of gastro-oesophageal
the age and species of the animal), the urinary and faecal
reflux (Savvas et al., 2009) so it might be time to recon-
loss, and any abnormal loss such as vomit.
sider the teaching of many years to starve for at least 12
hours. In horses, a full stomach may rupture when the
Haemoglobin level
horse falls to the ground as unconsciousness is induced;
except in cases of colic this is unlikely with current
 As already mentioned earlier [cardiovascular and respira.
methods of anaesthetic induction, but a full stomach will
 tory disease), anaemia reduces oxygen content and also
exert pressure on the diaphragm, in particular in dorsal
 makes injectable anaesthetic drugs more potent by reduc-
recumbency, resulting in hypoventilation and bloat in
 ing overall blood protein. Where surgery is not an emer-
some cases. In ruminants, a few hours of starvation will
 gency and there is a medical cause that can be treated, then
15
Section
1
Principles and procedures
this should be done For more inmmediate surgical needs,
3. Allergy. Allergic responses are, in general, not dose
in human anaesthesia, it used to be routine to transfuse
related and the allergy may be due to the drug itself
red blood cells, but the potential disadvantages (Shander
 Or to the vehicle in which it is presented. The
et al., 2012; Theusinger et al., 2012) now mean that where
reaction may take a number of forms: shock,
blood volume is adequate, low levels of haemoglobin are
asthma or bronchospasm, hepatic congestion from
tolerated unless extreme There is no equivalent evidence
hepatic vein constriction, blood disorders, rashes
relating to blood transfusions in animals but it is probable
 Or pyrexia. Terms such as 'allergic', 'anaphylactic',
that this is also a reasonable approach to veterinary
'anaphylactoid' or 'hypersensitive' have specific
anaesthesia.
meanings to immunologists but, unfortunately, they
are often used interchangeably. Strictly speaking, it is
inaccurate to use any of these terms until evidence of
the immunological basis of a reaction has been
INFLUENCE OF PRE-EXISTING
 established. Many of these reactions are histamine
DRUG THERAPY
related but other mediators such as prostaglandins,
leucotrienes or kinins may be involved. Some
immunologists consider that where either the
Modern therapeutic agents are often of considerable phar-
mediator or the mechanism involved is uncertain,
macological potency and animals presented for anaesthe.
reactions are best described as 'histaminoid' or
sia may have been exposed to one or more of these. Some
anaphylactoid' (Armitage-Chan, 2010).
 may have been given as part of the preoperative manage-
4.
 Drug interactions. Despite the importance of drug
ment of the animal but, whatever the reason for their
interactions, there is little information in the
administration, they may modify the animal's response to
veterinary literature on this subject Drug interaction
anaesthetic agents, to surgery and to drugs given before.
can occur outside the body, as when two drugs are
during and after operation. In some cases, dnug interac-
mixed in a syringe before they are administered, or
tions are predictable and these may form the basis of many
inside the body after administration by the same
of the combinations used in modern anaesthesia, but
or different routes. It is generally unwise to mix
effects which are unexpected may be dangerous.
 products or vehicles in the same syringe [although
le A[uo inoso pinom uooe snup e 'uoenis [eap! ue ul
frequently done). If drugs are to be administered
a desired site to produce the sought-after effect In practice,
into an IV infusion, it must be certain that some
dnugs are much less selective and are prone to produce
combination is compatible and, for example, does
'side effects' which have to be anticipated and taken into
not result in precipitation of one or both drugs
account whenever the drug is administered. (A 'side effect'
(Kanji et al., 2010). The result of the interaction
may be defined as a response not required clinically, but
between two drugs inside the body may be an
which occurs when a drug is used within its therapeutic
increased or decreased action of one or both or even
range.) Apart from these unavoidable side effects which
an effect completely different from the normal
are inherent, adverse reactions to dnugs may occur in many
 action of either drug. The result of interaction may
different ways which are of importance to the anaesthetist.
be simply the sum of the actions of the two drugs
These include:
(1 + 1 = 2), or greater (1 + 1 > 2),. when it is known
1. Overdosage. For some drugs, exact dosing may be
aqeinaidde ou sey juae auo uaum 'usiaiauns se
difficult Overdosage may be absolute as when an
effect but enhances the response to the other (0 + 1
amount greater than the intended dose is given in
> 1), the term 'potentiation' is used to describe the
error, or a drug is given by an inappropriate route.
effect of the first on the action of the second. An
eg a normal intramuscular dose may constitute a
agent may also antagonize the effects of another and
serious overdose if given intravenously. Relative
the antagonism may be 'chemical' if they form an
overdose may be due to an intrinsic difference in the
inactive complex, 'physiological' if they have directly
animal, for example, newborn animals are sensitive
opposing actions although at different sites, or
to non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs.
'competitive' if they compete for the same receptors.
The use in dogs and cats of flea collars containing
 Non-competitive antagonism may result from
Organophosphorus compounds may reduce the
modification by one drug of the transport,
plasma cholinesterase. Overdose manifestations may
biotransformation or excretion of the other. In the
also be due to side effects (e.g morphine producing
liver, the non-specific metabolic degradation of many
respiratory depression).
dnugs occurs and many different agents have the
2. Intolerance. This is exhibiting a qualitatively normal
ability to cause an 'enzyme induction' while a few
response but to an abnormally low or high dose. It
decrease the activity - 'enzyme inhibition: Analgesics
is usually simply explained by the Gaussian
such as phenylbutazone cause enzyme induction
 distribution of variation in the animal population.
jo aiei aul ul aseaiul ieaig e aonpoid ueo pue
16
An introduction to anaesthesia and general considerations
Chapter
1
metabolism of substrates. Barbiturate treatment of
pseudocholine-esterase. Aside from these more general-
epilepsy may almost halve the half-life of
ized species/breed differences, some individual animals
dexamethasone with a consequent marked
may respond to a drug in an unexpected manner that is
deterioration in the therapeutic effect of this 
 qualitatively different to that of normal individuals. Many
steroidal substance Competition for binding sites
such reactions are genetically determined.  Examples
and the displacement of one drug from the bound
 related to veterinary anaesthesia include malignant hyper-
(inactive) form may lead to increased toxicity.
ah un eaelray sasiu pue said ui enau
 horses and the response to surgery and anaesthesia of dogs
suffering from von Willebrands's disease.
Since the knowledge of the human genome, the genetics
PHARMACOGENETICS
of many such problems in humans has been clarifed,
enabling tests to be carried out prior to anaesthesia.
Throughout this chapter there has been reference made
Although knowledge of animal genomes is not as com-
to the existence of species differences, both anatomical
 plete, there are now genetic tests for the most common of 
and physiological. However, within a species, and even
these disorders in animals. For non-emergency surgery, in
within a breed, there are also differences. Many of these
 the future preanaesthetic testing in potentially susceptible
result in different metabolism of drugs: for example the
animals (from breed or family history) may allow the
cat's inability to conjugate many agents; rabbits' rapid
 anaesthetist to be prepared for the previously termed 'idi-
metabolism of atropine, differences between species in
osyncratic reaction'
REFERENCES
Absalom, A.R., De Keyser, R., Struys.
Cullen, D.J., Eger 2nd, E.l., Stevens,
Hemmerling, TM., Charabati, S..
M.M., 2011. Closed loop anesthesia:
W.C., et al., 1972. Clinical signs of
Zaouter, C., et al., 2010. A
are we getting close to finding the
 anesthesia. Anesthesiology 36.
randomized controlled trial
holy grail? Anesth Analg 112.
21-36.
demonstrates that a novel closed-
516-518.
Eger 2nd, E.1., 2001. Age, minimum
loop propofol system performs
American Society of Anesthesiologists,
alveolar anesthetic concentration,
better hypnosis control than manual
2010. http://www.asahq.org/Home/
and minimum alveolar anesthetic
administration. Can J Anaesth 57.
For-Members/Clinical-Information/
concentration-awake. Anesth Analg
725-735.
ASA-Physical-Status-Classification-
93, 947-953.
Johansson, J.s., Zou, H., 2001.
System. Accessed 18/10/2012.
Eger 2nd, E.l., Koblin, D.D., Harris.
Nonanesthetics [nonimmobilizers)
Antognini, J.F., Carstens, E., 2005.
RA., et al., 1997. Hypothesis:
and anesthetics display different
Measuring minimum alveolar
 inhaled anesthetics produce
microenvironment preferences.
concentration: more than meets the
immobility and amnesia by different
Anesthesiology 95, 558-561.
tail. Anesthesiology 103, 679-680.
mechanisms at different sites. Anesth
Johnson, C.B., Sylvester, S.P., Stafford,
Armitage-Chan, E., 2010. Anaphylaxis
Analg 84, 915-918.
K.., et al., 2009. Effects of age on
and anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg
Eger 2nd, E.l., Saidman, L.J..
 the electroencephalographic
37.306-310.
Brandstater, B., 1965. Minimum
response to castration in lambs
Beths, T., Glen, J.B., Reid, I., et al., 2001.
alveolar anesthetic concentration: a
anaesthetized with halothane in 
Evaluation and optimisation of a
standard of anesthetic potency.
Oxygen from birth to 6 weeks old.
target-controlled infusion system for
Anesthesiology 26, 756-763.
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 273-279.
administering propofol to dogs as
Eger 2nd, E.l., Xing, Y., Laster, M., et al.
Johnson, C.B., Wilson, PR., Woodbury.
 part of a total intravenous
2003. Halothane and isoflurane
M.R., et al., 2005. Comparison of
anaesthetic technique during dental
have additive minimum alveolar
analgesic techniques for antler
surgery. Vet Rec 148, 198-203.
concentration [MAC) effects in rats.
removal in halothane-anaesthetized
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Freeman,
Anesth Analg 96, 1350-1353.
red deer (Cervus elaphus]:
S.L., Jaggin-Schmucker, N., et al.
 Franks, N.P., 2006. Molecular targets
electroencephalographic responses.
2001. Infusion of a combination of
underlying general anaesthesia. Brit J
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 61-71
propofol and medetomidine for
Pharmacol 147 (Suppl 1), S72-S81.
Kanji, S., Lam, I., Johanson, C., et al..
long-term anesthesia in ponies. Am ↓ Franks, N.P., Lieb, W.R., 1984. Do
2010. Systematic review of physical
Vet Res 62, 500-507.
 general anaesthetics act by
and chemical compatibility of
Boscan, P., Rezende, M.L., Grimsrud, K.,
competitive binding to specific
commonly used medications
et al., 2010. Pharmacokinetic
receptors? Nature 310, 599-601.
administered by continuous infusion
 profle in relation to anaesthesia
Haynes, S.R., Lawler, PG., 1995. An
in intensive care units. Crit Care Med
characteristics after a 5% micellar
assessment of the consistency of
38, 1890-1898.
microemulsion of propofol in the
ASA physical status classification
Liu, N., Chazot, T., Hamada, S., et al..
horse. Br ↓Anaesth 104, 330-337.
allocation. Anaesthesia 50, 195-199.
2011. Closed-loop coadministration
17
Section
1
Principles and procedures
of propofol and remifentanil guided
premedication with xylazine in
Savvas, Il., Rallis, T., Raptopoulos, D..
by bispectral index: a randomized
horses. J Vet Med Sci 67, 569-575.
2009. The effect of pre-anaesthetic
multicenter study. Anesth Analg 112.
Otto, K., Short, C.E., 1991.
fasting time and type of food on
546-557.
Electroencephalographic power
gastric content volume and acidity in
Mapleson, W.W., 1996. Effect of age on
spectrum analysis as a monitor of
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 539-546.
MAC in humans: a meta-analysis.
anesthetic depth in horses. Vet Surg
Sears, D.A., 1970. Disposal of plasma
Br J Anaesth 76, 179-185.
20, 362-371.
heme in normal man and patients
McMillan, M., Brearley, I., 2013.
Quasha, A.L., Eger 2nd, E.l., Tinker.
with intravascular hemolysis. J Clin
 Assessment of the variation
J.H., 1980. Determination and
Invest 49, 5-14.
 in American Society of
applications of MAC. Anesthesiology
 Shander, A., Van Aken, H., Colomina,
 Anaesthesiologist's Physical Status
53. 315-334.
M.J., et al., 2012. Patient blood
Classifcation assignment in small
Perouansky, M., Pearce, R.A..
management in Europe. Br I Anaesth
animal anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth
Hemmings, H.C., 2012. Inhaled
109.55-68
Analges, 40, 229-236.
Anesthetics: Mechanisms of action.
Sherrington, C.s., 1906. The Integrative
Merkel, G., Eger 2nd, E.1., 1963. A
In: Millar, R.D., Erikson, L.I.,.
Action of the Nervous System. Yale
 comparative study of halothane and
Fleisher, L.A., et al. (Eds.), Miller's
University Press, New Haven, ch 1,
 halopropane anesthesia including
Anaesthesia, seventh ed. Churchill
pp. 1-200.
method for determining
Livngstone- Elsevier, ch 20.
Snow, l., 1847. On the inhalation of the
equipotency. Anesthesiology 24,
Rees, G.J., Gray, T.C., 1950. Methyl-n-
vapour of ether in surgical
346-357
propyl ether. Br J Anaesth 22, 83-91.
operations. John Churchill, London.
Messner, M., Beese, Ul., Romstock, J..
Rezende, M.L., Boscan, P., Stanley, S.D.,
Sonner, J.M., Antognini, J.F., Dutton,
et al., 2003. The bispectral index
et al., 2010. Evaluation of
R.C., et al., 2003. Inhaled anesthetics
declines during neuromuscular block
ardiovascular, respiratory and
and immobility: mechanisms,
 in fully awake persons. Anesth Analg
biochemical effects, and anesthetic
mysteries, and minimum alveolar
97, 488-491.
induction and recovery behavior in
anesthetic concentration. Anesth
Murrell, J.C., Johnson, C.B., White, K.L.,
horses anesthetized with a 5%
Analg 97, 718-740.
et al., 2003. Changes in the EEG
micellar microemulsion propofol
Theusinger, O.M., Felix, C., Spahn, D.R.,
during castration in horses and
formulation. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
2012. Strategies to reduce the use
ponies anaesthetized with
440-450.
of blood products: a European
halothane. Vet Anaesth Analg
Ribeiro, L.M., Ferreira, D.A., Bras, S.
perspective. Curr Opin Anesthesiol
30.138-146
et al., 2009. Correlation between
25.59-65.
Musk, G.C., Pang, D.S., Beths, T., et al.
clinical signs of depth of anaesthesia
Urban, B.W., Bleckwenn, M., 2002.
2006. Target-controlled infusion of
and cerebral state index responses in
Concepts and correlations relevant
propofol in dogs - evaluation of
dogs during induction of anaesthesia
to general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth
four targets for induction of
with propofol. Res Vet Sci 87.
89. 3-16.
anaesthesia. Vet Rec 157, 766-770.
287-291
Wolters, Ul., Wolf, T., Stutzer, H., et al.
Oku, K., Ohta, M., Yamanaka, T., et al.,
Rudolph, U., Antikowiak, B., 2004.
1996. ASA classification and
2005. The minimum infusion rate
Molecular and neuronal substrates
perioperative variables as predictors
[MIR) of propofol for total
for general anaesthetics. Nat Rey
of postoperative outcome. Br ↓
intravenous anesthesia after
Neurosci 5, 709-720.
Anaesth 77, 217-222.
18
aptel
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Introduction
19
 Monitoring body temperature
56
 General considerations relating
Hypothermia
56
to monitoring
20
Hyperthermia
57
Clinical assessment of the patient
21
Malignant hyperthermia
57
Monitoring the central nervous system
21
Monitoring urine volume
58
Eye position and reflexes
23
Monitoring blood glucose
58
 Anaesthetic gas analysers
24
Monitoring neuromuscular blockade
58
EEG and Bispectral index
25
Monitoring the circulation
26
Pulse rate and rhythm
26
Heart rate monitors
27
INTRODUCTION
 Tissue perfusion 
29
Arterial blood pressure
30
From the earliest days of anaesthesia, the anaesthetist has
Central venous pressure
38
monitored the patient's pulse rate, pattern of breathing
Left atrial pressure (pulmonary artery
and general condition. Advances in electronic technology
wedge pressure)
39
have made reasonably reliable easily attached, non-
Cardiac output
39
invasive monitoring devices available for clinical practice.
Observations and measurements of certain parameters
Blood loss
42
before, during, and after anaesthesia provide important
Monitoring the respiratory system
42
data to support the clinical assessment of the animal's
Rate monitors and apnoea alarms
42
condition and improve the chances of survival of the very
 ill by indicating what treatment is needed, as well as the
Tidal and minute volume monitors
43
Blood gas analysis
43
response to treatment already given.
 It is necessary to know what to measure as well as how
 Pulse oximetry 
47
aul uo aaiae Ke sisiaqsaeue ie iou pue l ainsea 0
Capnography
49
priority ranking of the monitoring devices available.
 Transcutaneous COz analysis
53
However, for major surgery, for anaesthesia and surgery of
Acid-base analysis
53
poor-risk patients, and for equine anaesthesia, it would be
difficult to defend the failure to use monitoring equip-
Blood gas and acid base values
53
 ment, especially if it were available. Recommendations for
Interpretation of acid base abnormalities
55
monitoring of anaesthetized patients are available on the
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
19
Section
1
Principles and procedures
web sites for the Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists,
hypoxaemia. In any animal, evaluation of the degree of
American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia,
sedation produced by premedicant dnugs may indicate
and the American Animal Hospital Association.
that the anaesthetic plan should be reassessed and either
dnug doses reduced or additional agents included.
Careful observation of the patient during induction of
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
anaesthesia may allow precise titration of drugs to achieve
the desired depth of anaesthesia and ensure early recogni-
RELATING TO MONITORING
tion of a complication that requires immediate specific
treatment, such as cyanosis, anaphylaxis, or cardiac arrest.
Complications, including death, may occur in healthy
Where possible, patients at risk for complications may be
patients at all stages of anaesthesia and monitors provide
attached to specifc monitoring equipment before induc-
early warning of life-threatening developments. Anaes-
tion of anaesthesia. Appropriate equipment for this would
 thetic mishaps may be caused by mechanical malfunction,
be the electrocardiograph (ECG), a device for measure-
disconnection of equipment, or human error. Judgemen-
 ment of blood pressure, or a pulse oximeter.
tal error frequently occurs when the anaesthetist is in a
Recording drugs, dosages and responses for each patient
hurry and circumvents basic practices and procedures, or
is essential and provides valuable information for any
when a decision must be made in an emergency. The
 subsequent time that anaesthesia may be needed. Noting
 prevalence of complications may also be associated with
 all measurements on an anaesthetic record provides a pic-
inadequate training or experience of the anaesthetist.
paid ot pasn aq ue ieul saueu jo uodosap ie
Knowledge and experience are a function of the nature
complications and plan treatment ( Fig. 2.1). Retrospective
of the training received and the years of practice, but
evaluation of diffcult cases and of series of records,
proper vigilance at all times can only be generated by
perhaps of patients with similar surgical procedures, or to
self-motivation.
compare different anaesthetic protocols, can be used to
Routines should be developed to ensure that each aspect
monitor the anaesthetist's performance and identify dif-
of apparatus function is checked before use. Failure to
ficult situations that require further thought and improved
follow a simple checklist in every case features high on the
 management. For research purposes, data can be acquired
list of causes of anaesthetic disasters. All anaesthetic equip-
into a computer for accurate data summaries.
ment, including monitoring devices, should be main-
Monitoring animals during anaesthesia must include
tained in good functioning order. It should be a matter of
observation of behaviour and reflexes and measurement
course to maintain monitors with a battery back up fully
of various physiological parameters at regular intervals to
charged in case of need in an area without a convenient
accomplish two objectives. The first objective is to ensure
electricity outlet nearby, failure of electricity supply, or the
that the animal survives anaesthesia and surgery. The
need to disconnect from the main supply to minimize
second objective is to obtain information that can be used
electrical interference with other monitoring equipment.
to adjust anaesthetic administration and management to
Proficiency with methods of electronic 5
surveillance
 minimize physiological abnormalities, which is especially
must be acquired during minor procedures so that they
important for animals that have already compromised
 can be applied properly in circumstances where their use
 Organ systems. The goal is to prevent development of pre-
is mandatory (eg. during major surgery or a cardiovascular
ventable adverse consequences 1 hour, 12 hours, or even
crisis). Routine use ensures that probes,
sensors, elec-
3 days after anaesthesia.
trodes, etc can be applied quickly to the animal and
 Monitoring should continue into the recovery period to
increases the likelihood that the information obtained is
determine the need for additional analgesic drugs. ade-
reliable.
quacy of ventilation, and to record serious deviations in
Although current practice is to establish monitoring
body temperature. Mucous membrane colour should be
only after the animal has been anaesthetized, it must
checked for at least 20 minutes after the animal has been
be recognized that many complications occur during
disconnected from oxygen as it may take that long for
induction of anaesthesia. Ideally, especially for poor-risk
hypoxaemia to develop in animals that are moderately
patients, monitoring should begin when the drugs for
hypoventilating and breathing air.
premedication are administered. Dogs and cats may vomit 
A variety of methods using inexpensive or expensive
after administration of an opioid and the quantity and
equipment can be used to monitor parameters determined
content of the vomit may warn that the animal was fed
by the species of animal to be anaesthetized and by the
recently and so may be at risk for regurgitation and pul-
abnormalities already present in the patient. Not all moni-
monary aspiration of gastric material. Brachycephalic
toring techniques need to be applied to every patient. A
breeds and animals with respiratory problems should
recommendation for three levels of monitoring is pre-
always be observed after administration of preanaesthetic
sented in Table 2. 1; level 1 monitoring information should
dnugs because sedation may cause partial or complete
be obtained from all anaesthetized animals, level 2 moni-
airway obstruction or serious respiratory depression and
tors are affordable and recommended for routine use in
20
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
Abbreviations
AG
2
3
4
AE
TIME
15
30
45
0
15
30
45
15
30
flow L/min
2
一一
End tidal CO2
37
32
38
38
38
Vaporizer %
2
1.75
2
1.5
HR
180
180
Arterial pressure:
VSystolic
160
160
ADiastolic
140
140
XMean
120
120
Ventilation:
Spontaneous
001
100
S
O
80
80
水*
Controlled
60
60
C
A|Anes.induction
40
40
S
AG Begin inhalant
20
20
AE End anes.
Ss Surgery start
10
10
SE Surgery end
E Extubation
0
Temperature
103.1
101.6
101.6
6'66
98.8
98.6
98.1
97.5
97.2
96.6
96.1
96.5
(ml) LRS
175
350
550
850
1050
1430
2050
2200
2530
2650
2725
Other
DETAILED COMMENTS:
1. Oxymorphone 4.5mg siowiy IV
2. Move to O.R 1200mg Cefotetan IV
3. Change from indirect to direct arteriai BP monitoring
4. Morphine 30mg IM
Figure 2.1 Anaesthetic record of a 61 kg. 6-year-old female Great Dane anaesthetized for exploratory laparotomy because of
and maintained with isoflurane. Heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory rate were recorded at regular intervals to facilitate
earlyrecognition of adverse trends
 some groups of patients, and level 3 monitors individually
QINICAL ASSESSMENT
offer improved monitoring for patients with specific
OF THE PATIENT
problems.
This chapter will describe the techniques of monitor-
ing using a systems approach, and offer guidelines for
Monitoring the central
interpretation of the information obtained. Further
nervous system
recommendations are given in the chapters devoted to
 species anaesthesia and the chapter on management of
Monitoring the depth of anaesthesia is not easy(see
complications.
Chapter l). An early attempt at definition through
21
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Table 2.1 Prioritization of monitoring
Monitor
Information obtained
Specific use
Level 1 (Basic monitoring)
Palpebral and pedal reflexes, eye position
 Depth of anaesthesia
 All anaesthetized animals
 Respiratory rate and depth of chest or bag 
Adequacy of ventilation
All anaesthetized animals
excursion
Oral mucous membrane colour
Oxygenation
All anaesthetized animals
Heart rate, rhythm, pulse strength, capillary
Assessment of circulation
All anaesthetized animals
refill time 
Temperature
Temperature
 Dogs and cats anaesthesia greater than
 30 min; all inhalation anaesthesia
Level 2 (Routine use recommended for some patients)
Arterial blood pressure measurement
Blood pressure; pulse pressure variation
All inhalation anaesthesia; cardiovascular
(indirect or direct methods)
disease or depression
Blood glucose
Blood glucose
Paediatric patients; diabetics; septicaemia;
insulinoma
Electrocardiography
 Cardiac rate and rhythm; diagnosis of
All inhalation anaesthesia; thoracic
 arrhythmia or cardiac arrest
 trauma or cardiac disease
 Pulse oximetry
Haemoglobin oxygen saturation; pulse rate
Animals breathing air during anaesthesia;
recovery from anaesthesia; thoracic
 trauma or pulmonary disease;
septicaemia/endotoxaemia
Capnography
 End-tidal carbon dioxide concentra tion; estimate 
 All inhalation anaesthesia; patients at risk 
of adequacy of ventilation; warning of circuit 
for complications
 disconnect/malfunction or cardiac arrest
Urine cutput, either by expression of urinary
 Urine volume produced during anaesthesia
 Dogs and cats; renal disease; some
 bladder or by urethral catheterization
 urinary tract surgery; multiorgan failure
Level 3 (Use for specific patients or problems)
Anaesthetic gas analyser
Inspired and end-tidal anaesthetic agent
Any patient on inhalation anaesthesia
concentration; evaluation of depth of
inhalation anaesthesia
Blood gases and pH
PaCOz, PaOz, pH, HCOs, base excess/deficit
Suspected hypcventilation or hypoxaemia;
 measurement of metabolic status
Cardiac cutput measurement 
Cardiac cutput
Sick animals with decreased perfusion;
 complicated surgeries
Central venous pressure
Indicator of central blood volume
Dehydrated/hypovolaemic patients
Packed cell volume and total protein
Haemodilution and protein concentration
Haemorrhage; large volume infusion of
 crystalloid solution
Peripheral nerve stimula tor
 Neuromuscular transmission
Use of neuromuscular blocking agents 
observation of changes in reflexes, muscle tone, and respi-
excitement might be observed), Stage II (when the animal
ration with administration of increased concentration of
appeared to be unconscious but exhibited involuntary
ether resulted in classification of anaesthesia into four
muscle movement, such as limb paddling, and vocaliza-
stages (Fig. 2.2). The animal was said to make the transi-
tion), Stage II (surgical anaesthesia), and Stage IV (anaes-
tion from consciousness to deep anaesthesia by passing
thetic overdose immediately prior to death). Stage Ill was
sequentially through Stage I (in which voluntary
further divided into Plane l [light anaesthesia sufficient
22
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
VENTILATION
Intercostal
Diaphragm 
Pattern
 Pupil
Eyeball
Eye
Lacrimation
Response to
position
reflexes
surgical stim.
Irregular
Awake
panting
Irregular
Stage Il
breath-
Palpebral
holding
Stage IllI
LIGHT
Regular
 Plane I
MEDIUM
Regular
Plane 2
shallow
DEEP
Jerky
Plane 3
Corneal
Stage IV
Figure 2.2 Changes in ventilation and eye signs follow recognized patterns with different stages of inhalation anaesthesia
The progression of these changes will be influenced by inclusion of injectable anaesthetic agents.
Adapteo from 5oma, 1971.
only for non-painful procedures), Plane 2 (medium depth
 anaesthesia employed for most surgical procedures), Plane
3 [deep anaesthesia), and Plane 4 (excessively deep anaes-
thesia). Although the progression of changes described in
Fig. 2.2 are generally accurate representations ofthe transi -
tion from light to deep anaesthesia, the rate of changes are
altered by concurrent administration of injectable drugs.
Thus, in clinical practice, depth of anaesthesia is judged
by a number of methods, including altered somatic and
 autonomic reflexes in response to nociceptive stimulation
and by knowledge of the amount of anaesthetic and anal-
gesic agents administered.
Eye position and reflexes
Eye movements are similar with thiopental, propofol, eto-
midate, alfaxalone, and inhalant anaesthetics in that the
eyeball rotates rostroventrally during light and moderate
depths of surgical anaesthesia, returning to a central posi-
tion during deep anaesthesia (Fig. 2.3). Muscle tone is
Figure 2.3 The rostroventral rotation of the eye in this dog
retained during ketamine anaesthesia and the eye remains
is consistent with light and medium planes of isoflurane or
centrally placed in the orbit in dogs and cats (Fig. 2.4).
sevoflurane anaesthesia.
23
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Table 2.2 Approximate MAc* values for isoflurane
and sevoflurane in several species
Anaesthetic agent
Dogs
Cats
Horses
Isoflurane
1.4
1.6
1.3
Sevoflurane
2.4
2.6
2.3
*MAC: minimum alveolar concentration of anaesthetic agent 
required to prevent purposeful movement in 50% of animals in
response to a standard painful stimulus; see species chapters for
ranges of values.
rates, heart rates, and blood pressure are not reliable
Figure 2.4 The central position of the eye, with a brisk
 guides to depth of anaesthesia. It is not uncommon for an
palpebral reflex and pupillary dilation, is observed typically
during ketamine anaesthesia in cats.
unstimulated dog or horse anaesthetized with an inhala-
tion agent to have a low arterial blood pressure and yet in
Uys e ol asuodsai ui saal si suiaou ueis anuu jxau au
incision, all accompanied by a dramatic increase in blood
and only slightly rotated in horses and ruminants. Fine
 pressure Nevertheless, significant increases in heart rate
nystagmus may be present in horses anaesthetized with
and/or arterial blood pressure in response to surgical stim-
ketamine (see Chapter ll). The palpebral reflex, which is
ulation are an indication of inadequate analgesia. In
partial or complete closure of the eyelids (a blink) elicited
certain circumstances, surgical pain can induce a vaso-
a i aa an g s  a ie d a e q
vagal response resulting in bradycardia, decreased periph-
stroking of the eyelashes, is frequently a useful guide to
eral perfusion and pale mucous membranes. An example
depth of anaesthesia. At a plane of anaesthesia satisfactory
is traction on the ovarian ligament during ovariohysterec-
for surgery, the palpebral reflex is present but weak and
tomy in a bitch. Preanaesthetic administration of an anti-
nystagmus is absent. A brisk palpebral reflex develops
cholinergic may prevent bradycardia but may also obscure
when anaesthesia lightens. Ketamine anaesthesia is associ -
heart rate responses to painful stimuli.
ated with a brisk palpebral reflex.
A corneal reflex is a similar lid response elicited by
gentle pressure on the cornea. The presence of a corneal
Anaesthetic gas analysers
reflex is no indicator of depth of anaesthesia and may
 The anaesthetic gas analyser measures the concentration
still be present for a short time after cardiac arrest has
of inhalation anaesthetic agent in inspired and expired
occurred.
gases (Fig. 2.5). The gases are sampled at the junction of
The pedal reflex is frequently tested in dogs, cats and
the endotracheal tube and breathing circuit by continuous
small laboratory animals to determine if depth of anaes-
aspiration of gases at a rate of 150 mL/min to a monitor
thesia is adequate for the start of surgery. Pinching the web
placed at some distance from the patient To assess the
between the toes or frm pressure applied to a nail bed will
depth of anaesthesia, the end-tidal concentration of inha-
 be followed by withdrawal of the limb if analgesia is inad-
lation agent is measured (alveolar concentration is meas-
equate Other species-specific reflexes that have been
ured at the end of exhalation) and compared with the
found useful include the whisker reflex in cats, where
Minimum Alveolar Concentration [MAC) value for that
 pinching of the pinna elicits a twitch of the whiskers, and
 inhalant anaesthetic and species (Table 2.2). Using MAC
tickling the inside of a pig's ear, where a shake of the
for monitoring depth of anaesthesia is not precise as MAC
 head indicates inadequate anaesthesia for surgery. It must
os ui asuodsai paiaid augo uoexaidde ue Auo s
be remembered that administration of neuromuscular
 of a population and MAC is decreased in very young and
blocking agents blocks somatic reflexes and respiratory
in old patients. Higher than MAC values will be required
responses, and that the eye position will be central.
to prevent movement in all patients, and to block auto-
Increasing the depth of anaesthesia by increasing
 nomic responses and increases in cortical electrical activity
administration of an anaesthetic agent in most cases pro-
in response to a painful stimulus (March & Muir, 2003a),
duces increased respiratory and cardiovascular depression
usually 1.2-1.5 times MAC, when anaesthesia is main-
However, more than one anaesthetic or preanaesthetic
  s t  q aa ie 
agent is generally administered and the cardiopulmonary
value may be sufficient when the patient is receiving con-
effects are determined by the combination of agents used
tinuous or intermittent administration of an adjunct
and their dose rates. Thus measurements of respiratory
agent(s) such as an opioid, lidocaine, ketamine propofol.
24
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
CAPNOMAC
ULTIMA
ALSRNS
SETUP
AUTO
MONITOR
C02
2
SELECT
SETUP
AGENT
SCREEN
296
LMM
9.12
3
TRENOS
ERASE
CAL
02
mmHg
40
4
EWERT
HELP?
RESET
CO2
CO2（mHg）O2N20
ISO
RR55
ALARM
31
h6
1.1
ET
.8
OP PROBE
IORMA
1.5
3
95
0
SUSPEND
2h:80
POWER
Figure 2.5 This gas analyser (Capnomac UltimaTM, Datex-Engstrom Inc., Tewkshury. Maryland, USA) is monitoring a 27 kg
female English Bulldog that was premedicated with glycopyrolate and butorphanol and anaesthesia induced with propofol
She has been breathing oxygen and isoflurane at a vaporizer setting of 2.5% for 5 minutes. The monitor indicates that the
inspired (Fi) isoflurane concentration is less than the vaporizer setting and that the end-tidal (ET) isoflurane concentration is
less than MAC value.
EEG and Bispectral index
Or medetomidine/dexmedetomidine. For these animals.
 the anaesthetic administration must be adjusted according
The subject of encephalogram (EEG) guidance to depth of
to observation of reflexes and lack of sigmificant cardiovas-
anaesthesia has been discussed in Chapter l and Murrell 
cular response to surgical stimulus.
and Johnson (2006) have published a review of the tech-
It should be noted that the gas analyser also accurately
 niques using bispectral index and somatosensory evoked
 measures inspired anaesthetic concentration, which may
 potentials for assessment of pain in animals.
be substantially lower than the vaporizer setting
in
Intraoperative awareness occurs when a patient becomes
rebreathing systems during anaesthesia in large dogs.
conscious during general anaesthesia. Significant psycho-
horses and ruminants (see Fig. 2.5). A situation may arise
logical effects have been identifed in humans after epi-
where administration of an anaesthetic agent may be inad-
sodes of awareness that later are associated with changed
uas ae aenaee rae ue asap aea
 behaviour (Apfelbaum et al., 2006). The American Society
In a retrospective study of equine anaesthesia, it was found
of Anesthesiologists [ASA) task force identified certain
that horses were four times more likely to move during
procedures and anaesthetic techniques during anaesthesia
anaesthesia when an anaesthetic agent analyser was not
of human patients that may be associated with intraopera-
used (Parviainen & Trim, 2000).
tive awareness and these included caesarian section,
Some monitors using the principles of infrared absorp-
cardiac surgery, trauma surgery, rapid-sequence induction.
tion spectrometry cannot be used for horses or ruminants
total intravenous anaesthesia, and use of reduced anaes-
as they will measure exhaled methane and record the con-
 thetic drug dosages with or without neuromuscular paraly-
centration as halothane, for example the Datex Capnomac/
sis.
Awareness has been reported in the absence of
Normac (Taylor, 1990). There may be minimal effect with
tachycardia or hypertension. Nonetheless, clinical tech-
isoflurane but negligible with sevoflurane and desflurane.
niques such as observation for lack of movement the
   s    s
palpebral reflex, and other monitors are useful to assess
should be unaffected by methane (Moens et al., 199l).
anaesthetic unconsciousness.
25
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Monitoring of brain electrical activity has clinical appli-
in anaesthetized cats in response to a noxious stimulus
cation and a number of monitors have been developed.
[March & Muir, 2003a). The relationship between BIS
Various signal processing algorithms can be applied to the
and clinically evaluated anaesthetic depth in dogs was
frequency, amplitude, and latency of the EEG to generate
found to be unsatisfactory (Bleijenberg et al., 201l).
a number. This number, or 'index', is scaled 0 to 100 with
Although BIS decreased significantly between sedation
a value of 100 associated with wakefulness and 0 referring
and  anaesthesia,
BIS values overlapped significantly
to an isoelectric EEG. One monitor, the Bispectral Index
between light and deep anaesthesia. Similarly, in horses
(BIS) has become the one most used. BIS is a proprietary
anaesthetized with isoflurane, BIS monitoring was not
algorithm based on a large number of EEG recordings
found to be a useful predictor of depth of anaesthesia
taken during human anaesthesia that converts a single
Or warning of patient movement (Haga & Dolvik, 2002).
channel frontal EG to an index 0 to 100, of which a range
In another investigation in horses anaesthetized with
of 40 to 60 is reported to be associated with anaesthesia
sevoflurane and undergoing a variety of surgical proce-
without awareness or decreased incidence of awareness
dures, the mean BIS value was >60 and changes in BIS
when compared with anaesthesia monitored by other
values were not detected in all horses that moved during
means. It has also been proposed that targeting a specific
anaesthesia (Belda et al., 20l0). Further investigations are
BIS index range may avoid excessive depth of anaesthesia
needed to define the recommendations for BIS monitor-
j auei iaiu e ie Aaoai raiua siuaed aun iel qn
ing in veterinary medicine.
anaesthesia with less respiratory depression and experi-
Another monitor used in human anaesthesia is the
ence shorter recovery times. Concerns are that the numeric
cerebral state index (CSI) monitor. The CSI is not depend-
value may be influenced by other factors such as bolus
ent on algorithms derived from human patients (see
administration of anaesthetic drugs, electrocautery, or cer-
Chapter l) and, consequently, was hoped to be more reli-
ebral hypoxia, and may not accurately reflect the depth of
able in domestic species. However, Ribeiro et al. (2009)
investigating induction of anaesthesia with propofol in
thetic administration. Further, that use of a brain function
dogs concluded that CSI monitoring was not consistent 
monitor may result in excessively deep anaesthesia to the
with the clinical observations observed in different stages
detriment of organ blood flow and function. Several pro-
of depth of anaesthesia.
spective multicentre controlled trials involving human
patients have evaluated the role of BIS monitoring in
determining depth of anaesthesia and reliability for pre-
vention of awareness during intravenous or inhalant
Monitoring the circulation
general anaesthesia (Bruhn et al., 2005; Avidan et al.,
 The heart rate pulse rate and rhythm, tissue perfusion, and
2008; Ellerkmann et al., 20l0; Kertai et al., 201l). The
blood pressure of all anaesthetized animals should be
results thus far have not supported a unifed view, however.
assessed at frequent regular intervals (Table 2.3).
it appears that BIs monitoring may have an impact on
incidence of awareness but not influence the amount of
 anaesthetic agents administered or influence postoperative
 Pulse rate and rhythm
mortality
The use of BIS monitoring is being investigated in
 The peripheral pulse rate and rhythm may be counted by
animals. Electrodes manufactured for human patients
 palpation of a peripheral arterial pulse, such as the femoral
may require modifcation and reconfguration to adjust
artery in dogs and cats, lingual artery in dogs (Fig. 2.6).
to the differences in shape and nature of animals'
facial, median or metatarsal arteries in horses (Fig. 2.7).
heads. Decreasing BIS values have been recorded with
and femoral, median, or auricular arteries in ruminants
increasing concentrations of isoflurane and sevoflurane
and pigs. The pulse rate and rhythm can also be deter-
in dogs and cats (March & Muir, 2003b; Lamont et al.
mined from the audible sound of blood flow from a
2004; Campagnol et al., 2007). Burst suppression of the
Doppler ultrasound probe (see later) and as a digital
EEG, characterized by periods of low amplitude waves
number and waveform generated by a pulse oximeter. The
interspersed with bursts of high amplitude waves, occurs
 physiological relationship between the heart sounds, ECG
during deep anaesthesia (2.0 MAC) resulting in paradoxi -
and arterial pulse is depicted in Figure 2.8. Pulse deficits
cal increases in BIS values (Lamont et al., 2004; Hena0-
 are identifed by palpation of a peripheral pulse that has
Guerrero et al., 2009). Concern has been expressed that
an irregular rhythm, pauses, or a pulse rate that is less than
the BIS range for animals may not be the same as the
the heart rate determined by auscultation of the heart
accepted range for anaesthesia in humans. A study in
using a stethoscope. Pulse deficits may be associated with
experimental cats found that pedal and palpebral reflexes
any of several cardiac dysrhythmias, such as sinoatrial
were lost at BIS values 66 to 67. however, these values
heart block, atrioventricular heart block, premature ven-
may not be associated with a surgical depth of anaesthesia
tricular depolarizations, or atrial fbrillation, and will
(March & Muir, 2003b). BIS values increased significantly
require an ECG for diagnosis.
26
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
Table 2.3 Methods of assessing cardiovascular
function in anaesthetized clinical patients
Heart rate and rhythm
Transverse
 Palpation of arterial pulse
facial artery
 Oesophageal stethoscope
Electrocardiogram
 Blood pressure monitor
 Pulse oximeter
Tissue perfusion
 Mucous membrane colour
 Capillary refill time
Blood pressure
 Bleeding at operative site
 Observation of intestine colour
Urine cutput
Arterial bood pressure
 Palpation of arterial pulse
Facial artery
 Doppler ultrasound method
 Oscillometric method
 Arterial catheterization
Lateral
nasal artery
Blood volume
Figure 2.7 Sites for palpation of arterial pulse or catheter
 Pulse pressure variation
placement for blood pressure measurement in horses.
Central venous pressure
Assess blood loss
Aortic
i
Aortic
valve
valve
opens
closes
A)
Aortic
Aortic
valve
valve
closes
opens
R
B
st
'Systole
Diastole
:Systole
Figure 2.8 Relationship between aortic pulse (A), ECG (B),
and heart sounds as auscultated with a stethoscope (C).
Moolifieo from Guyton, 1986.
Heart rate monitors
Heart rates measured before anaesthesia are greatly influ-
 enced by the environment. Means (standard deviations,
range) of heart rates obtained by palpation from healthy
ats at home were ll8 mean (SD 1l, range 80-160) beats
Figure 2.6 The lingual artery is easily palpated in dogs
per minute compared with mean 182 (SD 20, range 142-
midline on the ventral surface of the tongue, adjacent to the
222) when obtained by electrocardiography in the veteri-
nerve and between the lingual veins. The arrow in the
nary hospital (Sawyer et al., 1991).
photograph points to a line drawn adjacent to the lingual
 The lowest acceptable heart rates during anaesthesia are
artery.
controversial, but reasonable guidelines are 55 beats/min
27
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Figure 2.9 The oesophageal stethoscope. It may be used with a single earpiece or with a conventional stethoscope
for large dogs, 65 beats/min for adult cats, 26 beats/min
Electrocardiography
for horses, and 50 beats/min for cattle. Heart rates should
Heart rate and rhythm can be obtained from an ECG using
be higher in small breed dogs and much higher in imma-
standard limb leads in small animals, clip electrodes and
ture animals. Heart rates may be less than these values
ECG paste or gel, and selecting ECG Lead II on the oscil-
when medetomidine/dexmedetomidine has been admin-
loscope (Fig. 2.10A). Poor contact of the electrodes to the
istered. It should be remembered that heart rate is a major
skin from hair bunched in the clips, or close proximity to
determinant of cardiac output, consequently, bradycardia
should be treated if blood pressure and peripheral per-
 another electrical apparatus, such as the hot water circulat-
ing pad, can result in electrical interference that obscures
fusion are also decreased.
the ECG. The leads should not be placed over the thorax
as breathing will move the electrodes and result in a wan-
Oesophageal stethoscope
dering ECG baseline (Fig. 2.10B).
The oesophageal stethoscope (Fig. 2.9)is a simple method
A frequently used monitor lead in equine anaesthesia is
of monitoring heart rate in dogs and cats. This monitor
the 'base-apex' lead. The right arm electrode is clipped on
consists of a tube with a balloon on the end which is
 the neck in the right jugular furrow and the left arm elec-
passed dorsal to the endotracheal tube and into the
trode is passed between the forelimbs and clipped at the
Desophagus until the tip is level with the heart. The open 
 apex of the heart over the left fth intercostal space several
end of the tube is connected to an ordinary stethoscope 
 inches from the midline. The left leg electrode is clipped
headpiece to a single earpiece that can be worn by the
on the neck or on the shoulder. Good electrical contact is
anaesthetist or surgeon, or connected to an amplifer that
achieved with alcohol or electrode paste. Lead I is selected
makes the heart sounds audible throughout the room.
on the electrocardiograph and the normal confguration
This monitor provides only information about heart rate
includes a negative R wave (see Fig. 2. 10C). A bifid P wave
and rhythm; the intensity of sound is not reliably associ-
is frequently observed in the normal equine ECG. Sinus
ated with changes in blood pressure or cardiac output.
arrhythmia in dogs and cats is abolished when atropine
Other electronic oesophageal probes are available to
 Or glycopyrrolate has been administered. Other arrhyth-
provide heart rate and some also may produce an ECG
mias, for example second degree atrioventricular heart
and oesophageal temperature.
block and ventricular premature depolarizations (VPD) or
28
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
0:24AM
Source:
ECGLead:]
II
32mm/mv
25mm/s
MANUAL recording
A
3:56HRT
32（*）ART108
ART
2:5MMMV.>
C
Figure 2.10 (A) Normal lead Il ECG from a Labrador during inhalation anaesthesia. (B) ECG with a wandering baseline
induced by movement of leads as the dog breathes. The bottom trace is arterial blood pressure. This dog has a heart rate of
114 beats per minute, systolic arterial pressure of 96 mmHg. diastolic pressure of 46 mmHg. and mean pressure of 61 mmHg.
(C) Normal base apex ECG and blood pressure recorded from a horse anaesthetized with isoflurane.
premature ventricular complexes (PVC), may or may not
Tissue perfusion
require specifc treatment [see Chapter 21)
There is a high incidence of sinus arrhythmia and first
Evaluation of tissue perfusion can be done by considering
and second degree atrioventricular (AV) heart block in
gum or lip mucous membrane colour, the capillary refill
conscious unsedated horses (Robertson, 1990). In con-
time, and the blood pressure High mean arterial pressure
trast, AV block during anaesthesia is uncommon except
does not guarantee adequate tissue perfusion. For example,
when the horse has been premedicated with detomidine,
when blood pressure increases during anaesthesia in
Or supplemental intravenous injections of xylazine are
response to a surgical stimulus, cardiac output may be
given during anaesthesia. The appearance of this arrhyth-
decreased due to increased afterload from peripheral
mia during anaesthesia on any other occasion is cause for
vasoconstriction.
concern as this rhythm may progress within a few minutes 
Tissue perfusion is usually decreased when the gums are
to advanced heart block (P waves only, no ventricular
pale, rather than pink, sometimes when very pink, and the
complexes) and cardiac arrest. Atrial fibrillation and PVCs
capillary refill time (CRT) exceeds 1.5 seconds, or the
ean pyais amban Ae iq sasiy u Aaiii io
 n s i ) s  
if associated with hypotension
When MAP is above 60 mmHg. palpation of the strength
29
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Abbreviations
Myths about blood pressure in anaesthetized
animals
NIBP
Non-invasive blood pressure
IBP
Invasive blood pressure
If you can feel a strong pulse the blood pressure is
SAP
 Systolic arterial pressure
adequate
DAP
Diastolic blood pressure
Heart rate will increase during hypotension
MAP
Mean arterial pressure
CVP
Central venous pressure
CO
Cardiac output
An approximate estimate of blood pressure can be made
from palpation of a peripheral artery. However, strength
of a palpated pulse is determined by the pulse pressure
of the peripheral pulse and observation of oral membrane
colour and CRT should be used to assess adequacy of
(difference between systolic and diastolic pressures) and,
in states associated with vasodilatation, a peripheral pulse
peripheral perfusion and cardiac output. During laparot-
can be palpated at MAP as low as 40 mmHg so that, in
Omy, intestinal colour should be bright pink and intestines
some cases, palpation alone does not suggest the urgency
that are pale pink, white, or grey may be an indicator of
inadequate tissue perfusion. Measurement of central
for treatment. The turgidity of the artery will provide
further information because pressure is likely to be low if
venous O2 saturation may provide further information in
the artery is soft or collapsible rather than solid like a
sick patients, as described later.
pencil. Bear in mind that it is not uncommon for heart
rates to be within an accepted normal range while blood
Arterial blood pressure
pressure is low or decreasing (Fig. 2.1l).
Systolic (SAP), mean (MAP), and diastolic (DAP) arterial
Measurement of blood pressure can be made easily:
equipment cost varies. The investment in time and money
pressures in awake healthy animals are approximately
125-160 mmHg.
90-110 mmHg, and 75-95 mmHg.
is worthwhile in animals at risk for hypotension, such as
respectively. Excepting when premedication has included
small animals and horses anaesthetized with inhalation
detomidine or medetomidine or when anaesthesia was
agents, and in animals with abnormalities likely to give
rise to complications during anaesthesia. The least expen-
induced with ketamine or tiletamine, arterial blood pres-
sure is decreased from the awake value during anaesthesia.
sive techniques are the Doppler ultrasound technique in
dogs and cats, and direct blood pressure measurement
Arterial blood pressure is lower in paediatric patients than
in mature animals. For example, healthy 5- or 6-day-old
using an anaeroid manometer in horses, however, pur-
foals anaesthetized with isoflurane had an average MAP of
chase of a unit that monitors more than one parameter,
for example ECG, blood pressure, and temperature, is
58 mm Hg. When the same foals were reanaesthetized 4-5
weeks later, the average MAP had increased to 80 mmHg.
more economical than acquiring monitors individually.
with a corresponding decrease in cardiac index [Hodgson
Doppler ultrasound for indirect measurement
et al., 1990).
ofbloodpressure
Hypotension may be defined as MAP less than 65 mm Hg
in mature animals. A MAP as low as 60 mmHg may be
Hair is first clipped from the skin on the palmar surface
allowed in dogs and cats provided that the mucous mem-
of the paw of dogs and cats (Fig. 2.12). A probe covered
brane colour is pink and CRT is l second. This combina-
with contact gel is placed over the artery and taped in place
tion of values may occur during inhalation anaesthesia at
with the electrical lead pointing down towards the toes
the time of minimal stimulation during preparation of the
(Fig. 2.13). Ultrasound waves emitted from one of the two
operative site and before the onset of surgery. MAP is
 piezoelectric crystals embedded in the probe pass through
not usually allowed to fall below 65-70 mmHg for any
the skin and deeper tissues. A structure that is stationary
length of time in anaesthetized horses because of the
will reflect sound back to the second crystal without any
increased risk for postanaesthetic myopathy. When hypo-
frequency change (Stegall et al., 1968). Moving objects,
tension is documented, appropriate treatment can be
such as erythrocytes and the artery wall, will reflect some
instituted, such as decreasing anaesthetic depth or com-
 of the sound at a different frequency (Doppler-shift). The
mencing or increasing the intravenous administration of
change in frequency can be heard through a loudspeaker
fluids or administration of a vasoactive drug such as
as an audible swooshing sound with each pulse.
dopamine, dobutamine, or ephedrine. The outcome of
A cuff is wrapped snugly around the extremity proximal
untreated severe or prolonged hypotension may be unex-
to the probe, in dogs and cats with the centre of the inflat-
pected cardiac arrest during anaesthesia or neurological
able part of the cuff, or an arrow or dot, on the medial
deficits, blindness or renal failure after recovery from
aspect ofthe limb and the air tube positioned on the distal
 anaesthesia.
end of the cuff. The cuff is connected to an anaeroid
30
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
TIME
135
150
165
180
195
210
225
O2L/min
Vaporizer
2.2
Inspired Iso
End tidal Iso
1.6
.0
End tidal CO
32
28
SpO298
140
120
100
80
V
60
Systolic
40
Heart rate
20
Resp rate
T
10
Figure 2.11 Blood pressure (Doppler systolic) decreased without a change in heart rate after this hound was turned over
(Arrow 1) during anaesthesia. Blood pressure continued to decrease after isoflurane was discontinued. Infusion of dobutamine
(Arrow 2) produced a rise in blood pressure.
A
?
Figure 2.13 Doppler-shift pulse detector. One piezoelectric
crystal emits incident ultrasound signal while the other
receives the reflected signal from cells in flowing blood. The
frequency shift between the incident and reflected sound is 
converted to audible sound.
manometer and a bulb for manual inflation of the cuff
Figure 2.12 Sites for application of the Doppler probe for
with air (Fig. 2.14). In horses, the cuff is wrapped around
indirect measurement of arterial blood pressure in dogs. 1 & 2:
the base of the tail with the cuff air bladder centred over
Ulnar artery on the caudal surface of the forelimb, above
the ventral surface of the tail. The probe is taped distal
and below the carpal pad; 3: cranial tibial artery on the
e snos   t  ae o es eaee
to the cuff over the coccygeal artery in the ventral midline
on the medial surface of the flexor tendons and on the plantar
groove The coccygeal artery can be used for this technique
surface of the paw proximal to the foot pad; 6: dorsal pedall
in adult cattle but the results are not reliable. In foals, the
artery: 7: coccygeal artery on the ventral surface of the tail.
 probe and cuff are commonly attached to the tail. In foals
31
Section
1
Principles and procedures
that the cuff is level with the manubrium. Furthermore, a
auff that is attached too loosely or slips down the extrem-
ity and becomes loose, or situated over a joint such as the
carpus will result in an erroneously high value.
To measure blood pressure, the cuff is inflated to above
systolic pressure to occlude the artery and no sound is
ULTRASONICEOPPLER
heard. The pressure in the cuff is gradually released until
the frst sounds of blood flow are detected at systolic pres-
sure. As additional pressure is released from the cuff,
diastolic pressure is heard as a change in character of
sound from a one or two beat sound to a multiple beat
sound, to a muffling of sound, or to a growl. This will
Dccur 15-40 mmHg below systolic pressure. The sounds
associated with diastolic pressure are well defined in some
animals but not at all clear in others. In some animals, a
first muffing of beat signals may occur 10-15 mmHg
above the true diastolic pressure. In this event, the second
change in beat signal will be more abrupt or distinct. Mean
pressure can be calculated as one third of the pulse pres-
sure (systolic-diastolic) plus diastolic pressure.
A decrease in intensity of the pulsing sound, when the
attachment and setting have been unchanged, is a reliable
indication of decreased blood flow. Furthermore, changes
in cardiac rhythm are easily detected by listening to this
monitor.
 The Doppler ultrasonic method was observed to provide
both overestimated and underestimated values over a wide
range of systolic pressures in conscious and anaesthetized
dogs, with a tendency for overestimation when MAP
<80 mmHg and underestimation at high pressures
(Haberman et al., 2006; Bosiack et al., 2010). An investiga-
Figure 2.14 Measurement of arterial pressure in a dog by
tion in cats comparing the Doppler ultrasonic method,
taping a Doppler probe over an artery distal to the carpal
using a cuff placed halfway between the carpus and the
pad so that audible sounds of arterial pulses are emitted
elbow, with measurerments obtained from a femoral artery
from the box. A blood pressure cuff is applied higher up the
catheter revealed that the indirect method consistently
limb and the anaeroid manometer attached to the cuff is
underestimated systolic pressure by an average
of
used to identify systolic and diastolic pressures
14 mmHg (Grandy et al., 1992). Caulkett et al. (1998)
also determined that the Doppler method both overesti-
mated and underestimated systolic blood pressure in
and small ruminants in lateral recumbency, the probe can
anaesthetized cats but that it proved to be an accurate
be taped over the metatarsal artery on the lateral surface
predictor of MAP Using this technique of measuring
of the hind limb or the common digital artery on the
blood pressure in mature horses using a cuff width 48%
medial side of the forelimb distal to the carpus. The cuff
of the circumference of the tail (bladder width 10.4 cm)
is secured around the limb above the hock or carpus and
 systolic pressure was underestimated and diastolic pres-
positioned level with the sternum. In pigs, the probe is
' a      a
most reliable when taped over the common digital artery
1982). In another investigation, measurements of systolic
on the caudomedial aspect of the forelimb. The cuff
 arterial pressure in horses anaesthetized in dorsal recum-
 should be placed between the carpus and the elbow but,
-u en a jo  it y e un aueoiey ym auq
because of the triangular shape of the forearm, it may be
ference was reasonably accurate but, in 5% of the horses,
unable to occlude blood flow when inflation of the cuff
this technique had an error range of ±20 mmHg (Bailey
causes it to slip down over the carpus. For all animals, the
et al., 1994).
width of the air bladder within the cuff is important for
Oscillometry for indirect measurement
accuracy: a bladder that is too narrow will overestimate
ofbloodpressure
blood pressure and one that is too wide will underesti-
mate it The cuff (air bladder) width should be 40% of the
Devices that non-invasively measure peripheral blood
circumference of the extremity and the leg positioned so
pressure using the oscillometric method operate by
32
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
1112
WWWW
Figure 2.15 Non-invasive measurement of blood pressure by oscillometry. The cuff should be positioned level with the
alignment. A Doppler ultrasound probe is also attached to the limb of this dog for audible recognition of blood flow.
automatically inflating a cuff placed around an extremity.
[Haberman et al., 2006; Bosiack et al., 20l0). Closest cor-
either above or below the carpus, above or below the hock,
relations between direct and indirect measurements have
or the tail (Fig 2.15). The monitor measures and records
been measured using cuff widths of 40% of the circumfer-
the amplitude of pressure changes in the cuff caused by
 ence of the animal's leg or tail.
 pulses in underlying arteries. The cuff is inflated to above 
 By far the highest number of published articles compar-
systolic pressure and deflated slowly. The pressure oscilla-
ing NIBP and IBP measurements have been in dogs. Not
tions in the cuff start small and increase to a maximum
all investigations have produced similar results, in part
value [corresponding with MAP) and then decrease. Each
influenced by use of different models from several manu-
monitor uses fxed or variable parameter identification
facturers, measurement in awake versus anaesthetized
 points based on the MAP value to calculate electronically
animals, increased variability attributed to haemodynamic
systolic and diastolic pressures. The algorithm determin-
alterations imposed by disease, differences in size and
 ing systolic and diastolic pressures varies between models 
gender, sites of measurement, patient body position, phar-
and thus measurement results are not the same for all
macological methods used to alter blood pressure, and the
models. There is a also small difference in the recorded
investigators varied definitions of hypotension or hyper-
MAP and MAP calculated from the systolic and diastolic
tension. The take home' message is that NIBP does not
pressures using the formula MAP = diastolic pressure +
accurately predict IBP all ofthe time and that no treatment
0.33 (systolic - diastolic) and this value is dependent on
decision should be made based solely on one measure-
the measurement device [Kiers et al., 2008). Values for
ment. Investigations of specific models have employed
SAP, DAP, MAP, and heart rate are digitally displayed and
the average of three to six consecutive readings taken
the monitor can be programmed to measure automatically
   o e s -
at a specified time interval. The cuff should be situated
during anaesthesia, the site of surgery and accessibility
approximately level with the heart (manubrium
or
dictates the site for application of the cuff. Different sites
sternum if in lateral recumbency) for accurate measure-
have been investigated with the result that the forelimb
ment. Artefactual pressure changes induced in the cuff by
in dogs was determined to be more accurate when com-
movement of the extremity, for example, during prepara-
pared with lingual artery pressure and the hind limb
tion of the surgical site, will either induce abnormal read-
more accurate when compared with dorsal pedal artery
ings or preventthe monitor from obtaining a measurement
pressure [McMurphy et al., 2006), no difference between
Section
1
Principles and procedures
measurements was recorded between the fore and hind
isoflurane and high pressures MAP >140 mmHg were
limbs (Sawyer et al., 1991), or that the tibial or coccygeal
created by administration of medetomidine. Mean differ-
arteries provided better correlation than the metacarpal
ences between NIBP and IBP were <5 mmHg for MAP and
artery when compared with aortic or anterior tibial artery
DAP in all pressure ranges; SAP differences increased
pressure (Sawyer et al., 2004; Haberman et al., 2006).
as pressure increased from hypotension to hypertension
Most oscillometric monitors provide a reasonable approx-
resulting in underestimation of SAP The DINAMAP had
imation of MAP in normotensive animals.
good correlation with IBP systolic pressure in anaesthe-
The greatest concern during most anaesthetic episodes
tized cats (Caulkett et al., 1998), however, the Datascope
is the accurate identifcation of hypotension to avoid
Passport did not accurately estimate direct blood pressure
cardiac arrest or postoperative organ malfunction. The
in cats (Branson et al., 1997)
Surgivet V60046, with the cuff placed distal to the hock,
 In horses, the oscillometric method of blood pressure
provided accurate information for MAP in normotensive
measurement is used when direct measurement of arterial
and hypotensive dogs, with 90.6% of the dogs with MAP
 pressure is not possible, for total intravenous anaesthesia.
<70 mmHg being accurately diagnosed as hypotensive
and for awake animals. The cuff is wrapped around the tail
(Deflandre & Hellebrekers, 2007). The monitor was less
of mature horses andfoals or around the hind limb near the
accurate at high pressures. The Cardell 9401, DINAMAP
metatarsal artery in foals. The cuff should not be wrapped
(Device for Indirect Noninvasive Automatic Mean Arterial
tightly. Some investigators have recommended that the tail
Pressure) 8l00, DINAMAP 8300 and PetMAP overesti-
quff be placed close to the base of the tail but, in this
mated pressures during hypotension (Sawyer et al., 1991;
 author's opinion, more accurate readings are obtained with
Meurs et al., 1996; Bosiack et al., 20l0; Shih et al., 2010).
the cuff applied approximately 10 cm from the base of the 
 and did not reliably predict the severity of hypotension in
tail, where thetail diameter is constant for the length of the
animals with acute haemorrhage or in critically-ill patients
qff. In standing horses, cuff placement may be higher than
in the ICU. Wermick et al. (2010) compared measurements
the atrium, resulting in a measurement that is lower than
in anaesthetized dogs between pressures recorded from
the actual pressure. Early investigations of the DINAMAP
the dorsal pedal artery and from a cuff around the ante-
confirmed accurate and clinically useful values for arterial
brachium using the DINAMAP 8300. The DINAMAP
pressureusing a cuff width 24% of thetail circumference in
slightly underestimated SAP and DAP and overestimated
ponies (Geddes et al., 1977) and 25-35% in horses
MAP; comparisons that fell just short of the validation
(Latshaw et al., 1979; Muir et al., 1983). However, meas-
requirement proposed by the American College of Veteri-
  s g s     s
nary Intermal Medicine (Brown et al., 2007). In contrast,
beats/minute. Our experience using a Model 8300
the DINAMAP 8300 underestimated all BP parameters in
DINAMAP and a cuff width 35-40% of the tail circumfer-
awake experimental Beagles, and to a greater extent at high
ence ratio (child or small adult cuff for a mature horse
pressures generated by administration of phenylephrine
 depending on tail thickness and the amount of hair) has
(Haberman et al., 2006). Comparisons with the Cardio-
been that MAP value obtained from this monitor is usually
cap Il in clinical canine patients using premedication to
the same asthat obtained by direct blood pressure measure-
alter blood pressure (acepromazine or medetomidine)
ment. Occasionally, the DINAMAP recorded pressures
 generated a smaller bias than previously reported (Sawyer
10-20 mmHg higher than the true MAP An evaluation of
et al., 2004; McMurphy et al., 2006) but greater limits of
the Cardell Model 9402 and the DINAMAP Pro 100 in
agreement (variability) that was attributed to variation in
 anaesthetized foals ofless than 7 days of ageusing cuff sizes
clinical population (MacFarlane et al., 2010).
recommended by the manufacturers revealed that both
In clinical practice, it may be necessary to identify hyper-
monitors had similar performance (Giguere et al., 2005b).
tension before anaesthesia and to measure accurately high
Analysis of MA P values confirmed acceptable accuracy with
pressures during anaesthesia in patients at risk, such as
the cuffs on thetail or metatarsus for conditions of normo-
phaeochromocytoma, renal or endocrine disease. Oscil-
tension and hypotension, although the Cardell was most
lometric methods tend to underestimate systolic blood
accurate over the coccygeal artery and the DINAMAP over
pressures during hypertension (Haberman et al., 2006;
the metatarsal artery. Cuffs placed over the median artery
McMurphy et al., 2006: Deflandre & Hellebrekers, 2007:
produced less accurate values and wider variability. This
Bosiack et al., 20l0), consistently underestimate MAP or
study also confirmed that blood pressure did not correlate
DAP (Haberman et al., 2006), overestimated MAP or DAP
well with cardiac output, i.e. a good MAP does not guaran-
(Bosiack et al., 20l0), or underestimated SAP and DAP
tee that cardiac output is also acceptable. In summary.
with close agreement with MAP (McMurphy et al., 2006).
indirect method of measurement of blood pressure pro-
The Cardell 9301V with 2.5 cm-wide neonatal pressure
vides useful information in most horses, but may produce
cuff placed around the forelimb above the carpus, with the
erroneous values in a small number. Consequently, blood
monitor set at 'small cuff mode has been evaluated in cats
pressure should be measured by direct means whenevel
(Pedersen et al., 2002). Low pressure MAP <60 mmHg
possible in horses at risk of developing low blood pressure.
was achieved by increasing depth of anaesthesia with
for example, during inhalation anaesthesia.
34
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
Standards have been set for automated sphygmoma-
 paralleled the telermetered pressures (Meyer et al., 2010).
nometers in human medicine by several organizations.
The standards set by AAMI were not met in this study. The
including the British Hypertension Society, the Associa-
authors noted that the mean standard deviations were
tion for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation
substantially decreased by use of six averaged measure-
(AAMl) and the American National Standards Institute,
ments at any time point compared with a single
Inc. (ANSI). Devices validated for use in humans must
measurement.
have a correlation of ≥0.9 across a range of measurements
with specific % of readings to be within 5, 10, or 15 mmHg
Direct measurement of blood pressure
of the standard measurement. Requirements for validation
Measurement of arterial blood pressure directly is accom-
were tightened in 20ll. These standards have been met for
Aan ul '1o aaneg 7z 'sanea oz e yo uonuasul Aq pausid
MAP at low and normal pressures in dogs with the Surgivet
small animals, a 24 gauge catheter aseptically into a
V60046 (Deflandre & Hellebrekers, 2007), for MAP and
 peripheral artery; the dorsal pedal, anterior tibial, femoral.
DAP in cats with the Cardell 9301V (Pedersen et al., 2002).
 cOccygeal, metacarpal, auricular or lingual artery in dogs
and for MAP in foals using the Cardell 9402 and DINAMAP
(Fig. 2.16), the dorsal pedal, femoral or coccygeal artery
Pro 100 (Giguere et al., 2005b). For the most part, oscil-
in cats, the lateral nasal, facial, transverse facial, or meta-
lometric blood pressure monitors provide useful informa-
tion for management of the clinical patient Trends in
in ruminants, pigs and rabbits (Fig. 2.17). Placement of a
 pressures can be used to direct management of anaesthesia
atheter in an artery in most animals is not difficult with
and, although hypotension may not be accurately diag-
experience. Complications are rare provided there is strict
nosed, a decrease in measurements to low values should
attention to asepsis during insertion, wrapping to main-
be a warming that action should be taken. A single abnor-
tain cleanliness, use of sterile solutions for flushing, and
mal measurement should be confirmed by taking two
 a a u e a u as ae
more readings. Failure of the monitor to achieve a reading
removed to avoid a haematoma. The cap or extension
('timed out') when it had just previously been recording
 must be secured firmly to the arterial catheter to prevent
may indicate a change in peripheral blood flow. It must
accidental disconnection and blood loss. The catheter is
be remembered that although on average there is reason-
connected by saline-filled tubing to either an anaeroid
able correlation between direct and indirect pressure
manometer (Fig. 2.18) or an electrical pressure transducer
measurements, in individual patients the difference in
(Fig. 2.19) for measurement of arterial pressure. Either an
readings can be up to 20 mmHg and a patient may not be
air gap or a connector containing a latex diaphragm
identifed as having a MAP outside an accepted range.
Therefore NIBP readings must be assessed together with
other observations of cardiovascular performance and
depth of anaesthesia.
High-definition oscillometry
 In contrast to previously described oscillometric tech-
niques, high-definition oscillometric (HDO) technology
discriminates between pressure waveform changes that are
Cranial
characteristic for systolic, mean, and diastolic pressures.
tibial artery
The technology allows much more rapid assessments that
minimize the impact of outside factors, and is able to
accommodate fast heart rates and weak pulse signals. The
mo pue yau ie eine paseaun oy st uoaia
blood pressures and increased reliability for use in ill
patients. In anaesthetized dogs, comparison between IBP
Dorsal
 measured at the dorsal pedal artery and a high-definition
 pedal artery
oscillometric device, Memodiagnostic MD_15/90 Pro.
revealed that values for SAP, MAP, and DAP were all over
estimated by HDO and the overestimation increased for
SAP and DAP with increasing pressures (Wernick et al..
2010). The precision exceeded the 15 mm Hg limit required
for validation and only 50-60% of readings were within
10 mmHg. In a group of conscious experimental Beagles 
with implanted aortic devices for telemetry of blood pres-
sures, measurement of pressures from a cuff around the
Figure 2.16 Sites for insertion of arterial catheters on the
base of the tail using HDO revealed that MAP most closely
 cranial aspect of the right hind limb of a dog.
35
 Section
1
Principles and procedures
should be maintained next to the anaeroid manometer to
 prevent saline entering the manometer and to maintain
Fine nylon
sterility. An optional addition to the electrical transducer
Anaeroid
catheter or
is a continuous flushing device (Fig. 2.20) that can be
manometer
needle in artery
inserted between the transducer and the artery. This device
is connected to a bag of saline that has been pressurized
to 200 mmHg and will deliver 2-4 mL saline/hour to help
Three-waytap
 prevent clotting of blood in the catheter. Extension tubing 
Plastic tube
Auricular
6-8 cm long
arteries
Drip extension tube
Male Luer
conection
Three-way
taps
 20 ml syringe
Drip extension tube
 Figure 2.18 Inexpensive apparatus for the direct
measurement of mean arterial blood pressure.
Figure 2.17 Ink lines have been drawn over the auricular
arteries in this goat.
Figure 2.19 Direct measurement of blood pressure in a horse using a catheter in the facial artery connected by saline-filled
tubing to an electrical transducer.
36
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
a
d
(d) is connected to the device to give a continuous infusion of 3 ml per hour. With this particular version, rapid flushing of
the saline-filled tubing (a) to the arterial catheter is achieved by squeezing the tabs (arrow) around the valve.
sold specifically for arterial pressure measurement is non-
mmHg
distensible to preserve an accurate waveform.
120.
For accurate measurement, the electrical transducer, or
the air-saline junction in the tubing connected to the
manometer, are zero reference points and should be
placed level with the right atrium that approximately cor-
80
responds to the manubrium; the point of the shoulder or
A
B
thoracic inlet when the animal is in dorsal recumbency
 u  a n     
recumbency.
BHWW
dP/dt
The anaeroid manometer costs very little but provides
120.
only MAP The needle of the anaeroid manometer deflects
slightly with each beat and the value at the upper deflec-
tion of the needle is slightly less than the MAP value
obtained by direct measurement (Riebold & Evans, 1985).
80
D
The electrical transducer provides values for SAP, MAP and
DAP, heart rate, and a waveform that can be observed on
Figure 2.21 Waveforms from direct measurement of the
the oscilloscope or paper printout (Fig. 2.21). Values may
arterial pressure. (A) Good trace. (B) Recording of the same
be slightly different when recorded from different sites, for
pressure but with excessive damping. systolic pressure low,
[ad qesiop pue Aae lengu yo uosuedos adexa
diastolic pressure high, mean arterial pressure unchanged.
 artery pressures in dogs revealed that systolic pressure was
(C) Recording of same pressures but with resonance, systolic
higher and the diastolic pressure was lower in the pedal
pressure apparently increased while diastolic pressure
artery (McMurphy et al., 2006). Mean pressures should be
reduced, mean pressure unchanged. (D) llustration of how
similar in most arteries but systolic pressure increases by
left ventricular contractility may be estimated from the rate
up to 30% and diastolic pressure decreases by 10-15%
of rise of pressure during early systole (dP/dt) while the
shaded area gives an index of stroke volume.
with increasing distance of measurement site from the
 heart due to enhancement of the peripheral pulse pressure
(Guyton, 1986).
significant relationship has been documented between
 Important advantages of direct measurement of blood
 pulse pressure variation and volume loss and measure-
 pressure are the reliability of measurerment compared with
ment of pulse pressure variation has been used to predict
NIBP, independence from observer error, and the ability
 responsiveness of a patient by increased cardiac output to
continuously to observe the pressure and immediately
volume loading with IV crystalloid and/or colloid fluid
detect an abnormality (Fig. 2.22). Systolic pressure varia-
(Durga et al., 2008; Pizov et al., 20l0; Cannesson et al.,
tion (pulse pressure variation, 'cycling') caused by control-
201l). One multicentre study of human patients noted
led ventilation is an indication of decreased cardiovascular
that approximately 25% of patients with small pulse pres-
function (Fig. 2.23). Artificial ventilation is key to induc-
sure variation still experienced a clinically significant
ing cycling in that the increase in thoracic pressure during
increase in cardiac output in response to fluid loading
inspiration causes a signifcant decrease in stroke volume
(Cannesson et al., 20ll). Pulse pressure variation has been
in situations of decreased venous return to the heart. A
determined to be better than measurement of central
37
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Isecond
Iminute
Isecond
Arterial B.P.
- 150 mmHg
150 mmHg[
0
0
ECG
overdose of pentobarbital. Note that while the pressure trace shows the circulation to be ineffective, the ECG trace is little
different from normal - heart rate monitors relying on the QRS complex for detection of the heart beat would, under these
that all was well with the circulatory system.
103
84
118
66
2
80
(90)
A
B
anssad ad oi buiusa snssd asnd e anssid eae iss jo iau au ui suoee ()  an
ventilation as seen in this arterial waveform of a dog anaesthetized with isoflurane are predictive of decreased preload or
hypovolaemia. Note that hypovolaemia was present even when the arterial pressures were within accepted ranges. (B)
Expansion of blood volume using an IV fluid bolus resulted in improvement in cardiovascular function as demonstrated by
disappearance of systolic pressure and pulse pressure variations increased blood pressure, and decreased heart rate.
venous pressure for optimizing fuid therapy. Not all
manometer set or be constructed from venous extension
 animals with hypovolaemia may show systolic pressure or
tubes and a centimetre ruler (Fig. 2.24). A catheter of suf-
pulse pressure variations. Each patient with obvious pulse
ficient length is introduced into the jugular vein and
pressure variation should be evaluated for the potential
advanced until its tip lies in the cranial vena cava. The
adverse effect of volume loading before administration of
distance the catheter tip has to be introduced is, initially.
IV fluids. It must be remembered that cycling will not be
estimated by measurement of length from the jugular vein
observed in animals that are spontaneously breathing or
to the third rib and, once the catheter is connected to the
are ventilated with small (6 mL/kg) tidal volumes.
 manometer, its position may be adjusted until the level of
fluid in the manometer tube moves in time with the ani-
mal's respiratory movements. In dogs and cats, the intro-
Central venous pressure
duction of a catheter into the jugular vein is often greatly
The apparatus for measurement of central venous pressure
facilitated by laying the animal on its side and extending
(CVP) can include a commercially available plastic venous
its head and neck over a rolled up towel or sandbag. Care
8E
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
and manometer in close proximity or by using a spirit level
to ensure accuracy. The ideal reference point is the mean
Balanced electrolyte
pressure in the right atrium but, for practical purposes, the
solution with
a si m n s  siae 
administration set
located and is related to the position of the right atrium
in all animals, irrespective of body position. Measure-
 ments of CVP are not significantly affected by positioning
the animal in right or left recumbency or by catheter size.
although oscillations are more easily observed with a 16
gauge catheter (Oakley et al., 1997).
CVP is used in the evaluation of adequacy of blood
Fluid-filled
volume, with the normal range being 0-5 cmHzO or
manometer
 0-4 mmHg in small animals. Hypovolaemia is indicated
calibrated
when the CVP is less than 0 cmHzO. An increase in pres-
in cm
sure above 12 cmHzO or 9 mmHg may be caused by fluid
Overload or cardiac failure A recent study measured mean
CVP of 9.4 ± 3.6 cmH2O in standing horses with their
heads in a neutral position (Norton et al., 20ll). Head
height exerted a significant effect on CVP in that the CVP
decreased by 2.0 ± 6.5 cmH2O when the horses' heads
were elevated and increased by 3.7 ± 5.5 cmH2O when the
heads were lowered to the ground. The authors suggested
to increase accuracy of comparison of measurements to be
3-waystopcock
made over several hours that the zero reference point be
identified by a small line of clipped hair.
Manometer connected
Zero on scale
to jugular catheter
 corresponds with
Left atrial pressure (pulmonary arterial
(covered by bandage
thoracic inlet
occlusion pressure)
around neck)
Left heart failure may precede that of the right side and
Figure 2.24 Schematic diagram of the apparatus for
precipitate pulmonary oedema without a rise in central
measurement of central venous pressure.
venous pressure. The pulmonary arterial occlusion pres-
sure (PAOP) is used as a measure of the left atrial flling
 pressure. A balloon-tip catheter is introduced into the
must be taken to avoid entrainment of air during insertion
jugular vein and its tip advanced into the heart Inflation
of the catheter. Air embolism will occur through an open-
of the balloon with 0.5 mL air facilitates floating the cath-
ended catheter that is inserted with the animal in stermal
eter in the bloodstream into the pulmonary artery and
 or standing position or during inspiration in a recumbent
then the catheter can be advanced until the tip is wedged
animal. If the catheter is to be left in position for a long
in a small pulmonary vessel. The measurement is made
time, it is kept patent with a drip infusion or the catheter
using the same apparatus as is used for the measurement
is kept flled with heparin-saline solution (10 units/mL)
 of central venous pressure or using an electrical pressure
between measurements. Readings may be taken at any
transducer. Care must be taken to ensure that vessel occlu-
time If an intravenous drip is used, it is turmed full on and
 sion is not maintained between measurements or pulmo-
the stopcock manipulated frst to fill the manometer tube
nary infarction may occur. If a balloon catheter is used,
from the bag or bottle and then to connect the manometer
the balloon should only be inflated while measurements
tube to the catheter. The fall of fluid in the manometer is
are made and, if a simple catheter is used, it should be
observed and should be 'step-like' in response to respira-
slightly withdrawn from the wedged position between
tory pressure changes. The CVP is read off when fluid fall
mea surements.
cea ses.
Central venous pressure may also be measured by
Cardiac output
attaching an electrical transducer to the jugular catheter.
Venous pressures being low, the margin of error intro-
The measurement of cardiac output is not one that has
duced by inaccuracies in obtaining a suitable reference
been routinely carried out in clinical veterinary anaesthe.
point to represent zero pressure may be clinically signifi-
sia. Invasive methods are commonly employed in research
cant Whatever apparatus is used, the zero of the scale
and there are minimally invasive and non-invasive
should be carefully located, either by placing the patient
methods available for use in research and clinical patients.
68
Section
1
Principles and procedures
The cost of the equipment, as always, is a limiting factor.
the patient's PaCO2 increases up to 5 mmHg during
Various sources of inaccuracy are likely to influence results
rebreathing. Concurrent input from the pulse oximeter
of cardiac output measurements and personnel using
allows the NICO to calculate stroke volume and manual
these techniques should first read relevant literature.
entry of the patient's weight produces CO in mL/kg. Accu-
racy of the NICO is unsatisfactory in patients <l8 kg
Fickmethod
bodyweight (Yamashita et al., 2007). This technique is
The Fick method was one of the earliest methods to be
contraindicated in any animal for which a small increase
used to calculate cardiac output (CO) and utilized oxygen
in PaCO2 would be deleterious, such as conditions at risk 
as the indicator. The method used the formula CO = O2
for increased intracranial pressure Cardiac output meas-
consumption per minute/(arterial O2 content - mixed
urements obtained by NICO are useful to assess trends but
venous O2 content) × l00 because the size of a fluid stream
should not be considered as absolute values (Giguere
can be calculated when the amount of a substance enter-
et al., 2005a).
ing the stream and the concentration difference between
entry and removal are known (Lake, 1990). This method
Indicatordilutionmethod
has a number of technical diffculties and, more recently.
The principle involves injection of an indicator substance
a non-invasive technique using COz has been used in
into a central or peripheral vein and blood is withdrawn
clinical patients. The non-invasive cardiac output (NICO)
paai pue dund e yiim Aisnonuuo Aiae ue uoy
method employs a differential Fick partial rebreathing
through an electrical cuvette densitometer where the con-
technique that eliminates the need to measure mixed
centration of the indicator is measured. This blood is then
venous CO by assuming that the value remains constant
delivered back to the patient. The electrical input from the
(Jaffe, 1999). A combined mainstream capnometer and
densitometer is proportional to the indicator concentra-
fixed orifice differential pressure pneumotachometer (to
tion and the monitor generates an indicator-dilution
measure flow) adapter is inserted next to the endotracheal
curve that is plotted against time The area under the curve,
tube adapter (Fig. 2.25). An adjustable (rebreathing) loop
with some modifcations, is proportional to the cardiac
of tubing with an automatic valve is then attached before
output. The original technique used indocyanine green, a
connecting the patient to the circle anaesthesia system.
non-toxic dye, but this technique is complicated by a
The animal must be on controlled ventilation and the
gradual increase in baseline due to recycling. Thermodilu-
aul ieun os paioeuos io papuedxa st dool suuieaiqai
tion cardiac output measurement (TDCO) is an indicator
volume of the loop matches 35-70% of the ventilator's
dilution method that has replaced dye dilution and is the
tidal volume setting. The NICO has a 3-minute cycle
technique that is used for comparing all new methods of
within which the rebreathing valve is activated for 35
cardiac output measurement. A multilumen catheter with
seconds so that the animal's breathing is rerouted from
a thermistor approximately 4 cm from the tip (Swan-
the anaesthesia circle into the rebreathing loop. Typically.
Ganz catheter) is inserted into the jugular vein and
NICO
H
C.O
36
：2
ETC02
42
972
A
B
Figure 2.25 (A) Rebreathing circuit of the NICOTM (Novametrix Medical Systems, Inc. Wallingford, CT, USA). (B) NICOTM
monitor measuring cardiac output in an anaesthetized dog
40
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
-nd aun u sa dn au iun ueay aun ynoiu pauape
cardiac outputs but have a closer agreement at higher
monary artery. Correct placement of the catheter is con-
values.
firmed by connecting a pressure transducer to the lumen
that exits at the tip of the catheter and observation of the
Puise contour method
 distinctive pressures and waveforms as the catheter passes
 Monitors have been developed for assessing changes in
through the atrium, ventricle and pulmonary artery. The
cardiac output by analysis of the arterial pulse waveform.
catheter is designed such that one lumen of the catheter
The LiDCO""plus monitor includes the PulseCO" system
exits in the right atrium and that port is used for injection
that analyses the arterial waveform following initial calibra-
of cooled saline or 5% dextrose. The time of injection and
tion by measuring cardiac output by lithium dilution and
temperature of injectate is recorded by the monitor, the
calculates stroke volume and CO. The PiCCO"" system's
temperature changes in the pulmonary artery are detected,
initial calibration uses transpulmonary thermal dilution
and the time lapse from injection to measured tempera-
and requires cardiac catheterization. The FloTrac"m/Vigileo?M
ture change allow calculation of cardiac output Different
is 'self-calibrated’ based on an algorithm derived from
lengths of catheter and varying volumes of injectate are
sui uaaqau sss asau 'suuu ui suaanea
chosen to accommodate various sizes of animals, from
 ingly used for tracking the haemodynamic status of human
cats to horses. Either the ventilator is temporarily shut off
 patients in the ICU or postoperative recovery areas. Studies
 Or each injection is made at the same time in the respira-
in human patients have determined that the monitors lose
tory cycle and two to three measurements are performed
acauracy with time and require recalibration, particularly
in quick succession and averaged to improve accuracy.
when major changes in cardiovascular status have occurred,
Problems associated with insertion of a Swan-Ganz cath-
and that values obtained by one monitor differ from
eter include prolongation of anaesthesia time, initiation
values obtained from a monitor from a different manufac.
of premature ventricular depolarizations, and potential
turer. Although good agreement was obtained between
complications of laceration of a blood vessel, knotting of
LiDCO" and PulseCO"*, cardiac output measurements in
the catheter, and infection.
dogs anaesthetized with fentanyl and pentobarbital, the
Lithium dilution cardiac output (LiDCO") technique
PulseCO" was unable to measure accurately the decrease
mimics the dye dilution technique by injection of lithium
in CO after severe haemorrhage and the authors concluded
chloride into a central or peripheral vein and a pump
that recalibration was necessary after any major alteration
withdraws blood from an artery pulling it through a
in haemodynamic status (Cooper & Muir, 2007). Investiga-
lithium sensor to measure blood concentration. Advan-
tions of the PulseCO"" in dogs with systemic inflammatory
tages of this system include no major invasive catheteriza-
response syndrome (SIRS) (Duffy et al., 2009) and in
tion and a small volume of injectate that is easily injected
 horses using inotropes to change cardiovascular dynamics
by hand and which causes minimal haemodynamic effect.
m ie go ay aii (oo 'ie a aaes)
The patient's haemoglobin and sodium concentrations
compared with LiDCO"* and the need for frequent recali-
must be entered into the monitor because lithium is dis-
bration. In anaesthetized neonatal foals, values for CO
tributed only in plasma. Some blood loss may occur even
recordedusing
PulseCO"" agreed significantly better
though the sampled blood is returned to the patient. A
with values from LiDCO"" than measurements using the
close correlation between the LiDCO and thermodilution
PiCCO" method (Shih et al., 2009). Comparison of the
techniques has been verified in several animal species
FloTrac"*/Vigileo"" with TDCO in experimental dogs docu-
(Linton et al., 2000; Mason et al., 200l; Beaulieu et al.,
mented overestimations, sometimes excessive influenced
2005). One experimental study in anaesthetized neonatal
by MAP which led to the conclusion that FloTrac"m/Vigileo?m
foals discovered that the LiDCO technique overestimated
was not suitable for CO measurement in dogs (Bektas
TDCO measurements when CO <10 L/min and that the
et al., 2012).
correlations changed over time, however, the authors con-
cluded that LiDCO was an acceptable alternative to TDCO
Fow method
(Corley et al., 2002).
Transoesophageal Doppler echocardiography
cardiac
 In anaesthetized healthy experimental dogs weighing
 22-25.4 kg ventilated with tidal volumes of 10-15 mL/kg.
 monitor in anaesthetized human patients. The technique
cardiac outputs ranged from 50 to 303 mL/kg/min and the
involves insertion of a probe into the oesophagus to the
average difference between the LiDCO and NICO was
level of the left ventricular outflow tract. The pulsed-wave
9.3 mL/kg/min, indicating that NICO would be accepta-
Doppler crystal emits an ultrasound wave and moving
ble for clinical use (Gunkel et al., 2004). Comparison of
objects (red blood cells) change the frequency resulting in
the NICO and LiDCO techniques in foals 1-6 days old
 a curved waveform. Cardiac output is calculated from the
and weighing 32-6l kg identified a good correlation for
velocity-time integral (VTI, area under the curve) of the
CO measurements between the two techniques over a
ascending aorta X aortic cross-sectional area x heart rate.
wide range of values (Valverde et al., 2007). The NICO
Comparison with TDCO measurements has identified
technique tended to overestimate the LiDCO values at low
 no significant differences between measurements from
41
Section
1
Principles and procedures
both techniques in horses and dogs (Young et al., 1996;
Haemorrhage % of blood volume
Yamashita et al., 2007). Probe size has been a problem,
10%
 and the technique requires operator training.
20%
30%
0
Impedance cardiography
-10-
Transthoracic bioimpedance (BICO) involves placement
of electrodes, continuous output of high-frequency, low
-20-
magnitude current, measurement of electrical resistance,
and a monitor that calculates Co using an algorithm.
-30-
Percer
BICO did not produce acceptable values in Beagle dogs
Heartrate
(Yamashita et al., 2007).
-40
Mean arterial pressure
-50-
Cardiacoutput
Blood loss
Figure 2.26 Cardiovascular responses to graded
Monitoring blood loss should include measuring the
volume of blood aspirated into a suction bottle, estimating
haemorrhage in five splenectomized isoflurane-anaesthetized
free blood on drapes around the surgical site and counting
dogs. Results are presented as percent change from values
measured before blood loss
blood-soaked gauze squares. Placing a bucket under the
Adapteo from Weiskopf et al. 1981.
surgical site to catch free-flowing blood, for example during
rhinotomy in large animals, will assist assessment of blood
 Blood volume of paediatric patients may be 50% greater
loss. Gauze squares of different sizes absorb varying
than the blood volume of the mature animal. The percent-
amounts of blood from 5-8 mLto 12-14 mL. The volume
age of this volume that the animal can lose before circula-
of blood lost on the gauze squares may be estimated or the
tory shock ensues depends to a large extent on the physical
gauzes weighed and, after the weight of the sarme number
 status of the patient, the preanaesthetic PCV, the depth of
of dry gauzes has been subtracted, applying the formula
 anaesthesia, and the support treatment provided. Signif-
that l gweight equals 1 mL blood. Measurement of packed
cant cardiovascular changes occur after loss of 15% of the
cell volume is not useful during acute blood loss as this
blood volume The maximum blood loss allowed before
value will not change initially. Once an increased volume
giving a blood transfusion is usually 20% of the estimated
of balanced electrolyte solution with or without colloid
blood volume, however, in some animals up to 30% of
has been infused, the packed cel volume and total protein
the total blood volume may be lost without onset of hypo-
concentrations will decrease to a value of use during assess-
saeueaid ioleuu ou sey suaned aui j! eixody io uoisual
ment. When evaluating packed cell volume changes, it is
thetic illness, is ventilated with oxygen, the depth of
important to consider that anaesthesia per se will result in
anaesthesia is lightened, balanced electrolyte and colloid
sequestration of red blood cells in the spleen and decrease
 solutions are infused intravenously, and vasoactive drugs
the packed cell volume by up to 20%.
 are administered as needed.
In the conscious animal, loss of blood volume is ini-
tially compensated for by increased heart rate and cardiac
Monitoring the respiratory system
contractility, together with peripheral vasoconstriction.
These physiological responses are blunted or abolished
Visual observation of respiratory rate and depth of breath-
during anaesthesia. Consequently, the significance of the
ing is a basic estimate of adequacy of breathing. The res-
 blood loss may not be appreciated owing to maintenance
piratory rate may be counted by observation of chest
movement or movement of the reservoir bag on the anaes-
of a normal heart rate. Furthermore, it should be remem-
bered that when MAP is decreasing in response to
thesia machine The excursion of the chest, abdomen, or
haemorrhage, cardiac output decreases to a greater extent
bag should be observed to gain an impression of the depth
of breathing. In general, except possibly in horses, a spon-
(Fig. 2.26) (Weiskopf et al., 1981).
Measurement of arterial pressure is an important step
taneous rate of 6 breaths/min or less is likely indicative of
hypoventilation. Respiratory rates of 10 breaths/min or
in the management of blood loss as oxygen delivery to
tissues is impaired when mean arterial pressure decreases
 greater may provide adequate ventilation or be associated
below 60 mmHg. The potential impact of blood loss on
with hypoventilation when the breaths are shallow. Chest
the patient may be evaluated better by assessing the
wall movement with no corresponding movement of the
volume of blood loss against the total blood volume.
reservoir bag is indicative of airway obstruction or tension
The blood volume varies between species and is usually
pneumothorax.
assessed in mature animals as 86 mL/kg body weight in
Rate monitors and apnoea alarms
dogs, 56 mL/kg in cats, 72 mL/kg in draught horses and
ponies, lo0 mL/kg in Thoroughbreds and Arabians,
Rate monitors and apnoea alarms may use a thermistor
60 mL/kg in sheep.
either connected to the endotracheal tube or placed in
42
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
front of a dog's nose. The thermistor detects temperature
the tip of the needle into a rubber stopper. Leaving an air
differences between inspired and exhaled gases to produce
bubble in the syringe for any length of time allows diffu-
a signal that drives a digital rate meter to make a noise
 sion of gases between the blood and bubble such that
siee au ym a u yid io aiau u saea ym
 PCOz will decrease and POz will decrease if the animal is
 breathing. An alarm sounds if a constant gas temperature
breathing Oz and increase if the animal is breathing air.
is detected. Like the oesophageal stethoscope that counts
The syringe should be inverted several times over 20
seconds to mix the blood with the heparin. The tempera-
only and not adequacy of ventilation.
ture of the animal should be measured at the time of
sampling. Firm pressure should be applied to the artery
Tidal and minute volume monitors
for 3 minutes after percutaneous needle puncture to avoid
The volume of each breath (tidal volume) and the volume
haematoma formation.
Ideally, blood gas analysis should be performed imme-
of gas inhaled or exhaled per minute (minute volume) can
laa ses e suuoie Aq sieue leus ui pansau aq
diately after blood collection into plastic syringes because
there is a sigmificant change in PO2, an increase if PO2 is
such as a Wright's respirometer within the circle circuit or
12 kPa (90 mmHg) and a decrease when the PO2 is
to the endotracheal tube The respirometer has a low
>33.3 kPa (>250 mmHg). due to diffusion of O2 into or
resistance to breathing and is reasonably accurate over
out of the syringe and metabolism in white blood cells
volumes ranging from 4 L/min to 15 L/min but under
and platelets that consumes O2 and produces CO2
reads below 4 L/min.
(Beaulieu et al., 1999). Not all plastic syringes are the
Blood gas analysis
sis, and the magnitude of POz change depends on the
Measurement of the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
 manufacturer and characteristics of the syringe (Wu et al..
a sample of arterial blood (PaCO2) using blood gas analy-
1997). Investigations have discovered that the change in
sis is the best monitor of ventilation. Arterial blood may
PO2 over time is greater with a 3 mL syringe than a 5 mL
 be collected from any peripheral artery used for invasive
syringe (Wu et al., 1997) and inaccuracy is greater when
blood pressure measurement Commonly for clinical
<1.8 mL is collected into a 3 mL syringe compared with
patients, a small amount of 1 : looo heparin is drawn into
>2 mL (Hedberg et al., 2009). Furthermore accuracy of
a 3 mL plastic syringe using a 25 gauge needle and the
 PO2 measurement is related to the method of storage of
plunger withdrawn to wash the inside of the syringe with
the syringe before analysis, in iced water at o°C or at
heparin. Excess heparin is then squirted from the syringe
ambient temperature of 20-25°C. and the time lapse
leaving only syringe dead space filled with heparin and no
between collection and analysis ( Pretto & Rochford, 1994;
bubbles. A larger volume of heparin will increase the
Deane et al., z
2004, Picandet et al., 2007). Iced water
acidity of the sample. A 2 mL sample of blood is collected
decreases the rate of metabolism in blood and the lower
from most dogs and 2-3 mL from horses (collecting the
same volume for sequential samples). Individually pack-
sion of O2 from water into the plastic syringe through
aged 1 mL syringes containing a dry lithium heparin pellet
increased gas solubility and increased haemoglobin O2
[to decrease dilution) can also be used (for example.
affinity (Wu et al., 1997). A signifcant change in POz has
Portex? Line Draw Arterial Blood Sampling Kit, Smiths
been measured by l0 minutes after blood collection
Medical ASD, Inc, Keene, NH, USA). After removing the
(Pretto & Rochford, 1994; Picandet et al., 2007). PCO2
cap from the nozzle of the syringe the plunger should be
undergoes a clinically insignificant but statistically signifi-
pushed fully forward before allowing the syringe to fll
cant change. Picandet et al. (2007) suggested that although
pazudo suuieuos sasuas sseid iaiel pooia y
the PCO2 appeared to be stable, the value may have been
heparin are also commercially available.
a balance between leakage of COz out of the blood and
 Blood may be collected by percutaneous puncture or
increased CO2 from metabolism. Values other than PO2
from a catheter. The contents of the catheter should be
may be relied upon from plastic syringes stored at room
aspirated using a separate syringe before a sample of blood
1e4l paisassns uaaq sey l 'sainuiu 09 ol dn ainieiaduual
is collected for analysis. This mixture of saline and blood
blood from different species may require different han-
may be discarded or, if collected into a syringe containing
dling but published data reveal differences in results even
some heparinized saline, can be returned into the animal
within the same species. Despite differences in fndings
through a venous catheter. The blood sample should be
between investigations, it appears that with an expected
collected anaerobically slowly over several respiratory
PO2 of about 13.3 kPa (100 mmHg). the increase may be
cycles and without aspirating any air bubbles. Excessive
less if the plastic syringe is kept at room temperature until
aq ueo uasixo se papioae aq pinous ainsaid aneau
extracted from the blood sample. After expressing a drop
the decrease may be less in blood with a high PO2 when
of blood and any bubbles from the needle the syringe
the syringe is stored in a slurry of ice and water (Pretto &
should be sealed either with a special cap or by inserting
Rochford, 1994). Plastic syringes for blood gas analysis
43
Section
1
Principles and procedures
have largely replaced use of glass syringes due to decreased
cost and increased convenience. Glass syringes are non-
Table 2.4 Mean normal values for pH, PaCOz, and
PaOz in mature conscious unsedated animals
disposable items that must be sterilized before use and not
infrequently the plunger becomes immoveable or the glass
breaks. However, when blood is collected into glass
Species
pHa
PaCO2
PaO2
References
syringes and stored in an ice and water slurry at 0°C, PO2
Dogs
7.40
4.67
13.6
Horwitz et al., 1969
and PCO2 values are minimally changed for 90 minutes
(35)
(102)
(Pretto & Rochford, 1994; Beaulieu et al., 1999; Deane
7.38
5.3
13.3
Haskins et al., 2005
et al., 2004; Picandet et al., 2007: Noel et al., 2010).
(40)
(100)
Plastic vacutainer tubes containing lyophilized heparin
Cats
7.34
4.5
13.3
Middleton et al., 1981
have been used to collect blood from conscious horses for
(34)
(100)
 blood gas and acid-base analysis. A detailed investigation
of this practice revealed that PO2 increases significantly.
Horses
7.38
5.05-6.1
13.3
Steffey et al., 1987:
(38-46)
(100)
Wagner et al., 1991;
more than 6.65 kPa (50 mmHg) within 15 minutes, due
Wan et al., 1992
to diffusion of O2 through the wall of the tube with a
7.41
4.8
12.2
Clarke et al., 1991;
greater change occurring when tubes are stored at 0°C
(36)
(91)
Tate et al., 1993
than 22°C before analysis (Noel et al., 2010). The change
 in PCO2 was less dramatic but statistically significant and
Cattle
7.40
5.28
11.8
Gallivan et al., 1989
(39)
(89)
was greater when the vacutainer is stored at 22°C than
0°C. The calculated values of bicarbonate (HCO,), total
Sheep
7.48
4.4
12.2
Wanner & Reinhart,
CO2 (TCO2), standard base excess (SBE) were minimally
(33)
(92)
1978
affected. The authors also noted that the design of the
Goats
7.45
5.45
12.6
Forster et al., 1981
vacutainer tube does not allow collection of an anaerobic
(41)
(95)
blood sample and concluded that plastic vacutainer tubes
do not produce accurate results for PO2 and PCO2 but can
Pigs
7.50
5.4
10.5
Hannon, 1983
(41)
(79)
be used when HCO, TCO2 and SBE are the main interest,
in which case the tubes should be stored at 0"C when
Values for PaCOz and PaOz given as kPa (mmHg)
 analysis is delayed.
The blood sample is introduced into equipment incor-
porating electrodes measuring pH, PCO2 and PO2. The
machine uses the measured values to compute HCO3.
TCO2, SBE and oxygen saturation (SaO2). The patient's
 Hypercarbia in some anaesthetized dogs and cats during
temperature is entered into the blood gas analyser for
anaesthesia may be associated with tachycardia with or
 appropriate adjustment of pH and PO2. The patient's hae-
without increased blood pressure. In these animals, inter-
moglobin concentration must be known for an accurate
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IppV) will result
measure of base excess. Fully automated pH and blood gas
in decreased heart rate within a few minutes. In other
analysers are highly accurate but expensive. Portable and
patients, hypercarbia may be associated with hypotension.
less expensive equipment is available for example.
Hypercarbia in horses during anaesthesia may also cause
STATPAL? (Sendx Medical Inc, Carlsbad, California, USA)
stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, increased
and i-STAT? (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois,
blood pressure and cardiac output (Wagner et al., 1990.
USA), although the cost of individual analyses may be
Khanna et al., 1995). Adverse effects of hypercarbia are
higher.
observed in some horses as tachycardia of 60-70 beats/
min, or hypotension caused by decreased myocardial con-
Hypercarbia, hypocarbia
tractility. These abnormalities are corrected within 5-10
Normal values for PaCO in conscious unsedated animals
 minutes of initiating IPPV. More frequently, the effects of
are given in Table 2.4. Increased PaCO2 (hypercarbia.
hypoventilation during inhalation anaesthesia are mani-
hypercapnia) is a direct consequence of hypoventilation
fested as an inadequate depth of anaesthesia despite a
and commonly occurs during anaesthesia. An increase of
vaporizer setting that should provide a sufficient depth of
10 mmHg above normal is mild hypoventilation, an
anaesthesia. In t
these animals, controlled ventilation
increase of 10-20 mmHg is moderate hypoventilation,
expands the lungs, thereby improving uptake of anaes-
and an increase >20 mmHg is severe hypoventilation.
thetic agent and resulting in increased depth of anaesthe-
Thus, PaCO2 values exceeding 8 kPa (60 mmHg) are
sia (Fig.2.27).
indicative of severe respiratory depression. A decrease in
Oxygenation
PaCOz (hypocarbia) will occur with increased ventilation.
A PaCO2 less than 2.6 kPa (20 mmHg) causes cerebral
 PaO2 values are influenced by the inspired oxygen tension
vasoconstriction and cerebral hypoxia.
(PIO2), adequacy of ventilation, cardiac output, and blood
44
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
TIME
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
O2L/min
Vaporizer
2.5
Inspired Iso
1.7
1.6
2.1
2
.3
1.6
180
End tidal Iso
1.3
1.7
End tidal CO2
3438
46
50
43
3734
SpO2
160
98
98
98
98
66
140
140
120
120
100
80
80
V
60
Systolic
40
Heart rate
20
O
Resprate
10
Notes
Figure 2.27 Part of an anaesthetic record of a 32 kg Golden Retriever anaesthetized for stifle surgery. At Note 1 the dog was
moved into the operating room. The increase in ETCOz from 34 to 50 mmHg (4.5 to 6.65 kPa) over the next 30 minutes
 s e  s       u u  e   si 
concentration. Institution of controlled ventilation quickly increased the depth of anaesthesia (ET isoflurane concentration
increased to 1.6%), decreasing heart rate. Subsequently the vaporizer setting could be decreased.
pressure. A PaO2 of 12-14.6 kPa (90-110 mmHg) is
mismatched within the lung, resulting in a lower PaO2 in
normal in unsedated animals at sea level and PaOz values
some individuals.
less than 8 kPa (60 mmHg) constitute hypoxaemia.
Hypoxaemia may develop in dogs and cats during
The maximum possible PaO is govermed by the inspired
anaesthesia or recovery as a result of hypoventilation when
O2 % and animals breathing oxygen may have PaO2 values
breathing air. This situation is most likely to occur in old
up to five times greater than when breathing air. The
animals, animals with hypotension, pneumothorax, pul-
 partial pressure of oxygen at the alveolar level (PAO2) can
monary disease, CNS depression from metabolic disease,
be calculated from the following formula:
 Or after administration of opioids. Hypoxaemia may also
develop during general anaesthesia as a result of severe
PaO =[(barometric pressure - Pwater vapour) x FIO]
lung collapse. Patients at greatest risk are small animals
(PaCO/0.8)
during thoracotomy or repair of a ruptured diaphragm.
foals with pneumonia and horses with abdominal disten-
where the value for water vapour is 6.25 kPa [47 mmHg).
 sion from pregnancy or colic. Hypoxaemia may be sus-
FIOz is the fractional concentration of O2 in inspired gas,
pected but is not always obvious as the mucous membranes
and 0.8 is the respiratory exchange ratio. Values for PaO2
 may be less pink than desired but not cyanotic.
Auieay u paioadxa aie (shuu oot) edy Z'es ueui iaieaie
dogs and cats breathing oxygen. Horses and ruminants are
Oxygen content
subject to lung collapse during recumbency and anaesthe-
 Oxygen delivery to tissues is dependent on tissue blood
sia and, consequently. ventilation and perfusion are
flow and arterial blood oxygen content (CaO2). Oxygen
45
Section
1
Principles and procedures
content comprises O2 carried by haemoglobin (Hb) and
001
20
a small amount of dissolved O2. The formula for calculat-
ing CaO2 shows that the Hb concentration of the blood,
80
Arterial
16
the Hb oxygen affnity and the PO2 are important deter-
sat.97%
(ml/100m
minants of O2 content:
urati
PO,100
60-
satu
Venous
12
CaO mL/dL = [total Hb - (COHb +metHb)]xSaO2
sat.75%
obin
content
x 1.39+ PaO, x0.003
40
PO240
8
品
where SaO2 (oxygen saturation) is a decimal fraction of
20
4
1, Hb concentration in g/dL, and 1.39 mL/g is the volume
of Oz in mL that can be bound to l g of human Hb. The
number 1.31 or 1.34 is often substituted for 1.39 as being
0
a practical rather than theoretical value. Correct calcula-
20
40
60
80
100
tion of SaOz should refer to the ratio of oxyhaemoglobin
PO2(mmHg)
(OHb) to active Hb (OHb + deoxyhaemoglobin, HHb).
Inactive Hb has lost the ability to bind O2 and this most
Figure 2.28 Graph depicting the relationship between PaO2.
commonly refers to carboxyhaemoglobin (COHb) and
haemoglobin oxygen saturation SaOz. and oxygen content in
humans.
methaemoglobin (metHb) (Toffaletti & Zijlstra, 2007).
Most gas analysers calculate saturation from POz by com-
in temperature, and increased concentration of 2,3-
 puter and do not actually measure saturation. When the
diphosphoglycerate (DPG) in the red cells will produce a
total Hb value is used in the formula [as with blood
shift to the right, and vice versa. Comparison of O2 dis-
 gs analyser results) measured values for SaO2 may be
sociation curves is possible by using the Pso value that is
accurate in most anaesthetized patients because their
the PO2 required for 50% Hb saturation.
quantities of COHb and metHb are small. For accuracy.
The haemoglobin O2 affnity varies between species.
the different forms of Hb must be measured by an auto-
Human Hb Pso is 3.5 kPa (26.3 mmHg) (Lumb, 2000;
mated multiwavelength spectrophotometer commonly
Toffaletti & Zijlstra, 2007). The canine ODC is similar to
referred to as a cooximeter. Critical care management may
human with a range of Pso reported as 3.5-4.2 kPa [26-
include animals exposed to carbon monoxide poisoning
31.5 mmHg). however, the small difference may result in
Or animals with methaemoglobinaemia from acetomi-
small errors in measurement of canine PO2 produced by
nophen or benzocaine toxicity, for example. Carbon mon-
a blood gas analyser using human Pso (Scott et al., 2005).
oxide displaces O from Hb with an affinity approximately
Bovine, equine, and camelid ODC have lower Pso values
300x that of Hb affinity for O2. Animals with carbon
indicating higher O2 affinity. Thus, the llama ODC, Ps0
monoxide poisoning do not have decreased PO2 so that,
3.3 kPa (24.6 mmHg), is to the left of sheep such that the
unless the different forms of Hb are measured, the decrease
O2 content of llama blood at a PO2 of 6.7 kPa (50 mmHg)
in blood O2 content may not be realized. A value for O2
is similar to that of a PO2 of 8 kPa (60 mmHg) in sheep
saturation obtained from a pulse oximeter (SpO2) will not
(Moraga et al., 1996). Fetal ODC is shifted to the left of
be decreased in these patients because the wavelengths
the maternal curve so that the Hb is adapted to operate at
used by the monitors are not sensitive to COHb as a con-
lower PO2 levels present in the fetus. Fetal Hb concentra-
se uu 099 1e 1uBil yonw se Buiqiosqe qHOO jo aouanbas
tions are significantly higher than maternal in both llama
does OHb. A patient with increased concentration of
and sheep. increasing O2 content, and the camelid pla-
metHb would be reported as having an abnormally low
centa is very thin compared with others, facilitating O2
SpO2. MetHb absorbance is high at both wavelengths used 
diffusion (Moraga et al., 1996). In animals genetically
by pulse oximeters and the resultant effect is to decrease
adapted to high altitude, the left shift ofthe ODC improves 
SpO2 down to 85% regardless of the PaOzand SaO2 values
 Oxygenation of arterial blood that outweighs the decrease
(Tremper & Barker, 1990).
in offloading of O2 at the tissues.
The high O2 affnity and increased Hb concentration in
Oxygen affinity
llamas are not different whether the animals are at high
The O affnity of blood is usually described by the oxygen
 or low altitude, a similarity shared with guinea pigs that
dissociation curve (ODC) at standard values of pH = 7.40.
are also considered to be genetically adapted to high alti-
pCO2 = 5.33 kPa (40 mmHg)., and temperature of 37°C
tude (Pairet & Jaenicke, 2010). The high blood-O2 affnity
(Fig. 2. 28). The relationship between PaOz and SaO2 is
in camelids (llama, vicuna, alpaca, guanaco) is partly due
not linear because Hb changes its affinity for O2 at increas-
to amino acid substitutions in the Hb molecule that
ing levels of saturation. Several factors cause the normal
reduce the DPG effect and resists shift of the ODC to the
ODC to shift to the right or left along the x-axis, for
right (Weber, 2007). Thus, although the intrinsic O2 affin-
example, an increase in PCO2, decrease in pH, increase
ity of llama Hb is lower than camel (lowland species), the
46
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
effect on DPG binding results in greater O2 affinity.
 accuracy, ScvO2 should be measured from blood collected
Vicunas have a different amino acid substitution on Hb
from the tip of a central venous catheter placed close to,
that affects Cl binding and increases Hb O2 affinity in
or within, the right atrium (Walley, 20l0). The site of
vicuna over llama.
 sampling is important because sampling from the tip of a
Reduced Pso is critical for maintenance of arterial oxy-
catheter some distance away from the right atrium pro-
genation in animals at high altitude. Thus, factors that 
duces inaccurate results when compared to SmvO2.
 oppose that state and cause the ODC to shift to the right,
Peripheral venous blood collected from the cephalic,
such as hypoventilation and decreased pH, oppose this
femoral, or jugular veins is not comprised of blood from
effect and are deleterious to tissue oxygen delivery
 major organs and cannot be used to evaluate tissue oxygen
(Winslow, 2007). Where O2 extraction is high, as in
extraction but may be used as a screening method for arte-
exercise, hyperventilation, increased cardiac output, and
nial pH and PCO2
vasodilation are important for maintaining
tissue
Measurement of pH and blood gases in lingual venous
oxygenation.
blood from healthy normotensive, anaesthetized dogs
 High altitude human residents do not have Hb geneti-
slightly overestimated arterial pH and overestimated PCO2
cally adapted to high altitude but a variety of other
and base excess when compared to values measured in
physiological adaptations that include increased Hb
arterial blood (Pang et al., 2009). The differences were
concentration, hyperventilation, blunted response of the
not large and unlikely to signifcantly alter therapeutic
management. Most of the lingual PO2 values were exces-
levels (Hainsworth & Drinkhill, 2007). Hyperventilation
sively lower than PaOz values particularly during admin-
to a PaCO2 3.3 kPa (25 mmHg) is normal at high altitude
istration of medetomidine Significant differences were
and the alkalinization further improves Oz loading in the
obtained when comparing mean values for jugular venous
lungs. The reduction in Oz release to tissues is partly offset
and arterial pH and PCO2. The ranges of values for both
by a more effcient O2 extraction in the tissues by mecha-
parameters from all three sampling sites were almost
nisms including an increase in tissue capillarization.
identical.
Mixed venous, central venous, and venous POz
Pulse oximetry
Mixed venous PO2 (PmvO2) is obtained from a blood
sample collected from the pulmonary artery after place-
Pulse oximetry is a non-invasive method of continuously
ment of a cardiac catheter. The information obtained is
measuring haemoglobin oxygen saturation (SpO2). The
interpreted based on the fact that PmvO2 is representative 
abbreviation SpOz is used to identify the method of meas-
of total body O2 extraction. Factors that influence PmvO2
urement of SaO2. The pulse oximeter sensor consists of
are: (1) arterial O2 content (CaO2); (2) cardiac output; (3)
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that emit light in the red
distribution of peripheral blood flow; and (4) tissue O2
(660 nm) and infrared (940 nm) wavelengths and a pho-
extraction. Decreases in the first three factors or an increase
todetector that measures the amount of light that has been
in the fourth will cause decreased PmvOz. O2 saturation
transmitted through tissues (Tremper & Barker, 1990). The
of pulmonary artery blood is generally around 70-75%. A
 principles of measurement are based on the different light
decrease in SmvO2 to less than 65% is significant and indi-
absorption spectra of oxyhaemoglobin and reduced hae-
cates an abnormality in the patient, whereas a decrease to
moglobin, and the detection of a pulsatile signal. Pulse
50% is significantly low. Small variations in PmvO2 exert
 Oximeters are available as single parameter monitors or in
little influence on PaO2. As the PmvOz decreases further,
combination, for example, pulse oximetry and NIBP or
extraction of oxygen from alveolar gas is increased decreas-
 pulse oximetry and capnography.
ing PaO2, especially in patients with compromised venti-
Pulse oximeters display a digital record of saturation
lation such as hypoventilation or ventilation-perfusion
 and pulse rate, with an audible beep, and some monitors
mismatches. Conditions lowering PmvO2 are low cardiac
display the oxygen saturation waveform (Fig. 2.29). A
 output and hypotension or increased oxygen extraction
limit for acceptable saturation can be entered into the
created by sepsis and postoperative shivering, although the
monitor, allowing an alarm to sound when lower values
Opposite effect may occur when sepsis results in impaired
are sensed. The pulse rate displayed on the oximeter must
tissue oxygen extraction. An abrupt decrease in PmvO2
correspond to the rate obtained by palpation or ECG, and
may occur following a sudden decrease in cardiac output.
the sensor should be in position for at least 30 seconds
decreased venous return, for example, following reposi-
before the measurement can be assumed to be accurate.
tioning. and increased O2 consumption during muscle
 The shape of the sensor, thickness of tissue placed within
movement PmvOz may be higher than normal in animals
the sensor, the presence of pigment and hair, and move-
in which endotoxaemia has induced a hyperdynamic cir-
ment of the patient, can be responsible for the oximeter
culation with increased cardiac output.
failing to measure oxygen saturation. Ambient light may
Central venous O2 saturation measurement (ScvO2)
interfere with probe function and covering it with gauze
may be used as a surrogate for SmvO2. For greatest
 may produce a reading. It may be impossible to obtain a
47
Section
1
Principles and procedures
NIXOH
3
38
20
14147
83
P9
96
98.6
T2PROBEOFF
SPLAYALARMSMENU
QUICKSET
NIPMODE
PRINTER
TRENDS
SETUP
SUSPEND
Figure 2.29 Multiparameter monitor displays haemoglobin oxygen saturation (SpOz) waveform and value (96%), arterial
blood pressure (systolic 141 mmHg. diastolic 63 mmHg. mean 83 mmHg). and COz waveform and values (inspired 4 mmHg
(0.5 kPa), end-tidal 37 mmHg (4.9 kPa), respiratory rate 38 breaths/minute),. and temperature of 98.6°F in an anaesthetized
oximeter and blood pressure. ECG and NIBP are not connected.
reading from a pulse oximeter when peripheral vasocon-
Table 2.5 Relationship between PaOz and
striction is severe, for example after administration of
medetomidine in dogs or patients in circulatory shock.
haemoglobin saturation in humans
The pulse oximeter will not accurately reflect blood O2
content in patients with carbon monoxide or methaemo-
PaO2
Sa02
Interpretation
globin poisoning (see earlier). Oxygen delivery to tissues
kPa
mmHg
%
may be compromised by low blood O2 content, cardiac
output, or blood flow. Thus a patient with low Hb con-
≥13.3
≥100
100
Oxygenated
centration may display normal values for SpO2 and yet
10.6
08
94
suffer tissue hypoxia. Anaesthetic management of anaemic
 patients should, therefore, include administration of sup-
9.3
70
92
plemental inspired O2 and cardiovascular support.
8.0
09
90
Hypoxa emia
Pulse oximetry saves lives by detecting desaturation
6.7
50
08
before clinically apparent. SpO >90% does not
5.3
40
70
Venous
guarantee adequate oxygenation of tissues
A pulse oximeter detects inadequate blood oxygenation,
which should be taken as an indication to supplement
traumatic pulmonary contusions or pneumothorax, and
the animal's inspired oxygen concentration and to search
during thoracotomy or major surgery in the cranial
for the cause. Hypoxaemia is defned as PaO2 of 8 kPa
abdomen. It is also important to keep track of oxygenation
(60 mmHg) or SaO2 ≤90% (Table 2.5). A pulse oximeter
in animals during recovery from anaesthesia, in patients
is a valuable monitor for use on all anaesthetized animals
with partial airway obstruction, or when ventilation is
and specifically for animals anaesthetized with injectable
depressed or impaired by systemic opioid administration
anaesthetic agents and breathing air, or during inhalation
or residual pneumothorax after thoracotomy or ruptured
anaesthesia in patients with pulmonary disease or
diaphragm repair.
48
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
The pulse oximeter is particularly valuable because it
 a sl am ra  d an  aio
 provides an immediate monitor of decreased oxygen satu-
although all sites in the cats had low correlation, the hind
ration, so that corrective treatment can be initiated before
 paw was the most accurate. Failure to achieve readings was
respiratory or cardiovascular failure develops. Use of pulse
 most frequent with the Surgivet V3304.
oximetry is associated with reduction in odds of anaes-
 Different monitors, types of sensors, and alternative
thetic-related death (Brodbelt, 2009). Evaluation of the
sites for measurement have been evaluated in horses
patient should take into account the fact that the pulse
(Whitehair et al., 1990; Chaffin et al., 1996; Matthews
oximeter does not measure CO2 concentration or blood
et al., 2003). The Ohmeda Biox 3700 pulse oximeter
 pressure and may continue to read satisfactorily in the
and the Physio-Control Lifestat 1600 pulse oximeter
presence of hypotension. However, it can provide a
were evaluated in mature horses using the human ear
warning of a severe decrease in tissue blood flow caused
lobe probe (Whitehair et al., 1990). Measurements were
by hypotension or decreased cardiac output by abruptly
obtained from the tongue and the ear, with the most
failing to obtain a signal. Loss of signal may also occur
 accurate measurements obtained from the tongue; the oxi-
spontaneously with no change in the patient's condition
meters failed to detect a pulse at the nostril, lip, or vulva.
due to local blood vessel compression and measurement
 The results revealed that both oximeters tended to under-
is restored by changing the position of the probe. Com-
estimate saturation by 3.7%. with 95% of the oxygen
pression of the base of the tongue between the endotra-
saturation values within 1% above or 8% below SaO2
cheal tube and the jaw may decrease blood flow and signal
(Whitehair et al., 1990). The Nellcor N-200 pulse oxime-
acquisition from a probe clipped to the tongue.
ter was evaluated in anaesthetized foals using a fngertip
probe (Durasensor DS-l00A) (Chaffin et al., 1996).
SpO before desaturation is clinically apparent, it must be
Attachment of the probe to the tongue or ear of the foals
realized that the number observed on the pulse oximeter
slightly underestimated SaO2 within the range of 80-100%
is not always accurate and that different results may be
saturation. Evaluation of four Nellcor models and the Sur-
obtained from different probe types, different sites on the
givet V3304 in anaesthetized horses with the probe on the
body, different models, and different species of animals.
tongue lip. ear, nostril and prepuce or vulva found that
Most models are reasonably accurate for saturations >90%
correlations between SpOz and SaOz were fairly high at all
but for some models that consistently overestimate SaO2
sites except the ear [Matthews et al., 2003). All monitors
(Dolphin Voyager in dogs), a higher threshold of 93% has
 EXcept the Nellcor NPB-290 failed to produce readings at
been suggested (Burns et al., 2006).
some times, with the V3304 failing 60% of the times.
Different body sites in dogs have been evaluated for
Reflectance pulse oximeters detect changes in absorp-
accuracy of measurement of SaO2. In one investigation, a
tion of light reflected from tissues, rather than transmitted
multisite clip probe placed on the lip. tongue, toe web.
through tissues as just described (watney et al. l993:
and the tip of the tail gave accurate and reliable estima-
Chaffn et al., 1996). Attachment of a reflectance probe
tions of SaOz values during conditions of full haemo-
 designed for the human forehead to the ventral surface of
globin saturation and moderate haemoglobin desaturation
the base of the tail in foals had 100% sensitivity for detect-
(92%) (Huss et al., 1995). In this study, the human finger
ing SaO2 <90% but consistently underestimated the actual
probe was accurate only when placed on the dog's lip and
value (Chaffin et al., 1996). Therefore, this probe site com-
when haemoglobin saturation was complete The lip was
bination will incorrectly identify some foals as being
found to be the best site in conscious animals. Another
hypoxaemic.
study of conscious dogs in an intensive care unit found
that a circumferential pulse oximeter probe around a digit
or the metatarsus produced excellent correlations between
Capnography
pulse oximeter and SaO2 values (Fairman, 1993). An eval-
Capnography indirectly estimates PaCO2 by measuring
uation of the Ohmeda Biox 3700 with a human ear probe
the concentration of CO2 in expired gas. Capnography is
applied to the tongue provided an accurate evaluation of
also useful for diagnosis of mechanical problems in anaes-
SaO2 (Jacobsen et al., 1992). The pulse oximeter underes-
thetic circuits, airway obstruction, and cardiogenic shock.
timated SaO2 at higher saturations and overestimated
There are two types of gas sampling. Sidestream sampling
SaOzat saturations <70%. However, as the authors pointed
 is when gas is aspirated from an adapter inserted between
out, detection of hypoxaemia is more important than
the endotracheal tube and anaesthetic circuit (Matthews
measurement of the exact degree of hypoxaemia. One
et al., 1990) and delivered to the capnometer (see Figs.
evaluation of four Nellcor models and the Surgivet V3304
2.5, 2.29, 2.30). Gases leaving the analyser should be
with the probe applied at five sites in anaesthetized dogs
directed back into the anaesthetic circuit or into the scav-
and cats achieved arterial saturations of 98%, 85%, and
enging system. Mainstream gas sampling occurs when the
72% by varying inspired O2 % (Matthews et al., 2003).
measuring device is placed between the endotracheal tube
SpO2 measurements were reasonably accurate at SaO2
and delivery circuit (Fig. 2.3l). Measurement of CO2
>90%. The study revealed in dogs that measurements
directly exhaled from the patient provides more accurate
49
Section
1
Principles and procedures
measurement in patients with small tidal volumes or for
non-rebreathing circuits where alveolar gas is diluted by
the fresh gas flow. The COz concentration is measured by
infrared absorption and the capnometer provides breath-
by-breath numerical values for CO2 concentration and
usually a CO2 waveform (capnograph). The upward slope
of the waveform represents expiration and the highest
value is the end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2). The downward slope
occurs during inspiration and the inspiratory baseline
should be zero (Fig. 2.32). An increase in baseline to
0.5 kPa [4 mmHg) will occur with rebreathing due to an
increase in apparatus dead space, such as the endotracheal
tube extending beyond the incisors and inclusion of the
sampling adaptor and a humidity and moisture exchanger
[see Fig. 2.29). This degree of rebreathing is not significant
to the patient A greater increase in baseline to
1.3-1.9 kPa (10-14 mmHg) indicates equipment malfunc-
tion, such as a unidirectional valve on a circle circuit stuck
in the open or closed position, exhaustion of CO absorb-
Figure 2.30 Gases are aspirated from a T-adapter inserted
ent, incorrect assembly of a non-rebreathing circuit, or
between the endotracheal tube and the delivery circuit, and 
disconnection of a coaxial circuit (Fig. 2.33A). Respiratory
the capnogram and end-tidal COz are displayed on a
rate may increase, sometimes panting in dogs, despite eye
monitor distant from the patient. Also attached to this dog is
signs indicating adequate depth of anaesthesia. Signs of
a pulse oximeter probe on the tongue and blood pressure
-ai se rns eqia  us oaus
cuff and Doppler probe on a forelimb.
cardia and increased blood pressure may be present.
Falsely low measurements of ETCOz using side-stream
sampling may occur with the use of non-rebreathing cir-
cuits, because the high gas flow results in dilution of
expired gases, and in animals with very small tidal
Figure 2.31 A COz sensor inserted next to the endotracheal tube will more accurately measure end-tidal COz in animals with
oximeter probe on a foot, Doppler probe on the ventral surface of the tail over the coccygeal artery and a cloacal temperature
probe. After induction of anaesthesia an intraosseous needle was inserted in a femur for fluid therapy and drug
administration. The patient is lying on a heated pad.
50
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
D
End-tidal CO2
Table 2.6 Troubleshooting the capnogram
Expiration
Inspiration
Unexpectedly low ETcO2
CO2
Cardiac arrest
 Significant decrease in cardiac output
Abrupt onset hypotension
Air embolism
 Pulmonary embolism 
expiration (dead space), BC = expiration, CD = alveolar gas
 Sampling line disconnected or broken
plateau, D = end-tidal COz value, DE = inspiration.
 Endotracheal tube cuff deflated 
 Tidal volume too small
们
Absent ETcO2
Apnoea
 Endotracheal tube disconnect
 Airway obstruction 
 Oesophageal intubation 
A
Failure to read zero on inspiration (rebreathing)
50
 Large apparatus dead space
 Expiratory valve in circle stuck open or closed
Exhausted COz absorbent
 In and cut tubes of NRB attached backwards
 NRB circuit assembled incorrectly 
 Breathing rapid and shallow 
 Prolonged inspiratory or expiratory slope
 Gas sampling rate too low
50
 Partial airway obstruction 
Leak around endotracheal tube cuff
Bronchoconstriction
 Obstruction or crack in the sampling line
 NRB = non-rebreathing circuit
50
in large animals. Bumps and dips in the expiratory plateau
 may be caused by spontaneous respiratory efforts, heart-
beats, and movements of the animal by the surgeon
(Fig. 2.34).
D
Figure 2.33 Interpretation of capnograms. (A). Dog is
Measurement of high ETCO confirms respiratory
panting and inspiratory COz is 14 mmHg indicating
acidosis. PaCOz can be high when ETCOz is normal
or low. CO waveform is essential aid for alerting
significant rebreathing. (B) Normal appearance of an ETCO2
waveform during controlled ventilation. (C) Inspiratory
and troubleshooting abnormalities.
waveform is sloping indicating a leak during inspiration,
dilution with fresh gas during a long pause between breaths.
Changes in ETCO2 or waveform are useful indicators of
 or prolonged inspiration. (D) Waveform has a sloping
significant alteration in physiological status or equipment
expiration indicating partial airway obstruction or impaired
malfunction (Table 2.6, see Fig. 2.33). A sudden decrease
lung deflation y-axis = 0-50 mmHg (0-6.65 kPa).
in ETCO2 to 1.6-2.7 kPa (12-20 mmHg) is cause for
concern and the patient should be checked for hypoten-
volumes, breathing slowly, or that are panting. Falsely low
 sion or cardiac arrest. Absence of COz may indicate equip-
CO2 measurements will be obtained in animals that are
ment leaks and disconnection, pulmonary embolism or
ventilating with small tidal volumes, or in small animals
air embolism. Detection of CO2 >5 mmHg immediately
that have significant lung collapse such as diaphragmatic
after endotracheal intubation may rule out accidental
hernia or thoroscopy and during spontaneous ventilation
oesophageal intubation. Exhaled water vapour condenses
51
Section
1
Principles and procedures
46
3
5
ETCOZ
RR
0
vVVVVVV
FPP
INC02
96
OFF
85
PPR
88
0
180
70
ETC02
PPR
0
Figure 2.34 Cardiac oscillations are seen as regular small dips in the COz waveform generated by heartheats causing small air
movements within the airways. (A) Dog is breathing 13/minute with an end-tidal COz concentration of 46 mmHg (6.1 kPa)
indicating mild hypoventilation. (B) Dog is breathing only 5/minute with the same degree of hypoventilation. In both patients,
inspired COz of 0-2 mmHg is normal
in the sampling tubing and water trap but unpredictable
(14 mmHg) during isoflurane anaesthesia (Meyer & Short,
and bizarre values are obtained when water enters the
1985; Cribb, 1988; Moens, 1989). In one study of 110
monitor.
horses, the PaCO-ETCO2 difference was greater in heavier
Abrupt decrease ETCOz to 1.6-2.7 kPa (12-20 mmHg)
'su] Auaqunsan ieinel ym paieduo ouaquna
occurs with decreased cardiac output or cardiac arrest.
1989). Institution of controlled ventilation from the start
Significant correlation between ETCO2 and PaCOz has
of anaesthesia in horses may preserve the PaCO2-ETCO2
been recorded in dogs and horses, with the PaCO exceed-
difference to less than 10 mmHg. A mean PaCO2-ETCO2
ing the ETCO2 by 1.00-4.65 kPa (1-35 mmHg) depend-
difference of 1.8 ± 0.9 kPa (13.4 ± 6.9 mmHg: range
ing on the degree of pulmonary shunting and lung
0-37.5 mmHg) was measured in 125 horses anaesthe-
collapse The difference between PaCO2 and ETCO2 is
n iog uaqnan jsip un auinost ym pazn
usually less in dogs than in horses. In a group of mechani-
surgery (Trim, 1998). Spontaneously breathing foals
cally ventilated dogs in intensive care, the ETCOz was on
anaesthetized with isoflurane had a mean PaCOz-ETCO2
average 0.67 kPa (5 mmHg) less than PaCO2 (Hendricks
difference in the first hour of anaesthesia of 0.9 kPa
& King, 1994). In anaesthetized healthy mature horses, an
(7 mmHg) which increased over 90 minutes of anaesthe-
average difference of 1.6 kPa [12 mmHg). range 0-4.3 kPa
sia to 1.7 kPa (13 mmHg). coincident with an increase in
(0-32 mmHg) was recorded duringhalothane and 1.9 kPa
PaCO2 (Geiser & Rohrbach, 1992). This study emphasized
52
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
 the compensatory respiratory response is eliminated. Thus
anaesthetized foals.
 a patient may have normal acid-base status, respiratory
 In conditions in which hypoventilation is expected and
acidosis or alkalosis, metabolic acidosis or alkalosis, or a
the ETCO2 value is normal or low, for example in dogs
mixture of two or three respiratory and metabolic
with pulmonary disease or during thoracotomy, and
components.
anaesthetized horses at risk for severe lung collapse, such
Acid-base analysis is underpinned by complex mathe-
as colic patients or foals, one direct measurement of
matical formulae (Wooten, 20l0). The following informa-
PaCO2 by blood gas analysis is advisable, if available.
tion is a simplified and abbreviated version for clinical
ETCO2 values exceeding 6.7 kPa (50 mmHg) represent
evaluation.
increased PaCO2 and significant hypoventilation. The
ETCOz value at which controlled ventilation is recom-
Blood gas and acid-base values
mended varies between clinicians and is also dependent
on the patient's disease or procedure.
pH: The normal arterial pH of humans is 7.40. A pH <7.35
is referred to as an acidaemia and a pH >7.45 as an alka-
Transcutaneous CO2 analysis
laemia. Blood pH of some other species differs slightly
        
Carbon dioxide diffuses through tissues and can be
account the normal range of values for that species (see
 detected by a sensor on the skin. Transcutaneous capnom-
Table. 2.4).
etry is proposed as a non-invasive method of detecting
 PaCO2: This value is representative of the rate and depth
respiratory depression in patients after anaesthesia and
 of breathing and metabolic CO2 production. The normal
surgery and in the ICU. The transcutaneous CO2 (TcPCO2)
 average value for PaCO2 is 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg) in most
 sensor is warmed electrically and creates a local hyperae-
 species, except cats where pCO2 is lower Venous blood
PCO2 will be approximately 0.8 kPa (6 mmHg) higher
higher than PaCO2 (Eberhard, 2007). Published investiga-
than PaCO2. An increase in PaCO2 (hypercarbia, hyper-
tions in human patients have cited conflicting results, with
capnia) results in a decrease in pH and is most frequently
some studies confrming good correlation between TePCO2
due to hypoventilation. A decrease in PaCO2 results in
and PaCO and others signifcant bias and limits of agree-
 increased pH and is due to increased ventilation.
ment with a low degree of correlation. Studies are needed
HCOs: This value as reported by an automated blood
to determine the value of this monitor in veterinary
 gs analyser is calculated from pH and PCO2, thus it is
medicine.
representative of both respiratory and metabolic status.
For example a high [HCOs] may be due to metabolic
Acid-base analysis
 alkalosis or to a severe respiratory acidosis.
TCO2: Total CO2 (TCO2) is also representative of both
 Maintaining blood pH within a normal range is important
respiratory and metabolic status as it includes [HCO,]
for adequate cellular function. The most dominant buffer
and dissolved CO2, although the contribution by dis-
system is the bicarbonate [HCO, ]/carbonic acid, a rela-
solved CO2 is small (PCO2 mmHgx 0.003 mEq/L). Some-
tionship that is described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch
times chemical determination of TCO in serum or plasma
equation where the ratio of [HCO,] to dissolved CO2 is
is used as an estimate of blood bicarbonate concentration,
20: 1
however, results obtained from biochemical autoanalysers
may be significantly different from that obtained by cal-
pH = 6.1 +log[HCO; ]/(PaCO2 x 0.03)
culation from pH and PCO2. Errors arise from differences
 in handling the samples, such as exposure to air, underfill.
HCOy is an important buffer because it is volatile,
ing of blood collection tubes, delay in analysis, and renew-
being eliminated or retained as COz in the lungs, and is
 ing reagents. A combination of these factors may decrease
effective at a range of pH values. As a primary acid-base 
the TCO2 by as much as 5.3 mEq/L in canine blood and
abnormality develops there is a physiological compensa-
4.6 mEq/L in feline blood.
tion in the opposite direction. Thus, when acid is added
Base excess (BE): The BE value describes the buffering
to the system, it combines with HCO 3 generating COz that
 cpacity (bicarbonate and haemoglobin) ofthe blood and
can be eliminated through the lungs. In contrast, added
 provides a calculated assessment of the metabolic status
base combines with carbonic acid (HCOs) generating
 of the patient that is almost independent of respiratory
HCO that can be eliminated via the kidneys. Respiratory
 changes. There are a variety of formulae used to calculate
compensation may occur within hours but renal compen-
 BE and automated blood gas analysers compute BE. The
sation takes days. Other important buffers include pro-
value of BE describes the amount of acid or base (mEq/L)
teins and haemoglobin. When interpreting acid-base
that must be added in vitro to return the blood to pH 7.40
status in an anaesthetized animal, it should be remem-
under standard conditions of PCO2 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg).
bered that anaesthetic agents depress respiration such that 
 and temperature 37"C. Consequently, BE of zero is neither
ES
Section
1
Principles and procedures
acidotic nor alkalotic, positive BE describes a metabolic
acid-base status because the difference between arterial
alkalosis and negative BE (base defcit) describes a meta-
and venous PCOz is small.
bolic acidosis. Standard BE (SBE, also called BEef) is the
Acid-base charts (Siggaard-Andersen) and a PO2
BE value when haemoglobin is at 5 g/dL to represent more
PCO2 diagram are available for easy interpretation of
clearly the BE of the entire extracellular fluid in vivo.
 blood gas analyses at sea-level and at high altitude (Paulev
SBE can indicate the presence of a metabolic acidosis or
& Zubieta-Calleja, 2005).
alkalosis but may be misleading in cases of mixed acid-
Anion gap (AG): The AG is calculated from measured
base abnormalities. It also does not provide information
senum cations and anions as follows:
about the cause[s) of the metabolic abnormalities. A cor-
rected formula for SBE (SBEc) can be applied that includes
AG=(Na+ +K+)-(Cl-+HCO;)
values for albumin and phosphate (PO4) (Kellum, 2005),
The gap is mainly due to weak acids, primarily albumin
In humans, SBEc= (HCO;- - 24.4)+ ([8.3x Albumin g/dL
and some PO4, and a minor part due to strong ions, such
as lactate and sulphate (SO4). Plasma proteins other than
x 0.15] + [0.29 x Phosphate mg/dL x 0.32])x (pH - 7.4)
albumin can be positive or negative but the final composi-
Idaq aq iou  io  e lu  si uo
Normal SBE of 0 (range, ± 2.5 mEq/L) is used for
because it can be normal in the face of opposing metabolic
abnormalities. A change in [Na*] without concurrent
human patients, however, normal values differ between
 species (Table 2.7). Since metabolic status is influenced by
change in [Cl-], and vice versa, will alter the AG. Dehydra-
diet, in general, species that are carmivores usually have a
tion can widen the gap by increasing the concentrations
mild metabolic acidosis, whereas metabolic alkalosis is
of the measured ions and hypoalbuminaemia decreases
 the anion gap. Changes in albumin and PO4 commonly
normal in species that are herbivores, as determined by
blood gas analysers using reference values for human
Occur in critically ill patients and must be considered
 blood. The SBE of venous blood can be used to evaluate
when interpreting AG (Kellum, 2007: Fidkowski
&
Helstrom, 2009). A corrected formula for AG (AGc) is used
for human patients with metabolic acidosis (Kellum,
2005, 2007):
AGc=[[Na++K+]-[Cl-+HCO;-]
Table 2.7 Reference ranges for acid-base and
- (2[albumin in g/dL] + 0.5[phosphate in mg/dL])
 biochemical parameters
- lactate
Parameter
Dogs
Cats
Horses
or
HCOs (mEq/L)
22.2
18
24-30
AGc=[Na++K+]-[Cl-+ HCO;]
(18.8-25.6)
(14.4-21.6)
- (2[albumin in g/dL] + 1.5[phosphate in mmol/L])
SBE (mEq/L)
-1.8
6 ± 4.8
9 9-
-lactate
(-0.2-+3.4)
5 ± 2
2.1 ± 2.3
Using these formulae, AGc should be approximately
Lactate (mmol/L)
<2
<1.46
<2
zero.
 Anicn gap (mEq/L)
Strong ion difference (SID): SID is defined as the differ-
12-25
15-28
11.6 ± 5.06
ence between the sum of the strong cations (Na*, K', Ca²,
17 ± 2.0
and Mgt) and the sum of the strong anions (Cl and
Strong ion
3444
40 ± 8.4
lactate). Ionized concentrations of Mg and Ca are used in
difference* (mEq/L)
the formula but are sometimes omitted for simplicity. The
Strong ion gap
-8 ± 2
-2±6
apparent SID is defined as:
(mEq/L)
0.36 ± 1.84
SIDa =[Na+ + K+ + Ca²+ + Mg²+)- (Cl- + lactate)
Aror' (mEq/L)
12-15
13.5 ± 0.55
An increase in SID is the result of metabolic alkalosis
* SID = (Na+ + K+) - (CI + lactate)
and a decrease in SID the result of a metabolic acidosis.
+ Aror = 2.25 x albumin (g/dL) + 1.4 x globulin (g/dL) + 0.59 ×
Changes in SID not attributable to sodium or chloride fall
P, (mg/dL)
 into a category called unidentified ions (UA) that includes
Navarro et al., 2005: Hopper and Haskins, 2008: Valverde et al.
 substances such as ketoacids. Strong ion difference effec-
2008; Viu et al., 2010
tive (SIDe) is calculated from a formula that includes
54
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
albumin and PO4 and requires use of a computer program
respiratory acidosis because increased COz causes the car-
(Moviat et al., 2008).
bonic acid equilibrium equation to move to the right:
SIDe = 2.46 × 1opH-a × PCO2 mmHg +(albumin g/dL)
CO+HO = HCO; = H+ +HCO;
x (0.123 x pH - 0.63 1)+ (phosphate mEq/L)
x [0.309 x pH - 0.469)
If the PaCOz and pH are deviated from normal in oppo-
Strong ion gap (SIG): SIG is the sum of unmeasured ions
site directions then a respiratory component is present. If
and is equal to SIDe - SIDa. SIG is normally zero, although
the PaCOz and pH are changed in the same direction, then
respiratory and metabolic components are present.
 u r n uq s s go a e
patients, and does not change with changes in pH or
Increased PaCO2 most frequently occurs due to decreased
albumin concentration. Administration of colloids
ventilation caused by CNS depression from anaesthetic
that
include gelatin are known to elevate the SIG. A high SIG
agents or trauma, or to decreased ventilation from partial
>2 mEq/L indicates accumulation of unmeasured anions as
airway obstruction, pulmonary disease, lung collapse, or
failure of intercostal or diaphragmatic muscle function. A
 a cause of acidosis. SIG ≥5 mEq/L has been associated with
increased mortality in human patients (Moviat et al., 2008).
decrease in PaCO2 from normal is a respiratory alkalosis
 and commonly occurs as a result of hyperventilation when
AGc has a strong correlation with SIG, even when the
formula is simplified by omitting PO4 (Gunnerson, 2005).
the patient is anxious or distressed, as a physiological
A simplifed calculation of SIG has also been used
snoiosuos ul eixodaq io sisopie poqeiau ol asuodsal
(Constable, 2000):
patients, or due to mechanical overventilation. In human
patients, the change in pH expected from a change in
PaCOz can be calculated:
SIG mEq/L = [2.2 [Total protein g/dL]/ 1+ 10g.7-pH)- AG
· pH decreases by 0.05 unit and [HCO;] increases
Total weak acid concentration (Aror): The'weak' acids are
1 mEq/L for every acute 1.33 kPa (10 mmHg)
increase in PCO2
mostly proteins, especially albumin, and inorganic phos-
 pH increases 0.10 unit and [HCO;] decreases
phate, and are not completely dissociated at physiological
2 mEq/L for every acute 1.33 kPa (10 mmHg)
pH. They can act as non-volatile buffers, switching between
decrease in PCO2
forms that are associated or dissociated with a proton, i.e.
A vs HA, in response to pH. These non-volatile buffers are
Hopper & Haskins (2008) reported expected compensa-
 not in as large a quantity as the volatile buffer, HCO. but
tion in dogs as:
still have significant effects on pH. Hypoproteinaemia
[HCO;] increases 1.5 mEq/L for every acute 1.33 kPa
results in a non-respiratory alkalosis, whereas hyperprotei -
( 10 mmHg) increase in PCO2
naemia causes non-respiratory acidosis.
[HCO,] decreases 2.5 mEq/L for every acute 1.33 kPa
 Free water effect: The free water concentration is identi-
( 10 mmHg) decrease in PCO2
fied by sodium concentration, such that a deficit of free
Chronic hypercarbia or hypocarbia generate greater
water causes hypernatraemia and alkalosis (concentration
alkalosis) and excess of free water causes hyponatraemia
01 suma1 Alenpeia Hd 1eu os [OOH] ul sasueup
and acidosis (dilutional acidosis). The free water effect is
normal.
calculated by subtracting normal sodium concentration
Step 3: Determine the metabolic component using
blood gas and laboratory results. Complete assessment of
from measured sodium and multiplying the change in
 concentration by 0.25 in dogs and 0.22 in cats (Hopper &
acid-base balance will require knowledge of electrolyte
 and lactate values, patient history and immediate details
Haskins, 2008).
[i.e anaesthesia, ventilatory and circulatory status). It
has been proposed that non-respiratory acid-base abnor-
Interpretation of acid base abnormalities
malities fall into four categories: (l) free water deficit or
Step 1: Identification of the critical nature of the patient's
excess; (2) increased or decreased [Cl-]: (3) changes in
protein; and (4) presence of unmeasured organic anions
than 7.55 can be associated with significant effects on
(Fidkowski & Helstrom, 2009).
physiological function. Extreme values warrant immediate
SBE will determine the direction and magnitude of
management.
metabolic abnormality in most patients. It is less accurate
when abnormal levels of lactate, phosphate, or proteins
pH is determined by changes in PCO2, AGc or SID
are present. Calculation of the AG may or may not reveal
and ATOT.
the presence of unmeasured anions as the AG is influenced
 by electrolyte abnormalities and hypoproteinaemia.
Step 2: Determine whether a respiratory abnormality
Diagnosis of hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis is
exists. An increase in PaCO2 above normal is called a
determined by measurement of Na and Cl, the absolute
55
Section
1
Principles and procedures
value for Cl, and the ratio of Na to Cl. The ratio of sodium
Table 2.8 Adverse effects of perianaesthetic
to chloride is important because the Cl may be within the
hypothermia
accepted normal range but calculation of SBE or SIDa will
reveal a signifcant change in metabolic status. Calculation
Impaired cardiovascular function
of AGc or SIG more specifcally detects changes in unmeas-
Hypoventilation
Aeu anepel pooiq pateaala aleioel ga suoi suons pain
Decreased metabolism and detoxification of anaesthetic drugs
have several origins but should always be investigated for
Weakness during recovery from anaesthesia
Decreased resistance to infection
been identified, including citrate, isocitrate, ketoglutarate,
Increased incidence of surgical wound infection
 Increased postoperative protein catabolism
succinate, and malate.
Simple cases may be managed using pH and blood gas
analysis and routine laboratory tests to provide informa-
tion on pH, PCO2, SBE, and AG or AGc. Accurate determi-
nation of metabolic abnormalities in complex cases can
be made using AGc or SIG when the essential laboratory
test results and computerized formulae are available.
2.8) (Carli et al., 199l; Sheffeld et al., 1994; Kurz et al.,
1996; Reynolds et al., 2008). Mild hypothermia has been
associated with triple the incidences of adverse myocardial
Monitoring body temperature
-s aaeaiso pue suaed u aapia u sa
cal infection; effects that apply to other species. Body tem
In the normal animal, body heat is unevenly distributed
perature <35.6°C (96°F) appears to be associated with
with the core temperature being 2-4"C higher than the
increased ataxia in horses during recovery from inhalation
 peripheral. General anaesthesia inhibits vasoconstriction,
anaesthesia. Life-threatening cardiovascular depression
allowing generalized redistribution of body heat. An addi -
may develop when the temperature decreases below
tional decrease in body temperature occurs as heat is lost
32.8°C(91°F)
to the environment by exposure to cold operating room
 Rectal or oesophageal temperature should be monitored
conditions, skin preparation with cold solutions, and
at regular intervals during inhalation anaesthesia, during
abdominal surgical exposure Furthermore anaesthetics
protracted total intravenous anaesthesia, and during
inhibit thermoregulation, vasoconstriction, and shivering.
recovery from anaesthesia. Small animals can be insulated
thereby decreasing the thresholds for cold responses.
from a cool environment by a variety of methods, includ-
Administration of unwarmed IV fluid contributes substan-
tially to the decrease in body temperature.
ing plastic covered foam pads and hot water circulating
pads to lie on, and wrapping of extremities with towels
One method used in research animals to monitor tem-
or plastic bubble-wrap or cling-film. Heat loss from
 perature non-invasively involves subcutaneous injection
a q pa aq  in sn a
of temperature-sensitive microchips. One study in experi-
that the inspired air remains warm and humidifed. This
mental goats compared different sites with core [abdomi-
an be accomplished by employing rebreathing circuits
nal) and rectal temperatures (Torrao et al., 20ll). The
and low flow administration, or by atachment of a
results determined that temperature measured from
humidifer to the endotracheal connection of the anaes-
probes in the shoulder, flank or muscle varied from core
thetic circuit.
temperature by up to 3.5°C and the differences varied
Active skin warming ofthe limbs may be the most effec-
inconsistently. Microchips implanted in the retroperito-
tive method of preventing heat loss (Cabell et al., 1997).
neum most closely approximated core and rectal body
This can be accomplished by application of hot water or
temperatures with little variability.
hot air circulating devices (e.g. Bair Hugger), or warmed
towels, warmed fluid bags identified for this purpose by
Hypothermia
injection of food colour, and gel-filled packs. Special care
should be taken to avoid skin sloughing from burns
 There does not seem to be a generally accepted definition
caused by application of devices that are too hot. Electrical
of hypothermia and the defnition should be appropriate
to the species concerned. One study group has defined
frequently to blame for tissue damage It should also be
mild hypothermia in human patients to be between 34 °C
 remembered that warming devices placed over the site of
(93.2"F) and 36*C (96.8*F) (Reynolds et al., 2008). A
an intramuscular injection, or an opioid-filled patch
decrease in temperature of 1-3 °C below normal has been
applied to the skin, may alter local blood flow and speed
demonstrated to provide substantial protection against
absorption of the drug. Fluids to be administered IV
cerebral ischaemia and hypoxaemia in anaesthetized dogs
should be warm, either in the bag or bottle by storage in
(Wass et al., 1995). However, perioperative hypothermia
 an incubator or at the time of administration by attaching
is associated with several sigmificant adverse effects (Table
a warming block or device to the administration line.
56
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
Table 2.9 Causes of hyperthermia
cge and providing sedation, for example, butorphanol,
0.2 mg/kg IM, with or without acepromazine, 0.05-
0.1 mg/kg IM. Circulating iced water through a rigid
Causes
Examples
plastic pad placed in the cage with the cat is an effective
Fever
method of reducing body temperature Administration of
ketamine or hydromorphone and other opioids to cats has
Increased hypothalamic set
Infection, inflammation,
also been associated with hyperthermia developing during
point
septicaemia, endotoxaemia
recovery from anaesthesia (Posner et al., 20l0). Rarely.
 Hyperthermia
hyperthermia is a manifestation of the malignant hyper-
thermia syndrome (MH) which is a life-threatening
Increased heat generation:
Adverse drug reaction including
hypermetabolic condition triggered by stress and certain
increased basal metabolic
 amphetamines, neuroleptic
rate, increased muscle
 syndrome, serotonin syndrome
anaesthetic agents.
activity, increased thyroid
Seizures
hormone, increased
Thyrotoxicosis
Malignant hyperthermia
sympathetic activity
Phaeochromocytoma
 Malignant hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) occurs most frequently
syndrome
during anaesthesia of human beings and pigs (McGrath,
Decreased heat dissipation
Increased ambient temperature
1986; Roewer et al., 1995). but has been reported to occur
Old age
in dogs [O'Brien et al., 1990; Nelson, 1991; Roberts et al.,
Decreased cardiac output
200l), cats (Bellah et al., 1989), and horses (Manley et al.,
1983; Klein et al., 1989; Aleman et al., 2009). Clinical
McAllen & Schwartz, 2010
signs of MH in pigs (see Chapter 14) usually include an
increase in temperature, increased respiratory rate and
depth, increased ETCO2 and PaCO2, metabolic acidosis,
tachycardia, l
hypertension,  and  arrhythmias.  I
Purple
 Prevention of heat loss should be started at the beginning
blotches may be observed in the skin of the abdomen and
 of anaesthesia. Preparation of the surgical site is often the
snout The soda lime canister on the anaesthesia machine
time of greatest heat loss if active warming is not present
may become excessively hot to touch and the absorbent
 and alcohol and cold solutions are used in skin prepara-
changes colour rapidly, reflecting massive carbon dioxide
tion. An overhead hospital infant radiant heat warmer has
 production. Rigidity of the jaw and limb muscles may be
pue sien un eauodau suund ie aaaa uaaan
observed as the condition progresses. The animal dies
small dogs.
unless the condition is treated early.
 The clinical appearance of dogs developing MH during
 anaesthesia may differ from pigs. Tachycardia may not be
Hyperthermia
a feature, skeletal muscle rigidity may not occur, and rectal
Increased body temperature is occasionally measured
m si as ae     an
in anaesthetized animals. Hyperthermia developing in
established (Nelson, 199l). The earliest signs may be
dogs and cats is most often caused by either excessive
related to increased COz production. These signs include
eiuauodau quaaid on iduane ue ul ieay jo uoeidde
 an increased respiratory rate and depth, rapid changing of
or by a pyrogenic reaction to a bacterial infection or
CO2 absorbent colour, a hot CO2 absorbent canister, and
inflammation, a contaminant in IV fluids, or drugs.
increased ETCO in the absence of hypoventilation or mal-
Other causes of intraoperative hyperthermia are loss of
functioning one-way valves. Increased respiratory rate
central nervous system temperature regulation, thyrotoxi-
would be the only one of these signs present in a dog that
cosis, or phaeochromocytoma (Table 2.9). Symptomatic
was merely overheated.
treatment includes wetting the coat or hair with cold
 The clinical picture of MH in horses is not clear cut.
water, IV administration of cold fluids, and sedation if
Abnormal measurements may not be observed for some
applicable Determination of the cause of hyperthermia
time after induction of anaesthesia. Observed signs may
may indicate other specific treatment. Hyperthermia
be suggestive that the horse is in a light plane of anaesthe-
(40.5°C; 105*F) quite frequently develops in cats during
sia, however, the earliest changes are usually increased
recovery from anaesthesia that included administration
PaCOzand ETCOz. Heart rates may be mildly elevated and
of tiletamine-zolazepam. In these animals, the increase
arterial blood pressure is often within the normal range
in temperature is associated with increased muscle
for inhalation anaesthesia [Manley et al., 1983: Klein
activity such as paddling. uncoordinated movements,
et al., 1989). Changes in anaesthetic management may
 Or purposeful movements directed at restraints or band-
 permit the horse to survive anaesthesia but severe rhab-
ages. Treatment that is usually effective includes directing
domyolysis developing during recovery from anaesthesia
a flow of air over the cat from a fan placed outside the
may necessitate euthanasia.
57
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Monitoring urine volume
morphine (Robertson et al., 200l). A study of healthy
and traumatized dogs in the ICU receiving LRS 60 mL/
The urinary output depends on the renal blood flow that,
kg/day with a continuous infusion of either morphine,
in turn, depends on cardiac output and circulating blood
0.12 mg/kg/h, or fentanyl, 3 μg/kg/h, confrmed that
volume, and thus it is a relatively sensitive indicator of the
both opioids decreased urine flow significantly (Anderson
circulatory state during anaesthesia. Measurement of urine
& Day, 2008). Healthy control dogs receiving only LRS
production is advisable in animals with severe chronic
produced urine at a rate of 1.23 ± 0.13 mL/kg/h. Mor-
renal disease, renal failure, or circulatory failure from non-
phine or fentanyl infusion decreased urine production
renal causes. The urinary bladder may be catheterized
 to approximately 0.7 mL/kg/h and urine specific gravity
using aseptic technique before anaesthesia or after induc-
increased.
tion of anaesthesia, and the catheter connected to a plastic
bag for continuous collection of urine In event of inade-
quate urine flow, the catheter should be checked for block-
Monitoring blood glucose
age by mucus or blood and that urine is not pooling in
the bladder and cannot drain because of the relationship
Clinical signs of hypoglycaemia may not be obvious
between the catheter tip and positioning of the animal.
during anaesthesia and the condition may go unrecog-
Altermatively, urine may be collected and measured at the
nized. Consequences of hypoglycaemia are coma, hypo-
end of anaesthesia. Urine output of less than l mL/kg/
tension, or prolonged recovery from anaesthesia with
hour is considered to be inadequate. However, urine flow
depression, weakness, or even seizures.
during anaesthesia is very variable, for example, one group
Animals at risk for developing hypoglycaemia during
of healthy dogs anaesthetized for orthopaedic procedures
anaesthesia include paediatric patients, diabetics, and
with oxymorphone, propofol, and isoflurane produced
animals with hepatic disease, portosystemic shunt, insuli-
0-2.2 mL/kg/h (mean 0.46 mL/kg/h) (Boscan et al.,
noma, and septicaemia or endotoxaemia. Occasionally.
2010).
healthy adult sheep. goats, and even horses develop
Failure of patients to produce an adequate urine volume
hypoglycaemia which manifests as a prolonged or weak
over the course of anaesthesia may be unrelated to intra-
recovery from anaesthesia. Routine monitoring of patients
Operative cardiovascular function. Indeed, fluid retention
at risk for hypoglycaemia should include measurement of
is now a recognized complication of surgery in human
blood glucose at the start and the end of anaesthesia.
patients and has been documented to occur in anaesthe-
Blood glucose can be determined rapidly using reagent
tized dogs (Boscan et al., 20l0; Cagini et al., 20ll). Fluid
 strips and a glucometer. Animals with low blood glucose
retention has been measured by a variety of methods
cncentrations initially or those undergoing major Or
including weighing patients before and after anaesthesia.
prolonged surgery, should have their blood glucose
calculation of the discrepancy between the volume of fluid
monitored at approximately lhour intervals during
administered and the volume of urine produced,
and
anaesthesia.
bioimpedance analysis. The latter method
Iinvolves
 Patients at risk for hypoglycemia should be given 5%
 passing a small undetectable altermating current through
dextrose in water (D5w) as part of the intraoperative IV
the body, from hand to foot electrodes in humans, and
fluid therapy. D5W should be infused at a rate of 3
bioimpedance analysis measures the resistance to flow of
(2-5) mL/kg/hour to maintain blood glucose between 5.5
the current. This technique has detected increases in total
and 11.0 mmol/L (100 and 200 mg/dL). Balanced electro-
body water and extracellular fluid volume after anaesthe-
lyte solution should also be infused at the usual rate of
sia in dogs (Boscan et al., 20l0). The tendency to retain
5-10 mL/kg/hour.
fluid has been documented in human patients to be
 greater on the second postoperative day and apparently
umrelated to age or sex of the patient, early mobilization
Monitoring neuromuscular blockade
after surgery and early oral intake (Cagini et al., 20ll).
Fluid retention occurs even with intraoperative fluid
The mechanical response to nerve stimulation (i.e mus-
cular contraction) may be observed following the applica-
volume fluid therapy. The cause of fluid retention is
tion of supramaximal single, tetanic or ‘train-of-four’
thought to be multifactorial. Decreased arterial pressure
electrical stimuli to a suitable peripheral motor nerve,
or hypovolaemia during anaesthesia causes release of
usually a foot twitch in response to stimulation of the
vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) and that increases
 peroneal, tibial, or ulnar nerves. During general anaesthe-
free water absorption in distal tubules of the kidney
 sia the response obtained may be influenced by the anaes-
(Hauptman et al., 2000). Some anaesthetic agents may
thetic agents and any neuromuscular blocking drugs
influence urine output for example, decreased urine
which have been used. Details about neuromuscular
 ian si u p sm unoi
blocking drugs and the monitoring technique are given in
Chapter 8.
58
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
REFERENCES
Aleman, M., Nieto, J.E., Magdesian,
Bleijenberg, E.H., van Oostrom, H.
Campagnol, D., Teixeira Neto, F.J.,
K.G., 2009. Malignant hyperthermia
Akkerdaas, L.C, et al., 201l. A study
Monteiro, E.R., et al., 2007. Use of
 associated with ryanodine receptor 1
into the relationship between the
bispectral index to monitor depth of
(C7360G) mutation in Quarter 
bispectral index and the clinically
anesthesia in isoflurane-anesthetized
Horses. I Vet Intern Med 23,
evaluated anaesthetic depth in dogs.
dogs. Am I Vet Res 68, 1300-1307.
329-334.
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 536-543.
Cannesson, M., Le Manach, Y., Hofer.
Anderson, M.K., Day, T.K., 2008.
Boscan, P., Pypendop, B.H., Siao, K.T.,
C.K., et al., 2011. Assessing the
Effects of morphine and fentanyl
et al., 2010. Fluid balance.
diagnostic accuracy of pulse pressure
constant rate infusion on urine
glomerular filtration rate, and urine
variations for the prediction of fluid
 Qutput in healthy and traumatized
 output in dogs anesthetized for an
responsiveness: A 'Gray Zone'
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
orthopedic surgical procedure. Am ↓
approach. Anesthesiology 115,
528-536
Vet Res 71, 501-507.
231-241
Apfelbaum, J.L., Arens, J.F., Cole, D.J.
Bosiack, A.P., Mann, FA., Dodam, J.R.,
Carli, F., Webster, I., Pearson, M., et al..
et al., 2006. Practice advisory for
et al., 2010. Comparison of
1991. Postoperative protein
intraoperative awareness and brain
ultrasonic Doppler flow monitor, 
metabolism: effect of nursing elderly
function monitoring A report
oscillometric, and direct arterial
patients for 24 h after abdominal
by the American Society of
blood pressure measurements in ill
surgery in a thermoneutral
Anesthesiologists task force on
dogs. Vet Emerg Crit Care 20,
environment. Anaesthesia G6.
intraoperative awareness.
207-215.
292-299
Anesthesiology 104, 847-864.
Branson, K.R., Wagner-Mann, C.C.
Caulkett, N.A., Cantwell, S.L., Houston,
Avidan, M.S., Zhang. L., Burnside, B.A..
Mann, FA., 1997. Evaluation of an
D.M., 1998. A comparison of
et al., 2008. Anesthesia awareness
oscillometric blood pressure monitor
indirect blood pressure monitoring
and the bispectral index. N Engl J
on anesthetized cats and the effect of
techniques in the anesthetized cat.
Med 358, 1097-1108.
quff placement and fur on accuracy.
Vet Surg 27, 370-377.
Bailey, J.E., Dunlop, C.l., Chapman,
Vet Surg 26, 347-353.
Chaffin, M.K., Matthews, N.S., Cohen,
PL., et al., 1994. Indirect Doppler
Brodbelt, D., 2009. Perioperative
N.D., et al., 1996. Evaluation of
ultrasonic measurement of arterial
mortality in small animal
pulse oximetry in anaesthetised foals
 blood pressure results in a large
anaesthesia. Vet J182, 152-161.
using multiple combinations of
 measurement eror in dorsally
Brown, S.A., Atkins, C., Bagley, R.,
transducer type and transducer
recumbent anaesthetised horses.
et al., 2007. Guidelines for the
attachment site. Equine Vet J 28,
Equine Vet J 26, 70-73.
identifcation, evaluation and
437-445.
Beaulieu, K.E., Kerr, C.L., McDonell,
management of systemic
Clarke, K.W., England, G.C.W., Goosens,
W.N., 2005. Evaluation of a lithium
hypertension in dogs and cats. I Vet
L., 1991. Sedative and cardiovascular
dilution cardiac output technique as
Intern Med 21, 542-558.
effects of romifdine, alone and in 
a method for measurement of
Bruhn, I., Kreuer, S., Bischoff, P, et al..
combination with butorphanol, in
ardiac output in anesthetized cats.
2005. Bispectral index and A-line
the horse. JVet Anaesth 18, 25-29.
Am J Vet Res 66, 1639-1645.
AAl index as guidance for desflurane-
Constable, PD., 2000. Clinical
Beaulieu, M., Lapointe, Y., Vinet, B.
remifentanil anaesthesia compared
assessment of acid-base status:
1999. Stability of PO2. PCO2, and
with a standard practice group: a
Comparison of the Henderson-
pH in fresh blood samples stored in
multicentre study. Br J Anaesth 94.
Hasselbalch and strong ion
a plastic syringe with low heparin in
63-69.
approaches. Vet Clin Pathol 29,
relation to various blood-gas and
Burns, PM., Driessen, B., Boston, R.
115-128.
hematological parameters. Clin
et al., 2006. Accuracy of a third
Cooper, E.S., Muir, w.w., 2007.
Biochem 32, 101-107.
(Dolphin Voyager) versus first
Continuous cardiac output
Bektas, R.N., Kutter, A.P.N., Jud, R.S.,
generation pulse oximeter [Nellcor
monitoring via arterial pressure
et al., 2012. Evaluation of a
N-180) in predicting arterial oxygen
waveform analysis following severe
 minimally invasive non-calibrated
saturation and pulse rate in the
hemorrhagic shock in dogs. Crit
pulse contour cardiac output monitor
anesthetized dog. Vet Anaesth Analg
Care Med 35, 1724-1729.
[FloTrac/Vigileo) in anaesthetized
33, 281-295.
Corley, K.T.T., Donaldson, L.L., Furr.
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 464-471.
Cabell, L.W., Perkowski, S.Z., Gregor, T..
M.O., 2002. Comparison of lithium
Belda, E., Blissitt, K.J., Duncan, J.C.
et al., 1997. The effects of active
dilution and themodilution
et al., 2010. The bispectral index
 peripheral skin warming on
cardiac output measurements in 
 during recovery from halothane and
perioperative hypothermia in dogs.
anaesthetised neonatal foals. Equine
sevoflurane anaesthesia in horses.
Vet Surg 26, 79-85.
Vet J 34, 598-601.
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 25-34.
Cagini, L., Capozzi, R., Tassi, V., et al.,
Cribb, PH., 1988. Capnographic
Bellah, J.R., Robertson, S.A., Buergelt,
2011. Fluid and electrolyte balance
monitoring during anesthesia with
C.D., et al., 1989. Suspected
after major thoracic surgery by
controlled ventilation in the horse.
malignant hyperthermia after
bioimpedance and endocrine
Vet Surg 17, 48-52.
halothane anesthesia in a cat. Vet
 evaluation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
Deane, J.C., Dagleish, M.P., Benamou,
Surg 18, 483-488.
40, e71-76.
A.E., et al., 2004. Effects of syringe
59
Section
1
Principles and procedures
material and temperature and
Geiser, D.R., Rohrbach, B.W., 1992. Use
Hauptman, J.G., Richter, M.A., Wood,
duration of storage on the stability
of end-tidal CO tension to predict
S.L., et al., 2000. Effects of
 of equine arterial blood gas
arterial COg values in isoflurane-
anesthesia, surgery, and intravenous
variables. Vet Anaesth Analg 31,
anesthetized equine neonates. Am ↓
administration of fluids on plasma
250-257
Vet Res 53, 1617-1621.
antidiuretic hormone concentrations
Deflandre, C.J.A., Hellebrekers, L.J..
Giguere, S., Bucki, E., Adin, D.B., et al.,
 in healthy dogs. Am I Vet Res 61.
2007. Clinical evaluation of the
2005a. Cardiac output measurement
1273-1276.
Surgivet V60046, a non invasive
by carbon dioxide rebreathing.
Hedberg, P., Majava, A., Kiviluoma, K.,
blood pressure monitor in
2-dimentional echocardiography.
et al., 2009. Potential preanalytical
 anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
and lithium dilution method in
errors in whole-blood analysis:
Analg.35, 13-21.
anesthetized neonatal foals. J Vet
effect of syringe sample volume on
Duffy, A.L., Butler, A.L., Radecki, S.V.
Intern Med 19, 737-743.
blood gas, electrolyte and lactate
et al., 2009. Comparison of
Giguere, S., Knowles, H.A., Valverde, A.,
values. Scand I Clin Lab Invest 69.
continuous arterial pressure waveform
et al., 2005b. Accuracy of indirect
585-591.
analysis with the lithium dilution
measurement of blood pressure in 
Henao-Guerrero, PN., McMurphy, R.M..
technique to monitor cardiac output
neonatal foals. J Vet Intern Med 19,
KuKanich, B., et al., 2009. Effect of
in conscious dogs with systemic
571-576.
morphine on the bispectral index
 inflammatory response syndrome.
Grandy, J.L., Dunlop, C.l., Hodgson,
during isoflurane anesthesia in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 70, 1365-1373
D.S., et al., 1992. Evaluation of the
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 133-143.
Durga, P., Jonnavittula, N.,
 doppler ultrasonic method of
Hendricks, I.C., King, L.G., 1994.
Muthuchellappan, R., et al., 2008.
measuring systolic arterial blood
Practicality, usefulness, and limits
 Measurement of systolic pressure
pressure in cats. Am J Vet Res 53.
of end-tidal carbon dioxide
variation during graded volume loss
1166-1169.
monitoring in critical small animal
using simple tools on Datex
Gunkel, C.l., Valverde, A., Morey, T.E.,
patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 4.
 Ohmeda S/5 monitor. J Neurosurg
et al., 2004. Comparison of
29-39.
Anesthesiol 21, 161-164.
non-invasive cardiac output
Hodgson, D.R., Dunlop, C.l., Chapman,
Eberhard, P., 2007. The design, use, and
measurement by partial carbon
P.L., et al., 1990. Cardiopulmonary
results of transcutaneous carbon
dioxide rebreathing with the lithium
effects of isoflurane in foals
dioxide analysis: Current and future
dilution method in anesthetized
[abstract). Vet Surg 19, 316.
directions. Anesth Analg 105,
dogs. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 14.
Hopper, K., Haskins, S.C., 2008. A
S48-S52
187-195.
case-based review of a simplified
Elerkmann, R.K., Soehle, M., Riese, G.,
Gunnerson, K.J., 2005. Clinical review:
quantitative approach to acid-base
 et al., 2010. The Entropy Module
The meaning of acid-base
analysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18,
 and Bispectral Index as guidance
abnormalities in the intensive care
467-476.
for propofol-remifentanil
unit - epidemiology. Crit Care 9.
Horwitz, L.D., Bishop, V.s., Stone, H.L.,
 anaesthesia in combination with
508-516.
et al., 1969. Cardiovascular effects of
rgional anaesthesia compared
with a standard clinical practice
Guyton, A.C., 1986. Textbook of
low-oxygen atmospheres in.
Medical Physiology. W.B. Saunders.
conscious and anaesthetized dogs. J
group. Anaesth Intensive Care 38.
Philadelphia, pp. 218-229.
Appl Physiol 27, 370-373.
159-166.
Haberman, C.E., Kang. C.W., Morgan,
Huss, B.T., Anderson, M.A., Branson,
Fairman, N., 1993. Evaluation of pulse
 oximetry as a continuous monitoring
1.D., et al., 2006. Evaluation of 
K.R., et al., 1995. Evaluation of
technique in critically ill dogs in the 
oscillometric and Doppler ultrasonic
pulse oximeter probes and
 methods of indirect blood pressure
probe placement in healthy
small animal intensive care unit. Vet
estimation in conscious dogs. Can J
dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31.
Emerg Crit Care 2, 50-56.
Vet Res 70, 211-217.
9-14.
Fidkowski, C., Helstrom, J., 2009.
Diagnosing metabolic acidosis in the
Haga, H.A., Dolvik, N.l., 2002.
Jacobsen, J.D., Miller, M.w., Matthews.
critically ili: bridging the anion gap.
Evaluation of the bispectral index as
N.S., et al., 1992. Evaluation of
an indicator of degree of central
accuracy of pulse oximetry in dogs.
Stewart, and base excess methods.
Can I Anaesth 56, 247-256.
nervous system depression in
Am J Vet Res 53, 537-540.
isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J
Jaffe, M.B., 1999. Partial CO
Forster, H.V., Bisgard, G.E., Klein, I.P.,
1981. Effect of peripheral
Vet Res 63, 438-442.
rebreathing cardiac output -
chemoreceptor denervation on
Hainsworth, R., Drinkhill, M.J., 2007.
operating principles of the
 acclimatization of goats during
Cardiovascular adjustments for life
NICO" system. J Clin Monit 15.
hypoxia. J Appl Physiol 50.
at high altitude. Resp Physiol
387-401.
392-398.
Neurobiol 158, 204-211.
Kellum, J.A., 2005. Clinical review:
Gallivan, J.G., McDonell, W.N., Forrest,
Hannon, J.P., 1983. Blood acid-base
Reunification of acid-base
J.B., 1989. Comparative ventilation
qurve nomogram for immature
physiology. Crit Care 9, 500-507.
and gas exchange in the horse and
domestic pigs. Am I Vet Res 44.
Kellum, J.A., 2007. Disorders of
cow. Res Vet Sci 46, 331-336.
2385-2390.
acid-base balance. Crit Care Med 35.
Geddes, L.A., Chaffee, V., Whistler, S...
Haskins, S., Pascoe, PJ., Ilkiw, J.E., et al.,
2630-2636.
et al., 1977. Indirect mean blood
2005. Reference cardiopulmonary
Kertai, M.D., Palanca, B.J.A., Pal, N.,
pressure in the anesthetized pony.
values in normal dogs. Comp Med
et al., 2011. Bispectral index
Am J Vet Res 38, 2055-2057.
55. 156-161.
monitoring, duration of bispectral
60
Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
index below 45, patient risk factors.
March, PA., Muir Ill, W.W., 2003a.
Moens, Y., 1989. Arterial-alveolar
and intermediate-term mortality
 Minimum alveolar concentration
crbon dioxide tension difference
after noncardiac surgery in the
measures of central nervous system
and alveolar dead space in halothane
B-Unaware trial. Anesthesiology 114.
activation in cats anesthetized with
anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J
545-556.
isoflurane. Am J Vet Res G4.
21,282-284.
Khanna, A.K., McDonell, w.N., Dyson,
1528-1533.
Moens, Y., Gootjes, P., Lagerweij, E.
D.H., et al., 1995. Cardiopulmonary
March, PA., Muir Ill, W.W., 2003b. Use
1991. The influence of methane on
effects of hypercapnia during
of the bispectral index as a monitor
the infrared measurement of
controlled intermittent positive
 of anesthetic depth in cats
halothane in the horse. J Vet Anaesth
pressure ventilation in the horse.
anesthetized with isoflurane. Am ↓
18, 4-7.
Can J Vet Res 59, 213-221.
Vet Res 64, 1534-1541.
Moraga, F., Monge, C., Riquelme, R.
Kiers, H.D., Hofstra, J.M., Wetsels.
Mason, D.J., O'Grady, M., Woods, J.P..
et al., 1996. Fetal and maternal
J.F.M., 2008. Oscillometric blood
et al., 2001. Assessment of lithium
blood oxygen affinity: A comparative
pressure measurements: differences
dilution cardiac output as a
study in llamas and sheep. Comp
between measured and calculated
technique for measurement of
Biochem Physiol 115A, 111-115.
 mean arterial pressure. Neth J Med
ardiac output in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Moviat, M., Terpstra, A.M., Ruitenbeek,
66.474-479
62. 1255-1261
W., et al., 2008. Contributions of
Klein, L., Ailes, N., Fackelman, G., et al.
Matthews, N.S., Hartke, S., Allen, J.C.J.,
various metabolites to the
 1989. Postanesthetic equine
2003. An evaluation of pulse
'unmeasured' anions in critically ill
 myopathy suggestive of malignant
oximeters in dogs, cats, and horses.
patients with metabolic acidosis. Crit
hyperthermia. A case report. Vet Surg
Vet Anaesth Analg 30, 3-14.
Care Med 36. 752-758
18.479-482
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield, S.M.,
Muir, W.W., Wade, A., Grospitch, B.J..
Kurz, A., Sessler, D.l., Lenhardt, R.
Cornick, J.L., et al., 1990. A
1983. Automatic noninvasive
 1996. Perioperative normothermia
comparison of end-tidal halothane
sphygmomanometry in horses. I Am
to reduce the incidence of surgical-
concentration measurement at
Vet Med Assoc 182, 1230-1233.
wound infection and shorten
different locations in the horse
Murrell, J.C., Johnson, C.B., 2006.
hospitalization. New Engl I Med
[Abstract). Vet Surg 19, 317.
334, 1209-1215.
Neurophysiological techniques to
Lake, C.L. (Ed.), 1990. Monitoring of
McAllen, K.J., Schwartz, D.R., 2010.
assess pain in animals. J Vet
Adverse drug reactions resulting in
Pharmacol Ther 29, 325-335
ventricular function. In: Clinical
hyperthermia in the intensive care
Monitoring. W. B. Saunders Company.
Navarro, M., Monreal, L., Segura, D.,
Philadelphia, pp. 237-279.
unit. Crit Care Med 38, S244-S251.
et al., 2005. A comparison of
McGrath, C., 1986. Malignant
Lamont, L.A., Greene, S.A., Grimm,
traditional and quantitative analysis
hyperthermia. Semin Vet Med Surg
of acid-base and electrolyte
K.A., et al., 2004. Relationship of
bispectral index to minimum
(Small animal) 1, 238-244.
imbalances in horses with
alveolar concentration multiples of
McMurphy, R.M., Stoll, M.R., McCubrey.
gastrointestinal disorders. J Vet
sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 65.
R., 2006. Accuracy of an
Intern Med 19, 871-877.
93-98.
oscillometric blood pressure monitor
Nelson, T.E., 1991. Malignant
Latshaw, H., Fessler, J.F., Whistler, S...
during phenylephrine-induced
 hyperthermia in dogs. I Am Vet Med
et al., 1979. Indirect measurement
hypertension in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Assoc 198, 989-994.
of mean blood pressure in the
67.1541-1545.
Noel, PG., Couetil, L., Constable, P.D.,
normotensive and hypotensive horse.
Meurs, K.M., Miller, M.W., Slater, M.R.,
2010. Effects of collecting blood into
Equine Vet ↓ 11, 191-194.
1996. Comparison of indirect
plastic heparinised vacutainer tubes
Linton, R.A., Young, L.E., Martin, D.G..
oscillometric and direct arterial
and storage conditions on blood gas
et al., 2000. Cardiac output
 methods for blood pressure
analysis values in horses. Equine Vet
measured by lithium dilution,
 measurements in anesthetized dogs.
1 42 (Suppl 38), 91-97.
thermodilution, and transesophageal
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 32, 471-475.
Norton, J.L., Nolen-Walston, R.D.,
Doppler echocardiography in
Meyer, O., Jenni, R., Greiter-Wilke, A..
Underwood, C., et al., 2011.
anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 61,
et al., 2010. Comparison of telemetry
Repeatability, reproducibility, and
731-737
and high-definition oscillometry
effect of head position on central
Lumb, A.B., 2000. Nunn's Applied
for blood pressure measurements
venous pressure measurement in
Respiratory Physiology. Elsevier
in conscious dogs: Effects of
standing adult horses. J Vet Intern 
Limited, Philadelphia.
torcetrapib. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci
Med, 575-578
MacFarlane, PD., Grint, N., Dugdale, A..
49.464-471.
O'Brien, D., Pook, H.A., Klip. A., et al.,.
 2010. Comparison of invasive and
Meyer, R.E., Short, C.E., 1985. Arterial
1990. Canine stress syndrome/
non-invasive blood pressure
to end-tidal COz tension and
malignant hyperthermia
 monitoring during clinical
alveolar dead space in halothane- or
susceptibility: calcium hemostasis
anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Res
isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Am J
defect in muscle and lymphocytes.
Commun 34, 217-227.
Vet Res 46, 597-599.
Res Vet Sci 48, 124-128.
Manley, S.V., Kelly, A.B., Hodgson, D.,
Middleton, D.j., llkiw, J.E., Watson,
Oakley, R.E., Olivier, B., Eyster, G.E..
1983. Malignant hyperthermia-like
A.D.J., 1981. Arterial and venous
et al., 1997. Experimental evaluation
reactions in three anesthetized
blood gas tensions in clinically
of central venous pressure
horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc 183.
healthy cats. Am I Vet Res 42.
monitoring in the dog. I Am Anim
85-89.
1609-1611.
Hosp Assoc 33, 77-82.
61
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Pairet, B., Jaenicke, E., 2010. Structure of
Riebold, T.W., Evans, A.T., 1985. Blood
anesthetized dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit
 the altitude adapted hemoglobin of
pressure measurements in the
Care 20, 313-318.
guinea pig in the R2-state. PLos ONE
anesthetized horse: comparison of
Shih, A.C., Giguere, S., Sanchez, L.C..
5, e12389.
four methods. Vet Surg 14, 332-337.
et al., 2009. Determination of
Pang, D.S.J., Allaire, I., Rondenay, Y.,
Roberts, M.C., Mickelson, J.R.,
cardiac output in anesthetized
et al., 2009. The use of lingual
Patterson, E.E., et al., 2001.
neonatal foals by use of two pulse
wnous blood to determine the
Autosomal dominant canine
wave analysis methods. Am J Vet Res 
acid-base and blood-gas status of
malignant hyperthermia is caused by
70, 334-339.
dogs under anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth
a mutation in the gene encoding the
Soma, L.R. (Ed.), 1971. Depth of
Analg 36, 124-132.
skeletal muscle calcium release
general anesthesia. In: Textbook of
Parry, B.W., McCarthy, M.A., Anderson,
channel (RYR1). Anesthesiology 95,
Veterinary Anaesthesia. Williams &
G.A., et al., 1982. Correct occlusive
716-725.
Wilkins Company, Baltimore.
bladder width for indirect blood
Robertson, S.A., 1990. Practical use of
pp. 178-187.
pressure measurement in horses. Am
ECG in the horse. In Practice 12,
Steffey, E.P., Dunlop, C.l., Farver, T.B.,
JVet Res 43, 50-54.
59-67.
et al., 1987. Cardiovascular and
Parviainen, A.K., Trim, C.M., 2000.
Robertson, S.A., Hauptman, J.G.
respiratory measurements in awake
 Complications associated with
Nachreiner, R.F., et al., 2001. Effects
and isoflurane-anesthetized horses.
anaesthesia for ocular surgery: a
of acetylpromazine or morphine on
Am J Vet Res 48, 7-12.
retrospective study 1989-1996.
urine production in halothane-
Stegall, H.E., Kardon, M.B., Kemmerer.
Equine Vet ] 32, 555-559.
anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 62.
W.T., 1968. Indirect measurement of
Paulev, P.E., Zubieta-Calleja, G.R., 2005.
1922-1927
arterial blood pressure byDoppler
Essentials in the diagnosis of
Roewer, N., Dziadzka, A., Greim, C.A.,
ul trasonic sphygmomanometry.
acid-base disorders and their high
et al., 1995. Cardiovascular and
JAppl Physio] 25, 793-798.
 altitude application. J Physiol Pharm 
metabolic responses to anesthetic-
Tate, L.P., Corbett, W.T., Foreman, I.H.,
56 (Supp 4), 155-170.
induced malignant hyperthermia in
et al., 1993. Instrumentation of
Pedersen, K.M., Butler, M.A., Ersboll,
swine. Anesthesiology 83, 141-159.
exercising Thoroughbreds to
A.K., et al., 2002. Evaluation of an
Sawyer, D.C., Brown, M., Striler, E.L.,
determine blood gas tensions and
oscillometric blood pressure monitor
et al., 1991. Comparison of direct
acid-base status. Vet Surg 22.
for use in anesthetized cats. I Am Vet
and indirect blood pressure
171-176.
Med Assoc 221, 646-650.
 measurement in anesthetized dogs.
Taylor, PM., 1990. Interference with the
Picandet, V, Jeanneret, S., Lavoie, J.P,
Lab Anim Sci 41, 134-138.
Datex Normac anaesthetic agent
2007. Effect of syringe type and
Sawyer, D.C, Guikema, A.H., Siegel,
monitor for halothane in horses and
 storage temperature on results of
E.M., 2004. Evaluation of a new
sheep. I Assoc Vet Anaesth 17.
blood gas analysis in arterial blood
oscillometric blood pressure monitor
32-34.
of horses. J Vet Intern Med 21,
in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Vet
Toffaletti, J., Zijlstra, W.G., 2007
476-481.
Anaesth Analg 31, 27-39.
 Misconceptions in reporting
Pizov, R., Eden, A., Bystritski, D., et al.,.
Schauvliege, S., Van den Eede, A..
Oxygen saturation. Anesth Analg 105.
2010. Arterial and plethysmographic
Duchateau, L., et al., 2009.
S5-S9.
waveform analysis in anesthetized
Comparison between lithium
Torrao, N.A., Hetem, R.S., Meyer, L.C.R..
patients with hypovolemia.
dilution and pulse contour analysis
et al., 20ll. Assessment of the use of
Anesthesiology 113, 83-91.
techniques for cardiac output
temperature-sensitive microchips to
Posner, L.P., Pavuk, A.A., Rokshar, J.L..
measurement in isoflurane
determine core body temperature in
et al., 2010. Effects of opioids
anaesthetized ponies: influence of
goats. Vet Rec 168, 328.
 and anesthetic drugs on body
different inotropic drugs. Vet Anaesth Tremper, K.K., Barker, S.1., 1990.
temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth
Analg 36, 197-208.
Monitoring of oxygen. In: Lake, C.L.
Analg 37, 35-43.
Scott, N.E., Haskins, S.C., Aldrich, I..
(Ed)., Clinical Monitoring. W. B.
Pretto, J.1., Rochford, P.D., 1994. Effects
et al., 2005. Comparison of
Saunders Company, Philadelphia,
 of sample storage time, temperature
measured oxyhemoglobin saturation
pp. 283-313.
and syringe type on blood gas
and oxygen content with analyzer-
Trim, C.M., 1998. Monitoring during
tensions in samples with high
clculated values and hand-
anaesthesia: techniques and
oxygen partial pressures. Thorax 49.
calculated values obtained in
interpretation. Equine Vet Educ 10.
610-612.
unsedated healthy dogs. Am J Vet
207-218.
Reynolds, L., Beckmann, I., Kurz, A..
Res 66, 1273-1277.
Valverde, A., Giguere, S., Morey, T.E.,
2008. Perioperative complications of
Sheffeld, C.W., Sessler, D.l., Hunt, T.K.,
et al., 2007. Comparison of
hypothermia. Best Prac Res Clin
1994. Mild hypothemia during
noninvasive cardiac output measured
Anesth 22, 645-657.
isoflurane anesthesia decreases
by use of partial carbon dioxide
Ribeiro, L.M., Ferreira, D.A., Bras, S.,
resistance to E. coli dermal infection
rebreathing or the lithium dilution
et al., 2009. Correlation between
in guinea pigs. Acta Anaesth Scand
method in anesthetized foals. Am ↓
dinical signs of depth of anaesthesia
38, 201-205.
Vet Res 68, 141-147.
 and cerebral state index responses in
Shih, A., Robertson, S., Vigani, A., et al..
Valverde, A., Hatcher, M.E., Stampfli,
dogs duning induction of anaesthesia
2010. Evaluation of an indirect
H.R., 2008. Effects of fluid therapy
with propofol. Res Vet Sci 87.
oscillometric blood pressure monitor
on total protein and its influence on
287-291.
in normotensive and hypotensive
clculated unmeasured ions in the
62
 Patient monitoring and clinical measurement
Chapter
2
anesthetized dog. I Vet Emerg Crit
Wass, C.T., Lanier, W.L., Hofer, R.E., et
Winslow, R.M., 2007. The role of
Care 18, 480-487.
al., 1995. Temperature changes of >1
hemoglobin oxygen affinity in
Viu, I., Jose-Cunilleras, E., Armengou,
 or =1*C alter functional neurologic
Oxygen transport at high altitude.
L, et al., 2010. Acid-base imbalances
outcome and histopathology in a
Resp Physiol Neurobiol 158,
during a 120 km endurance race
canine model of complete cerebral
121-127.
compared by traditional and
ischemia. Anesthesiology 83.
Wooten, E.W., 2010. The standard
simplified strong ion difference
325-335.
strong ion difference, standard
 methods. Equine Vet | 42 (suppl 38),
Watney, G.C.G., Norman, W.M.,
total titratable base, and their
76-82.
Schumacher, J.P., et al., 1993.
relationship to the Boston
Wagner, A.E., Bednarski, R.M., Muir.
 Accuracy of a reflectance pulse
compensation rules and the
W.w., 1990. Hemodynamic effects
 oximeter in anesthetized horses.
Van Slyke equation for extracellular
of carbon dioxide during
Am J Vet Res 54, 497-501.
fluid. j Clin Monit Comput 24,
intermittent positive-pressure
Weber, R.E., 2007. High-altitude
177-188.
ventilation in horses. Am J Vet Res
 adaptations in vertebrate
Wu, E.Y., Barazanji, K.W., Johnson Jr.,
51, 1922-1929.
hemoglobins. Resp Physiol
R.L., 1997. Sources of error in
Wagner, A.E., Muir, W.w., Hinchcliff.
Neurobiol 158, 132-142.
A-aDOz calculated from blood
K.W., 1991. Cardiovascular effects
Weiskopf, R.B., Townsley, M.I., Riordan,
stored in plastic and glass syringes. ↓
of xylazine and detomidine
K.K., et al., 1981. Comparison of
Appl Physiol 82, 196-202.
in horses. Am J Vet Res 52.
cardiopulmonary responses to graded
Yamashita, K., Ueyama, Y., Miyoshi, K.,
651-657.
hemorrhage during enflurane.
et al., 2007. Minimally invasive
Walley, K.R., 2010. Use of central venous
halothane, isoflurane, and ketamine
 determination of cardiac output by
 Oxygen saturation to guide therapy.
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 60, 481-491.
 transthoracic bioimpedance, partial
Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 184,
Wernick, M., Doherr, M.G., Howard, I..
carbon dioxide rebreathing. and
514-520.
et al., 2010. Evaluation of high-
transesophageal Doppler
Wan, PY., Trim, C.M., Mueller, P.O..
definition and conventional
echocardiography in Beagle dogs.
1992. Xylazine-ketamine and
 oscillometric blood pressure
I Vet Med Sci 69, 43-47.
 detomidine-tiletamine-zolazepam
 measurement in anaesthetised dogs
Young, L.E., Blissett, K.J., Bartram, D.H..
anesthesia in horses. Vet Surg 21,
using ACVIM guidelines. J Small 
et al., 1996. Measurement of cardiac
312-318.
Anim Pract 51, 318-324.
output by transoesophageal Doppler
Wanner, A., Reinhart, M.E., 1978.
Whitehair, K.J., Watney, G.C.G.,
echocardiography in anaesthetized
 Respiratory mechanics in conscious
Leith, D.E., et al., 1990. Pulse
horses: Comparison with
sheep: response to methacholine.
oximetry in horses. Vet Surg 19.
thermodilution. Br I Anaesth 77.
JAppl Physiol 44, 479-482.
243-248.
773-780.
63
aptel
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Introduction
65
INTRODUCTION
Physical principles
65
Tension (partial pressure). units and 
atmospheric pressure
65
The term pharmacodynamics refers to the relationship
between drug concentration and its clinical or pharmaco-
Solubility coefficients of gases
66
67
logical effect, while pharmacokinetics refers to the math-
Concentration of a gas in solution
ematical description of the various processes relating to
Pharmacokinetics of inhaled anaesthetics
67
dnug movement from the site of its administration, fol-
Uptake of inhaled anaesthetics
67
lowed by distribution to the tissues and, finally, elimina-
Blood solubility and alveolar tension
68
tion from the body. To paraphrase pharmacokinetics is
what the body does to the drug' whereas pharmacody-
The tension of anaesthetic agents
namics is 'what the dnug does to the body: However, they
in brain tissue
69
cannot be regarded as separate processes for drugs produce
Recovery from anaesthesia
70
effects in vivo which alter their own kinetic and dynamic
Speed of uptake and elimination related
profiles, for example acute haemodynamic effects will
to safety of inhalation agents
70
influence distribution (Fig. 3.1).
Uptake and elimination of inhalation anaesthetics
in clinical practice
70
Physical principles
Other factors affecting inhalation
anaesthetic administration
71
 In the account of the pharmacokinetics of inhaled drugs
Pharmacokinetics of intravenous
 that follows, frequent reference is made to tensions, solu-
anaesthetics
72
bilities and concentrations of gases in solution. These
terms may perhaps be best explained by considering spe-
 Total apparent volume of distribution
72
cifc examples.
Total elimination clearance (Cle) and
elimination half-life (t1/zp)
73
Compartmental models
Tension (partial pressure), units and
73
atmospheric pressure
The one compartment model
74
The two compartment model
75
The tension of a gas in a liquid is the pressure of the agent
The multicompartment model
75
in the gas with which the liquid should be in equilibrium.
A liquid and a gas, or two liquids, are in equilibrium if.
 Practical methods of drug delivery
when separated by a permeable membrane, there is no
during intravenous anaesthesia
76
exchange between them. The statement that 'the tension
Target controlled infusions (TCI)
76
of nitrous oxide in the blood is 50.5 kPa (380 mmHg)
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
65
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Drug
Activity
Absorption
 Free drug in plasma
Site for
therapeutic
effect
Redistribution to
inactive tissues
 Site(s) for
Bound to plasma protein
side effects
Activity
Biotransformation
Activity
Excretion of metabolites
Excretion
Reabsorption
Excretion of
unchanged drug
Figure 3.1 Pathways for the uptake, distribution and elimination from the body of an active drug.
means that if a sample of blood were placed in an ambient
volume %. For example. if at sea level MAC was 1%. a
atmosphere containing nitrous oxide at a concentration of
tension of 1% of standard atmospheric, i.e. 7.6 mmHg Or
 50% v/v (and, therefore according to Dalton's law, exerting
1.0l kPa is what is required to prevent movement in
a partial pressure of 50.5 kPa (380 mmHg), there would
response to stimulation in 50% of animals. However, if
be no movement of nitrous oxide into or out ofthe blood.
anaesthesia is carried out at an elevation of 2000 metres,
Tension' is a term used by physiologists and anaesthetists,
atmospheric pressure is approximately 80 kPa, so the %
while physicists speak of 'partial pressure'
of anaesthetic gas required to give a tension of 1.01 kPa is
In the example above, tensions (partial pressures) are
now 1.25 %. Thus, MAC expressed as vol% has to be cor-
given in two units, mmHg. but also in kilopascals (kPa)
rected for the atmospheric pressure (Mapleson, 1996)
which is the SI unit and which, as veterinary scientists, we
 Fortunately, in clinical practice, most calibrated vaporizers
should be using. Reluctance to change is partly due to the
are compensated such that, at any dial setting. they put
fact that atmospheric pressure in weather forecasts is pre-
out a specific partial pressure of the agent, even although
sented in a variety of different units depending on the
the dial says % (see Chapter l0) and so the anaesthetist
 iauq e ss aie An iu aan iou ae
to us in mmHg (before that in inches Hg). In Europe, SI
(but the same mass) of anaesthetic.
units are used, and atmospheric pressure is presented as
millibars. A millibar is, in fact a hectopascal, so 10 mil.
Solubility coefficients of gases
libars = 1l kPa. 'Standard' atmospheric pressure at sea level
is approximately 760 mmHgor 1013 millibars ( 10l.3 kPa).
E ui paalossip sea e jo sse au 'aimeiadan uaaig Aue h
With an inhalation anaesthetic, anaesthesia depends on
solution, i.e. its concentration in the solution, varies
the tension (partial pressure) of the agent. Minimum alve-
directly with its tension (Henry's law) and is governed by
olar concentration (MAC, see Chapter 1) is expressed as
the solubility of the gas in the particular solvent The
66
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
solubility of anaesthetics varies widely and, therefore, at
profle can facilitate their use in clinical practice. They
any one tension, the quantities of the different anaesthet-
cannot be introduced into the brain without at the same
ics in the solvent are not equal. The solubility of anaesthet-
time being distributed through the entire body, and this
ics in the blood and tissues are best expressed in terms of
distribution exerts a controlling influence over the rate of
their partition, or distribution, coeffcients. For example,
the uptake or elimination of the anaesthetic by brain
the blood-gas partition coeffcient of nitrous oxide is 0.47.
tissue Even if the inhalation agent is metabolized to a
This means that when blood and alveolar air containing
considerable extent (eg. halothane), such metabolism
nitrous oxide at a given tension are in equilibrium, there
does not play a clinically significant part in removal of the
will be 47 parts of nitrous oxide per unit volume (say per
anaesthetic Thus, all inhalation anaesthetics may be
litre) of blood for every l00 parts of nitrous oxide per unit
pue ayeidn se iey se sasee paul Aieuassa se papiegan
volume (litre) of alveolar air. In general, the partition coef-
 elimination are concermed.
ficient of a gas at a stated temperature is the ratio, at
equilibrium, of the gas's concentration on the two sides of
Uptake of inhaled anaesthetics
a diffusing membrane or interface.
Tissue solubility does not necessarily correlate with
If some factors are reduced to their simplest possible
blood-gas solubility. The newer volatile agents (e.g. iso-
terms, and certain assumptions are made, it is possible
flurane desflurane sevoflurane) may have a low blood-
to give approximate predictions relating to inert gas
gas partition coeffcient but their brain-blood partition
Exchange in the body (Bourne, 1964). These predictions 
coefficient is not necessarily lowered to the same extent.
 are sufficiently realistic for practical purposes and serve to
The brain-blood partition coeffcient can be estimated by
illustrate the main principles involved. Once these are
dividing the brain-gas with the blood-gas partition coef-
understood more elaborate expositions found elsewhere
ficient The brain-blood partition coeffcients for haloth-
(Eger, 1974; 2010; Mapleson, 1989) should become rea-
ane, enflurane, isoflurane and desflurane calculate to be
sonably easy to follow.
1.86, 1.73, 1.67 and 1.27, respectively. Hence desflurane
For simplicity, the physiological variables such as cardiac
has a more rapid uptake in the brain tissue. For simplicity.
output and tidal volume must be assumed to be unaf-
in many theoretical calculations, it is often assumed that
fected by the presence of the gas, and to remain uniform
in the brain and all other tissues (except fat) gases have
throughout the administration. Allowance cannot be
very nearly the same solubility as they have in blood
made for alterations in the tidal volume as administration
because their tissue-blood partition coefficients are suff-
proceeds. The blood supply to the grey matter of the brain
ciently close to unity.
must be assumed to be uniform and the gas to be evenly
distributed throughout the grey matter. Finally, although
Concentration of a gas in solution
 in practice anaesthetics are seldom administered in this
way, the anaesthetic must be assumed to be given at a fxed
The concentration of a gas in solution may be expressed
inspired concentration, and, what is more it must be
in a variety of ways including:
 assumed that no rebreathing of gases occurs.
1. The volume of gas which can be extracted from a
The tensions of the gas in the alveolar blood and tissues
unit of volume of solution under standard
all tend to move towards inspired tension (Kety. 1951),
conditions (v/v)
but a number of processes, each of which proceeds at its
2. The weight of dissolved gas per unit volume of
Own rate, intervene to delay the eventual saturation of the
solvent (w/v)
tissues. The tension of the gas in the brain follows, with a
3. The molar concentration, i.e. the number of
slight delay, its tension in the alveolar air. Since both the
 gram-molecules of gas per litre of solvent The
rate of induction and recovery from inhalation anaesthesia
molar concentration is the most useful - equimolar
are governed by the rate of change of the tension of the
solutions of gases of different molecular weights
Aq pauaaos s! unl ui sui pue 'uieiq aul ul yauisaeue
contain equal concentrations of molecules. This
the rate of change of tension in the alveoli, the factors that
would not be so if their concentrations in terms of
determine the anaesthetic tension in the alveoli are obvi-
w/v were equal.
 ously of very great importance.
The rate at which the tension of an anaesthetic in the
alveolar air approaches its tension in the inspired air
PHARMACOKINETICS OF
depends on the pulmonary ventilation, the uptake of the
 anaesthetic by the blood and tissues and the inspired
INHALED ANAESTHETICS
concentration. First, by means of pulmonary ventilation
the gas is inhaled, diluted with functional residual air, and
Inhaled anaesthetics have a pharmacokinetic profle which
enters the alveoli. This is where diffusion occurs and nor-
results in ease in controlling the depth of anaesthesia as a
mally the alveolar gas equilibrates almost immediately
result of rapid uptake and elimination: a knowledge of this 
with the pulmonary blood, which is then distributed
67
Section
1
Principles and procedures
throughout the body. A second diffusion process occurs
as minute volume of respiration, the functional residual
across the capillary membranes of the tissues into the
capacity of the lungs, the cardiac output and the blood
interstitial fuid and from there through the cell mem-
flow to the main anaesthetic absorbing bulk of the
branes into the cells themselves. Venous blood leaving the
body - muscles and fat. However, one physical property
tissues is in equilibrium with the tissue tension. The blood
of the anaesthetic itself is considerably more important
from the tissues returns to the lungs, still carrying some of
than all of these factors - the solubility of the anaesthetic
its original content of anaesthetic, and is again equilibrated
in the blood. This is the factor that determines the height
with alveolar gas which now contains a slightly higher
Of the 'knee' in the alveolar uptake curve. With anaesthet-
tension of the anaesthetic. It is in this manner that the
   si  a   m  s
alveolar (or arterial) and venous (or tissue) tensions of the
solubility the knee is low. This may be illustrated by con-
anaesthetic in question gradually, and in that order, rise
 sideration of the hypothetical extremes of solubility
towards eventual equilibrium with the inspired tension.
A totally insoluble gas would not diffuse into the pul-
As this complex process proceeds, the tension of the
monary blood and would not be carried in it away from
anaesthetic in the alveolar air increases continuously, but
the lungs. If such a gas were inhaled at a constant inspired
not at a uniform rate. Plotted against time, alveolar tension
tension in a non-rebreathing system, its alveolar tension
rises in a curve that is, in general, the same for every inert
papaasoid pnousem sunl se Alleiquauodxa aseaiou! Pinom 
gas (Fig. 3.2). This curve tails off and slopes gradually
until, after a very short time, alveolar tension equalled
upwards until, after several hours or even days, depending
inspired tension (Fig. 3.3). The curve obtained would be
on the anaesthetic in question, complete equilibrium is
all initial rise and there would be no tail. Such a gas could
reached. The steep initial rise represents movement of
not ever be an anaesthetic, since none would ever reach
anaesthetic into the lungs, i.e the pulmonary
wash-in
the brain.
phase. The slowly rising tail represents more gradual tissue
A gas of extremely low blood solubility (see Fig. 3.3.
saturation. The change from steep part of the curve to the
curve B) would give an almost identical curve. The loss
 tail marks the point at which lung wash-in gives place to
into the pulmonary bloodstream of only a minute amount
tissue saturation as the most important influence. The tail
of the gas contained in the lungs at any moment would
 can be very long if the anaesthetic in question has a very
bring the tension of the gas in the blood into equilibrium
high fat/blood partition coefficient.
with that in the alveolar air. The capacity of the blood for
such a gas would be extremely small. Likewise, the capacity
Blood solubility and
of the entire body tissue [with the possible exception of
fat) would be small, since as already pointed out, the
alveolar tension
tissue-blood partition coeffcients of most anaesthetics are
The shape of curve obtained with any given anaesthetic
depends on a number of factors. These include such things
100
A
100-
Tail
(Tissue saturation phase)
F
'knee'
6
%
50-
%
A
A
Initial rise
(lung wash-in phase)
0
0
0
10
5
10
Time (min)
Time (min)
Figure 3.3 Alveolar tension curves for a totally insoluble gas
Figure 3.2 Typical alveolar tension curve for an inert gas
(A). of low solubility (B), (nitrous oxide) and a gas of
inhaled at a fixed concentration from a non-rebreathing
extremely high solubility (C), all breathed at a constant
system.
inspired concentration from a non-rebreathing system.
68
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
3
Table 3.1 Partition coefficients of some inhalation anaesthetics at 37°C
 Partition coefficient
Desflurane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Enflurane
Halothane
Blood-gas
0.42
1.40
09'0
007
1.94
Tissue-blood
Brain
1.29
1.57
1.70
2.70
1.94
Heart
1.29
1.61
1.78
1.15
1.84
Liver 
1.31
1.75
1.85
3.70
2.07
Muscle
1.02
1.92
3.13
2.20
88'2
Fat
27.20
44.90
47.59
0088
51.10
close to unity. If such an agent, even when given at the
1.0
highest permissible concentration of 80% with 20% of
N,O
 Oxygen, only produced a faint depression of the central
Desflurane
 nervous system, it could nevertheless be looked upon as a
very active agent because it would be deriving its effect
Isoflurane
through the presence in the brain of only a minute trace.
 At the other hypothetical extreme would be a gas of very
nearly infnite solubility in blood. All but a very small
Halothane
0.5
Pinom juauou auo Aue je sunl au ui ses aut jo uooey
dissolve in the pulmonary blood as soon as the blood
arrived at the alveoli. The capacity of the blood and body
tissues for such a gas would be vast The alveoli tension
curve (see Fig. 3.3, C) would be very flat, with virtually no
rapid initial rise and a very slowly rising tail. Given enough
time for full equilibrium, it might be possible to achieve
very deep anaesthesia by using a minute inspired tension
0
10
20
but, of course, in one sense, the gas would be a very weak
30
anaesthetic, since its concentration in the brain would be
Minutes of administration
enormous.
 Ranging between these hypothetical extremes of solubil-
Figure 3.4 Increase in alveolar tension (FA) towards inspired
ity are the gaseous and volatile anaesthetics. Their solubili-
tension (Fl) during administration at a fixed concentration in
a non-rebreathing system. Effect of blood solubility. The
ties in blood and tissues for humans and some animals
curves are not drawn accurately and only represent
(fgures taken from various sources but mainly from data
approximate, relative curves.
sheets) are shown in Table 3.1. The effect of the different
solubilities on the alveolar tension when the agents are
tension of the agent in the venous blood leaving that
administered at a constant inspired tension are shown in
tissue This lags behind the arterial tension by an amount
Figure 3.4.
that depends mainly upon the blood supply to the tissue.
Fatty tissues are exceptions to this rule for, in them, the
The tension of anaesthetic agents
relative solubilities play an important part. In organs with
a rich blood supply such as the brain and heart, the venous
in brain tissue
tension rises quite quickly to the arterial tension. After
In addition to the alveolar tensions, the anaesthetist is also
about 20 minutes [in humans) with anaesthetics whose
concerned with the tension of anaesthetic agents in the
solubility in grey matter is about equal to that in blood,
grey matter of the brain. In the lungs (unless pathological
or perhaps 40 minutes in the case of agents like halothane
changes are present), diffusion from the alveolar air to the
which are a little more soluble in grey matter, arterial and
blood is almost instantaneous, so that for theoretical pur-
grey matter tensions, during uptake and during elimina-
poses the tension in the arterial blood leaving the lungs
tion, are almost equal (see Fig. 3.3)
can be regarded as equal to the tension in the alveolar air.
It follows from these considerations that if a gas has a
Only when the body has become absolutely saturated
low blood solubility, any change in its tension in the
 does the arterial tension equal the tissue tension. During
alveolar air is quickly reflected in the grey matter in the
the saturation process, and after the administration
is
brain, whereas if the blood solubility is high there will be
 stopped, the tissue tension is accurately represented by the
a considerable delay because the whole body will act as a
69
Section
1
Principles and procedures
very large buffer. Thus, with an inhalation anaesthetic, the
implications; it determines (in an inverse manner) the
speed with which induction of anaesthesia can be carried
extent to which tissue tensions keep pace with alterations
out (when the inspired tension is kept constant) is gov.
in inspired tension and thus it controls the rate at which
erned by the solubility of the anaesthetic in the blood.
Low solubility (eg. desflurane) favours rapid induction,
 soluble agent, such as diethyl ether or methoxyflurane, no
whereas high blood solubility (e.g. methoxyflurane) leads
-iano ssois ji (aiqissod st uoisuat anssi ui asueus uappns
to slow induction. The important point to note here is, of
dosage is given, the anaesthetist has plenty of time in
course, that so far all arguments have been based on the
which to observe the signs of deepening unconsciousness
 paueueu st uoeuanuon paidsui aul ieu uodunsse
 and to reduce the concentration of the inhaled mixture.
constant In fact, alteration of the inspired tension can do
With an anaesthetic of low blood solubility. such as
much to overcome the slow induction with agents of high
sevoflurane however, increase in tissue tension follows
blood solubility. For example if in animals, methoxyflu-
very quickly after an increase in the inspired tension;
rane were given at concentrations that would give satisfac-
Aeuu asopiaao ssoig e pue Aipidei uadaap Aeu eisauisaeue
tory anaesthesia after full equilibration, induction might
result. It is, therefore, very important with the less soluble
take many hours. It would be a very long time before the
anaesthetics to consider carefully the factors that favour
 animal even lost consciousness. In practice, this diffculty
the giving of an overdose, the chief of which must be vola-
is overcome by starting the administration with a much
tility and potency.
higher concentration, which would, if administered indef-
initely, kill the animal. As the desired level of anaesthesia
Volatility
is reached, the inspired concentration is reduced. However,
Volatility governs the potential strength of the inspired
the maximum concentration that can be administered
is limited by the volatility of the anaesthetic, and its
mixture for, obviously, the more volatile the anaesthetic,
the greater the risk of its being administered at a high
pungency.
concentration. Gaseous anaesthetics and liquid anaesthet-
ics which have low boiling points are, therefore, poten-
Recovery from anaesthesia
tially dangerous.
When the administration of the anaesthetic is terminated,
its concentration in the inspired air cannot be reduced
Potency
[wash-out phase) to below zero. Although the full buffer-
With most drugs. potency determines the magnitude of
ing effect of the body tissues will not be seen after acceler-
a possible overdose. With inhalation anaesthetics, however,
ated inductions and brief administration (those tissues
usually MAC is taken as a measure of potency (Eger et al.
uoed pooiq-anss yaiy io Aiddns pooiq iood e y
1965; White, 2003). However, MAC is not a measurement
coefficient will then be only very incompletely saturated).
 of the potential to overdose, as the physical characteristics
elimination of the more soluble anaesthetics will take
of some anaesthetics mean that it is impossible to obtain
time and recovery will be slow. Low blood solubility leads
many multiples of MAC. With a weak anaesthetic such
to rapid elimination of anaesthetics like desflurane and
 as nitrous oxide, overdose is impossible; if it were not for
rapid recovery from anaesthesia.
lack of oxygen, nitrous oxide could be given at 100%
At the end of anaesthesia, the volume of nitrous oxide
concentration without danger. However, depending on
eliminated causes the minute volume of expiration to
species, isoflurane has a MAC of 1.3 % (i.e. a tension of
exceed the inspired volume and this outpouring of nitrous
InodeA paeimes sl (3Huu 0l Alaeuixoidde 1o edy E'1
 Oxide dilutes the alveolar content of oxygen. If the animal
pressure at 20"C is 31.5 kPa [236 mmHg) so, theoreti-
is breathing room air, the alveolar oxygen tension can fall
cally, it is possible to give approximately 25x MAC. Fortu-
to low levels, resulting in a severe reduction in PaO2. This
nately, modern calibrated vaporizers prevent this from
 phenomenon, called 'diffusion hypoxia' can also happen
happening.
if nitrous oxide is cut off during anaesthesia. Theoretically.
it can happen with any agent, but it is unlikely to have any
ill effects with very soluble agents, because of the small
Uptake and elimination of inhalation
volumes involved and the slow excretion of the agent. The
 anaesthetics in dinical practice
danger is greatest if two insoluble agents (eg.
. nitrous
oxide and desflurane) are administered together.
The various assumptions made for the purpose of theoreti
cal or mathematical predictions of inhalational anaes-
Speed of uptake and elimination related to
thetic uptake and elimination cannot be made in everyday
practice Many of the factors which have to be regarded as
safety of inhalation agents
constant if any mathematical prediction is to be made, do
 Blood solubility is not only important as a factor influenc-
in fact, vary considerably during the course of anaesthesia.
ing the speed of induction and recovery. It has wider
These factors include the tidal volume, the physiological
70
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
3
dead space, the functional residual capacity (FRC - that
Other factors affecting inhalation
volume of gas in the lungs which dilutes each single breath
anaesthetic administration
of anaesthetic),. the thickness and permeability of the
alveolar-capillary membrane, the cardiac output and pul-
The vaporizer
monary blood flow [which may be different, especially in
Modern vaporizers are capable of delivering very accurate
pathological conditions of the lungs), regional variations
concentrations:; limitations are described in Chapter 10
in ventilation/perfusion relationships in the lungs. the
(see also Fig. 3.5). The vaporizers are designed so that, at
blood flow through the tissues of the body, the partition
maximal output, they give the number of MAC multiples
coeffcients of the anaesthetic between the gaseous Or
that are considered safe for induction of anaesthesia in
vapour state and lung tissue or blood, and between blood
humans. This is, however, an inspired concentration that
and the body tissues, and the blood flow diffusion coef-
can killif maintained for too long. Older vaporizers which
ficient and diffusion distance for each of the tissues of
may be inaccurate or non-compensated vaporizers are still
the body.
in use in veterinary anaesthesia and these will not provide
 In addition, the anaesthetics themselves may modify
the same safety factor.
many of the variables as administration proceeds. For
example, most anaesthetics depres breathing and reduce
the cardiac output. Considerations such as these indicate
Thebreathing system
only too clearly why it is not yet possible to give a com-
 The fresh gas that flows into the breathing system (circuit)
plete account of the uptake and elimination of inhalation
is diluted by the expired alveolar gas, causing a difference
anaesthetics as encountered in clinical practice.
between the concentration of the inflowing gas and the
Temperature
Vaporizer
Delivery
Method of
Fresh gas flow
system
carbon dioxide
removal
Concentration effect
Second gas effect
Alveolar ventilation
Lungs
VQ ratio
Solubility
Circulation
Cardiac output
Brain
Perfusion
Sedatives
Effect
Age
Surgery
 Figure 3.5 The concentration cascade between the vaporizer and the brain tissue and some factors which influence it.
71
Section
1
Principles and procedures
concentration which is actually inspired. The lower the
slower is the rise in alveolar concentration. The volatile
fresh gas flow rates, the greater this difference becomes.
 anaesthetic agents all depress cardiac output and, while
Absorption by tubing and any absorbent used to remove
with spontaneous ventilation a protective negative feed
carbon dioxide, as well as high anaesthetic uptake by the
back exists with respect to high concentrations, the reverse
 animal, may also increase this difference. At the beginning
is true for the circulation because, due to the depressed
of anaesthesia, anaesthetic agent may be 'taken up' by the
circulation, less of the agent is removed from the alveoli
soda lime. Wet soda lime absorbs much less of volatile
so that alveolar concentration rises more rapidly.
anaesthetics than when it is relatively dry. A variable
 amount of the anaesthetic may be absorbed in the tubing
of the breathing system. There is a large difference between
materials.
PHARMACOKINETICS OF
In a circle system, the fresh gas utilization will vary
INTRAVENOUS ANAESTHETICS
widely depending on the arrangement of the system com-
ponents. An arrangement with the spill-off valve between
the fresh gas inlet and the lungs will result in lower fresh
The pharmacokinetics of the intravenous agents, i.e. the
gas utilization. Better characteristics with greater utiliza-
 processes by which drug concentrations at effector sites are
tion are found where the spill-off valve closes during inspi-
achieved, maintained and diminished after intravenous
ration and is as close to the lungs as possible.
(IV) injection, is of increasing importance today because
of the use of computer models to study dnug uptake and
The fungs
elimination, and the use of microprocessors to control
anaesthetic administration. For a more detailed account of
 Depending on how much fresh gas reaches the lungs and
their pharmacokinetics than follows here reference should
how much anaesthetic is carried away in the arterialized
be made to standard textbooks of pharmacology (eg.
blood, there will be a variable concentration difference
Shafer et al., 2010; Buxton & Benet, 2011),
between the inspired and arterial concentrations of the
 Pharmacokinetic variables commonly reported for IV or
anaesthetic The inspired concentration of the agent is the
 otherwise parenterally administered drugs are total appar-
easiest parameter to be changed by the anaesthetist in
ent volume of distribution, total elimination clearance.
order to influence the uptake and elimination of the
and elimination half-life.
anaesthetic.
With higher alveolar ventilation, there is a more rapid
increase in the alveolar uptake curve. Depending on the
Total apparent volume
properties of the anaesthetic agent (see Chapter 7), during
of distribution
spontaneous ventilation the animal has some limited pro-
tection against overdosage because volatile anaesthetics
The total apparent volume of distribution (Va) relates the
depress ventilation, but although this reduces the speed of
amount of dnug in the body to the plasma or blood
further uptake, it also reduces the elimination of any over-
concentration:
dose that has already occurred. Respiratory depression
should not be relied upon to prevent overdosage (as has
V =amount of drug/drug concentration
been suggested when draw-over non-compensated vapor-
A frequently reported total volume of distribution is the
saap Aoidsan ns se 'ai u, paida aie sia
volume of distribution at steady state, Vass the total appar-
Iejnoseaoiies Aq Palueduuome aq ol osie Aiayll st uois
depression.
ent volume a dnug would have if it were in equilibrium
with all body tissues. Another commonly reported, and
Nitrous oxide, because it can be given in high concentra-
usually larger, total volume of distribution is Vap which.
tion, increases alveolar ventilation and thus its own uptake
 together with elimination clearance (Cle), determines the
via the concentration effect, in particular when the animal
is hypoventilated and highly soluble agents are used (Eger,
 elimination half-life.
 In theory, a volume of distribution is measured by
1963). For example if halothane or sevoflurane is used in
injecting a known quantity of the drug and, after allowing
low concentrations, its uptake is increased as well (second
an adequate period of time for itto distribute determining
gas effect) due to the additional inspiratory inflow by the
 its concentration (both free and combined) in the plasma.
concentration effect of the nitrous oxide (Epstein et al.,
In practice, the equilibrium necessary is seldom attained
1964; Peyton et al., 2008).
because, before it is complete, the opposing processes of
metabolism or excretion come into operation.
Cardiac output
A knowledge of the apparent volume of distribution
Cardiac output is another major determinant of inhaled
makes it possible to calculate the doses to be administered
anaesthetic uptake The higher the cardiac output the more
initially and subsequently to achieve desired concentra-
 anaesthetic agent is removed from the alveolar gas and the
tions in the blood and tissues.
72
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
Total elimination clearance (Cle) and
duration of infusion. Hughes et al. (1992) proposed the
elimination half-life (t128)
use of context-sensitive half-time (t/2context) and defined
this as the time for the plasma concentration to decrease
Cle is an independent variable relating the rate of irrevers-
by 50% after termination of an IV infusion designed to
ible drug removal from the body to the plasma or blood
maintain a constant plasma concentration. Context refers
concentration:
to the duration of infusion. They demonstrated that
context-sensitive half-lives of commonly used IV anaes-
 Clg = rate of elimination/drug concentration
thetic agents and opioids could differ markedly from
elimination half-lives and were dependent on duration of
Thus, Cle is the sum of the elimination clearances of
infusion.
all the organs and tissues of the body, principally the
liver and the kidneys. The elimination half-life, t/2B. is a
Compartmental models
dependent variable and is the time required for
the
amount of drug in the body to decrease by one-half:
Drugs injected into a vein are distributed directly in the
bloodstream to the brain and the other tissues of the body.
t128 = ln2x Vas/Cle
Those given by the alimentary route (by mouth or high
into the rectum) must frst be absorbed into the blood and
or, t1/26 = 0.693x Vab/Cle
they then pass through the liver before reaching the central
nervous system. Passage through the liver (the 'frst pass')
These pharmacokinetic variables can be useful for drugs
is avoided if the dnugs are given via the mucous mem-
with a rapid onset of action, such as IV administered pro-
branes of the nose, the terminal rectum, or sublingually.
pofol, but they do not provide a complete description of
 50 that administration of suitable drugs by these routes
their pharmacokinetics. The total volume of distribution
renders the effective dose similar to that needed by the
is not realized until after extensive dnug distribution and
intravenous route. Elimination of these drugs from the
redistribution has occurred. Thus, predicted early drug
body is not a reversal of the process of absorption; they
 concentrations based on the dose and Vs will be very low.
are broken down, mostly in the liver, and are then excreted
Although elimination clearance begins from the time the
mainly by the kidneys.
drug arrives at the clearing organs, the relatively slow
When a drug is administered by IV injection, the onset
decline in dnug concentrations due to elimination clear-
and duration of its effect depend on the distribution to
ance becomes a significant factor in the relationship of
the tissues, tissue binding and access to those tissues
plasma (or blood) concentration with time only after the
where the pharmacological effect takes place, interaction
initial rapid decline due to the distribution and redistribu-
with receptor sites, and elimination by various routes (see
tion phase is over (Fig. 3.6).
Fig. 3.l). Since the body is composed of innumerable
 It is now appreciated that the offset of clinical effect is
tissue zones, each with a unique blend of perfusion,
not simply a function of half-life. It may be affected by the
binding affnity, etc for the drug. quantification of the
rate of equilibration between plasma and effector site and
whole process is nearly impossible unless some gross sim-
 plifications can be made. For any particular drug, the body
can be thought of as comprising one or more compart-
ments, each of which can be considered as a space
throughout which the substance is uniformly distributed
Early distribution phase
and has uniform kinetics of distribution or transport.
Late elimination phase
Secondary dispersion of highly lipid-soluble drugs such
icertr
as the IV anaesthetic agents occurs as they cross cell mem-
 branes and the limiting factor to this process is the rate at
con
which they are delivered to the cells - the blood flow to
Plasma
the tissues. Thus, organs with a rapid blood flow (eg.
brain, heart, liver, kidney) initially receive a high concen-
tration of the drug but, with time, this is depleted as the
agent redistributes into moderately and slowly perfused
tissues (the muscles and fat, respectively). The greater the
Time
lipid solubility of the drug the more rapid its redistribu-
Figure 3.6 Plasma concentration versus time relationship
tion, but even charged drugs can be redistributed. Redis-
following rapid intravenous administration of a drug such as
tribution also means that repeated doses of the drug can
propofol, illustrating the rapid decline in plasma drug
 exert prolonged effects due to the gradual passage over an
concentration during the early distributional (o) phase and
extended period from saturated sites where it is inactive,
the much slower decline in the terminal (β) elimination phase.
back into the plasma. Plasma and the organs where blood
73
Section
1
Principles and procedures
flow is rapid can be taken to represent one'compartment',
while moderately and poorly perfused tissues represent
second and third compartments.
2.00-
The one compartment model
When drugs behave as if they were distributed into a single
1.00
uniform compartment, excretion takes place according to
'first order' kinetics, i.e in any time period a constant
conc.
 proportion of the remaining drug will be eliminated; the
elimination rate is proportional to the concentration.
0.50
When a drug concentration decreases in this constant pro-
plasi
t1/2
portion manner, the concentration curve can be defined
Log 
by a simple exponential equation:
0.25
C/C° =e-kt
where C = drug concentration at time t; C° = drug concen-
tration at time 0 (i.e immediately after IV administration);
1
k = a constant; t = time elapsed; and e = the base of the
0
2
4
6
R
natural logarithm (2.718)
Time (hours)
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the equa-
tion, a linear equation results:
Figure 3.7 Simplified diagram of first order elimination from
the plasma of an intravenous drug. The plot of log plasma
In(C/C°)= -kt or In(C/c°)/t =-k
concentr ation versus time is linear.
Thus, the natural logarithm of the proportion by which C
time taken for the plasma concentration to halve [ti/2) is
 s         s
known as the plasma half-life. Va can be calculated for the
dimension of rate and will be stated in reciprocal units
initial concentration (i.e. that at zero time) and from this,
(t-'). From this it follows that a graph of In(C/C°) against
by assuming Vato be constant over the whole time period
time will yield a straight line, of gradient -k In practice,
(which, in practice, it seldom is), the clearance from the
very few drugs behave according to one compartment
plasma can be calculated. A more accurate method
kinetics, since some initial redistribution from the circula-
assumes (usually incorrectly) that the clearance from
tion to other tissues is almost inevitable. The majority of
the plasma is a constant fraction of the instantaneous
drugs can be regarded as obeying what are known as zero
level, thus:
order or first order kinetics.
A zero order process is one that occurs at a constant rate
Plasma clearance (C,)
and is, therefore, independent of the quantity of drug
Original dose
 present at the particular sites of absorption or removal. A
Area under curve to complete elimination.
zero order process requires a large excess of dnug available
on the entry side (eg. intravenous infusion) or, on the
The area under the curve [AUC) is obtained from a
removal side, a system of limited capacity.
gaph of the actual (not log concentration) against time.
A first order process is considered to be the most
A drug with a high C, will have a lower AUC than one
common for both dnug absorption and elimination. In a
with a lower Ci given at the same dose. A drug given to
frst order process, the rate of the reaction is exponentially
an animal with a reduced C resulting from disease will
related to the amount of drug available. In other words, a
have a higher AUC than the same drug administered to an
constant fraction of the drug is absorbed or eliminated in
animal with a normal C. It follows from this that the
constant time The rate constants (kab and ka) are measure-
diseased animal will be exposed to a higher drug concen-
ments of these fractions since they represent the fraction
tration for a longer period of time and greater and more
of the drug present which is absorbed or eliminated in
persistent drug effects can be produced unless the dose of
unit time (usually in l minute or l hour),
the drug is reduced.
 A very simplified example of a first order elimination is
What is known as 'the plateau principle' applies when
shown in Figure 3.7 where the natural logarithm (ln) of
a drug undergoes zero order absorption and first order
the plasma concentration of a drug given by a single IV
elimination. Under these conditions, it can be shown that
injection is plotted against time. Under these conditions,
when the concentration of the dnug being administered is
a plot of ln plasma concentration versus time is linear. The
changed, the time taken to reach a steady state (plateau)
74
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
3
Drug
Drug
Maximum 
Elimination
Elimination
Effective concentration
Minimum
V
V
A
B
ELY
Drug
Plas
Elimination
Time
Figure 3.8 Intermittent intravenous dosage to maintain an
effective anaesthetic concentration. Single compartment
model.
Figure 3.9 (A) Two compartment model. (B) Mamillary three
compartment model. (C) Catenary three compartment
model. In the mamillary three compartment model, both V2
and Vs exchange with V1. whereas in the catenary model, V3
level is determined solely by the reciprocal of kq. The
is 'deep' to Vz and is not connected in any way to V. This
height of the plateau reached depends on the concentra-
catenary model has been proposed for some drug
tion of the drug administered and when this height is
metabolites and has characteristics of its own.
attained, the amount of drug given is reduced to maintain
it.
Similar principles apply when a loading dose
15
followed by subsequent doses to maintain this level
(Fig. 3.8). About 97% of a drug will be eliminated from
be exercised when expanding the number of terms, since
the plasma in about 5 × t1/2 [i.e. 50% + 25% + 12.5% +
the 'degrees of freedom' in the regression equations are
6.25% + 3.125%).
 progressively reduced, thus widening the confidence inter-
val for the line. In other words, although a more complex
curve may fit measured concentration points better, the
The two compartment model
probability of it being correct diminishes. There are two
Frequently, the serial plasma concentrations after the
types of three compartment models. In one the 'mamil-
intravenous administration of a dnug show an initial rapid
lary' model, both peripheral compartments (Vz and V3)
decay (the α phase), followed by a linear decline (the β
connect to the central compartment (V,). For some dnug
phase) when plotted on the same semi-logarithmic axes.
metabolites, a different, 'catenary', model has been pro-
The curve of best ft is a bi-exponential decay, which is
posed where V is 'deep' to V2, but is not connected to V,
characteristic of drug concentration in the central com-
and has quite different characteristics.
partment (V) of a two compartment system where the
Rarely can a plasma decay curve be defined so precisely
drug is assumed to enter Vi, from which it is also elimi-
as to permit justification of more than three exponential
nated. A second peripheral compartment (V2) receives
terms. Moreover, the compartments cannot be equated
dnug by redistribution from V but elimination of the
with true anatomical volumes. The use of ‘perfusion
 ot yeq iasu q iax aeid axet rou sao 
models' overcomes many diffculties to some extent, but
(Fig. 3.9).
these require much more information. The perfusion
 In the two compartment model, the half-life is expressed
model takes a number of anatomically defined compart-
as t1/2p which makes it clear that it is limited to the β
ments and, by consideration of their volumes, blood flow
(elimination) phase of the decay, but it depends on both
rates through them and tissue/blood partition coefficients
elimination and distribution rates so that it cannot be
computes the movement of drug between them. Unfortu-
regarded as a direct indicator of elimination rate.
nately, with the possible exception of propofol in the dog.
for most agents, there is inadequate information available
for accurate prediction. Moreover, the tissue/blood parti-
The multicompartment model
tion coefficients vary widely because of the wide range of
A three compartment model has been used to explain a
solubilities in the various tissues, and in different species.
curve of declining dnug concentration which does not fit
 Thus, the perfusion model is limited by the number of
in a conveniently bi-exponential fashion and better fits a
identifiable tissues or organs for which reliable data are
three-exponential equation. However, great care must
available.
75
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Practical methods of drug delivery
14-
during intravenous anaesthesia
12-
 It is possible to improve the titration of intravenous drugs
(u;3r)
by administering continuous variable rate infusions rather
10
than by injecting intermittent bolus doses. Continuous
infusion is the logical extension of the more traditional
conc.
incremental bolus dose method which inevitably leads to
8-
fluctuations in blood (and hence brain) concentrations
Propofol
that follow each bolus dose (see Fig. 3.8). To achieve an
effective blood concentration rapidly, a “loading dose' is
administered; the loading dose is then continued by infu.
sions at suitable rates to maintain anaesthesia at the depth
required.
In practice, intravenous infusions are generally titrated
2
on an empirical basis depending on the response of the
20
40
60
80100120140
animal to the infusion rate However, the aim for the
Time (min)
future is to predict the dosage requirements from pharma-
cokinetic data. The smaller the loading dose, the greater
Figure 3.10 Blood propofol concentrations (μg/mL) in 6
the initial maintenance infusion rate needed because the
dogs (Beagles) after an induction dose of 7 mg/kg followed
by an infusion of 0.4 mg/kg/min, illustrating the tendency of
amount of drug infused must be equal to that which is
blood concentrations to rise when the infusion rate is kept
removed from the brain by both distribution and elimina-
constant throughout 120 minutes of anaesthesia.
tion processes. With time, distribution assumes less
importance, and the infusion rate required to maintain
any given blood concentration becomes solely dependent
on the elimination rate Thus, the infusion rate needed to
 controlled infusion regimens following a loading dose or
maintain a given concentration in the body decreases as a
initial high infusion rate In human anaesthesia, a syringe-
function of the infusion period. In other words, the
driven system was specifically designed for propofol, the
minimal infusion rate becomes 'context sensitive'
Diprifusor (Glen, 1998), and later a similar version for
Ideally, the anaesthetist would like to know the concen-
remifentanil, the Remifusor [Hoymork et al., 2003). These
tration of the anaesthetic agent attained and maintained
 drug-specific syringe-drivers have increased in sophistica-
at its site of effect (i.e. the brain) but, as may be guessed
tion over the last few years and are accepted 'medical
from the above considerations, this is rarely possible. All
that can be said is that the plasma or blood drug concen-
technology: Their computer base uses pharmacokinetic
data coupled with patient data of weight/agent etc. to
tration is often related to, and is a valid measure of, the
calculate the infusion rates necessary to reach and main-
required quantity so that t1/2 is, usually, the paramount
tain a set plasma propofol level. TCI with propofol and
determinant of dose frequency when intermittent admin-
remifentanil using this apparatus have been investigated
istration is practised. The main difficulties in devising suit-
able computer controlled infusion regimens for the
in dogs (Beths et al., 200l; Musk et al., 2005; Musk &
Flaherty, 2007).
induction and maintenance of IV anaesthesia arise from
The dedicated TCI infusers are expensive. Another
the variable response of individual subjects (Fig. 3.10).
method of TCI is to use a special Windows-based
The future of computer-controlled infusions for adminis-
computer program (Rugloope) to drive the syringe. The
tering intravenous anaesthetics will depend on their safety.
company claims that the program contains a complete
reliability, cost-effectiveness and 'user friendliness.
TCI model database for most common IV anaesthetic
Target controlled infusions (Tcl)
drugs. Its claim is only to be for marketed for experimental
use only. but it includes veterinary software, and has
Considerations of the points discussed above have led to
 been used experimentally with propofol in dogs (Bras
the establishment of two or three stages in computer
et al., 2009).
REFERENCES
Beths, T., Glen, J.B., Reid, J., et al., 2001.
 part of a total intravenous
Bourne, J.G., 1964. Uptake, elimination
Evaluation and optimisation of a
anaesthetic technique during
and potency of the inhalational
target-controlled infusion system for
dental surgery. Vet Rec 148,
anaesthetics. Anaesthesia 19.
 administering propofol to dogs as
198-203.
12-32.
76
An introduction to pharmacokinetics
Chapter
3
Bras, S., Bressan, N., Ribeiro, L., et al..
Epstein, R.M., Rackow, H., Salanitre, E..
anaesthetics. In: General Anaesthesia,
2009. A step towards effect-site
Wolf, G.L., 1964. Influence of the
ffth ed. Nunn, Utting & Brown,
 target-controlled infusion with
concentration effect on the uptake of
London, pp. 44-59.
propofol in dogs: a k(e0) for
anesthetic mixtures: the second
Mapleson, w.w., 1996. Effect of age on
 propofol. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 32.
gas effect. Anesthesiology 25.
MAC in humans: a meta-analysis. Br
182-188.
364-371.
IAnaesth 76, 179-185.
Buxton, I.L.O., Benet, L.Z., 2011.
Glen, J.B., 1998. The development of
Musk, G.C., Flaherty, D.A., 2007.
Pharmacokinetics. In: Brunton, L.L.
'Diprifusor': a TCl system for
Target-controlled infusion of propofol
(Ed.), Goodman & Gilmans's The
propofol. Anaesthesia 53 (Suppl 1),
combined with variable rate infusion
Pharmacological Basis of
13-21.
of remifentanil for anaesthesia of a
Therapeutics, twelfth ed. McGraw
Hoymork, S.C., Raeder, I., Grimsmo, B.,
 dog with patent ductus arteriosus. Vet
Hill Medical, New York.
et al., 2003. Bispectral index, serum
Anaesth Analg 34, 359-364.
Eger ll, E.1., 1963. Effect of inspired
dnug concentrations and emergence
Musk, G.C., Pang, D.S., Beths, T., et al..
anesthetic concentration on the rate
 associated with individually adjusted
 2005. Target-controlled infusion of
 of rise of alveolar concentration.
 target-controlled infusions of
propofol in dogs - evaluation of 
Anesthesiology 24, 153-157.
remifentanil and propofol for
four targets for induction of
Eger 2nd, E.l., Saidman, L.J.
laparoscopic surgery. Br J Anaesth
anaesthesia. Vet Rec 157, 766-770.
Brandstater, B., 1965.
91,773-780
Peyton, PJ., Horriat, M., Robinson, G.J..
Minimum alveolar anesthetic
Hughes, M.A., Glass, P.S.A., Jacobs, I.R.,
 et al., 2008. Magnitude of the
concentration: a standard of
1992. Context-sensitive half-time in
second gas effect on arterial
anesthetic potency. Anesthesiology
multicompartment pharmacokinetic
sevoflurane partial pressure.
26.756-763.
models for intravenous anaesthetic
 Anesthesiology 108, 381-387.
Eger ll, E.1., 1974. Anesthetic Uptake
drugs. Anesthesiology 76 (3).
Shafer, S.L., Flood, P., Schwinn, D.A.,
and Action. williams and wilkins,
334-341.
2010. Basic principles of
Baltimore.
Kety, S.S., 1951. The theory and
pharmacology. In: Millar, R.D. (Ed.),.
Eger ll, E.l., 2010. Inhaled anaesthetics:
 applications of the exchange of inert
Miller's Anesthesia, seventh ed.
Uptake and distribution. In: Millar.
 gas at the lungs and tissues.
Churchill Livingstone, New York, pp.
R.D. (Ed.), Miller's Anesthesia,
Pharmacol Rev [Baltimore) 3, 1-41.
479-495.
seventh ed. Churchill Livingstone.
Mapleson, w.w., 1989.
White, D., 2003. Uses of MAC. Br ↓
New York, pp. 539-560.
 Pharmacokinetics of inhalational
Anaesth 91, 167-169.
77
Chapter
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents,
and principles of premedication
Terminology
79
α-Adrenoceptor antagonists
91
 Phenothiazine derivatives
80
Atipamezole
91
Acepromazine
81
Yohimbine
91
Propionylpromazine
82
Tolazoline
92
 Fluphenazine
82
ldazoxan
92
Other phenothiazine agents
82
Peripheral cz-antagonist MK-467
92
Butyrophenones
83
Other agents used for sedation
92
Azaperone
83
Sedative-opioid combinations
92
 Droperidol
83
Immobilon@
93
Fluanisone
83
Anticholinergic agents
93
Benzodiazepines
84
Atropine
94
Diazepam
84
Hyoscine
94
Midazolam
84
Glycopyrrolate
94
 Climazolam
85
Fenpipramide
95
Zolazepam
85
Premedication
95
Benzodiazepine antagonists
85
Flumazenil
85
Sarmazenil
85
TERMINOLOGY
α,-Adrenoceptor agonists
85
Clinically relevant actions of
The terminology used in pharmacology and medical
dz-adrenoceptor agonist drugs
87
anaesthesia textbooks to describe dnugs which act on the
 central nervous system undergoes regular change as under-
Xylazine
88
standing of the modes of action evolves. The term hypnotic
Detomidine
89
is used regularly for a depressant of the central nervous
Medetomidine
89
system, which enables the animal to go to sleep more
easily, or a dnug used to intensify the depth of sleep. The
Dexmedetomidine
90
animal may be aroused by stimulus. However, the term
Romifidine
90
hypnosis' is also used for the 'sleep' component of anaes-
Clonidine
91
thesia (see Chapter l). The term sedative appears to be
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
79
Section
1
Principles and procedures
rarely used in medical literature, but can be considered to
During the past three decades, major pharmacological
be a drug which relieves anxiety and, as a result tends to
advances have been made in the recognition of specific
make it easier for the patient to rest or sleep - they are
dnug receptor sites and of the actions resulting from their
usually associated with drowsiness. Many drugs fall into
stimulation or blockade These advances have been fol-
both the sedative and the hypnotic categories, the differ-
lowed by synthesis of potent drugs, which act as agonists
entiation usually being related to dose They are best con-
Or as antagonists at such sites. These advances have
sidered as one group. exemplified by Q2-adrenoceptor
resulted in a better understanding of the actions of existing
agonists (oz-agonists) such as dexmedetomidine where
drugs, in newer and more potent agonist dnugs. and of
low doses cause drowsiness and higher doses cause sleep.
 antagonists enabling the reversal of some sedative agent
The term tranquillizer (or ataractic) appears now used only
effects.
in the veterinary texts but previously was considered to be
a drug with a predominant action in relieving anxiety
without producing undue sedation and that will affect
PHENOTHIAZINE DERIVATIVES
mood and behaviour.
There is considerable overlap between the action of CNS
depressant drugs. Benzodiazepines are considered to be
This group of drugs still has a major role both in human
both anxiolytics and sedative/hypnotics. Drugs such as
 psychiatric medicine and in veterinary anaesthesia. They
phenothiazines, now classified as antipsychotic in the
 are classified as antipsychotic drugs (or in older terminol-
medical literature, are those previously termed neuroleptics.
Ogy 'neuroleptics'). They are dopamine antagonists, but
They reduce psychomotor agitation, exerting their effects
also block α-adrenoceptors. The degree of activity in dif-
by blocking dopamine-mediated responses in the central
ferent pharmacological actions varies from one compound
nervous system. Overdose causes marked extrapyramidal
to another. All have a wide range of central and peripheral
symptoms and parkinsonian-type tremor. However, the
effects which have been well reviewed (Tobin & Ballard,
dopamine-blocking effects of such drugs mean that they
1979; Lees, 1979).
are now also considered to contribute to anaesthesia (see
Being dopamine antagonists, they have calming and
Chapter 1). The term 'tranquillizer' is still loosely used in
mood-altering (antipsychotic) effects, and also a powerful
cinical anaesthesia to cover both the anxiolytics and
antiemetic action, particularly against opioid induced
antipsychotics and will continue to be used in places in
vomiting. The degree of sedation produced varies between
this and later chapters.
drugs. They are metabolized by the liver, and long-term
The multiplicity of definitions is confusing. but under.
dosage can lead to liver damage In medical practice, seda-
standing of the major actions of the dnugs is important in
tion is an unwanted side effect but, in veterinary medicine,
order to appreciate their limitations. For example if drugs
the phenothiazine derivatives are used primarily for this
 such as the benzodiazepines are used for premedication,
 purpose In general, they are not considered to have anal-
they will not quieten a fit animal, but may make it more
 gesic activity, although methotrimeprazine is claimed to
difficult to handle by removing its inhibitions, so that
be a powerful analgesic in humans. Their major cardiovas-
vicious animals become more likely to bite or kick. By
cular side effects are related to their ability to block
reducing nervousness, phenothiazine derivatives may
 Q-adrenoceptors, and thus having an antiepinephrine
make an animal more liable to sleep, but will not make
[antiadrenaline] effect This results in a fall in arterial
the vicious animal easier to handle, no matter what dose
 blood pressure primarily due to peripheral vasodilatation,
is given. Effective sedation depends on selection of the
 and a decrease in packed cell volume caused by splenic
drug appropriate for the procedure, the species of animal.
dilation. Phenothazines exert an antiarrhythmic effect on
its temperament and condition, and must allow for pos-
the heart (Muir et al., 1975; Muir, 198l) that was origi-
sible side effects. Drug combinations are often more effec-
nally thought to be due to a quinidine action on the
tive in controllinganimals than high doses of an individual
cardiac membrane (Lees, 1979) but may be caused by a
dnug. Where 'sedative' and 'tranquillizing' drugs are used
blocking action on the cardiac 0-arrhythmic receptors
for premedication, low doses are usually utilized and their
[Maze et al.，]
1985; Dresel, 1985). The phenothiazines
effects on the subsequent depth and duration of anaesthe-
have a spasmolytic action on the gut although, at least in
sia must be taken into account. In all cases, it is important
horses, gut motility is not reduced (Davies & Gerring.
that the animal is left undisturbed for an adequate period
1983). However, as they cause relaxation of the cardiac
of time after administration of the sedative because stimu-
sphincter, in ruminants they increase the chance of regur-
lation during the onset of the drug's action may prevent
gitation should an animal become recumbent Phenothi-
the full effect from developing. To sedate an animal that
 azines have varying degrees of antihistamine activity and
is in pain, a suitable analgesic must be used, possibly in
also produce a partial cholinergic block. All cause a fall in
combination with a sedative drug, because most sedative
body temperature partly due to increased heat loss through
dnugs themselves have little or no analgesic activity and
dilated cutaneous vessels and partly through resetting of
may cause exaggerated reactions to painful stimulation.
thermoregulatory mechanisms. In spite of all their side
08
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
effects, the phenothiazines are well tolerated by the major-
hypothermia and a moderate antiemetic effect, especially
ity of normovolaemic animals.
against opioid-induced vomiting (Valverde et al., 2004).
Although promethazine is used as an antihistamine, the
 Clinical doses of acepromazine have little effect on res-
most commonly used phenothiazine today in the UK,
piration; sedated animals may breathe more slowly but
North America and Australasia is acepromazine. Other
the minute volume of respiration is unchanged. In all
derivatives such as chlorpromazine, propionylpromazine
species, acepromazine, as all phenothiazines, causes a
and promazine are or have been used elsewhere.
dose-related fall in arterial blood pressure mediated
through vasodilation. The lowering of blood pressure is
well tolerated in fit patients but may not be so in shocked 
Acepromazine
or hypovolaemic animals. The effects of clinical dose rates
Acepromazine, also known as ACP (its originaltrade name)
 of acepromazine on heart rate are generally minimal, most
Or as ace, is the 2-acetyl derivative of promazine and has
investigators having found a slight rise [Kerr et al., 1972;
the chemical name 2-acetyl-10-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)
MacKenzie & Snow, 1977: Parry et al., 1982) or no change
phenothiazine. It is prepared as the maleate, a yellow
(Muir et al., 1979). However, Popovic et al. (1972)
crystalline solid. It is metabolized in the liver and both
reported that in dogs, doses of 0.1 mg/kg IM acepro-
conjugated and non-conjugated metabolites are excreted
mazine caused bradycardia and even sinoatrial arrest.
in the urine Some of these metabolites are detectable
Changes in cardiac output appear to be minimal (Maze
for a considerable period ( McGree et al., 2013). Although
et al., 1985) even when in association with anaesthetic
available for over 50 years, it remains widely used in vet-
agents (Sinclair & Dyson, 2012).
erinary medicine for sedation, premedication, and a range
Fainting and cardiovascular collapse have been reported
of non-anaesthetic related indications. It continues to be
to occur occasionally in all species of animal following the
the subject of a huge number of scientific publications.
use of even low doses of acepromazine In some cases, it
Like all phenothiazine drugs, with low doses there are
may have been due to administration to a hypovolaemic
effects on behaviour and, as the dose is increased, sedation
animal but, in others, it has not been explained. Some
occurs but the dose-response curve rapidly reaches a
strains of Boxer dogs (particularly those in the UK) are
plateau after which higher doses do not increase, but only
 renowned for collapsing after a very small dose of acepro-
lengthen sedation and increase side effects (Tobin &
 mazine given by any route, and it has been suggested that
Ballard, 1979). Further increase in doses may cause excite-
this may be due to vasovagal syncope.
ment and extrapyramidal signs. In many animals, sedation
Acepromazine has little antihistamine activity. It has a
may be achieved with intramuscular (Im) doses as low as
powerful spasmolytic effect on smooth muscle including
0.03 mg/kg. although the drug has been used safely at ten
that of the gut, which may explain why it can give some
times this dose when prolonged effects were required. A
visceral analgesia (Sanchez et al., 2008) and is effective in
calming effect on the behaviour of excitable animals can
 treatment of equine spasmodic colic. Acepromazine is not
be seen at doses even below 0.03 mg/kg, making acepro-
thought to have specific analgesic properties. Although
 mazine a drug liable to abuse especially in the greyhound
it reduces amount of inhalation anaesthetic agents
and the equine sporting field. The length of action is dose
required (Heard et al., 1986; Doherty et al., 1997), it is
dependent but can be prolonged. Clinically obvious seda-
 not effective against experimentally applied nocioceptive
tion lasts 4-6 hours after doses of 0.02 mg/kg. In horses,
stimuli (Sanchez et al., 2008; Bergadano et al., 2009).
Parry et al. (1982) considered that there were detectable
 Acepromazine has some very specific properties, which
residual effects for 12 hours after doses of 0.1 mg/kg, and
 increase its usefulness as a premedicant agent:
for 16-24 hours after 0.15 mg/kg IM. In general, the
uaaq ue yum ie se iei se jou si uopas juaiede
+
 It reduces the dose required of anaesthetic agents for
achieved with Q2-agonists, although owners of giant
induction and maintenance
breeds of dog often complain that their animals are
 It has antiarrhythmic effects and protects against
sedated for several days following acepromazine adminis-
epinephrine-induced fibrillation (Muir, 1981)
tration. Despite this, there are many situations where ace-
+
When used as a premedicant in horses, it significantly
promazine is the sedative drug of choice.
reduces the incidence of death associated with
In practice, the dose is chosen in relation to the length
anaesthesia and surgery (Johnston et al., 1995; 2002).
of sedation required and the purpose for which it is
In dogs, its use also significantly reduces anaesthetic-
 needed. However, the drug cannot be relied upon to give
related deaths when compared with no
sedation in all animals; some individuals fail to become
premedication (Brodbelt et al., 2008a,b)
sedated and, in these, other drugs or dnug combinations
It has been shown to be a free radical scavenger
must be employed. Excitement reactions are rare but have
(Serteyn et al, 1999)
been reported following intravenous (IV) or IM injection
 Its use in anaesthetized horses reduces the 'shunt
of the drug (MacKenzie & Snow, 1977: Tobin & Ballard,
fraction' and increases arterial oxygenation (Marntell
1979). Other central effects of acepromazine include
et al., 2005).
81
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Relative contraindications to use of acepromazine
routes. Following IV injection, sedation is usually obvious
include:
within 5 minutes but full effects may not be apparent for
20 minutes and, when the drug is used for premedication,
·Hypovolaemia
at least this period should be allowed to elapse before
· Liver damage Low doses can be used but have
anaesthetic agents are given. Maximal effects are seen
increased duration
30-45 minutes after IM and SC injection.
Renal hypertension
Very small doses of acepromazine have been used to
Boxer dogs (see above)
treat behavioural problems in dogs and horses but the
 Stallions, because of the danger of priapism (see
below). However, the advantage of a 50% reduction
 dose required in any individual case can only be found by
trial and error. Parenteral doses of acepromazine for seda-
in anaesthetic death rate is generally considered to
tive and premedicant purposes in most domestic animals
outweigh the very small risk (Driessen et al., 20ll).
are in the range of 0.025-0.1 mg/kg. In horses, oral avail-
Acepromazine causes paralysis of the retractor penis
ability is good (Hashem & Keller, 1993) and the recom-
muscle and protrusion of the flaccid penis from the
mended dose is 0.15 mg/kg: this contrasts with dogs
 prepuce in bulls and stallions; it is often given to facilitate
where there is marketing authorization for oral dosage up
Examination of the penis. In horses, however, physical
t0 3 mg/kg, although whether this dose is required or is
damage to the dangling penis may result in swelling and
desirable is doubtful. Recommended doses for specifc
failure of the organ to return within the prepuce when the
 purposes will be discussed in the chapters relating to the
dnug action ceases. This event, which may eventually
individual species of animal.
necessitate amputation of the penis, has been reported
following the use of several phenothiazine derivatives.
There were several reported incidences of priapism, where
Propionylpromazine
there is an erection of the penis [rather than a flaccid
Propionylpromazine
10-(3-dimethyl aminopropyl)-2-
paralysis) in stallions following administration of the neu-
propionylphenothiazine, has been used widely in some
roleptanalgesic mixture 'Large Animal Immobilon' which
countries for sedation and premedication of both small
contains acepromazine (Pearson & Weaver, 1978). There
and large animal patients. Its actions, the sedation it pro-
are also very occasional reports of priapism occurring fol-
duces and its side effects are very similar to those of
lowing the administration of acepromazine alone [van der
acepromazine In horses, it is used in doses of 0.15-
Harst et al., 2002: Taylor & Bolt, 201l). Priapism in adult
0.25 mg/kg and, in dogs, the dose ranges from 0.2 to
geldings has been effectively treated by the administration
0.3 mg/kg. It has also been widely used in combination
of 8 mg of benztropinemesylate (wilson et al., 199l),. a
with methadone.
dnug used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease. However.
this dnug is not readily available. As both priapism and
Huphenazine
flaccid paralysis with subsequent physical injury
are
equally calamitous in valuable breeding stallions, the
 Fluphenazine is a very long acting (several weeks) agent
manufacturers specifically contraindicate use of acepro-
that has a licence for use in humans to treat certain psy-
mazine in these animals. The risk is very low [Driessen
chiatric diseases. It has a great affnity to dopamine D2
et al., 20ll). Should priapism occur, the condition must
receptors, thus acting as a dopamine antagonist. It has
 be treated quickly and effciently: an Esmarch's bandage
been used to produce long-term sedation for horses
will reduce the erection and allow the penis to be returned
stabled through injury, but also 'abused' as a 'calmer' for
to the sheath where it can be retained, but should this fail,
horses in competition, although this is strictly against
 Or in case of a flaccid paralysis, the penis must be sup-
competition rules. There are no published trials relating
ported to prevent further damage.
to its pharmacokinetics or clinical use in animal species,
At one time, it was thought that acepromazine might
but several detailing side effects in the horse These can be
reduce the threshold at which epileptiform seizures
dramatic and include sweating, ataxia, and extrapyrami-
occurred and therefore should not be used in dogs with
dal signs, the latter being reported to continue for some
epilepsy, or prior to myelography. With doses in the clini-
days after dosing. The toxicity is well reviewed by Brashier
cal range there was no good evidence to support this
[2006). Although this drug has no direct use in anaesthe-
theory (Tobias et al., 2006; da Costa et al., 201l; Drynan
sia, ifthe animal has been pretreated there may be additive
et al., 20l2) and, in Europe this contraindication has been
effects with drugs used for anaesthesia.
removed from the product information.
Solutions of acepromazine for injection are available at
Other phenothiazine agents
different concentrations (country dependent). Tablets for
oral use in dogs and cats and a paste for oral use in horses
 Chlorpromazine was used extensively in veterinary practice
are also available. The injectable forms are non-irritant,
but has largely been replaced. Its actions and side effects
painless and are effective by IV, IM or subcutaneous (SC)
are similar to those of acepromazine, but it is less potent
82
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
(doses of up to l mg/kg were used in all species of
 IM administration produces a good, dose-related sedative
animal). has a longer duration of action and produces
effect up to the maximum recommended dose for clinical
less sedation. Promazine has actions similar to those of
use [4 mg/kg). Pigs may show excitement during the first
chlorpromazine but is claimed to give better sedation
 20 minutes following injection, particularly if disturbed
with fewer side effects. For premedication, it was admin-
during this period. Intravenous use of this dnug frequently
istered at doses of up to l mg/kg. Methotrimeprazine is a
results in a vigorous excitement phase.
typical phenothiazine but it is also a potent analgesic,
Azaperone in clinical doses has minimal effects on res-
having a potency about 0.7 times that of morphine. In
 piration; such effect as there is being that of slight stimula-
veterinary practice in the UK, it was combined with etor-
tion. Clarke [1969) reported a consistent small fall in
phine as the neuroleptanalgesic mixture ‘Small Animal
 arterial blood pressure in pigs following the IM injection
Immobilon' Promethazine is used in veterinary medicine
 of 0.3-3.5 mg/kg of the drug. Reductions in cardiac output
primarily for its potent antihistamine activity, although
and heart rate are clinically insignifcant [MacKenzie &
Snow, 1977).
its actions in decreasing reactive oxygen species (Peters
Azaperone is used both as a sedative and as a preanaes-
et al., 2009). Solutions of this dnug are irritant to the
thetic medicant in pigs. It is also used on the farm to
tissues.
following the mixing of calves or pigs in one pen. When
azaperone is used to assist in vaginal delivery of piglets or
for caesarean section, the piglets may appear sleepy for
BUTYROPHENONES
some hours after delivery. However, provided they are kept
warm they breathe well.
Use in horses, although documented, is not advisable.
As with phenothiazines, the primary action of butyroph-
Doses of 0.4-0.8 mg/kg IM sometimes give good seda-
 enones is as dopamine antagonists and, in humans, they
tion, but some horses develop muscle tremors and sweat
were cassed as major tranquillizers (neuroleptics), and
profusely (Lees & Serrano, 1976). Intravenous use fre-
currently as antipsychotics. Used alone, they can cause very
    a   
unpleasant side effects, including hallucinations, mental
injury to the horse and/or its handlers (Dodman & Water-
agitation, and feelings of aggression. These side effects
man, 1979). The fact that pigs show a similar reaction,
often are not obvious to an observer and only become
coupled with the known central nervous effect in humans,
known when a human patient recovers from the drug and
jo ioaya oap e ol anp si iuauaixa au eui sisaaans
complains. The incidence is dose related and increases
the drug.
with increased dose rate. Overdose results in dystonic reac-
tions. We do not know whether the subjective effects pro-
duced in animals are similarto those that occur in humans,
Droperidol
but the unpredictable aggressive behaviour occasionally
 observed in animals given a butyrophenone suggests they
Droperidol is a potent neuroleptic agent which is an
may be.
extremely effective antiemetic and is said to antagonize
Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of the butyroph-
the respiratory depressant effects of morphine-like com-
enones are minimal, although arterial hypotension may
 pounds by increasing the sensitivity of the respiratory
result from Qi-adrenergic blockade They are potent
centre to carbon dioxide Although it was claimed that
antiemetics, acting on the chemoemetic trigger zone to
 extrapyramidal side effects were rare, they are produced by
Aq pasne aq Aeu se yns 'guoa panpu-mp iuaaand
overdosing but are sometimes delayed for up to 24 hours
opioid analgesics, thus making them the drug of choice
 after administration of the drug. In humans, droperidol
for the neuroleptic component of neuroleptanalgesia
 has recently had a resurgence in popularity for premedica-
(Brown et al., 20ll). Some texts even categorize butyroph-
tion (Sneyd, 2009) because of its effect in reducing post-
enones as injectable anaesthetic agents (Reves et al., 20l0).
 operative vomiting and for counteracting pruritus induced
although they can only contribute to the anaesthetic state
by epidural injection of morphine (Horta et al., 2006). In
when in combination with other agents.
veterinary medicine, droperidol has been most frequently
In veterinary medicine, drugs in this group are used as
used in combination, although it has also been used as a
sedatives, in neuroleptanalgesic combinations, and may
sedative in pigs.
be a useful part of other anaesthetic combinations.
Huanisone
Azaperone
This is 4'-fluoro-4-[4-{o-methoxy)phenyl]-1-piperazinyl]
Azaperone, 4'-fluoro-4 [4-{2 pyridyl)-1-piperazinyl] buty-
butyrophenone. It is used in the neuroleptanalgesic com-
rophenone, is a dnug licensed in Europe in pigs where its
bination 'Hypnorm' (p. 93).
E8
Section
1
Principles and procedures
than the parent compound; actions therefore tend to be
BENZODIAZEPINES
prolonged.
 In a variety of animals, benzodiazepines have the prop-
erty of stimulating appetite (Van Miert et al., 1989).
Chlordiazepoxide was frst introduced in 1955 and since
that time drugs of the benzodiazepine group have been
Diazepam has been particularly widely used for this in cats
widely used in human and veterinary medicine Many
showing anorexia following illness.
different compounds now exist differing primarily in
Of the available benzodiazepine drugs, diazepam,
bioavailability. permissible route of administration and
midazolam, climazolam and zolazepam have been most
duration of action. Drugs of this group are utilized to
uti lized in veterinary anaesthesia.
provide:
● an antianxiety action
Diazepam
sedation and hypnosis
Diazepam is insoluble in water and solutions for injec-
·anticonvulsant effects
tions contain solvents such as propylene glycol, ethanol,
 muscle relaxation
and sodium benzoate in benzoic acid. Intravenous injec-
·anterograde amnesia.
tion of many preparations causes thrombophlebitis due to
Benzodiazepine compounds exert their main sedative
 these solvents. An emulsion preparation is non-irritant to
effects through depression of the limbic system, and their
veins and is less painful to inject. Diazepam is highly
 muscle relaxing properties through inhibition of the inter-
protein bound, and is metabolized by the liver, many of
nuncial neurons at spinal levels. They act selectively at
the metabolites being active In humans, half-life of elimi-
 GABAA receptors within the central nervous system. They
nation has been reported as 43 hours. In contrast, in the
do not activate the receptor directly, but enhance the
dog it is shorter at 3.2 hours (Loscher & Frey, 1981) but
response to GABA by increasing the frequency of Cl-
 an active metabolite is longer lasting. In horses, Muir et al.
channel opening and, therefore, enhance the potentiation
(1982) reported half-lives between 2.52 and 2l.6 hours.
of the neural inhibition that is mediated by this transmit-
At clinical dosage rates, diazepam has no signifcant effect
ter (Olkkola & Ahonen, 2008). The effect of benzodi-
on the circulation or respiratory activity but does produce
azepines can be antagonized by inverse agonists or
some muscular relaxation. It has very low toxicity and
competitive antagonists such as flumazenil. The point of
lou op spouad paguoloid 1oy sgop ol uaaig sasop ag1e
action within the GABAA receptor is not identical to that
 produce changes in metabolic function.
at which general anaesthetic agents such as thiopental are
 Diazepam has a major role in veterinary practice in the
thought to exert part of their effect (see Chapter 1). Knowl-
control of convulsions of any origin. However, as with
edge of the molecular structure of the GABAA receptor and
most benzodiazepines, the sedative and hypnotic effects
its subunits is advancing rapidly and is beyond the scope
of diazepam alone appear to be minimal and in fit, healthy
of this book, but order of arrangement of 'subunits'
dogs attempts to use it alone for hypnosis have been
 appears to be responsible for different facets of the overall
unsuccessful. In horses, Muir et al. [1982) did find that at
action (at least in transgenic rats) leading to the future
doses exceeding 0.2 mg/kg IV there was some sedation
possibility of 'designer drugs with more specific actions
lasting for around 2 hours, but this was accompanied by
(Sneyd & Rigby-Jones, 2010).
muscle weakness. This dose of 0.2 mg/kg is used to sedate
It is impossible to induce anaesthesia with benzodi-
foals, which will tend to lie down.
azepine drugs alone in fit healthy animals (Lees, 1979).
The major anaesthetic use of diazepam is a part of an
 The benzodiazepines are generally employed in combina-
anaesthetic combination protocol, either as premedica-
tion with other central nervous depressant drugs 
to
tion, or in combination with other agents. In sick animals
produce anaesthesia and to counteract the convulsant
(which are more likely to sedate), it reduces the dose of
and hallucinatory properties of ketamine and tiletamine.
 anaesthetic agents subsequently required and its combina-
Used for premedication, they improve the quality of
tion with opioids for induction of anaesthesia provides
induction of anaesthesia and reduce the dose required of
good cardiovascular stability (Psatha et al., 20ll). It is par-
subsequent anaesthetic agents. Benzodiazepines cause
ticularly useful prior to or in combination with ketamine
minimal  cardiovascular  and  respiratory 
 depression,
as it appears to reduce the hallucinations, which seem to
although they may add to the depressant effects of the
be associated with this dissociative anaesthetic agent, and
other ana esthetics.
it has been used in this combination in very many species.
Many benzodiazepines can be given by the IM, IV, trans-
mucous membrane, oral and rectal routes. Maximal effects
Midazolam
may not be apparent for several minutes following IV
administration and there are marked differences between
Midazolam, (8-chloro-6 (2-flurophenol)-1-methyl-4H
individuals in sensitivity. Metabolism is in the liver and,
imidazo (1,5-a) (1,4)) benzodiazepine is a water-soluble
in many instances, metabolites are as active or more active
Hd aaoqy '5'e jo Hd e ym uonios e supiai punodo
84.
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
values of 4.0, the chemical configuration of the molecule
changes so that it becomes lipid soluble. The aqueous
BENZODIAZEPINE ANTAGONISTS
solution is not painful on IV injection and does not cause
thrombophlebitis. Midazolam is metabolized in the liver.
Humazenil
In humans, its half-life of elimination is considerably
shorter than that of diazepam thus it is less cumulative
Flumazenil is a potent and specific competitive benzodi-
and recovery is more rapid. In dogs, half-life of elimina-
azepine antagonist and, in human medical practice, is now
tion has been measured at 77-98 minutes [Hall et al.,
 being widely employed to reverse midazolam sedation in
1988; Court & Greenblatt, 1992), also shorter than that of
'day case' patients.
diazepam. Midazolam has good biovailability by non-IV
Flumazenil has been reported to reverse diazepam
routes including oral and transmucous membrane In
or climazolam sedation in sheep and cattle (Rhem &
humans, it is used to treat seizures, for premedication, as
Schatzmann, 1984) and has also been used in combina-
an infusion for sedation in intensive care, and as an IV
tion with naloxone to reverse climazolam/fentanyl com-
injection to induce deep sedation and often, amnesia. The
bination anaesthesia (Erhardt et al., 1986). Although to
auo ot jiey Aianeuixoidde si sueuny ul panbai asop
date the veterinary use of flumazenil has been limited by
third that of diazepam (Court & Greenblatt, 1992) and
 cost, it may be employed in any situation where it may
the onset of action is slower than a circulation time. In
become necessary to reverse the effects of a benzodi-
contrast to humans, in adult ft healthy animals, it is dif-
azepine drug (Heniff et al., 1997; Wismer, 2002).
ficult to induce sedation with IV midazolam alone, and
aberrant excitement reactions can occur (Covey-Crump &
Sarmazenil
Murison, 2008). However, in sick animals, or when com-
bined with agents such as opioids or ketamine, good hyp-
nosis can be achieved, and midazolam, in combination
land for use in dogs and cats. It has been used to reverse
with other agents, now has a major role in the anaesthesia
the effects of climazolam in a number of species (Rehm &
of all species.
Schatzmann, 1984; Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1996).
 The lack of guaranteed sedation with midazolam alone
Midazolam-induced ataxia in a horse was effectively
means that there are few animal studies on its use as a
reversed with sarmazenil (author KC).
 sole agent but there are very many publications detailing
its use in combination with other analgesic/anaesthetic
agents for sedation, as a premedicant and for anaesthesia.
α2-ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS
This wide literature provides a basis for the recommenda.
tions that will be given in the chapters on the individual
species.
Xylazine has been used as a sedative in animals since
1968 but, at that time, the mechanisms of its complex
Climazolam
actions and side effects were not understood. When it was
described as both excitatory and inhibitory of adrenergic
 Climazolam is a potent benzodiazepine which, following
and cholinergic neurons' (Kronberg et al., 1966), this
IV administration, has a very rapid onset of effect. It has
statement appeared more than a little confusing. A similar
a marketing authorization in Switzerland for use in dogs.
dug, clonidine, was originally used in humans for its
but has been used in a wide variety of animals including
powers of local peripheral vasoconstriction but now is
cattle sheep. horses and dogs (Rehm & Schatzmann,
used as an antihypertensive and also, off label, as a seda-
1984). It is used as part of anaesthetic combinations. It is
tive and analgesic.
particularly effective for use with ketamine and, in horses.
These actions and the correctness of the above descrip-
this combination has been used by constant rate infusion
tion only became explicable when Langer (1974)
(CRI) to produce total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA), the
 suggested the existence of receptor sites situated presy-
climazolam being reversed with sarmazenil (see below) at
naptically on the noradrenergic neurons which, when
the end of surgery to produce a rapid recovery (Bettschart-
stimulated by noradrenaline, inhibited the further release
Wolfensberger et al., 1996). Climazolam (1.0-1.5 mg/kg)
of this transmitter, thus forming a negative feedback
has also been used in combination with fentanyl
mechanism. Langer suggested further that these presyn-
(0.005-0.015 mg/kg) for anaesthesia in the dog (Erhardt
aptic inhibitory receptors differed from the previously rec-
et al., 1986).
Ognized α-adrenoceptors and should therefore be termed
O2-adrenoceptors. There are postsynaptic and presynap-
tic O2-adrenoceptors in both central and peripheral sites.
Zolazepam
The distinction between O1. and 02-adrenoceptors is made
This dnug is used in animals combined, in a fxed ratio,
on sensitivity to specific agonist and antagonists. Epine-
with the dissociative agent, tiletamine (see Chapter 6).
phrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline)
85
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Synaptic
vesicle
Box 4.1 Actions of αz-adrenoceptor agonists
with clinical significance
Central
 Sedation
Cardiovascular
-Depression of cardiovascular centre
‘Late' vasodilation (after peripheral vasoconstriction
Alpha2 receptor
has waned)
Alpha2 agonist
Analgesia
Norepinephrine
sedative drug
 Central and spinal
Pituitary - hormonal
- Reduced ADH, increased urination
Alpha receptor
- Reduced ACTH, decreased cortisol
Central and peripheral
Bradycardia
 Peripheral
Figure 4.1 This represents a noradrenergic neuron in the
Cardiovascular
central nervous system (CNS). Norepinephrine is the natural
Vasoconstriction
ligand and acts at the effector sites (α- and, peripherally.
Intestinal relaxation, decreased motility
also αz-receptors). However, in the central nervous system,
 Uterine stimulation
there are αz-receptors on the noradrenergic neuron;
Reduced renin and insulin secretions
stimulation of these acts as a negative feedback system and
prevents further release of norepinephrine. The αz-agonist 
- Hyperglycaemia
sedative drugs act at this point, and therefore block release
Platelets
of norepinephrine.
－Aggregation
stimulate both types. For 0. -adrenoceptors, phenylephrine
and methoxamine are considered to be fairly specific ago-
that exerted by O,-adrenoceptors at the same site Periph-
nists and prazosin to be a specific antagonist Classically.
eral postsynaptic Oz-receptors are spread widely in many
for pharmacological tests, clonidine was considered a
tissues explaining many of the actions of o2-agonists [Box
specific Q2-agonist and yohimbine an antagonist. Current 
4.1). Receptor distribution, concentration and subtypes
research utilizes newer and more selective agents.
(Bylund, i988; Bylund et al., 1988) vary with species,
Norepinephrine is the natural ligand for both Qi- and
which may explain some of the species differences that
Q2-adrenoceptors. When norepinephrine is released from
occur. The most dramatic of the peripheral effects is that
a 'sympathetic 'neuron, it acts on both these receptors at
of both arterial and venous vasoconstriction, over-riding
the effector site, resulting in 'sympathetic' stimulation.
the centrally induced reduction in sympathetic drive.
However, there are Oz-adrenoceptors on the sympathetic
Few drugs are absolutely specifc in their actions but just
 neuron which, when stimulated by the released norepine-
show selectivity. thus at higher doses, the alternative
phrine, exert a negative feedback and prevent further
O-receptors may also be stimulated or blocked, a factor
 release of norepinephrine (Fig. 4.1). Simplistically, the
 possibly explaining some of the side effects and aberrant
Q2-adrenoceptor agonists (α2-agonists) exert their central
reactions occasionally seen with their clinical use. All the
effects by stimulating these presynaptic C2-receptors, thus
O2-agonists other than xylazine have an imidazole ring.
 preventing the release of norepinephrine and damping or
 and it is thought that stimulation of imidazole receptors 
preventing sympathetic drive from the central nervous
may have a major role in their actions [Kahn et al., 1999).
system.
but it is possible that there is also some activity at mus-
As the presynaptic Oz-adrenoceptors inhibit norepine-
carinic, opioid and dopamine receptors. Knowledge of the
phrine release it might be expected that the action of
molecular biology and genetic basis of the receptors is
agonists would be the opposite of the classic effects
increasing at a rate to make it beyond the scope of this
of sympathetic stimulation. However, postsynaptic O2-
book, and readers are advised to consult recent pharma-
adrenoceptors often exert a stimulating action similar to
cological reviews.
86
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
Clinically relevant actions of α2-
 Animals deeply sedated with any of the Oz-agonists may
adrenoceptor agonist drugs
still demonstrate marked, even enhanced reflex responses.
Ane au um aiy a u snaqo iso si siu
In recent years, new potent and highly selective 02-agonists
 deeply sedated horse can respond to a simple touch with
have been developed for both medical and veterinary use.
a well-directed kick. This reflex response can occur in all
Advantages of use in humans are just beginning to be
 species, for example, dogs apparently heavily sedated with
appreciated (Sanders & Maze, 2007). There are now several
 medetomidine may abruptly rise and bite a person in the
thousand publications describing the clinical actions of
-epas isnul ot ianau si asessauu aul pauonot uaym pueu
these drugs. The major actions of clinical importance are
tion! The addition of opioids reduces or removes these
summarized in Box 4.1. This section will cover the general 
 principles of the actions and use of d2-agonists - specifics
responses.
When O2-agonists are used for premedication, they
of drug doses will be discussed in the relevant chapters for
 greatly reduce the dose requirements of inhalation anaes.
the species.
thetics or intravenous agents. They also combine with
 In veterinary practice, the drugs with marketing authori-
 opioids to produce deep sedation or even anaesthesia.
zations in either Europe or North America are xylazine.
detomidine, medetomidine, dexmedetomidine and romi-
fidine. The major actions and side effects of all these drugs 
Analgesia
are similar, although there may be differences in length of
O2-Agonists are potent analgesics through both spinal and
action and in the extent and significance of some of the
central actions and even in subsedative doses (Vainio
side effects seen. There are variations between the drugs in
et al., 1986; Nolan et al., 1986; Scheinin & Macdonald,
their specificity for O2- and o-receptors and this explains 
1989; Kahn et al., 1999; Murrell & Hellebrekers, 2005).
some of the differences in observed clinical effects. There
02-Agonists provide excellent analgesia when given by the
is also marked variation in species sensitivity to their
epidural or intrathecal routes through a direct action on
actions. For example, cattle are approximately l0 times
the receptors in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
more sensitive to xylazine than horses or dogs. but are
equally sensitive to medetomidine as are dogs, and equally
Cardiovascular effects
 Or less sensitive to detomidine than horses. Pigs appear
 The major side effects of oz-adrenoceptor agonists are on
very resistant to xylazine but only a little less so to
the cardiovascular system. With all the agents and in all
medetomidine. Generalized comparisons of their potency
species there is marked bradycardia, due to suppression of
are meaningless except in the context of a stated species
the central cardiovascular centre and mediated through
of animal.
the vagus nerve. There may be a reflex component in
response to the early hypertensive phase but this is not
Pharmacokinetics: routes of administration
the major cause - the bradycardia lasts long after the
Most O2-agonists are metabolized by the liver to the extent
hypertensive phase has waned, and also occurs when
that oral administration is not very effective, although
 peripheral antagonism has prevented the early phase rise
clonidine is administered orally to people and there are
in blood pressure (Bryant et al., 1998; Enouri et al., 2008:
reports of xylazine toxicity in people who have eaten meat
Honkavaara et al., 2008).
from animals recently darted with this dnug. Bioavailabil-
 The administration of an anticholinergic drug to prevent
the bradycardia induced by Q2-agonists has been sug-
ity is high for most other routes of administration -
 gested. However, when anticholinergic agents are used in
including across mucous membranes. Consequently, the
more potent agents must be handled with care to avoid
animals sedated with O2-agonists, although the fall in
accidental self-administration.
heart rate is prevented, there is tachycardia, and the
hypertensive phase of the Q2-agonist's action is enhanced
[Alibhai et al., 1996). In cats sedated with xylazine,
Sedation: hypnosis
administration of glycopyrrolate further decreased cardiac
All o2-agonists produce a dose-related degree of sedation
 output (Dunkle et al., 1986). Heart rates of normal sleep-
Auo asop ui aseanun Aue yum iae 'unuixeu e on dn
ing dogs (Hall et al., 199l)and horses [Hall, unpublished
increases duration. Whether or not it is possible to induce
data) drop to values similar to those seen in animals
recumbency depends on the species and the drug. For
 sedated by Q2-adrenoceptor agonists. The bradycardia in
example, ruminants assume recumbency when only mod-
 the sedated animal can be over-ridden by toxaemia or by
erately sedated while horses try to stay standing. In horses,
the administration of some anaesthetics. Thus, although
detomidine at doses of 10 or more times the dose used
 anticholinergics may be used in emergency, it is generally
for clinical sedation does not induce recumbency (Di
accepted that their routine use is not advisable.
Concetto et al., 2007), while even low doses of medeto-
The effects of oz-agonists on arterial blood pressure
midine may make the horse so ataxic that it falls ( Bryant
depend on the relative effects ofthe central and peripheral
et al., 1991)
stimulation. There is often an initial hypertensive phase.
L8
Section
1
Principles and procedures
the extent and duration of which depend on the particular
ventilation and, indeed, has been shown to occur follow-
dnug, its dose, route of administration, and the species of
ing clonidine injection in anaesthetized artificially venti-
animal concerned. The hypertensive phase is followed by
lated sheep (Eisenach & Grice, 1988). The problem seems
a more prolonged period of lower blood pressure, again
greatest in sheep (Kastner, 2006) but can occur with all
dependent on the drug, route of administration and the
numinants. Celly et al. (l999) demonstrated that within
species of animal. Cardiac output falls as a result of
10 minutes of xylazine injection there was extensive pul-
the bradycardia. The circulation appears to be slowed; the
monary damage, with intra-alveolar haemorrhage and
veins take time to fill and IV anaesthetic agents take longer
interstitial and alveolar oedema.
than expected to exert their effects. The exact state of the
Very occasionally, a horse will show tachypnoea for
peripheral circulation is more complicated and dose
 a short period of time This phase seems to pass rapidly
dependent. During the early phase of arterial hypertension
(15 minutes) without treatment The cause is unknown.
with bradycardia, peripheral resistance is increased, pre-
Kendall et al. (20l0) documented that this is a common
sumably through vasoconstriction. How long this poor
Occurrence in febrile horses. However, it can Occur
 peripheral perfusion lasts is difficult to ascertain, as blood
in healthy horses and Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al.
pressure may fall below pre-dosing values as a result of the
(1999) documented an experimental pony that always
 sd i  a u 
responded in this manner despite all cardiopulmonary
resistance is reduced.
parameters, including arterial blood gas values, being
poolq ueaio ul sasueuo ul 1nsai Aeu uossuoose
normal.
flow which may in turn have other effects. Cerebral
vasoconstriction induced by O2-agonists may lead to a
Other actions
decrease in intracranial pressure (McCormick et al., 1993).
All oz-agonist dnugs cause an increase in urination,
Administration of oz-agonists decreases intraocular pres-
thought to be through inhibition of antidiuretic hormone
sure (Trim et al., 1985; Virkkila et al., 1994).
(ADH) release. In some species, high dose rates induce
The question of the possible direct effects of oz-agonists
hyperglycaemia which might contribute to diuresis. Intes-
on the myocardium is an open one. There have been
tinal motility ceases almost completely. These side effects
anecdotal reports of animals which were in a very excited
 must be taken into account when these drugs are used to
state at the time of xylazine or detomidine administration
facilitate radiological investigations and glucose tolerance
suffering sudden cardiac arrest and the suggestion has
tests. Some of the Oz-agonists cause significant uterine
been made that this dnug might sensitize the heart to
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias. Muir & Piper (1977)
stimulation and their administration is contraindicated
au Ae aun iy uud ael io Kea Aia u
showed this to be the case in halothane anaesthetized
abortion.
dogs. but other studies have failed to show the same
effect in horses, Or with the other Q2-agonist agents
 In doses that produce clinical sedation, most of these
drugs cause hypothermia but the mechanism by which
(Pettifer et al., 1996). C2-Adrenoceptors are present in the
coronary vessels but, despite the potential for reduced
myocardial blood flow, in humans, the use of d2-agonist
species of animal. Xylazine-induced hypothermia has
agents during cardiac surgery reduces the overall morbid-
been shown to be antagonized by idazoxan while
clonidine-induced hypothermia is intensified (Livingstone
ity and mortality from the procedures (wijeysundera
et al., 1984). In rats, low doses of detomidine cause hypo-
et al., 2009).
thermia that can be reversed by yohimbine (Virtanen,
anp Aiqeqoid eiuayuaday asneo sasop iauaiy inq (6861
Respiratory and puimonary actions
to an Oi-adrenoceptor-stimulating action.
Respiratory effects of o2-agonists are dose and depth of
sedation related and differ between species of animal. In
Xylazine
dogs, cats and horses respiratory rates are reduced, but
unless there is very deep sedation, any fall in PaOz is not
Xylazine, 2-{2,6-dimethylphenylamino)-4H-5,5 dihydro-
usually clinically relevant (Hsu et al., 1985; Short et al.,
1,3-thiazine, was enthusiastically received as a sedative
1986; Clarke & Taylor, 1987). Dogs deeply sedated with
and, over the past 40 years, it has maintained its popular-
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine may breathe inter-
ity as a generally reliable sedative and premedicant in a
 mittently - gaps of up to 45 seconds being followed by 20
wide range of animal species (Clarke & Hall, 1969). The
rapid respiratory movements, and individual animals may
dnug is a typical oz-adrenoceptor agonist and exerts its
become hypoxic In ruminants, however, tachypnoea may
effects accordingly as described above It has some major
Occur, breathing appears to require a considerable effort
differences from the newer agents:
and the PaOz falls to levels causing desaturation of the
Its structure does not have an imidazole ring and, to
haemoglobin (Celly et al., 1997). This hypoxaemia does
 our knowledge, there are no studies documenting
not seem to be due to changes in blood pressure or in
xylazine activity at imidazole receptors
88
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
·There are marked variations in susceptibility to
Detomidine
xylazine between the various species of domestic
Detomidine 4-(2,3-dimethylphenyl)methyl-1H-imidazole
animals. Horses, dogs and cats require 10 times the
hydrochloride is an imidazole derivative which has
 dose needed in cattle. Pigs are even more resistant.
Lesser variations in sensitivity may occur in breeds
been developed as a sedative/analgesic for animals. It is
0h anqiuos auaiuu siu ie pue saads auis e uui 
supplied in multidose bottles, currently at a concentration
 the occasional failure of the drug to produce sedation
of 10 mg/mL and may be given by the IV and IM routes.
[a e mou si arau pue Ansuqns uaai ji annsaa si 1
 The ecbolic effect [increased uterine contractions) at
equisedative doses appears greater than for the newer
form marketed for this route in horses. Unlike xylazine
its relative potency in most domestic animals is fairly
agents
 When given to dogs, vomiting is more frequent and
similar.
+
 more prolonged than that seen following
 The properties of detomidine are well documented in
medetomidine administration.
Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica,Supplement 82/1986 [20
 papers). Its analgesic effects have been shown in a number 
Xylazine is non-irritant and can be given by IV, IM or
of pain models and it is particularly effective as an anal-
SC injection, although the SC route is less reliable.
gesic in equine colic (Jochle et al., 1989). Cardiopulmo-
se isjuoe-o ue jo leidi ane sagueu iauno pue Aieu
Although not proved by laboratory testing. anecdotally
there are suggestions that the potency of available com-
described above.
One difference between xylazine and detomidine
mercial solutions may decrease with time after first use of
the bottle and this deterioration may be enhanced by
appears to be in their effects on the uterus. Whereas
 xylazine appears to have marked ecbolic effects, detomi-
increased environmental temperature (Van Dieten, 1988.
dine, at IV doses of 20 μg/kg, slows electrical activity in
personal communication). In horses, the drug is usually
the pregnant bovine uterus, although higher doses
used in doses that enable the animal to remain standing
(40-60 μg/kg) will increase this activity (Jedruch &
(although with marked ataxia). In ruminants and in small 
Gajewski, 1986).
animals, sedation is dose dependent and higher doses are
Detomidine is now used widely as a sedative and pre-
used which may cause recumbency, unconsciousness and
medicant for horses but is also marketed for use in cattle
a state close to general anaesthesia. Although the dnug can
be a potent analgesic, where surgery is to be performed.
in Europe Detomidine has a high therapeutic index. The
early investigations in horses used dose rates between 10
local analgesia must be used to supplement its effects. The
cardiopulmonary and other effects of xylazine are typical
(the dose currently used for short duration sedation) and
 300 μg/kg, and horses remained standing after the highest
of this group of dnugs, as described above. Doses and reac-
doses, although with unacceptable prolongation of seda-
tions specific to various species will be discussed in the
relevant chapters.
tion and side effects (bradycardia, arterial hypertension,
ataxia, sweating, piloerection, muscle tremor and diure-
Xylazine has proved to be a very safe sedative in a wide
variety of animals but some serious reactions have been
sis). Action of detomidine is prolonged in patients with
abnormal liver function (Chambers et al., 1996). A more
reported. There have been reports of violent excitement or
detailed description of the effects and uses of detomidine
 collapse in horses associated with its IV injection, although
in horses is given in Chapter 1ll.
some may have been due to inadvertent intra-arterial
injection. Deaths have also been reported in cattle possibly
The doses of detomidine required in cattle appear to be
similar to those in horses. Again, early experimental work
as a result of the drug-induced hypoxaemia. The availabil-
 suggested that high doses were needed for adequate seda-
ity of antagonists such as atipamezole increases the safety
tion but subsequent trials have shown that doses of up to
 of xylazine. In small animals, deaths have mainly occurred
30 mg/kg are satisfactory. In the authors' experience, doses
in relation to other anaesthetic agents when xylazine has
been used in anaesthetic combinations (Clarke & Hall,
of 10 μg/kg IV produce sedation in cattle very similar to
that seen in horses, i.e cattle remain standing but show
1990; Dyson et al., 1998).
 marked ataxia. Detomidine has two advantages over xyla-
Xylazine is a useful dnug for premedication prior to
zine in cattle: less stimulation of uterine contraction and
induction of anaesthesia with one of a wide variety of
agents. Its use greatly reduces the dose of anaesthetic
decreased likelihood of recumbency.
required. In heavily sedated animals, circulation is slowed,
Medetomidine
the effects of subsequent anaesthetic agents is delayed and
overdose of the anaesthetic may result. Xylazine is particu-
This compound, 4-(1-{2.3-dimethylphenyl) ethyl)-1H-
larly useful in combination with ketamine for its muscle
imadazole, is a very potent, efficacious and selective
relaxing properties help to reduce the rigidity caused by
agonist for Oz-adrenoreceptors in the central and periph-
the dissociative agent and, for many years, xylazine/
eral nervous system ( Virtanen, 1989). It is a mixture of two
ketamine combinations have proved useful in a wide
sterioisomers and the preparation marketed currently for
range of animal species.
small animal use contains 1 mg/mL ofthe racemic mixture
68
Section
1
Principles and procedures
The dextrorotatory isomer (dexmedetomidine) is the
Dexmedetomidine
active component and is now marketed as a separate
Dexmedetomidine[[(+)-4-(S)-[1-(2,3-dimethylphenyl)ethyl]-
product. Medetomidine solution is non-irritant and can
be administered by IV, IM, SC or transmucous membrane.
1H-imidazole monohydrochloride) is the S-enantiomer
of medetomidine and the active component of the
It is metabolized rapidly in the liver, and has a half-life of
elimination of approximately 0.5-1.5 hours in dogs.
racemic agent. It is the most potent and specifc O2-
agonist available and was originally developed for use in
cats and horses (Salonen, 1989: Bettschart-Wolfensberger
humans.
et al., 1999; Grimsrud et al., 2012).
Dexmedetomidine now has veterinary marketing
Medetomidine induces sedation, hypnosis and analge-
 authorization for use in dogs and cats in many countries.
sia, and significant cardiovascular effects of bradycardia,
arterial hypertension  followed by hypotension and
Dose rates, which are essentially half of those used with
medetomidine are given in terms of body surface area
reduced cardiac output. Its actions in dogs and cats have
been well reviewed (Murrell & Hellebrekers, 2005; Cullen,
rather than as weight (as were originally those for medeto-
apis ssal ui snsai Aaiyiads si ieui paueio st il (auiu
1996). In most animals, medetomidine slows respiration
(Clarke & England, 1989). Nevertheless, at normal seda-
effects (Murrell & Hellebrekers, 2005). However, many
tive doses in healthy non-ruminant animals the PaCO2
veterinary studies have found no clinically significant dif-
ferences other than dose between use of dexmedetomidine
does not rise to an excessive level (Vainio et al., 1989;
Cullen, 1996). Cyanosis has been reported in up to one
and that of the racemic mixture for cats and dogs (Gra-
nholm et al., 2006, 2007), or when used off-label in other
third of dogs sedated with medetomidine (Clarke &
England, 1989; Vaha-Vahe, 1989) and, in most cases, this
species (Kastner et al., 200l ). There are now many publica-
tions detailing the effects of dexmedetomidine in a wide
has been attributed to decreased tissue blood flow with
range of species.
increased oxygen extraction leading to cyanosis from
venous desaturation. In bitches, the electrical activity of
the uterine muscle is depressed at doses of 20 μg/kg while,
Romifidine
at higher doses [40-60 μg/kg), there is an initial increase
Romifidine(N-{2-bromo-6-fluorophenyl)-4,5-dihydro-1H-
in this activity for some 5-7 minutes followed by depres-
imidazol-2-amine) was developed from clonidine and has
sion; it is reported that pregnant bitches do not abort
 all the usual properties of an O2-agonist. It is used prima-
(Jedruch et al., 1989). When medetomidine is used for
rily for sedation and premedication for horses [reviewed
premedication, it severely reduces the dose of IV agents
by England & Clarke, 1996), although it has or has had a
needed for anaesthetic induction or maintenance, and also
marketing licence for cats and dogs in some countries.
the MAC of volatile agents (Lerche & Muir, 2006).
After injection in the horse plasma levels fall so rapidly
 The marketing authorization for medetomidine is for
that a half-life of elimination cannot be calculated, but
use in cats and dogs, and details of dose and effect in these
experiments using radioactive romifidine have docu-
species are given in the relevant chapters. However, the
mented detectable radioactivity for 37 hours, suggesting
dnug has been used in a very large variety of other species.
residual metabolites. In contrast, in dogs, the plasma half-
 In rodents and other laboratory animals, there are marked
life of the parent drug is 2 hours [European Medicines
sid eu au siaa si o arasns ui suo
Agency, Safety report; Summary 2010). Romifidine's
being most resistant. Combinations with opioids or keta-
actions differ in some ways from the other 02-agonists in
mine are more effective than the sedative alone. Medeto-
'udy ssal aq ol sieadde aupyiuoy 'asn Aieuana
midine has been used also in sheep and cattle; IV doses
paneon uaum 'sasiy ul aupaau ueun aua
of 10-20 μg/kg causing sedation similar to that seen
to IV xylazine [1 mg/kg) or detomidine (20 μg/kg), romi-
after 0.1-0.2 mg/kg of xylazine (Kastner, 2006). In wild
fdine at 40 μg/kg and 80 μg/kg produced less ataxia and
animals, higher doses are required and the drug is usually
the horses' heads were held higher. The response to
used in combination with ketamine when administered
imposed stimuli was reduced to the same degree by all
by dart gun for immobilization. Indeed, medetomidine/
three drugs. The duration of effect was longest with romi-
 ketamine combinations have been found to provide excel-
fidine There is controversy as to the degree of analgesia
lent immobilization and relaxation in a wide range of
produced by romifdine (England & Clarke, 1996). For
species of animals, while the ability to reverse the sedation
example in cats, analgesia appeared to be less than that
with Oz-adrenoceptor antagonists has proved to be par-
of xylazine (Selmi et al., 2004) and, in clinical horses,
ticularly useful (Jalenka, 1989). In horses, despite the
when given as a constant rate infusion during isoflurane
risk of recumbency, use of medetomidine has become
anaesthesia, it did not appear to reduce the concentration
popular as a continuous rate infusion given following a
of inhalant required (Devisscher et al., 20l0). In contrast,
small (5-7 μg/kg) loading dose either for standing seda-
with electrical nocioceptive testing, romifidine had good
tion (Bettschart-wolfensberg et al., 1999) or, more fre-
 analgesic properties (Spadavecchia et al., 2005) and it has
quently, during anaesthesia (Ringer et al., 2007; Valverde
the expected analgesic activity when given by the epidural
et al., 2010).
or spinal route (Amarpal et al., 2002).
90
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
The lack of ataxia with romifidine has made it very
popular for use to sedate horses for standing procedures.
Box 4.2 Considerations when using
and it is also widely used for a premedication or with
atipamezole (or other αz-adrenergic
ketamine for anaesthetic induction in this species. In con-
antagonists)
trast, it clinical use in small animal practice is not wide-
spread as a greater degree of hypnosis is preferred in these
Analgesia is reversed as well as sedation
species. As with all o2-agonists, it has been used in many
Only the αz-agonists reversed
 other species with anticipated results.
-Ketamine convulsive action may be revealed
Dose required will depend on the residual degree of
Clonidine
sedation
Duration of action of agonist and antagonist must
Clonidine
(N-(2,6-dichlorophenyl)-4,5-dihydro-1H-
 match
imidazol-2-amine) is an Qz-agonist agent which, in
- Re-sedation can occur. Dangerous for wild animals
humans, has been used primarily as an antihypertensive
agent, sedation being an unwanted side effect. Publica-
tions detail its use in other areas such as control of opioid
withdrawal symptoms. It has been used in animals, but
influenced by the Qz-antagonists, was part of the sedative
the many agents in this class holding veterinary marketing
combination used and may have been the cause of this
licences are better researched for suitable dosage and
side effect.
effects.
Atipamezole
Atipamezole 4-(2-ethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-2-yl)-1H-
α2-ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
imidazole hydrochloride), is a specific O2-antagonist that
was developed to reverse the actions of medetomidine
The central and peripheral effects of o2-agonists can be
(and, more recently, dexmedetomidine) (Virtanen, 1989).
reversed by equally specific antagonists. These include ati-
and has marketing authorization for dogs and cats. In
dogs, to reverse recently given medetomidine sedation,
pamezole, yohimbine tolazoline and idazoxan. Other
actions, for which they might have clinical use, include:
doses of five times that of the medetomidine dose are
required (Vainio & Vahe-Vahe, 1989); the marketed solu-
·Antidepressant
tions of atipamezole are five times the strength of the
·Aphrodisiac
marketed medetomidine [and 10 times that of dexmedeto-
·Antiobesity
 midine) so that equal volumes of agonist and antagonist
·Antidiabetic (type 2).
can be employed. Cats sedated with medetomidine are
In veterinary practice, the Q2-antagonists are used to
usually given a lower dose [5o% in volume) of antagonist.
terminate sedation induced by an Q2-agonist in situations
Medetomidine and antagonism with atipamezole is now
such as at the end of a non-painful procedure in small
very widely used in small animal practice (Sinclair, 2003;
animals and horses, in ruminants, where prolonged
Murrell & Hellebrekers, 2005). Serious relapse into seda-
recumbency may be detrimental, after capture of wild
tion has not been noted. Atipamezole also reverses the
animals (Kock et al., 1989), or following accidental over-
cardiopulmonary effects of the Q2-agonists although, in
dose of the sedative agonists (Di Concetto et al., 2007).
dogs. there is a transient fall in blood pressure (Vainio.
There are some general considerations when using 02-
1990) and in sheep. although respiration is improved,
antagonists in clinical practice (Box 4.2). It is important
PaO2 may still be lower than prior to sedation (unpub-
to realize that reversal of sedation includes reversal of
lished observations, KC). Overdose of atipamezole does
analgesia. Depending on the agents chosen, re-sedation
Jo saiads isou ul sualqoid ioleu asnes ol ieadde jou
may occur and this could have serious consequences in
animal. Cats may appear hyper-alert, and injection into
wild animals that are no longer under observation and
the unsedated dog (Clarke & England, 1989) causes mild
vulnerable to predators. The dose rates of antagonist drugs
muscular tremors but little else Convulsions have never
for reversing sedation will vary with the dose of sedative
been noted in the absence of ketamine Atipamezole will
used and the elapsed time after its administration. Higher
also antagonize all oz-agonists (see species chapters).
 doses are required to reverse cardiopulmonary effects than
to reverse sedation (Vainio et al., 1989). Selection of
Yohimbine
optimum dose of antagonist is not easy and adverse side
effects of the antagonist may be revealed. Convulsions
Yohimbine, an extract from a plant, historically has been
have been reported after yohimbine, idazoxan and atipam.
used as an aphrodisiac. Although it has actions at many
ezole but, in most reports, ketamine, which is not
receptor sites (thus many side effects), numerous studies
91
Section
1
Principles and procedures
have demonstrated its effectiveness in antagonizing Q2-
used at subanaesthetic doses have also been used to sedate
agonist-induced sedation and analgesia in laboratory
aedus au sualdap Aq syiom ieuiuae ue suidiasy
animals and dogs. Doses of 0.1 mg/kg generally have been
neurons of noradrenaline, is still used to calm horses. It
employed to reverse xylazine sedation in small animals;
has a long action (up to three weeks) and is useful for
high doses have caused excitement in dogs.
horses that need to be kept quiet following injury. Magne-
siurm, once used in an anaesthetic combination for large
Tolazoline
animals, together with chloral and barbiturate is making
 se saY on A i s  eqa, e
This is used at doses of 4 mg/kg to antagonize the effects
'calmer' and this (currently - 2012) does not infringe
of xylazine in horses. The rate of IV administration needs
competition rules. However, in human anaesthesia, it is
to be controlled to approximately 100 mg/min to avoid
being used as an intra-anaesthetic infusion where it
hypotension. It is a mixed α- and o2-antagonist and also
 appears to contribute to analgesia and hypnosis, reducing
has a direct peripheral vasodilator action. Temporary side
the other agents required (James, 2009). However, a
effects, which usually last not more than 1-2 hours,
 magnesium infusion failed to reduce anaesthetic require-
 include changes in blood pressure, tachycardia, peripheral
ments in anaesthetized dogs undergoing surgery (Rioja
vasodilatation and sweating.
et al.,2012)
Idazoxan
Idazoxan ((±}-2-{2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxin-2-yl)-4,5-
SEDATIVE-OPIOID COMBINATIONS
dihydro-1 H-imidazole) is a very specific O2- adrenoceptor
antagonist that has been used widely as a tool in research.
 Clinically, the main veterinary experience has been in free-
The combination of two drugs with actions at different
ranging animals, where it has been effective in reversing
receptors often results in synergism where the overall effect
xylazine-induced sedation.
is greater than the sum of their individual actions. In
contrast, combinations of agents that work at the same
receptor can only be additive. This is the basis for the
Peripheral α2-antagonist MK-467
combination of sedative and opioid agents. The sedative
 This agent also known as L-659,066, is an exciting pros-
has an additional use of counteracting undesired opioid
pect as it does not cross the blood-brain barrier, and
side effects, in particular, excitement reactions and opioid-
therefore can be used to reverse the unwanted peripheral
induced vomiting. There is nothing new about the use of
effects (such as the vasoconstriction) of the O.2-agonist,
 such combinations, veterinarians having used them for
while leaving the sedation and analgesia intact. Bryant
 many years to render animals more manageable.
et al. (1998) first reported its effective use in sheep; effects
in ponies were disappointing as doses were too low.
tion and control of animals is extensive including O2-
Recently, interest has been revived and a number of recent
agonists, phenothiazines, butyrophenones (neuroleptic
publications have detailed the effects of MK-467 in reduc-
agents) and benzodiazepines all having been combined
ing the peripheral cardiovascular and other effects of
with a wide variety of agonist and partial agonist opioids.
medetomidine and dexmedetomidine, while leaving seda-
Where high doses of potent opioids such as fentanyl or
tion unchanged (Enouri et al., 2008; Honkavaara et al.
alfentanil (see chapter 5) are used, a state similar to
2012: Restitutti et al., 20l2). The dnug has also proved
anaesthesia is achieved. Unfortunately, severe respiratory
useful in pharmacological research to elucidate which
depression may accompany the use of these high dose
actions of the agonists are mediated peripherally
opioid techniques.
Thus, in veterinary anaesthesia, sedative/opioid combi-
 nations are used in three ways:
· To obtain more reliable sedation
OTHER AGENTS USED FOR SEDATION
 To induce anaesthesia, or a state close to this.
Commercially available fxed-dose combinations.
Some older and less specific agents are still used to produce
 Reliable sedation is achieved usually with acepromazine
sedation, albeit without marketing authorizations. Chlora!
or O2-agonists combined with an opioid such as butorpha-
hydrate produces excellent sedation in horses and cattle
nol,
buprenorphine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone,
with minimal cardiopulmonary side effects. The limita-
methadone or moderate doses of morphine. The improved
tions of its use were poor analgesia (but that can be pro-
sedation (e.g. reduction of ‘kick' response to touch in
vided by other means) and the fact that large volumes of
horses) can be achieved at opioid doses well below those
an irritant solution were required. The use of IV catheters
required for analgesia but, if more potent opioids are used,
reduces the importance of this latter problem. Barbiturates
they will contribute to pain relief. Fentanyl is the most
92
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
 popular opioid for anaesthetic indications; combinations 
became sedated but remain standing. Immobilon? is not
with benzodiazepines, or with Qz-agonists inducing
recommended for wild felidae.
unconsciousness. The ultra-potent opioids such as etor-
In humans, etorphine is extremely potent and its use
phine or carfentanil have been used in regimens for
'suisisse pue isauisaeue au on iasuep e sainsuon
darting wild animals (see Chapter 18).
Should an accident occur, naloxone is recommended as
 Suitable regimens for these indications for each species
the drug of choice for treatment of humans, but many
of animal are given in later chapters of this book.
 doses may be needed to maintain respiration until medical
The original concept of neuroleptanalgesia and neu-
help can be obtained (see Chapter 18). It is important that
roleptanaesthesia was used specifically to describe the
the naloxone is not expired. Although not licensed for use
combination of opioids with phenothiazines or butyroph-
in humans, there are anecdotal reports of diprenorphine
enones (neuroleptics). The neuroleptic agents have the
being used effectively in emergency situations, but this
specific property of reducing opioid-induced vomiting in
dnug does cause hallucinations in humans.
dogs (and humans). As many of the sedatives used (eg.
the Q2-agonists) are not 'neuroleptic' agents, the term
'sedative-opioid' combination is preferred.
The fixed ratio combinations date back to the
ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS
concept of neuroleptanaesthesia. Hypnorm, Thalamonal
and Innovar - VET are (or were) commercially available
Anticholinergic agents are used widely in anaesthesia to
mixtures of fentanyl and butyrophenone tranquillizer [flu-
anisone or droperidol). They have been used in dogs, pigs.
antagonize the muscarinic effects of acetylcholine and
thus to block transmission at parasympathetic postgangli-
primates, rabbits and rodents, particularly in the experi-
onic nerve endings. The main purposes are:
mental laboratory situation. The advantages of the mix-
+
 To reduce salivation and bronchial secretions
tures include ease of administration, reasonable safety
margin, quiet postoperative state, and reversibility with
 To block the effects of impulses in the vagus nerves
+
 To block certain of the effects produced by drugs that
narcotic antagonists (such as naloxone). Disadvantages
include variable response in certain breeds, the spontane-
stimulate the parasympathetic system.
ous movements that occur, the need to employ further
The reduction of salivation and bronchial secretion is
aq ol si Aiagins ioleu uaum eisauisaeue pue eisaieue
necessary if irritant volatile anaesthetics such as ether
performed, and respiratory depression.
are used. Ruminants produce large quantities of saliva
but anticholinergic drugs merely make their saliva more
Immobilon@
        
obstruction.
Immobilon@ is now marketed only for horses and deer.
Some drugs, in particular the O2-agonists and, in high
It consists of a very potent and long acting μ agonist
doses, the opioids, can cause marked vagally-mediated
bradycardia. Under light anaesthesia, surgery of the head
(10 mg/mL). When the procedure is completed, the effects
and neck is prone to trigger vagal reflexes, and the horse,
of the etorphine (but not acepromazine) can be reversed
dog and cat seem to be most at risk from these distur-
by the use of the specific antagonist diprenorphine
bances. In cats, dogs, and cattle, the oculocardiac reflex is
(3.0 mg/mL, LA Revivon@)
well known to result in bradycardia and even cardiac
After IV injection of Immobilon@, horses become
arrest; stimulation of the nose or other similarly sensitive
recumbent within one minute and, although excitement
 structures can have the same effect or cause laryngospasm.
 may occur, it is much less severe than following IM admin-
In horses, stimulation about the head and neck can
istration. Once recumbent intense muscular activity
produce sudden cardiac arrest without a prior warning of
makes the animal very stiff and violent continuous tremors 
bradycardia.
 occur for up to 20 minutes. Hypertension and tachycardia
Anticholinesterase drugs such as neostigmine are used
are present but respiration is severely depressed. Horses
to antagonize the block produced by competitive neu-
regain the standing position within a few minutes of IV
 romuscular blocking drugs and their use must be preceded
injection of Revivon@. Occasionally. horses become
or combined with one of the anticholinergic dnugs to
excited shortly after standing and a further excitement
block the muscarinic effects of the released acetylcholine.
phase may occur several hours later due to enterohepatic
 Also, the depolarizing agent suxamethonium has effects
recycling of the etorphine.
similar to those of acetylcholine and, at least in dogs and
Immobilon@ and other etorphine-containing combina-
cats, an anticholinergic 'cover' should be employed when
tions have been used extensively for the capture of wild
this relaxant is used (see Chapter 8).
game Modern use is as 'knockdown', as in horses, but the 
In recent years, the advisability of routine premedica-
historical reports (Harthoorn, 1972) used much lower
tion with anticholinergic dnugs has been questioned.
dose rates whereby the animals (elephants and giraffes)
These drugs certainly have side effects; for example the
E6
Section
1
Principles and procedures
tachycardia they induce may be undesirable and distur-
depression. Although atropine is, in general, a very safe
bance of vision may cause a cat to panic. Reduced gut
dnug with a wide therapeutic margin, occasional cases have
motility may cause colic in horses.
 been reported where an individual person or animal has
 Current practice seems to be not to use anticholinergic
 appeared unduly sensitive to the central effects.
dnugs for routine premedication unless there is a specifc
The main action of the drug is on the heart rate, which
0h inq '(spioido asop yaiy asn on uouau ga) uoseai
usually increases due to peripheral inhibition of the
reserve them for corrective measures should bradycardia
cardiac vagus; the initial slowing due to central action is
occur during the course of the anaesthetic This, of course,
only seen before the onset of peripheral inhibition. The
assumes that monitoring is adequate to detect the brady-
minute volume of respiration is slightly increased due to
cardia. However, IV injection of small doses of atropine
central stimulation. Bronchial musculature is relaxed and
may cause further bradycardia before increasing heart
bronchial secretions are reduced.
rate. At one time it was said that this was a central
Atropine has marked ocular effects. Mydriasis results
effect, but this is no longer thought to be the case and
from the local or systemic administration of atropine.
the reason is unknown (Glick, 2010). Glycopyrrolate, said
 Although atropine reduces muscle tone in the gastroin-
not to cross the blood-brain barrier, can also cause
testinal tract, at the doses usually used for premedication
this further bradycardia (Richards et al., 1989). Thus, the
this effect is minimal. The passage of barium meals along
decision to include an anticholinergic agent in premedica-
the gut of the dog is not appreciably slowed by atropine
tion may be based on the species of animal concerned,
 premedication. It is possible that the incidence of postan-
its size, the drugs to be used for and during anaesthesia,
aesthetic colic in horses is increased by the use of this dnug.
the likelihood of complications from bradycardia or
although historically very large doses [more than 10 times
vagal reflexes, the level of monitoring in use and any spe-
the 0.0l mg/kg now recommended) were used, and such
cifc contraindications. The main contraindications are in
high doses did cause impacted colic Because of the differ-
conditions associated with tachycardia and in certain
ent ways in which they metabolize the drug, the effective-
forms of glaucoma that are aggravated by dilatation of
ness of a given dose varies according to the species of
the pupil.
animal and will be discussed in the relevant species
chapters.
Atropine
Hyoscine
Atropine the most important of the alkaloids obtained
from Atropa belladonna [deadly nightshade). is used in
Hyoscine is an alkaloid resembling atropine, found in
anaesthesia as its water-soluble sulphate Its metabolism
the same group of plants but usually obtained from
is not the same in all species of animal. When adminis-
the shrub henbane (Hyoscyamus niger). The peripheral
aul wouy Aipidei Aian sieaddesip auidone 'ssop ol paial
actions of hyoscine resemble those of atropine. Hyoscine
bloodstream (half-life of elimination 30-40 minutes).
has a marketing licence for use in the horse as an antispas-
 Part of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine, part
molytic in cases of equine colic and is used to relax the
appears in the urine as tropine and the remainder is appar-
intestine before rectal examinations. It has been used
ently broken down in the body to as yet unidentified
during anaesthesia in horses at doses of 0.l mg/kg IV
substances. In cats, atropine is hydrolysed by either of two
when it has increased heart rate for around 15 minutes
esterases which are found in large quantities in the liver
(Borer & Clarke, 2006). In dogs., it has been used in doses
and kidneys. These esterases are also found in rats and at
of 5-20 μg/kg IM.
high levels in some strains of rabbits, thus making atro-
pine very short acting in this species
Glycopyrrolate
Atropine inhibits transmission of postganglionic cholin-
ergic nerve impulses to effector cells but inhibition is not
 Glycopyrrolate is a quaternary ammonium anticholinergic
equally effective all over the body and atropine has less
agent with powerful and prolonged antisialagogue activity.
effect upon the urinary bladder and intestines than upon
As an antisialagogue it is about fve times as potent as
the heart and salivary glands.
atropine. It is particularly useful for combination with
The dnug has unpredictable effects on the central
anticholinesterases for antagonizing the effects of non-
nervous system. Certain cerebral and medullary functions
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. It has a
are initially stimulated then later depressed, so that the
slower onset of action than atropine and, as neostigmine
fnal outcome depends on the dose used and the route
also has a slow onset of action, a preparation of neostig-
of administration. Clinical doses may produce an initial
mine with glycopyrrolate is available for when combined
slowing of the heart due to stimulation of vagal centres in
use is required. Work on anaesthetized human patients
the brain before its peripheral anticholinergic effects
showed no difference in the cardiovascular effects of atro-
occur.
Atropine overdose causes a 'central cholinergic
pine and glycopyrrolate other than in the time of onset
effect' with fluctuations between hyperexcitability and
of action.
94
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
4
Glycopyrrolate has now been used widely in veterinary
practice in doses of 0.01-0.02 mg/kg and a big advantage
Box 4.3 Classical aims of premedication
is that there is not the species-related pharmacokinetic
disadvantages of atropine and it is effective in rabbits.
To relieve anxiety. apprehension, fear and resistance to
However other potential advantages have not material-
anaesthesia
ized. A comparison (Richards et al., 1989) of atropine
 To counteract unwanted side effects of agents used in
given IV at doses of 0.02-0.04 mg/kg with IV glycopyrro-
anaesthesia
late (0.0l and 0.02 mg/kg) in dogs with dnug-induced
- Side effects depend on species and on drugs used
bradycardia showed that both agents caused a high inci-
- Examples - vomiting (mainly in dogs and cats), poor
dence of cardiac arrhythmia, including atrioventricular
quality of recovery, bradycardia, salivation and
block, during the frst three minutes after injection, and
excessive muscle tone
the tachycardia that followed was equal with both agents.
To reduce the dose of anaesthetic
It has been suggested that as the drug does not readily
- In many (but not all) cases, drug combinations may
cross the blood-brain barrier, it might have less effect on
have a lower incidence of side effects than a high
vision than other anticholinergic agents, but it still causes
dose of the anaesthetic would have on its own
pupillary dilation in the cat.
To contribute to perioperative analgesia
Aew uoenpawaid e snisabeue bupe-buo -
contribute to pain relief before, during and after
Fenpipramide
surgery
A combination of levomethadone with fenpipramide is
marketed in Europe under the trade name 'Polamivet.
 Fenpipramide is an anticholinergic agent, and is included
to prevent methadone-induced bradycardia. It appears t0
The sedative and anxiolytic drugs play the major role in
do this satisfactorily (Tunsmeyer et al., 20l2). but there
premedication, improving the quality of anaesthesia and
appears to be no information available concerning veteri-
recovery, contributing to anaesthesia and, in some cases,
nary use of fenpipramide alone.
counteracting unwanted side effects such as the muscle
rigidity produced by ketamine By calming the animal in
ua pue gudi essaau aue oad aaeaoai a
Busnu pue teue au yoq og husead ao ape si gu
staff. Moreover, by controlling emotional disturbance, the
PREMEDICATION
release of catecholamines is reduced, thus decreasing
the chance of epinephrine-induced cardiac arrhythmias.
Preanaesthetic medication or 'premedication' helps both
smoothing the course of anaesthesia and (usually) ensur-
the anaesthetist and the animal, for it makes induction
ing a quiet recovery.
and maintenance of anaesthesia easier for the anaesthetist
The degree of activity of the CNS at the time when
while, at the same time, rendering the experience safer
 anaesthesia is induced determines the amount of anaes-
and more comfortable for the patient. It implies the
thetic that has to be administered to produce surgical
administration, usually before, but sometimes at or imme-
anaesthesia. Sedatives and analgesics enhance the effects
diately after, the induction of anaesthesia, of sedatives.
 of the anaesthetic agents. In general, the depressant effects
anxiolytics and analgesics, with or without anticholiner-
 of the dnugs used in premedication summate (or are even
gics. The classical aims of using premedication are listed
 synergistic) with those of the anaesthetic and, unless this
in Box 4.3
is clearly understood, overdosage may occur. Most sedative
The use of anticholinergic agents for premedication has
drugs depress respiration and, if given in large doses
 been discussed in the previous section. Analgesic agents
 before anaesthetics that also produce respiratory depres-
are essential if the patient is in pain in the preoperative
 sion (e.g propofol), respiratory failure may occur before
period but, even when pain is absent, analgesics may
surgical anaesthesia is attained. Premedication must,
increase preoperative sedation, reduce the dose of anaes-
therefore, be regarded as an integral part of the whole
thetic drugs needed, contribute to analgesia during surgery
 anaesthetic technique.
and even, if suffciently long acting, contribute to analgesia
 The type of sedative drug chosen for premedication will
 postoperatively The use of long-acting analgesics such as
 depend on a variety of factors. Acepromazine is a good
buprenorphine is particularly popular for the contribution 
 anxiolytic and reduces the incidence of vomiting in dogs
they make to all stages of the anaesthetic process. Very
 and cats, so is particularly useful if morphine, hydromor-
potent but short-acting opioids, such as fentanyl and
 phone, or oxymorphone is also to be given. However,
alfentanil, will reduce the dose of anaesthetic required, but
 acepromazine increases the chance of regurgitation at
their short action means that further analgesia must be
induction of general anaesthesia in ruminants. The Q2-
 provided during recovery.
agonists provide profound sedation and are useful in the
95
Section
1
Principles and procedures
animal which is particularly difficult to handle. It is impor-
In the past, it was fairly simple to define the limits of
tant to remember that the potent opioids have a major
premedication and when anaesthesia began. Today, with
effect in reducing the dose of subsequent anaesthetic
the wide range of different types of drugs available such
dnugs otherwise overdosage will occur. Some sedatives
distinctions are no longer clear. Oz-Agonists or benzodi-
may provide muscle relaxation and these are especially
azepines may be given 30 minutes prior to anaesthesia as
effective in counteracting the muscle tension associated
premedicants or IV as part of the anaesthetic induction
with the use of ketamine Benzodiazepines provide little
process [co-induction). Dissociative agents, such as keta-
obvious preoperative sedation in healthy animals, but
mine, may be regarded as being dnugs for premedication
 may provide good premedication for the sick, and their
or for the induction or maintenance of general anaesthe-
muscle relaxing properties are useful when ketamine is to
sia. In clinical practice, exact definitions of terminology
 be used for induction. Often, more than one sedative drug
are unimportant as long as the anaesthetist clearly under-
is used in premedication. For example, Q2-adrenoceptor
stands the role played by each drug used, be it 'premedi-
agonists and benzodiazepines may be combined prior to
ant', 'dissociative agent' or 'anaesthetic', in the total
the use of ketamine. However, such polypharmacy must
process in bringing the animal to a state suitable for the
be used with care, as many such combinations have syn-
performance of surgery, examination, or whatever else is
Jo asopiaao ue iaisiuiupe ot Asea s l! pue Araie ssieia
required. Anxiolytics, sedatives, hypnotics and analgesics
anaesthetic agents given subsequently. Premedicant drugs
all have their place in this process. In any particular case,
can be given by any one or more of the usual routes of
the choice of drugs, their dose and route of administration
dnug administration. The choice is governed both by the
depends on the circumstances and gives the anaesthetist
nature of the drug and the time available before anaesthe-
the opportunity to demonstrate their clinical assessment 
sia is to be induced.
skills based on their scientific knowledge.
REFERENCES
Alibhai, H.l., Clarke, K.W., Lee, Y.H.,
acepromazine and xylazine. Am J Vet
xylazine in horses. Vet Rec 129.
et al., 1996. Cardiopulmonary effects
Res 57. 1472-1477.
421-423.
 of combinations of medetomidine
Borer, K.E., Clarke, K.W., 2006. The
Bryant, C.E., Thompson, I., Clarke, K.W.,
hydrochloride and atropine sulphate
effect of hyoscine on dobutamine
1998. Characterisation of the
in dogs. Vet Rec 138, 1i-13.
requirement in spontaneously
crdiovascular pharmacology of
Amarpal, Kinjavdekar, P., Aithal, H.P.,
breathing horses anaesthetized with
medetomidine in the horse and
et al., 2002. Analgesic, sedative and
halothane. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
sheep. Res Vet Sci 65, 149-154.
haemodynamic effects of spinally
149-157.
Bylund, D.B., 1988. Subtypes of alpha
administered romifdine in female
Brashier, M., 2006. Fluphenazine-
2-adrenoceptors: pharmacological
goats. J Vet Med A, Physiol Patho]
induced extrapyramidal side effects
and molecular biological evidence
Clin Med 49, 3-8.
in a horse. Vet Clin N Am Equine
converge. Trends Pharmacol Sci 9.
Bergadano, A., Andersen, O.K..
356-361
Pract 22, e37-45
Arendt-Nielsen, L., et al., 2009.
Brodbelt, D.C., Blissitt, K.J., Hammond,
Bylund, D.B., Ray-Prenger, C., Murphy.
 Modulation of nociceptive
T.J., 1988. Alpha-2A and alpha-2B
withdrawal reflexes evoked by single
R.A., et al., 2008a. The risk of death:
adrenergic receptor subtypes:
 and repeated nociceptive stimuli
the confidential enquiry into
perioperative small animal fatalities.
antagonist binding in tissues and cell
in conscious dogs by low-dose
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 365-373.
lines containing only one subtype.
acepromazine. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 245, 600-607.
261-272
Brodbelt, D.C., Pfeiffer, D.u., Young.
Celly, C.S., Atwal, O.S., McDonell, W.N..
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Clarke.
L.E., et al., 2008b. Results of
et al., 1999. Histopathologic
 the confidential enquiry into
K.W., Vainio, O., et al., 1999.
 alterations induced in the lungs of
Pharmacokinetics of medetomidine
perioperative small animal fatalities
sheep by use of alpha2-adrenergic
in ponies and elaboration of a
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-
receptor agonists. Am J Vet Res 60,
 medetomidine infusion regime
related death in dogs. I Am Vet Med
154-161.
which provides a constant level of
Assoc 233, 1096-1104.
Celly, C.s., McDonell, W.N., Young, S.S.
sedation. Res Vet Sci 67, 41-46.
Brown, E.N., Purdon, PL., Van Dort,
et al., 1997. The comparative
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Taylor.
C.J., 2011. General anaesthesia and
hypoxaemic effect of four alpha 2
PM., Sear, J.w., et al., 1996.
altered states of arousal: A systems
adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine,
Physiologic effects of anesthesia
neuroscience analysis. Ann Rev
romifdine, detomidine and
induced and maintained by
Neurosci 34, 601-628.
medetomidine) in sheep. J Vet
intravenous administration of a
Bryant, C.E., England, G.C., Clarke,
Pharmacol Ther 20, 464-471.
dlimazolam-ketamine combination
K.W., 1991. Comparison of the
Chambers, I.P., Waterman, A.E.,
in ponies premedicated with
sedative effects of medetomidine and
Livingston, et al., 1996. Prolonged
96
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
action of detomidine in TB
azaperone in the horse. Equine Vet J
Glick, D.B., 2010. The autonomic
horses with abnormal liver
11, 33-35.
system. In: Millar, R.D., Erikson, L.l.,
function. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 23,
Doherty, T.J., Geiser, D.R., Rohrbach,
Fleisher, L.A., et al. (Eds.), Miller's
27-28.
B.W., 1997. Effect of acepromazine
Anesthesia, seventh ed. Churchill
Clarke, K.W., 1969. Effect of azaperone
and butorphanol on halothane
Livingston-Elsevier.
on the blood pressure and
minimum alveolar concentration
Granholm, M., McKusick, B.C.,
pulmonary ventilation in pigs. Vet
in ponies. Equine Vet I 29.
Westerholm, F.C., et al., 2006.
Rec 85, 649-651.
374-376.
Evaluation of the clinical efficacy
Clarke, K.W., England, G.C.Ww., 1989.
Dresel, P.E., 1985. Cardiac alpha
and safety of dexmedetomidine or
Medetomidine, a new sedative-
receptors and arrhythmias.
medetomidine in cats and their
 analgesic for use in the dog and its
Anesthesiology 63, 582-583.
reversal with atipamezole. Vet
reversal with atipamezole. J Small 
Driessen, B., Zarucco, L., Kalir, B., et al.,
Anaesth Analg 33, 214-223.
Anim Pract 30, 343-348.
2011. Contemporary use of
Granholm, M., McKusick, B.C.,
Clarke, K.W., Hall, L.W., 1969. 'Xylazine'
 acepromazine in the anaesthetic
Westerholm, F.C., et al., 2007.
- a new sedative for horses and
management of male horses and
Evaluation of the clinical effcacy
cattle. Vet Rec 85, 512-517.
ponies: a retrospective study and
and safety of intramuscular
Clarke, K.W., Hall, L.W., 1990. A survey
opinion poll. Equine Vet J 43.
and intravenous doses of
of anaesthetic practice in small
88-98.
dexmedetomidine and
animals. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 17.
Drynan, E.A., Gray, P., Raisis, A.L., 2012.
medetomidine in dogs and their
4-10.
 Incidence of seizures associated with
reversal with atipamezole. Vet Rec
Clarke, K.W., Taylor, P.M., 1987.
the use of acepromazine in dogs
160, 891-897.
Detomidine; a new sedative for
undergoing myelography. I Vet
Grimsrud, K.N., Mama, K.R., Steffey.
horses. Equine Vet J 18, 366-370.
Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio) 22.
E.P, et al., 2012. Pharmacokinetics
Court, M.H., Greenblatt, D.J., 1992.
262-266.
and pharmacodynamics of
Pharmacokinetics and preliminary
Dunkle, N., Moise, N.S., Scarlett-Kranz,
intravenous medetomidine in
observations of behavioral changes
I., et al., 1986. Cardiac performance
the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
following administration of
in cats after administration of
38-48
midazolam to dogs. I Vet Pharmacol
xylazine or xylazine and
Hall, L.W., Dunn, I.K., Delaney, M.,
Ther 15, 343-350.
 glycopyrolate: echocardiographic
et al., 1991. Ambulatory
Covey-Crump, G.L., Murison, PJ., 2008.
evaluations. Am J Vet Res 47.
electrocardiography in dogs. Vet Rec
Fentanyl or midazolam for
2212-2216
129,213-216
co-induction of anaesthesia with
Dyson, D.H., Maxie, M.G., Schnurr, D.,
Hall, R.l., Szlam, F, Hug, C.C., Jr.
propofol in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
1998. Morbidity and mortality
1988. Pharmacokinetics and
35. 463-472.
associated with anesthetic
pharmacodynamics of midazolam in
Cullen, L.K., 1996. Medetomidine
 management in small animal
the enflurane-anesthetized dog. I
veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am
 Pharmacokinet Biopharm 16,
sedation in dogs and cats: a review
 of its pharmacology, antagonism and
Anim Hosp Assoc 34, 325-335.
251-262.
dose. Br Vet J152, 519-535.
Eisenach, J.C., Grice, S.C., 1988.
Harthoorn, A.M., 1972. Restraint and
da Costa, R.C., Parent, J.M., Dobson,
Epidural clonidine does not decrease
neuroleptanalgesia in ungulates. Vet
H., 2011. Incidence of and risk
blood pressure or spinal cord blood
Rec 91, 63-67.
factors for seizures after myelography
 flow in awake sheep. Anesthesiology
Hashem, A., Keller, H., 1993.
performed with iohexol in dogs: 503
68.335-340
 Disposition, bioavailability and
cases [2002-2004]. J Am Vet Med
England, G.C., Clarke, K.W., 1996.
clinical effcacy of orally
Assoc 238, 1296-1300.
 Alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonists in the
administered acepromazine in the
Davies, J.V., Gerring, E.L., 1983. Effect
horse - a review. Br Vet I 152.
horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 16.
 of spasmolytic analgesic drugs on
641-657.
359-368.
the motility patterns of the equine
Enouri, S.S., Kerr, C.L., McDonell, W.N.,
Heard, D.J., Webb, A.l., Daniels, R.T.,
small intestine. Res Vet Sci 34.
et al., 2008. Effects of a peripheral
1986. Effect of acepromazine on the
334-339.
alpha2 adrenergic-receptor
anesthetic requirement of halothane
Devisscher, L., Schauvliege, S., Dewulf,
 antagonist on the hemodynamic
in the dog. Am I Vet Res 47.
J., et al., 2010. Romifdine as a
changes induced by medetomidine
2113-2115.
constant rate infusion in isoflurane
administration in conscious dogs.
Heniff, M.S., Moore, G.P, Trout, A.,.
anaesthetized horses: a clinical
Am J Vet Res 69, 728-736.
et al., 1997. Comparison of routes
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
Erhardt, W., Stephen, M., Schatzmann,
of flumazenil administration to
425-433.
U., et al., 1986. Reversal of
reverse midazolam-induced
Di Concetto, S., Michael Archer, R.
anaesthesia by simultaneously
respiratory depression in a canine
Sigurdsson, S.F., et al., 2007.
administered benzodiazpine and
model. Acad Emerg Med 4,
Atipamezole in the management of
opioid antagonists in the dog. I
1115-1118.
detomidine overdose in a pony. Vet
Assoc Vet Anaesth 14, 90-99.
Honkavaara, I., Restitutti, F., Raekallio,
Anaesth Analg 34, 67-69.
 European Medicines Agency 2010.
M., et al., 2012. Influence of
Dodman, N.H., Waterman, A.E., 1979.
Romifidine, Safety report; Summary
MK-467, a peripherally acting
Paradoxical excitement following the
www.ema.europa.eu/ema accessed
alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist on
intravenous administration of
4/3/2013.
the disposition of intravenous
97
Section
1
Principles and procedures
dexmedetomidine in dogs. Drug
Kastner, S.B., 2006. A2-agonists in
Loscher, W., Frey, H.H., 1981.
Metab Disposit Biol Fate Chem 40,
sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg
Phamacokinetics of diazepam in the
445-449.
33. 79-96.
dog. Arch Int Pharmacodynam Ther 
Honkavaara, I.M., Raekallio, M.R.,
Kastner, S.B., Von Rechenberg. B.
254,180-195.
Kuusela, E.K., et al., 2008. The effects
Keller, K., et al., 2001. Comparison
Mackenzie, G., Snow, D.H., 1977. An
of L-659,066, a peripheral alpha2-
of medetomidine and
evaluation of chemical restraining
 adrenoceptor antagonist, on
 dexmedetomidine as premedication
agents. Vet Rec 101, 30-33.
 dexmedetomidine-induced sedation
in isoflurane anaesthesia for
Marntell, S., Nyman, G., Funkquist, P.,
 and bradycardia in dogs. Vet Anaesth
orthopaedic surgery in domestic
et al., 2005. Effects of acepromazine
Analg 35, 409-413.
sheep. J Vet Med A, Physiol Pathol
on pulmonary gas exchange and
Horta, M.L., Morejon, L.C., da Cruz,
Clin Med 48, 231-241.
crculation during sedation and
A.W., et al., 2006. Study of the
Kendall, A., Mosley, C., Brojer, I., 2010.
dissociative anaesthesia in horses.
 prophylactic effect of droperidol,
 Tachypnea and antipyresis in febrile
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 83-93.
alizapride, propofol and
horses after sedation with alpha-
Maze, M., Hayward, E., Jr, Gaba, D.M.,
 promethazine on spinal morphine-
agonists. J Vet Intern Med/Am Coll
1985. Alpha 1-adrenergic blockade
induced pruritus. Br I Anaesth 96,
Vet Intern Med 24, 1008-1011.
raises epinephrine-arrhythmia
796-800.
Kerr, D.D., Jones, E.W., Holbert, D.
threshold in halothane-anesthetized
Hsu, W.H., Lu, Z.X., Hembrough, F.B.,
et al., 1972. Comparison of the
dogs in a dose-dependent fashion.
1985. Effect of xylazine on heart rate
effects of xylazine and
Anesthesiology 63, 611-615.
and arterial blood pressure in
acetylpromazine maleate in the
McCormick, I.M., McCormick, P.W.,
conscious dogs, as influenced by
horse. Am J Vet Res 33, 777-784.
Zabramski, J.M., et al., 1993.
atropine, 4-aminopyridine.
Khan, Z.P., Ferguson, C.N., Jones, R.M..
Intracranial pressure reduction by a
doxapram, and yohimbine. J Am Vet
1999. Alpha-2 and imidazoline
central alpha-2 adrenoreceptor
Med Assoc 186, 153-156.
receptor agonists. Their
agonist after subarachnoid
Jalenka, H.H., 1989. The use of
pharmacology and therapeutic role.
hemorrhage. Neurosurgery 32,
medetomidine and medetomidine-
Anaesthesia 54, 146-165.
974-979; discussion 979.
keatmine combinations and
Kock, R.A., Iago, M., Gulland, F.M.D..
McGree, J.M., Noble, G., Schneiders, F.,
atipamezole at Helsinki Zoo - a
et al., 1989. The use of two novel alpha
et al., 2013. A Bayesian approach for
review of 240 cases. Acta Vet Scand
2 adrenceptor antagonists, idazoxan
estimating detection times in horses:
Suppl 85, 193-198.
and its analogue, RX821002A in zoo
exploring the pharmacokinetics of a
James, M.F., 2009. Magnesium: an
and wildlife animals. J Assoc Vet
urinary acepromazine metabolite. ↓
emerging drug in anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth 16, 4-10.
Vet Pharmacol Ther. 36, 31-42.
Anaesth 103, 465-467.
Kronberg, G., Oberdorf, A., Hoffmeister,
Muir, w.w., 1981. Drugs used to
Jedruch, I., Gajewski, Z., 1986. The
F, et al., 1966. Adrenergich-
produce standing chemical restraint
effect of detomidine hydrochloride
cholinergische neuronenhemmstoffe.
in horses. Vet Clin N Am Large Anim
(Domosedan) on the electrica]
Naturwissenschafaten 53, 502.
Pract 3. 17-44.
activity of the uterus in cows. Acta
Langer, S.Z., 1974. Presynaptic
Muir, w.W., Piper, FS., 1977. Effect of
Vet Scand Suppl 82, 189-192.
regulation of catecholamine release.
 xylazine on indices of myocardial
Jedruch, I., Gajewski, Z., Ratajska-
Biochem Pharmacol 23, 1793-1800.
contractility in the dog. Am J Vet Res
Michalczak, K., 1989. Uterine motor
Lees, P., 1979. Chemical Restraint of
38,931-934
responses to an alpha 2-adrenergic
Large Animals In Pharmacological
Muir, W.W., Sams, R.A., Huffman, R.H..
agonist medetomidine hydrochloride
Basis of Small Animal Medicine. In:
et al., 1982. Pharmacodynamic and
in the bitches during the end of
Bogan, JA., Lees, P., Yoxall, A.T.
phamacokinetic properties of
 gestation and the post-partum
(Eds.).Blackwell Scientifc
diazepam in horses. Am I Vet Res 43.
period. Acta Vet Scand Suppl 85.
Publications, London.
1756-1762.
129-134.
Lees, P., Serrano, L., 1976. Effects of
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T., Sheehan, W..
Jochle, W., Moore, J.N., Brown, I., et al.,
 azaperone on cardiovascular and
1979. Hemodynamic and respiratory
1989. Comparison of detomidine.
respiratory functions in the horse. Br
effects of a xylazine-acetylpromazine
butorphanol, flunixin meglumine
J Pharmacol 56, 263-269
drug combination in horses. Am ↓
 and xylazine in clinical cases of
Lerche, P., Muir, W.W., 2006. Effect of
Vet Res 40, 1518-1522.
equine colic. Equine Vet J Suppl,
medetomidine on respiration and
Muir, W.W., Werner, L.L., Hamlin, R.L.,
111-116.
minimum alveolar concentration
1975. Effects of xylazine and
Johnston, G.M., Eastment, I.K., Wood,
in halothane- and isoflurane-
acetylpromazine upon induced
J.L.N., et al., 2002. The confdential
anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 67.
ventricular fbrillation in dogs
mquiry into perioperative equine
782-789.
anesthetized with thiamylal and
fatalities {CEPEF}: mortality results
Livingston, A., Low, I., Morris, B., 1984.
halothane. Am J Vet Res 36.
 of Phases 1 and 2. Vet Anaesth Analg
 Effects of clonidine and xylazine on
1299-1303.
29.159-170
body temperature in the rat. Br ↓
Murrell, J.C., Hellebrekers, L.J.
Johnston, G.M., Taylor, PM., Holmes.
Pharmacol 81, 189-193.
2005. Medetomidine and
M.A., et al., 1995. Confdential
Livingstone, A., Nolan, A., Waterman,
 dexmedetomidine: a review of
mquiry of perioperative equine
A., 1986/87. The pharmacology of
cardiovascular effects and
falities (CEPEF-1): preliminary
the alpha 2 adrenergic agonist drugs.
antinociceptive properties in the dog.
results. Equine Vet J 27, 193-200.
J Assoc Vet Anaesth 14, 3-10.
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 117-127.
86
Principles of sedation, anticholinergic agents, and principles of premedication
Chapter
Nolan, A.M., Waterman, A.E..
Anesthesia, seventh ed. Churchill
Sinclair, M.D., Dyson, D.H., 2012. The
Livingston, A., 1986. The analgesic
Livingston-Elsivier.
impact of acepromazine on the
 activity of alpha-2 adrenoceptor
Richards, D.L.S., Clutton, R.E., Boyd, C..
efficacy of crystalloid, dextran or
agonists in sheep: A comparison
1989. Electrocardiographic fndings
ephedrine treatment in hypotensive
with opioids. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 14.
following intravenous glycopyrrolate
dogs under isofurane anesthesia. Vet
14-15.
to sedated dogs: a comparison with
Anaesth Analg 39, 563-573.
Olkkola, K.T., Ahonen, I., 2008.
atropine. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 16.
Sneyd, J.R., 2009. Droperidol: past,
Midazolam and other
46-50.
 present and future. Anaesthesia G4,
benzodiazepines. Handbook Exp
Ringer, S.K., Kalchofner, K., Boller, I..
1161-1164.
Pharmacol 335-360.
et al., 2007. A clinical comparison
Sneyd, J.R., Rigby-Jones, A.E., 2010. New
Parry, B.W., Anderson, G.A., Gay, C.C.
of two anaesthetic protocols using
drugs and technologies, intravenous 
1982. Hypotension in the horse
 lidocaine or medetomidine in
anaesthesia is on the move [again].
induced by acepromazine maleate.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 34,
Br ↓Anaesth 105, 246-254.
Aust Vet J 59, 148-152.
257-268.
Spadavecchia, C., Arendt-Nielsen, L.
Pearson, H., Weaver, B.M., 1978.
Rioja, E., Dzikiti, B.T., Fosgate, G., et al.
Andersen, O.K., et al., 2005. Effect
Priapism after sedation,
2012. Efects of a constant rate
of romifdine on the nociceptive
neuroleptanalgesia and anaesthesia
 infusion of magnesium sulphate in
withdrawal reflex and temporal
in the horse. Equine Vet J 10, 85-90.
healthy dogs anaesthetized with
summation in conscious horses. Am
Peters, F, Franck, T., Pequito, M., et al.
isoflurane and undergoing
J Vet Res 66, 1992-1998.
2009. In vivo administration of
owariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
Taylor, A.H., Bolt, D.M., 2011. Persistent
acepromazine or promethazine to
Analg 39, 599-610.
 penile erection (priapism) after
horse decreases the reactive oxygen
Salonen, I.S., 1989. Pharmacokinetics of
acepromazine premedication in a
species production response of
medetomidine. Acta Vet Scand Suppl
gelding. Vet Anaesth Analg 38,
subsequently isolated neutrophils to
85, 49-54.
523-525.
stimulation with phorbol myristate
Sanchez, L.C., Elfenbein, J.R.,
Tobias, K.M., Marioni-Henry, K.,
acetate. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 32.
Robertson, S.A., 2008. Effect of
Wagner, R., 2006. A retrospective
541-547.
 acepromazine, butorphanol, or
study on the use of acepromazine
Pettifer, G.R., Dyson, D.H., McDonell,
N-butylscopolammonium bromide
 maleate in dogs with seizures. J Am
W.N., 1996. An evaluation of the
 on visceral and somatic nociception
Anim Hos Assoc 42, 283-289.
influence of medetomidine 
 and duodenal motility in conscious
hydrochloride and atipamezole
Tobin, T., Ballard, S., 1979.
horses. Am J Vet Res 69. 579-585.
hydrochloride on the
 Pharmacological review - the
Sanders, R.D., Maze, M., 2007.
phenothiazine tranquilizers. J Equine
arrhythmogenic dose of epinephrine
in dogs during halothane anesthesia.
Alpha2-adrenoceptor agonists. Curr
Med Surg 3, 460-466.
Can I Vet Res 60, 1-6.
Opin Investig Drugs 8, 25-33.
Trim, C.M., Colbern, G.T., Martin, C.L.,
Scheinin, M., MacDonald, E., 1989. An
1985. Effect of xylazine and
Popovic, N.A., Mullane, J.F., Yhap, E.O..
introduction to the pharmacology of
ketamine on intraocular pressure in
1972. Effects of acetylpromazine
alpha 2-adrenoceptors in the central
horses. Vet Rec 117, 442-443.
maleate on certain cardiorespiratory
 responses in dogs. Am I Vet Res 33.
nervous system. Acta Vet Scand
Tunsmeyer, I., Vaske, B., Bosing, B..
1819-1824.
Suppl 85, 11-19.
et al., 2012. Cardiovascular effects
Psatha, E., Alibhai, H., Jimenez-
Selmi, A.L., Barbudo-Selmi, G.R.,
of a proprietary l-methadone/
Mendes, G.M., et al., 2004.
 fenpipramide combination
Lozano, A., et al., 2011. Clinical
efficacy and cardiorespiratory effects
Sedative, analgesic and
(Polamivet) alone and in addition to
of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl
mrdiorespiratory effects of
acepromazine in healthy Beagle
for induction of anaesthesia in dogs
romifdine in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
 that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet
31, 195-206.
451-463.
Anaesth Analg 38, 24-36.
Serteyn, D., Benbarek, H., Deby-dupont,.
Vaha-Vahe, T., 1989. Clinical evaluation
Rehm, W.F., Schatzmann, U., 1984.
G., et al., 1999. Effects of
of medetomidine, a novel sedative
Benzodiazepines as sedatives for
 acepromazine on equine
and analgesic drug for dogs and cats.
large animals. J Assoc Vet Anaesth
polymorphonuclear neutrophil
Acta Vet Scand 30, 267-273.
12, 93-106.
activation: a chemiluminescence
Vainio, O., Palmu, L, Virtanen, R..
Restitutti, F., Raekallio, M., Vainionpaa,
study. Vet J 157, 332-335.
et al., 1986. Medetomidine: A new
M., et al., 2012. Plasma glucose,
Short, C.E., Matthews, N., Harvey, R.,
sedative and analgesic drug for dogs
insulin, free fatty acids, lactate
et al., 1986. Cardiovascular and 
and cats. I Assoc Vet Anaesth 14,
and cortisol concentrations in
pulmonary function studies of a new
53-55
dexmedetomidine-sedated dogs with
sedative/analgetic (detomidine/
Vainio, O., Vahe-Vahe, T., 1989. Reversal
or without MK-467: A peripheral
Domosedan] for use alone in horses
of medetomidine sedation by
alpha-2 adrenoceptor antagonist.
 or as a preanesthetic. Acta Vet Scand
atipamezole in dogs. I Vet Pharmacol
Vet J193, 481-485.
Suppl 82, 139-155.
Ther 13, 15-22.
Reves, J.G., Glass, P.S.A., Lubarski, D.A..
Sinclair, M.D., 2003. A review of the
Vainio, O., 1990. Reversal of
McEvoy, M.D.,Martinez-Ruiz, R.,
physiological effects of alpha2-
 medetomidine-induced
2010. Intravenous anaesthetics.
agonists related to the clinical use of
crdiovascular and respiratory
In: Millar, R.D., Erikson, L.I.,
medetomidine in small animal
changes with atipamezole in dogs.
Fleisher, L.A., et al. (Eds.), Miller's
practice. Can Vet J 44, 885-897.
Vet Rec 127, 447-450.
99
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Vainio, O., Vaha-Vahe, T., Palmu, L..
van der Harst, M.R., van der Velden,
Virtanen, R., 1989. Pharmacological
1989. Sedative and analgesic effects
M.A., Ensink, J.M., 2002. [Priapism 
 profiles of medetomidine and its
of medetomidine in dogs. J Vet
in the stallion]. Tijdschr
antagonist, atipamezole. Acta Vet
Pharmacol Ther 12, 225-231.
diergeneeskunde 127, 746-751.
Scand Suppl 85, 29-37.
Valverde, A., Cantwell, S., Hernandez, J.,
Van Miert, A.S., Koot, M., Van Duin.
Wijeysundera, D.N., Bender, J.S..
et al., 2004. Effects of acepromazine
C.T, 1989. Appetite-modulating
Beattie, W.S., 2009. Alpha-2
 on the incidence of vomiting
drugs in dwarf goats, with
adrenergic agonists for the
 associated with opioid
special emphasis on benzodiazepine-
 prevention of cardiac complications
administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth
induced hyperphagia and its
among patients undergoing surgery.
Analg 31, 40-45.
antagonism by flumazenil and RO
Cochrane Database Syst Rev,
Valverde, A., Rickey, E., Sinclair, M.,
15-3505. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 12.
CD004126.
et al., 2010. Comparison of
147-156.
Wilson, D.V., Nickels, FA., Williams,
crdiovascular function and quality
Virkkila, M., Ali-Melkkila, T., Kanto, J..
M.A., 1991. Pharmacologic
of recovery in isoflurane-
et al., 1994. Dexmedetomidine as
treatment of priapism in two
 anaesthetised horses administered a
intramuscular premedication for 
horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc 199.
constant rate infusion of lidocaine or
day-case cataract surgery. A
1183-1184.
 lidocaine and medetomidine during
comparative study of
Wismer, T.A., 2002. Accidental ingestion
elective surgery. Equine Vet J 42,
dexmedetomidine, midazolam and
of alprazolam in 415 dogs. Vet Hum
192-199.
placebo. Anaesthesia 49, 853-858.
Toxicol 44, 22-23.
100
Kate Borer-Weir
 Physiology of pain
102
 Remifentanil
114
Pain assessment
103
 Alfentanil
114
Pain scales
104
 Etorphine
114
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Sufentanil and carfentanil
114
drugs (NSAIDS)
105
Opioid antagonists
115
Pharmacology
105
Local anaesthetics
115
COX-1 and COX-2
105
Anatomy and physiology
115
Side effects
106
Pharmacology
116
 Drugs available
107
Side effects
116
Carprofen
107
Drugs available
118
 Meloxicam
108
Procaine
118
Ketoprofen
108
 Amethocaine
118
 Phenylbutazone
109
Lidocaine
118
Suxibuzone
109
Prilocaine
118
 Flunixin
109
Mepivacaine
Firocoxib
118
109
109
Bupivacaine
118
Robenacoxib
Mavacoxib
109
Levo-bupivacaine
118
Dual Inhibitors: tepoxalin
Ropivacaine
109
118
Opioids
110
Routes of administration
119
Pharmacology
110
Topical local analgesia 
119
Side effects
111
Regional local analgesia
119
Drugs available
112
Intravenous regional analgesia (IvRA)
120
Morphine
112
Intra-articular analgesia
120
Methadone
112
Epidural and intrathecal analgesia
121
Pethidine (meperidine)
113
Systemic administration of lidocaine
123
 Papaveretum
113
Ketamine
124
Buprenorphine
113
Tramadol
124
 Butorphanol
114
Gabapentin 
125
Fentanyl
114
Other analgesic agents
126
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
101
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Analgesia is one component of the triad of anaesthesia
transmitters, such as endorphins, norepinephrine serot-
[with narcosis and muscle relaxation) and some anaes-
onin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) and y-aminobutyric
thetic drugs have analgesic properties. Analgesia must be
acid (GABA), reduce the painful stimuli reaching the
provided before surgery in animals with pre-existing inju-
brain. This forms the basis of the 'gate theory', an adaptive
ries as well as in the intra- and postoperative periods.
method of controlling the painful stimuli which reach the
It is difficult to define pain satisfactorily. Everyone has
 brain. It evolved to allow escape from life-threatening situ-
their own idea of 'what pain is' but it can be hard to put
ations and means that the brain does not perceive the true
this experience into words. The International Association
amount of pain until the concentrations of inhibitory
for the Study of Pain (IASP) has the following definition:
neurotransmitters, such as epinephrine and norepine-
auauadxa leuooua pue Aiosuas juesealdun ue si uied.
phrine, drop sufficiently to allow nociceptive transmission
associated with actual or potential tissue damage Or
 to resume. Descending pathways from the brain (particu-
described in terms of such damage: This defnition relates
larly the periaqueductal grey: PAG) also contribute to
to human experience and may not be accurate when
this inhibitory control. Stimulation of non-nociceptive
applied to animals, as they cannot describe emotions
-ssue huul ue (anssa io qnon q a) suonau
brought about by pain. However, the IASP also recom-
sion in nociceptive neurons.
mends that 'the inability to communicate verbally does
The nervous system demonstrates functional plasticity'
-suaadxa st lenpiaiu ue ieun Aqissod aun aau ou
and numerous changes occur after continued nociceptive
 ing pain and is in need of appropriate pain-relieving treat-
stimulation. The products of tissue breakdown and
ment: It is now generally accepted that animals feel pain
damage have direct and indirect effects on sensory neurons.
in the same way as humans, as the physiological mecha-
Neurotransmitters are released in the periphery from noci-
nisms are similar. Controversy exists about whether neo-
ceptive nerve terminals, including substance P, bradykinin.
natal animals and fetuses in utero feel pain and which
neurokinin A and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
 jo saeu uo ad on aqease ae saia
These substances cause vasodilation, extravasation of
age without analgesia.
plasma
 proteins, stimulation of inflammatory cells to
release more mediators and excitation of other sensory
 and sympathetic neurons. This produces an 'inflammatory
soup', sensitizing nociceptors and sensory nerves causing
PHYSIOLOGY OF PAIN
paseau reiaaieiaday Aed] uoessuas [enaudad
sensitivity to painful stimulation at the site of injury)
Nociception describes the sensory processes by which
 Prostaglandins in particular increase the sensitivity to pain
noxious stimuli are transmitted to the brain. Stimulation
by lowering the threshold at which nociceptive neurons
of peripheral nerve endings (nociceptors) generates action
fire.
      
potentials in sensory nerves. Different nociceptors respond
include spontaneous, ectopic activity in primary afferent
to different stimuli: mechanoreceptors respond to pres-
nerves and sprouting of sympathetic nerves around the
sure and stretch; thermoreceptors to heat and cold; and
 dorsal root ganglion.
chemoreceptors to inflammatory mediators such as Ht, K
Glutamate, one of the primary excitatory neurotransmit-
 and prostaglandins. Nociceptive impulses are transmitted
ters in the CNS usually acts via AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-
in A& and C fbres. A8 fibres are small myelinated fbres
5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid) and neurokinin
which transmit the sensation of fast, sharp pain. C fbres 
receptors.
However, continued nociceptive stimulation
are the smallest unmyelinated fibres which detect slow.
within the spinal cord releases glutamate and substance P
dull pain. Sensory neurons enter the spinal cord via the
and removes the Mgt plug which usually blocks the
dorsal horn (ending preferentially on cells in laminae 1,
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor for glutamate,
2 and 5) where they may stimulate a simple withdrawal
 allowing priming of this receptor. Once the NMDA recep-
reflex, passing the information directly to motor nerves to
tor is active, glutamate binding allows Ca²t entry and
cause movement of a limb away from a painful surface for
 stimulates second messenger release Continued nocicep-
example.
tive stimulation alters the distribution of AMPA receptors
Concurrently, information passes up the spinal cord in
within the dorsal horn and there may be loss of inhibitory
pathways including the spinothalamic and spinoreticular
neurons containing GABA. These changes within the CNS
tracts (in the ventrolateral white matter), through many
are known as central sensitization (secondary hyperalge-
intermeurons to reach the brain, particularly the thalamus.
sia), representing the spread of pain sensitivity (a lowered
From here, information passes to higher centres in the
threshold to pain) outside the area of the original injury.
cerebral cortex.
The development of central sensitization may be regulated
In the spinal cord, many receptors and mediators
by the c-fos gene, which is expressed rapidly in spinal and
modulate the information passing to the brain. Excitatory
 supraspinal neurons following nociceptive stimulation.
transmitters,
including glutamate substance P and
Allodynia describes altered pain perception, whereby
prostaglandins, propagate the pain impulse. Inhibitory
non-painful stimuli, such as touch, are perceived as painful
102
Analgesia
Chapter
5
by the patient It commonly occurs during neuropathic or
chronic pain and can be very hard to control with analge-
Box 5.1 Clinical signs and behaviours
sic drugs. The mechanism behind allodynia may include
commonly associated with pain
sprouting of non-nociceptive A fibres into areas of the
dorsal horn where C fibres normally terminate.
Cinical signs
Optimal pain managerment should include preventing
the development of chronic or neuropathic pain and
Tachycardia
pateiosse uaisis snoaau aui ui sasueup paeioosse au
Tachypnoea
with hyperalgesia. Pre-emptive analgesia describes the
Hypertension
 Pale mucous membranes
provision of analgesia before any painful stimuli have
Cardiac arrhythmias
Occurred. This prevents the development of hypersensi-
Dilated pupils 
tization during surgery and should result in less post-
Salivation
 Operative pain that is easier to manage with lower doses
Teeth grinding
of analgesic drugs. In animals with pre-existing injuries,
Sweating
such as those with orthopaedic problems or after road
Poor body or coat condition
traffic accidents, provision of analgesia as soon as pos-
sible may reduce the development of sensitization but
Observed behaviours
not completely eliminate it There are conflicting reports
Abnormal postures: hunched up. guarding abdomen,
on the benefits of pre-emptive analgesia and differences
 praying position
 between experimental and clinical studies. Meta-analyses
Abnormal movement (increased or decreased):
in human medicine have demonstrated both a positive
restlessness, circling. rolling)
effect (Ong et al., 2005) and no beneft (Moiniche
Abnormal gait: stiffness, lameness
et al., 2002).
Reluctance to move or lie down
 The goal of multimodal analgesia is to block the pain
Aggression
pathways at multiple sites, using agents with different
Paying attention to an injured area: licking. chewing
modes of action, thus providing more effective pain
Vocalization: whining. crying. howling
control with decreased dose rates and reduced prevalence
Head hanging down, low tail carriage
Depression, inappetance, dullness
 Or severity of toxic side effects. Drugs can be used to inhibit
Not grooming. poor hair coat 
transduction and peripheral sensitization, inhibit trans-
Increased urination and defaecation
mission of sensory impulses, modulate the spinal path-
Trembling
 on      Sm
Poor interaction with people or animals, hiding
 perception of a noxious stimulus in the brain.
Unaware of surroundings
 In humans, analgesia is considered to be effective when
the clinical signs of pain disappear. Similarly, a drug may
Note: Not all these are specific to pain, and may not be displayed
be considered to be analgesic in an animal if signs associ-
 by all species in all circumstances.
ated with pain are ameliorated following administration.
It is important to be sure that the dnug effect is truly anal-
gesia and not merely preventing the animal displaying the
rate, was correlated with behavioural assessment of pain
behavioural signs of pain. An extreme example would be
(Bussieres et al., 2008).
administration of a neuromuscular blocking drug that
Pain assessment often relies on behavioural indicators
causes paralysis without affecting the perception of a
of pain (see Box 5.l), but these vary between species,
painful stimulus.
breeds, and individuals. Behaviour is also modified when
the animal is in a hospital environment. Behavioural signs
of pain depend on the origin of the pain, for example.
visceral or somatic pain, and the type of procedure per-
PAIN ASSESSMENT
formed. Much of the early research on pain assessment
was performed on dogs in the acute postoperative period.
Pain assessment is a crucial component of effective anal-
Now research includes behaviours associated with chronic
gesia. Clinical signs of pain (Box 5.1) are unreliable, non-
 pain (including cancer), medical pain and pain in domes-
specific, and differ between species. Heart rate, respiratory
tic agricultural, and exotic species. Behavioural assess-
rate and pupil dilation were not useful indicators of pain
ment of pain in horses and donkeys (Ashley et al., 2005)
in dogs recovering from surgery (Holton et al., 1998a).
and laboratory animals (Roughan & Flecknell, 2004;
Furthermore, these parameters were poorly correlated with
Roughan et al., 2009) have been reviewed.
subjective pain scores in dogs after orthopaedic surgery
Measurement of 'stress hormones’ including epine-
(Conzemius et al., 1997). In horses following orthopaedic
phrine cortisol, endorphins, glucose and insulin have not
surgery, measurement of blood pressure, but not heart
 proved useful in diagnosing pain in individual animals in
103
Section
1
Principles and procedures
the clinical setting. although they can be supportive in
A simple numerical rating scale (NRS) can be used to
research studies to distinguish between treatment and
 assign a score from 0 to 10 for the assessed degree of pain.
control groups. They are increased by conditions causing
This score is commonly used to assess equine lameness.
 stress such as hospitalization and general anaesthesia.
The numbers do not have specific descriptors, and there is
When assessing behaviour, the animal should first be
often considerable inter-observer variability in scoring. A
observed undisturbed and then during a series of interac-
 more involved NRS uses multiple categories containing
tions. Some behaviours arising from poor general health,
specific descriptors of different types of behaviour, each of
be mistakenly
which has a numerical score. One descriptor from each
assessed as pain behaviour, and other behaviours such as
category is selected and the total score from each category
aggression may be normal for the individual. Pain may
added to give an overall pain score. This gives a more
also be evident through the suppression of normal behav-
thorough pain evaluation, but is also more time consum-
iour, rather than additional pain-related behaviour. Prey
ing. It can be limiting if the behaviour displayed by the
animals in particular are unlikely to display overt pain
individual animal does not match exactly any of the
behaviours as an evolutionary survival mechanism, and
descriptors in the scale. An example is the University of
pain assessment in these animals can be difficult Pain
Melbourne Pain Scale (UMPS), which includes both
behaviours are useful to detect the presence of pain but
behavioural responses and physiological data (Firth &
they may not indicate the severity of pain.
Haldane, 1999). A similar composite pain scale based on
the NRS has been developed to assess orthopaedic pain in
horses (Bussieres et al., 2008).
Pain scales
The previous pain scores are all unidimensional, assess-
Pain scales were created to increase objectivity in pain
ing only pain intensity. However, it is well known from
assessment and to decrease variability between scorers and
human experience that pain has additional significant
animals. Pain scales are not infallible but use of a pain
sensory and affective qualities. These are addressed in
score helps to monitor changes in the same animal over
multidimensional pain scores. The McGill pain question-
time providing information for adjustments 
in the
naire uses a series of descriptive words, categorized accord-
 analgesic regimen. During preanaesthetic evaluation, the
ing to their sensory, affective or evaluative capacity, each
patient should be assessed for pre-existing pain and a
of which is anchored to a numerical score to assess pain
judgement made regarding the degree of pain likely to be
 in humans (Melzack, 2005). The Glasgow Composite Pain
experienced during the procedure. For example, minor
Tool was developed in a similar way to assess acute surgi-
 procedures such as laceration repair would be expected to
cal pain in dogs (Holton et al., 200l). A series of expres-
quse less pain than major orthopaedic surgery or
sions and descriptions of behaviour were reduced to
thoracotomy.
specific words and phrases to describe different aspects
 A simple descriptive score [SDS) uses a scale from 0 to
of the pain experience The aim was to reduce inter-
3 to score no pain (0), mild pain (1), moderate pain (2)
observer variability and bias. The Short Form of the
and severe pain (3). This is simple and quick to perform 
Glasgow Pain Scale is an extension of this, incorporating
during a busy working day but is subjective and relatively
a numerical score to aid clinical use (Reid et al., 2007).
inmprecise. Inter-observer variability using an SDS was fair
Many of the problems associated with pain assessment
for dogs post-surgery assessed by three or four vets (Holton
in animals and limitations of some of the scores currently
et al., 1998b)
 available, including validation of the score and linearity
 The visual analogue scale (VAS) is a line 100 mm long
of the scale used, have been reviewed (Flecknell &
anchored at either end with 0 = no pain and 100 = worst
Roughan, 2004).
pain possible (Fig. 5.1). The observer places a mark on the
Analgesiometry systems (nociceptive threshold testing)
line at their assessment of the patient's pain and the dis-
are commonly used in the initial testing of analgesic drugs
tance from 0 to the mark is measured. There is consider-
to assess relative potency, onset and duration of action.
able inter-individual variability in the score assigned by
These involve the use of a controlled and repeatable stimu-
different observers using a VAS (Holton et al., 1998b), but 
lus, often a pressure or thermal stimulus, applied before
a single observer can become consistent with practice.
and afer administration of an analgesic (Dixon et al.
2002). The animal is observed for a specifc aversion
response, such as turning of the head, at which point the
stimulus is stopped and the maximum value noted. This
0
50
100
provides a very useful starting point for the comparison of
人
different analgesics in animals, but it must be appreciated
No
Worst pain
that clinical pain is much more complex and the perforrm
pain
possible
ance of a drug in an analgesiometry system may not be
representative of its effcacy as an analgesic in different
Figure 5.1 Visual analogue scale (VAS).
dlinical pain scenarios [Melzack, 2005).
104
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Specific pain scores for different species are discussed
to arachidonic acid is catalysed by phospholipase A2
further in the relevant species chapters.
which is inhibited by glucocorticoids (Fig. 5.2).
PGs have many homeostatic functions in the body.
 including maintenance of the gastric mucosal barrier and
NON-STEROIDAL ANTI-
protection against gastric ulceration. PGs also help to
maintain adequate renal blood flow, especially in situa-
INFLAMMATORY DRUGS (NSAIDS)
tions where this is reduced. As well as their physiological
functions, PGs are key inflammatory mediators, acting
NSAIDS have anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic
synergistically with other mediators, such as histamine
smp pasn kuouo isou a suome aie Aau suoe
  ' a o ' 
in veterinary medicine to relieve pain and inflammation
and oedema.
 in all species. Many can be given initially by injection and
In general, NSAIDs are well absorbed after oral admin-
then prescribed orally for longer-term use. They are not
istration, are highly protein bound in plasma and have a
Aueu aie arau pue uoesial sup patauo on ialqns
large volume of distribution (Lees et al., 2004b; Curry
different agents licensed for use in different species and in
et al., 2005). There are signifcant species differences in
different countries. Salicylate is a naturally occurring
 pharmacokinetics, including clearance, half-life and COX
NSAID found in willow which has been used for thou-
selectivity, meaning that extrapolation between different
sands of years. However, the first synthetic NSAID was
species is not recommended (Lees et al., 2004b). Genetic
synthesized in the 1870s (Lees et al., 2004b). Acetylsali-
polymorphisms in response to NSAIDS exist, for example
cylate (acetylsalicylic acid; aspirin) still has an annual con-
clearance and elimination half-life of celecoxib in Beagles
differed by more than twofold in animals with hepatic
microsomal enzyme differences (Paulson et al., 1999)
Disease states may also reduce clearance and thus increase
Pharmacology
the effective half-life of NSAIDS (Lohuis et al. 1991). The
NSAIDS inhibit production of prostaglandins (PGs) and
pharmacokinetics can also differ depending on whether
thromboxane (TX) via inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase
NSAIDs are administered before or after general anaesthe-
(COX; Fig. 5.2). PGs, TX and leukotrienes (LTs) are gener-
sia (Lascelles et al., 1998).
ated from arachidonic acid which is a 20-carbon fatty acid,
released from cell membrane phospholipids after cell
cox-1 and cox-2
damage The conversion of cell membrane phospholipid
Two iso-enzymes of COX with slightly different chemical
structures were discovered in 1991. Initially, these two iso-
forms were thought to have quite separate and different
roles. COx-l was regarded as the constitutive enzyme,
Cell membrane phospholipids
responsible for the production of PGs with physiological
 or ‘housekeeping' functions including gastric and renal
protection. COX-2 was thought to be the inducible enzyme,
PLA2
found at sites of injury producing PGs with inflammatory
functions.
Classical NSAIDs inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2 with
COX-1 inhibition resulting primarily in the side effects of
Arachidonic acid
these dnugs including gastric ulceration and renal failure.
Drug manufacturers sought to develop NSAIDs with
COX-2 selective inhibitory activity. They hoped this would
COX-1
COX-2
5-LOX
remove the risk of side effects, but retain the beneficial
anti-inflammatory effects.
NSAIDs are thus classifed into:
Prostaglandins &
Prostaglandins &
Leukotrienes
●Non-selective dnugs which inhibit both COX-1 and
thromboxane
 thromboxane
COX-2 equally (classical NSAIDs)
+
 COX-2 selective which selectively or preferentially
PLA2 = Phospholipase A2
inhibit COX-2
COX =Cyclo-oxygenase
+
 COX-1 selective which selectively or preferentially
LOX = Lipoxygenase
inhibit COX-1
 COX-2 specific which inhibit COX-2 exclusively and
Figure 5.2 Metabolism of phospholipids to form arachidonic
have almost no effect on COX-1 at therapeutic doses.
acid, prostaglandins, thromboxane and leukotrienes.
These are also known as 'coxib' drugs.
105
Section
1
Principles and procedures
  n  s  a s qi
(Chandrasekharan et al., 2002). Others have reported that
binding pocket of the COX-2 receptor, but are too large to
it has a low expression level, limiting its clinical impor-
fit into the smaller COX-1 receptor, resulting in their selec-
tance [Kis et al., 2005). Some NSAIDs may have a central
tivity (Bergh & Budsberg, 2005).
component to their analgesic actions mediated by COX-3.
The COX-1:COX-2 ratio describes the selectivity of the
Most NSAIDs cross the blood-brain barrier poorly, with
 NSAID and refers to the dose of drug which must be given
the exception of paracetamol, which appears to exert its
to inhibit each of the two isoforms. Non-selective agents
main antipyretic and analgesic effects in the CNS. Para-
have a COX-l:COX-2 ratio close to 1. COX-2 selective
cetamol has minimal inhibitory effects on peripheral COX
inhibitors have a ratio greater than l (i.e a higher dose of
activity in vitro, but produces analgesia in different animal
dnug must be given to inhibit COX-1 compared to the dose
models of pain and nociception (Warner & Mitchell,
required to inhibit COX-2). The specifc COX-2 inhibitors
 2002). It also lacks ulcerogenic potential in the gastroin-
typically have a COX-1:COX-2 ratio of 100 or more This
testinal tract It may be a potent inhibitor of COX-3
means you would need to give l0ox more drug to inhibit
(Chandrasekharan et al., 2002) with weak activity against
COX-1 than you would to inhibit COX-2.
COX-1 and COX-2. However, in humans, the existence of
The COX-1:COX-2 ratio varies depending on the type
COX-3 has not been proven and, as a result interest and
of assay used. The whole blood assay is considered the
research in the area has waned. The target site of action of
most applicable to the in vivo situation. Ratios also vary
paracetamol is still unclear. On a similar note, some
between different tissues and species. For example, in
studies have reported that carprofen is only a weak inhibi-
the dog. carprofen is thought to be COX-2 selective; in
tor of COX in the periphery [Lees et al., 2002), yet it is a
the horse it is non-selective, whereas in humans, it is
powerful analgesic agent. It has been hypothesized that
COX-l selective (Brideau et al., 200l; Lees et al., 2002,
central inhibition of COX-3 may contribute to carprofen's
2004b). Many COX-1:COX-2 ratios are based on the ICs0
analgesic actions.
for each isoform (the concentration of drug giving 50%
Other studies have hypothesized that the central anal-
inhibition of COX). However, it is more relevant to look
 gesic effect of NSAIDs is mediated by activation of descend-
at the ratio that reflects the clinically desirable degree of
inhibition for each enzyme This is believed to be 20% or
within the spinal cord (Lizarraga & Chambers, 2006).
less for COX-1 inhibition and 80% or more for COX-2
NSAIDs may also exert anti-inflammatory actions
inhibition, resulting in an ICzo COX-1:ICso COX-2 ratio.
through a variety of COX-independent mechanisms,
This ratio is often quite different from the ICso ratio for a
including key signaling pathways involving phosphatidyli-
'smup uag
nositol 3-kinase (PI3K), peroxisome proliferator-activated
Initially, the roles of COX-1 and COX-2 were thought
receptors (PPAR), nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) and
to be quite separate with little overlap in the functions of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) among others.
the PGs produced by each isoform. However, we now
These mechanisms have been recently reviewed (Little
know that there is a considerable overlap between the two
et al., 2007b; KuKanich et al., 2012).
(Wallace 1999; Curry et al., 2005). In particular, C0X-1
is upregulated at sites of injury and catalyses the produc-
Side effects
tion of inflammatory PGs. COX-1 is involved in spinal
cord pain processing and hypersensitization, and CoX-1
The side effects of NSAIDs are mainly related to undesir-
uied aneiadisod sanpan pios leuids aul u uonauu
able inhibition of COx-1 and are generally common to
in rats (Zhu et al., 2005). COX-2 has physiological roles
the group although the likelihood of each varies slightly
in the body, including gastric ulcer healing and it is con-
depending on the COX-1:COX-2 selectivity ratio of the
stitutively expressed in many tissues, including the kidney.
specifc drug and the particular species concerned. Gas-
brain, reproductive tract and ciliary body of the eye.
trointestinal ulceration is one of the commonest side
The role of COX-2 in different tissues and the effects of
effects in both humans and animals. PGs increase blood
COX-2 inhibition have been reviewed (Bergh & Budsberg.
flow to the gastric mucosa and also increase secretion of
2005). Therefore, selective COX-2 inhibition does not
 protective mucous and bicarbonate. COX-2 is upregulated
completely eliminate the side effects associated with clas-
 around existing gastric ulcers and this isoenzyme may play
sical NSAIDS.
a key role in ulcer healing. In humans and small animals,
There is continuing debate over the presence of a third
gstric lesions and gastric ulcerations are commonest. In
isoform of COX, COX-3, within the CNS (Kis et al., 2005).
horses, while gastric ulceration occurs in response to
Some consider this to be a separate isoform, others feel
NSAIDs, lesions involving the colon resulting in right
that it is merely a splice variant of COX-l and should not
 dorsal colitis may also occur, particularly after an NSAID
be considered separately from COX-1, while others ques-
overdose. Combination therapy with two different NSAIDs
tion its existence at all (Kis et al., 2005). COX-3 was first
or administration above the recommended dose also
described in dogs where it was primarily found in the
increases the risk of serious GI side effects (Reed et al.,
a ixo au aq paid sem pue xao ieaia
2006).
106
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Both carprofen and meloxicam had minimal effects on
human patients after heart attacks and strokes. Conversely.
individual variation was apparent, with permeability
specifc COX-2 inhibitors reduce production of PGI2 and
increasing in some (Craven et al., 2007), while gastric
  s    q  
lesions on endoscopy and occult blood on faecal examina-
increased susceptibility to thrombotic events in humans.
tion have been reported in experimental dogs (Luna et al.
The risk of these vascular thrombotic events led to the
2007). In horses, non-selective COX inhibitors such as
withdrawal of many coxib drugs from the human market.
flunixin slow the recovery of ischaemic-damaged intestinal
The thrombotic risk to animals treated with coxib drugs is
mucosa (Campbell & Blikslager, 2000: Tomlinson &
unclear at the moment, as long-term treatment was neces-
Blikslager, 2004), mainly by affecting the integrity of tight
sary in humans before the risk became evident. Animals
junctions between intestinal cells and thus increasing
have a different vascular wall structure to humans and
 s i s a   r
tend to have a lower risk of thrombotic vascular events
meloxicam, a COX-2 selective inhibitor in the horse [Little
overall, so there may be minimal risk associated with the
et al., 2007a).
use of coxib drugs in veterinary species.
COX-inhibiting nitric oxide donors (CINODs)
are
nitrosoesters of classical NSAIDs, which may have a better
GI safety profle than NSAIDS. In the body, CINODs are
Drugs available
broken down to release the parent NSAID and nitric oxide
[NO). NO is a vasodilator which may help to prevent local
The use of NSAIDs in the cat (Lascelles et al., 2007) and
dog (KuKanich et al., 20l2) have been comprehensively
ischaemia in the GI tract associated with COX inhibition
Or, alternatively, NO may prevent neutrophil attachment
reviewed. Most clinical studies comparing the analgesic
to gastric mucosal blood vessels. The pharmacology of
efficacy of different NSAIDs in veterinary species have con-
the first CINoD to be developed, naproxcinod,
has
cluded that there are minor, if any, differences in efficacy
 between the commonly used drugs (Slingsby & Waterman-
been reviewed (wallace et al., 2009), although there have
been no reports of the use of CINODs in veterinary
Pearson, 2000a, 2002: Deneuche et al., 2004; Laredo
medicine.
et al., 2004; Erkert et al., 2005; Leece et al., 2005). This
 In the kidney. PGs are released from the macula densa
may reflect true equivalency between different drugs or
 may be due to limitations in pain assessment scores to
in response to vasoconstriction of the afferent arteriole.
detect subtle differences in analgesia in animals. The evi-
The resultant vasodilation helps to maintain adequate
 dence for long-term use of NSAIDs to treat canine osteoar-
renal blood flow and glomenular filtration rate (GFR)
Adverse renal effects of NSAIDS are most likely to occur
thritis has recently been reviewed (Innes et al., 20l0) with
during periods when renal blood flow is already compro-
the authors concluding that longer-term treatment had
mised, such as hypotension due to haemorrhage shock or
beneficial effects compared to acute treatment, with a low
 general anaesthesia. These effects appear to be similar with
incidence of adverse effects. Dnug doses of commonly used
both non-selective NSAIDs and selective COX-2 inhibitors
NSAIDs licensed in veterinary species in the UK are listed
as both COX-1 and COX-2 are constitutively expressed in
in Table 5.1.
the kidney. Perioperative carprofen had no effect on GFR
 Or renal blood flow in experimental, healthy anaesthetized
Beagles (Frendin et al., 2006) and meloxicam had no sig-
Carprofen
nificant effect on renal function in otherwise healthy dogs
At clinically effective doses, carprofen is a weak inhibitor
rendered hypotensive under anaesthesia (Bostrom et al.,
of COX iso-enzymes in the periphery (Brideau et al., 2001;
2006). NSAID-induced nephrotoxicity in humans is more
Lees et al., 2002, 2004a). Its anti-inflammatory actions
 roe s i oe sd un 
may be due to a number of different mechanisms, includ-
inhibitors (Weir, 2002).
 ing inhibition of reactive oxygen species and lysosomal
The different COX isoforms are responsible for produc-
enzymes, stimulation of proteoglycan synthesis and modi -
ing PGs and TX with different vascular effects. Prostacyclin
fication of the release of cytokines such as IL-1 and IL-6
(PGI2) is produced under the action of COX-2 in the vas-
[Armstrong & Lees, 2002; Lees et al., 2002). Central inhi-
cular endothelium. PGI2 inhibits platelet aggregation,
bition of COX-3 has also been proposed to explain car-
l uous a sapns rao aaa iee suana
cular smooth muscle. Thromboxane A2 (TXA2) is pro-
carprofen is mildly COX-2 preferential in dogs [Kay-
ducedby COx-1 in platelets andcauses platelet aggregation,
Mugford et al., 2000; Wilson et al., 2004). In cats, the
vasoconstriction and proliferation of vascular smooth
recommended dose of carprofen causes 95% inhibition of
muscle Usually, the body is able to maintain equilibrium
COX-2 for 42 hours (Giraudel et al., 2005). The COX-
in the production of PGI2 and TXA2. Aspirin primarily
1:COx-2 ratio in the horse is around 1.6-2, making car-
inhibits COX-1, reducing production of TXA2. This can
profen non-selective or very mildly COX-2 selective
result in bleeding. but is also the reason for the use of
(Brideau et al., 200l; Beretta et al., 2005).
107
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Table 5.1 Drug doses of some commonly used NSAIDs licensed in veterinary species in the UK
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Pig
Carprofen
2-4 mg/kg μ 24 h
 4 mg/kg ONCE
0.7 mg/kg q 24 h
1.4 mg/kg 
N/A
IV, SC, PO
IV, SC
IV, PO
IV, SC
Meloxicam
0.2 mg/kg on day 1;
0.3 mg/kg once SC OR
0.6 mg/kg q 24 h
 0.5 mg/kg 
 0.4 mg/kg
0.1 mg/kg q 24 h
0.1 mg/kg on day 1:
IV, PO
once
 once IM 
thereafter 
0.05 mg/kg q 24 h 
IV, SC
IV, SC, PO
thereafter SC, PO
Ketoprofen
2 mg/kg q 24 h or
2 mg/kg q 24 h or followed
2.2 mg/kg q 24 h IV
3 mg/kg μ
3 mg/kg 
followed by
 by oral admin 1 mg/kg
 24 h IV, IM
 once IM
0.25-1 mg/kg q 24 h
q 24 h for 5 days
IV, IM, SC, PO
SC, PO
 Phenylbutazone
N/A
4.4 mg/kg q 12 h for 4 days
N/A
N/A
followed by 2.2 mg/kg
q 24-48 h
IV, PO
 Flunixin 
NA
NA
1.1 mg/kg q 24 h
2.2 mg/kg
2.2 mg/kg
IV, PO
q 24 h IV 
 once IM 
Suxibuzone
NA
N/A
6.25 mg/kg
N/A
N/A
q 12 h for 2 days, then V dose.
 Ponies: use /z horse dose
PO
Tepoxalin
 10 mg/kg 
NA
N/A
N/A
N/A
q 24 h PO
Firocoxib
 5 mg/kg
NA
0.09 mg/kg IV then 0.1 mg/kg
N/A
N/A
q 24 h PO
PO q 24 h for up to 14 days
 Mavacoxib
2 mg/kg
NA
N/A
N/A
N/A
q 1 month PO
Robenacoxib
 2 mg/kg SC
2 mg/kg SC
N/A
N/A
N/A
1 mg/kg PO q 24 h
1 mg/kg PO q 24 h
Tolfenamic acid
4 mg/kg q 24 h for
4 mg/kg q 24 h for 3 days 
N/A
 2-4 mg/kg IV, 
2 mg/kg
sepE
SC, PO
SC
once IM 
IM, SC, PO
Vedaprofen
NA
N/A
2 mg/kg followed by 1 mg/kg 
N/A
N/A
q 12 h PO
NVA: Not applicable; q: Every; IV: intravenous; SC: subcutaneous; IM: intramuscular; PO: per os. Recommended licensed dosing regimens
change frequently and readers are urged to consult up-to-date data sheets before use
Meloxicam
reported in a dog which developed cutaneous and
ocular lesions 24-48 hours after administration (Niza
Meloxicam is COX-2 selective (Kay-Mugford et al., 2000).
et al., 2007).
It reduced production of inflammatory mediators in
synovial fluid (PGE2. substance P and bradykinin) and
reduced activity of matrix metalloprotease (MMP)
Ketoprofen
enzymes and markers of cartilage catabolism such as
glycosaminoglycans (de Grauw et al., 20o9). Meloxicam
Ketoprofen is a non-selective or COX-l selective NSAID,
administered to dogs for 10 days had no effect on platelet
licensed for use in a variety of species. It is not generally
function or blood clotting (Brainard et al., 2007). A pos-
considered a very potent analgesic or anti-inflammatory
sible adverse drug reaction to meloxicam has been
dnug. but has a good antipyretic action.
108
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Phenylbutazone
Robenacoxib
Phenylbutazone is most commonly used in horses where
Robenacoxib is a novel specifc COX-2 inhibitor licensed
it is frequently used orally for long-term treatment of
for use in dogs and cats (King et al., 2009), producing
chronic musculoskeletal conditions. It is slightly COX-1
 good anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic effects
selective in the horse, with a COX-1:COX-2 ratio around
in experimentally-induced inflammation in cats (Giraudel
0.5 (Beretta et al., 2005)
et al., 2009). The drug has a short residence time in blood
but accumulates in inflammatory exudate (King et al.,
Suxibuzone
2009). Using in vitro whole blood assays, the ICso COX-
l:COx-2 ratio in cats was 502 and in dogs was 129;
Suxibuzone is a prodrug for phenylbutazone in horses and
whereas the more clinically relevant IC2o COX-1:ICso
is rapidly converted to phenylbutazone and oxyphenbuta-
[apnei] oz sem saop u pue ZI sem sies ul oei Z-xO
zone after absorption. Suxibuzone and phenylbutazone
had comparable effcacy (Sabate et al., 2009), but suxibu-
et al., 2009b; King et al., 2010). The use of 2 mg/kg in cats
resulted in 5% inhibition of COX-1 and 90% inhibition
zone had lower gastric ulcerogenic potential than phe-
of COX-2 over 12 hours (Giraudel et al., 2009b). Bioavail-
nylbutazone (Monreal et al., 2004). The difference in
ability was 84-88% after SC or PO administration in
ulcerogenic potential between the two drugs was hypoth-
fasted dogs. but dropped to 62% in fed dogs [Jung et al.
esized to be due to a local toxic effect of phenylbutazone
2009).
in the gastric mucosal cells and unrelated to COX inhibi-
tion; however, both drugs were administered at more than
twice their respective recommended doses (Monreal et al.,
Mavacoxib
2004).
Mavacoxib has been recently marketed in dogs as a long-
term oral drug administered once monthly. It has a low
Aunixin
rate of elimination in the bile, resulting in a prolonged
Flunixin is COX-l selective in the horse, with a COX-
plasma half-life. The elimination half-life was longer in
client-owned dogs (39 days) than experimental Beagles
1:COX-2 ratio of 0.4 (Beretta et al., 2005). It is commonly
used in the treatment of orthopaedic and soft tissue condi-
(19 days). Five percent of client-owned dogs had an elimi-
tions and is a particularly good analgesic for equine colic.
 nation half-life greater than 80 days, making this subgroup
 at increased risk of toxic side effects after repeated monthly
There is concern that flunixin may mask increasing levels
of pain indicative of the need for surgical intervention in
dosing. Its COX-1:COX-2 ratio is 40, making mavacoxib
colic, and it should thus be used with caution until a
COX-2 selective, rather than specific. In manufacturer's
diagnosis has been reached.
data involving a comparison of mavacoxib with carprofen
in 600 dogs, the incidence of GI side effects was similar
with both drugs.
Frocoxib
Firocoxib has an ICso COX-1:COX-2 selectivity ratio (in a
canine whole blood assay) of 384, making it highly COX-2
Dual Inhibitors: tepoxalin
specifc (Brideau et al., 2001; McCann et al., 2004).
Tepoxalin inhibits both COX iso-enzymes as well as
 a se ui s  u 
5-lipoxygenase [5-LOX) resulting in reduced formation of
has a COX-1:COX-2 ratio of 58 in this species (McCann
PGs, TX and leukotrienes (LTs). The leukotrienes are
et al., 2005). According to the manufacturer's data, after
important inflammatory mediators in their own right.
oral administration, firocoxib is detected in plasma within 
 involved in many different inflammatory, allergic and neo-
15 minutes and peak plasma concentrations are reached
plastic conditions (Goodman et al., 2008) so inhibition
within 90 minutes. Plasma concentrations are maintained
 of 5-LOX should contribute to the anti-inflammatory and
for 24 hours, making once daily dosing possible
The
analgesic properties of these drugs (Curry et al., 2005).
safety of firocoxib has been evaluated in experimental
 Leukotrienes cause neutrophil recruitment and activation
dogs (Steagall et al., 2007). In dogs with arthritis, frocoxib
 in the endothelium and the gastric lining. contributing to
was as effcacious (Pollmeier et al., 2006) or more effca-
gstric irritation and ulceration (Moreau et al., 2005). One
cious (Hazewinkel et al., 2008) than carprofen.
of the theories about the side effects of NSAIDs is that
The pharmacokinetics of frocoxib have been described
when COX is inhibited, arachidonic acid is shunted into
in the horse ( Kvaternick et al., 2007). In horses with arthri-
 the 5-LOX pathway, increasing production of leukotrienes 
tis. firocoxib had similar effcacy to phenylbutazone
 and thus increasing the risk of gastric ulceration (Kirchner
(Doucet et al., 2008). Both firocoxib and flunixin pro-
et al., 1997). The dual inhibitors should avoid this bio-
duced effective analgesia in horses after gastrointestinal
logical imbalance by inhibiting both enzyme pathways.
surgery but, unlike flunixin, frocoxib did not impair gas-
At present, there is little evidence about the clinical
use of tepoxalin in dogs. Most published evidence
2009a).
has been conducted in a laboratory setting using rats
109
Section
1
Principles and procedures
(Wallace et al., 1993). Tepoxalin was compared to meloxi-
decision has not yet been reached on the naming of the
cam in experimental dogs, although clinical efficacy or
receptors. Initially, Martin et al. (1976) hypothesized that
side effects were not evaluated (Agnello et al., 2005).
there was also a o [sigma) receptor, although this is now
Tepoxalin was more effective than carprofen or meloxicam
thought not to be a true opioid receptor. Recently, another
at inhibiting the inflammation (increased PGE2 concentra-
udaiou aul uey au ul papnul uaaq sey ioidanan
tions) due to experimentally-induced uveitis in dogs
orphanin FQ receptor (N/OFQ. OP4, NOP). Opioid
[Gilmour & Lehenbauer, 2009). After its initial launch,
 receptors are G-protein coupled receptors causing cellular
there were anecdotal reports from vets of gastrointestinal
hyperpolarization due to potassium efflux, closing of
complications (vomiting and diarrhoea) associated with
calcium channels and reduced cyclic adenosine mono-
tepoxalin treatment in dogs, in contrast to the experimen-
phosphate (cAMP) production via inhibition of adenylate
tal GI safety demonstrated with rats. There is still a need
cyclase These cellular effects reduce cell excitability and
for large scale published clinical trials in dogs. In dogs.
inhibit release of neurotransmitters.
tepoxalin has a high first pass effect after oral administra-
 The μ receptor is found throughout the CNS, particu
tion resulting in rapid conversion to an acid metabolite
larly in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and in areas of
(Homer et al., 2005). This acid metabolite is a potent
the brain (such as the periaqueductal grey; PAG) respon-
inhibitor of COX. As a result, tepoxalin in dogs only inhib-
sible for descending inhibitory control of nociceptive
its 5-LOX for a short period oftime, whereas the inhibition
transmission. Binding to the μl receptor is responsible for
of COX is much longer lasting, so the drug is actually
the majority of opioid-related side effects, including
 acting as a non-selective classical NSAID, or even a COX-1
euphoria and addiction in humans. The μ receptor is the
selective drug. This may be the reason for the side effects
main receptor responsible for the analgesic actions of
'ssop ul palodal
opioids, although there is evidence, at least in humans and
Licofelone is another dual inhibitor which reduces
rodent models, for some analgesia mediated by the K
lameness in experimental dogs, although it is not currently
receptor, possibly acting in the dorsal horn of the spinal
commercially available in the UK (Moreau et al., 2005.
cord. However, analgesia induced by K agonists is rela-
2007).
tively weak and has a ceiling effect The K receptor may be
responsible for dysphoria. There is some evidence that K
agonists can antagonize some of the side effects induced
OPIOIDS
by μ agonists. The & receptor may modify the actions of
opioids at other receptors. The N/OFQ receptor has a pro-
nociceptive (i.e antianalgesic) action supraspinally and
Opioids have been used as painkillers in humans for at
endogenous N/OFQ may be responsible for setting a pain
least 2000 years. Opium is the prototype opioid, derived
threshold. The role of N/OFQ in modulation of analgesia
from the poppy (Papaver somnifenum), its major active con-
is incompletely understood, although N/OFQ receptor
stituent being morphine There is now a wide range of
antagonists show potential as long-lasting analgesics
both naturally occurring and synthetic opioids available.
[Zaveri, 2003).
 jo  soa 1 s 1 an i os
 Drugs may be agonists or antagonists at all opioid recep-
They are principally used to provide analgesia but some
ad oyas auo yano sue iiau jaxa e io 'sio
are cough suppressants. Unfortunately, these drugs have a
 of receptor. Furthermore, some drugs are agonists at one
wide range of side effects and, in humans, they cause
type of receptor and antagonists at another [agonist-
euphoria and addiction, rendering them liable to abuse
 antagonists). Partial opioid agonists also exist which exert
and resulting in controls on their supply and use. Abuse
agonist actions at the specifc receptor, although not
is not a feature of their use in veterinary patients. At least
usually as profound as a pure agonist Partial agonists
in humans, it seems that the euphoric effects of opioids
often provide sufficient analgesia for clinical use and may
paunuosun aie siuaed se eisaaieue iaul o anquon
also be able to antagonize some of the side effects of pure
by any residual pain. Whether this is also true in animals
agonists. Partial agonists are less liable to abuse and so are
can only remain a speculation.
subject to less stringent controls over their use They are
discussed further under buprenorphine below.
Pharmacology
 In humans, oral opioids often have reasonably good
bioavailability and long elimination half-lives, whereas in
Endogenous opioid ligands, such as the endorphins,
dogs, opioids such as methadone and morphine have
dynorphins and enkephalins, are found in the CNS.
short elimination half-lives and are rapidly cleared from
 Opioids, both natural and synthetic, bind to opioid recep-
the circulation. Oral opioids in animals generally have
tors (Martin et al., 1976). The main opioid receptors are
very poor bioavailability due to high frst pass metabolism
known as μ (mu, OP3, MOP), K (kappa, OP2, KOP) and
in the liver (KuKanich et al., 2005) making oral adminis-
8 (delta, OP1, DOP). Opioid receptor terminology is still
tration unfeasible in most veterinary species. Care is neces-
the subject of considerable debate, and a unanimous
 sary when administering systemic opioids to animals with
110
Analgesia
Chapter
5
significant hepatic disease as the metabolism of opioids is
Vomiting is most likely to occur after the use of mor-
reduced and thus their half-life extended (Waterman &
phine in dogs and cats (KuKanich et al., 2005) and is less
Kalthum, 1990). There is currently increasing interest in
likely after administration of other opioids.Vomiting is
-ejnuoy auosodi ou spioido juaa jo uoensdeua
thought to be due to stimulation of the chemoreceptor
tions to provide sustained release preparations for use in
 trigger zone Administration of morphine as a premedi-
humans, enabling prolongation of dosing intervals.
ant also significantly increases the risk of gastro-
Opioids have synergistic actions with most sedatives
oesophageal reflux during general anaesthesia in dogs
and anaesthetic agents. In general, opioids have an anaes-
(Wilson et al., 2005). Administration of ACP 15 minutes
thetic sparing effect (minimum alveolar concentration
before the opioid significantly reduced the incidence of
[MAC] sparing effect; see Chapters l and 7) in small
vomiting in dogs (Valverde et al., 2004a). Opioids reduce
animals, allowing lower doses of injectable and inhala-
tional agents to be used, thus reducing the side effects of
tion and reduced faecal output (Boscan et al., 2006a).
puy ot paley Alleiauas aaey sapnis sasioy ul suase asau
 These GI alterations may predispose horses to colic due to
a MAC sparing effect of opioids (Bennett et al., 2004) and
pelvic flexure and caecal impactions. Some studies have
this may be related to the central excitatory effects of
indicated that perianaesthetic morphine does not increase
opioids in horses. However, clinical studies have noted
the incidence of colic in horses [Mircica et al., 2003;
that horses administered opioids as part of an anaesthetic
Andersen et al., 2006), whereas others have reported an
regimen were easier to maintain at a stable plane of anaes-
increased risk (Senior et al., 2004, 2006). However, other
thesia and required fewer supplementary doses of inject-
dnugs. such as the Q2-agonists and general anaesthetic
able anaesthetic agents (Clark et al., 2005).
agents, as well as pain itself, will also cause significant
reductions in GI motility.
Side effects
In general, opioids do not have profound cardiovascular
 e     
The side effects of opioids vary with species and drug. Side
 doses of the full μ agonists, thought to be due to activation
effects are much more common when high doses are given
of the parasympathetic nervous system and can thus
experimentally to pain-free animals, and many side effects
usually be treated successfully with anticholinergics. There
 are less serious when used clinically in painful animals.
may be a direct negative chronotropic effect of some
Respiratory depression is commonly cited as the most
potent full μ agonists such as remifentanil in humans
important side effect of opioids, but this is generally much
less of a problem in animals than in humans. High doses
et al.,2
2005). but otherwise there are minimal direct
of the potent full μ agonists, especially administered IV or
cardiac effects attributed to opioid administration. In
in an anaesthetized animal are most likely to cause prob-
l    n  s
lematic respiratory depression, necessitating the use of
et al., 1978)
 intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPpV). During
Hyperthermia (up to 40°C) after use of opioids has
the recovery period, or postoperatively, when IPPV cannot
been reported in cats (Posner et al., 2007, 2010). Mydriasis
be used, highly respiratory depressant opioids are best
 Occurs in cats, whereas opioids cause miosis in dogs.
 avoided. Respiratory depression may be more problematic
 Pruritus has been reported after epidural opioids (espe-
in patients which cannot tolerate even mild increases in
cially morphine) and is a major problem in humans.
PaCO2, such as animals with head trauma or raised intra-
 There are occasional reports of epidural morphine-induced
cranial pressure. In animals with thoracic pain, opioids
pruritus in veterinary species (Burford & Corley. 2006).
jo nsan e se uonuny Aionesai aidu Ainoe Aeu
Urinary retention may also occur after epidural opioids. It
their analgesic effect. The cough reflex is depressed and
is usually self-limiting, but requires careful nursing care
this may increase the risk of aspiration.
and bladder expression until normal function resumes.
In dogs. opioids usually produce sedation. However.
Delayed hair regrowth over the site of epidural opioid
historically, there has been a great deal of concern that in
 administration is also commonly reported.
cats and horses, especially pain-free animals, opioids cause
Histamine release occurs after IV injection of pethidine
excitement (Muir et al., 1978), including box-walking in
(meperidine) and occasionally after rapid IV injection of
horses. This stems from pharmacological studies which
morphine, resulting in hypotension (Guedes et al., 2006).
used much higher doses of opioids than would be used
 The other opioids are much lesslikely to induce histamine
clinically. Sensible clinical doses of opioids can be used
 release after IV injection.
quite safely in these species, as excitement is particularly
 All opioids cross the placental barrier and may result in
unlikely to occur when pain is present. Dysphoria may
 respiratory depression and sedation in the neonate if used
occur after higher doses of opioids in all species. Use of
at parturition. An opioid antagonist such as naloxone may
sedatives such as acepromazine (ACP) or the Oz-agonists
be used to antagonize these effects in the neonate.
may help to minimize the excitatory or dysphoric effects
Many of the side effects are thought to be mediated by
of opioids.
peripheral opioid receptors, raising the possibility of the
111
Section
1
Principles and procedures
use of peripheral opioid antagonists which are unable to
Onset time is around 10-15 minutes after IV adminis-
cross the blood-brain barrier, such as methylnaltrexone,
tration and up to 30 minutes after IM administration.
to reduce side effects without affecting the degree of anal-
Morphine is most commonly administered every 4 hours
gesia produced (van Hoogmoed & Boscan, 2005; Boscan
in dogs and horses and every 4-6 hours in cats. Individual
et al., 2006b).
variations in duration of action reinforce the need for
pazjusoal e sl (Hlo) eisasleiadAu pasnpur-pioido
frequent pain assessment to titrate an analgesic regimen
phenomenon in humans and rodents associated with
to effect.
both acute and chronic opioid use, resulting in a paradoxi-
The major metabolite in humans is morphine-6-glu-
cal increased sensitivity to pain after opioid administra-
curonide which may contribute to morphine's analgesic
tion (Angst & Clark, 2006; Lee et al., 2011). The underlying
efficacy. Morphine-6-glucuronide has not been detected in
 e an ae sa o
dogs following morphine administration ( KuKanich et al..
many different pathways and receptors, including interac-
2005).
tions between the NMDA receptor, 5-HT receptors, sub-
stance P and nitric oxide among others. In humans and
rodents, it is thought to have a genetic basis, associated
Methadone
with alterations in genes encoding for peripheral β2-
Methadone is a synthetic full μagonist, with an onset and
adrenoceptors and drug transporters. It has not been inves-
duration of action similar to morphine. The pharmacoki-
'saiads Areaaa ul luaixa ieai Ae oi paiea
netics in dogs have been reported (KuKanich & Borum,
2008; Ingvast-Larsson et al., 2010). It is much less likely to
Drugs available
induce vomiting than morphine and histamine release is
unlikely, making methadone safer for IV injection. There
Doses of commonly used opioids are listed in Table 5.2.
 s a a u s  a
of morphine and methadone Methadone has been
n aui ui sop pue sieo ui asn oy pasuasi Auaai
Morphine
Methadone exists as a racemic mixture and the R(-)
Morphine is still considered the 'gold standard' opioid to
enantiomer (levo-methadone) appears to be responsible
which all other drugs are compared. It produces profound
for most of the μ agonist actions [ McCance-Katz, 20ll). In
analgesia mediated via μ (and possibly k) agonist activity. It
humans, levo-methadone also has a lower cardiac toxicity
produces euphoria and is addictive in humans and thus falls
(QT interval prolongation, increasing the risk of torsades
into Schedule 2 of the UK controlled drugs legislation.
de pointes) (Grilo et al., 2010).
Table 5.2 Drug doses of some commonly used opioids in veterinary species
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Pig
 Morphine 
0.2-0.5 mg/kg q 4 h
0.1-0.3 mg/kg q 4-6 h 
0.1-0.15 mg/kg q 4 h
 0.1 mg/kg
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
IV, IM 
CRI: 0.1-0.3 mg/kg/h
CRI: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg/h
CRI: 0.1 mg/kg/h 
q 4 h
q 4 h
Methadone
0.2-0.5 mg/kg q 4 h
0.1-0.3 mg/kg q 4 h
0.1-0.15 mg/kg q 4 h
IV, IM
 Pethidine (meperidine)
3-5 mg/kg
 3-5 mg/kg 
2 mg/kg
?3-5 mg/kg
 ?1-2 mg/kg
IIM, never IV
q 2 h
q 2 h
q 1-2 h
q 2 h
q 1-2 h
 Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
0.01--0.02 mg/kg
0.005-0.01 mg/kg
0.005-0.01 mg/kg
70.01 mg/kg
IV IM, 7SC
q 4-6 h
4 8-9 b
4 8-9 h
4 8-9 b
4 8-9 b
Butorphanol
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
0.1-0.5 mg/kg q 2-4 h 
0.1 mg/kg
?0.05-0.1 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
IV, IM
q 2-4 h
q 2-4 h 
q 2-4 h
q 2-4 h 
 Fentanyl
Bolus 1-10 μg/kg
Bolus 1-10 μg/kg
4 μg/kg
IV
CRI: 0.1-0.7 μg/kg/min
 CRI: 0.1-0.4 μg/kg/min
Remifentanil IV
 0.1-0.6 μg/kg/min
7
>
7
7
N/A: Not applicable; q: Every; CRl:= Continuous rate (intravenous) infusion; IV: intravenous; SC: subcutaneous; IM: intramuscular. Note: Not
all of these agents are licensed for use in animals. Many doses are empirical and evidence based recommendations are still required,
aesop lewdo jano Auieaun saepus i saoads ewue ael ui Ayeined
112
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Some have reported that the S[+) enantiomer of metha-
Recently, the drug has been described as a high affinity/
done (dextro-methadone) is an NMDA antagonist,
Au Aian spuq auudiouaidng isuase n Apiae ya
whereas others have reported NMDA antagonism by both
to the μ receptor and demonstrates slow receptor kinetics,
enantiomers, although higher doses are required to block
resulting in a long onset of action of around 45 minutes
NMDA receptors than to achieve μ opioid effects (Matsui
and a long duration of up to 6-8 hours. However, thermal
& williams, 2010).
 antinociceptive thresholds were increased in cats from 4
There is little published veterinary literature on levo-
to 12 hours after injection (Robertson et al., 2003a). Con-
methadone, although it is commercially available in
versely, following ovariohysterectomy, dogs required
Europe formulated with fenpipramide (an anticholiner-
further analgesia 4-5 hours after administration of 0.02-
saop ul paiesnsaaun uaaq sey upium 'jaaiueiod, se (
0.04 mg/kg (Slingsby et al., 2011).
(Tunsmeyer et al., 20l2). Levo-methadone provided good
The high affnity and slow dissociation from the μ recep-
analgesia in cats after ovariectomy (Rohrer Bley et al.,
tor has led to concerns that if the analgesia produced by
2004).
 buprenorphine is insufcient, it may be diffcult to top-up
with a full μ agonist. However, a large dose of morphine
Pethidine (meperidine)
can displace buprenorphine from the μ receptor if more
 profound analgesia is required.
01 Ajanixoidde) uoe jo jasuo pidei e sey aupiuiad
The high affinity of buprenorphine for the μ receptor
minutes) and a short duration of action of up to 2 hours
 can be used to advantage if unacceptable opioid-related
 in small animals but less in largeanimals. Pethidine admin-
 side effects occur in a painful patient. Administration of a
istered IV causes histamine release and signs of anaphy-
 pure μl antagonist would antagonize the side effects seen
laxis. For this reason, it should only be administered
but would leave the animal without any opioid-related
IM. Pethidine is less likely to produce bradycardia than
analgesia. Buprenorphine can displace the original opioid
the other opioids, as its chemical structure is similar
from the receptor, thus reducing the side effects seen, but
to atropine.
still produce opioid-related analgesia. This process is
known as sequential analgesia and is used to antagonize
Papaveretum
some of the effects of very potent full μ agonists such as
sedation and respiratory depression. Buprenorphine is
Papaveretum is a mixture of opioids, containing mor-
phine, papaverine and codeine (253 parts morphine, 23
commonly used for this purpose in laboratory animal
anaesthesia to antagonize the adverse effects of fentanyl,
providing analgesia along with profound sedation and
control of vicious dogs when used in conjunction with a
et al., 1989). Nalbuphine (see below) has been recom-
sedative Vomiting is a common side effect. Doses used are
similar to those for morphine as are speed of onset and
Administration of buprenorphine onto the oral mucous
duration of action.
membranes of cats resulted in equivalent plasma concen-
trations and degree of thermal antinociception to that
achieved after injection (Robertson et al., 2003b, 2005a).
Buprenorphine
 and this route is suitable for more prolonged analgesia in
Buprenorphine falls onto Schedule 3 of the UK Misuse of
animals that are difficult to inject. However, clinically, the
Drugs Act 197l and is licensed for administration in dogs.
transmucosal route may be inferior to IV or IM administra-
cats and horses in the UK. It produces minimal sedation
tion in cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy, with increased
and respiratory depression when used at clinical doses.
 pain scores in cats administered buprenorphine transmu-
 ieed e se paquosap Alesissei s auudiouaidng
cosally compared to the other routes (Giordano et al.,
agonist The drug has a bell-shaped' dose-response curve.
2010). The alkaline pH of cat saliva improves absorption,
where initially increasing the dose increases the analgesic
 and transmucosal administration may be less effective in
effect until a threshold is reached, after which further dose
 species with neutral salivary pH. A case report of transmu-
increases result in a decreasing analgesic effect, i.e. the
drug is antagonizing its own analgesic effect. There was
 good analgesia (Walker, 2007), although a pharmacoki-
concern that administration of high doses of buprenor-
netic study failed to detect plasma concentrations of
phine could potentially result in 'anti-analgesia: These
buprenorphine after sublingual administration (Messen-
concerns appear unfounded, as the doses required to
ger et al., 2011).
produce this effect are well above those which are used
 Buprenorphine is also available in a transdermal patch
clinically. Clinically, increasing the dose may improve the
formulation, utilizing a matrix formulation. A 35 μg/h
quality of analgesia, although no increased analgesic effect
patch has been evaluated in cats and did not result in
was demonstrated by increasing the dose from 0.02 to
 changes in thermal thresholds, although signs of eupho-
0.04 mg/kg in dogs
s undergoing ovariohysterectomy
ria, sedation and mydriasis were observed (Murrell et al.,
(Slingsby et al., 20ll).
2007).
113
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Butorphanol
Remifentanil
Butorphanol is a mixed agonist-antagonist drug, being an
Remifentanil is an ultra-short acting full μ agonist. It is a
agonist at K receptors and an antagonist at μ receptors. As
a result, it does not produce profound analgesia and is best
rapid metabolism by hydrolysis by non-specific blood and
reserved for use in non-painful conditions. In the UK, it is
tissue esterases without involvement of the liver. Its rapid
currently not subject to controls under the Misuse of Drugs 
onset and offset of action make remifentanil most suitable
Act 197l. It is used in cats, dogs and horses in sedative
for use as a CRI. Its context sensitive half-life is unaffected
combinations with d2-agonists and to produce mild anal-
by duration of infusion, giving it a short, predictable dura-
gesia. Butorphanol is also used in dogs for its antitussive
tion of action without cumulative effects. Recovery from
effect. Onset time is around 5-15 minutes and duration
remifentanil is more rapid than from any other opioid
of action is controversial, although thought by many to be
and, as such, provision for postoperative analgesia must
around 2 hours (Robertson et al., 2003a; Lascelles & Rob-
be made well in advance of termination of remifentanil
ertson, 2004). Data provided by the manufacturer indicates
infusion.
that butorphanol provides analgesia for 4-6 hours. Butor-
 In dogs undergoing orthopaedic surgery, remifentanil
phanol has been administered as a continuous rate infu.
reduced isoflurane requirements by 40-50% [Allweiler
sion (CRl) to conscious horses (Sellon et al., 200l, 2004).
et al., 2007). Pre-emptive administration of an anticholin-
ergic is recommended as remifentanil can cause profound
bradycardia. Remifentanil is also more respiratory depres-
Fentanyl
 sant than the other opioids and IPPV is usually required.
Fentanyl is a pure μ agonist with a potency around 50
times greater than morphine, enabling the use of small
Alfentanil
doses to produce profound analgesia. After IV injection, it
 This fentanyl derivative is only one-quarter as potent an
has a rapid onset ofaction (around 1-2 minutes), although
analgesic as fentanyl itself. It has a rapid onset of action,
a single dose will only last around 20 minutes. It can be
although it may accumulate following repeated doses.
used as part of an induction protocol in cardiovascularly
Analgesia is accompanied by respiratory depression and
umstable small animal patients in association with a ben-
 severe bradycardia.
zodiazepine such as diazepam or midazolam. It is often
used as a CRl, although cumulation will occur after pro-
longed infusions. It is a relatively potent respiratory
Etorphine
depressant, especially when used in high doses as a CRI
Etorphine is a very potent derivative of morphine It has
under anaesthesia and IPpV may be required. Bradycardia
 similar properties to morphine but is more respiratory
aiidei si inq 'sasop yaiy jo asn ayn yiim inoio osie ae
depressant Its very great potency means that a small
reversible by reduction of the infusion rate or treatment
volume can be used in dart gun projectiles for immobiliz-
with anticholinergics.
ing large, wild game animals. However, this makes it a
Fentanyl is well absorbed across intact skin and is avail-
 dangerous drug to handle and constitutes a safety hazard
able in a transdermal patch formulation, designed to
to the anaesthetist.
release fentanyl gradually. The patch contains a reservoir
 Etorphine is extremely long acting and recovery is also
of fentanyl which is released across a rate controlling
delayed by enterohepatic recycling. Its action is usually
membrane. Damage to the patch can result in more rapid
terminated by the use of diprenorphine, a specific antago-
release of fentanyl and the potential for overdose and
nist, but relapse into deep sedation may occur The drug
toxicity. A case of profound sedation in a dog has been
produces CNS stimulation before depression, resulting in
reported due to suspected ingestion or transmucosal
Excitement before the onset of anaesthesia. In an attempt
absorption of fentanyl (Schmiedt & Bjorling, 2007). In
to overcome this, etorphine is marketed in fxed ratio
dogs and cats, there is a significant lag time [up to 24
combinations with phenothiazine tranquillizers ('Large
Animal Immobilon' with acepromazine and 'Small Animal
centrations begin to rise however, in horses, plasma fen-
Immobilon' with methotrimeprazine). Should accidental
   s   s s
self-administration occur, death can result if the human
[Maxwell et al., 2003; Orsini et al., 2006). A skin depot of
antidote (naloxone) is not readily available.
the drug is produced and fentanyl continues to be absorbed
into the circulation for some time after removal of the
Sufentanil and carfentanil
patch. The duration of action in dogs and horses is up to
72 hours after patch application and up to l04 hours in
 Sufentanil is approximately 10 times as potent as fentanyl
cats. However, frequent pain assessment is still necessary
It is not used extensively in veterinary medicine Carfen-
as breakthrough pain may occur, necessitating further
tanil is one of the most potent opioids known. It is said
opioid or non-opioid analgesic administration.
to be three to eight times as potent as etorphine and is
114
Analgesia
Chapter
5
useful for anaesthesia of elephants, although it is a danger-
anaesthesia to produce a MAC sparing effect and contrib-
 ous drug to handle since it is rapidly absorbed across
ute to multimodal analgesia. Local analgesia can be pro-
mucous membranes. An antagonist dnug suitable for use
duced using dnugs such as opioids as well as the local
in humans should be readily available whenever carfen-
anaesthetic dnugs.
tanil is used.
Many surgical procedures can be satisfactorily per-
formed under local anaesthesia. It enables protracted
operations to be performed on standing animals and, in
Opioid antagonists
large animals, this avoids the dangers associated with pro-
Naloxone is a pure antagonist at all opioid receptors and
 longed recumbency. Whether or not sedation is employed
will antagonize the effect of all opioid agonists but it is
 as an adjunct will depend on the species, temperament
less effective against partial agonists. In humans, reversal
 and health of the animal, as well as the magnitude of the
of opioid actions with naloxone is sometimes accompa-
 procedure In adult cattle and horses, sedation may induce
nied by tachycardia, but there are no reports of this in the
the animal to lie down and it is thus often better avoided.
veterinary literature The drug is fairly short acting and its
 In other animals, sedation should be adopted since effi-
effects may wear off before those of the previously admin-
cient surgery is greatly facilitated by the reduction of fear
istered agonist so that repeated doses of antagonist may
and liability to sudden movement. Local anaesthetics may
be required. This is particularly important in veterinary
exert a sedative action when they are absorbed from sites
 medicine where large and frequent doses of naloxone are
of injection and for surgery on the standing animal the
necessary to counter the accidental self-administration of
dose of any sedative drug should be reduced to allow for
etorphine.
this.
Naltrexone is a long-acting derivative of naloxone and,
although not often used in veterinary practice, it is useful
Anatomy and physiology
should a long-acting pure antagonist be required.
 Some partial agonists, which either produce poor anal-
The unit of nervous tissue consists of the nerve cell
gesia or cause dysphoria sufficient to preclude their use as
(neuron) and its processes, the dendrites, and axon. The
analgesics, are used for their antagonistic properties. Nal-
orphine was the frst partial agonist to be used as an antago-
cells. The larger neurons are surrounded by a coat of fatty
nist but it has now been superseded by naloxone because
 material known as the myelin sheath. The thickness of this
of the psychomimetic effects of nalorphine. Nalbuphine is
 sheath increases with the diameter of the axon it encloses,
a K agonist and μ antagonist similar to butorphanol. It is
 and it is composed of a number of lipoprotein lamellae.
used in humans to reverse opioid-induced respiratory
These are laid down from Schwann cells that enclose the
depression with the aim of maintaining some K-mediated
 axons. The myelin sheath is not continuous along the
analgesia. Diprenorphine is marketed as a specific antago-
 entire length of the fibre, but is interupted at more or less
nist for etorphine and, in animals, it appears to be very
 regular intervals (the nodes of Ranvier) to leave short seg-
efficient in this role. However, as it causes hallucinations
 ments of the axon covered only by the Schwann cells. At
in humans; it is only licensed for use in animals and in 
these nodal areas in myelinated fibres and throughout the
humans naloxone remains the dnug of choice for counter-
 entire length of the unmyelinated fibres, the axon is sepa-
 ing the effects of etorphine.
rated from the surrounding tissue fluid only by the thick-
 ness of the Schwann cell. In the internodal segments of
Buus u ps s uxe a saq eu
fluid by the myelin sheath as well.
LOCAL ANAESTHETICS
 Peripheral nerves are composed of fbres of many dif-
ferent diameters, the smallest of which have no surface
The terms local anaesthetic' and local analgesic are often
 myelin coating. while the larger fibres are surrounded by
used interchangeably and there is considerable debate
 increasing numbers of myelin lamellae. There is some cor-
 siui ul asn oi uat anedondde anou aul si ypium iaao
relation between fibre size and function, with the largest
chapter, dnugs which act by blocking Na* channels are
diameter fbres (15-25 μm) transmitting somatic motor
described as local anaesthetics. Local anaesthetic tech-
efferent information. Smaller fibres (5-15 μm) carry pro-
niques are considered as those which can be used to
prioceptive and cutaneous afferent messages and the
provide the sole means of anaesthesia and analgesia for a
smallest fibres (<5 μm) transmit afferent and efferent
surgical procedure. For example, standing surgical proce-
nociceptive information.
 dures can be performed in large animals after performing
 Not all nerve fibres are equally sensitive to local anaes-
a paravertebral block with a local anaesthetic dnug for
thetics. When a peripheral nerve is exposed to a local
flank surgery. Conversely, local analgesic techniques are
anaesthetic, conduction in its constituent fibres is blocked
used to provide analgesia but do not produce complete
 at a rate that is inversely proportional to their diameters.
anaesthesia. They are often used as an adjunct to general
Function fails first in the smallest, unmyelinated fbres
115
Section
1
Principles and procedures
followed by the smaller myelinated fibres and finally larger
myelinated fibres. This is because the Schwann cells con-
ceiling. beyond which any further increase in molecular
e  n  a a  
weight is followed by a decrease in activity.
thetic solutions compared to those which contain little or
Lipid solubility of a local anaesthetic determines its
no myelin. Once a dnug has penetrated through the con-
nective tissues of the nerve, it can act upon the entire
However, this relationship is clearer in vitro than in vivo
length of any unmyelinated fibre but only on the short
      s  
segments at the nodes of Ranvier in myelinated fibres.
vivo. Protein binding determines duration of action as the
The number of nodes of Ranvier per unit length of an
binding site [Nat channel) is protein. Finally, pKa (the pH
 axon is greater in small fibres than in thick ones. The most 
at which the solution contains equal proportions of
sensitive nerve fibres are B fbres, conveying sympathetic
charged and uncharged molecules) determines speed of
information. Next most sensitive are sensory A8 fibres,
onset Local anaesthetics are weak bases [proton accep-
 conveying painful information. The least sensitive are the
tors) with pKas ranging from 7.7 to 8.9. At body pH (7.4).
largest, Ao motor fibres. The sensitivity of the unmyeli-
weak bases such as local anaesthetics become ionized by
nated C fibres, also conveying painful sensory informa-
aCcepting protons: B + H+→BH+. However, local anaesthet-
Jo Aisd an sasiii s r r s 'uo
ics must diffuse across the axon sheath to bind to the
producing a differential block where only sensory fibres
internal side of the Na* channel in their uncharged free
are blocked, leaving motor function unaffected. Sensa-
base form. Local anaesthetics with a pKa closest to body
tions are lost in the following order: pain, followed by cold
pH (such as mepivacaine: pKa 7.6) have the fastest onset
and warmth, then touch and deep pressure.
of action as proportionally more dnug is present in its
uncharged form. Local anaesthetics with a higher pKa,
Pharmacology
such as bupivacaine (pKa 8.l), have a longer onset of
action as proportionally more of the dnug is in its ionized
      s
form. In infected tissue, the pH generally drops, resulting
action potentials along a nerve axon by blocking Na+ chan-
in a greater proportion of local anaesthetic becoming
nels and stabilizing excitable cell membranes. They
ionized and thus unable to penetrate the cell membrane.
 prevent movement of Nat ions down their concentration
As a result, local anaesthetics are often ineffective in
gradient from the extracellular surface through specific
infected tissues. Once inside the cell, the local anaesthetic
channels into cells and thus prevent cells depolarizing and
must be ionized in order to bind to the internal surface of
reaching threshold potential for propagation of the action
the Nat channel.
potential. The drug binds to the internal surface of a Nat
Warming local anaesthetics to 40°C reduces the pKa
channel on the cell membrane.
(e.g. for lidocaine from 7.92 at 25°℃ to 7.57 at 40°C),
Most local anaesthetics consist of an aromatic lipophilic
thus hastening the speed of onset and potentially improv-
end and a hydrophilic (amine) end, joined by an interme-
ing quality of analgesia (Arai et al., 2006).
diate chain. Some compounds lack the hydrophilic tail
padde ane Aayl ieui ul iensnun aie soausaeue leool
(e.g. benzocaine) and are nearly insoluble in water so that
directly at their site of action and systemic absorption
they are unsuitable for injection but they can be applied
therefore controls offset and duration of action. Some
to mucosal surfaces. The intermediate chain may be either
local anaesthetics, such as lidocaine, cause vasodilation
'i sp sie yrm pul e ro iai
and are thus commercially available with epinephrine
Ester-linked drugs (procaine and amethocaine) are metab-
added as a vasoconstrictor to reduce local blood flow and
olized by esterases (plasma pseudo-cholinesterases). They
prolong duration of action. Conversely, cocaine is a potent
have shorter durations of action and their metabolism is
vasoconstrictor as it inhibits neuronal uptake of catecho-
not affected by liver dysfunction. Amide-linked drugs are
lamines and also inhibits monoamine oxidase The sys-
metabolized in the liver. The metabolites of local anaes.
temic absorption of a local anaesthetic is affected by:
thetics are of clinical importance since they may exert both
1.
 The site of injection
pharmacological and toxicological effects similar to those
2.
The dosage
of their parent compounds. The excretion of both ester-
3.
The addition of a vasoconstrictor
and amide-linked compounds occurs through the kidneys.
 4. The pharmacological profile of the drug itself.
Less than 5% of the drug is excreted unchanged. The renal
clearance of the amide-type dnugs appears to be inversely
related to their protein-binding abilities. Renal clearance
Side effects
is also inversely proportional to urinary pH, suggesting
that urinary excretion occurs by non-ionic diffusion.
Local anaesthetics affect not only neurons but all types of
Modification of the chemical structure alters activity and
excitable tissue including skeletal, smooth and cardiac
the physical properties ofthe molecule. Lengthening of the
muscle. Cardiovascular and central nervous disturbances
intermediate chain or addition of carbon atoms to the
are the commonest side effects but allergic reactions
116
Analgesia
Chapter
5
causes a decrease in the rate of depolarization in Purkinje
Table 5.3 Commonly used and toxic doses of some
fibres and ventricular muscle, a reduction in amplitude of
local anaesthetics
the action potential, and a marked decrease in conduction
velocity. On the ECG, there is an increase in the P-R inter-
Normal dose
Toxic dose
val and in QRS complex duration. This causes a suppres-
(mg/kg)
(mg/kg)
sion of automaticity, decreased electrical excitability of
 Lidocaine
10-20
the myocardium and reduced myocardial contractility.
5
Severe arrhythmias and cardiac arrest are possible. In
Bupivacaine
2
3.5-4.5
experimentally-induced toxicity in anaesthetized dogs. a
 Ropivacaine
3
5
reduction in systolic function occurred before the onset of
arrhythmias (Coyle et al., 1994).
 Note: Not all of these agents are licensed for use in animals
The cardiovascular toxicity of the local anaesthetics
slower to dissociate from Na* channels than ropivacaine
occasionally occur with ester-type agents. Toxicity most
 or lidocaine, thus allowing the development of re-entry
commonly occurs following inadvertent intravascular
arrhythmias. Conversely, lidocaine at low doses is used to
injection resulting in high systermic plasma concentrations
treat ventricular tachyarrhythmias [it is a class Ib anti-
of the drug. Before injection, it is essential to draw back
arrhythmic drug) because of its effects on the cardiac
 on the plunger of the syringe to check it has not acciden-
action potential. It shortens the duration of the action
tally penetrated a blood vessel. Simple overdose is also
potential and refractory period by reducing the repolariza-
common in small animals as many of the commercially
tion phase and can thus prevent re-entry arrhythmias.
available presentations are very concentrated. It is essential
There is currently a lot of interest in human medicine
to weigh accurately the animal and calculate the safe dose
in the use of lipid infusions to treat local anaesthetic car-
before using a local anaesthetic. Many local anaesthetics
diovascular toxicity. Initial studies were performed in
have a narrow margin of safety before toxic doses are
experimental dogs administered an overdose of bupi-
-ad iae uo aou st x (e' ae) pauoe
vacaine, causing circulatory arrest. Cardiopulmonary
forming some blocks, such as intercostal and interpleural
resuscitation was initiated with internal cardiac massage
blocks, which have a high degree of systemic absorption.
followed by a bolus and CRI of 20% lipid infusion (Wein-
The CNS is the first body system to be affected by toxic-
berg et al., 2003). All the dogs treated with lipid infusion
ity. Signs include depression or sedation, muscle tremors
survived, whereas none of the saline control animals did.
and seizures depending on the dose of local anaesthetic
Subsequent case reports from human medicine have rec-
reaching the brain. These effects may be missed during
ommended bolus doses of 1 mL/kg every 3-5 minutes
perioperative use in a sedated or anaesthetized animal.
during resuscitation, up to a maximum of 3 mL/kg fol-
These paradoxical and conflicting effects are explained by
lowed by 0.25 mL/kg/min. The mechanism of this effect
the fact that local anaesthetics preferentially block inhibi-
is currently unknown. It has been hypothesized that the
tory interneurons, resulting in excitatory effects. As the
see uium aseud eseid pidi, e sanea uoisnul pidi
concentration of local anaesthetic increases, both inhibi-
the lipid soluble bupivacaine molecules and makes them
tory and excitatory neurons are blocked, resulting in
wnavailable to tissues (Weinberg et al., 2003). The lipids
Overall depressant effects. Lidocaine has anticonvulsant
 may also interact with bupivacaine directly at the tissue
activity as well as the ability to produce seizures. In general.
level or may alter metabolic energy utilization in the heart.
the dose giving rise to anticonvulsant activity is less than
Further investigation of the optimal dose rate and dura-
that associated with convulsions.
tion of infusion is still required and the safety of rapid
The cardiovascular system is next to be affected by toxic-
infusion of high doses of lipid still requires investigation.
ity and arguably the most important Local anaesthetics
Currently, recommendations are that lipid infusion should
have direct actions on the heart and peripheral vasculature
only be used alongside other conventional treatments
through blocking Nat channels and indirect actions via
such as cardiac massage and epinephrine in case of cardiac
 blockade of sympathetic nerve fibres resulting in vasodila-
tion. Sympathetic blockade is particularly marked after
induced seizures.
epidural injection of local anaesthetics, resulting in
Methaemoglobinaemia is also possible after use of local
pooling of blood in the pelvic and splanchnic circulations.
anaesthetics. It occurs when Fe?+ in haemoglobin is oxi-
This can result in reduced venous return to the heart and
dized to Fe?t which is unable to bind and carry oxygen,
systemic hypotension.
resulting in cyanosis. Methaemoglobin production occurs
Toxic concentrations of local anaesthetics are associated
particularly after use of prilocaine but also with lidocaine,
with a reduction in the rate of rise of phase 0 ofthe cardiac
procaine and benzocaine (Lagutchik et al., 1992).
action potential (the phase of rapid cellular depolarization
Local analgesics can enhance the duration of action of
due to Nat conductance across the cell membrane). This
both depolarizing and non-depolarizing neuromuscular
117
Section
1
Principles and procedures
blocking agents. Drugs such as the phenothiazine deriva-
Prilocaine
tives and pethidine (meperidine) may lower the threshold
 Prilocaine has a pKa similar to lidocaine (7.7) resulting in
at which the convulsant actions of local anaesthetics are
a rapid onset of action. Potency is similar to lidocaine
encountered.
although the degree of protein binding is lower [55%). It
is the most rapidly metabolized amide and its metabolism
Drugs available
releases o-toluidine, which causes methaemoglobinaemia
It is most commonly utilized in EMLA cream {Eutectic
Cocaine is an alkaloid obtained from the leaves of Eryth.
Mixture of Local Anaesthetics), which is a mixture of 2.5%
roxylum coca, a South American plant, and is an ester-
lidocaine and 2.5% prilocaine, used for topical anaesthe-
linked local anaesthetic first introduced by Koeller in
sia of intact skin. A eutectic mixture describes two com-
1884. Its toxicity and addictive properties in humans led
pounds which, when mixed under specific conditions.
to a search for synthetic substitutes and reference to it now
 produce a substance that now behaves with a single set of
has become largely historical. Its one remaining use is for
physical characteristics.
nasal surgery, where its intense vasoconstriction shrinks
the mucous membrane allowing more room for the
surgeon and aiding haemostasis.
Mepivacaine
Cinchocaine is a potent, toxic local anaesthetic It is now
Mepivacaine is an amide-linked local anaesthetic with a
mainly used as part of a commercially available euthanasia
pKa of 7.6 and a rapid onset ofaction (around 10 minutes).
mixture for large animals (Somulose; with the potent bar-
It is around 75% protein bound with a duration of action
biturate, quinalbarbitone). Cinchocaine is added to the
of around 2 hours. It is commonly utilized for diagnostic
sie anpaid c sauen yanoua aie u ai
and therapeutic local analgesia in equine lameness inves-
arrest and the barbiturate is used to produce CNS
tigation, as specific nerve blocks of the distal limbs per-
depression.
formed with mepivacaine produce less tissue swelling and
oedema than those performed with lidocaine.
Procaine
Bupivacaine
Procaine was introduced in 1905. It has a high pKa (8.9).
therefore onset of action is slow. Lipid solubility is low
Bupivacaine is an amide-linked local anaesthetic with a
resulting in low potency and due to its ester linkage it has
high pKa of 8.l resulting in a slow onset of action of
around 40 minutes. However, it is around 95% protein
a short duration of action. It is licensed for use in food-
producing animals in the UK.
bound and has a very long duration of action of 6-8
Kouanod yaty e sey pue aqnios pidi Aaa osie si l 'sinoy
 Bupivacaine is not licensed for use in veterinary species
Amethocaine
although it is commonly used to provide long-acting intra-
Amethocaine is an ester-linked local anaesthetic which is
 and postoperative analgesia. It is also the most toxic local
 anaesthetic with a narrow margin of safety (see Table 5.3)
particularly useful for desensitizing mucous membranes.
It can be instilled into the conjunctival sac instead of
proxymetacaine (proparacaine) and it can also be applied
Levo-bupivacaine
to the pharyngeal, laryngeal and nasal mucous membranes.
Levo-bupivacaine is the S(-) enantiomer of bupivacaine
An ointment is available for desensitization of intact skin.
and was developed for use in human medicine as a less
toxic alternative to bupivacaine. The concentrations
Lidocaine
needed to produce CNS toxicity and myocardial depres-
 sion are higher for levo-bupivacaine compared to racemic
Lidocaine [lignocaine) was introduced in 1944. Lidocaine
bupivacaine.
is an amide-linked local anaesthetic, with a pKa of 7.9 and
a rapid onset of action. It is only around 70% protein
Ropivacaine
bound so it has a limited duration of action of around 2
hours. Duration of action is also reduced by absorption
Ropivacaine was also developed as a less toxic alternative
away from the site of application due its profound
to bupivacaine. It has a propyl group attached to the
vasodilatory properties, unless formulated with epine-
amine end of the molecule, compared to a butyl group in
phrine Its lipid solubility and potency are lower than
bupivacaine. It is formulated as a pure S(-) enantiomer,
some of the other newer local anaesthetic agents such as
 which is less toxic and more potent than the R-enantiomer.
bupivacaine. It spreads well throughout tissues and pen-
 The pKa of ropivacaine is the same as bupivacaine, as is
etrates mucosal surfaces well, making it a suitable agent
the protein binding, meaning that the two compounds
for topical application.
have similar onsets and durations of action. Ropivacaine
118
Analgesia
Chapter
5
has a slightly lower lipid solubility than bupivacaine
 recommended thatthe patches are applied for 12 hours per
al ou p au jo uoauad anpan keu yium
 day over the site of injury. The patches have been used anec-
motor fibres. The motor blockade produced by ropivacaine
 dotally in veterinary species, although the bioavailability is
is less profound and of shorter duration than that pro-
 poor (around 3%) andthe lidocaine is rapidly metabolized
duced by bupivacaine, meaning that ropivacaine may be
 after absorption. In horses, lidocaine was not detected in
more able to produce a differential nerve block. The
the plasma after patch application (Bidwell et al., 2007).
margin of safety in dosing of ropivacaine is slightly greater
Splash blocks are currently receiving increased interest. It
than for bupivacaine but accurate dosing is still essential
 was always assumed that local anaesthetics should not be
used close to wound edges as they would cause tissue swell 
ing, oedema and inhibit wound healing. However, modern
local anaesthetics are much less likely to cause these prob-
Routes of administration
lems. Application of bupivacaine into the peritoneal cavity
The techniques of local anaesthetic administration are
and along the incisional surfaces ofthe abdominal muscles
generally not diffcult to learn and do not involve the use
reduced pain scores in dogs after ovariohysterectomy
 of expensive or complicated equipment.
without any side effects (Carpenter et al., 2004).
Wound soaker' or diffusion catheters (Fig. 5.3) are
increasingly used to provide postoperative analgesia to
Topical local analgesia
 areas which are not suitable for a specific peripheral nerve
Proparacaine (proxymetacaine) and amethocaine are used
block (wolfe et al., 2006; Abelson et al., 2009). The cath-
to produce cormeal anaesthesia (Herring et al., 2005).
eters have small holes, known as micropores, and are
Caution is required as repeated use of these drugs may
 buried within the wound during surgical closure They are
 particularly suitable for use after amputations, mammary
tear production, due to a reduction in cormeal sensation.
 strips and ear surgery for example.
Topical anaesthesia of the larynx in cats is usually per-
formed before intubation using lidocaine spray , but there
Regional local analgesia
is concern that the propellents in some formulations may
be irritant Topical anaesthesia of intact skin is achieved
Simple regional blocks include the ‘inverted-L' block used
using EMLA (lidocaine and prilocaine) or amethocaine
aiel ut Aragins guipueis mole ot yuey au azauisaeue ol
cream. They are useful adjuncts to venous catheterization
animals, where two linear infiltrations are made of the
in fractious animals including cats and rabbits. Caution
whole thickness of the abdominal wall, one cranial to and
over the amount applied is necessary due to the potential
one dorsal to, the line of incision. Ring block of an extrem-
to induce methaemoglobinaemia with prilocaine
punone aueid asiansuin e jo uoenul sanloau A
Lidocaine is formulated in a patch for long-term use
the whole extremity, paying particular attention to the sites
to treat conditions such as osteoarthritis in humans,
 of large nerve trunks. In limbs, the technique is more effec-
with the aim of achieving high local lidocaine concentra-
aunn e on ieis a si usalun aun uaum a
tions and minimal systemic absorption. In humans, it is
When used for operations on a cow's teats, it is important
Figure 5.3 The catheter usually is placed by the surgeons before wound closure but can be placed later via an introducer
Allenoi s! l! os patenis s! (anid aul te yool no se iop yelg aul jo lal aul oi) salou uoisnjui, aul yl eae aul latauie
contained within the wound, and in the area requiring analgesia. The 'non-infusion' end of the catheter is firmly anchored to
the skin. In veterinary medicine, a long acting local anaesthetic is usually injected via this catheter at 4-6 hour intervals. For
analgesia in humans, a continuous infusion may be used
Photograph courtesy of Elizabeth Armitage-Chan.
119
Section
1
Principles and procedures
that vasoconstrictors are not added to the local anaesthetic
 Intravenous regional analgesia (IVRA)
solutions, as prolonged vasoconstriction may result in
In 1908, Bier frst reported a technique of 'venous anaes-
ischaemic necrosis of the teat end.
More commonly, regional analgesia is performed by
thesia: A small venous catheter is inserted at the distal
extremity of a limb and secured. The limb is exsanguin-
blocking conduction in the sensory nerve or nerves inner-
vating the operation site. The operative feld itself is not
ated, usually with an Esmarch bandage, a tourniquet is
 inflated or tied to occlude the arterial supply at the top of
touched while its sensations are abolished and good anal-
gesia results from the use of small quantities of solution.
the limb and the local anaesthetic solution is injected via
The solution must, however, be brought into the closest
the catheter. Analgesia of the limb up to the lower limit of
the tourniquet occurs rapidly, and when the tourniquet is
possible contact with the nerve which is to be blocked.
Specific nerve blocks can produce analgesia of a region Or
released it wears off with almost equal rapidity.
area of the body. These include blockade of a single nerve.
The mode of action of this technique is unclear but it
Or groups of nerves such as the brachial plexus (radial.
seems to be both safe and simple for operations on the
digits, especially in ruminants where the procedure can be
median, ulnar, musculocutaneous and axillary nerves) to
 provide anaesthesia of the distal forelimb.
carried out on the standing animal and in dogs, usually as
The accuracy of local anaesthetic placement when per-
an analgesic adjunct to general anaesthesia. The good
analgesia and bloodless feld are appreciated by the
forming specific nerve blocks can be improved by use of a
nerve stimulator and a dedicated, insulated needle (Mahler
surgeon. Analgesia develops distally and progresses proxi-
& Reece, 2007: Mahler & Adogwa, 2008). After inserting the
mally so it is important that the injection is made as dis-
needle, a small current is passed through it The technique
tally as possible. If the tourniquet is left in place for more
than about 1.5 hours ischaemic damage may follow and
relies on the fact that the nerve to be blocked contains motor
pain is severe. It is also important that the tourniquet is
fibres as the stimulating current produces a muscle twitch.
The needle is redirected until a twitch can still be observed
not released immediately after local anaesthetic injection
with the lowest possible current as this implies that the tip
dnug and systemic toxicity. Bupivacaine should not be used
of the needle is in close proximity to the nerve sheath.
for this technique at all because, due to its toxicity, cardio-
Recently, ultrasound guided techniques for local anaesthetic
blocks (brachial plexus, femoral and sciatic nerves) have
vascular collapse and death may occur when the tourni-
quet is released. Major advantages of this technique are
been described (Campoy et al., 20l0) which should aid accu-
that it requires no precise knowledge of anatomy and only
racy in placement Continuous peripheral nerve blockade
can be achieved with catheters placed subcutaneously around
one injection is required.
peripheral nerves to enable postoperative blockade in a con-
scious patient without the need for repeated injections
Intra-articular analgesia
[Mahler & Reece, 2007: Driessen et al., 2008).
Intrapleural local anaesthesia describes the placement
Intra-articular analgesia (or intrasynovial in tendon
 of local anaesthetics in the pleural space usually via an
sheaths) is used to provide profound local analgesia with
indwelling chest drain placed following thoracic proce-
minimal systemic side effects. It is important to use pre-
dures. Intermittent instillation of long-acting local anaes-
servative free drugs as the preservatives may have toxic
thetics, such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine, into the chest 
effects on articular cartilage and a sterile injection tech-
drain provided effective analgesia after thoracotomy in
nique is essential to avoid introducing infection into the
humans (Tetik et al., 2004). In dogs post-thoracotomy.
joint Many dnugs have a prolonged duration of action
intrapleural bupivacaine was as effective as systemic mor-
when injected into synovial cavities, and a single injection
phine or intercostal nerve blocks with bupivacaine
 may produce 24 hours of analgesia due to slow systemic
(Thompson & Johnson, 199l). The drug diffuses across
absorption. Morphine has a low lipid solubility and is
the pleura and blocks the intercostal nerves. After instilla-
thus retained within the synovial cavity for a prolonged
tion of local anaesthetic, the patient should be placed
period of time (Lindegaard et al., 20l0a). Low doses are
 incision-side down to allow gravity dependent pooling of 
also required to produce comparable analgesia compared
the drug near the intercostal nerves on the affected side
to systemic recommendations, and this may be further
and aid development of analgesia there The presence of
limited by the size of the joint space restricting the volume
 an open pericardium, and thus direct contact between the
that can be comfortably injected.
local anaesthetic and the heart, did not increase the cardiac
Upregulation of opioid receptors occurs in inflamed
toxicity or induce arrhythmias (Bernard et al., 2006).
joints (Keates et al., l999; Sheehy et al., 200l) and
Intratesticular anaesthesia is commonly used during
both opioids and local anaesthetics produce analgesia
castration of large animals, involving injection of a short-
when injected intra-articularly (Day et al., 1995; Linde-
acting local anaesthetic into the testicle and subcutane-
gard et al., 2010b). In general, local anaesthetics produce
ously in the scrotum. Injection may also be performed
more profound intra-articular analgesia than opioids,
higher in the spermatic cord.
although superior analgesia can be produced by using a
120
Analgesia
Chapter
5
combination of the two (Sammarco et al., 1996; Santos
Anatomy of the epidural space
et al., 2009). However, the effects of intra-articular mor-
 The epidural space is not a cavity in the undisturbed state
phine are controversial and a meta-analysis of human
in vivo; it contains blood vessels, lymphatics, nerves and
 studies concluded that intra-articular morphine produced
fat in dorsal and lateral compartments, i.e it is only a
a definite but mild analgesic effect although systemic
potential space.
absorption of morphine could not be excluded (Gupta
The spinal cord lies within the spinal canal and is
etal.,2001)
covered by three membranes: the outer layer is the dense
Recent evidence indicates that local anaesthetics may be
dura mater, with the arachnoid mater underneath and the
toxic to chondrocytes. After 30 minutes exposure to bupi-
delicate pia mater immediately surrounding the spinal
vacaine in vitro, less than 30% of cultured equine chondro-
cord. The wall of the spinal canal is formed by the verte-
cytes were viable (Park et al., 20ll). Cell viability after
bral arches and bodies, the intervertebral discs and the
exposure to lidocaine was 66% and mepivacaine 86%.
 Ketamine has been used intra-articularly in humans pro-
intervertebral ligaments. The spinal cord and dura mater
 end at the lumbar enlargement and the canal itself tapers
ducing analgesia for up to 24 hours without psychomimetic
 off caudal to this, to end at the fourth or fifth coccygeal
side effects, although the analgesia produced was not as
effective as that due to intra-articular bupivacaine (Dal et al.,
vertebra. Spinal nerves caudal to the end of the dural sac
are known as the cauda equina. The dural sac ends between
2004). NmDA receptors are found on peripheral sensory
axons which may be responsible for the analgesic effect of
L6 and L7 in most dogs and between L7 and S3 in cats. In
each vertebral segment, the canal has lateral openings
 peripheral ketamine. Other agents used intra-articularly in
between the vertebral arches, the intervertebral foraminae,
humans, and occasionally animal studies, include corticos-
through which pass blood vessels and the spinal nerves.
teroids, NSAIDS, O2-agonists and neostigmine
The venous plexuses of the spinal canal lie in the epi-
dural space to form a network and can be subdivided into:
Epidural and intrathecal analgesia
1. A pair of ventral venous plexuses lying on either side
Epidural analgesia describes the administration of drugs
of the dorsal longitudinal ligament of the vertebra,
into the extradural space (outside the dura mater but
into which the basivertebral veins drain.
umdermeath the ligamentum flavum). Intrathecal (spinal,
2.
 A single dorsal venous plexus which connects with
subdural or subarachnoid) analgesia is more commonly
the dorsal external veins. All interconnect with one
utilized in human medicine, and describes injection of
another and form a series of venous rings at the level
drugs into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), where diffusion
 of each vertebra. The accidental injection of dnugs
of the drugs is aided by movement of CSF
into these veins may occur during epidural injection
Advantages of epidural analgesia include fewer side
and result in toxicity.
effects of the drugs compared to systemic administration,
In addition to the venous plexuses, branches from ver-
long-lasting analgesia from a single injection and its con-
tebral, ascending cervical, deep cervical, intercostal,
tribution to a multimodal analgesic plan. Most epidural
lumbar and iliolumbar arteries enter the intervertebral
injections have a MAC sparing effect, reducing inhalational
foramina and anastomose with one another, chiefly in the
agent requirements by 30-40% (Golder et al., 1998). Epi-
lateral parts of the epidural space The spaces between the
durals are also useful to produce profound muscle relaxa-
nerves, arteries and veins in the epidural space are filled
tion of the affected area. Epidural analgesia in small
with fatty tissue, the amount of which corresponds with
animals has been reviewed (Jones, 2001; Campoy, 2004).
the adiposity of the subject.
In small animals, epidural injections are most com-
For drugs to be effective after epidural injection, they
monly performed at the lumbosacral (L-S) space. In large
must diffuse into neuronal tissue. There have been many
animals, the sacrococcygeal (S-Co) or frst intercoccygeal
different suggestions as to the fate of epidurally injected
(Col-Co2) spaces are more commonly
employed,
dnugs including: uptake into epidural fat, leakage out
described as ‘caudal block' producing analgesia over the
through the intervertebral foramina, diffusion into nerve
tail and croup as far as the mid-sacral region, the anus,
roots outside the meninges or removal by epidural blood
vulva, perineum and the caudal aspect of the thigh.
flow. The most likely explanations are probably diffusion
without affecting motor function of the hind limb and
into the dorsal roots of spinal nerves within the dura
 allowing the animal to remain standing. In animals at
mater or direct diffusion through the meninges to reach
parturition, 'straining’ or ‘bearing down' ceases while
the CSF and superficial layers of the spinal cord.
uterine contractions are unaffected. With L-S injections,
Drugs used for epidural injection
motor function of the hind limbs is usually affected, but
the area of analgesia produced is greater, extending from
Epidural analgesia can be produced using local anaesthet-
the tail and perineal area caudally, including the hind
ics, opioids, ketamine [Redua et al., 2002; Hamilton et al.
limbs and abdominal area. Epidural morphine injected at
2005). Qz-agonists, NSAIDS and other agents. A com-
the L-S space may also produce analgesia of the thorax.
monly used clinical combination is a local anaesthetic
121
Section
1
Principles and procedures
plus an opioid. This combination usually produces better
used to determine correct location of the spinal needle
quality analgesia with a shorter onset time and a longer
before drug injection. These include the hanging drop'.
duration than the use of a single agent (Ganidagli et al.
lack of resistance to a test injection of air or sterile saline
2004). Local anaesthetics cause temporary loss of sensa-
and the presence of epidural pressure waves (Iff et al.
tion in those parts of the body supplied by affected sensory
2007). These are discussed in more detail in specific
nerves and, when more concentrated solutions are used,
species chapters.
paralysis of those parts supplied by the motor fibres.
 Morphine is the most commonly used epidural opioid
Continuous epidural block
as its low lipid solubility ensures that it is retained within
Epidural catheters can be used to provide long-term anal.
the spinal canal for a prolonged period of time providing
 gesia and, with the correct choice of drugs and concentra-
analgesia for up to 24 hours after a single injection. The
tions, animals can be kept both ambulatory and pain free
low lipid solubility may also result in a high potency when
(Hansen, 200l ). The technique can also be used to prevent
administered spinally (Dickenson et al., 1990), but does
straining in cases of rectal and vaginal prolapse. Use of
mean that epidural morphine has a prolonged onset of
epidural catheters in 43 horses has been reported (Martin
action of 1 hour or more Spinally administered opioids
et al., 2003). The introduction of commercially available
may act at presynaptic sites in the dorsal horn to prevent
sterile packs of catheters and suitable needles has made
the release of substance P and at postsynaptic receptors to
the use of continuous blocks attractive in many species.
hyperpolarize nerve cells. Thus, they diminish nociception
Risks associated with continuous epidural block include
without having any noticeable effect on motor function.
technical difficulties in catheter placement and manage-
Epidural xylazine produces profound analgesia in some
ment, the potential for damaging the spinal cord, menin-
animals without interfering with motor activity (Caulkett 
ges and nerves and introducing infection. However,
et al., 1993) although sedation, decreased intestinal activ-
practice should render the technique safer and its accom-
ity and mild ataxia are reported in horses and cattle [Lee
plishment less formidable in all species.
et al., 2004). Lidocaine and xylazine combinations have
been used to good effect in horses and cattle (Grubb et al.
Contraindications to epidural injections
1992, 2002). Medetomidine has been used epidurally in
Contraindications include anatomical abnormalities
small animals at the L-S space however, injection is
usually accompanied by cardiopulmonary changes (hyper-
[including pelvic fractures which may increase the risk of
 inadvertent intrathecal injection), uncontrolled hypovol-
tension followed by hypotension, bradycardia and respira.
tory depression) suggesting that much ofthe epidural drug
aemia, coagulopathies, infection or skin disease at site of
needle insertion, bacteraemia or septicaemia and raised
is absorbed systemically.
The spread of solutions injected epidurally is most likely
intracranial pressure [inadvertent intrathecal injection
a function of the volume of dnug used (Freire et al., 2010)
may result in brain herniation).
and the site of injection. During late pregnancy and par-
turition, epidural blockade tends to spread further. This
Side effects
may be due to the space occupying and massaging effects 
Motor blockade is a common complication of epidural
 of distended venous plexuses in the epidural space causing
injection. Urinary retention can occur, particularly with
rhythmic pressure waves which tend to disperse solutions
the use of epidural opioids and may require manual
lying around them. Increased vascularity of the meninges 
expression of the bladder until normal function returns.
and changes in the CSF may also contribute to the
Pruritus has been reported occasionally after epidural
increased spread during pregnancy. Spread can be increased
opioids in animals (Haitjema & Gibson, 200l; Burford &
in obese patients as the increased epidural fat reduces the
volume of the epidural space. Local anaesthetic concentra.
moner in humans. Unlike in humans, respiratory depres-
tion affects the efficacy and selectivity ofthe block (sensory
sion attributable to epidural opioids is uncommon in
versus motor blockade).
animals. Neurological damage due to spinal nerve trauma
Hyperbaric solutions of local anaesthetics have been
has been reported and infection can occur. Delayed hair
used epidurally by the addition of glucose [50 mg/mL). In
regrowth commonly occurs over the injection site and can
humans, hyperbaric (compared to plain) ropivacaine
be very distressing for owners.
increased the speed of onset of block, spread and reliabil-
 Inadvertent intrathecal injection is possible at the L-S
ity of analgesia, duration of analgesic effects and also has-
space In cats, the subarachnoid space extends into the
tened recovery from the motor effects of the block (Fettes
sacral area, meaning that CSF can be obtained after place-
et al., 2005).
ment of a needle in the L-S space. It is also possible to
All drugs injected epidurally should be preservative free
obtain CSF from the L-S space in dogs, even though theo-
to avoid neurotoxic effects of preservatives. Use of a sterile
retically the subarachnoid space ends at L6-L7. Puncture
surgical technique is also essential to avoid the risk of
of the dura is not a problem as long as it is recognized.
introducing infection. Different techniques have been
Before injection, the spinal needle should be carefully
122
Analgesia
Chapter
5
observed for any sign of CSF in the hub. If the needle has
understood but may involve both spinal and supra-spinal
been placed in the subarachnoid space, it is common to
effects through lidocaine's actions at voltage-gated Na*
halve the proposed doses of dnugs to be injected, as the
channels which are upregulated by both inflammatory
presence of CSF will aid cranial spread of the drugs and
and neuropathic pain. Experimentally, lidocaine CRI
could result in cardiopulmonary toxicity if the normal
increases thermal thresholds in horses (Robertson et al.
epidural doses were used. Intrathecal morphine has been
2005b)
reported to cause myoclonus in two dogs (Kona-Boun
Lidocaine is an effective pro-kinetic agent in humans
et al., 2003; da Cunha et al., 2007).
and horses (Rimback et al., 1990; Groudine et al., 1998;
 Before epidural injections, the spinal needle should also
Brianceau et al., 2002; Malone et al., 2006). This may be
 be carefully observed for any signs of blood in the needle
 partly attributed to its analgesic effect as pain and nocicep-
hub. A 'bloody tap' indicates perforation of a spinal blood
tion inhibit gastrointestinal motility due to stimulation of
vessel, and systemic toxicity could result if injection was
 sympathetic innervation of the GI tract Alternatively, lido-
completed. The spinal needle should be withdrawn in
caine may affect release of neurotransmitters and inflam-
this case.
matory mediators and reduce peritoneal irritation affecting
 Hypotension is possible, as a result of either sympa-
GI motility (Rimback et al., 1990). In normal horses, lido-
thetic blockade or cardiovascular depression from high
aine CRI had no effect on duodenal or rectal distension
systemic plasma concentrations of local
anaesthetics.
thresholds suggesting minimal effects on visceral antinoci-
Local anaesthetics should not be injected epidurally in
ception (Robertson et al., 2005b). However, lidocaine
cardiovascularly unstable animals and some authors rec-
effects on visceral pain in animals with abnormal gastroin-
ommend pre-emptively fluid loading every patient before
testinal function and inflammatory changes may be quite
any epidural injection to avoid the risk of hypotension.
different from normal pain-free horses. Lidocaine CRI
Bradycardia and hypotension has also been reported as a
improved the barrier function of ischaemic jejunal mucosa
Bulunp anssaid enpida u saseau aaiel yo auanbasuom
in experimental horses, preventing the deleterious effects
injection (Iff & Moens, 2008).
on GI barrier function caused by NSAIDS such as flunixin
(Cook et al., 2008).
Systemic administration of lidocaine
Systemic lidocaine has anti-inflammatory effects, inhib-
iting neutrophil functions, such as release of lysosomal
Low dose lidocaine CRI is commonly used intra- and
postoperatively in dogs and horses, but not cats due to
et al., 1990), attenuating leucocyte adhesion to endothe-
unacceptable cardiopulmonary depression (Pypendop &
lial cells, reducing microvascular permeability and extrava-
Ilkiw, 2005). Suggested doses are in Table 5.4. Lidocaine
puos) siei ul uixoiopua Aq paonpul pimy jo uoes
has a profound dose-dependent MAC sparing
effect
et al., 1
1997: Hollmann & Durieux, 2000) and reduced
(Doherty & Frazier, 1998; Dzikiti et al., 2003; Valverde
haemodynamic and cytokine responses to endotoxin in
et al., 2004b) and can obtund the EEG changes associ-
rabbits (Taniguchi et al., 2000). Lidocaine inhibits accu-
ated with the noxious stimulation of castration (Murrell
 mulation, adhesion, activation and migration of human
et al., 2005). The analgesic mechanism is not completely
neutrophils (Hollmann & Durieux, 2000) but, in horses,
Table 5.4 Doses of other analgesic agents commonly used in animals
Dog
Horse
Lidocaine
Bolus 1-2 mg/kg IV over 15 mins
Not suitable
Bolus 1.3-1.5 mg/kg IV over 15 mins
CRI: 50-100 μg/kg/min 
CRI: 50 μg/kg/min
Ketamine
Bolus 0.5 mg/kg IV;
As dogs
Bolus 0.6 mg/kg IV;
CRI intraop: 10-20 μg/kg/min;
CRI: 10-25 μg/kg/min
postop: 2 μg/kg/min
 Tramadol
2-3 mg/kg IV
2 mg/kg IV, SC
2 mg/kg IM q 4 h
CRI: 1.3-2.6 mg/kg/h
 2-10 mg/kg PO
PO: 2-10 mg/kg q 6-12 h
Gabapentin
10 mg/kg PO q 12 h
10 mg/kg PO q 8 h*
2.5-5 mg/kg PO q 8-24 h
q: Every; CRI = Continuous rate (intravenous) infusion; IV: intravenous; SC: subcutaneous; IMI: intramuscular; PO = per os. Note: Not all of
these agents are licensed for use in animals. Many doses are empirical and evidence based recommendations are still required
*After Vettorato & Corletto (20 11)
123
Section
1
Principles and procedures
effects have only been noted at concentrations greater than
2009). A single dose of 2.5 mg/kg ketamine IM at the time
those likely to be reached after lidocaine CRI (Cook et al.,
of anaesthetic induction significantly improved postopera-
2009b). The anti-inflammatory effects of local anaesthet-
tive analgesia in dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy
ics have been comprehensively reviewed (Hollmann &
(Slingsby & Waterman-Pearson, 2000b). Suggested doses
Durieux, 2000) and there is a great deal of research interest 
 are in Table 5.4. The optimal dose of ketamine to produce
in this area in both human and veterinary medicine The
clinical analgesia requires further investigation.
anti-inflammatory actions are thought to be mediated by
Ketamine CRI has been used at varying doses in experi-
G-protein (particularly Gq) coupled receptors rather than
mental
horses with conflicting anti-nociceptive and
Nat channels (Hollmann et al., 200l). Theoretically, the
adverse effects [Fielding et al., 2006; Lankveld et al., 2006;
anti-inflammatory effects and inhibition of neutrophil
Peterbauer et al., 2008), reflecting the diffculties of using
response to bacteria may increase the risk of systemic
experimental, pain-free subjects to investigate a drug
infection, although experimentally. no adverse effects on
thought to act on chronic pain.
host defence mechanisms have been observed (Hollmann
A combined CRI of morphine, lidocaine and ketamine
& Durieux, 2000).
(MLK) or lidocaine and ketamine is frequently used to
Although intravenous local anaesthetics can cause CNS
provide profound, multimodal analgesia in dogs and
and cardiovascular toxicity. low doses of lidocaine at a
horses [Muir et al., 2003; Enderle et al., 2008).
slow infusion rate minimize the likelihood of toxicity
Other NMDA antagonists, such as amantadine, dex-
 developing. The first signs of toxicity are usually sedation
tromethorphan and magnesium, may prove useful for
or muscle fasciculations [Meyer et al., 200l ), which disap-
 neuropathic pain management, although further research
pear rapidly upon discontinuation of the infusion.
into their effcacy is required. Amantadine is an antiviral
dnug also used for treatment of Parkinson's disease in
humans. It has been used as an adjunctive treatment (with
meloxicam) in dogs with osteoarthritis at a dose of
KETAMINE
3-5 mg/kg every 24 hours PO and improved activity
scores (Lascelles et al., 2008).
Ketamine, as well as being an injectable anaesthetic agent,
Perzinfotel, a selective NmDA antagonist reported to be
has analgesic properties at subanaesthetic doses. Ketamine
10 times as potent as ketamine has been investigated in
is a non-competitive NMDA antagonist. The NMDA recep-
dogs and had a potent MAC-sparing effect without adverse
tor is a crucial part of the mechanism of CNS hypersensi-
cardiopulmonary side effects (Kushiro et al., 2007;
tization and wind-up. Ketamine exists as a racemic mixture
Ueyama et al., 2009).
and the S(+) isomer has a greater inhibitory effect at the
NMDA receptor than R(-) ketamine, resulting in increased
analgesic potency with fewer side effects than the racemic
TRAMADOL
mixture (Kohrs & Durieux, 1998). In humans, there are
conflicting studies on the benefits of ketamine as an anal-
aaoiso un uonai e suodai aos ym hisan
Tramadol is a synthetic analogue of codeine, used for
opioid requirement and improved analgesia (Michelet
more than 20 years to treat pain in humans. Tramadol is
et al., 2007) while others have reported benefcial effects
not a controlled drug in the UK, and has a low potential
only after the development of unacceptable side effects 
for abuse, which has made it popular in human medicine.
[Max et al., 1995). Direct comparison between studies is
It is not licensed for use in veterinary species. It is a weak
often difficult due to differences in anaesthetic and anal-
opioid receptor agonist and inhibits reuptake of noradren-
gesic techniques utilized and the surgical procedures
 aline and serotonin, giving it an Qz-adrenergic effect. Tra-
udertaken (Elia & Tramer, 2005). Ketamine may reduce
madol exists as a racemic mixture with (+)-Tramadol
the occurrence of phantom limb pain in humans (Dertwin-
acting via μ, K and & opioid receptors as well as O2- and
kel et al., 2002). Ketaminemay also haveanti-inflammatory
serotonin receptors. The other enantiomer, (-)-Tramadol
effects through reducing neutrophil activation and release
acts via Cz- receptors. In humans, tramadol is primarily
of cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF-o) and
metabolized to O-desmethyltramadol, an active metabo-
interleukin-6 (IL-6) (Lankveld et al. 2005).
lite known as Ml, which is a more potent μ receptor
 In dogs undergoing forelimb amputation, ketamine
agonist, thought to be responsible for the main analgesic
intra- and postoperatively reduced pain scores and
effects. This demethylation reaction is controlled by cyto-
increased activity levels with no adverse cardiorespiratory
o a ss m ga d a
effects [Wagner et al., 
2002). However, others have
in humans, resulting in individual variation in efficacy
between extensive and poor metabolizers. In veterinary
receiving ketamine CRI (Boscan et al., 2005; Solano et al.,
 species, metabolism varies and therapeutic concentrations
2006; Bergadano et al., 2009) and have questioned the
of Ml may not be produced (Giorgi et al., 2009a) result-
analgesic effects of low doses in dogs (Bergadano et al..
ing in debate over the mechanisms of analgesia produced
124
Analgesia
Chapter
5
by tramadol. Higher concentrations of N-O-didesmethyl-
although increased apnoeic threshold and reduced total
tramadol (M5) are measured in veterinary species (Giorgi
CO sensitivity are reported in cats, mediated by effects at
et al., 2009a,b). This metabolite also has a higher affnity
opioid receptors (Teppema et al., 2003; Monteiro et al.,
for the μ opioid receptor than the parent compound, but 
2009).
may not produce clinically significant analgesia as it
 In horses, very low plasma concentrations of Ml or M2
does not easily penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
are reported after administration (Giorgi et al, 2006;
N-desmethyltramadol (M2) is also produced in large
Shilo et al., 2008). However, these metabolites and M5
aoeul ue aq on juanou si inq sieue ul sauenh
can be detected by sensitive liquid chromatography/mass
metabolite (Giorgi et al., 2009a).
 spectrometry techniques (De Leo et al., 2009). The elimi-
The pharmacokinetics have been investigated most
 nation half-life in the horse was very short, suggesting that
completely in the dog. with conflicting results between
frequent administration (probably 2 mg/kg IM every 4
different studies, perhaps depending on the individual
hours) would be necessary to maintain effective plasma
animals used and their P2D6 capacity. For example, three-
concentrations in horses (Shilo et al., 2008). The bioavail-
fold differences in volume of distribution and area under
ability in horses was very low (3%) thus precluding oral
plasma concentration curve were reported after IV admin-
administration. The clinical efficacy in the horse has not
istration of similar doses to Beagle dogs (KuKanich &
been investigated, although experimentally there was no
Papich, 2004; Giorgi et al., 2009b). The elimination half-
effect on thermal threshold after IV administration
life in dogs after PO or IV administration is much shorter
(Dhanjal et al., 2009) although epidural administration
than in humans, suggesting frequent administration
increased electrical thresholds [Natalini & Robinson,
2000). The pharmacokinetics have also been investigated
centrations (KuKanich & Papich, 2004; McMillan et al.,
in goats (de Sousa et al., 2008)
2008: Giorgi et al., 2009b). Tenfold differences in the
plasma Ml concentrations have been reported in different
studies and Ml is not reliably detected in all individuals
(McMillan et al., 2008; Giorgi et al., 2009c). Tramadol is
GABAPENTIN
available as a sustained release oral formulation but, in
dogs. the pharmacokinetics are highly variable with
plasma concentrations only reliably detected in 50% of
There is increasing evidence that many conditions in
individuals (Giorgi et al., 2009c). These pharmacokinetic
animals are associated with neuropathic pain, including
studies appear to be at odds with the few clinical studies
syringomyelia in dogs (Rusbridge & Jeffery, 2008) and
which have reported good analgesia after tramadol admin-
laminitis in horses (Jones et al., 2007). Management of
istration in the dog (Mastrocinque & Fantoni, 2003;
neuropathic pain is of major importance in human medi -
Kongara et al., 2009; Seddighi et al., 2009; Vettorato et al.
cine and is receiving increasing attention in veterinary
2009). Doses are given in Table 5.4.
medicine although good experimental evidence for many
 Pharmacokinetics have been reported in the cat (Pypen-
 of the drugs used to treat neuropathic pain in animals is
dop & Ilkiw, 2008). Clearance was slower in cats than
lacking.
dogs, reflecting species differences in liver biotransforma-
[eins e si uium aup sdadaue ue si uuaea
tion, particularly as elimination of Ml requires glucuroni-
analogue of GABA, although gabapentin does not exert its
dation. The effects of tramadol on nociceptive (thermal
effects via GABA receptors. It is currently thought to bind
and pressure) thresholds in cats have been investigated
to the α2d subunit protein associated with voltage-
(Steagall et al., 2008; Pypendop et al., 2009) and trama-
dependent calcium channels, reducing calcium influx into
dol has been used epidurally (Castro et al., 2009). Trama-
 presynaptic nerve terminals and inhibiting release of exci-
dol in cats preanaesthesia reduced the MAC of sevoflurane
tatory amino acids in the CNS. It has also been hypothe-
by 40% (Ko et al., 2008) and produced good analgesia in
sized to act via NMDA receptors, Nat channels, opioid
cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy (Brondani et al..
receptors or monoaminergic pathways (Rose & Kam,
2009 ). Chronic administration of oral tramadol in cats has
2002). Most of the reports of its use in veterinary species
not been investigated, although anecdotally good results
are anecdotal, case reports or small case series (Cashmore
can be obtained in animals where NSAIDs are ineffective
et al., 2009) and it is not licensed in animals. Suggested
 Or contraindicated. The tablets are unpalatable to cats,
doses are given in Table 5.4.
however.
The pharmacokinetics have been studied in horses
The main side effect in dogs is mild sedation, although
(Dirikolu et al., 2008; Terry et al., 20l0). Gabapentin was
nausea, salivation and retching are occasionally seen
used in a single case report to treat suspected neuropathic
(McMillan et al., 2008; Monteiro et al., 2009). Direct
siea] 'asioy e ui sisaied aau lenouaj surmooy uid
administration of Ml in dogs produces more consistent
et al., 2007).
signs of nausea and sedation (KuKanich & Papich, 2004).
Preliminary studies in cats have indicated that oral
Clinically, there are minimal cardiorespiratory side effects,
gabapentin had no effect on thermal thresholds
125
Section
1
Principles and procedures
(Pypendop et al., 20l0), despite the dnug having good oral
in specific types of neuropathic pain such as treatment of
bioavailability in this species (Siao et al., 20l0). Gabapen-
headshaking in horses, thought to have a similar patho-
tin also did not cause a reduction in isoflurane MAC in
 genesis to post-herpetic (trigeminal) neuralgia in humans.
experimental cats (Reid et al., 2010). However, it should
The use, effcacy and side effects of drugs used to treat
be noted that these animals were not suffering from neu-
u yasan ao leap iea e aan ued oiedonau
ropathic pain. In dogs undergoing intervertebral disc
veterinary species.
surgery, gabapentin reduced pain scores, although the
efect was not significant until 3 days after surgery, suggest-
ing that gabapentin may have a delayed analgesic effect
(Aghighi et al., 2009).
OTHER ANALGESIC AGENTS
Pregabalin is a derivative of gabapentin, thought to have
the same mechanism of action. Pharmacokinetics have
Nitrous oxide (NzO), xenon and the Q2-agonists have
 been studied in dogs (Salazar et al., 2009). Other anticon-
 analgesic properties and are discussed further in the rele-
vulsants, such as carbamazepine, may have a role to play
  g  a  s s
REFERENCES
Abelson, A.L., McCobb, E.C., Shaw, S.,
intraoperative anaesthetic and
interpleural lidocaine and
et al., 2009. Use of wound soaker
postoperative analgesic conditions.
bupivacaine combination in
atheters for the administration of
Br JAnaesth 96, 259-261.
anesthetized dogs with and without
local anesthetic for post-operative
Armstrong, S., Lees, P., 2002. Effects of
an open pericardium. Vet Surg 35.
analgesia: 56 cases. Vet Anaesth
carprofen (R and S enantiomers and
252-258
Analg 36, 597-602.
racemate) on the production of IL-1,
Bidwell, L.A., wilson, D.V., Caron, J.P.,
Aghighi, S.A., Tipold, A., Kastner, S.B.R.,
IL-6 and TNF-alpha by equine
2007. Lack of systemic absorption of
2009. Effects of gabapentin as
chondrocytes and synoviocytes. J Vet
lidocaine from 5% patches placed
add-on medication on pain after
Pharmacol Ther 25, 145-153.
on horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
intervertebral disc surgery in
Ashley, F.H., Waterman-Pearson, A.E.,
443-446.
dogs- preliminary results.
Whay, H.R., 2005. Behavioural
Boscan, P., Pypendop, B.H., Solano,
Proceedings of the 10th World
assessment of pain in horses and
A.M., et al., 2005. Cardiovascular
Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia,
donkeys: application to clinical
and respiratory effects of ketamine
Glasgow, UK, 133.
practice and future studies. Equine
infusions in isoflurane-anesthetized
Agnello, K.A., Reynolds, L.R., Budsberg.
Vet I 37, 565-575.
dogs before and during noxious
S.C., 2005. In vivo effects of
Bennett, R.C., Steffey, E.P., Kollias-Baker.
stimulation. Am J Vet Res G6.
tepoxalin, an inhibitor of
C., et al., 2004. Influence of
2122-2129
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase, on
morphine sulfate on the halothane
Boscan, P., Van Hoogmoed, L.M., Farver.
 prostanoid and leukotriene
sparing effect of xylazine
T.B., et al., 2006a. Evaluation of the
production in dogs with chronic
hydrochloride in horses. Am J Vet
effects of the opioid agonist
osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res G6,
Res 65, 519-526.
morphine on gastrointestinal tract
966-972
Beretta, C., Garavaglia, G., Cavalli, M.,.
function in horses. Am I Vet Res 67,
Allweiler, S., Brodbelt, D.C., Borer, K.,
2005. COX-1 and COX-2 inhibition
992-997.
et al., 2007. The isoflurane-sparing
in horse blood by phenylbutazone.
Boscan, P., Van Hoogmoed, L.M.,
and clinical effects of a constant rate
flunixin, carprofen and meloxicam:
Pypendop, B.H., et al., 2006b.
infusion of remifentanil in dogs. Vet
an in vitro analysis. Pharmacol Res
Phamacokinetics of the opioid
Anaesth Analg 34, 388-393.
52, 302-306.
antagonist N-methylnaltrexone and
Andersen, M.S., Clark, L., Dyson, S.J..
Bergadano, A., Andersen, O.K..
evaluation of its effects on
et al., 2006. Risk factors for colic in
Arendt-Nielsen, L., et al., 2009.
gastrointestinal tract function in
horses after general anaesthesia for
Plasma levels of a low-dose
horses treated or not treated with
 MRI or nonabdominal surgery:
 constant-rate-infusion of ketamine
morphine. Am I Vet Res 67.
 absence of evidence of effect from
and its effect on single and repeated
998-1004.
perianaesthetic morphine. Equine
nociceptive stimuli in conscious
Bostrom, I.M., Nyman, G., Hoppe, A..
Vet J38, 368-374
dogs. Vet I 182, 252-260.
et al., 2006. Effects of meloxicam on
Angst, M.S., Clark, J.D., 2006. Opioid-
Bergh, M.S., Budsberg. S.C., 2005. The
renal function in dogs with
 induced hyperalgesia: a qualitative
 coxib NSAIDs: potential clinical and
hypotension during anaesthesia. Vet
systematic review. Anesthesiology
pharmacologic importance in
Anaesth Analg 33, 62-69.
104, 570-587.
veterinary medicine. J Vet Intern Med
Brainard, B.M., Meredith, C.P., Callan,
Arai, Y.C., Ikeuchi, M., Fukunaga, K.,
19. 633-643.
M.B., et al., 2007. Changes in
et al., 2006. Intra-articular injection
Bernard, F, Kudnig, S.T., Monnet, E.,
platelet function, hemostasis, and
 of warmed lidocaine improves 
2006. Hemodynamic effects of
prostaglandin expression after
126
Analgesia
Chapter
5
treatment with nonsteroidal
Caulkeltt, N., Cribb, P.H., Duke, T..
Davis, J.L., Posner, L.P., Elce, Y., 2007.
anti-inflammatory drugs with various
1993. Xylazine epidural analgesia for
Gabapentin for the treatment of
cyclooxygenase selectivities in dogs.
 cesarian section in cattle. Can Vet J
neuropathic pain in a pregnant
Am J Vet Res 68, 251-257.
34.674-676
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 231,
Brianceau, P., Chevalier, H., Karas, A.,
Chandrasekharan, N.V., Dai, H., Roos,
755-758.
et al., 2002. Intravenous lidocaine
K.L., et al., 2002. COX-3, a
Day, T.K., Pepper, W.T., Tobias, TA..
and small-intestinal size, abdominal
 Cyclooxygenase-1 variant inhibited
et al., 1995. Comparison of intra-
fluid, and outcome after colic surgery
by acetaminophen and other
articular and epidural morphine for
in horses. I Vet Intern Med 16,
analgesic/antipyretic drugs: cloning.
analgesia following stifle arthrotomy
736-741.
structure, and expression. Proc Natl
in dogs. Vet Surg 24, 522-530.
Brideau, C., Van Staden, C., Chan, C.C.
Acad Sci USA 99, 13926-13931.
de Grauw, J.C., van de Lest, C.H.,.
2001. In vitro effects of
Clark, L., Clutton, R.E., Blissitt, K.J..
Brama, PA., et al., 2009. In vivo
cyclooxygenase inhibitors in whole
et al., 2005. Effects of peri-operative
effects of meloxicam on
blood of horses, dogs, and cats. Am I
morphine administration during
 inflammatory mediators, MMP
Vet Res 62, 1755-1760.
halothane anaesthesia in horses. Vet
activity and cartilage biomarkers in
Brondani, J.T., Loureiro Luna, S.P, Beier.
Anaesth Analg 32, 10-15.
equine joints with acute synovitis.
S.L., et al., 2009. Analgesic effcacy of
Conzemius, M.G., Hill, C.M.
Equine Vet I 41, 693-699.
perioperative use of vedaprofen.
Sammarco, I.L., et al., 1997.
De Leo, M., Giorgi, M., Saccomanni, G..
tramadol or their combination in
Correlation between subjective and
et al., 2009. Evaluation of tramadol
cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
objective measures used to
and its main metabolites in horse
J Feline Med Surg 11, 420-429.
determine severity of postoperative
plasma by high-performance liquid
 pain in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
chromatography/fluorescence and
Burford, J.H., Corley, K.T., 2006.
Morphine-associated pruritus after
210, 1619-1622.
liquid chromatography/electrospray
ionization tandem mass
single extradural administration in a
Cook, V.L., Jones Shults, I., McDowell,
horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
M., et al., 2008. Attenuation of
spectrometry techniques. Rapid
193-198.
ischaemic injury in the equine
Commun Mass Spectrom 23.
jejunum by administration of
228-236.
Bussieres, G., Jacques, C., Lainay, O.
 systemic lidocaine. Equine Vet J 40.
de Sousa, A.B., Santos, A.C., Schramm,
et al., 2008. Development of a
composite orthopaedic pain scale in
353-357.
S.G., et al., 2008. Pharmacokinetics 
horses. Res Vet Sci 85, 294-306.
Cook, V.L., Meyer, C.T., Campbell, N.B.,
of tramadol and
O-desmethyltramadol in goats after
Campbell, N.B., Blikslager, A.T., 2000.
et al., 2009a. Effect of frocoxib or
intravenous and oral administration.
The role of cyclooxygenase inhibitors
 flunixin meglumine on recovery of
ischemic-injured equine jejunum.
JVet Pharmacol Ther 31, 45-51.
in repair of ischaemic-injured jejunal
Am J Vet Res 70, 992-1000.
Deneuche, A.l., Dufayet, C., Goby, L..
mucosa in the horse. Equine Vet J
et al., 2004. Analgesic comparison
Suppl, 59-64.
Cook, V.L., Neuder, L.E., Blikslager, A.T.,.
et al., 2009b. The effect of lidocaine
of meloxicam or ketoprofen for
 Campoy, L., 2004. Epidural and spinal
orthopedic surgery in dogs. Vet Surg
anaesthesia in the dog. In Practice
 on in vitro adhesion and migration
33. 650-660.
26.262-269
of equine neutrophils. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 129, 137-142.
Dertwinkel, R., Heinrichs, C., Senne, I..
Campoy, L., Bezuidenhout, A.J., Gleed,
et al., 2002. Prevention of severe
R.D., et al., 2010. Ultrasound-guided
Coyle, D.E., Porembka, D.T., Sehlhorst,
C.S., et al., 1994. Echocardiographic
phantom limb pain by perioperative
approach for axillary brachial plexus.
administration of ketamine - an
femoral nerve, and sciatic nerve
evaluation of bupivacaine
observational study. Acute Pain 4.
blocks in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
ardiotoxicity. Anesth Analg 79.
9-13.
37.144-153.
335-339
Dhanjal, J.K., Wilson, D.V., Robinson,
Carpenter, R.E., wilson, D.V., Evans,
Craven, M., Chandler, M.L., Steiner.
E., et al., 2009. Intravenous 
A.T., 2004. Evaluation of
J.M., et al., 2007. Acute effects of
 tramadol: effects, nociceptive
intraperitoneal and incisional
carprofen and meloxicam on canine
 properties, and pharmacokinetics in
lidocaine or bupivacaine for
gastrointestinal permeability and
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
 analgesia following
mucosal absorptive capacity. J Vet
581-590.
owariohysterectomy in the dog. Vet
Intern Med 21, 917-923.
Dickenson, A.H., Sullivan, A.F., McQuay.
Anaesth Analg 31, 46-52.
Curry, S.L., Cogar, S.M., Cook, I..
H.J., 1990. Intrathecal etorphine,
Cashmore, R.G., Harcourt-Brown, T.R.
2005. Nonsteroidal
fentanyl and buprenorphine on
Freeman, P.M., et al., 2009. Clinical
Antinflammatory Drugs: A Review.
spinal nociceptive neurones in the
diagnosis and treatment of suspected
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 41, 298-309.
rat. Pain 42, 227-234.
neuropathic pain in three dogs. Aust
da Cunha, A.F., Carter, J.E., Grafinger.
Dirikolu, L., Dafalla, A., Ely, K.J., et al.,
Vet I 87, 45-50.
M., et al., 2007. Intrathecal
2008. Pharmacokinetics of
Castro, D.S., Silva, M.F., Shih, A.C.,
morphine overdose in a dog. I Am
gabapentin in horses. J Vet 
et al., 2009. Comparison between
Vet Med Assoc 230, 1665-1668.
Pharmacol Ther 31, 175-177.
the analgesic effects of morphine
Dal, D., Tetik, O., Altunkaya, H., et al..
Dixon, M.J., Robertson, S.A., Taylor.
and tramadol delivered epidurally in
2004. The effcacy of intra-articular
PM., 2002. A thermal threshold
cats receiving a standardized noxious
ketamine for postoperative analgesia
testing device for evaluation of
stimulation. I Feline Med Surg 11.
 in outpatient arthroscopic surgery.
analgesics in cats. Res Vet Sci 72.
948-953.
Arthroscopy 20, 300-305.
205-210.
127
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Doherty, T.j., Frazier, D.L., 1998. Effect
research into practice. Anim Welfare
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic
of intravenous lidocaine on
13, S71-S75.
approach in the cat to determine a
halothane minimum alveolar
Flecknell, PA., Liles, J.H., Wootton, R.,
dosage regimen for the COx-2
concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J
1989. Reversal of fentanyl/fluanisone
selective drug robenacoxib. J Vet
30,300-303
 neuroleptanalgesia in the rabbit
Pharmacol Ther 32, 18-30.
Doucet, M.Y., Bertone, A.L..
using mixed agonist/antagonist
Giraudel, J.M., Toutain, PL., King, J.N..
Hendrickson, D., et al., 2008.
opioids. Lab Anim 23, 147-155.
et al., 2009b. Differential inhibition
Comparison of effcacy and safety of
Freire, C.D., Torres, M.L., Fantoni, D.T.,
of cyclooxygenase isoenzymes in the
 paste formulations of frocoxib and
et al., 2010. Bupivacaine 0.25% and
cat by the NSAID robenacoxib. J Vet
 phenylbutazone in horses with
methylene blue spread with epidural
Pharmacol Ther 32, 31 -40.
naturally occurring osteoarthritis.
anesthesia in dog. Vet Anaesthes
Giraudel, J.M., Toutain, P.L., Lees, P,
JAm Vet Med Assoc 232, 91-97.
Analges 37, 63-69.
2005. Development of in vitro assays
Driessen, B., Scandella, M., Zarucco, L..
Frendin, J.H., Bostrom, IM., Kampa, N.,
for the evaluation of cyclooxygenase
2008. Development of a technique
et al., 2006. Effects of carprofen on
inhibitors and predicting selectivity
for continuous perineural blockade
renal function during medetomidine-
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
of the palmar nerves in the distal
 propofol-isoflurane anesthesia in
drugs in cats. Am I Vet Res 66.
equine thoracic limb. Vet Anaesth
dogs. Am J Vet Res 67, 1967-1973.
700-709.
Analg 35, 432-448.
Ganidagli, S., Cetin, H., Biricik, H.S., et
Golder, FJ., Pascoe, PJ., Bailey, C.S., et
Dzikiti, T.B., Hellebrekers, L.J., van Dijk,
al., 2004. Comparison of ropivacaine
al., 1998. The effect of epidural
P, 2003. Effects of intravenous
with a combination of ropivacaine
mophine on the minimum alveolar
lidocaine on isoflurane
and fentanyl for the caudal epidural
concentration of isoflurane in cats.
 concentration, physiological
anaesthesia of mares. Vet Rec 154.
Vet Anaesth Analg 25, 52-56.
 parameters, metabolic parameters
329-332.
Goodman, L., Coles, T.B., Budsberg. S.
 and stress-related homones in
Gilmour, M.A., Lehenbauer, T.w, 2009.
2008. Leukotriene inhibition in
horses undergoing surgery. J Vet Med
Comparison of tepoxalin, carprofen,
small animal medicine. J Vet
A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 50,
and meloxicam for reducing
Pharmacol Ther 31, 387-398.
190-195.
intraocular inflammation in dogs.
Grilo, L.S., Carrupt, PA., Abriel, H.,
Elia, N., Tramer, M.R., 2005. Ketamine
Am J Vet Res 70, 902-907.
2010. Stereoselective Inhibition of
 and postoperative pain - a
Giordano, T., Steagall, PV., Ferreira,
the hERG1 Potassium Channel.
quantitative systematic review of
T.H., et al., 2010. Postoperative
Front Pharmacol 1, Article 137,
randomised trials. Pain 113, 61-70.
analgesic effects of intravenous,
1-11.
Enderle, A.K., Levionnois, O.L., Kuhn.
intramuscular, subcutaneous or oral
Groudine, S.B., Fisher, H.A., Kaufman,
M., et al., 2008. Clinical evaluation
transmucosal buprenorphine
R.P., Ir., et al., 1998. Intravenous
 of ketamine and lidocaine
administered to cats undergoing
lidocaine speeds the return of bowel
intravenous infusions to reduce
ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
function, decreases postoperative
isoflurane requirements in horses
Analg 37, 357-366.
pain, and shortens hospital stay in
under general anaesthesia. Vet
Giorgi, M., Saccomanni, G., Daniello,
 patients undergoing radical
Anaesth Analg 35, 297-305.
M.R., et al., 2006. In vitro
retropubic prostatectomy. Anesth
Erkert, R.S., MacAllister, C.G., Payton,
metabolism of tramadol in horses:
Analg 86, 235-239.
M.E., et al., 2005. Use of force plate
preliminary data. J Vet Pharmaco]
Grubb, T.L, Riebold, T.W., Crisman, R.O.,
analysis to compare the analgesic
Ther 29, 124.
et al., 2002. Comparison of lidocaine.
effects of intravenous administration 
Giorgi, M., Del Carlo, S., Saccomanni,
xylazine, and lidocaine & xylazine for
 of phenylbutazone and flunixin
G., et al., 2009a. Pharmacokinetic
cudal epidural analgesia in cattle. Vet
 meglumine in horses with navicular
and urine profle of tramadol and its
Anaesth Analg 29, 64-68.
syndrome. Am J Vet Res G6,
major metabolites following oral
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W., Huber, M.J..
284-288.
immediate release capsules
1992. Comparison of lidocaine.
Fettes, P.D., Hocking, G., Peterson, M.K..
administration in dogs. Vet Res 
xylazine, and xylazine/lidocaine for
et al., 2005. Comparison of plain 
Commun 33, 875-885.
cudal epidural analgesia in horses.
and hyperbaric solutions of
Giorgi, M., Del Carlo, S., Saccomanni,.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 201, 1187-1190.
ropivacaine for spinal anaesthesia. Br
G., et al., 2009b. Pharmacokinetics
Guedes, A.G., Rude, E.P., Rider, M.A.,
JAnaesthes 94, 107-111.
of tramadol and its major
2006. Evaluation of histamine
Fielding, C.L., Brumbaugh, G.W..
metabolites following rectal and
release during constant rate infusion
Matthews, N.S., et al., 2006.
intravenous administration in dogs.
of morphine in dogs. Vet Anaesth 
Pharmacokinetics and clinical effects
NZ Vet]57. 146-152.
Analg 33, 28-35.
of a subanesthetic continuous rate
Giorgi, M., Saccomanni, G., Lebkowska-
Gupta, A., Bodin, L., Holmstrom, B.
infusion of ketamine in awake
Wieruszewska, B., et al., 2009c.
et al., 2001. A systematic review of
horses. Am J Vet Res 67, 1484-1490.
Pharmacokinetic evaluation of
the peripheral analgesic effects of
Firth, A.M., Haldane, S.L., 1999.
tramadol and its major metabolites
intraarticular morphine. Anesth 
Development of a scale to evaluate
after single oral sustained tablet
Analg 93, 761-770.
postoperative pain in dogs. I Am Vet
administration in the dog: a pilot
Haitjema, H., Gibson, K.T., 2001. Severe
Med Assoc 214, 651-659.
study. Vet J 180, 253-255.
pruritus associated with epidural
Fecknell, PA., Roughan, J.V., 2004.
Giraudel, J.M., King, I.N., Jeunesse, E.C.,
morphine and detomidine in a
 Assessing pain in animals putting
et al., 2009a. Use of a
horse. Aust Vet J 79, 248-250.
128
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Hamilton, S.M., Johnston, S.A.,
Ingvast-Larsson, C., Holgersson, A..
Kona-Boun, J.I, Pibarot, P, Quesnel, A..
Broadstone, R.V., 2005. Evaluation of
Bondesson, U., et al., 2010. Clinical
 2003. Myoclonus and urinary
 analgesia provided by the
 pharmacology of methadone in
retention following subarachnoid
administration of epidural ketamine
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 48-56.
morphine injection in a dog. Vet 
in dogs with a chemically induced
Innes, J.F., Clayton, I., Lascelles, B.D.,
Anaesth Analg 30, 257-264.
synovitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 32,
2010. Review of the safety and
Kongara, K., Chambers, P, Johnson,
30-39.
effcacy of long-term NSAID use in 
C.B., 2009. Glomerular fltration rate
Hansen, B.D., 2001. Epidural catheter
the treatment of canine
after tramadol, parecoxib and
analgesia in dogs and cats: technique
Osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 166, 226-230.
pindolol following anaesthesia and
 and review of 182 cases. J Vet Emerg
Jones, E, Vinuela-Fernandez, I., Eager,
analgesia in comparison with
Crit Care 11, 95-103.
R.A., et al., 2007. Neuropathic
morphine in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
Hazewinkel, H.A., van den Brom, W.E.,
changes in equine laminitis pain.
36,86-94.
Theyse, L.F., et al., 2008. Comparison
Pain 132, 321-331.
KuKanich, B., Borum, S.L., 2008. The
 of the effects of frocoxib, carprofen
Jones, R.S., 2001. Epidural analgesia in
disposition and behavioral effects of
and vedaprofen in a sodium urate
the dog and cat. Vet / 161, 123-131.
methadone in Greyhounds. Vet
Cystal induced synovitis model of
Jung, M., Lees, P., Seewald, W., et al.
Anaesth Analg 35, 242-248.
arthritis in dogs. Res Vet Sci 84.
2009. Analytical determination and
KuKanich, B., Papich, M.G., 2004.
74-79.
 pharmacokinetics of robenacoxib in
 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
Herring, I.P., Bobofchak, M.A., Landry.
the dog. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 32.
the metabolite O-desmethyltramadol
M.P., et al., 2005. Duration of effect
41-48.
in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 27.
and effect of multiple doses of
Kay-Mugford, P., Benn, S.J., LaMarre, I.
239-246.
topical ophthalmic 0.5%
et al., 2000. In vitro effects of
KuKanich, B., Bidgood, T., Knesl, O..
proparacaine hydrochloride in
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
2012. Clinical pharmacology of
dinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
drugs on cyclooxygenase activity in
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
66. 77-80.
dogs. Am J Vet Res 61, 802-810.
drugs in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
Hollmann, M.W., Durieux, M.E., 2000.
Keates, H.L., Cramond, T., Smith, M.T.,
69-90.
Local anesthetics and the
1999. Intrarticular and periarticular
KuKanich, B., Lascelles, B.D., Papich,
inflammatory response: a new
opioid binding in inflamed tissue in
M.G., 2005. Pharmacokinetics of
therapeutic indication?
experimental canine arthritis. Anesth
Anesthesiology 93, 858-875.
morphine and plasma
Analg 89, 409-415.
concentrations of morphine-6-
Hollmann, M.w., Gross, A., Jelacin, N.,
King, I.N., Dawson, I, Esser, R.E., et al..
gucuronide following morphine
et al., 2001. Local anesthetic effects
2009. Preclinical pharmacology of
administration to dogs. J Vet
on priming and activation of human
robenacoxib: a novel selective 
Pharmacol Ther 28, 371-376.
neutrophils. Anesthesiology 95.
 inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2. J Vet
Kushiro, T., Wiese, A.J., Eppler, M.C..
113-122.
Pharmacol Ther 32, 1-17.
et al., 2007. Effects of perzinfotel on
Holton, L., Reid, I., Scott, E.M., et al.,
King, J.N., Rudaz, C., Borer, L., et al.,.
the minimum alveolar concentration
2001. Development of a behaviour-
2010. In vitro and ex vivo inhibition
of isoflurane in dogs. Am J Vet Res
based scale to measure acute pain in
of canine cyclooxygenase isoforms
68, 1294-1299.
dogs. Vet Rec 148, 525-531.
by robenacoxib: A comparative
Kvaternick, V., Pollmeier, M., Fischer, I..
Holton, L.L., Scott, E.M., Nolan, A.M.,
study. Res Vet Sci 88, 497-506.
et al., 2007. Pharmacokinetics and
et al., 1998a. Relationship between
Kirchner, T., Aparicio, B., Argentieri,
metabolism of orally administered
physiological factors and clinical
D.C., et al., 1997. Effects of
frocoxib, a novel second generation 
pain in dogs scored using a
 tepoxalin, a dual inhibitor of
coxib, in horses. J Vet Pharmacol
numerical rating scale. J Small Anim
cyclooxygenase/5-lipoxygenase, on
Ther 30, 208-217.
Pract 39, 469-474.
 events associated with NSAID-
Lagutchik, M.S., Mundie, T.G., Martin,
Holton, L.L., Scott, E.M., Nolan, A.M.,
induced gastrointestinal
D.G., 1992. Methemoglobinemia
et al., 1998b. Comparison of three
inflammation. Prostaglandins Leukot
induced by a benzocaine-based
methods used for assessment of pain
Essent Fatty Acids 56, 417-423.
topically administered anesthetic in
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 212.
Kis, B., Snipes, JA., Busija, D.W., 2005.
eight sheep. I Am Vet Med Assoc
61-66.
 Acetaminophen and the
201, 1407-1410.
Homer, L.M., Clarke, C.R., Weingarten,
 cyclooxygenase-3 puzzle: sorting out
Lankveld, D.P., Bull, S., Van Dijk, P.,
A.J., 2005. Effect of dietary fat on
facts, fctions, and uncertainties. J
et al., 2005. Ketamine inhibits
oral bioavailability of tepoxalin in
Pharmacol Exp Ther 315, 1-7.
LPS-induced tumour necrosis
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 28,
Ko, J.C., Abbo, L.A., Weil, A.B., et al.,
factor-alpha and interleukin-6 in an
287-291.
2008. Effect of orally administered
equine macrophage cell line. Vet Res
Iff I., Moens, Y., 2008. Two cases of
tramadol alone or with an
36.257-262
 bradyarrhythmia and hypotension
intravenously administered opioid
Lankveld, D.P., Driessen, B., Soma, L.R.,
 after extradural injections in dogs.
 on minimum alveolar concentration
et al., 2006. Pharmacodynamic
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 265-269.
of sevoflurane in cats. J Am Vet Med
effects and pharmacokinetic profile
Iff, I., Moens, Y, Schatzmann, U., 2007.
Assoc 232, 1834-1840.
of a long-term continuous rate
Use of pressure waves to confirm the
Kohrs, R., Durieux, M.E., 1998.
infusion of racemic ketamine in
 correct placement of epidura]
Ketamine: teaching an old drug new
healthy conscious horses. J Vet
needles in dogs. Vet Rec 161, 22-25.
tricks. Anesth Analg 87, 1186-1193.
Pharmacol Ther 29, 477 -488.
129
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Laredo, FG., Belda, E., Murciano, I.,
Lindegaard, C., Frost, A.B., Thomsen,
catheterization for delivery of
et al., 2004. Comparison of the 
M.H., et al., 2010a. Pharmacokinetics
analgesics in horses: 43 cases
 analgesic effects of meloxicam and
of intra-articular morphine in horses
(1998-2001). I Am Vet Med Assoc
carprofen administered
with lipopolysaccharide-induced
222, 1394-1398.
 preoperatively to dogs undergoing
synovitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
Martin, W.R., Eades, C.G., Thompson,
orthopaedic surgery. Vet Rec 155.
186-195.
J.A., et al., 1976. The effects of
667-671.
Lindegaard, C., Gleerup, K.B., Thomsen,
morphine- and nalorphine- like
Lascelles, B.D., Robertson, S.A., 2004.
M.H., et al., 2010b. Anti-
drugs in the nondependent and
Use of thermal threshold response to
inflammatory effects of intra.
morphine-dependent chronic spinal
waluate the antinociceptive effects of
 articular administration of morphine
dog. I Pharmacol Exp Ther 197.
butorphanol in cats. Am J Vet Res
in horses with experimentally
517-532.
65, 1085-1089
induced synovitis. Am J Vet Res 71,
Mastrocinque, S., Fantoni, D.T., 2003. A
Lascelles, B.D., Court, M.H., Hardie.
69-75.
comparison of preoperative tramadol
E.M., et al., 2007. Nonsteroidal
Little, D., Brown, S.A., Campbell, N.B..
and morphine for the control of
anti-inflammatory drugs in cats: a
et al., 2007a. Effects of the
early postoperative pain in canine
review. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
cyclooxygenase inhibitor meloxicam
owariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
228-250.
on recovery of ischemia-injured
Analg 30, 220-228.
Lascelles, B.D., Cripps, P.., Jones, A..
equine jejunum. Am I Vet Res 68.
Matsui, A., Williams, J.T., 2010.
et al., 1998. Effcacy and kinetics of
614-624.
Activation of mu-opioid receptors
crprofen, administered
Little, D., Jones, S.L., Blikslager, A.T.,
and block of Kir3 potassium
preoperatively or postoperatively, for
 2007b. Cyclooxygenase (COX)
channels and NMDA receptor
the prevention of pain in dogs
inhibitors and the intestine. J Vet
conductance by L- and D-methadone
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet
Intern Med 21, 367-377.
in rat locus coeruleus. Br J
Surg 27, 568-582.
Pharmacol 161, 1403-1413.
Lizarraga, I., Chambers, J.P, 2006.
Max, M.B., Byas-Smith, M.G., Gracely.
Lascelles, B.D., Gaynor, J.S., Smith, E.S.,
Involvement of opioidergic and
et al., 2008. Amantadine in a
alpha2-adrenergic mechanisms in
R.H., et al., 1995. Intravenous
infusion of the NMDA antagonist,
multimodal analgesic regimen for
the central analgesic effects of
ketamine, in chronic postraumatic
alleviation of refractory osteoarthritis
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
pain in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 22.
drugs in sheep. Res Vet Sci 80,
pain with allodynia: a double-blind
53-59.
194-200.
comparison to alfentanil and
placebo. Clin Neuropharmacol 18,
Lee, I., Yamagishi, N., Oboshi, K., et al.
Lohuis, J.A., van Werven, T., Brand, A.
 2004. Comparison of xylazine,
360-368.
et al., 1991. Pharmacodynamics and
lidocaine and the two drugs
Maxwell, L.K., Thomasy, S.M., Slovis, N.,.
pharmacokinetics of carprofen, a
et al., 2003. Phamacokinetics of
combined for modifed dorsolumbar
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
fentanyl following intravenous and
epidural anaesthesia in cattle. Vet Rec
drug, in healthy cows and cows with
155,797-799.
transdermal administration in
Escherichia coli endotoxin-induced
mastitis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 14,
horses. Equine Vet J 35, 484-490.
Lee, M., Silverman, S.M., Hansen, H.,
219-229
McCance-Katz, E.F., 2011.
et al., 2011. A comprehensive review
(R)-methadone versus racemic
of opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Pain
Luna, S.P., Basilio, A.C., Steagall, PV.,
methadone: what is best for patient
Physician 14, 145-161.
et al., 2007. Evaluation of adverse
cre? Addiction 106, 687-688.
Leece, E.A., Brearley, J.C., Harding, E.F.
effects of long-term oral
McCann, M.E., Andersen, D.R., Zhang.
2005. Comparison of carprofen and
administration of carprofen,
etodolac, flunixin meglumine,
D., et al., 2004. In vitro effects and
 meloxicam for 72 hours following
in vivo efficacy of a novel
 owariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet
ketoprofen, and meloxicam in dogs.
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in dogs
Anaesth Analg 32, 184-192.
Am J Vet Res 68, 258-264.
with experimentally induced
Lees, P, Aliabadi, FS., Landoni, M.F.
Mahler, S.P., Adogwa, A.O., 2008.
synovitis. Am J Vet Res 65, 503-512.
2002. Pharmacodynamics and
Anatomical and experimental studies 
McCann, M.E., Rickes, E.L., Hora, D.F.,
emantioselective pharmacokinetics of
of brachial plexus, sciatic, and
et al., 2005. In vitro effects and in
racemic carprofen in the horse. J Vet
femoral nerve-location using
vivo efficacy of a novel
Pharmacol Ther 25, 433-448.
peripheral nerve stimulation in the
 cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor in cats
Lees, P., Giraudel, I., Landoni, M.F.
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 80-89.
with lipopolysaccharide-induced
et al., 2004a. PK-PD integration and
Mahler, S.P., Reece, J.L., 2007. Electrical
pyrexia. Am J Vet Res 66.
PK-PD modelling of nonsteroidal
nerve stimulation to facilitate
1278-1284
anti-inflammatory drugs: principles
placement of an indwelling catheter
McMillan, C.., Livingston, A., Clark,
 and applications in veterinary
for repeated brachial plexus block in
C.R., et al., 2008. Pharmacokinetics
 pharmacology. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
a traumatized dog. Vet Anaesth
 of intravenous tramadol in dogs.
27.491-502.
Analg 34, 365-370.
Can J Vet Res 72, 325-331.
Lees, P., Landoni, M.F., Giraudel, J.
Malone, E., Ensink, I., Turner, T, et al.,
Melzack, R., 2005. The McGill pain
et al., 2004b. Pharmacodynamics and
2006. Intravenous continuous
questionnaire: from description to
pharmacokinetics of nonsteroidal
infusion of lidocaine for treatment
measurement. Anesthesiology 103.
anti-inflammatory drugs in species of
of equine ileus. Vet Surg 35, 60-66.
199-202.
veterinary interest. J Vet Pharmacol 
Martin, C.A., Kerr, C.L., Pearce, S.G..
Messenger, K.M., Davis, J.L., LaFevers,
Ther 27, 479-490.
et al., 2003. Outcome of epidural
D.H., et al., 2011. Intravenous and
130
Analgesia
Chapter
5
sublingual buprenorphine in horses:
agonist in horses. Am J Vet Res 39.
hyperthermia in cats. Vet Anaesth
pharmacokinetics and influence of
1632-1635.
Analg 34, 40-47.
sampling site. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
Murrell, J.C., Robertson, S.A., Taylor.
Posner, L.P., Pavuk, A.A., Rokshar, J.L..
374-384.
PM., et al., 2007. Use of a
et al., 2010. Efects of opioids and
Meyer, G.A., Lin, H.C., Hanson, R.R.,
 transdermal matrix patch of
anesthetic drugs on body
et al., 2001. Effects of intravenous
buprenorphine in cats: preliminary
temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth
 lidocaine overdose on cardiac
pharmacokinetic and
Analg 37, 35-43.
electrical activity and blood pressure
pharmacodynamic data. Vet Rec 160.
Pypendop, B.H., 1lkiw, J.E., 2005.
in the horse. Equine Vet J 33.
578-583.
Assessment of the hemodynamic
434-437.
Murrell, J.C., White, K.L., Johnson, C.B.,
effects of lidocaine administered IV
Michelet, P., Guervilly, C., Helaine, A.,
et al., 2005. Investigation of the EEG
in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am ↓
et al., 2007. Adding ketamine to
effects of intravenous lidocaine 
Vet Res 66, 661-668.
morphine for patient-controlled
during halothane anaesthesia in
Pypendop, B.H., Ilkiw, I.E., 2008.
 analgesia after thoracic surgery:
ponies. Vet Anaesth Analg 32.
 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol, and
influence on morphine
212-221.
its metabolite O-desmethyl-
consumption, respiratory function.
Natalini, C.C., Robinson, E.P., 2000.
tramadol, in cats. J Vet Pharmacol
 and nocturnal desaturation. Br ↓
 Evaluation of the analgesic effects of
Ther 31,52-59.
Anaesth 99, 396-403.
epidurally administered morphine.
Pypendop, B.H., Siao, K.T., Ilkiw, I.E.,
Mircica, E., Clutton, R.E., Kyles, K.W.,
 alfentani, butorphanol, tramadol,
2009. Effects of tramadol
et al., 2003. Problems associated
and U50488H in horses. Am J Vet
hydrochloride on the thermal
with perioperative morphine in
Res 61, 1579-1586.
threshold in cats. Am I Vet Res 70,
horses: a retrospective case analysis.
Niza, M.M., Felix, N., Vilela, C.L., et al.
1465-1470
Vet Anaesth Analg 30, 147-155.
2007. Cutaneous and ocular adverse
Pypendop, B.H., Siao, K.T., Ilkiw, I.E..
Moiniche, S., Kehlet, H., Dahl, J.B..
reactions in a dog following
2010. Thermal antinociceptive effect
2002. A qualitative and quantitative
meloxicam administration. Vet
of orally administered gabapentin in
systematic review of preemptive
Dermatol 18, 45-49.
healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 71,
analgesia for postoperative pain
Ong. C.K., Lirk, P., Seymour, R.A., et al..
1027-1032.
relief: the role of timing of analgesia.
2005. The effcacy of preemptive
Redua, M.A., Valadao, C.A., Duque, J.C.,
Anesthesiology 96, 725-741.
analgesia for acute postoperative
et al., 2002. The pre-emptive effect
Monreal, L., Sabate, D., Segura, D..
pain management: a meta-analysis.
of epidural ketamine on wound
et al., 2004. Lower gastric
Anesth Analg 100, 757-773.
sensitivity in horses tested by using
ulcerogenic effect of suxibuzone
Orsini, JA., Moate, PJ., Kuersten, K.
von Frey filaments. Vet Anaesth
compared to phenylbutazone when
Analg 29, 200-206.
et al., 2006. Pharmacokinetics of
administered orally to horses. Res
fentanyl delivered transdermally in
Reed, S.K., Messer, N.T., Tessman, R.K..
Vet Sci 76, 145-149.
healthy adult horses - variability
et al., 2006. Effects of
 among horses and its clinical
 phenylbutazone alone or in
Monteiro, E.R., Junior, A.R., Assis, H.M.,
implications. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
combination with flunixin
et al., 2009. Comparative study on
the sedative effects of morphine.
29, 539-546.
meglumine on blood protein
Park, J., Sutradhar, B.C., Hong, G., et al.
concentrations in horses. Am J Vet
methadone, butorphanol or
Res 67, 398-402.
 tramadol, in combination with
2011. Comparison of the cytotoxic
 acepromazine, in dogs. Vet Anaesth
Reid, I., Nolan, A.M., Hughes, J.M.L..
effects of bupivacaine, lidocaine, and
Analg 36, 25-33.
mepivacaine in equine articular
et al., 2007. Development of the
short-form Glasgow Composite
Moreau, M., Daminet, S., Martel-
chondrocytes. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
Measure Pain Scale (CMPS-SF) and
Pelletier, J., et al., 2005. Superiority
127-133
denivation of an analgesic
of the gastroduodenal safety profle
Paulson, S.K., Engel, L., Reitz, B., et al..
intervention score. Anim Welfare 16.
of licofelone over rofecoxib, a COx-2
1999. Evidence for polymorphism in
 selective inhibitor, in dogs. J Vet 
97-104.
the canine metabolism of the
Reid, P., Pypendop. B.H., Siao, K.T.,
Pharmacol Ther 28, 81-86.
cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitor.
celecoxib. Drug Metab Dispos 27,
et al, 2010. The effects of intravenous
Moreau, M., Lussier, B., Doucet, M.,
gabapentin administration on the
et al., 2007. Efficacy of licofelone in
1133-1142
minimum alveolar concentration of
dogs with clinical osteoarthritis. Vet
Peterbauer, C., Larenza, PM., Knobloch,
isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 111,
Rec 160, 584-588.
M., et al., 2008. Effects of a low dose
633-637.
Muir, W.W., 3rd, Wiese, A.J., March,
infusion of racemic and S-ketamine
Rimback, G., Cassuto, I., Tollesson, PO..
PA., 2003. Effects of morphine,
 on the nociceptive withdrawal reflex
1990. Treatment of postoperative
lidocaine, ketamine, and morphine-
in standing ponies. Vet Anaesth
paralytic ileus by intravenous
 lidocaine-ketamine drug
Analg 35, 414-423.
lidocaine infusion. Anesth Analg 70,
combination on minimum alveolar
Pollmeier, M., Toulemonde, C.
414-419.
concentration in dogs anesthetized
Fleishman, C., et al., 2006. Clinica]
Robertson, S.A., Lascelles, B.D., Taylor.
with isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 64,
evaluation of frocoxib and carprofen
P.M., et al., 2005a. PK-PD modeling
1155-1160
for the treatment of dogs with
of buprenorphine in cats:
Muir, W.w., Skarda, R.T., Sheehan, W.C.
osteoarthritis. Vet Rec 159, 547-551.
intravenous and oral transmucosal
1978. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Posner, L.P., Gleed, R.D., Erb, H.N.,
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
narcotic agonists and a partial
et al., 2007. Post-anesthetic
28, 453-460.
131
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Robertson, S.A., Sanchez, L.C., Merritt,
ropivacaine and morphine on
Slingsby, L.S., Waterman-Pearson, A.E..
A.M., et al., 2005b. Effect of systemic
lipopolysaccharide-induced synovitis
2000a. Postoperative analgesia in the
lidocaine on visceral and somatic
in horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 36,
cat after ovariohysterectomy by use 
nociception in conscious horses.
280-286.
of carprofen, ketoprofen, meloxicam
Equine Vet J 37, 122-127.
Schmidt, W., Schmidt, H., Bauer, H.,
or tolfenamic acid. J Small Anim 
Robertson, S.A., Taylor, P.M., Lascelles,
et al., 1997. Influence of lidocaine
Pract 41, 447-450.
B.D., et al., 2003a. Changes in
on endotoxin-induced leukocyte-
Slingsby, L.S., Waterman-Pearson, A.E..
thermal threshold response in eight
endothelial cell adhesion and
2000b. The post-operative analgesic
 cats after administration of
macromolecular leakage in vivo.
effects of ketamine after canine
buprenorphine, butorphanol and
Anesthesiology 87, 617-624.
owariohysterectomy - a comparison
morphine. Vet Rec 153, 462-465.
Schmiedt, C.W., Bjorling, D.E., 2007.
between pre- or post-operative
Robertson, S.A., Taylor, P.M., Sear, J.W.
Accidental prehension and suspected
administration. Res Vet Sci 69.
2003b. Systemic uptake of
transmucosal or oral absorption of 
147-152.
buprenorphine by cats after oral
fentanyl from a transdermal patch in
Slingsby, L.S., Waterman-Pearson, A.E.,
mucosal administration. Vet Rec 152,
a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 70-73.
2002. Comparison between
675-678.
Seddighi, M.R., Egger, C.M., Rohrbach.
meloxicam and carprofen for
Rohrer Bley, C., Neiger-Aeschbacher, G..
B.W., et al., 2009. Effects of tramadol
postoperative analgesia after feline
Busato, A., et al., 2004. Comparison
 on the minimum alveolar
owariohysterectomy. J Small Anim
of perioperative racemic methadone.
concentration of sevoflurane in dogs.
Pract 43, 286-289.
levo-methadone and
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 334-340.
Solano, A.M., Pypendop, B.H., Boscan,
dextromoramide in cats using
Sellon, D.C., Monroe, V.L., Roberts,
P.L., et al., 2006. Effect of intravenous
indicators of post-operative pain. Vet
M.C., et al., 2001. Pharmacokinetics
administration of ketamine on the
Anaesth Analg 31, 175-182.
and adverse effects of butorphanol
minimum alveolar concentration of
Rose, M.A., Kam, P.C., 2002.
administered by single intravenous
isoflurane in anesthetized dogs. Am J
 Gabapentin: pharmacology and its
injection or continuous intravenous
Vet Res 67, 21-25.
use in pain management.
infusion in horses. Am J Vet Res 62.
Steagall, PV., Mantovani, FB., Ferreira,
Anaesthesia 57, 451 -462.
183-189.
T.H., et al., 2007. Evaluation of the
Roughan, J.V., Flecknell, PA., 2004.
Sellon, D.C., Roberts, M.C., Blikslager.
adverse effects of oral frocoxib in
Behaviour-based assessment of the
A.T., et al., 2004. Effects of
healthy dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
duration of laparotomy-induced
continuous rate intravenous infusion
30, 218-223.
abdominal pain and the analgesic
of butorphanol on physiologic and
Steagall, PV., Taylor, PM., Brondani.
effects of carprofen and
outcome variables in horses after
J.T, et al., 2008. Antinociceptive 
buprenorphine in rats. Behav
celiotomy. I Vet Intern Med 18,
effects of tramadol and
Pharmacol 15. 461-472.
555-563
acepromazine in cats. J Feline Med
Roughan, J.V., Wright-williams, S.L.
Senior, J.M., Pinchbeck, G.L., Allister, R..
Surg 10, 24-31.
Fecknell, PA., 2009. Automated
et al., 2006. Post anaesthetic colic in
Taniguchi, T., Shibata, K., Yamamoto,
analysis of postoperative behaviour:
horses: a preventable complication?
K., et al., 2000. Effects of lidocaine
 assessment of HomeCageScan as a
Equine Vet J 38, 479-484.
administration on hemodynamics
novel method to rapidly identify
Senior, J.M., Pinchbeck, G.L., Dugdale.
and cytokine responses to
pain and analgesic effects in mice.
A.H., et al., 2004. Retrospective study
endotoxemia in rabbits. Crit Care
Lab Anim 43, 17-26.
of the risk factors and prevalence of
Med 28. 755-759.
Rusbridge, C., Jeffery, N.D., 2008.
colic in horses after orthopaedic
Teppema, L.J., Nieuwenhuijs, D.,
Pathophysiology and treatment of
surgery. Vet Rec 155, 321-325.
Olievier, C.N., et al., 2003.
neuropathic pain associated with
Sheehy, J.G., Hellyer, PW., Sammonds,
Respiratory depression by tramadol
syringomyelia. Vet J175, 164-172.
G.E., et al., 2001. Evaluation of
in the cat: involvement of opioid
Sabate, D., Homedes, I., Salichs, M.,
opioid receptors in synovial
receptors. Anesthesiology 98.
et al., 2009. Multicentre, controlled,
membranes of horses. Am J Vet Res
420-427.
randomised and blinded feld study
62, 1408-1412.
Terry, R.L., McDonnell, S.M., Van Eps.
comparing effcacy of suxibuzone
Shilo, Y., Britzi, M., Eytan, B., et al.
A.W., et al., 2010. Pharmacokinetic
and phenylbutazone in lame horses.
 2008. Phamacokinetics of tramadol
profle and behavioral effects of
Equine Vet J 41, 700-705.
in horses after intravenous,
gabapentin in the horse. J Vet
Salazar, V., Dewey, C.W., Schwark, W.,
intramuscular and oral
Pharmacol Ther 33, 485-494.
et al., 2009. Pharmacokinetics of
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
Tetik, O., Islamoglu, F., Ayan, E., et al.,
 single-dose oral pregabalin
31, 60-65.
2004. Intermittent infusion of 0.25%
 administration in normal dogs. Vet
Siao, K.T., Pypendop, B.H.,Ilkiw, I.E.
bupivacaine through an intrapleural
Anaesth Analg 36, 574-580.
2010. Phamacokinetics of
atheter for post-thoracotomy pain
Sammarco, I.L., Conzemius, M.G..
gabapentin in cats. Am J Vet Res 71.
relief. Ann Thorac Surg 77, 284-288.
Perkowski, S.Z., et al., 1996.
817-821.
Thompson, S.E, Johnson, J.M., 1991.
Postoperative analgesia for stifle
Slingsby, L.S., Taylor, PM., Murrell, J.C..
Analgesia in dogs after intercostal
surgery: a comparison of intra-
2011. A study to evaluate
thoracotomy. A comparison of
 articular bupivacaine, morphine, or
buprenorphine at 40 mug kg(-1)
morphine, selective intercostal nerve
saline. Vet Surg 25, 59-69.
compared to 20 mug kg(-1) as a
block, and interpleural regional 
Santos, L.C., de Moraes, A.N., Saito,
 post-operative analgesic in the dog.
analgesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg
M.E., 2009. Effects of intraarticular
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 584-593.
20, 73-77.
132
Analgesia
Chapter
5
Tirel, O., Chanavaz, C., Bansard, J.Y.
Vettorato, E., Corletto, F., 2011.
operatively to dogs. J Vet Pharmaco]
et al., 2005. Effect of remifentanil
Gabapentin as part of multi-modal
Ther 13. 137-147.
with and without atropine on heart
analgesia in two cats suffering
Weinberg, G., Ripper, R., Feinstein, D.L.
rate variability and RR interval in
 multiple injuries. Vet Anaesth Analg
et al., 2003. Lipid emulsion infusion 
children. Anaesthesia 60, 982-989.
38. 518-520.
 rescues dogs from bupivacaine-
Tomlinson, J.E., Blikslager, A.T., 2004.
Vettorato, E., Zonca, A., Isola, M., et al..
induced cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth
Effects of ischemia and the
2010. Pharmacokinetics and efficacy
Pain Med 28, 198-202.
cyclooxygenase inhibitor 
of intravenous and extradural
Weir, M.R., 2002. Renal effects of
flunixin on in vitro passage of
tramadol in dogs. Vet I 183.
nonselective NSAIDs and coxibs.
lipopolysaccharide across equine
310-315.
Cleve Clin I Med 69 (Suppl 1),.
jejunum. Am I Vet Res 65.
Wagner, A.E., Walton, J.A., Hellyer, PW.
S153-58.
1377-1383.
et al., 2002. Use of low doses of
Wilson, D.V., Evans, A.T., Miller, R.,
Tunsmeyer, I., Vaske, B., Bosing. B..
ketamine administered by constant
2005. Effects of preanesthetic
et al., 2012. Cardiovascular effects of
rate infusion as an adjunct for
administration of morphine on
 a proprietary L-methadone/
postoperative analgesia in dogs. J
gastroesophageal reflux and
fenpipramide combination
Am Vet Med Assoc 22l, 72-75.
regurgitation during anesthesia in
(Polamivet)] alone and in addition to
Walker, A.F., 2007. Sublingual
dogs. Am I Vet Res 66, 386-390.
acepromazine in healthy beagle
administration of buprenorphine for
Wilson, J.E., Chandrasekharan, N.V.,
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39,
long-term analgesia in the horse. Vet
Westover, K.D., et al., 2004.
451-463
Rec 160, 808-809.
Determination of expression of
Ueyama, Y., Lerche, P., Eppler, C.M..
Wallace, J.L., 1999. Selective COX-2
cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 isozymes in
et al., 2009. Effects of intravenous
 inhibitors: is the water becoming
canine tissues and their differential
administration of perzinfotel,
muddy? Trends Pharmacol Sci 20,
sensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-
fentanyl, and a combination of both
4-6.
 inflammatory drugs. Am J Vet Res 
drugs on the minimum alveolar
Wallace, I.L., McCafferty, D.M., Carter,
65, 810-818.
 concentration of isoflurane in dogs.
L., et al., 1993. Tissue-selective
Wolfe, T.M., Bateman, S.W., Cole, L.K.,
Am J Vet Res 70, 1459-1464.
inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis
et al., 2006. Evaluation of a local
Valverde, A., Cantwell, S., Hernandez, J.,
in rat by tepoxalin: anti-
anesthetic delivery system for the
et al., 2004a. Effects of acepromazine
inflammatory without gastropathy?
postoperative analgesic management
 on the incidence of vomiting
Gastroenterology 105, 1630-1636.
of canine total ear canal ablation 
associated with opioid
Wallace, J.L., Viappiani, S., Bolla, M..
randomized, controlled, double-
 administration in dogs. Vet Anaesth
2009. Cyclooxygenase-inhibiting
blinded study. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
Analg 31, 40-45.
nitric oxide donators for
328-339.
Valverde, A., Doherty, T.j., Hernandez,
 osteoarthritis. Trends Pharmacol Sci
Zaveri, N., 2003. Peptide and
J., et al., 2004b. Effect of lidocaine
30, 112-117.
 nonpeptide ligands for the
on the minimum alveolar
Warner, T.D., Mitchell, JA., 2002.
nociceptin/orphanin FQ receptor
 concentration of isoflurane in dogs.
Cyclooxygenase-3 (COX-3): filling in
ORL1: research tools and potential
Vet Anaesth Analg 31, 264-271.
 the gaps toward a cox continuum?
 therapeutic agents. Life Sci 73,
van Hoogmoed, L.M., Boscan, P.L.,
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99,
663-678.
2005. In vitro evaluation of the
13371-13373
Zhu, X., Conklin, D.R., Eisenach, J.C.
effect of the opioid antagonist
Waterman, A.E., Kalthum, W., 1990. The
2005. Preoperative inhibition of
N-methylnaltrexone on motility of
effect of clinical hepatic disease on
cyclooxygenase-1 in the spinal cord
the equine jejunum and pelvic
 the distribution and elimination of
reduces postoperative pain. Anesth
flexure. Equine Vet J 37, 325-328.
 pethidine administered post-
Analg 100, 1390-1393.
133
6
Chapter
General pharmacology of the injectable agents
used in anaesthesia
Introduction
135
INTRODUCTION
Formulation of injectable
 anaesthetic agents
137
Sites of action of injectable
Injectable anaesthetic agents may be used either just to
 induce anaesthesia prior to maintenance with an inhalant,
anaesthetic agents
138
 Or as the only anaesthetic agent for as long as required. In
IV agents acting primarily at the
human anaesthesia, such use is almost always by intrave-
GABAA receptors
138
 nous (IV) injection, duration being extended by infusion.
The barbiturates
138
This is termed ‘total intravenous anaesthesia' or TIVA.
Thiopental
138
Many injectable agents are poor analgesics so additional
 Methohexital
139
aas] eapi si uoisnu aq ll jo iuauaue eisa
 Pentobarbital sodium
139
Aq st uuad ie uu Aeu Aaeid (e iandeu
Other barbiturates
140
bolus injections. Some agents can be given by the intra-
Phenols
140
muscular (Im) route and, in veterinary practice may be
Propofol
used (often with sedatives or analgesics) at a dose which
140
 gives anaesthesia of suffcient duration for some surgery.
Fospropofol
142
This is only practicable with agents with minimal cardiac
 Steroid anaesthesia
142
depressant effects, such as ketamine. Other routes which
Alfaxalone
143
have been employed with suitable agents include subcu-
Imidazole derivatives
taneous (SC). intraperitoneal (not recommended for
145
routine use), transmucous membrane and even oral or
Etomidate
145
rectal. The IV route gives the anaesthetist some control
Metomidate
146
over anaesthetic depth; the other routes do not.
New etomidate derivatives
146
Injectable anaesthesia is often claimed to be 'easy' and
to require less equipment than do inhalant anaesthetics,
Eugenols
146
but this is not so. Some factors that the anaesthetist has
Drugs acting primarily at the
paistl ane suisn aie Aau sanup aui suuanuon iapisuos on
NMDA receptor
147
in Box 6.1. Not all agents given IV produce loss of con-
 Dissociative agents
147
sciousness in one injection site-brain circulation time
Ketamine
147
and, if not, it becomes more difficult to titrate the dose to
the animal's requirements. Once the agent has been
 Tiletamine and tiletamine-zolazep am
injected, it cannot be removed other than by the metabolic
combination
148
process so there is no margin for error. Duration of action
Miscellaneous agents
148
depends both on redistribution and on metabolism (see
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
135
Section
[1
Principles and procedures
Box 6.1 Some considerations when using injectable anaesthetic agents
Legal Requirements
Pain on injection
Country dependent
●This may be the formulation or the drug itself
Laws concerning storage, handling and recording
Shelf-life once open
●In European Union, the 'Cascade
·Does it contain a preservative?
Pharmacokinetics (see Chapter 3)
●Is the vial 'single use only'?
Speed of onset of action
Side effects of carrier?
Does the drug work in a circulation time or is there a
·Histammine release by cremophor EL
delay in action, even with IV use?
If a delay, is it due to slow crossing of the blood-brain
● Hyperlipidosis following lipid infusions
barrier, reaching the receptors, or is it a prodrug?
Combination with other drugs
 Some formulations may be incompatible with infusion 
Initial volume of distribution
fluids and/or other ancillary drugs
·Redistribution is often the reason for initial termination
 Pharmacodynamics
of anaesthesia from a single IV dose
Differences between thin and fat animals
Quality of anaesthesia
Is the drug highly protein bound? Does ionization
●Smooth passage to unconsciousness
influence the activity?
●Lack of response to stimuli (analgesia)
·Muscle relaxation
Clearance
Context-sensitive half-life and route of elimination
Cardiovascular: myocardial depression,
Is the drug cumulative?
heart rate and rhythm, peripheral
Is it suitable for TIVA?
vascular resistance
Is metabolism in the cat (or any other species) different?
·The major factor in overall safety
Effect of disease?
●Limits level of overdose before death occurs (LD 50)
●CV effects are not always easily reversible until drug
Routes of administration
metabolized
Only IV or other routes?
If only IV, why? Duration of action too short? Irritant
Respiratory effects
(see formulation)?
●Ability to give oxygen and ventilate should aways be
available
Formulation
Maximal available concentration
Other side effects
 Limits use in large animals
Examples:
Limits non-IV use
●Myoclonic movement; vomiting: hallucinatory effects
Irritancy
Quality of recovery
Limits route of injection
·Is it quiet; examples
Tissue damage if not IV?
- Do dogs vocalize?
Thrombotic potential; erythrocyte damage
- Are horses able to get up quietly and without ataxia?
ass e ym sue hous aie yum siuae pue (e iadeu
Chapter 16) may metabolize the drug and/or the solvent
injection given for induction of anaesthesia may become
differently. Knowledge of pharmacodynamics of the agents
long acting when used for TIVA as context-sensitive half-
is also essential for safe use. Almost all of the injectable
life increases. Table 6.l gives relevant comparative phar-
macokinetic data for humans for the dnugs discussed in
bation, oxygen and the ability to ventilate should still be
this chapter. However, there are many species differences,
available. It is more diffcult to compensate for cardiovas-
not all of which are well documented. In particular, cats,
cular effects resulting from overdose Specific side effects,
because of their inability to conjugate many agents (see
for example myoclonus, may be more problematic in
136
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
data available
Agent
Elimination
Clearance
Apparent volume of distribution
Protein binding (%)
half-life (hours)
(mL/kg/min)
at steady state (l/kg)
Thicpental
7-17
3-4
1.5-3
58
 Methohexital
2-6
10-15
1.5-3
58
Propofol
1.8-7
DE-02
2-10
86
Etomidate
2.9-5.3
18-25
2.5-4.5
76
Ketamine
2.5-3
12-17
3.1
09
These values differ in other species (see text). Note the wide variation in some reported values.
After Hijazi & Boulier (2002). Evers et al. (2006); Reves et al. (2012).
different species. For example, a quiet calm non-ataxic
ketamine [the hydrochloride). Such solutions may or may
recovery is essential for horses so only agents [or combina-
 not have additive preservatives and antibacterial agents.
tions) that will ensure this should be used. Most IV
anaesthetics are used in perioperative combination with
Lipid emuision
sedatives and analgesics to overcome the shortcomings of
Many dnugs used in anaesthesia use lipid emulsion carri-
the anaesthetic agent, but the combinations may further
ers, the most notable being propofol. The emulsions used
alter the pharmacodynamics.
may vary in their source and percentage of lipid, each
component having a technical reason for its presence.
Formulation of injectable
and in their droplet size. Macroemulsions [droplet size
0.1-100 μum) such as used for Diprivan@ (the original
anaesthetic agents
propofol) appear white while microemulsions (droplet
There is not yet an ideal injectable anaesthetic and the
size >0.1 μm) are translucent or opalescent Lipid emul-
search continues for new drugs, or new, improved formu-
sions are an excellent growth medium for bacteria, and
lations of existing drugs. The technology involved in for-
this has caused clinical problems (Bennett et al., 1995).
mulation (or pharmaceutics) is advancing rapidly and a
Some formulations of propofol now contain EDTA or
full resume is beyond the scope of this chapter. Useful
sodium metabisulphite to retard (but not prevent) bacte-
reviews include Baker & Naguib (2005) and Loftsson &
nial growth. Lipid infusions may cause hyperlipaemia. This
Brewster (2010). MacPherson (2001) also explains the
might contribute to the propofol infusion syndrome [see
various preservatives that may be added, their potential
below). Cats do not metabolize lipids as rapidly as other
side effects and neurotoxicity. Formulations must allow
species (see Chapter 16).
the drug to be available once injected; even small changes
can change bioavailability. They should not be irritant if
Cyclodextrins
injected extravascularly, not cause pain on injection, have
 These are complex polysaccharides, derived from starch.
no cardiopulmonary effects themselves, not be toxic, and
that have a hydrophobic centre and 'wrap round' lipophilic
should not release histamine or cause anaphylactic reac-
sanup
described as 'guest-host complexes' (Sneyd,
tions. A further consideration is to ensure that the final
2004). There are a number of different forms which are
product remains sterile in use; this is of particular impor-
 suitable for solubilizing a wide range of drugs. In veteri-
tance in small animal practice where economics prefer the
nary anaesthesia, they are the carrier for alfaxalone [see
use of multidose bottles. Generic versions of drugs may
below) but are/have been trialled for several other IV
differ in formulation from the original branded product.
anaesthetic agents including propofol. Although non-
The following are the most common methods of formulat-
toxic, the concern in human use is that they may possible
ing IV anaesthetic drugs.
trigger anaphylactic reactions; time will tell.
Water based
Propylene glyco!
The agent may be presented as a 'salt' to improve solubil-
This is used as a solvent for a number of agents in anaes-
ity. Examples include thiopental (as the sodium salt) and
thesia, these being etomidate and diazepam. It is miscible
137
Section
1
Principles and procedures
with water at all concentrations and also has some pre-
Thiopental
servative action. It does cause pain on injection and a high
incidence of thrombophlebitis.
Thiopental (thiopentone) was introduced into veterinary
practice in the 1930s and over the next 60 years became
Micelle formulations
the most widely used agent for induction of anaesthesia.
Nanotechnology to produce polymeric micelle formula-
Thiopental was originally licensed at a dose of up to
tions of a number of drugs, including propofol, has been
30 mg/kg, now considered a massive overdose, but which
investigated. The micelles are so small that solutions
gave prolonged hypnosis. Previous editions of this book
appear clear.
review the veterinary studies. Thiopental's primary use in
human and in veterinary anaesthesia is for the induction
Solvents no longer used
 of anaesthesia. However, all barbiturates are neuroprotec-
Cremophor EL, which is polyethylated castor oil, was tried
tive, are excellent antiepileptics and infusions of thiopen-
tal still have place for prolonged sedation, for example in
as a solvent for a number of anaesthetic dnugs, but can
cause anaphylaxis and, since the withdrawal of the steroid
poisoning cases causing fts and, in humans, in cases of
head injury (Majdan et al., 2013).
combination Saffan@ or Althesin@ (see steroid anaesthe-
sia below), is now no longer used.
Thiopental sodium is presented as a yellow solid, to be
Polysorbate 80, derived from sorbitol, was considered a
dissolved in water before use the concentration to be
made being as low as practicable in relation to volume
possibility, but propofol in polysorbate 80 caused major
when tested in goats
required. Thus, 1.25% or less is recommended for cats and
cardiopulmonary
depression
(Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 2000).
small dogs, 2.5% for larger dogs and up to 10 % for horses
and cattle. The preparation contains anhydrous sodium
carbonate to prevent precipitation of the insoluble free
Sites of action of injectable
acid by atmospheric CO2. Aqueous solutions are strongly
anaesthetic agents
alkaline and are incompatible to mix with many analgesics
and sedative drugs, but do seem compatible with propofol
The state of consciousness we term 'general anaesthesia'
(Chilvers et al., 1999; Ko et al., 1999). Depending on con-
and the receptor theories of how drugs cause this are dis-
centration, the solution is highly irritant It can only be
-uis Aiauanxa ue azens ol 'I iadeuo u pass
used IV and even 1.25% causes skin sloughs if accidentally
fied view, the injectable [and some inhalation) anaesthetics
injected extravascularly; l0% solutions can result in major
that cause dose-dependent hypnosis are agonists at the
damage to surrounding tissues. Solutions of thiopental
GABAA receptors, but do not necessarily effect the same
site on that receptor. They may also act at other central
easily occur (Strachan et al., 2008)
and peripheral ion channels and/or receptors; hence the
The pharmacokinetics of thiopental are typical of a
difference in properties between the agents. The dissocia-
cumulative agent. Following a single IV injection, blood
tive agents, such as ketamine, act primarily as antagonists
and brain levels rise then fall rapidly as the drug is redis-
at NmDA receptors. It is also possible to obtain a state
tributed into other tissues, in particular fat. From a single
resembling anaesthesia by the combination of opioid ago-
'induction' dose of thiopental, recovery of consciousness
nists, d2-agonists and dopamine antagonists (Brown et al..
is as rapid as for propofol as both are very lipophilic and
201l ); these agents are discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
have a large volume of distribution. However, for thiopen-
tal, metabolism by the liver is slow, so if larger or multiple
doses are given, it accumulates in the tissues; recovery now
depends on metabolism and can be very prolonged. With
IV AGENTS ACTING PRIMARILY AT
only an induction dose of thiopental, there is residual
THE GABAA RECEPTORS
sedation following recovery. In animals with little fat, or
 in which liver enzymes may not be fully functional (eg.
The barbiturates
greyhounds; neonates), recovery is even slower (Sams
et al., 1985; Robinson et al., 1986). In mixed-breed dogs.
Currently, four barbiturate drugs are used in veterinary
the half-lives of elimination have been reported as from
medicine Phenobarbital is very long acting and is used as
approximately 2.5 to 7 hours and plasma clearances as
an anticonvulsant. Within anaesthesia, agents used are
from 1.5 to 97 mL/kg/minute [Brandon & Baggot, 1981;
pentobarbital, thiopental and methohexital. All three
Ilkiw et al., 1991). It has always been claimed (and is the
exert their hypnotic properties primarily by actions at the
 author's experience) that barbiturates are shorter acting in
GABAA receptor (see Chapter l). Properties in common
herbivores than in cats and dogs but, with the range of
are that all are very respiratory depressant and are poor
reported values from different laboratories, it is not pos-
analgesics. All are metabolized by the liver, with species
sible to find evidence to prove this (Ilkiw et al., 1991;
differences in rate.
Abass et al., 1994). Thiopental is highly protein bound
138
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
(more than 75%); it is the non-bound fraction that is
 animals, uraemia, untreated hypovolaemia and hypopro.
 teinaemia. In small animals, there are several agents avail-
anaemia) are very sensitive to its effects. The dnug also is
 able which are preferable to thiopental for longer periods
partially ionized and acts as a weak organic acid; the dis-
 of anaesthesia, although the drug can be useful for this
Im hd u au ls e ie ns si juso uoos
 purpose in small ruminants.
markedly affect the degree of ionization, and this in turn
Thiopental's current limited availability relates to its
can alter distribution.
 r  i   
When thiopental is injected IV, it results in a smooth
below) but, where available, it remains a useful agent in
induction of anaesthesia within a circulation time: in the
veterinary anaesthesia.
unpremedicated animal, this is very rapid (with fast injec-
tion, it can be as little as 20 seconds in a horse). If pre-
medication reduces cardiac output (as do the O2-agonists),
Methohexital
then speed of induction will be slowed. The induction
Methohexital sodium is a racemic mixture of the 0-d and
dose of thiopental required for endotracheal intubation in
a-l isomers of sodium 5-allyl-1-methyl-5-{l-methyl-2-
an unpremeditated animal (most domestic species) can be
pentynyl) barbiturate, and differs from thiopental in
Over 15 mg/kg after acepromazine premedication with
having no sulphur in the moleaule. It is supplied as a
rapid injection in dogs. the dose is 7-10 mg/kg and,
after Q2-agonists, the dose reduces further depending on
colourless solid and, when dissolved in water, forms a
colourless solution which is stable for at least six weeks
the sedation achieved (Young et al., 1990; England &
kept at room temperature.
Hammond, 1997). Doses used to induce anaesthesia in
-oun se juaiod se aimi Aianeixodde s! leiixauouan
horses premedicated with acepromazine are ll mg/kg.
pental, and it is less irritant if accidentally given outside
while after moderate O2-premedication, 7 mg/kg suffices
the vein. As for thiopental, when given by rapid IV injec-
(Clarke & Gerring. 1990). Previously, the recommenda-
tion, it rapidly crosses the blood-brain barrier and causes
tion (for humans and dogs) was to give thiopental very
anaesthesia in a circulation time As for thiopental, initial
rapidly, but current advice for small animals is that the
lowering of plasma levels and awakening is due to redis-
dnug should be injected more slowly, over around one
tribution, but it differs from thiopental in that metabolism
minute, in order to reduce the initial cardiorespiratory
is much faster, is relatively non-cumulative and complete
depression. A major reason for fast administration was to
recovery is rapid, seldom exceeding 30 minutes even after
avoid an excitement phase at induction; effective sedative
prolonged infusion. Hepatic metabolism breaks metho-
 premedication negates this problem.
hexital down to non-active metabolites which are rapidly
Thiopental is very respiratory depressant. Rapid IV injec-
tion of the dnug causes apnoea and a fall in blood pressure,
excreted. Cardiorespiratory actions and lack of analgesia
are similar to those of thiopental. Sedative premedication
even in normovolaemic animals, through a decrease in
 avoids muscle tremors during the induction of and recov-
systemic vascular resistance. In hypovolaemic animals,
rapid injection of thiopental can be fatal. After the initial
ery from anaesthesia. Suitable doses will be discussed in
fall, in normovolaemic animals, the blood pressure returns
the relevant species chapters.
Methohexital has been superseded by propofol for most
to about the normal level but there is a persistent tachy.
indications but, where it is still available, it can prove a
cardia. The drug has a dose-dependent direct depressant
useful agent both for anaesthetic induction and for the
effect on the myocardium but, at normal induction doses.
maintenance of hypnosis.
cardiac output is maintained by the increase in heart rate.
Thiopental is a poor analgesic; very deep levels of anaes-
thesia are necessary to prevent response to noxious stimu-
Pentobarbital sodium
lation so, if used other than as an induction agent,
additional analgesia, such as fentanyl, is required. Muscle
Pentobarbital sodium in the form of a racemic mixture of
sodium 5-ethyl-5-{ 1-methylbutyl) barbiturate is marketed
PaCO2 through respiratory depression. S
Shivering is
as a sterile 6.5% solution containing propylene glycol.
common in all species of animal in the recovery period
Pentobarbital has been, and in some areas still is, used to
and may be due to persistent cutaneous vasodilation in a
 provide total injectable anaesthesia. It is relatively non-
cold environment.
irritant and, although the best results are obtained with IV
The only absolute contraindication to the use of thio-
administration, it has been used by intraperitoneal injec-
pental as an induction agent is porphyria, a disease char-
tion in laboratory animals. In humans, it can be used for
acterized by progressive acute demyelination of nerves.
sedation by the oral or rectal routes. When given IV, it is
that is well documented in humans. Porphyria is very rare
slow to cross the blood-brain barrier, so anaesthetic
but has been diagnosed in catle, pigs and cats (Tobias,
induction is slow. The usual mode of administration is to
1964). Partial contraindications for thiopental include
 give two-thirds the calculated dose rapidly, so that there
neonates, caesarean section with a live fetus, very thin
is not an excitement phase on induction (one of its
139
Section
1
Principles and procedures
isomers has an excitatory effect). Following induction, the
(Diprivan@) containing 1% w/v soya bean oil, 1.2% w/v
anaesthetist must wait some time [a minute or more) to
purified egg phosphatide and 2.25% w/v glycerol (see
ensure full effect before giving the next increment, or over-
'Formulation' above). Contamination of syringes of pro-
dose may occur. Doses in unpremedicated dogs and cats
aneiadoisod jo anuapiul uaiy e ul panesidui sem loyod
to give anaesthesia long enough for 30 minutes of surgery
infection (Bennett et al., 1995) and so some preparations
(with additional analgesia) are up to 30 mg/kg IV. Full
 now contain preservatives. The frst clinical trials of pro-
recovery is accompanied by excitement and, in dogs, vocal-
861 ui saop iog '2za1 ui suenq ioy paodau aiam jogod
ization, and takes up to 24 hours. Premedication reduces
(Hall, 1984) and 1987 (watkins et al., 1987) and for cats
the dose needed, reduces the chance of excitement at
in 1988 (Brearley et al., 1988). Since this time, propofol
induction or recovery, and speeds recovery. Use of the
has become the IV induction agent most widely used in
intraperitoneal route, which is not recommended, often
human anaesthesia, as well as being used for TIVA and for
results in a major excitement reaction during the induc-
sedation in intensive care.
tion period.
 Propofol is licensed for IV use as an anaesthetic agent
The side effects of pentobarbital anaesthesia are as of
in humans, cats and dogs. There is occasionally pain on
thiopental; dose dependent respiratory depresion, hypo-
injection. Although propofol is non-irritant, it can only be
tension, and myocardial depression although, at mini-
used IV as its elimination is too rapid for use by other
mally effective dose rates, an increased pulse rate
routes. A number of generic versions of propofol are avail-
may sustain cardiac output. Analgesia is very poor. Con-
able. Currently (2012) in the USA and in Europe there
traindications and partial contraindications are as for
are two formats with veterinary licences. Propoflo@ is
thiopental.
similar to the original, and vials are for single use only.
As for thiopental, pentobarbital appears to be metabo-
Propofol" Plus (PropoFlo"*28) contains benzyl alcohol as
lized more rapidly in horses, sheep and goats than in pigs.
preservative, and its multidose bottles may be used for up
dogs and cats, although the authors have been unable to
to 28 days after the vial is frst broached. PropoClear" was
locate evidence to confirm this. Pentobarbital is used to
a formulation as a micelle but, unfortunately, in clinical
control seizures (e.g. caused by poisons of unknown
(ig "ie ia nou] uoaui uo yud pad ii a
origins). It is used also in very concentrated forms for
and possibly caused local tissue damage and has been
euthanasia. The euthanasia solutions contain preservatives
withdrawn.
and must not be used for anaesthesia, even in large
 Following IV injection of propofol, hypnosis is induced
animals. Many of the euthanasia solutions 
(eg.
in a circulation time with anaesthetic depth reaching
Somulose@) are combined with an agent to stop the heart.
maximal after around 90 seconds (Reves et al., 20l2).
They should be given very slowly to ensure that the pento-
Recovery is extremely rapid and complete. The initial
barbital has time to cross the blood-brain barrier and
recovery from a bolus injection is through redistribution,
induce anaesthesia before cardiac arrest occurs. In preg-
 as is thiopental. Also, as for thiopental, propofol is highly
nant animals, anaesthesia prior to administration of such
protein bound. The difference between the two agents is
euthanasia solutions is preferable to ensure that the fetus
that the clearance of propofol as it is released from these
is anaesthetized prior to the cardiac arrest in the dam, as
tissues is very rapid (see Table 6.1), so residual sedation is
it is probable that transport of pentobarbital across the
not seen. Propofol is highly lipophilic and rapidly metab-
placenta is slow.
olized primarily to inactive glucuronide conjugates,
involving cytochrome P450 systems, the metabolites being
Other barbiturates
excreted in the urine. However, clearance can be greater
than liver blood flow, and extrahepatic mechanisms (eg.
Thiamylalsodium
lung and kidney) are thought to contribute.
Thiamylal closely resembles thiopental in chemical struc-
Pharmacokinetic studies in animals have shown species,
ture except that while the latter is the ethyl derivative of
breed and individual variations, and also variations
the series, the former is the allyl compound. It is also
depending on other anaesthetic and sedative agents given,
similar to thiopental in its actions as an anaesthetic It is
in speed of elimination of propofol. In dogs. half-life of
no longer available.
elimination, depending on other dnugs administered, has
been reported as between 75 and 486 minutes, volume
of distribution as from 3.7 to 6.5 L/kg and clearance as
Phenols
between 34 and 58 mL/kg/minute (Nolan et al., 1993;
Propofol
Reid & Nolan, 1993, 1996; Zoran et al., 1993; Hall et al.,
1994; Hughes & Nolan, 1999): the values of clearance
The active ingredient of propofol, 2,6 di-isopropylphenol
and volume of distribution being considerably higher
(Fig 6.1), exists as an oil at room temperatures. Propofol
than the human values (see Table 6.1). Zoran et al. (1993)
is presented for anaesthetic use as a free flowing oil-in-
compared the pharmacokinetics of propofol in grey-
water milk-coloured macro-emulsion, the original format
hounds with mixed breed dogs: half-life of elimination
140
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
does not affect bronchomotor tone or gastrointestinal
Table 6.2 Mean utilization rate of propofol
motility, and decreases the risk for catecholamine-induced
cardiac arrhythmias. None of the hundreds of clinical and
Species
Mean utilization rate
 scientifc studies carried out since has negated these origi-
(mg/kg/min)
nal findings. Propofol does not trigger malignant hyper-
Mouse
2.22
thermia in susceptible pigs (Raff & Harrison, 1989).
The pharmacokinetics of propofol make it the ideal
Rabbit
1.55
agent for use as TIVA and, in human anaesthesia, it is used
Rat
0.61
widely in this manner in combination with infusions of
potent opioids, such as fentanyl or remifentanil, to provide
Pig
82'0
the necessary analgesia (see Chapter 3). The respiratory
13
0.19
depressant effects of these combinations mean that IPPV
is essential. Similar opioid combinations are used in dogs
 Data supplied to L Hall by JB Glen
[Andreoni & Hughes, 2009): in horses, ketamine or 02-
agonists are used to provide analgesia with propofol infu-
 sions (Nolan et al., i996; Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al..
was longer (175 minutes cf 122 minutes) and clearance
2001 ). In humans, low dose propofol infusion is used for
less (54 cf 115 mL/kg/minute) in greyhounds. In vitro
prolonged sedation for intensive (critical) care. Some
studies have shown breed and gender differences in meta-
unexpected deaths in children on this regimen led to the
bolic utilization of propofol (Hay Kraus et al., 2000) and
contraindication of prolonged propofol for paediatric use,
also suggest that the canine kidney (in contrast to humans)
but it is now realized that the propofol infusion syndrome
does not metabolize the drug (Soars et al., 2001). In the
(PRIS) is not limited to this age group. PRIS is defined as
goat, half-life of elimination is very rapid (15 minutes)
the occurrence of bradycardia resistant to treatment,
and clearance very high (275 mL/kg/minute) (Rigby-Jones
together with lipaemic plasma, metabolic acidosis and
et al.,2002)
often rhabdomyolysis (Fudickar & Bein, 2009). PRIS is
 The cat, however, because of its inability to conjugate
usually fatal. Its aetiology is not fully understood.
 phenols, metabolizes both propofol and the lipid solvent 
 Propofol is now accepted as a most useful agent in all
more slowly than other carmivores. Table 6.2 gives data
domestic animals (Short & Bufalari, 1999), although
from the original developmental work (IB Glen, personal
volume and cost limit use in large animals. The dose for
communication to LwH), and demonstrates that the uti-
induction of anaesthesia in unpremedicated dogs is
lization of propofol is very slow in cats. Very recent, as yet
around 6 mg/kg: recovery from this is complete [awake,
unpublished (20l2) work has investigated the pharma-
walking, no ataxia) in around 20 minutes. Premedication
cokinetics of a single dose of 8 mg/kg propofol in the cat.
reduces this dose depending on degree of sedation; for
Early analysis of the results (a one compartmental model)
example 0.02-0.04 mg/kg of acepromazine reduces the
suggests that the volume of distribution is 14 ±6 L/kg, the
necessary propofol dose by about 30%. Premedication
half-life of elimination 5.9 ± 3.6 hours, and the clearance
with 10 or 20 μg/kg of medetomidine decreases the anaes-
115 ± 45 mL/kg/minute (Khursheed Mama, also on behalf
thetic induction dose in dogs to about 5 mg/kg and 3 mg/
 of colleagues, personal communication to KC, October
kg respectively (Hall et al., 1994, 1997). There is a sugges-
2012).
tion that some families of Boxer dogs may be more sus-
 In cats, considerable first pass extraction of propofol
ceptible to propofol since recovery was prolonged in some
occurs in the lung (Matot et al., 1993), but it is uncertain
related animals of this breed (Hall & Chambers, 1987). In
whether all of the drug is released back into the circulation
dogs, excitatory phenomena, mainly muscle twitching.
or is metabolized in the pulmonary tissue.
extensor rigidity and opisthotonus, occur occasionally
 Propofol causes dose-dependent respiratory and cardio-
associated with the use of propofol (Davies & Hall, 1991).
vascular depression, equivalent to that resulting from thio-
In unpremedicated cats, the IV dose for induction is
pental injection. As such, it is not safer than thiopental (as
around 8 mg/kg, recovery after this single dose is less
has been claimed) but has the advantage of the rapid
rapid - presumably because of relative inability to conju-
recovery of consciousness. Heart rate changes with propo-
gate phenols. In cats, the incidence of postanaesthetic side
fol vary. Propofol is a very poor analgesic and, if used for
effects such as vomiting/retching and sneezing or pawing
 surgery, additional analgesia is required. Details of early
at the mouth is about 15%, but this can be reduced by
pharmacological studies performed in rabbits, cats, pigs
acepromazine premedication (Brearley et al., 1988). Pro-
and monkeys (Glen, 1980; Glen & Hunter, 1984) showed
pofol, however, is cumulative in cats. Pascoe et al. (2006)
that propofol is compatible with a wide range of drugs
showed that while complete recovery (walking without
used for premedication, inhalation anaesthesia and neu-
ataxia) was similar to that in dogs (means of 74-80
romuscular block. It lacks any central anticholinergic
minutes) after just induction or a 30-minute infusion of
effect, is not potentiated by other non-anaesthetic drugs.
propofol, if infusion continued for 150 minutes, recovery
141
Section
1
Principles and procedures
was significantly delayed to 148 minutes. Of more concern
anaesthesia is considered as mandatory. Duration from a
is the report from Andress et al. (1995) where cats received
single dose is a little longer than that of propofol. Side
daily administration of a 30-minute propofol infusion.
effects reported at recovery are similar to those seen after
 Recovery time increased significantly after the second day.
 propofol infusion (Candiotti et al., 2011).
On the basis of pre-set criteria, no cat completed the
A study in rabbits (Li et al., 20l2) compared the phar-
intended 10-day trial. Haematology showed an increase in
macokinetics of prolonged infusion (2. 4, 6 or 8 hours)
Heinz bodies but, more importantly, the cats had stopped
of propofol (emulsion formulation) and fospropofol.
eating. had diarrhoea, general malaise and two had facial
Minimal infusion rate (MIR) ranged from 0.75 to 1.08 mg/
Dedema. Whether these toxic signs relate to the propofol
kg/minute for propofol and 1.8-2.4 mg/kg /minute for
or the lipid, and whether there is any relation to PRIS is
fospropofol. Induction was smooth in both cases; time to
not known. Bley et al. (2007) used propofol infusions of
loss of righting reflex was 6-8 minutes for propofol and
5-20 minutes twice daily for 5 days for radiotherapy in
17-19 minutes for fospropofol. Recovery times increased
cats and did not note clinically serious adverse effects.
with increasing length of infusion; after 2, 4, 6 and 8 hours
Nevertheless, there are other agents suitable for anaesthe-
being 10,19, 36 and 48 minutes for propofol, and 15, 26,
sia in cats [see Chapter 16), and these authors would not
52 and 84 minutes for fospropofol. These times demon-
recommend use of daily infusions of propofol in cats
strate the context sensitive recovery time of both propofol
unless no other regimen is available.
and fospropofol. Of concern, one rabbit in the 8-hour
 Propofol has been used for anaesthesia in many species
fospropofol group died during the recovery phase. Rabbits
of animal, both as an induction agent and for TIVA. Suit-
received oxygen supplementation, breathed spontane-
able dosage regimens will be discussed in the relevant
ously and, although respiratory rate was reduced, SpO2
species chapters.
never fell below 90%.
The place of fospropofol in veterinary medicine has yet
to be elucidated. In humans, there is concern that formate
Fospropofol
accumulation following fospropofol could be toxic.
Fospropofol
(phosphono-O-methyl-2,6-disopropyl-
although there are no such reports to date. There are no
phenol,disodium salt) is a water-soluble prodrug of pro-
publications concerning fospropofol or its metabolites in
pofol (see Fig 6.1). It is broken down by endothelial
cats. However, there is a need for long-term sedation for
alkaline phosphatases to propofol, formaldehyde and
and e lonodidsny pue 'sieue u aien anisuau
phosphate (Fechner et al., 2008). It has been developed,
useful for this purpose.
and is licensed in some countries, for sedation for surgical
 procedures and in intensive care, the rationale being that,
Steroid anaesthesia
by avoiding a lipid 'carrier', propofol infusion syndrome
might be avoided.
A number of neurosteroid compounds have been investi-
There is now quite considerable experience with
gated as hypnotics in humans, although currently none
the use of fospropofol in humans for sedation. As a
remain in clinical use Hydroxydione [Anderson, 1956)
prodnug. induction of sedation from a single bolus dose
was slow to take effect and very irritant to the veins; others
(6.5 mg/kg) takes 4-8 minutes (Bengalorkar et al., 20l1).
which at least reached clinical trial include minaxolone,
Reported side effects at induction are paraesthesia and
eltanalone, and pregnanolone (Kumar et al., 1993; Sear.
pruritus but not pain on injection. Monitoring as for
1996. 1998). Alfaxalone (alphaxalone) has always been
Alkaline
phosphatase
Fospropofol
Propofolr
Formaldehyde
Phosphate
wnios
Figure 6.1  Chemical structure of fospropofol disodium and the scheme of its enzymolysis to propofol.
142
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
 One the most promising steroids, but is virtually insoluble
 There is no preservative, and it is recommended that an
in water. However, in combination with another weakly
opened bottle vial be used within a day.
hypnotic steroid, alphadolone, it was dissolved in cremo-
Alfaxalone is relatively short acting. non-irritant and
phor EL, and the combination marketed as 'Althesin@' in
is non-cumulative, making it suitable both for IV induc-
human anaesthesia and as 'Saffan@' for use in cats.
tion of anaesthesia and TIVA by bolus injection or by
Althesin was withdrawn from medical clinical use in 1984,
infusion. The dose recommended by Jurox for induction
because of concerns of reaction to the cremophor, but
of anaesthesia in non-premedicated dogs is 2 mg/kg
IV given slowly over 60 seconds, although the current
advent of the alfaxalone in cyclodextrins, discussed in
European data sheet suggests that up to 3 mg/kg might
detail below.
be needed on occasions. In premedicated dogs, reduced
Saffan contained 9 mg of alfaxalone and 3 mg of
doses are used depending on the degree of sedation. For
alphadolone per mL, and therefore most studies, refer-
maintenance of anaesthesia, recommended doses are,
enced in previous editions of this book, expressed the dose 
in non-premedicated dogs, 0.13-0.16 mg/kg/minute or
in terms of total steroid. Saffan was non-irritant, and was
boluses of 1.3-1.5 mg/kg and, in premedicated dogs.
licensed for use in cats by either IV or IM injection. It was
0.1-0.12 mg/kg/minute or boluses of 1-1.2 mg/kg. Cats
non-cumulative and was used to extend anaesthesia
appear to need higher doses, 5 mg/kg, again given
without unduly lengthening recovery times. Its specifc
slowly IV, being recommended for induction of anaesthe-
advantage was that, in cats, it was not very respiratory
sia. Suggested doses for maintenance in cats are, for
depressant and could be given at a single dose that was
 non-premedicated 0.16-0.18 mg/kg/minute or boluses of
suffcient to enable the surgery of ovariohysterectomy.
1.6- 1.8 mg/kg and for premedicated cats, 1.1-1.3 mg/
Analgesia, judged lack of movement or cardiovascular
 kg/minute or boluses of 1.1-1.3 mg/kg. There appear no
e iusaaiul 'aenbape paieadde ains oi sasuodsa
contraindications to use of alfaxalone with any of the
study suggested that alfaxalone was responsible for the
usually used premedicant sedative, analgesic or anti-
hypnotic effect but alphadolone for the antinociception
a   te  s sa
(Nadeson & Goodchild, 2000); if this is so, the current
injectable anaesthetic agents is specifically contraindi-
formulation of alfaxalone may not provide such good
cated. Some of the experimental work supporting these
surgical conditions. Following Saffan injection, blood 
pamaiaai-iaad un paustqnd aq on (zioz) ian sey si
 pressure fell through vasodilation. Cardiac index was well 
journals but abstracts of presentations are available
maintained (Dyson et al., 1987). Saffan's disadvantages
(www.Alfaxan.co.uk).
were a 'twitchy' recovery (it was essential to keep the cats
 Alfaxalone is rapidly metabolized in the liver. The phar-
in a quiet environment) with face-rubbing. paddling, and
macokinetics in dogs have been investigated (Ferre et al.
even opisthotonus. Reactions to the cremophor manifest
 2006) at both the usual IV induction dose (2 mg/kg) and
by swollen paws, ears, larynx and occasionally pulmonary
at a supramaximal dose (10 mg/kg). At 2 mg/kg and
oedema. Despite these side effects, which did lead directly
 10 mg/kg respectively, the mean duration of anaesthesia
to the death of some cats, the overall death rate in practice
 until the dog responded to the presence of an endotracheal
in cats anaesthetized with Saffan was considerably less
tube was 6.4 and 26.2 minutes: plasma clearance 59.4 and
than with other methods of anaesthesia employed (Clarke
52.9 mL/kg/minute, plasma terminal half-life (t/2) 24.0
& Hall, 1990), presumably due to the limited degree of
and 37.4 minutes, and for both, volume of distribution
cardiac depression when compared to other agents.
between 2 and 3 L/kg. The authors concluded there was
Saffan was licensed only for cats. Dogs were specifically
no clinically significant difference in pharmacokinetic
contraindicated because of their sensitivity to histamine
parameters between the doses. In greyhounds (Pasloske
release in response to the cremophor, although there were
et al., 2009), following 2 mg/kg alfaxalone IV, t1/2 was 34.3
reports of its use in this species in combination with anti-
minutes and plasma clearance 48.4 mL/kg/minute, sug-
histamine agents. However, Saffan was used satisfactorily
gesting alfaxalone is slightly longer acting in this breed,
in a very wide range of domestic and exotic species, the
but the difference is unlikely to be of major clinical sig-
main limitation being size in relation to volume of the
nificance. A similar study in cats (Whittem et al., 2008)
dnug combination.
Examined the pharmacokinetics of 5 mg/kg and 25 mg/kg
IV; results for these two doses were, respectively: plasma
clearance 25.1 and 14.8 mL/kg/minute and t1/2 45.2 and
Alfaxalone
 76.6 minutes. The cat study also investigated continuing
Alfaxalone, solubilized in 2-hydroxypropyl β-cyclodextrin 
anaesthesia by four incremental doses; the duration of
[Alfaxan@; henceforth termed alfaxalone) has been devel-
 subsequent anaesthesia resulting from each increment did
Oped, initially in Australia by Jurox Pty Ltd, and (2012) is
 not change, suggesting that at least over this dosage sched-
licensed as an anaesthetic drug for use in cats and dogs in
ule there were no clinically evident cumulative effects.
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Europe. It is
Safety studies, giving the intended dose, and three and
'saoq ui 'lu/uu oi jo uonnos snoanhe ue se paiuasaid
ten times its multiple in both dogs and cats have been
143
Section
1
Principles and procedures
published (Muir et al., 2008, 2009). In dogs, this dosing
(Keates & Whittem, 20l2), a dose-escalation study found
schedule was 0 (placebo), 2, 6 and 20 mg/kg: in cats 0. 5.
the median dose of alfaxalone which induced apnoea was
15 and 50 mg/kg of alfaxalone Rescue IPPV was allowed
10 mg/kg (i.e. 5x recommended doses) and for propo-
if necessary.
fol was 13 mg/kg [i.e twice the normal induction dose).
In dogs. induction of anaesthesia was smooth and
Amengual et al. (20l3), however, found that, in premedi-
rapid; for 2, 6 and 20 mg/kg respectively, the duration of
cated dogs, the incidence of post-induction apnoea was
/'69 pue 7e 't'6 sem nws snoixou 0n asudsai yo yl
high (around 50%) with either alfaxalone (1.5 mg/kg)
minutes and duration of anaesthesia (to extubation) 9.8.
or propofol (3 g/kg) given by fast IV injection, reinforc-
31.4 and 75.1 minutes. Quality of anaesthesia appeared
ing the data sheet advice for Alfaxan@ that it should be
excellent and, from the results, antinociception appeared
 given slowly. An experimental study in non-premedicated
to last throughout the whole period. Recovery was not
dogs (Rodriguez et al., 20l2),. compared the cardiores-
described, but scores did not differ between doses.
piratory effects of a mean of 4.15 mg/kg alfaxalone
Alfaxalone caused an increase in heart rate, and a fall in
(i.e above the recommended dose) with a mean of
arterial blood pressure, cardiac output and systemic vascu-
2.91 mg/kg etomidate; at these doses alfaxalone increased
lar resistance, but the changes were minimal except at
(statistically but not clinically significantly) heart rate
20 mg/kg and, even at this dose, were clinically acceptable.
and cardiac index, with a non-signifcant fall in arterial
Respiratory depression occurred at all doses; apnoea was
blood pressure and systemic vascular resistance. Quality
common particularly at the higher doses.
of induction and recovery were better than those of eto-
In cats, induction of anaesthesia was smooth and rapid;
midate. Maddern et al. (2010) showed that, in dogs, the
for 5, 15 and 50 mg/kg respectively, the duration of lack
mean dose of alfaxalone needed for anaesthetic induction
of response to noxious stimuli was 15.3, 48.4 and 143.7
was 1.2 mg/kg after premedication with medetomidine
minutes and duration of anaesthesia 26, 75.4 and 172
4 μg/kg or butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg but, in dogs receiving
minutes. Thus, in contrast to dogs, antinociception did not
both premedicants, the alfaxalone dose was significantly
 appear to last for the whole period of anaesthesia. Recov-
reduced to
0.8 mg/kg. Psatha et al. (20ll) compared
ery quality was scored as excellent after doses of 5 and
the use of alfaxalone to a diazepam/ketamine/propofol
15 mg/kg. but 5 hours after receiving 50 mg/kg. five [of
combination for methadone-premedicated dogs in ASA
eight) cats had not fully recovered and were euthanized.
grade 3 or worse; they found that 1-2 mg/kg alfaxalone
Alfaxalone caused a dose dependent fall in heart rate, arte-
gave satisfactory induction of anaesthesia, systolic arte-
rial blood pressure, cardiac output and systemic vascular
 rial blood pressure did not fall from pre-induction values 
resistance, but the changes at 5 and 15 mg/kg were rarely
 and that cardiovascular parameters throughout the subse-
statistically and unlikely to be clinically significant. At
quent gaseous maintenance of anaesthesia did not differ
50 mg/kg [(i.e. a 10x overdose), cardiovascular depression
between treatments. Alfaxalone can be used satisfacto-
was very marked. Apnoea was common at all doses. Even
rily for induction of anaesthesia in premedicated (ace-
at 5 mg/kg. PaO2 fell and 5/8 cats required IPPV at some
promazine morphine and atropine) puppies aged 6-12
period; by 15 mg/kg all cats received IPPV. In summary, in 
weeks (O'Hagan et al., 20l2a); dose rates were similar to
cats, doses of up to 15 mg/kg produced minimal or clini-
those seen in adult dogs.
cally acceptable cardiovascular changes, but respiratory
In cats premedicated with acepromazine and meloxy-
depression was a potential problem even at 5 mg/kg. The
cam, mean doses of alfaxalone required for induction of
dose of 50 mg/kg was obviously an unacceptably high
anaesthesia and endotracheal intubation were 4.7 mg/kg
overdose but, even then, no cat died at the time of drug
(Taboada & Murison, 20l0). In young cats (>12 months),
administration.
the1
mean
dose needed to induce anaesthesia in
The peer-reviewed publication of the pharmacokinetic
non-premedicated cats was 4.2 mg/kg but, in cats pre-
and safety studies described above demonstrate that IV
medicated with acepromazine and butorphanol, was
alfaxalone produces good quality anaesthesia in dogs and
2.7 mg/kg (Zaki et al., 2009). Recovery quality was better
cats, is non-cumulative, at clinically applicable doses car-
in premedicated cats. O'Hagan et al. (20l2b) found that
diovascular effects are minimal but [in contrast to Saffan
the mean dose of alfaxalone required for induction for
in cats), dose-dependent apnoea and respiratory depres-
endotracheal intubation in heavily premedicated kittens
sion may occur. In clinical practice, however, it is usual to
(acepromazine, morphine and atropine) under 12 weeks
use ancillary sedative and analgesic agents. There are now
of age was 4.7 mg/kg.
a number of publications, both clinical and experimental,
The studies described above all support the information
investigating such combinations for induction of anaes-
 supplied by the manufacturers that IV alfaxalone admin-
thesia, and often comparing alfaxalone with other anaes-
istered over a minute leads to a smooth induction of
thetic regimens. In dogs, alfaxalone did not cause pain on
anaesthesia, cardiovascularchanges are minimal (increased
injection (Michou et al., 20l2). To compare the incidence
heart rate and sometimes a small fall in arterial blood
of apnoea induced by alfaxalone or propofol in dogs
144
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
there may be transient apnoea but this is no more, and
Alfaxalone has been used in rabbits, doses of 2-3 mg/
probably less, likely to occur than after propofol. However.
kg IV providing satisfactory conditions for endotracheal
in many of the above mentioned studies, although recov-
ery was usually classified as excellent or acceptable, there
(Grint et al., 2008). Alfaxalone can be used by IM injec-
is mention of occasional incidences of twitching and pad-
tion. Saffan was used by this route routinely in cats. For
dling in recovery, even following relatively prolonged
alfaxalone, it is probable that combinations with sedatives
anaesthesia with inhalant agents (Jimenez et al., 2012;
will be needed to ensure a practicable volume Alfaxalone
Mathis et al., 20l2).
has already been used by a variety of routes in exotic
Alfaxalone for TIVA is of particular interest as this was
animals.
.IM administration of 20 mg/kg to red-
one of the major uses of Saffan in cats. In an experimental
eared sliders (turtles) resulted in a smooth induction of
-iouoipau pue auizeuondase yam panepas saop u Apnis
sedation/anaesthesia of short duration (Kischinovsky
phone, Ambros et al. (2008) compared alfaxalone and
et al., 20l3). Alfaxalone by immersion followed by
propofol for TIVA. Cardiovascular parameters (including
branchial/transcutaneous irrigation proved adequate for
cardiac output) did not differ between treatments. Respira-
 surgery on an axolotl (MicMillan & Leece, 20ll). In the
tory depression was greater with propofol. Recovery times
 green iguana, 10 mg/kg alfaxalone IM provides light seda-
 and quality did not differ between treatments. Two studies
tion, 20 mg/kg short duration anaesthesia and 30 mg/kg
have examined alfaxalone TIVA for ovariohysterectomy in
anaesthesia for 40 minutes (Bertelsen & Sauer, 20ll).
dogs, in each case the dogs received oxygen supplementa-
 Approximately 10 mg/kg IM in marmosets provides ade-
tion. Suarez et al. (20l2) premedicated the bitches with
 quate sedation to allow mask induction or IV injection
acepromazine (0.0l mg/kg) and morphine (0.4 mg/kg)
(Thomas et al., 20l2). Combinations with medetomidine
then used alfaxalone or propofol for induction and for
have been used IM to immobilize wallabies (Bouts et al..
maintenance of anaesthesia. Doses required for mainte-
 2011). These early studies suggest that alfaxalone will have
nance were 0.1-0.02 mg/kg/minute for alfaxalone and
a major role to play in the immobilization of exotic
0.3-0.5 mg/kg/minute for propofol. Both agents provided
animals.
adequate anaesthesia for the purpose There were no sig-
 In larger animals, IV alfaxalone, in combination with
nificant differences in cardiopulmonary parameters or
heavy sedation, has been used successfully to anaesthetize
recovery parameters between treatments, but both caused
01 sdn dot, se pue juae uojonpul ue se yioq sasiou
marked respiratory depression. Herbert et al. (20l3) com-
enable castration [Leece et al., 2009; Kloppel & Leece,
(y/su zo'o) auudouaidnq yim uoeipawad paied
201l; Keates et al., 2012). The pharmacokinetics have been
and either acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg) or dexmedetomi-
 investigated in adult horses and in foals (Goodwin et al..
pue uonu c roud (sy/lu lo'o Aiaiexodde) au
 2011, 2012). Alfaxalone has also been used in pigs ( Keates,
TIVA with alfaxalone. Alfaxalone infusion rate was
2003) and sheep (Andaluz et al., 20l2: Torres et al., 2012;
significantly lower after dexmedetomidine [median 0.08
oys Aoeyses sui1d sas1o Ie ul '(7io7 'ie ia ysi
range 0.06-0.19 mg/kg/minute) than after acepromazine
duration anaesthesia.
(median 0.1l range 0.07-0.33). Beths et al. (2012) pre-
Alfaxalone in cyclodextrin has been available in veteri-
medicated cats with medetomidine (0.02 mg/kg) and
nary practice in Australia for some years and, by August
morphine (0.3-0.5 mg/kg);: mean induction and infusion
2010 it was licensed in Australia, New Zealand, Thailand
rates were 1.8 mg/kg and 0.18 mg/kg/minute and apnoea
and in six European countries. Its use in small animals as
and hypoventilation were common. Quality of anaesthe-
ul saipnis riendod Aian auosaq sey juase uonpui ue
sia was better, but quality of recovery worse in the medeto-
use as TIVA are less well developed. Its potential for
midine group. In cats, alfaxalone as a total intravenous
causing respiratory depression is accepted but, to date,
(saam Zi>) sunon Aian iugia ui Pan sem yasaeue
 there have been no published reports of any unexpected
premedicated kittens (O'Hagan et al., 20l2b) to enable
 side effects. It is anticipated that this agent will prove very
ovariohysterectomy: following induction dose the first
 useful in small animal and other areas of veterinary anaes-
increment was required at 5.5 minutes; bolus administra-
thetic practice.
tions to maintain anaesthesia amounted to 0.18 mg/kg/
minute. Mean recovery time [in some cases after atipam-
ezole) was 40 minutes. Apnoea did not occur. Noise
Imidazole derivatives
induced twitching was noted in three of 37 cats. In all
Etomidate
these studies, premedication used moderately high doses
of opioid, and/or 02-agonists; these were considered nec-
Etomidate (R-1-{ 1-ethylphenyl)imidazole-5-ethyl ester) is
essary to contribute to perioperative analgesia but may
an imidazole derivative that exists in a chiral form. The
well have influenced both respiratory depression and time
formulations for clinical use are the R (+) enantiomer
and quality of recovery. There is still need to elucidate the
(Forman, 20ll). Currently, there are two commercial prep-
best combination with alfaxalone to enable surgery.
arations available, one in propylene glycol, the other as a
145
Section
1
Principles and procedures
lipid, but formulations in cyclodextrins have also been
Etomidate has been used in other species, being most
developed. When injected into the bloodstream, etomi-
useful in pigs (Clutton et al., 1997). although volumes
date becomes approximately 75% protein bound. It has a
required are large Volume and the tendency for myoclonic
large volume of distribution both centrally and peripher-
episodes limit potential for use in large animals.
ally and so, as for thiopental, it quickly enters the brain
and leaves rapidly as it becomes redistributed in the body.
It is quickly hydrolysed by esterases in the liver and plasma
Metomidate
to pharmacologically inert metabolites. The clearance is
Metomidate an imidazole derivative similar to etomidate,
15-20 mL/kg/minute and the context sensitive half-life in
was marketed for use, in combination with the butyroph-
humans is shorter than that of propofol. The pharmacoki-
emone, azaperone, as a hypnotic in pigs. Anaesthetic prop-
 netics of etomidate in cats have been investigated (Wertz
erties are very similar to those of etomidate, minimal
et al., 1990)and are best described by a three-compartment
cardiac depression, and very poor (or non-existent) anal-
open model similar to those determined in people.
gesia. At the doses used, duration of action is longer than
 In effective doses, etomidate causes loss of conscious-
that of etomidate. Metomidate has also been given by
ness in one injection site-brain circulation time. There
intraperitoneal injection at the same time as an intramus-
may be some pain on injection. In dogs, doses of 1.5-3 mg/
cular injection of azaperone but the results were unpre-
kg produce hypnosis, in a dose dependent manner, lasting
dictable. Although introduced as a hypnotic for pigs, it has
from 10 to 20 minutes. Intravenous injection is associated
 also been used for restraint for a variety of species of birds
with a high incidence of involuntary muscle movement,
(Cooper, 1974). Metomidate is no longer available
tremor and hypertonus, although these can be reduced by
commercially.
sedative premedication. The EEG changes produced by
etomidate at induction are similar to those seen with bar-
biturates and no specific epileptogenic or convulsive activ-
New etomidate derivatives
ity is observed, so the muscle movements cannot be
The desire to fnd an IV hypnotic agent with the cardio-
attributed to central nervous activity. Lack of cardiovascu-
vascular sparing and pharmacokinetic advantages of eto-
lar depression is the outstanding feature of etomidate;
midate, but which does not result in adrenocortical
there is minimal effect on cardiac function. The dnug does
release significant amounts of histamine andthere is a very
suppression has led to the synthesis of a number of eto-
 midate derivatives; an example of how knowledge of struc-
low incidence of thrombosis after injection.
sanup lausisap, oi pal sey uonouny on uoan ui aim
ul aseaioul ue panodai lem g wueuauipal '586l ul
(Sneyd & Rigby-Jones, 2010). Those that appear furthest
in
development include methyoxycarbonyl-etomidate
prolonged etomidate infusion. This led to the realization
that the drug inhibits increases in plasma cortisol and
[MOC-etomidate), carboetomidate and methoxycarbonyl-
carboetomidate (Sneyd & Rigby-Jones, 20l0; Forman,
aldosterone concentrations during surgical stress, even
2011; Pejo et al., 2012a,b,c; Sneyd, 2012). MOC-etomidate
when adrenocorticotropic hormone levels are normal or
is an exceptionally short-acting hypnotic that is metabo-
increased. As a result, in human anaesthesia and sedation,
lized by non-specific plasma esterases; it still depresses
etomidate is no longer used for infusions. The safety or
adrenocortical function, but for a much shorter time than
 otherwise of etomidate as an IV induction agent in patients
does etomidate. Carboetomidate has been designed (by
in shock has been debated frequently (Flynn & Shehabi.
removal of a binding nitrogen atom from etomidate) not
2012), but its lack of cardiovascular effects ensures that it
remains in use as an anaesthetic induction agent.
to inhibit adrenocortical function, but is metabolized a
little slower. Pejo et al. (2012a) explain how they hypoth-
Etomidate is used quite widely for induction of anaes-
esized that by incorporating MOC-etomidate's labile ester 
thesia in cats and dogs (see Chapters 15 and 16). in par-
ticular in animals with cardiovascular compromise In
into etomidate, they might obtain the best qualities of
both the etomidate derivatives - rapid elimination with
 normal dogs, induction doses of 3 mg/kg caused no sig-
no inhibition of adrenocortical function; methoxycarbonyl-
nificant changes in blood pressure cardiac output or heart
carboetomidate is the result.
aaid umon (zioz 'ie na zanuo] ae
with midazolam, 4 mg/kg etomidate had less effect on
blood pressure than did 8 mg/kg propofol (Sams et al.,
Eugenols
2008). In studies in models of hypovolaemia (induced by
haemorrhage). etomidate had minimal cardiovascular
The eugenols are related to oil of cloves. A eugenol, pro-
effects in dogs (Pascoe et al., 1992) and in swine [Johnson
panidid (Epontol). became available in the UK in 1967.
et al., 2003). In canine surgical patients, adrenocortical
Epontol was found to produce profound hypotension,
function is suppressed for 2-6 hours after 2 mg/kg IV
probably because propanidid was dissolved in cremophor
etomidate (Kruse-Elliott et al., 1987; Dodam et al., 1990).
EL. Recently, a new eugenol agent, AZD3043, has under-
but that suppression is not total.
 gone trials in humans (Sneyd, 2012). Clove oil is used
146
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
widely as an anaesthetic in fish, although it has proved
chloride 0.01% as a preservative and, in some prepara-
lethal in cane toads (Hernandez et al., 2012).
tions, EDTA as an antioxidant. Medical preparations
include less concentrated solutions, preservative free solu-
tions, and the S (+)-ketamine isomer. Ketamine is non-
irritant, and can be given by almost any route including
DRUGS ACTING PRIMARILY AT THE
IV. IM, SC, transmucous membrane, and transdermal.
NMDA RECEPTOR
Veterinary preparations do cause pain on IM or SC
injection.
Dissociative agents
Protein binding of ketamine has been reported in
humans as 60-64% (Hijazi & Boulieu, 2002) and in dogs
Three cyclohexylamine(
derivatives, phencyclidine (no
 and horses, as approximately 50% ( Kaka et al., 1979; Kaka
longer in regular use), ketamine and tiletamine, have been
& Hayton, 1980). This is considerably less than that of
used to produce 'anaesthesia: The type of anaesthesia they
 thiopental or propofol, making ketamine a drug of choice
produce differs markedly from that produced by the agents
 for hypoproteinaemic patients such as those with burns or
discussed above and they have been described as having
with acute blood loss. Following IV injection of ketamine,
cataleptic, analgesic and anaesthetic action, but no hyp-
anaesthesia does not occur in a circulation time; there is
notic properties. Catalepsy is defined as a characteristic
a short delay (of seconds not minutes). Ketamine is then
akinetic state with loss of orthostatic reflexes but without
 distributed rapidly, and initial recovery is through redistri-
impairment of consciousness in which the extremities
bution. Elimination half-life is also relatively fast, 58-70
appear to be paralysed by motor and sensory failure.
minutes being reported in dogs, cats and horses (Baggot
Another definition of the state produced by these agents
& Blake, 1976; Waterman et al., 1987: Pypendop & Ilkiw.
is 'dissociative anaesthesia' which is characterized by com-
 2005). Ketamine metabolism is by hydroxylation and con-
plete analgesia combined with only superficial sleep. In
jugation, but one of the metabolites, norketamine, is also
humans, hallucinations and emergence delirium phenom-
active, and is probably partly responsible for prolonged
ena are known to occur, and, although it cannot be estab-
behavioural effects. Certainly, infusions of ketamine in
lished whether similar phenomena are experienced by
horses can have a clinical cumulative effect in relation to
animals, behaviour suggests that it might be so. Spontane-
duration of side effects (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al.,
ous involuntary muscle movement and hypertonus are not
1996), although pharmacokinetics of infusions do not
uncommon during induction and purposeless tonic-
 suggest that this should be so (Lankveld et al., 2006). Bio-
clonic movements of the extremities may be mistaken to
availability of IM injection is from 50 to 90% bioavailable
indicate an inadequate level of anaesthesia and, unless this 
and plasma levels rise very quickly (Baggot & Blake, 1976;
possibility is recognized, overdoses may be given. Animals
Hanna et al., 1988). In recent years, there have been many
ul auol poos e aney pue uado saka iaul um uieuai Aeu
studies looking at the potential advantages of S (+)-keta-
     s  
mine, these being higher potency and faster elimination.
reflexes, while analgesia is excellent. In practice, these
However, a number of veterinary studies have failed to find
agents are usually used in combination with sedatives.
any clinically significant difference between use of the
which reduce or prevent the hallucinatory side effects and
S [+)-enantiomer or the racemate (Jud et al., 2010;
improve muscle relaxation.
Gerritsmann et al., 20l2).
It is now known that these three agents are antagonists
During ketamine anaesthesia, circulation is well main-
 at the NMDA receptor, and therefore have good analgesic
 tained, mainly supported by sympathetic support as keta-
properties, but they have no actions at the GABA receptor.
mine blocks the reuptake of norepinephrine by adrenergic
hence their lack of the more usual form of hypnosis.
nerve terminals. The direct effect of ketamine on isolated
inotropic actions depending on the experimental condi-
Ketamine
tions [Hanouz et al., 2004: Jiang et al., 20ll). Cardiac
 Ketamine is a dissociative anaesthetic agent that is used
arrhythmias are uncommon under ketamine anaesthesia
widely throughout veterinary anaesthesia, in combination
and the minimal arterial blood pressure is always similar
with a variety of sedative agents. When used alone, anaes-
to and rarely less than the preoperative level. At normal
thesia is as described above Its use in human anaesthesia
clinical doses, respiration is well maintained, but is
has been limited by the hallucinatory effects, but it is
depressed with overdosage In cats overdosed with xyla-
being ‘rediscovered’ for anaesthesia on the battlefield
 zine and ketamine, depression is sometimes manifest by
[Mercer, 2009),. as an analgesic and for a variety of other
rapid shallow breathing which can be misinterpreted, and
uses including as an antidepressant.
apnoea follows. In veterinary anaesthesia, ketamine is
Veterinary preparations currently available in the UK
U sisjuose-o io/pue sauidazeipozuaq uim pauquon
contain racemic ketamine hydrochloride, 100 mg/mL,
order to counteract the unwanted 'dissociative' side effects;
as a colourless aqueous solution with benzethonium
cardiopulmonary depression may be considerably greater
147
Section
1
Principles and procedures
with these combinations than with ketamine alone. Simi-
together with an Q2-agonist or opioid. In domestic cats,
larly, control of the airway (usually retained with ketamine
the drug combination at clinical doses causes tachycardia
alone) is lost with the combinations.
with slight rises in blood pressure and cardiac output Its
 The diffculty in assessing the depth of unconsciousness
use in non-domesticated cats has been well described by
coupled with the poor muscle relaxation produced by
Lewis [1994). In dogs and horses, recovery is often violent,
ketamine make it doubtful that it should ever be used
 Even with o2-agonists, and ketamine is usually preferred.
alone for anaesthesia for surgery. However, in combina-
Telazol is particularly popular for use in wild animals
tion, most effectively with Oz-agonists, the fact it can be
as it can be made into highly concentrated solutions
administered by so many routes means that it has a wide
convenient for dart guns. Lin et al. [1993) give extensive
range of veterinary uses. Ketamine combinations may be
documentation of doses which have been used, success-
given IM at single doses adequate for surgical procedures 
fully or otherwise, in domestic experimental and wild
and, as such, they are widely used in cats, laboratory
animals.
animals, and by dart in wild animals. Ketamine can,
however, be used in a more controllable manner, follow-
ing premedication with the sedative, for IV anaesthetic
Miscellaneous agents
induction and, if required, subsequent infusion to extend
Some miscellaneous agents which still have animal use are
duration. There are very many possible anaesthetic com-
binations, and some suitable dose regimens will be given
mentioned briefly below.
in the species chapters.
In veterinary anaesthesia, low dose ketamine infusions
Chloralhydrate
are being used for perioperative analgesia in dogs and
Chloral hydrate is a white, translucent, crystalline sub-
horses (Wagner et al., 
2002; Elfenbein et al., 20ll),
stance which volatilizes on exposure to air, producing a
although experimental nociceptive testing does not always
penetrating smell. It is not deliquescent, but it is readily
support the clinical belief that there is good postoperative
soluble in water and aqueous solutions are generally
analgesia (Bergadano et al., 2009). Ketamine (preservative
stable. Solutions may be sterilized by boiling for a few
free) has also been used by the epidural route as an anal-
minutes. Chloral hydrate is a prodnug: it is reduced to
gesic (Robinson & Natalini, 2002; Hamilton et al., 2005;
2,2,2-trichloroethanol and its narcotic effect is generally
DeRossi et al., 20ll). All authors consider that ketamine
attributed to this substance. When given by IV injection its
can only provide part of the multimodal postoperative
effects are slow in appearing and this means that it is dif-
anaesthetic regimen, and there is need for more objective
ficult to assess the degree of depression produced by a
assessment of its use in the postoperative period. However,
given dose as injection proceeds. Even following slow
although ketamine has been widely used for anaesthesia
intravenous infusion of a dilute solution, narcosis contin-
in animals over the years, it may be that, as in human
ues to deepen for several minutes and additional doses
medicine, new uses for this drug are now being developed
should not be administered until it is clear that the
in veterinary anaesthesia.
maximum depth of depression from the initial dose has
been reached. Perivascular injection causes severe tissue
Tiletamine and Tiletamine-Zolazepam
reaction, often followed by sloughing of the overlying
tissues, but use of an intravenous catheter reduces the risk
combination
 of this happening.
Tiletamine hydrochloride is a dissociative agent similar to
Chloral hydrate is not an anaesthetic. It has only very
ketamine but at least twice as potent, and much longer
weak analgesic action. Hypnotic doses cause respiratory
lasting. Tiletamine is currently marketed in combination
depression. At sedative, and even hypnotic doses cardiac
with the benzodiazepine agent, zolazepam (Telazol@'
function is well maintained, but large doses result in arte-
 Zoletil@) in many countries. This preparation is a 1:1
 rial hypotension. Death from chloral hydrate results as a
dry powder with a long shelf-life.
result of respiratory depression. The drug was never used
Lin et al. (1993) give an extensive review of the clinical
as an anaesthetic in dogs and cats but, formerly. it was
pharmacology of tiletamine, of zolazepam and of the
used extensively in large animals, sometimes in combina-
clinical use of the combination. Pharmacodynamics are
tion with a barbiturate. Used as a sedative in horses, and
very similar to those of ketamine, other than the longer
anaesthesia induced with thiopental, the resultant period
duration of action. Tiletamine, as ketamine may be
of anaesthesia was suitable for castrations and recovery
administered by a wide number of different routes. Its
occurred within the hour. Its action in cattle is similar to
 plasma half-life in cats is 2-4 hours; that of zolazepam up
that in horses and recovery is quiet. It was often given, well 
to 5 hours. However, zolazepam has proved insufficient to
diluted with water, by stomach tube into the rumen. It is
remove the unwanted side effects of the dissociative drug.
still used occasionally as a sedative in cattle, but more
muscle rigidity is common and some seizure-like manifes-
recently
1
introduced agents are more convenient to
tations may be seen, so it is usual to administer Telzol@
administer.
148
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
Chloralose
An intravenous dose of 80-100 mg/kg of chloralose causes
Chloralose is prepared by heating equal quantities of
loss of consciousness but spontaneous muscular activity is
glucose and chloral hydrate under controlled conditions
common. The peak narcotic action of chloralose is seen
so that two isomers are produced. Only 0-chloralose has
some 15-20minutes after injection. The arterial blood
narcotic properties; β-chloralose can produce muscular
 pressure is elevated and the activity of the autonomic
pain. 0-Chloralose is available commercially as a white,
nervous system is believed to be unaffected. The heart rate
crystalline powder and it is used as a 1% solution in water
is often greatly increased and respiratory depression does
or saline. The solution is prepared fresh immediately
not occur until very large doses are given. In the body.
before use by heating to 60°C. Heating above this tenm-
chloralose is broken down to chloral and glucose and the
perature results in decomposition and precipitation occurs
safety margin is relatively wide. Disadvantages are its rela-
on standing. Chloralose is still extensively used in physi-
tive insolubility, the long comparatively shallow depth of
ological and pharmacological non-survival experiments.
 anaesthesia and the slow recovery accompanied by strug-
 Because large volumes of solution have to be given before
gling. It has no place in veterinary practice but many exper-
consciousness is lost, anaesthesia is often induced with
imentalists regard it as a valuable drug for maintenance of
some other agent such as methohexital or, today, propofol.
unconsciousness for long, non-survival experiments.
REFERENCES
Abass, B.T., Weaver, B.M., Staddon, G.E.
Andress, J.L., Day, T.K., Day, D., 1995.
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Freeman,
et al., 1994. Pharmacokinetics
The effects of consecutive day
S.L., Jaggin-Schmucker, N., et al.,
of thiopentone in the horse.
propofol anesthesia on feline red
2001. Infusion of a combination of
I Vet Pharmacol Ther 17,
blood cells. Vet Surg 24, 277-282.
 propofol and medetomidine for
331-338.
Baggot, J.D., Blake, J.W., 1976.
long-term anesthesia in ponies. Am ↓
Alfaxan Research http://www.
Disposition kinetics of ketamine
Vet Res 62, 500-507.
alfaxan.co.uk/Alfaxan_LearnMore/
in the domestic cat. Arch int
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Semder, A..
learn_Alfaxan Research.html
Pharmacodynam Ther 220,
Alibhai, H., et al., 2000.
accessed 12/10/12.
115-124.
Cardiopulmonary side-effects and
Ambros, B., Duke-Novakovski, T.,
Baker, M.T., Naguib, M., 2005. Propofol:
pharmacokinetics of an emulsion 
Pasloske, K.S., 2008. Comparison
the challenges of formulation.
of propofol (Disoprivan) in
of the anesthetic effcacy and
Anesthesiology 103, 860-876.
comparison to propofol solved in
cardiopulmonary effects of
Bengalorkar, G.M., Bhuvana, K., Sarala,
polysorbate 80 in goats. I Vet Med A,
continuous rate infusions of
N., et al., 2011. Fospropofol: clinical
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 47.
alfaxalone-2-hydroxypropyl-beta-
 pharmacology. J Anaesthesiol Clin
341-350.
cyclodextrin and propofol in
Pharmacol 27, 79-83.
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Taylor.
dogs. Am I Vet Res 69.
Bennelt, S.N., McNeil, M.M., Bland,
PM., Sear, I.W., et al., 1996.
1391-1398
LA., et al., 1995. Postoperative
 Physiologic effects of anesthesia
Amengual, M., Flaherty, D., Auckburally.
infections traced to contamination
induced and maintained by
A., et al., 2013. An evaluation of
of an intravenous anesthetic.
intravenous administration of a
anaesthetic induction in healthy
propofol. New Engl I Med 333,
cimazolam-ketamine combination
dogs using rapid intravenous
147-154.
 in ponies premedicated with
 injection of propofol or alfaxalone.
Bergadano, A., Andersen, O.K..
acepromazine and xylazine. Am J Vet
Vet Anaesth Analg 40, 115-123.
Arendt-Nielsen, L., et al., 2009.
Res 57, 1472-1477.
Andaluz, A., Felez-Ocana, N., Santos, L.-
Plasma levels of a low-dose
Bley, C.R., Roos, M., Price, I., et al..
et al., 2012. The effects on cardio-
 constant-rate-infusion of ketamine
2007. Clinical assessment of
respiratory and acid-base variables of
and its effect on single and repeated
repeated propofol-associated
the anaesthetic alfaxalone in a
nociceptive stimuli in conscious 
anesthesia in cats. I Am Vet Med
2-hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin
dogs. Vet I 182, 252-260.
Assoc 231, 1347-1353.
(HPCD) fomulation in sheep. Vet ↓
Bertelsen, M.F., Sauer, C.D., 2011.
Bouts, T., Karunaratna, D., Berry, K..
191,389-392.
Alfaxalone anaesthesia in the green
et al., 2011. Evaluation of
Anderson, C.D., 1956. Hydroxydione
iguana [Iguana iguana). Vet Anaesth
medetomidine-alfaxalone and
sodium [viadril] for anesthesia; a
Analg 38, 461-466.
medetomidine-ketamine in semi-free
report of clinical experience. Calif
Beths, T., Touzot-Jourde, T., Musk, G.,
ranging Bennett's wallabies
Med 85, 187-188.
et al., 2012. Total intravenous
[Macropus rufogriseus). I Zoo
Andreoni, V., Hughes, I.M., 2009.
anaesthesia (TIVA) in cats. http://
Wildlife Med 42, 617-622.
Propofol and fentanyl infusions in
www.alfaxan.co.uk/Alfaxan_
Brandon, R.A., Baggot, J.D., 1981.
 dogs of various breeds undergoing
LearnMore/learn_
The pharmacokinetics of
surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 36,
Alfaxan Research.html accessed
thiopentone. J Vet Pharmacol
523-531.
12/10/12.
Ther 4, 79-85.
149
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Brearley, J.C., Kellagher, R.E.B., Hall,
Intern Med Am Coll Vet Intern Med
and pharmacodynamics of the
L. W., 1988. Propofol anaesthesia in
25, 1134-1137.
injectable anaesthetic alfaxalone in
cats. J Small Anim Pract 29, 315-322.
England, G.C., Hammond, R., 1997.
the horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 38,
Brown, E.N., Purdon, PL., Van Dort,
Dose-sparing effects of romifdine
431-438.
C.J., 201l. General anesthesia and
 premedication for thiopentone and
Grint, N.I., Smith, H.E., Senior, J.M.,
 altered states of arousal: a systems
halothane anaesthesia in the dog. I
2008. Clinical evaluation of
neuroscience analysis. Annu Rev
Small Anim Pract 38, 141-146.
alfaxalone in cyclodextrin for the 
Neurosci 34, 601-628.
Evers, A.S., Crowder, C.M., Balser, J.R...
induction of anaesthesia in rabbits.
Candiotti, K.A., Gan, T.J., Young, C..
2006. General anaesthesthetics. In:
Vet Rec 163, 395-396.
et al., 2011. A randomized, open-
Brunton, L.L., Lazo, J.S., Parker, K.L..
Hall, L.W., 1984. A clinical study of a
label study of the safety and
(Eds.), Goodman and Gilman's 'The
new intravenous agent in dogs and
tolerability of fospropofol for
Pharmacological Basis of
cats. I Assoc Vet Anaesth 12.
patients requiring intubation and
Therapeutics? McGraw-Hill, New
115-121.
mechanical ventilation in the
York, pp. 348.
Hall, L.W., Chambers, J.P, 1987. A
intensive care unit. Anesth Analg
Fechner, I., Schwilden, H., Schuttler, J..
clinical trial of propofol infusion
113.550-556
2008. Phamacokinetics and
anaesthesia in dogs. I Small Anim
Chilvers, M., Jones, D., Rushmer, I., et
pharmacodynamics of GPl 15715 or
Pract 28, 623-637.
al., 1999. Propofol-thiopentone
fospropofol [Aquavan injection]
-
Hall, L.W., Lagerweij, E., Nolan, A.M..
admixture: recovery characteristics.
water-soluble propofol prodrug
et al., 1994. Effect of medetomidine
Anaesth Intensive Care 27, 601-609.
Handbook Exp Pharmacol 253-266.
on the pharmacokinetics of propofol
Clarke, K.W., Gerring, E.L., 1990.
Ferre, Pl., Pasloske, K., Whittem, T.
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 55, 116-120.
Detomidine as a sedative and
et al., 2006. Plasma
Hall, L.w., Lagerweij, E., Nolan, et al.,
premedicant in the horse [1985.
pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in
1997. Disposition of propofol after
1990). Proceedings of the 36th
dogs after an intravenous bolus of
medetomidine premedication in
Annual Convention of the American
Alfaxan-CD RTU. Vet Anaesth Analg
beagle dogs. I Vet Anaesth 24,
Association of Equine Practitioners,
33.229-236
23-29.
Lexington, Kentucky, December 2-5
Flynn, G., Shehabi, Y., 2012. Pro/con
1990, pp. 629-635.
Hamilton, S.M., Johnston, S.A.,
debate: Is etomidate safe in
Broadstone, R.V., 2005. Evaluation
Clarke, K.W., Hall, L.W., 1990. A survey
hemodynamically unstable critically
 of analgesia provided by the
 of anaesthetic practice in small
ill patients? Crit Care 16, 227.
administration of epidural ketamine
 animals. I Assoc Vet Anaesth 17.
Forman, S.A., 2011. Clinical and
in dogs with a chemically induced
4-10.
molecular pharmacology of
synovitis. Vet Anaesth Analg 32.
Clutton, R.E., Blissitt, K.J., Bradley, A.A.,
etomidate. Anesthesiology 114,
30-39.
et al., 1997. Comparison of three
695-707.
Hanna, R.M., Borchard, R.E., Schmidt,
 injectable anaesthetic techniques in
Fudickar A., Bein, B., 2009. Propofol 
S.L., 1988. Pharmacokinetics of
pigs. Vet Rec 141, 140-146.
infusion syndrome: update of
ketamine HCl and metabolite I in 
Cooper, J.E., 1974. Metomidate
clinical manifestation and
the cat: a comparison of i.y., i.m..
anaesthesia of some birds of prey for
 pathophysiology. Minerva Anestesiol
and rectal administration. J Vet 
laparotomy and sexing. Vet Rec 94.
75.339-344
Pharmacol Ther 11, 84-93.
437-440.
Gerritsmann, H., Stalder, G.L., Seilern-
Hanouz, J.L., Persehaye, E., Zhu, L..
Davies, C., Hall, L.W., 1991. Propofol
Moy, K., et al., 2012. Comparison of
et al., 2004. The inotropic and 
and excitatory sequelae in dogs.
S[+}-ketamine and ketamine, with
lusitropic effects of ketamine in
Anaesthesia 46, 797-798.
medetomidine, for feld anaesthesia
isolated human atrial myocardium:
DeRossi, R., Frazilio, FO., Jardim, P.H.,
in the European brown hare [Lepus
the effect of adrenoceptor blockade.
et al., 2011. Evaluation of thoracic
europaeus). Vet Anaesth Analg 39,
Anesth Analg 99, 1689-1695, table
epidural analgesia induced by
511-519.
of contents.
lidocaine, ketamine, or both
Glen, J.B., 1980. Animal studies of the
Hay Kraus, B.L., Greenblatt, D.J..
administered via a lumbosacral
anaesthetic activity of ICl 35 868.
Venkatakrishnan, K., et al., 2000.
approach in dogs. Am I Vet Res 72.
Br 」Anaesth 52, 731-742
Evidence for propofol hydroxylation
1580-1585
Glen, J.B., Hunter, S.C., 1984.
by cytochrome P4502B11 in canine
Dodam, J.R., Kruse-Elliott, K.T., Aucoin,
Pharmacology of an emulsion
 liver microsomes: breed and gender
D.P, et al., 1990. Duration of
formulation of ICl 35868. Br J
differences. Xenobiotica 30,
 etomidate-induced adrenocortical
Anaesth 56. 617-626
575-588.
suppression during surgery in dogs.
Goodwin, W., Keates, H., Pasloske, K..
Herbert, G.L., Bowlt, K.L., Ford-Fennah,
Am J Vet Res 51, 786-788.
et al., 2012. Plasma pharmacokinetics
V., et al., 2013. Alfaxalone for total
Dyson, D.H., Allen, D.G., Ingwersen,
and pharmacodynamics of alfaxalone
intravenous anaesthesia in dogs
W, et al., 1987. Effects of saffan on
in neonatal foals after an intravenous
undergoing ovariohysterectomy: a
cardiopulmonary function in healthy
 bolus of alfaxalone following
comparison of premedication with
cats. Can J Vet Res 51, 236-239.
premedication with butorphanol
acepromazine or dexmedetomidine.
Efenbein, J.R., Robertson, S.A., Corser,
tartrate. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
Vet Anaesth Analg 40, 124-133.
A.A., et al., 2011. Systemic effects of
503-510.
Hernandez, S.E., Sernia, C., Bradley. A.J.
a prolonged continuous infusion of
Goodwin, W.A., Keates, H.L., Pasloske,
2012. The effect of three anaesthetic
 ketamine in healthy horses. J Vet
K., et al., 2011. The pharmacokinetics
protocols on the stress response in
150
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
cne toads [Rhinella marina]. Vet
with ketamine for induction of
pharmacology and use in veterinary
Anaesth Analg 39, 584-590.
 anaesthesia in horses following
medicine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 16.
Hijazi, Y, Boulieu, R., 2002. Protein
xylazine and guaifenesin. Vet
383-418.
binding of ketamine and its active
Anaesth Analg 39, 591 -598.
Loftsson, T., Brewster, M.E., 2010.
 metabolites to human serum. Eur J
Kischinovsky, M., Duse, A., Wang. T..
 Pharmaceutical applications of
Clin Pharmacol 58, 37-40.
et al., 2013. Intramuscular
cyclodextrins: basic science and
Hughes, J.M., Nolan, A.M., 1999.
administration of alfaxalone in
product development. J Pharm
Total intravenous anesthesia in
red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta
Pharmacol 62, 1607-1621.
 greyhounds: pharmacokinetics of
elegans) - effects of dose and body
MacPherson, R.D., 2001. Pharmaceutics
 propofol and fentanyl - a preliminary
 temperature. Vet Anaesth Analg 40,
for the anaesthetist. Anaesthesia 56,
study. Vet Surg 28, 513-524.
13-20.
965-979.
Ilkiw, J.E., Benthuysen, JA., Ebling, W.F.,
Kloppel, H., Leece, E.A., 2011.
Maddern, K., Adams, V.J., Hill, N.A..
et al., 1991. A comparative study of
Comparison of ketamine and
et al., 2010. Alfaxalone induction
the pharmacokinetics of thiopental
alfaxalone for induction and
 dose following administration of
in the rabbit, sheep and dog. I Vet
 maintenance of anaesthesia in
medetomidine and butorphanol in
Pharmacol Ther 14, 134-140.
ponies undergoing castration. Vet
the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 7-13.
Jiang, X., Gao, L., Zhang. Y, et al., 2011.
Anaesth Analg 38, 37-43.
Majdan, M., Mauritz, W., Brazinova, A.,.
A comparison of the effects of
Ko, J.C., Golder, E., Mandsager, R.E..
et al., 2013. Barbiturates use and
ketamine, chloral hydrate and
et al., 1999. Anesthetic and
its effects in patients with severe
 pentobarbital sodium anesthesia
crdiorespiratory effects of a 1:1
TBl in fve European countries.
on isolated rat hearts and
mixture of propofol and thiopental
J Neurotrauma 30, 23-29.
ardiomyocytes. I Cardiovasc Med
sodium in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Mathis, A., Pinelas, R., Brodbelt, D.C.,
[Hagerstown] 12, 732-735.
215. 1292-1296.
et al., 2012. Comparison of quality
Jimenez, C.P., Mathis, A., Mora, S.S.,
Kruse-Elliott, K.T., Swanson, C.R.,
of recovery from anaesthesia in cats
et al., 2012. Evaluation of the quality
Aucoin, D.P., 1987. Effects of
induced with propofol or alfaxalone.
of the recovery after administration
etomidate on adrenocortical
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 282-290.
 of propofol or alfaxalone for
function in canine surgical patients.
Matot, I., Neely, C.F., Katz, R.Y., et al..
induction of anaesthesia in dogs
Am J Vet Res 48, 1098-1100.
1993. Pulmonary uptake of propofol
anaesthetized for magnetic resonance
Kumar, V.L., Malhotra, I., Kumar, V.,
in cats. Effect of fentanyl and
imaging. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
1993. Anaesthetic steroids - a
halothane. Anesthesiology 78,
151-159.
review. Indian I Med Sci 47, 87-95.
1157-1165
Johnson, K.B., Egan, T.D., Layman, I..
Lankveld, D.P., Driessen, B., Soma, L.R.,
McMillan, M.W., Leece, E.A., 2011.
et al., 2003. The influence of
et al., 2006. Pharmacodynamic
 Immersion and branchial/
hemorrhagic shock on etomidate:
effects and pharmacokinetic profle
transcutaneous irrigation anaesthesia
a pharmacokinetic and
 of a long-term continuous rate
with alfaxalone in a Mexican axolotl.
pharmacodynamic analysis. Anesth
infusion of racemic ketamine in
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 619-623.
Analg 96, 1360-1368.
healthy conscious horses. JVet
Mercer, S.., 2009. 'The Drug of War' -
Jud, R., Picek, S., Makara, M.A., et al.,
Pharmacol Ther 29, 477-488.
 historical review of the use of
 2010. Comparison of racemic
Ledingham, I.M., Watt, I., 1983.
Ketamine in military conflicts. J Roy
ketamine and S-ketamine as agents
 Influence of sedation on mortality in
Naval Med Serve 95, 145-150.
for the induction of anaesthesia in
citically ill multiple trauma patients.
Michou, J.N., Leece, E.A., Brearley, J.C.,
goats. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
Lancet 1, 1270.
2012. Comparison of pain on
511-518.
Leece, E.A., Girard, N.M., Maddern, K.,
injection during induction of
Kaka, J.S., Hayton, W.L., 1980.
2009. Alfaxalone in cyclodextrin for
anaesthesia with alfaxalone and two
Pharmacokinetics of ketamine and
induction and maintenance of
formulations of propofol in dogs.
 two metabolites in the dog. I
anaesthesia in ponies undergoing
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 275-281.
Pharmacokinet Biopharm 8.
feld castration. Vet Anaesth Analg
193-202.
Muir, W., Lerche, P, Wiese, A., et al.
36, 480-484.
2008. Cardiorespiratory and
Kaka, J.S., Klavano, PA., Hayton, W.L.,
Lewis, J.C.M., 1994. Anaesthesia of
anesthetic effects of clinical and
1979. Pharmacokinetics of ketamine
non-domestic cats. In: Hall, L.W.
supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in
in the horse. Am J Vet Res 40.
Taylor, PM. (Ed.), Anaesthesia of the
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
978-981.
 cat. Balliere Tindall, London, pp.
451-462.
Keates, H., 2003. Induction of
329-330
Muir, W., Lerche, P, Wiese, A., et al.
anaesthesia in pigs using a new
Li, R., Zhang, W.S., Liu, I., et al., 2012.
2009. The cardiorespiratory and
alphaxalone formulation. Vet Rec 
Minimum infusion rates and
 anesthetic effects of clinical and
153, 627-628.
recovery times from different
supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in 
Keates, H., Whittem, T., 2012. Effect of
 durations of continuous infusion of
cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 42-54.
intravenous dose escalation with
fospropofol, a prodrug of propofol,
Nadeson, R., Goodchild, C.s., 2000.
alfaxalone and propofol on
in rabbits: a comparison with
Antinociceptive properties of
occurrence of apnoea in the dog. Res
 propofol emulsion. Vet Anaesth
neurosteroids Il. Experiments with
Vet Sci 93, 904-906.
Analg 39, 373-384.
Saffan and its components 
Keates, H.L., van Eps, A.W., Pearson,
Lin, H.C., Thurmon, J.C., Benson, G.J..
alphaxalone and alphadolone to
M.R., 2012. Alfaxalone compared
et al., 1993. Telazol - a review of its
reveal separation of anaesthetic and
151
Section
1
Principles and procedures
antinociceptive effects and the
of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl
phamacokinetics and anesthetic
involvement of spinal cord GABA[A]
for induction of anaesthesia in dogs
effects of methohexital,
receptors. Pain 88, 31-39.
that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet
pentobarbital, thiamylal, and
Nolan, A., Reid, I., Welsh, E., et al.
Anaesth Analg 38, 24-36.
thiopental in Greyhound dogs and
1996. Simultaneous infusions of
Pypendop. B.H., Ilkiw, J.E., 2005.
non-Greyhound, mixed-breed dogs.
propofol and ketamine in ponies
Pharmacokinetics of ketamine and
Am I Vet Res 46, 1677-1683.
 premedicated with detomidine: a
its metabolite, norketamine, after 
Sear, J.W., 1996. Steroid anesthetics: old
pharmacokinetic study. Res Vet Sci
intravenous administration of a
compounds, new drugs. I Clin 
60.262-266
bolus of ketamine to isoflurane-
Anesth 8, 91S-98S.
Nolan, A.M., Reid, I., Grant, S., 1993.
 anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res GG.
Sear, J.W., 1998. Eltanolone: 50 years on
The effects of halothane and nitrous
2034-2038
and still looking for steroid hypnotic
oxide on the pharmacokinetics of
Raff, M., Harrison, G.G., 1989. The
agents! Eur J Anaesthesiol 15,
propofol in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol
screening of propofol in MHS swine.
129-132.
Ther 16, 335-342.
Anesth Analg 68, 750-751.
Short, C.E., Bufalari, A., 1999. Propofol
O'Hagan, B., Pasloske, K., McKinnon,
Reid, I., Nolan, A.M., 1993.
anesthesia. Vet Clin N Am Small
C., et al., 2012a. Clinical evaluation
Pharmacokinetics of propofol
Anim Pract 29, 747-778.
 of alfaxalone as an anaesthetic
in dogs premedicated with
Sneyd, J.R., 2004. Recent advances in
induction agent in dogs less than 12
acepromazine and maintained with
intravenous anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth
weeks of age. Aust Vet I 90, 346-350.
halothane and nitrous oxide. J Vet
93.725-736.
O'Hagan, B.J., Pasloske, K., McKinnon.
Pharmacol Ther 16, 501 -505.
Sneyd, J.R., 2012. Novel etomidate
B., et al., 2012b. Clinical evaluation
Reid, I., Nolan, A.M., 1996.
derivatives. Curr Pharm Des 18.
of alfaxalone as an anaesthetic
 Pharmacokinetics of propofol as an
6253-6256
induction agent in cats less than 12
induction agent in geriatric dogs. Res
Sneyd, I.R., Rigby-Jones, A.E., 2010.
weeks of age. Aust Vet J 90, 395-401.
Vet Sci 61, 169-171.
 New drugs and technologies.
Pascoe, PJ., lkiw, JI.E., Frischmeyer, K.j..
Reves, J.G., Glass, PS.A., Lubarski, D.A.,
intravenous anaesthesia is on the
2006. The effect of the duration of
McEvoy, M.D., et al., 2012.
move [again). Br J Anaesth 105.
propofol administration on recovery
Intravenous anaesthetics. In: Millar.
246-254.
from anesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth
R.D., Erikson, L.l., Fleisher, L.A..
Soars, M.G., Riley, R.J., Findlay, K.A..
Analg 33, 2-7.
et al. (Eds.), Miller's Anesthesia,
et al., 2001. Evidence for significant
Pascoe, PJ., Ilkiw, J.E., Haskins, S.C.,
seventh ed. Churchill
differences in microsomal drug
et al., 1992. Cardiopulmonary effects
Livngston-Elsivier.
glucuronidation by canine and
 of etomidate in hypovolemic dogs.
Rigby-Jones, A.E., Nolan, J.A., Priston,
human liver and kidney Drug Metab
Am J Vet Res 53, 2178-2182.
M.J, et al., 2002. Phamacokinetics
Dispos 29, 121-126.
Pasloske, K., Sauer, B., Perkins, N., et al..
of propofol infusions in critically ill
Strachan, FA., Mansel, J.C., Clutton,
2009. Plasma pharmacokinetics of 
neonates, infants, and children in an
R.E., 2008. A comparison of
alfaxalone in both premedicated
intensive care unit. Anesthesiology
microbial growth in alfaxalone.
and unpremedicated Greyhound
97,1393-1400.
 propofol and thiopental. J Small
dogs after single, intravenous
Robinson, E.P., Natalini, C.C., 2002.
Anim Pract 49, 186-190.
 administration of Alfaxan at a
 Epidural anesthesia and analgesia in
Suarez, M.A., Dzikiti, B.T., Stegmann,
dinical dose. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
horses. Vet Clin N Am Equine Pract
F.G., et al., 2012. Comparison 
32, 510-513.
18, 61-82, vi.
of alfaxalone and propofol
Pejo, E., Cotten, J.F., Kelly, E.W., et al.,
Robinson, E.P., Sams, R.A., Muir, W.W..
administered as total intravenous
 2012a. In vivo and in vitro
1986. Barbiturate anesthesia in
anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy
 pharmacological studies of
greyhound and mixed-breed dogs:
 in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
methoxycarbonyl-carboetomidate.
comparative cardiopulmonary
236-244.
Anesth Analg 115, 297-304.
effects, anesthetic effects, and
Taboada, FM., Murison, PJ., 2010.
Pejo, E., Feng, Y., Chao, W., et al.
recovery rates. Am J Vet Res 47,
Induction of anaesthesia with
2012b. Differential effects of
2105-2112.
alfaxalone or propofol before
etomidate and its pyrrole analogue
Rodriguez, J.M., Munoz-Rascon, P.,
isoflurane maintenance in cats. Vet
carboetomidate on the
Navarrete-Calvo, R., et al., 2012.
Rec 167, 85-89.
 adrenocortical and cytokine
Comparison of the cardiopulmonary
Thomas, A.A., Leach, M.C., Flecknell,
responses to endotoxemia. Crit Care
 parameters after induction of
PA., 2012. An alternative method of
Med 40, 187-192.
anaesthesia with alphaxalone or
endotracheal intubation of common
Pejo, E., Ge, R., Banacos, N., et al.,
etomidate in dogs. Vet Anaesth
marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). Lab 
 2012c. Electroencephalographic
Analg 39, 357-365.
Anim 46, 71-76.
recovery, hypnotic emergence, and
Sams, L., Braun, C., Allman, D., et al..
Tobias, G., 1964. Congenital porphyria
the effects of metabolite after
2008. A comparison of the effects
in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 145.
continuous infusions of a rapidly
of propofol and etomidate on the
462-463.
 metabolized etomidate analog in
induction of anesthesia and on
Torres, M.D., Andaluz, A., Garcia, F.,
rats. Anesthesiology 116, 1057 -1065.
cardiopulmonary parameters in dogs.
et al., 2012. Effects of an intravenous
Psatha, E., Alibhai, H.l., Jimenez-
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 488-494.
bolus of alfaxalone versus propofol
Lozano, A., et al., 2011. Clinical
Sams, R.A., Muir, W.w., Detra, R.L.,
on intraocular pressure in sheep. Vet
 efficacy and cardiorespiratory effects
et al., 1985. Comparative
Rec 170, 226.
152
General pharmacology of the injectable agents used in anaesthesia
Chapter
6
Wagner, A.E., Walton, JA., Hellyer, P.W.,.
in the horse. Res Vet Sci 42,
supraclinical doses. J Vet Pharmacol
et al., 2002. Use of low doses of
162-166.
Ther 31, 571-579.
ketamine administered by constant
Watkins, S.B., Hall, L. W., Clarke, K.W..
Young, L.E., Brearley, J.C., Richards,
rate infusion as an adjunct for
1987. Propofol as an intravenous
D.L.S., et al., 1990. Medetomidine as
 postoperative analgesia in dogs.
 anaesthetic agent in dogs. Vet Rec
a premedicant in dogs and its
JAm VetMed Assoc 221, 72-75.
120, 326-329.
reversal by atipamezole. J Small
Walsh, V.P., Gieseg, M., Singh, P.M.
Wertz, E.M., Benson, G.J., Thurmon,
Anim Pract 3i, 554-559.
et al., 2012. A comparison of two
J.C., et al., 1990. Pharmacokinetics
Zaki, S., Ticehurst, K., Miyaki, Y., 2009.
 different ketamine and diazepam
of etomidate in cats. Am J Vet Res
Clinical evaluation of Alfaxan-CD(R)
combinations with an alphaxalone
51, 281-285.
as an intravenous anaesthetic in
 and medetomidine combination for
Whittem, T., Pasloske, K.S., Heit, M.C.,
young cats. Aust Vet J 87, 82-87.
induction of anaesthesia in sheep.
et al., 2008. The pharmacokinetics
Zoran, D.L., Riedesel, D.H., Dyer, D.C..
NZ Vet J 60, 136-141.
 and pharmacodynamics of
1993. Pharmacokinetics of propofol
Waterman, A.E., Robertson, S.A., Lane,
alfaxalone in cats after single and
in mixed-breed dogs and 
J.G., 1987. Phamacokinetics of
multiple intravenous administration
greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 54,
intravenously administered ketamine
 of Alfaxan at clinical and
755-760.
153
7
Chapter
General pharmacology of the
inhalation anaesthetics
Introduction
155
inhalation anaesthetic agents have been investigated.
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
156
Many of those once used clinically have now been dis-
carded but, surprisingly, the frst two are still in use, at
Analgesia
156
least in some parts ofthe world. Ofthose covered in earlier
 Uptake and elimination
156
editions of this book, chloroform (frst used in 1847) was
 Flammability and chemical stability
157
discarded as it results in dose-dependent liver toxicity
and also sensitizes the heart to epinephrine-induced
Biotransformation and organ toxicity
158
arrhythmias. Cyclopropane was withdrawn because it
Actions on vital body functions
158
is flammable and explosive when mixed with oxygen.
Interaction with other drugs
159
Trichlorethylene an excellent analgesic, reacted with the
Occupational exposure to inhalation
carbon dioxide absorbent and had to be given by a non-
 anaesthetic agents
159
rebreathing system. The agents discussed individually
Individual inhalation anaesthetics
below, to the best of the authors' knowledge, all remain
159
in clinical use (in humans and/or in animals) in some
Nitrous oxide (NzO)
159
areas of the world.
Xenon
160
The ideal inhalation anaesthetic should provide good
 Diethyl ether
161
quality anaesthesia, be practicable to give, non-flammable.
stable chemically under all circumstances [in and out of
Halothane
161
the animal). allow a rapid induction and recovery from
Methoxyflurane
162
anaesthesia, have minimal efects on circulation and on
Enflurane
162
the respiratory system, provide analgesia and muscle relax-
Isoflurane
162
ation, be non-toxic and have no other unwanted side
effects. No such agent exists, although xenon is coming
 Desflurane
164
close to meeting these targets.
Sevoflurane
164
The term 'volatile anaesthetic agent' can be applied to
 Comparison of volatile agents for
agents that are in liquid form at room temperature and 1
veterinary clinical practice
165
atmosphere of pressure and, therefore, require the use of
a vaporizer. However, other agents are in gaseous form,
and are presented in cylinders. The term 'inhalation agent'
covers all. The mode of action of inhalation agents has
INTRODUCTION
been discussed in Chapter l. Suffice it to say here that
actions at any single receptor, ligand or voltage-gated
Since the frst use of nitrous oxide (NzO) by Watt in 1844,
channel cannot explain all the effects of inhalation anaes-
and of ether by Morton in l846., a large number of
thetic agents.
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
155
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Minimum alveolar
ether and methoxyflurane, are not known to act at this
concentration (MAC)
receptor, yet have marked analgesic properties, while many
other volatile agents do not.
The concept of minimum alveolar concentration (MAC),
how it is measured and factors which will effect it were
Uptake and elimination
discussed in Chapter 1. Variation in measurement of MAC
have been reviewed by Shaughnessy & Hofmeister [2013). If
The pharmacokinetics of inhalation agents, the impor-
a combination of inhalation anaesthetic agents is employed,
tance of the physical properties and the influence of physi-
their MACs are additive; this is the basis of regimens that use
ological effects (e.g. cardiac output and ventilation) have
NO (since NzO is not sufficiently potent to be used as a
 been explained in Chapter 3. The important physical prop-
sole anaesthetic agent) together with a volatile agent such as
erties of agents in current use are given in Table 7.1. Of
isoflurane (Eger et al., 2003). It is now thought that an inha-
practical importance are:
lation anaesthetic's effect in preventing moverment (and that
The lower the blood/gas solubility the faster the
is what defines MAC) is mediated at the spinal cord (Sonner
induction of anaesthesia
et al., 2003; Antognini et al., 2005), while higher centres
 Speed of recovery from a short anaesthetic is fastest
influence amnesia, l
hypnosis, and perception of pain.
with agents with low blood/gas solubility, but
However, MAC remains the standard measure of 'potency
juage au jo dn ayet, Aq pauasey ose st uuaeme
of an anaesthetic, is the measure by which equipotent levels
by tissues other than the brain
of inhalation anaesthetics can be compared, and gives an
indication of the concentration that, depending on other
 Recovery from a long anaesthetic will depend also on
the amount of agent in the tissues, so the gas
 agents given, will be required in the clinical situation.
solubility in other tissues becomes an issue. A high
fat solubility delays full recovery from a prolonged
Analgesia
anaesthetic
· Induction of anaesthesia can be hastened by giving
The mode by which inhalation agents produce, or do not
 more than one MAC multiple, assuming that the
 produce, analgesia is not clear-cut. The two gaseous agents,
saturated vapour pressure of the agent allows a
NO and xenon, produce marked analgesia, possibly
sufficient concentration and that it can be given
through actions at the NMDA receptor. The volatile agents,
without causing hypoxia (Tables 7.1 and 7.2).
Table 7.1 Physical characteristics of some anaesthetic agents
Anaesthetic
Human blood?
 Brain/blood 
Oil/gas
Fat/blood
Boiling
Saturated vapour
gas part.coeff.
part.coeff.
part.coeff.
part.coeff.
point *c
pressure at 20*c in
mm Hg (kPa)
 Xenon
1.115-1.14
0.23
1.9
-108.1
Atmospheric (gas at 20°℃)
 Desflurane
0.42
1.3
18.7
27
23.5
664 (88.5)
Nitrous oxide
0.47
1.1
1.4
2.3
89.0
Atmospheric (gas at 20°℃)
Sevoflurane
0.65
1.7
53.0
48
58.5
157 (20.9)
Isoflurane 
1.4
1.6
45
48.5
236 (31.5)
 Enflurane
1.8
1.4
98.0
36
56.5
172 (22.9)
Halothane
2.5
1.9
220.0
51
50.2
240 (32.0)
Ether
12.0
2.0
65.0
34.6
442 (58.9)
Methoxyflurane
15.0
1.4
06
104.8
23 (3.1)
NB: Atmospheric pressure may be reported in mmHg or millibar. 1 millibar = 1 hectopascal = 0.1 kPa
Order gives the lowvest blood/gas solubility first. Solubilities depend on the temperature (most reported are at 37°C) and for oil/gas on oil
(zloz "je ia sajeos eooz "je la ouepebjag) salpads uaaiaq Aen sanjea kuqnlos seb/poolg sanjen pajoda ui suoeuen aouay 'pasn
partly. but not totally related to triglyceride value. Values compiled from Eger (1995), Jones (1990), Steffey (2002), Goto et al. (1998) and
Jordan & wright (2010).
156
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
17
 Table 7.2 Some reported minimal alveolar
explosions (Fatheree & Leighton, 2004; Wu et al., 2004).
Dunning et al. (2007). in in-vitro experiments, have dem-
concentration (MAc) values
onstrated that sevoflurane breakdown with both Barolyme
and soda lime can result in explosive concentrations of
Anaesthetic
Species
MAC (vol %)
hydrogen, and this may have been a contributory cause of
Nitrous oxide
 Humans 
104
the fires that have occurred.
Anaesthetic agents need to be stable in storage and pre-
Xenon
 Humans
62-71
119
cautions required to ensure this will be discussed under
Dog
the specific agents. The greatest concern is the potential for
 Halothane
 Humans
0.75
sod auee aut a m he a ya uo
Dog
56'0-98'0
used for CO2 absorption (e.g. soda lime or Barolyme) in
0.82-1.22
closed breathing systems. Until relatively recently, it was
Horse
0.88
thought that the fluorinated hydrocarbons, other than
Goat
1.3-1.4
sevoflurane, did not react with soda lime under the condi-
Isoflurane
 Humans
1.2
tions likely to occur clinically, but this is now known not
Dog
1.28
to be true.
1.22.22
Sevoflurane when used in closed systems, produces a
Horse 
1.31
number of breakdown products of which 'Compound A'
Goat
1.5-1.62
(CF,=C(CF,)-O-CH,F) is nephrotoxic in rats. Although
 Sevoflurane
 Humans
2.1
toxic values (in rats) usually need to exceed 1000 ppm,
Dog
2.09-2.36
under certain circumstances, levels as low as 50 ppm may
2.54.0
Horse
cause medullary tubular necrosis (Keller et al., 1995). The
2.312.84
 concentrations of Compound A which occur are greatest
Goat
2.7
at higher temperatures, with dry absorbents, with low flow
Desflurane
 Humans
6
Dog
7.210.32
10.27
trations of sevoflurane (Baum & Aitkenhead, 1995). Levels
3
Horse
8.06
in humans and the dog using closed systems are usually
10.52
about 20 ppm but, in certain circumstances, reach over
Goat
50 ppm in individuals (Smith et al., 1996). Nevertheless,
MAC values depend on measurement methods and conditions
there is no evidence that renal failure has resulted from
(Quasha et al., 1980) hence range reported. MACs over 80%
sevoflurane anaesthesia in humans (Sahin et al., 20ll) or
represent a theoretical projection.
during veterinary use in domestic animals.
Information compiled from the following reviews: Eger (1994).
Clarke (1999), Lynch et al. (2000), Alibhai, (2001), Steffey (2002),
 The passage of some inhalation anaesthetic agents over
Shaughnessy & Hofmeister, 2013 and original papers: Barter
very dry highly basic CO2 absorbents results in accumu-
et al. (2004), Goto et al. (1998), Nickalls & Mapleson (2003),
lation of carbon monoxide (CO) and formaldehyde
Steffey et al. (2005a,b).
within a closed anaesthetic system. Of the inhalation
agents in common use, desflurane produces the greatest
amount of CO, and halothane probably the least (Fang
Flammability and chemical stability
et al., 1995). It was thought that breakdown of sevoflu-
rane would not release CO until the cases mentioned
Modern anaesthetics must be non-flammable in
the
above In both those cases, the absorbent was Barolyme,
range of concentrations and gas mixtures (usually of O2
which has since been withdrawn. In Fatheree & Leighton's
and NzO) used in clinical practice Non-flammability is
ase (2004), a low flow (not closed) system was being
achieved by halogenation - in particular fluorination -
- of
used. At the end of surgery, they found that the absorb-
the agent In most cases, this does not greatly change the
ent canister was very hot, and on disconnection, saw
flammability limits but it does increase the energy neces-
white smoke and smelt burning plastic (on later exami-
sary to ignite the agents and it is this which renders these
nation there was fused plastic, and burnt rubber). The
agents non-flammable in normal clinical use.
 patient had arterial blood carboxyhaemoglobin of 29%.
Although the anaesthetic agent itself may not be easily
 Oxygen saturation of only 69%, developed acute respira-
flammable, its breakdown products may be so. NzO
tory distress syndrome, but recovered with intensive care.
increases the flammability of organic vapours because its
During anaesthesia, the only point of note had been
exothermic decomposition results in production of an
that inspired sevoflurane was low despite a vaporizer
oxygen-rich mixture (33% O2). Breakdown of sevoflurane
setting of 8%. An unexpectedly low delivered sevoflurane
with the carbon dioxide absorbent, Barolyme, leads to a
 concentration appears to be a warning sign of breakdown
massive rise in temperature (see chemical stability below),
of the agent In the report of Wu et al. (2004), there
resulting in melting of the anaesthetic cirauit, fires and
was an explosion and fre in a machine which had been
157
Section
1
Principles and procedures
left with oxygen running and the vaporizer turned on
Actions on vital body functions
between patients.
 The problems relating to agent breakdown occur mainly
In experiments on isolated organs, almost all anaesthetics
with dry soda lime, and can be reduced by turning off the
have a dose-dependent depressant effect on the cardiovas-
O2 flow of 'fail-safe' machines when they are not in use to
 s  'e    q  
aun yanoiy moy ses snonuuos yo paa suip aut pioae
be modifed or even controlled by mechanisms such as
system. However, the best avoidance is to use one of the
the effect of increased CO2 or the response to surgery
newer absorbents; those without the KOH are less likely
causing sympathetic stimulation. There are major differ-
to result in breakdown of any inhalation agents; the
ences between the cardiovascular actions of the agents
absorbents which do not contain any of the strong bases
in spontaneously breathing patients compared to those
(see Chapter 10) reduce agent breakdown even further and
undergoing intermittent positive pressure ventilation
are best used for sevoflurane.
(IPpV), when CO2 can be controlled. Of practical clinical
importance for comparison of such effects is, for the car-
diovascular system, the effect of equipotent dose effects on
Biotransformation and
heart rate and rhythm (including sensitivity to epine-
organ toxicity
phrine), on myocardial contractility, cardiac output, and
 on the resistance of peripheral, pulmonary, cerebral and
auisaeue uoeieuui jo insan e se sueio on aseea
other organ vasculature. Of particular importance is the
agents may be due to direct toxic effects of the agent, to
o i u  m o  uo 
effects mediated by metabolites, or to hypoxic changes,
 pressure). The effect of different anaesthetic agents on
usually from poor organ blood flow. Except in sensitivity
overall blood flow to specific organs, in particular
reactions, the toxicity of the unchanged compound is
brain, kidneys and heart, has been the subject of a great
often, but not always, directly related to the concentration
deal of research in human anaesthesia, in order to relate
present and decreasing the concentration and/or the dura-
use of a specific agent to a specific type of surgery.
tion of exposure will decrease toxicity.
Or patient disease. For example, isoflurane causes more
Toxic effects of anaesthetic dnugs are most commonly
coronary steal than enflurane [Diana et al., 1993): there
seen in the liver and kidneys. Kharasch (2008) has recently
are many investigations as to the relative effects of sevoflu-
reviewed the current understanding of the mechanisms.
rane and desflurane on this phenomenon. With the
The most commonly cited example is that of halothane.
exception of NzO, all the inhalation anaesthetics produce
A small amount of halothane (up to 3%) is metabolized
a concentration-dependent depression of respiration.
by anaerobic reduction, catalysed by CYP2A6, that results
Although there is some difference of degree between
in a small increase in transaminase, which is clinically
the agents currently used, the impact on respiration is
unimportant. However, large amounts (25% plus) undergo
considered of less importance than cardiovascular effects
oxidation catalysed predominantly by CYP2El. Break-
as IPpV can always be employed. Some anaesthetics are
down products include trifluoroacetyl halides which can
irritant to the airways that may lead to breath holding
link to liver proteins. In some cases, antibodies are formed
when they are used for anaesthetic induction or in very
against the halothane-induced antigen, resulting 
in
lightly anaesthetized animals. Good monitoring (see
immune-mediated liver damage (so-called halothane
Chapter 2) enables many of these depressant effects to be
hepatitis'). However, isoflurane and enflurane produce
detected and treated.
similar breakdown products to halothane to a lesser extent
 All the halogenated volatile anaesthetic agents, (but not
and, although very rare, similar autoimmune-mediated
the gaseous agents NzO and xenon) can trigger the condi-
hepatitis may occur (Frink, 1995; Kenna & Jones, 1995).
The renal damage which was reported following the
prolonged use of methoxyflurane was originally thought
cognitive dysfunction through a direct neurotoxic action
to be due to free fluoride ions formed from hepatic metab-
[reviewed by Mandal et al., 2009).
olism. This theory is now known to be incorrect. In most
 Not all effects of inhalation agents are negative. Despite
species, fluoride alone is nephrotoxic only at very high
the concern over cognitive dysfunction mentioned above,
concentrations. Kharasch (2008) explains that methoxy-
most anaesthetic agents are thought to have neuroprotec-
flurane is O-demethylated to fluoride and to dichloracetic
tive properties (Matchett et al., 2009; Schiflliti et al.
acid (DCAA). DCAA alone is not nephrotoxic, but appears
2010) against hypoxic insult, as do many intravenous
to increase the toxicity of fluoride. Of the fluorinated inha-
lation agents, only methoxyflurane breaks down both to
hypoxic insults; most experimental evidence in animal
fluoride and DCAA. The incorrect interpretation of the
models suggests that this protection is greater than that of
mechanisms of methoxyflurane nephrotoxicity delayed
 intravenous agents and that this is so has been confirmed
the introduction of sevoflurane (metabolism of which
in clinical practice (De Hert et al., 2005; Landoni et al.,
results in fluoride) for many years.
2007: Bein, 20ll; Van Rompaey & Barvais, 2011).
158
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
7
Interaction with other drugs
sevoflurane and desflurane In the USA, levels of exposure
which should not be exceeded are, for example, by govern-
Any drug that has CNS depressant effects, whether seda-
ment recommendation 2.0 ppm for volatile agents and
tive, hypnotic or analgesic will add, or in some cases be
 25 ppm for NzO. Other countries differ in their require-
 synergistic with, the effect of inhaled anaesthetic agents.
ments [ISSA, 1996). The limits of exposure chosen by
Many such drug combinations are used to reduce the dose
various authorities differ between countries have no good
of inhalation anaesthetic agent used, and will be described
evidence base (ISSA, 1996). The most serious concern was
in the relevant species chapters. The basis of use is that if
that of effects on fertility and on developmental defects.
less inhalation agent is used, there will be less cardiovas-
ISSA (1996) summarizes a meta-analysis of the evidence
cular depression. There is little or no evidence as yet that 
available in 1996; there is evidence in experimental
this is always the case; blood pressure may be higher but
models that implicates nitrous oxide but there is little
cardiac output and therefore blood flow, may not be
compelling evidence of long-lasting harm relating to the
improved over that which would have occurred with the
other agents. However, there is evidence of concurrent
inhalation agent alone. The exception is the use of some
reduction in cognitive function for personnel working in
an atmosphere contaminated by inhalation anaesthetics.
themselves give poor analgesia. Local nerve blocks where
The result of the concerns led to the introduction of waste
practicable are particularly effective. Other techniques
gs scavenging, and regular monitoring of its effcacy (see
include infusion of opioids, lidocaine, O2-agonists or keta-
Chapter l0), and the authors are in no doubt that this
mine (see Chapter 5). There are species differences between
has improved the working environment in operating
the most suitable methods.
theatres.
Agents which stimulate the CNS will tend to reverse the
effects of anaesthetic drugs. In veterinary patients for
anaesthesia, interactions with accidental ingested of rec-
reational drugs ('uppers or downers') may have to be con-
INDIVIDUAL INHALATION
sidered on rare occasions.
ANAESTHETICS
All neuromuscular blocking drugs are potentiated by
volatile anaesthetics in a dose-dependent manner (see
Nitrous oxide (N20)
Chapter 8), but not by the inhalation agent, xenon. Inter-
est has been greatest in relation to anaesthesia of patients
NzO is a gaseous anaesthetic agent. Although the frst
with myasthenia gravis (Blichfeldt-Lauridsen & Hansen,
 original anaesthetic agent, it is still in use in medical and
2012). Sevoflurane has been reported to reduce the TOF
veterinary anaesthesia, in particular because of its out-
(train of four) ratio in a dose-dependent manner in both
 standing analgesic effects, which are evident at subanaes-
normal and myasthenic patients (Nitahara et al., 2007).
thetic concentrations. Its mode of action is thought
 The sensitization of the myocardium to both endog-
primarily to be action inhibiting the NMDA receptor
enous and exogenous epinephrine by the inhalational
(Jevtovic-Todorovic et al., 1998; Mennerick et al., 1998).
 agents has been the subject of much investigation. Straight-
(s laideu aas] Auaod pisaeue si ueidxa Ae uium
chain hydrocarbons (such as halothane) tend to sensitize
As such, the use of BIS monitors are ineffective at monitor-
the heart to catecholamines; the ethers, especially if fluori-
ing the depth of anaesthesia with this agent, as are audi-
nated, do not have this effect.
tory evoked potentials (see Chapter 1) (Yagi et al., 1995).
NzO is a colourless gas with a faint rather pleasant
Occupational exposure to inhalation
smell; it is not flammable or explosive but it will support
anaesthetic agents
combustion, even in the absence of free O2. Compressed
into cylinders (tanks) at 40 atmospheres pressure it lique-
Personnel exposed to trace concentrations of inhalation
fies so is presented in cylinders (see Chapter 10). NzO is
anaesthetics in the atmosphere inhale and retain these
also available in a 50% mixture with 50% oxygen, as
agents in their bodies for some hours or even days.
Entanox? or Nitronox.
depending on the solubility of the agents concerned. As a
The MAC of NzO is over l00% so it cannot be used
result of concerns raised in the 1970s that such exposure
alone to produce anaesthesia and must be administered
 might be deleterious to health, legal requirerments seting
with suffcient O2 (>25%) to prevent hypoxia. However,
limits' to such exposure have been introduced in most
the rapid onset and recovery from its effects, coupled with
countries. In the UK, they are governed by The Control of
 its strong analgesic properties make it a useful adjuvant to
Substance Hazardous to Human Health (COSHH) regula-
an anaesthetic protocol. The low solubility of NzO results
tions' and the Occupational Exposure Standards (OES) set
 in rapid equilibration between inspired and expired con-
is based on an eight hour time weighted average of
centrations. As a result, when used with oxygen in a low-
100 ppm of NzO, 10 ppm of halothane and 50 ppm of
flow rebreathing circuit, concentrations of NzO tend to
isoflurane. The limits have not been updated to include
 increase as, while after equilibration there is no further
159
Section
1
Principles and procedures
uptake of NzO, oxygen is still being utilized. To prevent a
effects, is an excellent analgesic, is neuroprotective, and is
hypoxic mixture, higher flows or inspired oxygen monitor-
mon-toxic [including to the environment).
ing are advisable.
The mode of action of xenon is thought to be primarily
1e Apoq aui ul saseds pally-see oju! Aip!dei saou OeN
at the NMDA receptors (as for NzO). Xenon's analgesic
a greater rate than nitrogen can diffuse out. This is of
effects at subanaesthetic doses are equal to or better
considerable importance in herbivores and in the presence
(depending on the nociceptive stimulus used) than N2O.
of a closed pneumothorax. The low solubility also results
Xenon has no action on GABA receptors and, as a result,
in the phenomena of 'the second gas effect' at induction of
many anaesthetic depth monitors such as BIS are unreli-
anaesthesia, and potentially in'diffusion hypoxia' at recov-
able (see Chapter 1). In contrast to NO, auditory evoked
ery. When NzO is frst administered to a patient, a large
potentials (see Chapter l) can be used for some assess-
gradient exists between the tension in the inspired gas and
ment of depth of xenon anaesthesia (Yagi et al., 1995:
the arterial blood so that initially the blood takes up large
Sanders & Maze, 2005).
volumes of gas. Its rapid removal from the alveoli by the
Xenon is non-flammable non-explosive, and is pre-
 blood elevates the tension of any remaining (second) gas
 sented in cylinders as a compressed gas. Its density is 4.5
or vapour such as oxygen, or a volatile anaesthetic agent,
times and viscosity twice that of air. As a result, its use
and augments alveolar ventilation. Thus, during the frst
 requires special flow meters (Baumert, 2009 ). It is obtained
few minutes of NzO administration, anaesthetic uptake is
 by fractional distillation of liquefied air, quantities are very
facilitated because the enhanced tension of the second gas
small (>0.0875 ppm) and the process requires a lot of
ensures a steeper tension gradient for its passage into the
Jo uonod yo ynpoid-aq e si ll yanoe 'su iaua
blood. This is known as 'the second gas effect: There is
 Oxygen, xenon has many uses other than anaesthesia, is
 also a reverse effect speeding elimination of the accompa-
o spoa s u on l si pe aisxa 
nying volatile agent at recovery, speeding arousal (Peyton
electronically controlled administration involving totally
et al, 20ll). The phenomenon known as
closed systems and enabling recovery of agent are being
hypoxia' occurs immediately following anaesthesia when
devised to make full use of what is available.
the gas is being rapidly eliminated from the lungs: N2O
The MAC of xenon has been reported as between 63 and
may form 10% or more of the volume of expired gas, and
 71% in humans and a theoretical ll9% for dogs [Lynch
the outward diffusion of NzO into the alveoli lowers the
et al., 2000; Sanders et al., 2003). Induction and recovery
partial pressure of Oz in the lungs, and therefore in arterial
 are very rapid and excitement-free, from both short and
blood. Thus, 5-10 minutes of O2 inhalation when NzO is
long anaesthetics. The solubility characteristics of xenon
discontinued at the end of a lengthy procedure is advisable
are closer to those of nitrogen than are those of NzO, so
there is less (but not no) potential for xenon expanding
from any pulmonary inadequacy.
gs-filled spaces. In humans, potential expansion of gas
NO causes minimal cardiovascular effects. It is non-
bubbles in the blood is of concern for surgery such as
irritant to inhale, and it causes increased pulmonary ven-
cardiopulmonary bypass. Studies investigating this (Lock-
tilation [Hall, 1988). Only 0.004% of NzO is metabolized
wood, 2002; Casey et al., 2005: Benavides et al., 2006)
and it has no direct toxic effects on liver and kidneys.
 suggest that although it can happen, the expansion is less
However, exposure to low levels over several days causes
than with NzO, and clinical studies [Lockwood et al.,
bone marrow depression in humans due to interference
2006) found no problem. Nevertheless, the possibility of
with methionine synthase giving rise to disturbances of
 expansion of gut spaces needs to be considered if xenon
folate metabolism (Hathout & El-Saden, 201l) and mega-
is ever to be used in herbivores.
blastosis (ISSA, 1996). It is embryotoxic in experimental
Xenon has minimal effects on the cardiovascular system;
animals. It is also a major 'greenhouse' gas. The use of NO
it does not cause depression of myocardial contractility
within anaesthesia is now declining in popularity, but it
when tested in 'in vitro' preparations or in animal models
still has a major role as an analgesic.
with induced cardiac damage [Ishiguro, 200l; Sanders
et al., 2003). It does not sensitize the heart to epinephrine.
Xenon
 Preconditioning with xenon protects against subsequent
cardiac ischaemia. It does have some vagotonic effects
 Xenon, a gaseous agent, has been used 'experimentally' as
(Ishiguro, 200l). Xenon causes dose-dependent respira-
an anaesthetic for more than 60 years. It first received a
tory depression, resulting in apnoea at high doses (Dingley
licence' for use in humans in Russia in 2000, and is now
et al., 1999). The high viscosity and density of xenon are
approved in several European countries. Its actions have
 such as to increase airway resistance. Zhang et al. (1995)
been the subject of many reviews (Lynch et al., 2000:
 demonstrated that pulmonary resistance was statistically
Sanders et al., 2003; Harris & Barmes, 2008; Jordan &
Wright, 20l0). The interest lies in the fact it is very insolu-
 breathing with xenon than breathing N2O.
 ble (see Table 7.1), thus resulting in a very rapid induction
Other advantages of xenon include that it does not
 and recovery, has minimal if any cardiovascular depressant
trigger malignant hyperthermia. There is no evidence of
160
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
7
toxicity, whether direct, through metabolism or through
the margin of safety with ether means that it is still used
breakdown products. Its release into the environment
in humans and animals in situations where there is
(from where it came) causes no environmental damage.
minimal equipment and expertise available; in such cir-
To date, animal studies of xenon anaesthesia have been
cumstances, many potential causes of fres also are not
where the animal has been an experimental model. From
available.
the 'control' stages of such a dog model, and following
induction of anaesthesia with propofol, Francis et al.
Halothane
[2008) compared three anaesthetic maintenance proto-
cols: 1.2% isoflurane + 70% Nz0: 0.8% isoflurane +
Halothane, 2-bromo-2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane, was
5 μg/kg min remifentanil; and 63% xenon +5 μg/kg min
introduced into medical and to veterinary anaesthesia in
remifentanil. Blood pressure fell with both isoflurane pro-
1956 (Hall, 1957) and was so greatly superior to existing
tocols, but not with the xenon protocol. However, heart
agents that it soon became used throughout the world. It
rate fell with both remifentanil protocols; heart rate and
 was the first inhalation agent that could be used effectively
cardiac output was lowest, and systemic vascular resist-
in large animals; without it many advances in equine
 ance, epinephrine and norepinephrine levels highest with
xenon + remifentanil. Although remifentanil would have
'authorized' for medical or veterinary use in North America
 been the major cause of bradycardia, the vagotonic effect
or Europe, it is still in use in other areas of the world, and
of xenon may have contributed. The veterinary clinical
remains on the World Health Organisation's list of core
 perspective from this study is that the high blood pressure
medicines (wHO, 2010).
seen with the xenon + remifentanil did not mean that
Halothane is a colourless liquid, which is broken down
cardiac output and tissue blood flow were necessarily
by ultraviolet light and so is stored in dark bottles with
adequate.
thymol as a preservative Thymol collects in calibrated
vaporizers, decreasing anaesthetic output and making
Diethyl ether
regular service essential. Physical properties of halothane
are given in Table 7.1. Its low solubility relative to ether
Diethyl ether, commonly known simply as 'ether', was one
(the agent most used prior to halothane) means that
of the earliest volatile anaesthetics to be used in clinical
induction and recovery are calm, and relatively rapid,
practice Its flammability, irritant smell, and high blood
 albeit slower than the newer agents discussed below.
gas and blood fat solubilities, and slow induction and
Halothane does not irritate the respiratory mucosa and
 recovery mean it is not used in the developed world.
50, in contrast to isoflurane, it can be used to induce
Ether is a transparent, colourless liquid, which is highly
anaesthesia without causing breath-holding. It is for this
flammable in air and explosive in Oz-rich atmospheres. It
reason that halothane has, until the advent of sevoflurane.
is decomposed by air, light and heat; the liquid is, there-
remained available for human use. Most veterinary cali-
fore, stored in amber-coloured bottles kept in a cool dark
brated vaporizers will produce an inspired concentration
 place Its heavy vapour (twice that of air) tends to pool on
sies pue saop ul eisauisaeue aonpui ol alqissod s!l (o6s jo
the floor and, unless ventilation is good, the possibility of
with it using 2-4%; anaesthesia then can be maintained
fres is very great Sparks of static electricity from electrical
with end tidal concentrations of 0.8-l.2%, as MAC is
switches and apparatus can easily ignite ether/air mixtures 
0.8-1.4% depending on species (see Table 7.2).
and ether/oxygen mixtures are explosive. Ether should
Halothane causes dose-dependent respiratory depres-
 not be administered in locations where electrical equip-
sion, leading to a progressive rise in PaCOz. Nevertheless,
0l si aaue io sneedde riqdeoei se yons jua
animals tend to breathe spontaneously better under
be used.
halothane anaesthesia than after the more modern agents
Ether is safe in the presence of epinephrine Its admin-
(Steffey, 2002). There is a dose-dependent depression of
istration is associated with sympathoadrenal stimulation
cardiac output and arterial blood pressure in all mam-
which opposes its negative inotropic effect. Normally,
malian species due mainly to a negative inotropic effect,
cardiac output is well maintained even at deep levels of
although it does cause some block of transmission at sym-
unconsciousness. During light levels of unconsciousness,
pathetic ganglia. Bradycardia is common due to vagal
ether does not depress respiration. The metabolites of
activity. Arrhythmias are associated with COz accumula-
ether are relatively non-toxic substances as ethyl alcohol,
tion from respiratory depression, hypoxia, catecholamine
acetic acid and acetaldehyde.
release and overdosage. Halothane sensitizes the heart to
The MAC of ether in humans is around 3.2%. It is very
epinephrine-induced tachyarrhythmias. Some adaptation
irritant to the airways and its inhalation provokes the
of both cardiovascular and respiratory function occurs
secretion of saliva and of mucus within the respiratory
with time (Dunlop et al., 1987; Steffey et al., 1987). Blood
tract (although this problem is counteracted by premedi-
pressure tends to increase at the start of surgery as a
cation with an anticholinergic agent). Postanaesthetic
result of increased systemic vascular resistance (Wagner
nausea is pronounced. However, despite its disadvantages.
et al., 1995)
161
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Halothane has minimal muscle relaxant effects and is a
is from 1.7% in humans to 2.4% in cats (see Table 7.2).
poor analgesic, so supplementation with analgesics (see
It causes dose-related cardiovascular and respiratory
Chapter 5) is often effective. It does not contribute to
depression. Comparative studies of equipotent concentra-
postoperative analgesia. Shivering is often seen in all
tions of halothane, enflurane, isoflurane and sevoflurane
species of domestic animals during recovery but the reason
dogs showed that enflurane produced the greatest falls in
for it is not completely understood. Halothane can be a
cardiac output and arterial blood pressure [Mutoh et al..
trigger for malignant hyperthermia, as can all the halogen-
ated anaesthetic agents.
such as epinephrine but to a lesser extent than does
  ()  qa si 
halothane (Stevens. 1972). The actions of the non-
liver. The pathways and potential 'immune-mediated' tox-
depolarizing relaxants are markedly enhanced. The degree
icity of the trifluoroacetyl halides have been discussed
of metabolic biotransformation is approximately 2-8%
earlier (biotransformation and organ toxicity). The small
(Elliott & Strunin, 1993) a by-product being small quanti-
 increase in liver enzymes that occurs routinely on the basis
ties of inorganic fluoride, but also trifluroacetyl chloride,
 of dose and time of halothane administration is clinically
so it is capable of causing immune-mediated hepatitis.
unimportant in most domestic species. However, there
Enflurane has epileptogenic properties (Stevens, 1972):
appears to be some variation between species in suscepti-
muscle twitching is seen in humans and in dogs, and there
bility to hepatic damage. The guinea pig is particularly
can sometimes be seizure-like activity at induction and
susceptible (Lunam et al., 1985) and there being several
recovery (Eger, 1995).
reports of postanaesthetic fatalities in goats associated
with acute liver damage [Antognini & Eisele, 1993, Alibhai,
lsoflurane
2001). However, itis the very occasional immune-mediated
fatal fulminant hepatic failure (less than 1:35 000 - as
Isoflurane (Fig. 7.1)is a structural isomer of enflurane, and
reported in the National Halothane Study, Bunker, 1968;
exists as a racemic mixture of two optical isomers (Stevens,
Bunker et al, 1969) associated with repeated exposure to
1972). It is a clear liquid supplied in dark coloured glass
the drug at short intervals (Elliott & Strunin, 1993), which
 bottles and does not require the use of any preservative.
is the reason for the withdrawal of halothane from human
Isoflurane's high volatility, coupled with its relatively low
anaesthsia in North America and Europe. There are no
solubility in blood and tissues (see Table 7.1) mean that
substantiated reports of this type of hepatitis resulting
induction of and recovery from anaesthesia is noticeably
from halothane anaesthesia in animals.
faster than with equipotent doses of halothane, and its low
solubility in fatty tissues avoids accumulation in obese
subjects. During anaesthetic maintenance it is easy to
Methoxyflurane
maintain stability or to change depth. Clinical signs of
Methoxyflurane is a non-explosive and non-flammable
 anaesthesia resemble those of halothane. However, isoflu-
anaesthetic agent that is also a potent analgesic at sub-
rane has a pungent smell and is irritant to the airways.
anaesthetic doses and, in Australia, it is administered by
[soy on iod oiiue jueieuu ue se sipaid
admission. It was withdrawn from human anaesthetic use
because of the renal toxicity discussed above (Biotransfor.
mation and organ toxicity). Its physical properties (see
Isoflurane
Table 7.1) of a high blood gas solubility results in uptake
and elimination being very slow; its high boiling point
F
CI
F
and low saturated vapour pressure mean that high concen-
trations are not possible, and therefore it is very difficult
(but not impossible) to overdose. It gives good postopera-
人
tive analgesia because of its prolonged elimination. It
Desflurane
 stimulates the sympathetic system, supporting circulation;
blood pressure and cardiac output are well maintained. In
veterinary anaesthesia, it was popular for small animals
because of these margins of safety.
H
Enflurane
Sevoflurane
Enflurane is a fluorinated ether first developed by Ross
Terrell in the 1960s. It provides good anaesthesia, the solu.
F
H
bility resulting in onset and elimination times being a
Figure 7.1 Chemical structure of isoflurane, desflurane and
little shorter than those of halothane [see Table 7.1). MAC
sevoflurane.
162
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
7
causing airway secretions, coughing and breath-holding It
140-
is, therefore, not suitable for 'mask' induction in people.
120
The problem does not appear so acute in animals; most
veterinary calibrated vaporizers will provide inspired con-
100-
blood
centrations of 5% which is higher than required for mask
HWW)
80-
induction, and isoflurane has been used successfully to
2
60-
induce and/or to maintain anaesthesia in many species.
arte
40-
Isoflurane is authorized as an anaesthetic agent in many
Mean
animal species, and has a 'minimal residual limit' for use
20-
in food animals in Europe It has been used widely in
0-
humans and animals for over 40 years and, as such, there
160-
is a lot of knowledge of its actions. Comprehensive reviews
140 -
of its pharmacological properties are those of Wade &
120-
100-
is greater than with halothane but surgical stimulation
80-
helps to counteract this. Isoflurane causes a marked dose-
60-
dependent fall in arterial blood pressure, and systemic
40-
vascular resistance; at doses close to MAC (Fig. 7.2; see
20-
Table 7.2), there is little myocardial depression, heart rate
is well maintained, or even (depending on species)
0
2000-
increased, so that cardiac output and blood flow remain
1800-
good. Compared with halothane under isoflurane in
1600-
e 'yud iadde saueiquau snnu 'isausaeue uasixo
65
1400
sign of good peripheral blood flow. At higher MAC values,
1200-
cardiac depression does occur, although cardiac output is
0001
2SE
sometimes maintained by increased heart rate Isoflurane
P办
800-
does not sensitize the myocardium to epinephrine-
600-
400-
induced arrhythmias.
200-
For human anaesthesia, there is often concern about
0-
10 sases aseasip ol uoteial ul sueio pyirads jo uoisnyiad
1.0 Mac1.5 Mac
1.0 Mac1.5 Mac
Spontaneous
specifc surgery. As isoflurane maintains cardiac output in
Controlled
association with vasodilation, blood flow to most vital
ventilation
ventilation
 Drgans is well maintained. However, with the increase in
Control
HalothaneIsoflurane
 neurosurgery, of relevance to veterinary anaesthesia are the
SevofluraneDesflurane
effects of anaesthetics on cerebral blood flow. In common
with sevoflurane and desflurane, isoflurane, at l MAC or
Figure 7.2 Comparison of cardiovascular parameters in goats
less, preserves cerebral vasculature response to CO2 and
anaesthetized with one of four volatile anaesthetic agents.
can decrease cerebral vascular resistance and cerebral met-
Goats were anaesthetized with the inhalant at concentrations 
abolic rate (Young, 1992). It is also considered that pre-
of MAC and 1.5 MAC, and breathing spontaneously or
conditioning with volatile anaesthetic agents confers some
ventilated to normocapnia. Control is non-anaesthetized but
degree of neuroprotection to hypoxia (Eger, 1995),
in lateral recumbency. There were few statistically significant
differences between agents. At MAC with spontaneous
although probably less than that provided by nitrous
oxide and xenon.
desflurane or sevoflurane and SVR was significantlylower
Isoflurane can be used satisfactorily in small animals in
 with desflurane than either isoflurane or sevoflurane - not
a  u, a u  sio  a
what was expected! This difference was not present with
(Brosnan et al., 1998) (see Chapter 10) but its potency and
IPPV. Halothane is shown to demonstrate that, in this set of
high volatility mean that, to avoid overdose, it is usually
experiments, cardiac index was well maintained in
administered from a calibrated vaporizer. As the boiling
 comparison with the newer agents, even at 1.5 MAC
point and, therefore the saturated vapour pressure of
Figure courtesy of HiK Alibhai, and a0apteo from Alibhai, 2001.
halothane and isoflurane are similar (see Table 7.1), recy-
cled ex-halothane vaporizers can be recalibrated for isoflu-
rane at service and are economical to purchase for
immune-mediated hepatitis in susceptible patients is
veterinary use.
        
Isoflurane undergoes a small amount of biotransforma-
 trigger for malignant hyperthermia. Isoflurane can interact
tion (approximately 0.2%), the main metabolites being
with dry soda lime to form carbon monoxide (Kharasch,
trifluroacetic acid and inorganic fluoride, but the risk of
2008), but the quantities are less than with desflurane.
163
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Desflurane
hyperthermia. In experimental circumstances, the effects
of desflurane on vital organ function are similar to those
Desflurane is a fluorinated methyl ethyl ether, differing
of isofurane (Merin et al., 199l; Hartman et al., 1992)
from isoflurane only in the substitution of fluorine for
in that it causes dose-related vasodilatation, moderate
chlorine at the α-ethyl carbon atom (see Fig. 7.1). It is a
impairment of myocardial function and a similar degree
clear, colourless and virtually odourless fluid, with a
of respiratory depression. The heart is not sensitized to
boiling point of 23.5°C and a saturated vapour pressure
epinephrine-induced arrhythmias. However, 'sympathetic
of 88.53 kPa (664 mmHg) at 20°C (see Table 7.1). Des-
 io s  s   s a
 in inhaled concentration was followed by tachycardia and
added preservatives. It is not degraded by artificial light
an increase in arterial blood pressure (Ebert & Muzi,
but, nevertheless, is supplied in dark coloured bottles.
1993; Weiskopf et al., 1994). Variations in reported MAC
As desflurane boils at close to room temperature, if the
may be due to a similar occurrence. Desflurane decom-
bottle is inadequately sealed, all ofthe agent vaporizes and
 poses to release carbon monoxide when used with dry
the bottle is found empty. The low boiling point also
soda lime so, in order to use it with minimum fresh gas
means that a special vaporizer, such as the Tec 6 vaporizer
flows, the soda lime must be damp, or one of the less
(see Chapter l0) is essential. In these vaporizers, desflu-
basic carbon dioxide absorbents (see Chapter l0) may
y aaa  im ds e u  si a
be used.
and controlled to maintain a constant temperature of
The major potential advantages of desflurane in com-
approximately 39°C, while an electronically controlled
parison with isofurane result from its low solubilities in
pressure regulating valve ensures a precise output from the
blood and fat. However, in most veterinary species, it is
vaporizer which is not affected by the rate of gas flow. With
probable that the advantages are minimal once other
the Tec 6, the desflurane concentration is reduced by up
agents have also been employed (Mohamadnia et al.
to 2% by the concurrent use of NzO in the carrier gas flow
2008; Lozano et al., 2009). The exception is in the horse
(Johnston et al., 1994), but there is no evidence as to
(see Chapter ll ), where desflurane renders it exceptionally
whether other makes of vaporizer suffer from the same
easy to maintain stable anaesthesia and, as it is possible
problem. The vaporizers are 'fail safe' in that any fault
to run in a totally closed system, it is economical in use.
results in'cut off of supply of desflurane; the consequen-
Clarke et al. (1996a,b) reported that, in ponies, recovery
tial rapid recovery of the patient can cause problems, so
after desflurane, when coupled with low dose xylazine,
some other method of maintaining anaesthesia should
proved to be extremely rapid, quiet and uneventful;
always be available.
without xylazine, animals tended to fall at their first
Desflurane has a very low solubility in blood, fat and
attempt to stand. Subsequent clinical investigations (Brad-
tissues (see Table 7.l) and induces anaesthesia very
brook et al.，2
 2006) have confirmed these advantages,
rapidly, as well as permitting rapid changes in depth of
although they become less pronounced when multiple
anaesthesia when the inspired concentration is altered
analgesic/other anaesthetic agents are also included in the
(Eger, 1992; Smiley, 1992; White, 1992; Jones & Nay.
regimens. Most veterinary anaesthetists who have used
1994). Similarly, recovery is rapid. Unfortunately. as for
desflurane to anaesthetize clinical cases are impressed by
isoflurane, it is irritant to the airways and, therefore in
the speed and the completeness of recovery which is faster
people, induction of anaesthesia is complicated by breath-
than isoflurane, although differences do not always reach
holding. coughing and laryngeal spasm (Smiley, 1992:
statistically signifcance (Mohamadnia et al., 2008; Lozano
White, 1992). No similar problems have been reported
et al., 2009).
when desflurane has been used to induce anaesthesia in
 Desflurane does not have any authorization for veteri-
the dog and cat and dogs recovered within 3-9 minutes
 nary use. Its future use in animals will probably depend
following 5-9 hours of desflurane anaesthesia (Hammond
[eia aul ul aney si! pue siazodea jo Aqelieae uo
et al., 1994; McMurphy & Hodgson, 1995).
anaesthetic market.
The MAC of desflurane varies between species and
between individuals within that species (see Table 7.2). In 
Sevoflurane
an individual animal, the MAC of an inhalation agent
does not usually vary by more than lo% (Quasha et al.,
Sevoflurane is a fluorinated ether [see Fig. 7.1), which has
1980) but, for desflurane, there have been reports of
 been licensed for medical use in Japan since 1990 and is
sudden large increases of MAC during the period of meas-
now approved for clinical use in medical practice in the
urement (Eger et al., 1988; Clarke et al., 1996a). Such
 USA and Europe. It has a veterinary marketing authoriza-
differences have not been reported for other inhalation
tion (as at 20l2) only for use in dogs. Nevertheless, in the
agents.
last 10 years, it has become very popular for clinical anaes-
Desflurane undergoes minimal metabolism (0.02%)
thesia in a wide variety of animals, anecdotally of particu-
and therefore the potential for toxicity is low [Kharasch
lar note being the ease of maintaining a stable level of
et al., 2006). Desflurane can be a trigger for malignant
anaesthesia.
164
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
7
 Sevoflurane is marketed, depending on manufacturer, in
 assessments are not available, it appears to be a useful and
dark plastic, glass or aluminium bottles. This is because
well-tolerated anaesthetic agent.
there are concerns about its stability in the presence of
Lewis Acids (electron pair acceptors), which are present in
various metals and in some components of glass (Baker,
2009). Some preparations have additional water content
COMPARISON OF VOLATILE
to prevent this reaction. Contaminants and damage
AGENTS FOR VETERINARY
thought to due to the Lewis-Acid reactions were found in
QINICAL PRACTICE
one type of (otherwise conventional) vaporizer, which has
mow been redesigned to prevent any contact between the
anaesthetic and metal.
 The advent of sevoflurane and desflurane led to a very
Sevoflurane is non-irritant to the respiratory passages so
large number of studies comparing them with isoflurane.
that induction of anaesthesia is not complicated by cough-
either as sole agents, or more usually in clinical studies, in
ing or breath-holding and, indeed, it was the ability to use
combination with induction agents and with analgesics.
it for 'mask' induction that frst earmed it popularity. Cali-
Comprehensive reviews include (Eger, 1994; Clarke, 1999.
brated vaporizers will provide up to 8% sevoflurane; this
2008; Steffey. 2002). Alibhai [2001) compared the effects
(      
in goats of all three agents (see Fig. 7.2).
was chosen for human use to enable very rapid mask
Mask induction of anaesthesia with sevoflurane in suit-
induction. The solubility coeffcients (see Table 7.1) mean
ably sized animals is smooth and rapid; it is possible with
that such induction is faster than with isoflurane [although
the other two agents but may be accompanied by breath-
 not as fast as desflurane), but the differential in recovery
holding or by salivation. For all three agents, although
is not so marked. It is very easy to maintain a stable level
speed of induction and recovery follow the pattern as
of anaesthesia, but also easy to overdose. Both induction
 eXpected from solubilities (desflurane faster than sevoflu-
 and emergence phases usually are smooth, although there
rane, faster than isoflurane), in clinical studies where other
have been reports of occasional emergence excitement in
agents are also being used, the difference is masked; dif-
children (Kuratani & Oi, 2008) and in animals (Clarke.
ferences are there and sometimes [Matthews et al., 1998.
1999; Mohamadnia et al., 2008: Lozano et al., 2009).
Bradbrook et al., 2006) but not always (Leece et al., 2008;
Sevoflurane can predispose the brain to convulsive activity
Mohamadnia et al., 2008; Lozano et al., 2009), reach sta-
(Eger, 1995; Constant et al., 2005), although not to the
tistical significance. Nevertheless, recoveries from desflu-
same extent as enflurane
rane seem to be fastest, but whether the difference is of
The pharmacological actions of sevoflurane (Ebert et al.
clinical value has yet to be evaluated. Quality of recovery
1995; Clarke, 1999; Stefey, 2002) are similar to those of
is of special importance in horses and will be discussed in
isoflurane and desflurane; i.e. there is dose-dependent
Chapter 1l.
depression of both cardiovascular and respiratory systems
 The cardiopulmonary changes induced by equipotent
but, at MAC (see Table 7.2), cardiac output is usually well
administration of any of the three agents are very similar
maintained (see Fig. 7.2). Sevoflurane does not sensitize
- all three agents induce similar dose-dependent reduc-
the heart to epinephrine-induced arrhythmias. Sevoflu-
tions in cardiac output, blood pressure, systematic vascular
rane can be a trigger for malignant hyperthermia.
resistance [see Fig. 7.2) and respiratory depression. With
Approximately 5% of sevoflurane is metabolized; the
Aq panoddns si uoeini au 'uoedai snoaueuons
metabolic products include hexafluropropanol, which is
the induced hypercarbia. Differences between the agents 
rapidly conjugated, and free fluoride The problems of
 may reach statistical significance in one study but not
sevoflurane's stability with soda lime are discussed above
 in another, and are unlikely to be of veterinary clinical
(flammability and chemical stability). Despite high free
 relevance All three agents can trigger malignant hyperther-
fluoride from biotransformation and despite compound
 mia. None sensitizes the heart to epinephrine-induced
A from breakdown with soda lime, extensive clinical expe-
arrhythmias.
rience in humans has not found cases of renal failure
 The major differences between the agents lie in their
following its use. The (very rare) reports ofthe overheating
biotransformation and their chemical stability. The theo-
and fires are more concerming the danger can be avoided
retical toxicity from sevoflurane metabolism, or from its
totally by use of the newer non-basic carbon dioxide
reaction with strong base carbon dioxide absorbents has
absorbents (see Chapter 10).
 A o u u o o po aq io
 In veterinary clinical anaesthesia, sevoflurane has now
 practice However, the risk of the absorbent overheating.
become used widely in domestic and exotic animals (see
and/or of the release of carbon monoxide, means that
species chapters); despite the limitations of sevoflurane's
veterinary surgeons should consider using the new non-
chemical stability, methods to combat its breakdown have
 basic absorbents (see Chapter 10) when administering
been developed, and no unexpected clinical problems
sevoflurane, and possibly desflurane, in a closed breathing
have been reported. Although, as yet, epidemiological
system.
165
Section
1
Principles and procedures
In summary, as long as the necessary apparatus (e.g. a
practice Sevoflurane is the agent of choice for 'mask'
desflurane vaporizer; suitable carbon dioxide absorbent)
induction but, other than this, and legal requirements
is available isoflurane desflurane and sevoflurane are all
 allowing. the choice between them is the personal prefer-
 excellent anaesthetic agents for use in veterinary clinical
ence of the anaesthetist.
REFERENCES
Alibhai, H.l.K., 2001. Aspects of
Congress of Veterinary
isoflurane and enflurane in coronary
inhalation anaesthesia in the goat.
Anaesthesiology, Santos, Brazil.
artery bypass patients. Anesth Analg
Thesis for the degree of PhD. Royal
Brosnan, S., Royston, B., White, D.
77,221-226
Veterinary College. University of
1998. Isoflurane concentrations
Dingley, I., Ivanova-Stoilova, T.M.,
London, UK.
using uncompensated vaporisers
Grundler, S., et al., 1999. Xenon:
Antognini, J.F., Eisele, PH., 1993.
within circle systems. Anaesthesia
recent developments. Anaesthesia 54.
Anesthetic potency and
53.560-564
335-346
cardiopulmonary effects of enflurane.
Bunker, I.P., 1968. Final Report of the
Dunlop, C.I., Steffey, E.P., Miller, M.F.
halothane, and isoflurane in goats.
National Halothane Study.
et al., 1987. Temporal effects of
Lab Anim Sci 43, 607-610.
Anesthesiology 29, 231-232.
halothane and isoflurane in laterally
Antognini, J.F., Barter, L, Carstens, E..
Bunker, I.P., Forrest, W.H., Mosteller, F.
recumbent ventilated male horses.
2005. Overview movement as an
et al., (Eds.), 1969. National
Am J Vet Res 48, 1250-1255.
 index of anesthetic depth in humans
Halothane Study. A study of the
Dunning, M.B., 3rd, Bretscher, L.E.
 and experimental animals. Comp
possible association between
Arain, S.R., et al., 2007. Sevoflurane
Med 55, 413-418.
halothane anesthesia and post
 breakdown produces flammable
Baker, M.T., 2009. Sevoflurane-Lewis
operative hepatic necrosis.
concentrations of hydrogen.
acid stability. Anesth Analg 108.
Washington DC Government
Anesthesiology 106, 144-148.
1725-1726.
printing office.
Ebert, T.J., Muzi, M., 1993. Sympathetic
Barter, L.S., Ilkiw, J.E., Steffey, E.P., et al..
Casey, N.D., Chandler, I., Gifford, D.,
hyperactivity during desflurane
 2004. Animal dependence of inhaled
et al., 2005. Microbubble production
anesthesia in healthy volunteers. A
 anaesthetic requirements in cats. Br J
in an in vitro cardiopulmonary
comparison with isoflurane.
Anaesth 92, 275-277.
bypass circuit ventilated with xenon.
Anesthesiology 79, 444-453.
Baum, J.A., Aitkenhead, A.R., 1995.
Perfusion 20, 145-150.
Ebert, T.J., Harkin, C.P., Muzi, M., 1995.
Low-flow anaesthesia. Anaesthesia
Clarke, K.W., 1999. Desflurane and
Cardiovascular responses to
50 (Suppl), 37-44.
sevoflurane. New volatile anesthetic
sevoflurane: a review. Anesth Analg
Baumert, J-H., 2009. Xenon-based
agents. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim 
81, S11-S22
 anaesthesia: theory and practice.
Pract 29, 793-810.
Eger, E.1., 2nd, 1984. The pharmacology
Open Access Surg 2, 5-13.
Clarke, K.W., 2008. Options for
of isoflurane. Br J Anaesth
Bein, B., 2011. Clinical application of
inhalation anaesthesia. In Practice
56 (Suppl 1), 71S-99S.
the cardioprotective effects of volatile
30, 513-518.
Eger, E.l., 2nd, 1992. Desflurane animal
anaesthetics: PRO - get an extra
Clarke, K.W., Song, D.Y., Lee, Y.H., et al.,
and human pharmacology: aspects
beneft from a proven anaesthetic
1996a. Desflurane anaesthesia in
of kinetics, safety, and MAC. Anesth
free of charge. Eur I Anaesthesiol 28,
the horse; minimum alveolar
Analg 75, S3-S7; discussion S8-9.
620-622.
concentration following induction 
Eger, E.l., 2nd, 1994. New inhaled
Benavides, R., Maze, M., Franks, N.P.,
of anaesthesia with xylazine and
anesthetics. Anesthesiology 80.
2006. Expansion of gas bubbles by
ketamine. JVet Anaesth 23, 56-59.
906-922.
nitrous oxide and xenon.
Clarke, K.W., Song, D.Y., Alibhai, H.I.K.
Eger, E.l., 2nd, 1995. New drugs in
Anesthesiology 104, 299-302.
et al., 1996b. Cardiopulmonary
anesthesia. Int Anesthesiol Clin 33.
Bergadano, A., Lauber, R., Zbinden, A..
effects of desflurane in ponies after
61-80.
et al., 2003. Blood/gas partition
induction of anaesthesia with xylazine
Eger, E.l., 2nd, Johnson, B.H., Weiskopf,
 coeffcients of halothane, isoflurane
and ketamine. Vet Rec 139, 180-185.
R.B., et al., 1988. Minimum alveolar
 and sevoflurane in horse blood. Br ↓
Constant, I., Seeman, R., Murat, I..
concentration of I-653 and
Anaesth 91, 276-278.
2005. Sevoflurane and epileptiform
isoflurane in pigs: definition of a
Blichfeldt-Lauridsen, L., Hansen, B.D..
EEG changes. Paediatr Anaesth 15,
supramaximal stimulus. Anesth
2012. Anesthesia and myasthenia
266-274.
Analg 67, 1174-1176.
gravis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 56,
De Hert, S.G., Turani, F., Mathur, S.
Eger, E.l., 2nd, Xing, Y., Laster, M., et al..
17-22.
et al., 2005. Cardioprotection with
2003. Halothane and isoflurane have
Bradbrok, C.A., Borer, K.E., Armitage-
volatile anesthetics: mechanisms and
additive minimum alveolar
Chan, E., et al., 2006. A comparison
dinical implications. Anesth Analg
concentration [MAC) effects in rats.
in clinical cases of recovery from
100, 1584-1593.
Anesth Analg 96, 1350-1353.
anaesthesia following maintenance 
Diana, P., Tullock, W.C., Gorcsan, I.
Elliott, R.H., Strunin, L., 1993.
with desflurane or isoflurane.
3rd, et al., 1993. Myocardial
Hepatotoxicity of volatile anaesthetics.
Proceedings of the 9ih world
ischemia: a comparison between
Br JAnaesth 70, 339-348.
166
General pharmacology of the inhalation anaesthetics
Chapter
Fang, Z.X., Eger, E.l., 2nd, Laster, M.J.,
specialists ebookbrowse.com/2-
sevoflurane and isoflurane
et al., 1995. Carbon monoxide
consensus-paper-anaesthetic-gases-
anaesthesia in horses undergoing
production from degradation of
pdf-d515518 accessed 18/3/13.
magnetic resonance imaging. Vet 
desflurane, enflurane, isoflurane.
Ishiguro, Y., 2001. Cardiovascular effects
Anaesth Analg 35, 383-391.
halothane, and sevoflurane by soda
of xenon. Int Anesthesiol Clin 39.
Lockwood, G., 2002. Expansion of air
lime and Baralyme. Anesth Analg 80.
77-84.
bubbles in aqueous solutions of
1187-1193.
Jevtovic-Todorovic, V., Todorovic, S.M.,
nitrous oxide or xenon. Br J Anaesth
Fatheree, R.S., Leighton, B.L., 2004.
Mennerick, S., et al., 1998. Nitrous
89,282-286.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
oxide (laughing gas) is an NMDA
Lockwood, G.G., Franks, N.P., Downie,
after an exothermic Baralyme-
antagonist, neuroprotectant and
N.A., et al., 2006. Feasibility and
sevoflurane reaction. Anesthesiology
neurotoxin. Nat Med 4, 460-463.
safety of delivering xenon to
101, 531-533.
Johnston, R.V., Ir, Andrews, I., Deyo.
patients undergoing coronary artery
Francis, R.C., Reyle-Hahn, M.S., Hohne.
D.J., et al., 1994. The effects of
bypass graft surgery while on
C., et al., 2008. The haemodynamic
carrier gas composition on the
cardiopulmonary bypass: phase I
 and catecholamine response to
 performance of the Tec G desflurane
study. Anesthesiology 104, 458-465.
 xnon/remifentanil anaesthesia
vaporizer. Anesth Analg 79.
Lozano, A.J., Brodbelt, D.C., Borer, K.E..
in Beagle dogs. Lab Anim 42,
548-552.
et al., 2009. A comparison of the
338-349.
Jones, R.M., 1990. Desflurane and
duration and quality of recovery
Frink, E.1., Jr., 1995. The hepatic effects
sevoflurane: inhalation anaesthetics
from isoflurane, sevoflurane and
 of sevoflurane. Anesth Analg 81,
for this decade? Br I Anaesth 65.
desflurane anaesthesia in dogs
S46-S50.
527-536
undergoing magnetic resonance
imaging. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
Goto, T., Suwa, K., Lezono, S., et al.
Jones, R.M., Nay, P.G., 1994. Desflurane.
220-229.
1998. The blood-gas partition
Anaesth Pharmacol Rev 2, 51-60.
coefficient of xenon may be lower
Lunam, C.A., Cousins, M.J., Hall, P.D.,
Jordan, B.D., Wright, E.L., 2010. Xenon
than generally accepted. Br J Anaesth
1985. Guinea-pig model of
as an anesthetic agent. AANA J 78,
80, 255-256.
halothane-associated hepatotoxicity
387-392
in the absence of enzyme induction
Hall, L.W., 1957.
Keller, K.A., Callan, C., Prokocimer, P.,
and hypoxia. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
Bromochlorotrifluroethane
et al., 1995. Inhalation toxicity study
[fluothane); a new volatile
232.802-809
of a haloalkene degradant of
anaesthetic agent. Vet Rec 69.
Lynch, 3rd, C., Baum, J., Tenbrinck, R.,
sevoflurane, Compound A [PIFE), in
615-618.
2000. Xenon anesthesia.
Sprague-Dawley rats. Anesthesiology
Hall, L.W., 1988. Effects of nitrous
Anesthesiology 92, 865-868.
83, 1220-1232.
Mandal, PK., Schiflliti, D., Mafrica, F.
oxide on respiration during
Kenna, J.G., Jones, R.M., 1995. The
halothane anaesthesia in the dog.
et al., 2009. Inhaled anesthesia and
 organ toxicity of inhaled anesthetics.
Br I Anaesth 60, 207-215.
cognitive performance. Drugs Today
Anesth Analg 81, S51-S66.
45.47-54.
Hammond, R.A., Alibhai, H.l.K., Walsh,
Kharasch, E.D., 2008. Adverse drug
Matchett, G.A., Allard, M.W., Martin,
K.P., Clarke, K.W., Holden, D.J..
 reactions with halogenated
R.D., et al., 2009. Neuroprotective
White, R.N., 1994. Desflurane in the
anesthetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 84.
effect of volatile anesthetic agents:
dog: minimum alveolar
158-162.
molecular mechanisms. Neurol Res
concentration alone and in
Kharasch, E.D., Schroeder, J.L., Liggitt,
31, 128-134.
combination with nitrous oxide.
H.D., et al., 2006. New insights into
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfeld, S.M., Mercer.
JVet Anaesth 21, 21-23.
the mechanism of methoxyflurane 
D., et al., 1998. Recovery from
Harris, P.D., Barnes, R., 2008. The uses
nephrotoxicity and implications for
sevoflurane anesthesia in horses:
 of helium and xenon in current
 anesthetic development [part 1):
comparison to isoflurane and effect
dinical practice. Anaesthesia 63.
Identification of the nephrotoxic
of postmedication with xylazine. Vet
284-293.
metabolic pathway. Anesthesiology
Surg 27, 480-485.
Hartman, J.C., Pagel, PS., Proctor, L.T.,
105, 726-736.
McMurphy, R.M., Hodgson, D.S., 1995.
et al., 1992. Infuence of desflurane.
Kuratani, N., Oi, Y., 2008. Greater
The minimum alveolar concentration
isoflurane and halothane on regional
incidence of emergence agitation in
of desflurane in cats. Vet Surg 24.
tissue perfusion in dogs. Can ↓
children after sevoflurane anesthesia
453-455.
Anaesth 39. 877-887.
as compared with halothane: a
Mennerick, S., Jevtovic-Todorovic, V.,
Hathout, L., El-Saden, S., 2011. Nitrous
meta-analysis of randomized
Todorovic, S.M., et al., 1998. Effect
oxide-induced B(1)(2) deficiency
 controlled trials. Anesthesiology 109,
of nitrous oxide on excitatory and
myelopathy: Perspectives on the
225-232
inhibitory synaptic transmission in
dinical biochemistry of vitamin
Landoni, G., Biondi-Zoccai, G.G.
hippocampal cultures. J Neurosci 18.
B(1)(2). J Neuro] Sci 301, 1-8.
Zangrillo, A., et al., 2007. Desflurane
9716-9726
ISSA, 1996. ISSA International Section
 and sevoflurane in cardiac surgery: a
Merin, R.G., Bernard, J.M., Doursout,
on Prevention of Occupational Risks
meta-analysis of randomized clinical
M.F, et al., 1991. Comparison of the
in Health Services Safety in the use
 trials. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 21.
effects of isoflurane and desflurane
of anesthetic gases. Consensus paper
502-511.
on cardiovascular dynamics and
from the basic German and French
Leece, E.A., Corletto, F., Brearley, J.C.
 regional blood flow in the
documentation. Working document
 2008. A comparison of recovery
chronically instrumented dog.
for occupational safety and health 
times and characteristics with
Anesthesiology 74, 568-574.
167
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Mohamadnia, A.R., Hughes, G., Clarke.
inhalational agents? CNS Drugs 24,
Van Rompaey, N., Barvais, L., 2011.
K.W., 2008. Maintenance of
893-907.
Clinical application of the
anaesthesia in sheep with isoflurane.
Shaughnessy, M. R., Hofmeister, E. H.
crdioprotective effects of volatile
desflurane or sevoflurane. Vet Rec
2013. A systematic review of
anaesthetics: CON - total
163, 210-215.
sevoflurane and isoflurane minimum
intravenous anaesthesia or not total
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Kim, H.Y.
alveolar concentration in domestic
intravenous anaesthesia to
 et al, 1997. Cardiopulmonary effects
cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 40, in press.
anaesthetise a cardiac patient? Eur ]
 of sevoflurane, compared with
Smiley, R.M., 1992. An overview of
Anaesthesiol 28, 623-627.
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane.
induction and emergence
Wade, J.G., Stevens, W.C., 1981.
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 58, 885-890.
characteristics of desflurane in
Isoflurane: an anesthetic for the
National Halothane Study, 1969. Edited
pediatric, adult, and geriatric
eighties? Anesth Analg 60, 666-682.
by Bunker, J.P., Forrest W.H.
patients. Anesth Analg 75, S38-S44;
Wagner, A.E., Dunlop, C.I., Wertz, E.M.,
Mosteller, F., et al., A study of the
discussion S44-36.
et al., 1995. Hemodynamic
possible association between
Smith, I., Nathanson, M., White, PF..
responses of horses to anesthesia
halothane anesthesia and
1996. Sevoflurane - a long-awaited
and surgery, before and after
 postoperative hepatic necrosis.
volatile anaesthetic. Br I Anaesth 76,
administration of a low dose of
Washington DC Government printing
435-445.
endotoxin. Vet Surg 24, 78-85.
office.
Soares, J.H., Brosnan, R.J., Fukushima.
Weiskopf, R.B., Moore, M.A., Eger, E.l.,
Nickalls, R.W., Mapleson, W.w., 2003.
EB., et al., 2012. Solubility of
2nd, et al., 1994. Rapid increase
Age-related iso-MAC charts for
haloether anesthetics in human and
in desflurane concentration is
isoflurane, sevoflurane and
animal blood. Anesthesiology 117.
 associated with greater transient
desflurane in man. Br J Anaesth 91,
48-55.
cardiovascular stimulation than with
170-174.
Sonner, J.M., Antognini, J.F., Dutton,
rapid increase in isoflurane
Nitahara, K., Sugi, Y., Higa, K., et al.
R.C., et al., 2003. Inhaled anesthetics
concentration in humans.
2007. Neuromuscular effects of
and immobility: mechanisms.
Anesthesiology 80, 1035-1045.
sevoflurane in myasthenia gravis
mysteries, and minimum alveolar
White, PF., 1992. Studies of desflurane
patients. Br JAnaesth 98, 337-341.
anesthetic concentration. Anesth
in outpatient anesthesia. Anesth
Peyton, PJ., Chao, I., Weinberg, L.,
Analg 97, 718-740.
Analg 75, S47-S53; discussion
et al., 2011. Nitrous oxide diffusion
Steffey, E.P., 2002. Recent advances in
S53-44.
 and the second gas effect on
inhalation anesthesia. Vet Clin N Am WHO, 2010. World Health
emergence from anesthesia.
Equine Pract 18, 159-168.
Organisation's list of core medicines
Anesthesiology 114, 596-602.
Steffey, E.P., Hodgson, D.S., Dunlop, C.l.,
(WHO, 2010). http://www.who.int/
Quasha, A.L, Eger, E.l., 2nd, Tinker.
et al., 1987. Cardiopulmonary
medicines/publications/
J.H., 1980. Detemination and
function during 5 hours of constant-
essentialmedicines/en/index.html.
applications of MAC. Anesthesiology
dose isoflurane in laterally recumbent,
Wu, J., Previte, J.P., Adler, E., et al..
53.315-334
spontaneously breathing horses. J Vet 
2004. Spontaneous ignition,
Sahin, S.H., Cinar, S.O., Paksoy, I., et al..
Phamacol Ther 10, 290-297.
explosion, and fre with sevoflurane
2011. Comparison between low flow
Steffey, E.P., Mama, K.R., Galey, F.D..
and barium hydroxide lime.
sevoflurane anesthesia and total
et al., 2005a. Effects of sevoflurane
Anesthesiology 101, 534-537.
intravenous anesthesia during
dose and mode of ventilation on
Yagi, M., Mashimo, T., Kawaguchi, T.,
 intermediate-duration surgery: effects
ardiopulmonary function and
et al., 1995. Analgesic and hypnotic
on renal and hepatic toxicity.
blood biochemical variables in 
effects of subanaesthetic
Hippokratia 15, 69-74.
horses. Am J Vet Res 66, 606-614.
concentrations of xenon in human
Sanders, R.D., Maze, M., 2005. Xenon:
Steffey, E.P., Woliner, M.J., Puschner, B.,
volunteers: comparison with nitrous
from stranger to guardian. Curr
et al., 2005b. Effects of desflurane
oxide. Br I Anaesth 74, 670-673.
Opin Anaesth 18, 405-411.
and mode of ventilation on
Young, W.L., 1992. Effects of desflurane
Sanders, R.D., Franks, N.P., Maze, M..
ardiovascular and respiratory
on the central nervous system.
2003. Xenon: no stranger to
functions and clinicopathologic
Anesth Analg 75, S32-S37.
anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 91,
variables in horses. Am I Vet Res 66.
Zhang, P., Ohara, A., Mashimo, T.,
709-717.
669-677
et al., 1995. Pulmonary resistance in
Schiflliti, D., Grasso, G., Conti, A..
Stevens, W.C., 1972. New halogenated
 dogs: a comparison of xenon with
et al., 2010. Anaesthetic-related
anesthetics: enflurane and isoflurane.
nitrous oxide. Can J Anaesth 42,
neuroprotection: intravenous or
Calif Med 117, 47.
547-553.
168
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Introduction
170
 Steroidal agents
182
Relaxation using agents which act centrally
170
Pancuronium
182
e eaudad e ay uum shnp buzn
170
Vecuronium
182
Using specific neuromuscular blocking agents
170
Rocuronium
183
Theory of neuromuscular transmission
171
Benzylisoquinolinium agents
183
Release of acetylcholine
171
Atracurium
183
Effector mechanisms (nicotinic
Cisatracurium
184
acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs))
171
Mivacurium
184
Other influences on the
 Non-depolarizing NMBAs no longer
neuromuscular receptor
172
in common use
184
Neuromuscular block
172
Factors affecting the action of NMBAs
185
Non-depolarizing NMBs (competitive)
172
 Pharmacokinetics of the NMBAs
185
Depolarizing NMBs (non-competitive)
173
Body temperature
185
Pattern of neuromuscular block
173
Administration of other drugs
185
Sensitivity of muscles to neuromuscular
 Extracellular pH 
186
block
173
Neuromuscular disease
186
 Monitoring of neuromuscular block
174
 Blood pressure and flow 
186
Peripheral nerve stimulation
174
 Electrolyte imbalance
186
Site of stimulation 
174
Evoked recovery from
Strength and pattern of stimulation
175
neuromuscular block
186
Assessment of muscle contraction
178
Practical aspects of reversal of NMB
186
Factors affecting monitoring
180
Reversal agents
186
Recognition of paralysis when a nerve
Neostigmine
186
stimulator is not used
180
Edrophonium
187
Neuromuscular blocking agents
180
Sugammadex (Org 25969): a new concept
Requirements of a neuromuscular
in NMB reversal
187
blocking agent
180
Use of neuromuscular blocking drugs in
Agents which produce depolarizing block
180
veterinary anaesthesia
188
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine)
180
Indications
188
Agents which produce non-depolarizing
Essential requirements for use of NMBAs
188
(competitive) block
181
Technique of use
189
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
169
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Postoperative complications of
is seldom profound. Some degree of muscle relaxation can
neuromuscular blocking agents
190
 also be produced by the Qz-adrenoceptor agonists.
Prolonged apnoea
190
Most anaesthetic agents cause decreased activity of
ventral horn cells in the spinal cord, and thus muscle
Continued NMB
190
relaxation, although there is variation between agents in
 Deep anaesthesia
190
the degree of relaxation produced at a given ‘plane' of
Hypothermia
190
anaesthesia. In general (with a few exceptions such as
Overventilation
190
ether anaesthesia), profound muscle relaxation from
190
 general anaesthetic agents is obtained only when doses are
Residual NMB
such to produce a deep generalized depression of the
Centrally acting muscle relaxants
191
whole central nervous system with accompanying dose-
Guaifenesin
191
dependent depression of the cardiovascular and respira-
Benzodiazepines
191
tory systems.
Utilizing drugs which have
INTRODUCTION
a peripheral action
Local analgesics injected so as to block the transmission
To relax skeletal muscles, it is necessary to abolish vol-
of impulses in motor nerves result in profound muscle
untary muscle contractions and modify the slight tension,
relaxation. This is demonstrated strikingly by paravertebral
nerve block in cattle, and also following the use of epi-
which is the normal state [the 'tone' or tonus' of the
dural analgesia where the motor nerves are blocked as they
muscle). Tone is maintained by many complex mecha-
nisms but, briefly. it can be said that all result in the
leave the spinal cord. The major disadvantage is that the
motor block may last longer than desired, and can be a
slow asynchronous discharge of impulses from cells
in
problem at recovery in large animals. Combinations of
the ventral horn region of the spinal cord. This discharge
local analgesia and general anaesthesia are used frequently.
gives rise to impulses in the motor neurons, which cause
the muscle fbres to contract. Activity of these ventral
Peripheral nerve blocks such as brachial plexus, femoral
horn cells is controlled by impulses from the higher
 Or epidural blocks, provide excellent intraoperative anal-
centres (cerebrum, cerebellum, or medulla oblongata)
gesia, prevent wind-up in the dorsal horn cells of the
 spinal cord and can thus make a marked contribution to
exciting the motor neuron direct, or by impulses through
the small motor nerve fbre system (the -efferents) which
postoperative pain control, and have the added advantage
of providing excellent muscle relaxation.
activate them indirectly via the stretch reflex arc Move-
ments controlled by the yfibre system are essentially
directed towards governing the length of the muscle. In
contrast, voluntary movement involving direct activity in
Using specific neuromuscular
the y-fibres, results in muscle tension of a given magni-
blocking agents
tude The small motor nerve fibre system is, like the motor
fibres to the skeletal muscles themselves, a cholinergic
Modern neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) act at the
one and any dnug which can affect the neuromuscular
 neuromuscular junction, and by their use it is possible to
junction may also interfere with the effect of the y-fibres
produce quickly, and with certainty, any degree of muscle
relaxation by neuromuscular block [NmB) without influ-
on the muscle spindles, thus reducing the afferent inflow
encing the excitability and functioning of the central
from the muscle spindles to the brainstem. Thus, there
nervous and cardiovascular systems. They are commonly
is a possibility that a drug. which paralyses the y-fibres
called 'muscle relaxants' or simply 'relaxants: They do not
and so reduces muscle spindle proprioceptive inflow to
the higher centres, actually contributes to a sleep-like
cross the blood-brain barrier and thereby have no direct
state.
action on the central nervous system.
 In order that the mode of action of NMBAs be under-
stood, it is essential that the phenomena which occur
Relaxation using agents which act centrally
at the neuromuscular junction upon the arrival of an
impulse in the motor nerve should be appreciated. The
Centrally acting drugs, such as guaiphenesin and benzo
following brief review of neuromuscular transmission is
diazepines, produce muscle relaxation by selectively
depressing the transmission of impulses at the internun-
 anaesthesia. For a more detailed study, reference should
cial neurons of the spinal cord, brainstem and subcortical
be made to the standard texts of physiology. and the
regions of the brain, but the relaxation produced by them
reviews cited below.
170
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
higher than normal for some time. A stimulus applied
THEORY OF NEUROMUSCULAR
during this time evokes a greater than normal release of
TRANSMISSION
acetylcholine which, in turn, antagonizes the non-
depolarizing NMB.
A number of clinically relevant factors may interfere
The neuromuscular junction is the most accessible of the
with this complex Ca?t and/or protein mechanism. High
synapses in the body to study and over the last 100 years
extracellular concentrations of magnesium inhibit calcium
very much has been revealed about it Broadly. motor
entry into the cell, thus resulting in muscle weakness. Ca2+
nerve endings contain vesicles of acetylcholine that are
released as a result of an action potential in the nerve After
antagonists, such as verapamil, may act by inhibiting
release, the acetylcholine diffuses across the synaptic gap
protein combinations. In dogs, a dose of 1 mg/kg of vera-
[cleft) and interacts with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
pamil has been shown to produce a significant interaction
with the non-depolarizing agent, pancuronium, which
[nAChRs) embedded in the postjunctional membrane of
 persists long beyond the period of the calcium antagonist's
the muscle, directly opposite the sites of its release [the
cardiac effects [Jones, 1984). Clostridial toxins exert their
end plates), triggering the chain of events leading to
effects by damaging the proteins involved in the exocytotic
muscle contraction. The acetylcholine is immediately
 process. Inhalation anaesthetics may be considered to be
broken down by acetylcholinesterase, which is situated in 
non-specifc calcium antagonists and so potentiate neu-
the synaptic cleft. However, within this synaptic transmis-
romuscular blockade.
 sion system, there are many processes involved which have
 Acetylcholinesterase is an enzyme that is secreted by the
been further elucidated or which still await explanation.
muscle and is located in large amounts in the synaptic cleft
Martyn et al. (2009) have reviewed recent knowledge of
clinical relevance.
of the end-plate. It hydrolyses acetylcholine [to choline
and acetate) very rapidly, thus terminating the muscle con-
traction. Choline is taken up into the nerve terminal and
Release of acetylcholine
used to synthesize more acetylcholine.
Acetylcholine is synthesized in the nerve cytoplasm by
choline acetyl-O-transferase and must be pumped into
Effector mechanisms (nicotinic
vesicles (each containing a 'quantum') against its concen-
acetylcholine receptors (nAchRs))
tration gradient The vesicles are situated close to the junc-
tional surface. An action potential in the motor nerve
 Muscle contraction is initiated by acetylcholine released at
triggers the opening of voltage-gated Ca²-channels,
the neuromuscular junction acting on the nAChRs on the
calcium enters the nerve terminal, and the increase in
end-plate at the neuromuscular junction. All nicotinic
intracellular calcium initiates a very rapid series of events 
receptors so far isolated and characterized, function as
terminating in the exocytotic release of quanta of acetyl-
 cation channels, the activation of which causes a change
choline into the synaptic cleft. Electron microscopy shows
 in postjunctional membrane potential. Thus, they behave
small protein particles in the active zone of the nerve
in a similar manner to receptors for other known chemical
endings between the vesicles, and it is thought that these
transmitters and belong to a family of closely related
are the Ca² channels. Abnormalities of some of these
receptors [5-HT3 receptor, GABAA receptor, glycine recep-
proteins have been identified as causing loss of function
tor and kainate-type glutamate receptor). The common
therefore potentially reduced acetylcholine release and
 element in this receptor family is that the receptors consist
muscle weakness. Ca²t does not directly cause the vesicles
of five glycosylated protein subunits of varying molecular
to release their acetylcholine, but initiates their exocytosis
 type. Each of the subunits traverses the muscle membrane
via a complex protein fusion pathway (Jones, 1984; Lang
at the end-plate region and they are arranged to form the
& Jahn, 2008).
walls of an aqueous pore representing the ion channel
The amount of acetylcholine (number of quanta)
through which mainly sodium and potassium ions flow
released is very dependent on the concentration of ionized
to produce the single channel current measurable by the
extracellular calcium, evidence suggesting that it is propor-
physiologists' patch-clamping technique The subunits
tional to the fourth power of the change in Cat concentra-
have been designated o, β. y, & and ε with further subdivi-
tion. Ca² continues to flow into the nerve terminal until
 sions given numbers. In the postsynaptic nAChRs in the
the outflow of potassium returns the membrane potential
 end-plates of mature skeletal muscle there are two αl, and
to normal. The build-up of calcium within the nerve ter-
 one each of β, & and ε. The neurotransmitter acetylcholine
minal explains the condition of 'post-tetanic potentiation'
 must bind to sites on two o subunits for the ion channel
seen when the degree of effect a non-depolarizing NMBA
 to open, produce the single channel current and initiate
is tested by stimulating the nerve with high tetanic fre-
 muscle contraction. Non-depolarizing NMBAs also attach
quencies (see 'monitoring block' below). Under these
 to these sites so, if even one 0. subunit is occupied, acetyl-
conditions, intracellular calcium increases, and remains 
 choline cannot bind to two and open the channel. In fetal
171
Section
1
Principles and procedures
muscle the & is ‘replaced' by a Y [hence termed the
is faster when the extracellular concentration of Ca²+ is
ysubunit). Although some change from fetal to adult
high. The extent of desensitization appears to vary between
receptors occurs before birth, further conversion continues
individuals of any one species. Acetylcholine has been
 in the neonatal period. Mature receptors are situated at or
shown to change the affinity of the receptor for certain
very close to the neuromuscular junction, but the fetal
blocking agents in a way which may be connected with
Y-subunit may be more widely spread over the muscle
the desensitization process.
surface In clinical cases of immobility (eg. by burns or
denervation), mature receptors revert to the y-subunit and
also become more widely distributed over the muscle
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
surface - this process commences within hours of immo-
bility so can be a factor in many situations, although it
may take days to complete The clinical importance is the
Consideration of the mechanisms of neuromuscular trans-
different responses of the two types of receptors to NMBAs.
 mission outlined above suggests many ways in which the
The y-subunits show long opening times. This makes therm
process may be modified to produce failure or block of
very sensitive indeed to depolarizing agents, such as sux-
transmission. There are two types of NMBAs, the non-
amethonium, not only to the relaxant effects, but also for
depolarizing and the depolarizing. with very differing
the release of potassium. However, they are very resistant
properties.
to non-depolarizing NMBAs. The changes in these receptor
subtypes [and also other variations, for example o7. a
Non-depolarizing NMBs
further subtype thought to be of importance and currently
(competitive)
under investigation) may explain unexpected differences
in response to NmBAs of some patients.
Non-depolarizing NmBs are also termed competitive.
Presynaptic nAChRs are present on the nerve terminal
curare-like or antagonist NMBs. All non-depolarizing
and have an influence on normal neuromuscular trans-
NMBAs block transmission by attaching to the nAChRs,
mission. Although different types have been identified
where they themselves exert no direct action. However,
pharmacologically, their types in relation to action are not
even by blocking one O site they prevent the acetylcholine
as clear as for the postsynaptic receptors. However, one
acts as a positive feedback and responds to low concentra-
from causing depolarization of the postsynaptic mem-
tions of acetylcholine by facilitating its release at the end-
brane. When the reduction in the degree of depolarization
plate while the second group (or effect), which contain
is such that a threshold depolarization of the membrane
03β2 units, respond to a high concentration of acetylcho-
adjacent to the end-plate is not achieved, a neuromuscular
line and act in a negative feedback mechanism. This nega-
block is present. As the effect is 'all or none' for each motor
tive feedback, i.e. the increase in acetylcholine in the
 end-plate what is seen in any particular muscle during this
synaptic cleft leading to a decrease in further acetylcholine
type of block represents a spectrum of these thresholds.
release, is thought to be the cause of post-tetanic fade and
For complete suppression of the motor response to occur.
m (maq u, aas) ay (o) nog go un
even the most resistant synapses must be blocked. In
non-depolarizing NMBAs. Suxamethonium does not stim-
normal neuromuscular transmission, an excess of acetyl-
ulate the o3β2 receptor and with a single dose of this
choline is produced by motor nerve stimulation. There
agent, TOF fade is not seen, although it will occur if there
also exist many more receptors than necessary for the
is a Phase II block (see below).
production of a total increase in cation conductance
required to trigger an action potential. This results in a
substantial 'safety factor' (Jones, 1984). It has been shown
Other influences on the
that under certain conditions in cat tibialis muscle four
to five times as much acetylcholine is released as is needed
neuromuscular receptor
for threshold action. Expressed in terms of receptors this
General anaesthetics, local analgesics and antibiotics are
means that 75-80% of the receptors must be occluded
all potential causes of end-plate ion channel block.
before the threshold is reached (Cookson & Paton, 1969).
 A remarkable property known as 'desensitization' is dis-
 The existence of a safety factor means that the action of
played by the acetylcholine receptor of striated muscle and
the drug is far from terminated at the time when transmis-
its associated systems. This was frst described by Katz &
 sion is apparently normal. There is likely to be consider-
Thesleff in 1957, and appears as the waning of a stimulant
able 'subthreshold action' which is only detectable when
effect or development of repolarization (usually partial
 a tetanic stimulus is applied to the motor nerve or when
but under some circumstances complete) despite the
the relaxant action of some other dnug is potentiated.
continued presence of acetylcholine or some other depo-
As discussed above, acetylcholine is normally metabo-
larizing substance at the end-plate. The rate of this repo-
lized very rapidly by the acetylcholinesterase in the synap-
larization increases with the concentration of the drug and
tic cleft, thus enabling the non-depolarizing NmBA to
172
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
occupy the receptor. The use of an anticholinesterase, such
this reason that suxamethonium is no longer used by infu-
as neostigmine slows the metabolism of acetylcholine,
 sion or incremental doses. However, a Phase II block can
 increases the number of molecules available in the synap-
occur with a single dose if sufficiently large and the anaes-
tic cleft, and therefore 'shifts' the competitive balance in
thetist should be aware of its existence.
favour of acetylcholine for occupancy of the receptors. This
is the basis of reversal of NMB with neostigmine. However
it must be remembered that the increase in acetylcholine
will also act on the muscarinic receptors causing a number
PATTERN OF NEUROMUSCULAR
of side efects and, as long as the NMBA remains in the
 synaptic cleft (time depending on the metabolism of indi-
BLOCK
vidual NmBA), there will remain a degree of NMB.
Sensitivity of muscles to
Depolarizing NMB (non-competitive)
neuromuscular block
Suxamethonium (also termed succinylcholine)
PuE
The concept of sensitivity refers to the concentration of
decamethonium (now only used for research purposes)
dnug at the neuromuscular junction needed to produce a
are examples of depolarizing NMBAs. Suxamethonium's
 specific degree of blockade. Different muscles have differ-
structure is that of two molecules of acetylcholine It works 
 ent sensitivities to NMB. The standard often quoted order
frst as an agonist, binding to the muscle nAChRs, depolar-
from most sensitive [lowest doses needed) onward is
izing the end-plate and therefore triggering muscle
muscles of facial expression, jaw, tail, neck and distal
contraction, which usually manifests as generalized fas-
limbs, proximal limbs, laryngeal/pharyngeal, abdominal
ciculation. However, in contrast to acetylcholine that has
wall, intercostal, then most resistant, the diaphragm. It is
a rapidly terminated action (ms), with suxamethonium
unlikely that this order is true for all animals and all
the end-plate remains depolarized until the drug is
NMBAs. Whilst Sarrafzadeh-Rezaei & Clutton (2009)
removed from the plasma, by plasma (pseudo) cholineste-
found that, in anaesthetized dogs, the nasaolabialis
rases. Relaxation occurs because the membrane remains
 muscles were more sensitive to a vecuronium block than
depolarized and non-responsive to further stimulation 
the carpal flexor muscles, but also pointed out that all
(Burns & Paton, 1951). As discussed above, the depolar-
facial muscles do not have the same sensitivity. Clutton
izing drugs do not affect the α3β2 receptor so, with a
[2007), for small animals, disagrees with the classical list
single relatively small dose, tetanic or TOF fade does not
 in that he places the diaphragm as being more sensitive
occur, or occurs only minimally. The depolarizing NMBA,
than the limbs, although dogs may still breathe through
however, will affect some other nAChRs and muscarinic
actions of the intercostal muscles. There is considerable
acetylcholine receptors, with resultant multiple side
evidence that in horses, the limb muscles are far more
effects. In this phase (Phase I) of a depolarizing NMB, use
sensitive at least to the onset of NMBAs, than are some of
of anticholinesterase to increase available acetylcholine
the superficial facial muscles often used for monitoring
will augment the NMB.
block (Hildebrand et al., 1986; Mosing et al., 2010).
The above simplistic description of the depolarizing
 There are several practical aspects to the potential dif.
NMB does not explain the condition known as Phase II
ferences in sensitivity. The first is to find a suitable site for
(dual) block that occurs if a suxamethonium NMB is con-
monitoring the NMB by nerve stimulation (see 'Monitor-
tinued for longer than a single short acting dose. Lee
ing of neuromuscular block, below). If a very sensitive site
[2009) has reviewed the practical aspects of this block, but 
is chosen, then a full block may be registered there, while
the actual mechanism is not yet fully understood. The
the block of the muscles that the surgeon requires is not
condition as it occurs with infusion of suxamethonium is
optimal. More importantly for recovery, monitoring at a
that, following the standard Phase I block when there is
 very insensitive site might suggest good reversal of NMB
minimal tetanic or TOF fade there is then a period of
when many important muscles are still at least partially
tachyphylaxis, whereby a much higher dose of suxametho-
 paralysed. The other major use made of diferences in
 nium appears to be required before reaching the Phase II
 muscle sensitivities is to attempt to use low dose NMBAs
block. The Phase II block behaves as if it were a non-
 to achieve relaxation of some muscles while still enabling
depolarizing block, there is tetanic and TOF fade, pre-
the animal to breathe spontaneously. Currently, this is
sumed to be through the same presynaptic feedback
 most used in the dog in order to keep the eye central and
 mechanism that ocurs in the standard non-depolarizing
 still for ocular surgery. Although the dog may continue to
NMBA block; in some but not all stages there can be
breathe, there is likely to be diaphragmatic and costal
partial (but not total) reversal by the use of anticholineste-
muscle weakness that will impair ventilation, increase
rase and the block is massively increased by very small
 arterial carbon dioxide, and limit any possible ventilatory
doses of non-depolarizing NMBAs. Once a Phase II block
 response to hypoxia. These authors strongly recommend
is established, the duration is very prolonged, and it is for
that the dogs are artificially ventilated, if only to obtain
173
Section
1
Principles and procedures
the best ventilatory and cardiovascular conditions neces-
relative muscle sensitivity to depolarizing or non-
 sary for good intraocular surgery.
depolarizing NMBAs.
 In human anaesthesia, there are many studies investi-
gating the relative sensitivity of nerve/muscle groups
diaphragm or to other muscles in which it is particularly
MONITORING OF NEUROMUSCULAR
important to avoid postanaesthetic residual block (e.g. the
BLOCK
larynx). Similar investigations in veterinary medicine have
been limited. Also, there is still little understanding of the
Knowledge of the degree of NmB is necessary to ensure
mechanisms underlying the cause of differing muscle sen-
that the block is adequate for the procedures but, more
sitivities. Among the mechanisms suggested as being
importantly, to monitor recovery and to be as certain as
responsible for differing responses are:
possible that no residual NMB remains once the person/
animal regains consciousness and is no longer being ven-
1.Perfusion
tilated. In human anaesthesia, inadequate reversal of NMB
This is important in relation to onset of action, as NMB
leads, among other side effects, to inadequate ventilation,
can only be produced when the drug binds with acetyl-
impaired hypoxic respiratory response, laryngeal weakness
choline receptors at the neuromuscular junction (Donati.
and airway obstruction (Fink & Hollmann, 2012). The
1988). For the onset phase, concentration gradients
same problems can be anticipated to occur in veterinary
between the plasma and the receptors are large and thus
perfusion plays a major part in the development of neu-
long acting NMBAs were available and monitoring tech-
romuscular block. During recovery from block, plasma
niques were not, in dogs post-block laryngeal weakness
concentration changes slowly with time, so that the con-
could be a serious problem. In horses, ensuring that limb
centration gradient between plasma and receptors on the
muscles have returned to normal strength is a prerequisite
different muscles is likely to be small. As a result, per-
for a good quality recovery.
fusion plays only a minor role, duration of blockade being
In many places, in human and veterinary anaesthesia
determined mainly by plasma concentration and sensitiv-
degree of NMB is assessed subjectively from the responses
ity of each muscle.
of the patient. However, the advent of monitoring by the
response to peripheral nerve stimulation enables a more
2.Acetyicholine receptor numbers,
objective, and therefore much safer assessment of onset,
distributionand type
depth and recovery from NMB.
The motor innervation pattern of muscles, acetylcho-
linesterase activity and number and density of receptors at
Peripheral nerve stimulation
mou iou si hl inq 'ed e Aeid ie Ae suoiai aieid-pu
0 Aiasuas aosnu  anquoo Aeu asau mou Ae
Simple peripheral nerve stimulators (Fig. 8.1) are readily
 neuromuscular blocking drugs.
available. However, when monitoring NMB by peripheral
nerve stimulation, it is necessary consider the following:
3. Fibre and end-plate size in the muscle
●The site of stimulation
In goats, there is a direct association between time to
· The strength and the pattern of stimulation
spontaneous recovery from vecuronium or suxametho-
· How to assess the muscle contraction. This can be
nium blockade and size of fibres in the diaphragm, pos-
Subjective
terior cricoarytenoideus, thyroarytenoideus and ulnaris
■Quantitative
lateralis muscles (Ibebunjo & Hall, 1993). This evidence
acceleromyography
for influence of fbre size is supported by the fact that
mechanomyography
laryngeal and facial muscles contain very small fbres
electromyography.
while larger fibres are found in the diaphragm and still
larger ones in peripheral muscles, a rank order identical to
Site of stimulation
the relative sensitivities of these muscles to neuromuscular
block (Donati et al., 1990). Subsequent similar work
The requirement is a superficially placed motor nerve with
(Ibebunjo et al., 1996) found that recovery was shortest
easy access that innervates a muscle with contraction that
in the laryngeal muscles and longest in the abdominal
an be observed/monitored, and the movement of which
muscles, and that this correlated directly with fibre size
will not be detrimental to surgery. It is important to avoid
and inversely with end-plate/fibre size ratio. They con-
accidental direct stimulation of the muscle In humans,
cluded that, in the goat, recovery from NMB was shortest
the site most used is the ulnar nerve to the adductor pol.
in muscles composed of small fibres with large end-plates.
licis, movement of the thumb being observed/measured.
Incidentally. in this study, there was no difference in
As the NMB differs between different muscles, a specifc
174
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
Figure 8.2 One suitable site for stimulation of the facial
nerve in the horse.
A number of different nerve/muscle combinations have
been employed for assessment of NMB. In horses, the
facial nerve (Fig. 8.2) can be palpated on the masseter
muscle ventral to the lateral canthus of the eye and, when
this is stimulated, produces easily visible contractions of
the muscles of the lip and nostrils. The peroneal nerve can
be stimulated as it crosses the head of the fibula to produce
contractions of the digital extensor muscles (Fig 8.3; see
also Fig. 8.7). It is advisable to restrain the hind leg when
this nerve is stimulated even if no mechanical recording
of the response is proposed. Mosing et al. (2010) describe
location of the radial nerve in the non-dependent limb
Figure 8.1 This shows a relatively siple nerve stimulator,
by palpation of the groove between the lateral extensor
capable of delivering a range of different stimulation
digitorum and the lateral ulnaris muscles, approximately
patterns, which is used to monitor neuromuscular block. The
 4 cm (in Shetland ponies) distal to the lateral tuberosity
needles are placed over the ulnar nerve, approximately
2-4 cmm apart. On stimulation, presence or absence of
of the radius. In dogs, muscle responses to electrical stimu-
movement of the paw can be seen. The lead on the paw is,
lation of the ulnar, tibial, peroneal and facial nerves have
in fact, an ECG lead, but the position is where the sensor for
been reported in many studies. The ulnar nerve is stimu-
acceleromyography would be placed.
lated at its most superfcial location on the medial aspect
Photograph courtesy of Hatim IK Alibhaf.
 of the elbow and contraction involving the forepaw is
assessed visually by palpation or by acceleromyography
(see Fig. 8.1). The peroneal nerve is stimulated on the
measured result may differ depending on site This was
lateral aspect of the stifle and muscle twitch of the hind
well demonstrated in a study in Shetland ponies (Mosing
foot assessed; this site is particularly useful when the head
et al., 20l0) in which the peroneal, the radial and the
end of the animal is covered, for example during ocular
facial nerves (to the orbicularis orbis muscle) were stimu-
surgery. Peroneal nerve stimulation has been used in the
lated, the response being measured by acceleromyography.
assessment of neuromuscular block in cows, calves, llamas
Following injection of 0.6 mg/kg rocuronium, within the
and pigs.
5-minute measuring period before reversal with sugam-
madex (see Evoked recovery from NmB below), a full
Strength and pattern of stimulation
block did not occur in the orbicularis oculi, but did in the
limb muscles. This fnding is similar to those of previous
The observed muscle response following stimulation of a
studies in horses, where muscles stimulated by the pero-
 peripheral nerve is only reliable when one electrical stimu-
neal nerve show greater sensitivity to NmBAs than muscles
lus causes the nerve to depolarize, the same number of
innervated by the facial nerve (Manley et al., 1983; Hilde-
nerve fbres are stimulated each time, and direct stimula-
brand & Arpin, 1988).
tion of muscle fbres is avoided. After a nerve has been
175
Section
1
Principles and procedures
often preferred, especially in animals with thick skin. It is
recommended that the negative electrode of the stimulator
is placed distally, and skin temperature (for surface elec-
trodes) should be kept >32"C as hypothermia increases
electrical impedance (Fuchs-Buder et al., 2009).
A number of different 'stimulation patterns' are in use,
each having advantages/disadvantages under different cir-
qmstances. It must be remembered that, as explained
earlier (release of acetylcholine), fade' following multiple
stimulations occurs only with a non-depolarizing or a
Phase II block, and is not a feature of a Phase I depolar-
izing block. This is because at the early stages of recovery.
a non-depolarizing block can be partly antagonized by an
increase in acetylcholine The classical theory is that tetanic
or multiple stimulations decrease available acetylcholine.
probably both by depleting the acetylcholine available for
release but also by reducing further acetylcholine release
through the negative feedback system. In contrast, a depo-
larizing block is not antagonized by acetylcholine; hence
the absence of fade.
For all patterns, characteristics of the stimulation is
usually the same, a monophasic impulse duration 0.2 ms
and rectangular wave form (Fuchs-Buder et al., 2009).
The single twitch
 Single twitch stimulation at frequencies of 0.1-1 Hz has
been used extensively to investigate effects of NBAs in
human subjects. At a stimulus frequency greater than
about 0.15 Hz, the response becomes progressively
smaller (i.e fade) owing to the presynaptic feedback'
Figure 8.3 Site for stimulation of the peroneal nerve in the
effects impairing further release of acetylcholine Using a
horse. The nerve crosses the shaft of the tibia just distal to
single stimulation, a 'control' twitch is needed prior to
the head of the fibula and is often palpable at this site in
giving the NMBA for comparison of subsequent twitches.
thin-skinned horses.
While repetitive stimuli at a frequency of <0.05 Hz
causes fade, there is also a condition known as the 'stair-
case phenomenon' whereby, in the absence of NMBAs,
depolarized to produce an action potential, it is resistant
repetitive stimuli over time potentiate the mechanical
to further stimulation for its refractory period of some
response of the muscle, i.e. the twitch size increases, until
0.5-1.0 ms. Most clinically available peripheral nerve
a point in time where the response appears to stabilize.
stimulators (see Fig. 8.l) will deliver all of the various
Both single twitches, 1 Hz every second for l0 minutes,
stimulation patterns described below. These patterns and
and TOF (see below) pattern, 15-second intervals for 15
their responses have been well illustrated by Viby.
minutes, have been shown to cause this, while a tetanic
Mogensen (20l0). A supramaximal stimulus is essential to
stimulation prior to such stimulation reduced the effect
ensure that all the muscle fibres in the effector muscle
(Kopman et al., 200l). Martin-Flores et al. (20llb) dem-
contract. With the majority of stimulators, this is achieved
onstrated that the 'staircase' also occurred in dogs, and
at a 'calibration' test prior to administering the NMBA.
that approximately 25 minutes of stimulation was required
 This generally involves the anaesthetist increasing the
to obtain an acceptably stable baseline. The clinical impor-
current until the maximal muscle contraction is achieved,
tance of this phenomenon is that the anaesthetist must be
although some units can self-calibrate In recent publica-
aware that an increasing “baseline' of twitch might be
tions on NMB monitoring in horses, currents in the region
occurring throughout the early intraoperative period of
of 40-60 mA have been employed (Mosing et al., 2010).
 monitoring and thus introduce a bias into the subsequent
Supramaximal stimulation can be achieved using surface
results.
or needle electrodes: paediatric ECG silver/silver chloride
The single twitch is used primarily to assess the speed
 gel electrodes are excellent provided the underlying skin
 On onset of NMB. It is of less use for monitoring recovery
as it depends on comparison with the pre-NmB twitch,
However, in veterinary anaesthesia, needle electrodes are
impossible to judge visually and even with measurement,
176
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
such as acceleromyography, the 'staircase effect' may make
Double burst stimulation (DBS)
the result unreliable.
 The DBS consists of two short lasting bursts of tetanus
Train-of-four
(2-4 pulses at 50 Hz) separated by 0.75 seconds. The
interval of 0.75 seconds allows the muscle to relax com-
Since its description by Ali et al. (1970), the TOF (four
pletely between tetanic bursts, so that response to this
pulses at 2.0 Hz) has become the most popular of the
pattern of stimulation is two single separated muscle con-
methods available to the clinical anaesthetist to monitor
tractions perceived as two twitches. The tetanic bursts
competitive NMB. The method involves recording four
fatigue the neuromuscular synapse more than two single
 q a e   ssn i
twitches so that fade is exaggerated during the second
stimulation of its motor nerve at a rate of 2 Hz, with an
burst. Several different combinations of tetanic stimula-
interval of at least 10 seconds (15 seconds is more usually
tion have been used but the pattern known as DBS3,3, or
employed) between trains to avoid fade' between succes-
DBS3,2 seem satisfactory (Fig. 8.5). The larger response to
sive trains of stimuli.
DBS means that the first response reappears just before
With no NMB, all four twitches should be of equal
that from TOF stimulation and the second response occurs
height. Loss of the fourth response represents 75-80%
slightly before the fourth response to TOF (Gill et al.
NMB; loss of twitches 3, 2 and 1 represent 85%, 90% and
1990). A fading second response is comparable with TOF
98-100% block, respectively. The twitch-height ratio.
ratio <0.6 (Fuchs-Bader et al., 2009). DBS was designed to
height (amplitude) of the fourth response (T4) divided
improve clinical detection of residual curarization because
by the height of the first (Tl) is known as the TOF ratio
it is easier to compare visually or tactilely the strength of
(Fig. 8.4). With a complete NMB, the TOF ratio will be 0,
 the two contractions to DBS than to compare the strength
as T1 will be 0; with complete recovery (or pre-block), the
of the frst and fourth contractions with TOF ratio.
TOF ratio should be l, i.e the fourth twitch will be at the
same height as the frst In human anaesthesia, it is con-
Tetanic stimufation and post-tetanic count
 sidered that a TOF ratio of 0.7 means adequate diaphrag-
Repetitive high frequency stimulation of the motor nerve
matic recovery, but it requires recovery to TOF of 0.9 for
where the responses to individual stimuli fuse and
return of adequate laryngeal/pharyngeal function, and a
TOF of 0.9 is now usually taken as the being acceptable
level of recovery from NMB. In veterinary anaesthesia.
there is no reason to accept less and, for large animals that
0.2 msec
require perfect muscle function for recovery, a TOF of 1
would be preferable.
Practically, the major advantage of the TOF is that for
normal clinical use itis not necessary to establish a control
20 mse
response before the administration of the NMB. In veteri-
750 msec
nary anaesthesia, the TOF is now used routinely both
Stimulation:
clinically and in research studies to assess the recovery
from NmB in a large number of species.
TOF DBS3.3
Response:
TOF and
DBS3.s ratios1.0
0.2
0.4
0.7
0.9
Control
Recovery
Figure 8.5 Stimulation patterns and muscle response at
Control
Curarized
various degrees of non-depolarizing neuromuscular block.
The stimulation pattern shown is a TOF followed by a double
Height of 4
burst. At partial recovery, the difference in the degree of
Twitch height ratio =
Height of I
fade' at partial recovery is more obvious with visual
monitoring of movement with the double burst.
Figure 8.4 Pattern of responses to TOF stimulation during
From Jergen Viby-Mogensen. 2010. Neuromuscular monitoring. ln:
recovery from non-depolorizing neuromuscular block. Twitch
Miller, R.D., Eriksson, Ll, Fleysher, L.A., et al. (Eos.), Miller's
height calculated as percentage inhibition of first response to
Anesthesia, seventh eo. Churchill Livingstone Esevier, Philadelphia,
TOF stimmulation.
with permission.
177
Section
1
Principles and procedures
facilitation or potentiation (see Fig. 8.6). The effect
increases with the duration and frequency of tetanic stim-
ulus and can persist for up to 30 minutes. It can lead to
20msec
T
underestimation of neuromuscular block and, to avoid it,
it is necessary to delay further tetanic stimulation for at
Stimulation:
least two minutes (Brull et al., 1991). However, during
profound neuromuscular blockade when all responses to
single twitch, TOF and tetanic stimulation have been abol-
Te (50 Hz)
ished, post-tetanic facilitation following a tetanic burst
may allow responses to occur with single twitch stimula-
Response:
tion. Post-tetanic count (PTC) is the number of responses
to 1 Hz stimulation 3 seconds after a 5 second 50 Hz
tetanus (Fuchs-Buder et al., 2009). The number of post-
tetanic responses is inversely related to depth of blockade;
the smaller the PTC the deeper the neuromuscular block.
Control
Moderate non-dep.
The major use of this mode of stimulus is to assure that
block
block is total, as the PTC returns before the TOF during
recovery from a non-depolarizing block.
Assessment of muscle contraction
Subjectively
Visual or tactile assessment of muscle contraction follow-
Control
Moderate dep. block
ing peripheral nerve stimulation is the most common
Figure 8.6 Stimulation pattern and evoked responses before
method of assessing NMB, both in human and veterinary
and after a moderate neuromuscular block with non-
clinical practice Although clinically it is adequate to
depolarizing and depolarizing NMBAs. The stimulation
ensure that the NMB is present or that any residual block
pattern shown consisted of a series of single stimuli,
is only weak, it almost invariably underestimates the
followed by a 5 second tetanic burst (50 Hz), then a further
degree of residual block in recovery. Some authorities con-
series of single stimuli. Note the fade in tetanic response
with the non-depolarizing block and the subsequent
sider that it is inaccurate once the TOF exceeds 0.4, but
 post-tetanic potentiation. With the depolarizing block there
certainly it cannot distinguish between a TOF of 0.7 (still
is no fade in tetanic response and no post-tetanic
lapea-sun) I pue (an o aaiap iuaaai Ae e
potentiation.
et al., 2009). In a study in anaesthetized horses, Martin
From JergenViby-Mogensen, 2010. Neuromuscular monitoring. n:
Flores et al. (2008) compared visual assessment of TOF
Miller, R.D., Eriksson, L., Ffeisher, L.A., et af. (Eos.), Miller's
with acceleromyography, and demonstrated that while
Anesthesia, seventh eo. Churchil Livingstone Elsevier, Philadelohia,
both demonstrated onset of block equally, visual assess-
with oermission.
ment suggested that TOF was 1 (i.e no residual NMB), a
median of 12 (range 8-42) minutes before acceleromyog-
summate to produce a sustained muscle contraction
raphy registered a TOF of 0.9. Thus, tactile and visual
causes what is known as 'tetany: The absence or presence
assessment of twitch is too subjective for research studies
of fade due to presynaptic effect of non-depolarizing (but 
into NMB agents or their antagonists, and must also be
not with a depolarizing - see above) blockade has been
used with care in situations, such as in horses, where even
used to assess adequacy of recovery in order to judge
slight residual block can be dangerous.
whether any clinically significant blockade persists
(Fig. 8.6). Most usually, a tetanic stimulation of 50 Hz for
Acceleromyography
5 seconds is employed, after which it may be possible to
 This involves simple equipment that is practicable to use
decide, by visual, tactile or more objective means, whether
in clinics. Unfortunately, the units are not cheap, although
there is any fade in response to this tetanic stimulation.
a recent publication (Langford, 2012) suggests that the
A sustained tetanus correlates with a TOF ratio of 0.7 or
accelerometer built into some 'smart phones' can be used
greater.
to detect the movement The usual commercially available
As described earlier (release of acetylcholine), as well as
 systems for acceleromyography have the stimulating and
the 'fade' during stimulation, in the presence of an NMBA,
measuring (piezo-electrodes) incorporated into one unit.
the transmitter substance released following tetanic stimu-
The recording electrodes are placed where the movement
lation can cause the magnitude of response to a subse-
resulting from muscle contraction is to occur; for example
 quent stimulus to be enhanced. This is termed post-tetanic
the hoof for stimulation of the peroneal nerve of the
178
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
The use of acceleromyography sounds simple but,
unfortunately, a number of potential errors mean that the
results are not always identical to those measured by the
'gold standard' of mechanomyography. Although gener-
ally adequate for clinical use, where used for research pur-
poses, a number of calibrations and corrections are advised
(Fuchs-Buder et al., 2007: Claudius & Viby-Mogensen,
2008). These would include the supramaximal stimulus,
 avoidance of direct muscle stimulation, pre-block calibra-
tion, the use or not of preload etc The potentiation of the
single twitch by the 'staircase effect' discussed above also
affects the TOF It is routine with TOF to apply the train
of stimuli every 15 seconds. Prior to the administration of
NMBs, the TOF ratio often will then become greater than
1, i.e. the fourth twitch is greater than the frst; this is
known as 'reverse fade: While this would be undetectable
by subjective assessment of twitch height, it is noted rou-
tinely with acceleromyography (although surprisingly.
tiation could result in an overestimation of the size of T4,
and therefore overestimation of the TOF ratio (and under-
estimation of the degree of block). However, changes in
Tl are also relevant. Martin-Flores et al. (20llb) studied a
-Uos, iou 1o pauouipuos, uaaq pey 4p!ym sgop jo dnoe
ditioned' by 25 minutes pre-block stimulation. In the
unconditioned' dogs, the size of Tl in the TOF ratios at
full recovery were from 94 to 123% different from the
pre-block values, but the TOF ratios remained unchanged.
As in clinical practice it may not be practical to stimulate
for an adequate time prior to block, the other approach is
to recalculate the recovery results in relation to the pre-
block TOF, a process termed 'normalization: For details on
the complicated calculations necessary, see Martin-Flores
et al. (201lb); normalized TOF ratios are lower than meas-
ured ones, so if not 'normalized', a higher TOF ratio is
required to ensure adequate reversal of block in clinical
circumstances.
Figure 8.7 This pony's neuromuscular function being
ass eawuo e buisn udeouoaane g paotuou
(TOF-Watch @) which incorporates the stimulator and monitor
Mechanomyography
into one unit. Stimulation is of the peroneal nerve. Note that the 
This is considered the 'gold standard' for monitoring of
needles are 'fixed' so that their distance apart will always be
a suas ieu au ui aiqeoidi Aaa st inq 'ann
constant. The movement sensor is on the coronet of the hoof.
limb or appendage has to be frmly fixed, a load applied.
Photograph courtesy of Martina Mosing.
and the force of muscle contraction in response to nerve
stimulation is measured with suitable transducers. It is the
horses (Fig. 8.7) and the palmar aspect of the paw when
fxing ofthe limb that causes the practical problems. There
the ulnar nerve is stimulated in dogs (see Fig. 8.1). Move-
are restraints available for human thumbs but, in veteri-
p aia e sa as eis a u 
 nary studies, the systems have to be specifically designed.
correlates with acceleration of that muscle. As force = mass 
 i e u i  ql a m ui ss
X acceleration (Newton's Law), and mass is constant, then
been described for the horses (Hildebrand et al., 1986)
acceleration is proportional to the force generated by the
and the pig (Clutton et al., 1986) and Clutton et al.
muscle The unit can then calculate and give the size of T1
[20l3) have described a simpler but invasive system for
(which can also be taken as equivalent to the single twitch )
use in experimental pigs. However, mechanomyography
and a TOF ratio. The appendage must be free to move, but 
that movement can be limited by application of a small
NMBAs or their reversal, and is not suitable for general
load.
clinical use.
179
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Electromyography
ability of a partially paralysed animal to breathe the
 endotracheal tube may be occluded and the negative pres-
With this system, the electrical impulses generated in the
sure generated in the tracheal tube during an attempt at
muscle in response to nerve stimulation are measured.
inspiration measured with a simple aneroid manometer
This involves insertion of three needle electrodes - the
active electrode from the belly of the muscle, a reference
(often present as part of a breathing system). An inspira-
tory pressure of 10-20 cmH2O may indicate thatthe block
electrode on the point of origin of the muscle and a
ground electrode positioned between the recording and
is insufficient to produce respiratory inadequacy. Even
the stimulating electrodes. Although primarily used for
then, residual paralysis of the muscles of the pharynx
and larynx may cause upper airway obstruction after
research studies, it is not as impracticable to use clinically
as is mechanomyography. Its special advantage is that it
extubation.
 can be used in muscles such as the diaphragm.
Factors affecting monitoring
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING
AGENTS
Some patient conditions and errors in monitoring tech-
niques other than those discussed above can affect the
muscle response observed following stimulation of a
Requirements of a neuromuscular
 motor nerve and can lead to erroneous conclusions being
blocking agent
drawn.
The ideal NMBA would provide a very rapid onset of
Hypothermia
paralysis, be short acting, its action easily reversed, be non-
Hypothermia is a common finding during general anaes-
cumulative so that it could be given by infusion, be rapidly
 metabolized but not totally dependent on any single route
thesia and may cause the degree of NMB to be overesti-
of elimination, have minimal cardiovascular effects, would
mated. It is generally accepted that there is a l0% decrease
not trigger the release of histamine, and would have no
in twitch height per degree C, although the TOF ratio
shows only a minimal effect. Reduction in body tempera-
other unwanted side effects. No such agent exists, hence
ture decreases renal, hepatic and biliary elimination of
the number which have been, or are still in routine use.
 In human anaesthesia, the rapid onset is necessary for
non-depolarizing drugs and, during hypothermia, reduced
doses may be needed to produce any given degree of
rapid sequence induction and endotracheal intubation in
blockade. Below a body core temperature of 34.5°C
order to avoid regurgitation and potentially fatal inhala-
ansseu ktuisaui aoaq Aeu suouou (da I't6)
tion of gastric content. Histamine release with NMBAs is
as thermoregulatory vasoconstriction ocaurs. Reduction of
a major problem in humans, and NMBAs are implicated
muscle blood flow in hypothermic animals may lead to
m pateosse sixudeue go aiad yiiy aaa e u
delay in the onset of the block. Unless allowance is made
anaesthesia. Cardiovascular side effects may be the results
for this delay, an unduly deep block can result if assess-
of this histamine release, or a direct action of the NMBA,
most usually at the autonomic system. The need for the
ment is too soon after injection of the NMBA and further,
ability to extend the block and still have rapid termination
unnecessary, doses are administered.
of block is equally important.
There are no NMBAs licensed for veterinary use; doses,
Recognition of paralysis when a
duration etc are based on published papers, reviews and
nerve stimulator is not used
the authors' clinical experience In anaesthesia, NMBAs are
Ae a tm se o ni l a  u s
Simple clinical evaluation of the degree of NMB using
anaesthetized. In the following section, drugs and doses
such criteria as the respiratory efforts in the anaesthetized
discussed are all based on IV administration.
animal is not ideal for the reasons discussed above, but is
used clinically in many circumstances. The muscular
Agents which produce
recovery and signs seen will depend to some extent on the
species, the anaesthetic agents employed, and on the
depolarizing block
NMBA employed.
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine)
Lack of diaphragmatic activity can be taken to indicate
either complete muscle paralysis or a low PaCO2 from
This agent is the only representative of this group of drugs
artificial ventilation. If an animal can move its limbs in
that is available clinically. It still has the fastest onset and
such a way as to be able to maintain itself in sternal recum-
shortest duration of any NMBA. Its structure is of two
bency, it usually means that at the most only partial neu-
conjoined acetylcholine molecules and, as discussed
romuscular block is present Short, jerky respiratory efforts 
above, it first depolarizes the end-plate and, therefore,
would indicate that marked blockade exists. To assess the
causes an initial muscle fasciculation (said to be very
180
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
painful by conscious volunteers) before relaxation occurs.
Suxamethonium has a number of other side effects. It
is a very potent trigger of malignant hyperpyrexia, indeed,
plasma, this occurring through breakdown by plasma
this syndrome was frst recognized as occurring in animals
(pseudo) cholinesterase which is now known to be
 as a result of the use of suxamethonium to intubate anaes-
butyrylcholinesterase. Suxamethonium action cannot be
thetized pigs (Hall et al., 1966). Following the administra-
reversed. Again, as discussed earlier, at single doses for
tion of suxamethonium, there is a rise in serum K, released
intubation, the suxamethonium-induced block shows
from the stimulated muscles, possibly contributing to the
minimal fade to either tetanic or TOF stimulation but, if
cardiac arrhythmias. In humans, following an anaesthetic
further or larger doses are given, a Phase Il block may
protocol which has included suxamethonium, many
occur when 'fade' is present As suxamethonium is no
patients suffer from myalgia, this is not specifically related
longer used to produce prolonged NMB, this situation will
to the muscle spasm as it still occurs where prior use of
not be considered further.
an non-depolarizing NMBA has prevented this from
 Plasma cholinesterase is not present at the muscle end-
Occurring. In birds, suxamethonium produces spastic
 plates. It is synthesized in the liver, and is lowered in many
paralysis of the whole body. Animals susceptible to malig-
clinical situations, liver disease, age etc, but the reduction
nant hyperthermia also respond to suxamethonium with
a a e si an a ais aq n s
a spastic paralysis.
increase in duration of a suxamethonium NMB. In humans,
however, there are many genetic variations of the enzyme,
Dose rates and duration
most (but not all) of which make only a little difference to
 In humans, following a dose of 1 mg/kg suxamethonium
speed of metabolism of suxamethonium. As a result, many
IV, onset of NMB occurs in less than 60 seconds and 90%
studies have looked at methods of detecting the genetic
recovery will take 9-13 minutes (Torda et al., 1997). There
variants, which become clinically very relevant if the gene
are, however, wide species differences in sensitivity. The
is homozygous (Lee, 2009). It is probable that different 
first published use of depolarizing NMBAs in veterinary
species also have different variants of plasma cholineste-
patients was by Dr LW Hall (Hall, 1952; Hall & Lehmann,
rase, and that this might explain the differing sensitivities
1953). The following information was gained from his
to suxamethonium. The ability of plasma cholinesterase to
considerable experience. Horses, pigs and cats are rela-
hydrolyse butyrylthiocholine has been used to predict sen-
tively resistant, but dogs, sheep and cattle are paralysed by
sitivity to suxamethonium in humans, but has not been of
 small doses. In horses, 0.1-0.15 mg/kg IV usually cause
value in animals. Faye (1988) has made an extensive study
paralysis of the limb, head and neck muscles without pro-
of the role of cholinesterase in the explanation of differing
ducing diaphragmatic paralysis, this generally lasts for
species sensitivity to suxamethonium, and demonstrated
 about 4-5 minutes, although limb weakness may persist
massive species differences. Details of the results of this 
 for some time longer. In cattle and sheep, one-sixth of this
work can be found in previous editions of this book. In
quantity (o.02 mg/kg) produces paralysis of the body
her opinion, the affinities of cholinesterase for different
 muscles without diaphragmatic paralysis and this relaxa-
substrates are different between species. Faye also consid-
tion lasts 6-8 minutes. Pigs require much larger doses; to
ers it is most important that the substrate used for assay is
facilitate endotracheal intubation, the dose required is
suxamethonium itself. In domestic animals, that low
about 2 mg/kg. which produces complete paralysis for
cholinesterase levels may be encountered after exposure to
only 2-3 minutes. In cats, 3-5 mg of suxamethonium
 Organophosphorus compounds is relevant as these are still
chloride (total dose) produces 5-6 minutes of paralysis.
used occasionally impregnated in flea collars, or for other
By/au e'o jo sasop pue aaiisuas Alaaneieduo si gop au
means of parasite control.
produce total paralysis of 15-20 minutes' duration, a
Suxamethonium stimulates nicotinic and muscarinic
single dose occasionally producing Phase II block.
receptors throughout the body, leading to a large number
 Apart from its use to facilitate endotracheal intubation
 of side effects. Anticholinergic premedication will prevent
in pigs and cats, it seems that today there are no good
the muscarinic responses. Injection of suxamethonium
indications for suxamethonium in veterinary anaesthesia.
causes a rise in blood pressure in all animals although, in
If it loses its place for human endotracheal intubation to
 some species (e.g. the cat), this may be preceded by a fall
rocuronium/sugammadex (see below), it will almost cer-
which can be prevented by the prior administration of
tainly become unavailable.
 atropine. Pulse rate changes are variable, both bradycardia
and tachycardia being observed, sometimes in the same
Agents which produce non-
animal, but often the heart rate does not change. In horses
depolarizing (competitive) block
and dogs, the nicotinic response predominates (Adams &
Hall, 1962) - very occasionally a fall in blood pressure
The numbers of the non-depolarizing NMBAs available
with bradycardia is seen, but an increase in both blood
demonstrate that the ideal one has yet to be found.
pressure and heart rate is the usual response. Cardiac
Table 8.1 demonstrates the major properties in relation
arrhythmias are common.
to the requirements in people Although speed of onset
181
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Table 8.1 Some doses, times of onset and duration of commonly used NMBAs in humans
NMBA
Single
Onset time in minutes
Duration in minutes (to return
dose
(to % of maximum T1
to % of control T1; 25% means
mg/kg
depression reached;
that T1 is 25% of its original
100% means T1 = zero)
control height)
Human
 Pancuronium
0.1
4 (100%)
100 (25%)
Vecuronium
0.1
1.8-2.4 (100%)
4454 (25%)
Rocuronium
0.6
1.5-1.9 (100%)
32-37 (25%)
 Atracurium
0.5
3.2 (100%)
46 (25%)
0.5
1.9 (100%)
69 (95%)
Cisatra curium
0.1
7.7 (100%)
46 (25%)
0.1
2.4 (90%)
45 (25%)
 Mlivacuarium
0.15
3.3 (100%)
19 (25%)
0.15
2.7 (95%)
10 (5%)
Aq paouanju! aq pinom Aaut se 'atewixoudde ane pue 'aouepinb se uanib ane sawil jxat aas - Jatp Aew sapads lewjue awos ui sasoa aN
relative dose, anaesthetic method, and by method of assesment of NMB. T1 is first stimulus in TOF.
Data obtained mainly from Naguib & Lien (2010) and Craig & Hunter (2009).
[for endotracheal intubation) can be improved by increas-
minutes. Clutton (2007) suggests a higher dose of 0.1 mg/
ing the dose given, this is at the expense of duration, which
kg. Hildebrand & Howitt [1984), in a dose-finding study
lengthens accordingly. There are species differences with
in the horse, required doses of around 0.125 mg/kg for
some of the agents as to doses which are satisfactory. as
adequate NMB and, indeed, a further increment of0.03 mg/
discussed below and the doses for humans in Table 8.1
kg was required to obtain a full NMB of the hind leg. In a
are not necessarily suitable for animals.
retrospective study ofclinical use (Hildebrand et al., 1989),
Structurally the non-depolarizing fall into two catego-
it was found that doses of from 0.12 to 0.2 mg/kg had been
ries, the steroidal agents, pancuronium, vecuronium and
used, with increments of approximately 0.03-0.05 mg/kg
rocuronium, and the benzylisoquinolinium compounds,
if required to lengthen the NMB, so it would seem that the
mivacurium, atracurium and cisatracurium.
initial recommendation of 0.06 mg was conservative,
although resulting in a more rapid recovery. Clutton (2007)
recommends doses of 0.2 mg/kg for pigs but, in contrast,
Steroidal Agents
only 0.05 mg/kg were required to obtain a complete block
Pancuronium
in calves, lasting 43 ± 19 minutes to 50% recovery. At this
 stage, antagonism with neostigmine (always given with an
Pancuronium bromide is an amino steroid non-
anticholinergic) was successful.
depolarizing NMBA which works fairly rapidly, but is rela-
The prolonged duration of pancuronium means that, in
tively long acting (seeTable8. 1) Ithas no majorundesirable
 general clinical use it is not suitable for continuous infu-
side effects. It is cleared mainly via the kidney so the action
sion. It is better to use incremental doses of 25-35% of the
is prolonged in renal failure. There is about 20-30%
original at the time when the NMB has started to become
hepatic involvement, but some of the metabolites secreted
ineffective In a dose-finding study in pigs, Veres-Nyeki et al.
via the bile have some NMB activity. In liver failure, there
[2012) administered a bolus of 0.1 mg/kg, then an infusion
may also be a prolonged effect due to an increase in the
of 0.1 mg/kg/hour, with 'top ups' as required; their overall
volume of distribution (Craig & Hunter, 2009).
total dose needed worked out as 0.10-0.21 mg/kg/hour, but
 Pancuronium has been used widely in veterinary anaes-
they commented on the wide individual variation.
thesia since its firstintroduction. Initially, doses of 0.06 mg/
kg were suggested for use in dogs. Gleed & Jones (1982)
Vecuronium
foundthat atthat doseittook 168 secondsto reach maximal
relaxation, and the time to 50% recovery (at which stage
Vecuronium is a monoquartermary analogue of pancuro-
 st i s (asoa r uoe a i a
nium. Due to the instability of the 3-acetyl group in high
182
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
concentrations in solution, the dnug is marketed as a
Rocuronium
freeze-dried buffered powder with water in a separate
Rocuronium, formerly known as Org 9426, a steroidal
ampoule. The powder can be kept on the shelf at room
temperature without deterioration. Vecuronium is cur-
non-depolarizing NmBA, is a derivative of vecuronium. In
humans, onset of block after rocuronium is very rapid (see
rently the most specific neuromuscular blocking drug in
Table 8.1). Initial animal studies (Muir et al., 1989; Cason
clinical use and is shorter acting than pancuronium. It
shows a low propensity to liberate histamine and pos-
et al., 1990) confirmed this, and demonstrated that com-
sesses a negligible ganglionic blocking action, hence car-
 pared with vecuronium the onset of NMB was very rapid,
diovascular side effects are unlikely to be seen during
its duration of action similar and its potency about one-
ffth. Rocuronium has minimal cardiovascular effects,
clinical use. In humans, it is eliminated primarily by
biliary excretion but with around 30% eliminated by the
however, in anaesthetized cats, it may be considered to
have some mild vagolytic activity (Marshall et al., 1994).
urine (Craig & Hunter, 2009).
Vecuronium has been used in a variety of animal
In cats, more than 50% of the injected dose is eliminated
unchanged in the bile and only 9% in the urine (Khuenl-
species, as single doses, incremental dosing [Jones &
Brady et al., 1990). It does not cause histamine release.
Seymour, 1985) or as an infusion. Doses of 0.06 mg/kg
give around 10 minutes deep NMB in dogs, and a little
Rocuronium has been used at doses between 0.3 and
0.6 mg/kg in dogs (Auer, 2007) and cats (Auer & Mosing.
longer in the horse. Clutton [2007) recommends 0.05-
2006) and 0.4-0.6 mg/kg in horses (Auer et al., 2007).
0.1 mg/kg for dogs and 0.05 mg/kg for cats, while Jones
The time to return of TOF of 0.9 or the T1 of the TOF to
& Seymour (1985) recommend doses of 0.06-0.2 mg/kg
in dogs, depending on the duration of block required.
 95% of starting value is approximately 20 minutes in the
Sheep are particularly sensitive (as for many non-
at, 30 minutes in the dog. but around 60 minutes in the
depolarizing NMBAs). Martin-Flores et al. (2012c) dem-
horse In all species tested, recovery of NM transmission
onstrated that 0.013 mg/kg (13.2 μg/kg) was an effective
was faster with use of smaller doses. In horses, doses of
0.3 mg/kg were sufficient to keep the eyeball central for
ED 95; i.e. effective in 95% of sheep. Clutton & Glasby
 30 minutes for ophthalmic surgery (Auer & Moens, 201l).
(1998) used 0.025 mg/kg (25 μg/kg) in a series of sheep
 There appear no reports as yet of doses required in the
and, at this dose, NMB lasted for 40 minutes. In horses,
sheep.
Martin-Flores et al. (20l2b) conducted a vecuronium
dose-response study. but found great  variations
Rocuronium can be reversed by the standard methods
using anticholinesterase, but also, very specifically and
between individual animals, these individual variations
being confirmed with clinical experience (Martin-Flores
completely, by the cyclodextrin, sugammadex. Sugamma-
 dex will reverse even the deepest NMB induced by rocuro-
et al., 2012a). Testing used the TOF The lowest dose,
0.025 mg/kg (25 μg/kg). did not cause any T1 depression,
nium. In humans the speed of onset of rocuronium is
and while the highest dose used, 0.1 mg/kg (100 μg/kg).
sufficiently rapid to allow endotracheal intubation, so the
caused an incomplete block, the partial block that was
new ability to reverse rapidly if suddenly needed (eg can't
produced was long lasting - up to 2 hours and required
intubate can't ventilate scenario) may mean that suxam-
ethonium will no longer be required. In veterinary anaes-
reversal with neostigmine.
 Usually, it is easy to reverse the NMB from vecuronium
thesia, the ability for a complete reversal of rocuronium
by sugammadex may mean that rocuronium becomes the
with anticholinesterases. However, Martin-Flores et al.
NMBA of choice for horses.
(20lla) report a case in a dog where edrophonium failed
to reverse NMB more than an hour afer administration
of 0.l mg/kg vecuronium. The block was eventually
Benzylisoquinolinium agents
reversed with neostigmine and atropine. There were miti -
gating factors in that dog was very ill, and had received
Atracurium
ium 'unisaueu supnut 'suase iao snonaunu
Atracuriumbesylate is a bisquaternaryisoquinoline com-
could well have influenced duration of block. Gurney &
pound and is available as a mixture of 10 sterioisomers
Mosing (2012) report a case of prolonged NMB in a
(Amaki et al., 1985). It is eliminated by pH and
horse which initially received 0.05 mg/kg vecuronium,
temperature-dependent Hofmann degradation, as well as
but when that failed to provide an effective block, was
 a  s ps- a qi 
then given 0.1 mg/kg atracurium; despite several doses
laudanosine and a monoquatermary ester which is further
of edrophonium it was not until 125 minutes after atra-
degraded to a second laudanosine molecule and an acry-
curium administration that the NMB was adequately
late ester. None of these degradation products is active at
reversed.
the neuromuscular junction and, although laudanosine
 In people, vecuronium can be reversed using sugam-
crosses the blood-brain barrier and theoretically can lead
 madex, but there are as yet no reports of reversal of vecuro-
to excitement reactions, at clinical doses in veterinary
nium with this agent in veterinary anaesthesia. This may
anaesthesia such reactions have not been reported. The
be the reversal treatment of choice in the future.
half-life of the Hofmann degradation process in cats and
183
Section
1
Principles and procedures
in people is about 20 minutes (Craig & Hunter, 2009).
dogs anaesthetized with pentobarbitone; in vivo terminal
Coupled with uptake by the liver, kidney and other tissues,
half-life was a mean 16.4 ± 2.7 minutes which was con-
the process produces a rapid plasma clearance and an
siderably shorter than plasma breakdown of the dnug in
apparent large distribution volume The Hofmann degra-
vitro, suggesting a metabolic or renal pathway was also
dation process does not need an enzyme system and
involved in recovery. In clinical use, Adams et al. (2006)
attains a linear relationship between the dose of drug and
 Examined speed of recovery from NMB in dogs with or
the rate of metabolism irrespective of the substrate load.
without a hepatoportal shunt They used a loading dose
The pharmacokinetics in renal failure are unchanged but,
of 0.1 mg/kg, followed by increments of 0.03 mg/kg. NMB
in severe liver failure in people, atracurium is slower to
lasted from means of 29 (no shunt) to 34 (shunt) minutes
reach maximum effect and has a shorter duration of
and all dogs recovered satisfactorily from anaesthesia and
action, due to an increased volume of distribution.
NMB. Jurado et al. (20l2) report an accidental overdose
As atracurium at high doses in people causes histamine
of 0.4 mg/kg given over approximately 12 minutes; it
release, in human anaesthesia, it is usually administered
resulted in tachycardia and hypertension, which resolved
initially at relatively small doses then continued as an
over the next 15-30 minutes.
infusion for longer periods as required. Veterinary anaes-
thesia has utilized either this approach or 'top-ups' as
Mivacurium
necessary. The paralysing dose for the dog is from 0.3 to
0.5 mg/kg and recovery from these doses occurs in about
Mivacurium, is a benzylisoquinolinediester compound
40 minutes [Jones et al., 1983). For major surgical proce-
 -au on pi-a ax u e y
dures, Clutton (2007) recommends a loading dose of
of atracurium. It consists of three sterioisomers of which
0.5 mg/kg for the dog and 0.25 mg/kg for cats, with incre-
one is active Its breakdown products are pharmacologi-
ments as required of approximately 30% of the original
cally inactive Breakdown is by plasma cholinesterase. Low
dose. Lower doses (0.1l mg/kg) are usually satisfactory for
plasma cholinesterase levels are associated with a longer
duration of action and a decreased plasma cholinesterase
maintaining a central eye for intraocular surgery. Atracu-
due to hepatic failure results in prolonged activity.
rium has been administered to dogs by continuous infu-
sion of 0.5 mg/kg/hour after a loading dose of 0.5 mg/kg
although alternative pathways for clearance are available
(Jones & Brearley, 1985). Kastrup et al. (2005) demon-
(Savarese et al., 1988).
strated that the duration of atracurium block is consider.
In humans, mivacurium is fairly slow in onset but is
very short acting, making it exceptionally useful for con-
ably greater with sevoflurane anaesthesia than with total
intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) with propofol. They exam-
tinuous infusion. In veterinary anaesthesia, there are very
few reports of its use and, as doses will be very species
ined the duration of action of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 mg/kg
atracurium; under sevoflurane anaesthesia duration of
 specific (as they are for suxamethonium), it is imposible
NMB was 40, 46 and 59 minutes respectively, compared
to recommend doses for most domestic species. Sheep.
however, have active plasma cholinesterase. Clutton &
o s 1isse  s  e 2 'o o
total intravenous anaesthesia.
Glasby (1998) successfully used a dose of 0.2 mg/kg, fol-
lowed (after 15 minutes) by increments of 0.07 mg/kg as
A single injection of 0. 1l mg/kg of atracurium produces
 paralysis of about 20-30 minutes duration in halothane-
anaesthetized horses (Hildebrand et al., 1986). Atracu-
rium has also been administered by infusion to horses
Non-depolarizing NMBAs no longer
under halothane anaesthesia. After a loading dose of
in common use
0.05 mg/kg in another investigation, a 95-99% reduction
in TOF hoof-twitch response was produced by an infusion
The NMBA most used in human and veterinary anaesthe-
of 0.17 ± 0.01 mg/kg/hour (Hildebrand & Hill, 1989).
sia for very many years was d-tubocurarine chloride and
anaesthetists should have some knowledge of its actions
for historical reasons. It frst became available in 1944.
Cisatracurium
After IV injection, maximum activity is apparent within
Cisatracurium is one of the l0 isomers of atracurium. It is
 2-3 minutes and lasts for 35-40 minutes in most species
more potent and causes less histamine release than the
of animal. Some 30-40% ofthe dose is excreted unchanged
parent drug. Its metabolism in people is primarily via
in the urine within 3-4 hours [Kalow, 1959). It is highly
Hofmann degradation, although there is a small amount of
protein bound. An effective dosefor NMB of d-tubocurarine
renal excretion. Onset of action is slower than for atracu-
chloride given to dogs and cats causes a severe fall in blood
rium, but recovery times are similar (Craig & Hunter, 2009)
pressure and an increase in heart rate. The fall in arterial
Although cisatracurium has been used in animals in
blood pressure appears to be due to block of impulse
eXperimental studies, there are as yet few publications
transmission across autonomic ganglia - hence tachycar-
looking at dose and effectiveness for veterinary clinical
dia from vagal block - and/or release of histamine In pigs.
use. Chen et al. (2009) examined the pharmacokinetics in
doses of the order of 0.3 mg/kg cause complete relaxation
184
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
with respiratory paralysis without at the same time causing
is particularly important to the anaesthetist because it rep-
 any marked fall in arterial blood pressure. Doses of 0.22-
resents the surgically optimal level of neuromuscular
0.25 mg/kg produce good relaxation with respiratory
block.
arrest in anaesthetized horses breathing 0.8-1.0% haloth-
 Drug distribution depends on tissue perfusion so that.
ane and no significant hypotension is encountered.
as mentioned earlier, cardiac output is important in speed
CGallamine triethiodide is eliminated unchanged by the
of onset, reduction leading to slow and lesser distribution
kidneys and so its removal from the plasma is dependent
with lengthening of t1/2z. a slower onset of action but
on renal function. It does not cause the degree of hista-
eventually. a stronger effect, and vice versa if cardiac
mine release of d-tubocurarine. Gallamine has been used
 Output is high. Also important is the volume of distribu-
at a dose of 1 mg/kg IV in dogs and cats, this dose resulting
tion; the greater this is, the lower the concentration
 in apnoea of 10-20 minutes duration, at 0.5-1 mg/kg in
achieved with a set initial IV dose of the drug. Removal of
horses and ruminants, and at 4 mg/kg in pigs.
the NmBA from the neuromuscular junction [and, there-
Alcuronium chloride is a diallylnortoxiferine, a derivative
fore, recovery) depends on the fall in plasma levels.
of the alkaloid toxiferine obtained from calabash curare.
through metabolism and elimination, but also through
It has been used quite extensively in dogs and horses at
changes in volume of distribution (Craig & Hunter,
 0.1 mg/kg and seemed to have no significant histamine
 2009). Protein binding is also an important factor in
liberating or ganglionic blocking effects. It is relatively
establishing active plasma levels of the NMBA. Thus,
long acting and there were problems with its reversal, so
 any factor that influences cardiac output, muscle blood
it was advised to limit its use to one single injection [Jones
flow, metabolism, elimination or volume of distribution
et al.,1978)
will affect the speed of onset and of recovery from
Pipecuronium bromide is an analogue of pancuronium. In
NMBAs. This explains the range of variations in effects that
dogs, about 77% of the injected dnug is said to be elimi-
are seen in clinical practice as age most anaesthetic agents
nated in the urine with less than 5% being excreted in the 
and disease states will influence one or more of these
bile One potential advantage of pipecuronium is that it 
factors.
is apparently free from cardiovascular side effects. Its neu-
romuscular blocking effects in the dog have been investi-
gated (Jones, 1987a,b). It appears to be no longer
Body temperature
available.
The effect of muscle and body temperature on the potency
and duration of action of muscle relaxants is diffcult to
Factors affecting the action of
 im    n is
regional blood flow and decrease renal, hepatic and biliary
neuromuscular blocking drugs
elimination of the non-depolarizing NMBAs. Practically.
Factors such as age, concurrent disease, concurrent admin-
 in clinical practice, the requirements of non-depolarizing
istration of other drugs, body temperature, extracellular
NMBAs are decreased during moderate hypothermia and
pH, neuromuscular and other disease and genetic abnor-
delay in onset time of block and unless allowance is made
 malities may influence response to muscle relaxant drugs.
for this, gives rise to the risk of serious overdosing if the
either directly, or indirectly via the pharmacokinetics.
 drug is being given in incremental doses to assess its effects
as administration proceeds.
Pharmacokinetics of the NMBAs
Administration of other drugs
All neuromuscular blocking agents contain quatermary
ammonium groups making them positively charged at
Any drug which has anticholinesterase properties will
body temperature; they are highly water soluble and rela-
 prolong the action of suxamethonium or mivacurium and
tively insoluble in fat Their pharmacokinetics can be
 possibly tend to antagonize non-depolarizing neuromus-
described by a two- or three-compartment model (see
 cular blockade Several antibiotics, especially the aminogly-
Chapter 3), with a rapid distribution phase, followed by
cosides, may produce or enhance non-depolarizing block,
one or two slower elimination phases, consisting of
possibly by binding calcium to produce hypocalcaemia,
biotransformation and excretion. For most drugs, a two-
 or by influencing binding of calcium at presynaptic sites.
compartment model is suitable and thus two half-lives can
 Antibiotic induced or enhanced competitive block is not
be determined: the half-life of distribution (t1/2α) and the 
 invariably antagonized by anticholinesterase drugs or by
half-life of elimination (ta/23). The mean residence time
 administration of calcium. General anaesthetics may have
(MRT) has been introduced for statistical purposes - the
a marked effect on neuromuscular block, and this may
time for 63.2 % of the administered dose to be excreted.
 differ between agents used. Inhalation agents potentiate
The value, known as Css95, is the plasma concentration at
 non-depolarizing relaxants such as pancuronium and atra-
which a 95% decrease in muscle contraction occurs. This
qurium (Kastnup et al., 2005).
185
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Extracellular pH
therefore reduce the breakdown of acetylcholine. With
the greater numbers of acetylcholine molecules, there is
Hypercapnia augments tubocurarine block and opposes
 a greater chance they will occupy the two o sites necessary
its reversal by neostigmine. Alcuronium and pancuronium
on the temporarily 'unblocked' receptor [Martyn et al.
block are apparently unaffected by PCO2. but block due
2009). There are no effective 'antidotes' to suxametho-
to suxamethonium may be potentiated by acidosis. A
nium or other agents which act by depolarization, but
number of explanations have been advanced to account
for these fndings and it seems likely that factors such as
certain anticholinesterases will reduce the effect of a
Phase II block. However, if a Phase Il block is not
protein binding, ionization of the relaxant and ionization
 present, prolonged paralysis requiring several hours of
of the receptor sites may be important.
ventilatory support may result from anticholinesterase
administration.
Neuromuscular disease
The commonly used anticholinesterase agents are
Animals suffering from myasthenia gravis are resistant to
 neostigmine and edrophonium, although pyridostigmine
depolarizing neuromuscular blockers and are more than
 has also been used. The use of these agents in the reversal
normally sensitive to competitive blocking agents, but
 of neuromuscular blockade in veterinary anaesthesia was
there are several reports of satisfactory use of atracurium
well reviewed by Jones [1988). The inhibition of acetyl-
or vecuronium at very low doses in this condition
cholinesterase, although it is the main action, is not the
 only effect of these drugs. Their other actions include a
(reviewed by Shilo et al., 2011).
direct stimulation of the receptor as well as a presynaptic
effect involving enhancement of acetylcholine release
Blood pressure and flow
(Deana & Scuka, 1990). Neostigmine and pyridostigmine
Recovery from the effects of relaxant drugs is likely to be
appear to differ from edrophonium in their effects, the
more rapid if blood flow through the muscle is high and
 ui saaa aq pasne si siu eu su usains
thus maintains a steep concentration gradient between
 actions on presynaptic receptors (Wachtel, 1990).
tissues and blood by removing molecules of the agent as
 soon as they are freed from receptors.
Practical aspects of reversal of NMB
There are three general considerations before an anti-
Electrolyte imbalance
cholinesterase is used to reverse an NMB:
A deficiency of calcium, potassium or sodium retards the
●Anticholinesterases cannot reverse a really deep NMB,
depolarization of motor end-plates and by thus inhibiting
 and reversal should not be attempted unless there are
neuromuscular transmission will increase the blocking
 some signs of recovery (e.g. increase in muscle tone,
effects of the non-depolarizing muscle relaxants. In con-
TOF > 0.4)
trast, hyperkalaemia and hypermatraemia render muscles
· Once all the acetylcholinesterase is blocked,
more resistant.
increasing the dose of anticholinesterase will have no
further effect on NMB. With neostigimine in humans,
this maximal effect occurs around 0.07 mg/kg
(Kopman & Eikermann, 2009)
EVOKED RECOVERY FROM
· Muscarinic receptors will also be affected leading to a
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCK
wide range of unwanted, and sometimes dangerous
side effects, such as bradycardia, salivation,
 defaecation and urination. These are prevented by
While it is possible for non-depolarizing NMBAs to be
eliminated from the body, thus resulting in termination
administration of an anticholinergic prior to or
mixed with the anticholinesterase Atropine has a
of action, some agents have a prolonged effect and, even
rapid onset of action so is usually mixed with the
with short acting NMBAs, there is great individual varia.
anticholinesterase, either neostigmine or
tion in response. Thus, antagonism of non-depolarizing
edrophonium, while glycopyrrolate's onset may be
neuromuscular block is usually indicated in routine clini-
slower, so it may be preferable to give prior to the fast
cal practice - especially in horses to enable them to stand
onset edrophonium.
safely.
The principle underlying use of antagonists to NMBAs
is tilting of the balance between the concentration of ace-
Reversal agents
tylcholine and the concentration of the drug at the neu-
Neostigmine
romuscular junction in favour of the former. This is
most commonly done using drugs that block the
Neostigmine is probably the most widely used anti
 acetylcholinesterase at the neuromuscular end-plates and
cholinesterase antagonist of non-depolarizing NMBAs in
186
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
human anaesthesia (Kopman & Eikermann, 2009). The
Currently (2012). it is not licensed in the USA. The
time course of the antagonizing effect is about 7-10
product information states that the dose range is
minutes. Atropine or glycopyrrolate may be given first, or
2-4 mg/kg in humans for routine reversal of either
may be mixed in the syringe with neostigmine and the
 NMBA where some recovery of TOF has already occurred,
mixture given in small repeated doses until full respiratory
but doses of l6 mg/kg can be given if immediate
 activity is established or monitoring reveals a satisfactory
reversal of a full blockade of rocuronium is required
TOF ratio.
(there is no similar information given concerning vecuro-
Neostigmine, even if given with full doses of atropine,
nium). Reversal is very rapid. In the very rare cases of
 may cause serious cardiac arrhythmias if there has been
re-curarization, a repeat dose of 4 mg/kg can be given.
gross underventilation during anaesthesia or if COz has
Following the use of sugammadex, it is advised that
been allowed to accumulate at the end of operation with
rocuronium or vecuronium should not be used for 24
a view to ensuring return of spontaneous respiration.
hours or the ensuing neuromuscular block might be
Hypercapnia also increases the neuromuscular block of
unreliable (although this time-lag is probably overcau-
non-depolarizing agents and so antagonism is likely to be
tious). If a new NMB is required in this time, non-steroid
less effective under these conditions. In the absence of
types of NMBAs such as cisatracurium can be used
facilities for monitoring of neuromuscular block, reliance
without interference.
must be placed on clinical signs to assess when reversal is
Although sugammadex effectively reverses both vecuro-
adequate, as described above (Monitoring neuromuscular
nium and rocuronium, the majority of interest, and there-
block). The atropine-neostigmine mixture should be
fore of published studies relate to NMB with rocuronium.
 'ea   e  's l n 
Rocuronium has a rapid onset block, suitable for endotra-
these signs disappear.
cheal intubation in people and, therefore, the ability for
immediate reversal means that rocuronium/sugammadex
could replace suxamethonium for the purpose of intuba-
Edrophonium
tion. Mirakhur (2009) reviewed the early clinical investiga-
tions of sugammadex, many of which were those on which
Edrophonium is an effective and reliable antagonist to the
the above licensed dosage regimens were based. These
non-depolarizing agents. Earlier impressions that its
 studies demonstrated the very rapid reversal (1-5 minutes),
effects were too short lasting were probably due to use of
that speed of reversal was increased with increasing doses
inadequate doses and, with the use of higher doses, the
drug is now becoming popular. Doses of edrophonium in
of sugammadex and that reversal was equally effective
 after a prolonged NMB by multiple doses of the relaxant.
excess of 0.5 mg/kg appear similar in effect to that of
neostigmine, but the onset of action is considerably
Limited studies in different age groups suggested that age
was not a clinically important factor (reversal was slightly
shorter [about 1-3 minutes) making it easier to titrate
longer in the elderly). The anaesthetic technique used did
more accurately its administration to full reversal of block-
not influence reversal. Major concerns for safety in human
ade For dogs. Clutton (2007) recommends its use at
0.5 mg/kg mixed together with atropine at 0.04 mg/kg.
anaesthesia relate to possible drug interactions through
cyclodextrin binding (some antibiotics, steroids including
contraceptives), and to hypersensitivity. In trials in volun-
Sugammadex (Org 25969): a new concept
teers, one patient developed self-limiting symptoms and
was later shown to be hypersensitive to sugammadex by
in NMB reversal
skin tests, and two asthmatic patients had bronchospasm
Sugammadex is a gamma cyclodextrin that binds very spe-
which may or may not have been related to the use of
cifically to the aminoglycoside NMBAs, rocuronium and
sugammadex (Craig & Hunter, 2009).
vercuronium, thus preventing them from being effective.
Pharmacokinetic studies of sugammadex in humans
 give a plasma clearance of 120 mL/min, a volume of dis-
interact with the receptors at the neuromuscular junction
tribution of 18 L and a half-life of elimination of 100-136
(Booij, 2009) and therefore avoiding the unpleasant side
minutes. Elimination is primarily via the urine. Sugam-
effects associated with classical reversal techniques using
 madex also appears to increase the speed of rocuronium
neostigmine The property of cyclodextrins to inactivate
excretion via the urine [although not total speed of rocuro-
nium excretion as the 'captured' rocuronium does not
being investigated as an alterative solvent - but the inves-
undergo the biliary excretion that would otherwise occur).
tigators recognized the potential - hence this totally new
To date, there have been no clinical concerns in the few
method of reversal of NMB (Bom et al., 2002).
 patients with renal impairment who have received sugam-
Sugammadex (as Bridion"") first received a licence in
madex for reversal of rocuronium (Craig & Hunter, 2009)
Europe in 2008 to reverse, in people NMB induced by
Since the'launch' of sugammadex, there have been many
rocuronium or vecuronium, and the product information
has been updated in 2012 (EMC, 2012).
in relation to rapid sequence induction, for reversal if
187
Section
1
Principles and procedures
problems intubating. and in cases such as myasthenia
consider that in all patients who have received
gravis where using conventional techniques is problematic.
NMBAs, the trachea should be intubated, oxygen
Its price, however, is limiting its use (Fink & Hollmann,
administered, and intermittent positive pressure
2012), although analyses of cost-benefit in human anaes-
ventilation always should be employed
thesia on the basis of the rapid recovery and reduction in
2. To facilitate control of respiration
se leaig se jou st uoenuil sul ieu isassns aun suisinu
 During intrathoracic surgery but also to
at frst sight (Chambers et al., 20l0; Paton et al., 2010)
'regularize' inefficient respiration; for example in
dogs which are panting
Sugammadex in veterinary medicine
3. To prevent unwanted reflexes
Mosing et al. (20l2) carried out a cross-over study in eight
■
 Some reflexes may remain during very deep
dogs in which, under isoflurane anaesthesia, NMB was
general anaesthesia, for example a head shake
induced with either rocuronium, 0.6 mg/kg, or vecuro-
during ear surgery
nium, 0.1 mg/kg. Sugammadex, 8 mg/kg. was adminis-
4. To assist in reduction of dislocated joints
tered 5 minutes later. Onset of block was more rapid with
■
 The effect on the reduction of fractures is not as
rocuronium than vecuronium. Reversal to TOF ratio of 0.9
 great since the diffculties of reduction are due
occurred in less than 2 minutes in each case, demonstrat-
 primarily to spasm of muscles around the fracture
 ing that sugammadex at this dose could reverse a profound
site provoked by haematomas and broken bone
block in dogs. Mosing et al. (20l0) also demonstrated that
fragments
5 uaig sy/su + ie xapeuuuesns saiuod puenaus nuaia u!
5. To ease the induction of full anaesthesia in animals
minutes after rocuronium (o.6 mg/kg) resulted in the
already unconscious from intravenous narcotic dnugs
return of a TOF ratio of 0.9 within 3.4 (± 1.7) minutes,
 This used to be used in horses following rapid
depending on the nerve stimulated. The potential for com-
injection of thiopental to induce anaesthesia, but
 plete effective reversal will revolutionize the user of NMB
is unnecessary with modern preanaesthetic
in this species if the cost of reversal should ever become
sedative medication (see Chapter 11)
practicable.
6.
 To facilitate the performance of endotracheal
intubation and endoscopy
 In human anaesthesia, a rapidly acting NMBA is
employed routinely to enable endotracheal
USE OF NEUROMUSCULAR
intubation. Most animals can be intubated
without the use of these drugs, but they may
BLOCKING DRUGS IN VETERINARY
ANAESTHESIA
make endotracheal intubation very much easier in
cats and pigs. However, if used for this purpose, a
method of ventilation by mask must be available
Indications
for emergency in case endotracheal intubation
should fail.
The general indications for the use of these drugs in vet-
erinary clinical practice are:
1. To relax skeletal muscles for easier surgical access
Essential requirements
 This is the major reason for use. Not only does
for use of NMBAs
relaxant use make surgical access easier, but
doing so it minimizes bruising of muscle
NMBAs cause paralysis of skeletal muscles with no loss of
caused by retractors, thus contributing to
consciousness, analgesia, or even sedation. Without anaes-
postoperative comfort of the animal and to
-uos Aiy si auo paaianai seu ium jeue Aue 'eisa
wound healing
scious while paralysed, a terrifying situation, even without
  If used for spinal surgery, the surgeon must be
surgery. If surgery is proceeding, there is the addition of
 aware of their use; despite the outstanding access
pain and stress. These authors consider that, with the
they provide they remove the 'safety muscle
current range of anaesthetic and immobilizing drugs avail-
twitch' that warns the surgeon that he/she is
able, there now is no situation where an NMBA should be
 likely to damage a spinal motor nerve
given to a conscious animal.
 It is used to facilitate eye surgery by ensuring a
There are therefore three major essential requirements
central position and immobility of the eyeball. In
before an NMBA should be administered: the animal must
most, but not all species, the extraocular muscles
be unconscious and have adequate analgesia; there must
are blocked easily, and only low doses of NMBs
be the ability to ventilate adequately for a sustained period
are required. At these doses, the animal may be
of time; and the anaesthetist should either have experience
able to breathe spontaneously, but ventilation
to recognize when the NMB has waned sufficiently for
will still be impaired. The authors of this book
recovery, or suitable monitors of block available.
188
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
Ability to ventilate
technique - a tourniquet stops the relaxant reaching one
To ventilate adequately, it is essential that the trachea has
hand, and if awareness is suspected for any reason, the
been intubated, the use of a facemask, except in an emer-
patient is asked to move that hand.
Aeysis nou st 'l sdue uon uum Aua
Recovery from NMB
because it is all too easy to inflate the stomach as well as
Before administering an NMB, the anaesthetist must be
the lungs. Modes of providing intermittent positive pres-
sure that they are able to detect full reversal of NMB.
sure ventilation (IPPV) are described in Chapter 9. IPPV
should still be given even where such low doses of NmBA
whether by nerve stimulation or clinical judgement as
have been used that the animal is still making respiratory
discussed above. In particular, this needs to ensure the
efforts.
restoration of adequate spontaneous respiration. Rate is
not necessarily indicative of efficiency and monitoring
(e.g. pulse oximetry, tidal volume and/or capnography) is
Ensuring unconsciousness and analgesia
helpful.
Ensuring unconsciousness and analgesia is not easy - in
human anaesthesia, awareness during anaesthesia,
 although rare, remains a problem (Hudetz & Hemmings.
Technique of use
2012). Animals cannot tell us afterwards that they were
In veterinary anaesthesia, NMBAs are used mostly in the
aware making it even more imperative that we ensure
dog, cat, and the horse; specifc details of the practical use
adequate anaesthesia. During NMB, many of the signs.
is given in the chapters concerned. However, NMBAs may
such as respiratory rate, eyeball position, movement in
be required in other species, such as the pig or the sheep.
response to surgery that are normally used to judge the
 when used for research purposes. The absolute technique
depth of anaesthesia are abolished. It is therefore neces-
 will depend on the species, the procedure, and drugs used
sasop ie uanig aie sluase auisaeue aul ieut ainsua ot Aies
 may also be constrained by the research to be undertaken.
that would cause unconsciousness in animals without
Below are generalized suggestions, which can be modi fied
Cl sasuodn souoine Aq papnl si eisaieu an
 according to species and need.
surgery, such as changes in heart rate and arterial blood
Use of non-depolarizing NMBAs for surgery
pressure in response to painful stimuli. Thus, monitoring
equipment must also be adequate to assess these param-
The anaesthetic regimen used must be sufficient to provide
eters at sufficiently short intervals.
adequate anaesthesia, analgesia and unconsciousness
In human anaesthesia, the bispectral index (BIS)
throughout the procedure, and should therefore be one
monitor is used as a supplementary monitor during NMB.
with which the anaesthetist is familiar without NMBAs,
Its use has reduced, but not abolished incidences of aware-
and whose pharmacokinetic profle in the species con-
ness (Hudetz & Hennings, 2012), and it must be empha-
cerned is known. It is usual to premedicate fairly heavily
sized that one case of awareness is one too many. It is also
with sedatives and analgesics, preferably using those with
accepted that, as BIS is based on propofol anaesthesia, the
a long duration of action unless further doses are to be
EEG changes are not always comparable with those which
snouaaeu uv ainpaoid au ui ianei pasngui io ua
occur under inhalation anaesthesia (see Chapters l and
catheter should be placed. An IV induction with a suitable
7). In dogs, several studies in anaesthetized patients have
agent allows rapid endotracheal intubation, although
compared apparent 'depth of anaesthesia' with BIS read-
ews u anqissod si suase uoeiequi ue ym uonpu
ings: although the mean (or median) BIS decreases with
animals. Following endotracheal intubation (essential).
depth of anaesthesia as would be expected, there were
the animal is then connected to a suitable anaesthetic
many 'outliers' where a low BIS was associated with a light
 breathing system and oxygen together with any other gases
level of anaesthesia, or vice versa and the authors con-
[nitrogen, nitrous oxide, fluorinated inhalation anaes-
cluded that the outliers meant that it was not safe to
thetic agents) administered The regimen for maintenance
depend on BIS values (or other EEG derived parameters)
of anaesthesia, be it inhalation, total IV infusions, or a
as the judge of anaesthetic depth in this species (Bleijen-
mixture of both, can then be commenced and anaesthesia/
berg et al., 20ll; Ribeiro et al., 2012).
analgesia stabilized. Inhalation anaesthesia is advised
Prior to the availability of BIS monitors, a number of
while learning to use NMBAs, as it has the advantage of
aul ssasse daq oi eisaqsaeue ueuny ul pasn aiam suea
being easy to ascertain that the animal is receiving an
adequacy of anaesthesia during NMB. Many were EEG
 adequate, but hopefully not excessive amount of agent. An
based, such as looking at the effect of evoked auditory
inhalation anaesthetic agent monitor provides useful
 potentials on the EEG. These techniques have had experi-
 information when using a rebreathing system. Cardiovas-
mental use for various purposes in animals, but their
qular measurements should be made before administra-
success in relation to awareness obviously cannot be
 tion of the NMBA and start of surgery. Minimal monitoring
assessed. Another technique used in people, which is not
must include some method of measuring pulse rate and
applicableto veterinary anaesthesia, is the isolated forearm
rhythm and arterial blood pressure as these parameters
189
Section
1
Principles and procedures
will be used to judge if anaesthesia is adequate, and a
procedure If this happens, the animal should be venti-
pulse oximeter to ensure adequate oxygenation. Measure-
lated until the cause of the apnoea can be ascertained
ment of end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) facilitates adequate appli-
and treated. The four most common causes are continual
cation of artificial ventilation.
NMB, deep anaesthesia, hypothermia and overventilation.
Before any NMBA is administered, it is essential to
confirm that the ventilator is working correctly when
Continued NMB
attached to the patient Many anaesthetists have found
Continuing NMB can be identified by peripheral nerve
the relaxant effects have worn off if they have neglected
stimulation, but is more difficult to ascertain if this is not
this precaution!
 available. It is best prevented by the avoidance of excessive
 The NMBA can now be administered; a single starting
doses of NMBAs, mixing NMBAs (Gurney & Mosing.
 t  s   s
2012), and by using the newer shorter acting agents. If
 initial dose) or an infusion as required. Time (dependent
 non-depolarizing agents were used, then the block may be
on the agent - see Table 8. 1) must be allowed for the block
reversed using an anticholinesterase (with an anticholin-
to establish before more NMBA is given. The desired level
ergic agent - see above), but this will only be effective if
of block is established easily when TOF monitoring is
there was some return of muscle tone, and there is a
employed - maintenance of one twitch usually provides
maximal dose after which there will be no further effect.
good operating conditions, although some surgeons prefer
 There is no antidote to the Phase I block of depolarizing
a total block. When an intermittent injection technique is 
drugs and the only treatment is IPPV until the return of
used supplementary doses of NMBAs should not, in
adequate spontaneous breathing.
general, exceed half the initial dose.
Judgement of depth of anaesthesia is now based on
Deep anaesthesia
knowledge of how much anaesthetic is being administered
coupled with lack of autonomic response [heart rate,
Once certain that residual NMB is not the reason for
Kiabins ot (saipads auos ui azis Aielldnd 'aunssaid poolq
failure to breathe, depth of anaesthesia should be light-
However, the influence of the anaesthetic related agents
ened, while still continuing to ventilate the patient. If
being used on these parameters must also be considered;
antagonists [e.g. to opioids, Oz-agonists etc.) are employed,
eg. Q2-agonist or opioid induced bradycardia; atropine
 the influence on subsequent postoperative analgesia needs
causing pupillary dilatation. Also, although usually heart
consideration.
rate increases if anaesthesia is too light, occasionally there
is a vaso-vagal response with extreme bradycardia and
Hypothermia
consequent hypotension. If anaesthesia is exceptionally
light, contractions of limb or facial muscles, or small jerky
 This is one of the commonest causes of prolonged apnoea
following the use of non-depolarizing agents. Precautions
in response to surgical stimulation may be seen on some
need to be taken to maintain the body temperature, espe-
occasions.
s! lley siul Xuoiooeoun pue Auoniedel Bunp Alle
 At the end of surgery, depth of residual block should be
particularly great in small animal patients and there is
assessed, and reversal employed as required. IPPV needs
often diffculty in antagonizing the effects of non-
 to be continued until spontaneous ventilation is adequate.
depolarizing dnugs in these animals until they are
IPPV can be slowed (but not stopped) to allow arterial
rewarmed.
carbon dioxide levels to return to 'normal anaesthetized’
40-45 mmHg (5.3-6 kPa) if ventilation has been exces-
Overventilation
sive (a capnography helps with this) but, under anaesthe-
sia, respiration does not increase in response to increased
If the animal has been overventilated, PaCO2 may be suf-
carbon dioxide and, indeed, high levels, coupled with
ficiently low to prevent return of spontaneous breathing.
hypoxia, will delay recovery through central depression.
and the mode of returming COz to normal (and not above)
has been discussed above In the authors' experience, if
other factors [reversal of NMB, light depth of anaesthesia
and normothermia) are correct, then the animal will
POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS OP
attempt to breathe despite continuing ventilation.
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENTS
Residual NMB
Prolonged apnoea
Animals should not be left in the postoperative period
The fear of every anaesthetist when first using NMBAs
with any residual neuromuscular block. The problems
is that the animal will not breathe at the end of the
au a saads uian An sin on sueia
190
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
respiratory inadequacy, failure to control the airway, post-
[around 100 mg/kg) will become recumbent. However,
 Operative lung infections and, in large animals, problems
 guaifenesin produces no analgesia, nor does it make the
in regaining their feet.
animal unconscious and, although the ethical situation is
not as for an NMBA, guaifenesin is generally used in com-
bination with an IV anaesthetic agent to ensure that the
animal is unconscious. Details of doses and combinations
are given in the relevant chapters (ll and 12).
CENTRALLY ACTING
Cattle and horses given guaifenesin, alone or as part of
MUSCLE RELAXANTS
an anaesthetic induction, will breathe spontaneously.
Hubbell et al. (1980) investigated its effects in horses and
found that at doses which caused recumbency there was
Guaifenesin
a signifcant fall in arterial blood pressure a transient
Guaifenesin (Guaiphenesin, guaicol glycerine ether, GGE
but significant fall in PaO2, but that all other cardiopul-
 Or GG) is an agent which, in veterinary medicine, is used,
 monary parameters, including cardiac output, remained
usually in combination with anaesthetics, to give a degree
unchanged.
of muscle relaxation. It is thought to exert its effect at the
Guaifenesin has been used in other species of animal
spinal cord by interfering with polysynaptic transmission
        s
and, therefore, in contrast with NMBAs, it crosses the
volumes of solution which must be infused. In humans.
 blood-brain barrier. It is used primarily in large animals.
it is licensed for oral use in cough medicines as an expec-
The doses required, coupled with the fact that concen-
torant, but there are also anecdotal reports of its use in the
trated solutions are very irritant, causing damage to the
alleviation of symptoms of fbromyalgia.
intima of the veins with subsequent (delayed) thrombi
formation (Herschl et al., 1992) and has a concentration
Benzodiazepines
dependent haemolytic effect, mean that it needs to be used
as dilute as possible (preferably no more concentrated
Benzodiazepine agents cause muscle relaxation by an
than 5%) by IV infusion. A number of stabilized solutions
action at the spinal cord in a similar manner to that caused
ae (uno au uo gupuadap suoeuuo guiea jo)
by guaifenesin. They are used to good effect for this prop-
available. A solution in water or 5% dextrose can be made
 aae    ss a u 
up from the crystals; this is not stabilized and, if spilt, the
tions. It is considerably easier to administer a small
crystals precipitate out, and are very irritant, including to
volume of diazepam to a horse than to infuse 500-
human skin.
1000 mL guaifenesin. The benzodiazepine agents most
When guaifenesin is given alone by IV infusion, the
employed in veterinary anaesthesia have been discussed in
horse/cow becomes weak, and with sufficiently high doses
 Chapter 4.
REFERENCES
Adams, A.K., Hall, L.W., 1962. An
rocuronium bromide in the dog. Vet
evaluated anaesthetic depth in dogs.
αxperimental study of the action of
1173, 422-427.
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 536-543.
suxamethonium on the circulatory
Auer, U., Moens, Y., 2011.
Bom, A., Bradley, M., Cameron, K.,
system. Br J Anaesth 34, 445-450.
Neuromuscular blockade with 
et al., 2002. A novel concept of
Adams, W.A., Mark Senior, I., Jones,
rocuronium bromide for ophthalmic
reversing neuromuscular block:
R.S., et al., 2006. cis-Atracurium in
surgery in horses. Vet Ophthalmol
chemical encapsulation of
dogs with and without porto
14, 244-247.
rocuronium bromide by a
systemic shunts. Vet Anaesth Analg
Auer, U., Mosing, M., 2006. A clinical
cyclodextrin-based synthetic host.
33.17-23
study of the effects of rocuronium in
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 41,
Ali, H.H., Utting, I.E., Gray, C., 1970.
isoflurane-anaesthetized cats. Vet
266-270.
 Stimulus frequency in the detection
Anaesth Analg 33, 224-228.
Booij, L.H., 2009. Cyclodextrins and the
of neuromuscular block in humans.
Auer, U., Uray, C., Mosing, M., 2007.
emergence of sugammadex.
Br J Anaesth 42, 967-978.
Observations on the muscle relaxant
Anaesthesia 64 (Suppl 1), 31-37.
Amaki, Y., Waud, B.E., Waud, D.R.,
rocuronium bromide in the horse
Brull, S.J., Connelly, N.R., O'Connor,
1985. Atracurium-receptor kinetics:
- a dose-response study. Vet Anaesth
T.Z., et al., 1991. Effect of tetanus on
simple behavior from a mixture.
Analg 34, 75-81.
subsequent neuromuscular
Anesth Analg 64, 777-780.
Bleijenberg, E.H., van Oostrom, H..
monitoring in patients receiving
Auer, U., 2007. Clinical observations on
Akkerdaas, L.C., et al., 2011
vecuronium. Anesthesiology 74.
the use of the muscle relaxant
 Bispectral index and the clinically
64-70.
191
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Burns, B.D., Paton, W.D., 1951.
Donati, F, 1988. Onset of action of
Herschl, M.A., Trim, C.M., Mahaffey.
Depolarization of the motor
relaxants. Can J Anaesth 35.
E.A., 1992. Efects of 5% and 10%
emd-plate by decamethonium 
S52-S58.
guaifenesin infusion on equine
and acetylcholine. I Physiol 115,
Donati, F., Meistelman, C., Plaud, B.,
vascular endothelium. Vet Surg 21,
41-73.
1990. Vecuronium neuromuscular
494-497.
Cason, B., Baker, D.G., Hickey, R.F.
blockade at the diaphragm, the
Hildebrand, S.V., Arpin, D., 1988.
et al., 1990. Cardiovascular and
orbicularis oculi, and adductor
Neuromuscular and cardiovascular 
neuromuscular effects of three
pollicis muscles. Anesthesiology 73,
effects of atracurium administered to
steroidal neuromuscular blocking
870-875.
healthy horses anesthetized with
drugs in dogs [ORG 9616, ORG
EMC, 2012. http://
halothane. Am J Vet Res 49,
9426, ORG 9991). Anesth Analg 70.
www.medicines.org.uk/EMC/
1066-1071.
382-388.
medicine/21299/SPC/
Hildebrand, S.V., Hill, T., 3rd, 1989.
Chambers, D., Paulden, M., Paton, F..
Bridion+100+mg+ml+solution
Effects of atracunium administered
et al., 2010. Sugammadex for reversal
+for+injection/. Accessed 1/8/2012.
by continuous intravenous infusion
of neuromuscular block after rapid
Faye, S., 1988. PhD thesis. University of
in halothane-anesthetized horses.
sequence intubation: a systematic
Leeds, Leeds
Am J Vet Res 50, 2124-2126.
review and economic assessment.
Fink, H., Hollmann, M.W., 2012. Myths
Hildebrand, S.V, Howitt, G.A., 1984.
Br J Anaesth 105, 568-575.
and facts in neuromuscular
 Dosage requirement of pancuronium
Chen, C., Yamaguchi, N., Varin, F..
pharmacology. New developments
in halothane-anesthetized ponies: a
2009. Studies on the
in reversing neuromuscular
comparison of cumulative and
pharmacokinetics of cisatracurium in
blockade. Minerva Anestesiol 78,
single-dose administration. Am J Vet
anesthetized dogs: in vitro-in vivo
473-482.
Res 45, 2441-2444.
correlations. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
Fuchs-Buder, T., Claudius, C..
Hildebrand, S.V., Holland, M., Copland,
32.571-576
Skovgaard, L.T., et al., 2007. Good
V.S., et al., 1989. Clinical use of the
Claudius, C., Viby-Mogensen, I.,
dinical research practice in
neuromuscular blocking agents
 2008. Acceleromyography for use
pharmacodynamic studies of
atracurium and pancuronium for
in scientifc and clinical practice:
neuromuscular blocking agents Il:
equine anesthesia. I Am Vet Med
a systematic review of the
the Stockholm revision. Acta
Assoc 195, 212-219.
evidence. Anesthesiology 108,
Anaesthesiol Scand 51, 789-808.
Hildebrand, S.V., Howitt, G.A., Arpin,
1117-1140.
Fuchs-Buder, T., Schreiber, J.U..
D., 1986. Neuromuscular and
Clutton, E., 2007. Surgical relaxation
Meistelman, C., 2009. Monitoring
cardiovascular effects of atracurium 
 and neuromuscular block. In Practice
neuromuscular block: an update.
in ponies anesthetized with
29. 574-583.
Anaesthesia 64 (Suppl 1), 82-89.
halothane. Am I Vet Res 47.
Clutton, R.E., Glasby, M.A., 1998. A
Gill, S.S., Donati, F., Bevan, D.R., 1990.
1096-1100.
 comparison of the neuromuscular
Clinical evaluation of double-burst
Hubbell, J.A., Muir, W.W., Sams, R.A..
 and cardiovascular effects of
stimulation. Its relationship to
1980. Guaifenesin: cardiopulmonary
 vecuronium, atracurium and
train-of-four stimulation.
effects and plasma concentrations in
mivacurium in sheep. Res Vet Sci 64.
Anaesthesia 45, 543-548.
horses. Am J Vet Res 41, 1751-1755.
233-237.
Gleed, R.D., Jones, R.S., 1982.
Hudetz, A.G., Hemmings, H.C., Jr, 2012.
Clutton, R.E., Richards, D.L.S., Lee, J.C.,
Observations on the neuromuscular
Anaesthesia awareness: 3 years
1986. The effects of vecuronium
blocking action of gallamine and
of progress. Br J Anaesth 108,
bromide on single-twitch studies in
 pancuronium and their reversal by
180-182.
maignant hyperthermia susceptable
neostigmine. Res Vet Sci 32.
Ibebunjo, C., Hall, L.W., 1993. Muscle
pigs. Vet Surg 15-461.
324-326.
fbre diameter and sensitivity to
Clutton, R.E., Dissanayake, K., Lawson,
Gurney, M., Mosing, M., 2012.
neuromuscular blocking drugs. Br ↓
H., et al., 2013. The construction
Prolonged neuromuscular blockade
Anaesth 71, 732-733.
and evaluation of a device for
in a horse following concomitant
Ibebunjo, C., Srikant, C.B., Donati, F.,
mechanomyography in anaesthetized
use of vecuronium and atracurium.
1996. Duration of succinylcholine
Gottingen minipigs. Vet Anaesth
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 119-120.
and vecuronium blockade but not
Analg 40, 134-141.
Hall, L.w., 1952. A report on the
potency correlates with the ratio of
Cookson, I.C., Paton, W.D., 1969.
dinical use of bis-{β-
endplate size to fbre size in seven
 Mechanisms of neuromuscular
dimethylaminoethyl )-succinate
muscles in the goat. Can I Anaesth
block. A review article. Anaesthesia
bisethiodide [Brevidil E, M & B
43, 485-494.
24. 395-416.
2210) in the dog. Vet Rec 64:
Jones, R.M., 1984. Calcium antagonists.
Craig, R.G., Hunter, J.M., 2009.
491-492.
Anaesthesia 39, 747-749.
 Neuromuscular blocking drugs and
Hall, L.W., Lehmann, H., 1953.
Jones, R.S., 1987a. Interactions
their antagonists in patients with
Response in dogs to relaxants
between pipecuronium and
organ disease. Anaesthesia 64
derived from succinic acid and
suxamethonium in the dog. Res Vet
(Suppl 1), 55-65.
choline. Br Med I 1, 134-136.
Sci 43, 308-312.
Deana, A., Scuka, M., 1990. Time course 
Hall, L.W., Woolf, N., Bradley, J.W..
Jones, R.s., 1987b. Observations on the
 of neostigmine action on the 
et al., 1966. Unusual reaction to
neuromuscular blocking action of
emdplate response. Neurosci Lett 118,
suxamethonium chloride. Br Med J
pipecuronium in the dog. Res Vet Sci
82-84.
2, 1305.
43.101-103.
192
Relaxation of the skeletal muscles
Chapter
8
Jones, R.S., 1988. Reversal of
Lang, T, Jahn, R., 2008. Core proteins
Mosing, M., Auer, Ul., Bardell, D., et al.
nueromuscular block - a
of the secretory machinery. Handb
2010. Reversal of profound
review. J Assoc Vet Anaesth 15.
Exp Pharmacol, 107-127.
rocuronium block monitored in
80-88.
Langford, R., 2012. iPhone for
three muscle groups with
Jones, R.S., Brearley, J.C., 1985.
monitoring neuromuscular function.
sugammadex in ponies. Br I Anaesth
Atracurium infusion in the dog.
Anaesthesia 67, 552-553.
105, 480-486.
Proceedings of the 2nd International
Lee, C., 2009. Goodbye
Mosing, M., Auer, U., West, E., et al..
Congress of Veterinary Anaesthesia,
suxamethonium! Anaesthesia 64
2012. Reversal of profound
Sacramento, pp. 172-173.
(Suppl 1), 73-81
rocuronium or vecuronium-induced
Jones, R.S., Seymour, C.J., 1985. Clinical
Manley, S.V., Steffey, E.P., Howitt, G.A..
neuromuscular block with
observations on the use of
et al., 1983. Cardiovascular and
sugammadex in isoflurane-
wcuronium as a muscle relaxant in
 neuromuscular effects of
anaesthetised dogs. Vet I 192.
the dog. I Small Anim Pract 26.
 pancuronium bromide in the pony.
467-471.
213-218
Am JVet Res 44, 1349-1353.
Muir, A.W., Houston, I., Green, K.L.
Jones, R.S., Heckmann, R., Wuersch, W.,.
Marshall, R.J., Muir, A.W., Sleigh, T.,
et al., 1989. Effects of a new
1978. Observations on the
et al., 1994. An overview of the
 neuromuscular blocking agent [Org
neuromuscular blocking action of
pharmacology of rocuronium 
9426) in anaesthetized cats and pigs
alcuronium in the dog and its
bromide in experimental
and in isolated nerve-muscle
reversal by neostigmine. Res Vet Sci
animals. Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl 9,
preparations. Br J Anaesth 63.
25, 101-102.
9-15.
400-410.
Jones, R.S., Hunter, J.M., Utting, J.E..
Martin-Flores, M., Campoy, L., Ludders,
Naguib, M., Lien, C., 2010.
1983. Neuromuscular blocking
J.W., et al., 2008. Comparison
 Pharmacology of muscle relaxants
action of atracurium in the dog and
between acceleromyography and
and their antagonists. In: Miller.
its reversal by neostigmine. Res Vet
visual assessment of train-of-four
R.D., Eriksson, L.l., Fleisher, L.A..
Sci 34, 173-176.
 for monitoring neuromuscular
et al. (Eds.), Miller's Anesthesia,
Jurado, O.M., Mosing, M., Kutter, A.P.
blockade in horses undergoing
seventh ed. Churchill Livingstone
et al., 2012. Cardiovascular
surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
Elsevier, Philadelphia,
effects of cis-atracurium overdose
220-227
pp.859-912.
in a dog following misplacement
Martin-Flores, M., Boesch, J., Campoy.
Paton, F., Paulden, M., Chambers, D.
 of neuromuscular monitoring
L., et al., 201la. Failure to reverse
 et al., 2010. Sugammadex compared
eectrodes. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
 prolonged vecuronium-induced
with neostigmine/glycopyrrolate for
119-120.
neuromuscular blockade with
routine reversal of neuromuscular
Kalow, W., 1959. The distribution,
edrophonium in an anesthetized
block: a systematic review and
destruction and elimination of
dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 47,
economic evaluation. Br ↓ Anaesth 
muscle relaxants. Anesthesiology 20.
294-298.
105. 558-567
505-518.
Martin-Flores, M., Lau, E.J., Campoy, L.
Ribeiro, L.M., Ferreira, D.A., Bras, S..
Kastrup. M.R., Marsico, F.F., Ascoli, FO.
et al., 201lb. Twitch potentiation: a
et al., 2012. Correlation between
et al., 2005. Neuromuscular blocking
potential source of error during
clinical signs of depth of anaesthesia
properties of atracurium during
neuromuscular monitoring with
and cerebral state index responses in
sevoflurane or propofol anaesthesia
acceleromyography in anesthetized
dogs with different target-controlled
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 32.
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
infusions of propofol. Vet Anaesth
222-227.
328-335.
Analg 39, 21-28.
Katz, B., Thesleff, S., 1957. A study of
Martin-Flores, M., Campoy, L., Gleed.
Sarrafzadeh-Rezaei, F., Clutton, R.E.
the desensitization produced by
R.D., 2012a. Further experiences with
2009. The effect of volatile
 acetylcholine at the motor end-plate.
vercuronium in the horse. Vet
anaesthetics on the relative
J Physiol 138, 63-80.
Anaesth Analg 39, 218-219.
sensitivity of facial and distal
Khuenl-Brady, K., Castagnoli, K.P.,
Martin-Flores, M., Pare, M.D., Adams,
 thoracic limb muscles to vecuronium
Canfell, P.C., et al., 1990. The
W., et al., 2012b. Observations of the
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
neuromuscular blocking effects and
potency and duration of vecuronium
55-62.
pharmacokinetics of ORG 9426 and
in isoflurane-anesthetized horses. Vet
Savarese, J.J., Ali, H.H., Basta, S.J..
ORG 9616 in the cat. Anesthesiology
Anaesth Analg 39, 385-389.
et al., 1988. The clinical
72.669-674
Martin-Flores, M., Pare, M.D., Campoy.
 neuromuscular pharmacology
Kopman, A.F, Eikermann, M., 2009.
L., et al., 2012c. The sensitivity of
of mivacurium chloride
Antagonism of non-depolarising
sheep to vecuronium: an example of
(BW B1090U). A short-acting
neuromuscular block: current
 the limitations of extrapolation. Can
nondepolarizing ester neuromuscular
practice. Anaesthesia 64 (Suppl 1),
I Anaesth.
blocking drug. Anesthesiology 68,
22-30.
Martyn, J.A., Fagerlund, M.J., Eriksson,
723-732
Kopman, A.F, Kumar, S., Klewicka,
L.l., 2009. Basic principles of
Shilo, Y, Pypendop, B.H., Barter, L.S.,
M.M., et al., 2001. The staircase
neuromuscular transmission.
et al., 201l. Thymoma removal in a
phenomenon: implications for
Anaesthesia 64 (Suppl 1), 1-9.
cat with acquired myasthenia gravis:
monitoring of neuromuscular
Mirakhur, R.K., 2009. Sugammadex in
a case report and literature review of
transmission. Anesthesiology 95.
dinical practice. Anaesthesia 64
anesthetic techniques. Vet Anaesth
403-407.
(Suppl 1), 45-54.
Analg 38, 603-613.
193
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Torda, TA., Graham, G.G., Warwick,
experimental pigs used in 
Elsevier, Philadelphia,
N.R., et al., 1997. Pharmacokinetics
ardiovascular research. Vet Anaesth
pp.1515-1531.
 and pharmacodynamics of
Analg 39, 529-532.
Wachtel, R.E., 1990. Comparison of
suxamethonium. Anaesth Intensive
Viby-Mogensen, I., 2010. Neuromuscular
anticholinesterases and their effects
Care 25, 272-278.
monitoring. In: Miller, R.D.,
 on acetylcholine-activated ion
Veres-Nyeki, K.O., Rieben, R.,.
Eriksson, L.I., Fleisher, L.A., et al.
channels. Anesthesiology 72.
Spadavecchia, C., et al., 2012.
(Eds.), Miller's Anesthesia, seventh
496-503.
Pancuronium dose refinement in
 ed. Churchill Livingstone
194
9
Chapter
of the lungs
Introduction
195
 pressure ventilation' or IPPV. It is used widely in anaesthe-
sia to counteract anaesthetic-induced respiratory depres-
Spontaneous respiration
195
 sion, or whenever neuromuscular blocking agents have
IPPV when the chest wall is intact
197
been used (see Chapter 8). It is also a routine technique
IPPV after opening of the pleural cavity
199
 in intensive care, but here more sophisticated methods of
Collapse of the lung
199
ventilation are required than for anaesthesia. There are
199
differences between spontaneous breathing and IPPV, and
Paradoxical respiration
IPPV when the thoracic cage is opened widely at thora-
Mediastinal movement
200
cotomy from when it is intact The anaesthetist must
Effects on the circulation
200
appreciate what these differences are if IPPV is to be cor-
Possible harmful effects of IPPV
200
rectly managed under all circumstances.
PEEP, CPAP and recruitment manoeuvres
201
Recruitment manoeuvres
201
 Management of IPPV
202
SPONTANEOUS RESPIRATION
Manual ventilation
202
Lung ventilators
202
 In a spontaneously breathing animal, active contraction of
Essential characteristics
203
 pheric intrapleural pressure still further by enlarging the
Ventilator settings
205
relatively rigid thoracic cavity. The decrease in intrapleural
Weaning from IPPV
205
pressure lowers the alveolar pressure (Fig. 9.1) so that a
Other modes of lung ventilation
205
 pressure gradient or driving force is set up between the
exterior and the alveoli. This overcomes the airway resist-
High frequency lung ventilation
205
ance and air flows into the alveoli until, at the end of
Lung ventilation in intensive care
206
inspiration, the alveolar pressure becomes equal to the
Ventilation in veterinary anaesthesia:
atmospheric pressure. During expiration the pressure gra-
the future
206
 dient is reversed and air flows out of the alveoli.
 The transpulmonary pressure is a measure of the elastic
forces which tend to collapse the lungs (Fig. 9.1). There is
no one single intrapleural pressure; in the ventral parts of
INTRODUCTION
papuexa sgunl aun daay ot luaipyyns isn! s! i! isauo au
but because of the influence of gravity acting on the lungs,
The techniques used to ventilate the lungs during anaes-
in the dorsal parts of the chest the intrapleural pressure
thesia usually involve endotracheal intubation, then peri-
should be much more below atmospheric. However, it is
odic inflation of the lungs. The commonest method used
 not at all certain how uniform the pressure on the pleural
 iso juaniu, se umou si suisni asan u
 surface of the lung really is. The hilar forces, the buoyancy
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
195
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Lung volume
Spontaneous breathing
001
chan
Insp.
Exp.
Insp.
01+
1
Alveolar
pressure
cml
Transpulmonary pressure
A
Pleural pressure
-10
Inspiration
Expiration
+10
Figure 9.1 Changes in lung volume, pleural and
breathing (diagrammatic only).
of the lung in the pleural cavity and the different shapes
B
-10
of the lung and chest wall are all possible sources of local
pressure differences. Thus, it is customary to measure the
intraoesophageal pressure as being representative of the
mean intrapleural pressure (Fig. 9.2).
IPPV
 The alveolar pressure changes generate airflow into and
 out of the lungs against a resistance in a way analagous to
20
that stated by Ohm's Law for electricity, where:
cmH2C
E
R=
R
A
So that:
10
alveolar pressure change
Resistance
ainflow
Airway resistance is largely influenced by the lung
?
volume because the elastic recoil of lung parenchyma
exerts traction on the pleural surfaces and walls of airways
Figure 9.2 Pressure changes (A) at the mouth end of
(holding them patent) when the lungs are inflated above
endotracheal tube, (B) in the thoracic oesophagus during
residual volume. As the lungs are further inflated, elastic
 spontaneous breathing and IPPV with closed chest
recoil pressure increases, thus further dilating the airways
(diagrammatic only).
and decreasing resistance to air flow. This relationship
 between airway resistance and lung volume is hyperbolic
in nature, as shown in Figure 9. 3. Airway resistance also
Total respiratory resistance (Rrs) may be estimated by
depends on the nature of airflow through the airway. With
the application of an oscillating airflow to the airways with
a clear airway and a low gas flow rate intrapulmonary flow
measurement ofthe resultant pressure and airflow changes.
is largely laminar (streamlined) and airway resistance is
A technique was developed by Lehane et al. (l980) to
also low, but obstruction or a high flow velocity will give
measure airway resistance as a function of lung volume
rise to turbulence and a greatly increased resistance Meas-
during a vital capacity manoeuvre and so to derive specifc
urement of airway resistance must be made when gas is
lower airways conductance, s.Glaw (conductance being the
flowing. During IPPV, when the chest wall is intact, resist-
 reciprocal of resistance) and the expiratory reserve volume
ance to expansion of the lungs is also offered by the chest
(ERV). The method was modified by Watney et al. (1987,
wall which then contributes to the total respiratory
1988) for use in anaesthetized and paralysed horses and
resistance.
dogs and it was demonstrated that, in ponies, xylazine,
196
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
breathing animals and, indeed, positive end expiratory
[2]
pressure (PEEP) (see PEEP and CPAP below) has many
positive advantages. However, resistance increases the
work of breathing, and common sense suggests that appa-
ratus resistance should be kept to a minimum. Purchase
B
[1965a,b) studied the resistance afforded by four closed
istance
breathing systems used in horses and cattle and in three,
all of which had internal bores of 5 cm, found it to be of
(1)
the order of 1 cmHO (0.1 kPa) per 100L/min at flow rates
of 600 L/min. The resistance of endotracheal tube connec-
tors was relatively high in comparison with that of the
Lung volume
remainder of the apparatus.
Figure 9.3 Resistance and volume curves together with
 During a breathing cycle, mean intrathoracic pressure
lower airways conductance curves (Glaw). (1): Resistance
may be above or below atmospheric pressure as a result of
curves; (2): (Glaw): (A): normal airway: (B): obstructed airway.
apparatus resistance. For example, if the expiratory flow
Lehane et al. 1980, by permssion of Oxford University Press
through a piece of apparatus with a high resistance is great
enough to induce turbulence, while the inspiratory rate is
low (as it often is in horses) so that during inspiration the
 acepromazine, halothane and enflurane produce broncho-
flow is laminar, the mean intrathoracic pressure will be
dilation and a decrease in ERV while isoflurane appears to
above atmospheric. Conversely, if the inspiratory flow rate
increase ERV. In dogs, it was concluded that both broncho-
 is greater, there may be a subatmospheric mean intratho-
constriction and changes in lung volume may be respon-
racic pressure. Mean intrathoracic pressures above atmos-
sible for changes in airway resistance seen during hypoxia.
 pheric reduce the effect of the thoracoabdominal pump
 During spontaneous breathing, changes in resistance may
for venous return, with subsequent cardiovascular effects.
necessitate a great increase in the work of breathing. The
Large subatmospheric mean intrathoracic pressures may
effect of inhalation anaesthetics on total respiratory resist-
be equally dangerous, perhaps by producing pulmonary
ance in conscious horses was studied by Hall & Young
[1992) who showed that halothane appeared to have no
volume. Trapping of gas in the lungs occurs more readily
effect while enflurane and isoflurane seemed to increase
at low lung volumes and gas trapping produces wide-
it. In contrast in humans, neither isoflurane nor sevoflu-
 spread airway obstruction with serious impairment of res-
rane altered resistance, although desflurane at higher con-
piratory function.
centrations did cause an increase (Nyktari et al, 20ll).
 Resistance is not the only factor opposing movement of
air in and out of the chest; a full analysis includes the
IPPV VVHEN THE CHEST
effects of compliance and inertance. Adding the compli-
WALl IS INTACT
ance and inertance forms the reactance and this can be
combined with the resistance in one complex term called
the 'impedance: If the impedance of the respiratory system
IPPV is applied easily during anaesthesia by rhythmical
is known then the resistance and reactance can be deter-
compression of the reservoir bag of a breathing circuit.
mined. A non-invasive method (Michaelson et al., 1975)
nq sunzaanss [enuu Aq paaanue Aiduis iso si su
that does not require patient cooperation has been adapted
machines have been designed and built to relieve the
for use in conscious animals as described by Young and
anaesthetist of the bag-squeezing duty. If the bag is
Hall (1989) for horses but it is diffcult to use in anaes-
 squeezed as the animal breathes in, the tidal volume may
thetized, intubated animals because the impedance of the 
be augmented ('assisted ventilation'). The increased ventila-
tube alone is much greater than that of a non-intubated
tion produced results in 'washout' of CO2 and the PaCO2
animal. Small airways contribute little to the total lung
falls below the threshold for stimulating the respiratory
resistance; although each one has a large individual resist-
centre so that spontaneous breathing movements cease
ance, there are large numbers in parallel so that the overall
and the anaesthetist can impose whatever respiratory
effect is small. This is important because small airway
rhythm is required - 'controlled ventilation' A machine pro-
disease {which increases local resistance) is not detected
vides the most effcient means of ventilating the lungs for
by measurement of total airway resistance until the condi-
o uaa io kuadoid il asn on inq 'spouad paguoioid
tion is well advanced.
squeeze a bag correctly, it is necessary to understand the
Anaesthetic apparatus may afford resistance that is con-
 principles underlying IPPV and under what circumstances
siderably higher than that offered by the animal's respira-
 any possible harmful effects may arise.
Compliance has been defined in many ways but the
resistance will cause serious problems in spontaneously
simplest definition is that it is the volume change
197
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Volume
Total
Resistance during anaesthesia is increased by the resistance
lung
of apparatus used, such as endotracheal tubes. Animals
Deflate
capatity
resistance so that it is necessary to allow a more prolonged
expiratory period if the lungs are to deflate to FRC. If this
is not done, lung volume will be greater at the start of the
next inspiration and there will be a steady increase in FRC
until the retractive forces of the lung. which increase with
increase in lung volume, become suffcient to empty the
lungs to a new FRC in the time available and the inspira-
Inflate
tory and expiratory tidal volumes become normally
related. While conscious, the animal with expiratory
obstruction empties its lungs by active expiratory move-
Residual
ments but, when anaesthetized and paralysed or made
volume
otherwise apnoeic, expiration may become passive and,
 consequently, of longer duration. The pattern of IPPV used
must make allowance for this, and large tidal volumes
Pressure
should be delivered with long expiratory pauses between
each inspiration to allow the chest to return to its original
Figure 9.4 Total thoracic compliance curves showing
resting position.
hysteresis. The compliance can be altered by a number of
The induction of general anaesthesia is usually associ-
factors: (A) the lung compliance is reduced by lack of
ated with an increase in resistance due to a decrease in
surfactant (respiratory distress syndrome), reduction of elastic
lung volume but this may be countered to some extent by
tissue in the lungs (as in emphysema), and fibrosis or scar
bronchodilation, depending on the agents given.
tissue; (B) the chest wall compliance is altered by obesity and 
splinting of the diaphragm by abdominal disorders.
The most obvious effect of IPpV when the chest is
closed is on the circulatory system. During spontaneous
breathing, by lowering intrathoracic pressure, inspiration
produced by unit pressure change (SV/8P). Compliance
 ugments the venous return to the heart; in many animals,
shows hysteresis (Fig. 9.4). It is changes in surfactant
 as can often be seen on the arterial blood pressure trace,
which seem to be responsible; airway resistance and tissue
there are indications that a increased stroke volume is
 l  s e ao  s
produced. During IPpV, however, intrathoracic pressure
needed for the calculation necessary to obtain this value
rises during inspiration, blood is dammed back from
should be made when no air is flowing into or out of the
the thorax, venous return and stroke volume decrease;
lungs (ie. at the end of inspiration). Compliance meas-
blood flows freely into the thoracic vessels during the
ures cannot be compared unless related to a lung volume
expiratory period. Fortunately, by causing distension of
such as the functional residual capacity (FRC). Unfortu-
veins this damming back of blood during inspiration
nately, measurement of FRC is not a simple procedure and
produces a reflex increase in venous tone which, in normal
such measurements of compliance as have been made in
animals, appears to compensate for the changed intratho-
animals have often omitted this refnement.
racic conditions during the inspiratory period and restores
As commonly measured, compliance has two compo-
the venous return towards normality. Obviously. the
nents and compliance values can be found for both the
-  an s  a   n l
lungs themselves and the thoracic cage When the chest
 pensate will depend on the degree of venomotor integrity
wall is not intact the total compliance measured
[which can be affected by drugs), the blood volume, the
approaches that of the lungs alone It might seem that
magnitude of the intrathoracic pressure rise and its
 methods using high airway pressures to inflate the lungs
duration.
might be safe if, when compliance is reduced, it is the tho-
 The magnitude and duration of the increased pressure
racic cage itself which is uncompliant, because alveoli only
within the thorax during the inspiratory phase of IPPV
rupture when overdistended. However, decreased compli-
are, therefore, critical and are reflected in the 'mean
ue :oyun-uou aq on ide si saaiasau suml aul jo aue
 intrathoracic pressure: This mean pressure, like the mean
airway pressure which produces little ventilation of some
arterial blood pressure, is not the simple arithmetical
regions may overdistend and even rupture alveoli in other
 mean between the highest and lowest pressures reached
regions. During anaesthesia, compliance may be altered by
in the system and its calculation is not always easy for
assistants resting their weight on the chest, by the use of
the non-mathematician. It is clearly important to keep
retractors and by the degree of muscle relaxation.
this mean pressure as low as possible during the respira-
 Airway resistance has to be overcome to deliver gas to
tory cycle and this can be accomplished in a variety
the alveoli at inspiration and to expel it during expiration.
of ways.
198
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
1. Short application of positive pressure
pressure will be applied from a lower baseline and the
pressure gradient necessary to produce the required
The shorter the inspiratory period during IPpV the lower
the mean intrathoracic pressure will be for any given
volume change in the lungs can be achieved with a lower
applied pressure. Theoretically, it might seem thatthe peak
 peak pressure. Theoretically, this might be expected to help
maintain cardiac output, but changes in arterial blood
pressure should never be maintained - expiration should
 commence as soon as the peak pressure is achieved - or
 pressure and cardiac output are proportional to the dura-
tion of the increased airway pressure and not necessarily
the circulation will suffer. However, the short application
of a positive pressure may not result in very good distribu-
to the peak pressures reached. Consequently, merely
 decreasing the peak airway pressure may have but little
tion of fresh gas within the lungs. In humans, very short
effect ifthe inspiratory phase is long. Expiratory subatmos-
inspiratory periods have the effect of increasing the physi-
ological dead space, while Hall et al. [l968) found a
pheric pressure may also cause airway collapse and air
trapping. and is not used in routine ventilation during
decrease in the physiological dead space/tidal volume
 anaesthesia (although subatmospheric pressures for inspi-
ration are, of course, the basis of the “iron lung' type
relatively long inspiratory phase A compromise seems to
be necessary here, but exactly what it is likely to be for any
ventilators used in human patients with long-term
one animal of any one species remains pure speculation.
paralysis).
It is usually taught that in small animals [dogs, cats, foals.
calves, sheep), the inspiratory time should be l.0-1.5
seconds and in adult horses and cattle 2-3 seconds pro-
IPPV AFTER OPENING OF THE
vided the lungs are healthy.
PLEURAL CAVITY
2. Rapid gas fow rate
If the necessary tidal volume of gas is to be delivered to
Collapse of the lung
the lungs in a short inspiratory period, it is clear that the
flow rate will need to be high. The rate at which gas can
 Normally, distension of the lungs to fll the thoracic cavity
flow into the lungs, however, is largely dictated by the
is due to the existence of a pressure gradient between the
resistance offered by the apparatus used and the airway
airway and the pleural cavity The airway pressure is usually
resistance The airway resistance to the various lung regions
atmospheric and the intrapleural pressure subatmospheric
may not be uniform. For example, a bleb of mucus may
due to the outward recoil forces of the chest wall, the
 partially obstruct a small bronchus and greatly increase the
lymphatic removal of fluid from the pleural cavity and the
resistance to gas flow through it A high gas flow rate
limited expansibility of the lungs. This distending force is
through a neighbouring, unobstructed bronchus may
 opposed by what has been termed the 'elasticity' of the
result in overdistension of the alveoli supplied by it in an
lung tissue, although the term 'elasticity' is not strictly
interval of time so short that the alveoli supplied by the
 applicable because surface tension in the alveoli contrib-
partially obstructed bronchus will not have time for more
utes in a most important manner to the lung retractive
than minimal expansion. Theoretically, it would seem that
 force. When the chest is opened and atmospheric pressure
umder these circumstances alveolar rupture might occur
allowed to act directly in the pleural cavity, the normal
but, in practice this complication seems rare unless pul-
pressure gradient is abolished and the retractive forces
monary contusions exist from auto-trauma.
cause the lung to collapse (Fig. 9.5).
3. Low expiratory resistance
Paradoxical respiration
of IPPV will delay the fall in intrathoracic pressure, will
The paradox is that during spontaneous breathing follow-
result in an increase in mean intrathoracic pressure and
al Kaes ienald aui ou suuado ael ieianeun su
possibly in circulatory consequences. However, expiratory
lung on the damaged side of the chest becomes smaller
resistance can result in more orderly emptying of alveoli
 on inspiration and larger on expiration. Normally, when
and an increase in FRC with consequent widening of the
the thorax enlarges due to activity of the inspiratory
airways that helps to prevent airway collapse. It is now
 muscles its increased volume comes to be occupied by air
recognized that there are many situations (e.g. in animals
which enters via the trachea and blood which enters the
with obstructive emphysema) where a higher expiratory
right atrium and thin-walled great veins. In the presence
resistance is advantageous (see PEEP and CPAP).
of a unilateral open pneumothorax, air enters not only
4.Subatmospheric pressure during the
 into the lungs via the trachea but also through the chest
wall defect into the pleural cavity. The proportion of air
expiratory phase
entering by each route is largely governed by the relative
If a subatmospheric pressure is applied to the airway
size of the chest wall defect to the tracheal lumen. When
during the expiratory phase of IPPV. the inspiratory
the opening to the hemithorax is large, or when there is
199
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Atmospheric pressure
 open pneumothorax breathing spontaneously shuttles air
from one lung to the other. This 'pendulum air produces.
in effect, an increase in respiratory dead space, and the
animal's respiratory efforts are less effective in producing
Overall ventilation. It is not seen after bilateral opening of
the pleural cavity through a sternotomy. Applying positive
pressure to the airway during inspiration abolishes para-
doxical respiration.
Relative
cross-section
areas of trachea
Mediastinal movement
Retractive
In any normal animal, the mediastinum is not a rigid
forces
partition between the two halves of the chest and, in prac-
tice, the behaviour of each half of the chest during respira-
Mediastinum
tion is always dependent on the conditions prevailing in
the other half. Unilateral pneumothorax can occur in all
Figure 9.5 Forces responsible for collapse of the lung
domestic animals and its presence causes the mediasti-
 bunp im isup aut jo buado jeaeun buolo
num to move towards the intact side during inspiration
spontaneous breathing. The volume of air entering the
pleural cavity at each breath will depend on the relative
and the opposite way during expiration. This movement
cross-sectional area of the trachea and the defect in the
of the mediastinum results in obstruction of the thin-
chest wall
walled great veins and thus impedes the venous return to
the heart, but this is not often the major problem as death
is usually due to hypoxia. Rigidity of the mediastinum
may be encountered in chronic inflammatory pleuritis.
Atmosphericpressure
Effects on the circulation
Intact side
Open side
It might be expected that most of the potentially harmful
effects of IPPV on the circulatory system would be absent
Pendulum air
when the pleura is opened widely because an opening in
the chest wall should prevent compression of intrathoracic
vessels when positive pressure is applied to the airway.
There is no evidence to prove if this is the case and, in
clinical practice, there will be many other interferences to
the circulation (e.g. caused by the surgeon) that will
 Atmospheric pressure plus
predominate.
retractive force
Figure 9.6 Effect of unilateral pneumothorax on
 intrabronchial pressure.
POSSIBLE HARMFUL
EFFECTS OF IPPV
any degree of airway obstruction, the greater volume of
The effects of IPPV on pulmonary ventilation are, of
air will enter through the hole in the chest wall and the
course, in the main clearly beneficial, and often essential.
mediastinum will be pushed towards the intact side of
The potential effects on the circulation have been dis-
the chest. During inspiration, pressure in the bronchi on
cussed above Concern is always voiced that there may be
the open side of the chest will be greater than in the
rupture of lung tissue if inspiratory pressures are too high.
trachea because of the addition of the normal retractive
However, this is no more likely to occur during properly
forces of the lung to the atmospheric pressure acting on
conducted IPPV, particularly if the chest is closed, than
the pleural surface of the exposed lung (Fig. 9.6). Thus, on
during the ordinary activities of life - very high intrapul-
inspiration the increased volume on the intact side of the
uo se rns saaie sunp donaaap sanssard Aeuo
chest is occupied by air from the collapsed lung as well as
ing. or straining at defaecation or parturition. Care is
from the atmosphere. The exposed lung, therefore,
needed, however, when ventilators are used for, in some.
becomes smaller. On expiration, the lung on the intact
sticking of valves may expose the patient's airway directly
to the high pressures at which gases are delivered from
[n e ym iee ue em si ul aie sa
the anaesthetic machine to the ventilator As already
200
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
mentioned, uneven inflation of alveoli is a distinct pos-
(positive end-expiratory pressure). If airway pressure
sibility during IPPV but the surrounding tissues seem to
above atmospheric is maintained throughout the breath it
provide suffcient support to prevent rupture of the rela-
is known as CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure).
tively overinflated alveoli.
The two conditions do differ but the terms are often used
Any uneven distribution of gas must have the effect of
synonymously.
 disturbing the normal ventilation/perfusion relationships
The respiratory benefits of an expiratory resistor include
q as uo ai an ie siae il 's a u
an overall reduction in airway resistance due to an increase
 anaesthesia itself and, if IPPV produces more uneven gas
in FRC, movement of the tidal volume above the airway
distribution, it will probably fail to affect any improve-
closing volume, a tendency towards re-expansion of any
ment in the alveolar-arterial oxygen tension gradient
collapsed lung and, possibly, a reduction in total lung
found during anaesthesia in spite of any improvement in
water. The net result is that ventilation/perfusion relation-
tidal exchange which it may produce. This is most evident
ships are improved. However, these advantages are, in
in the anaesthetized horse, where IPpV appears to produce 
some circumstances, counterbalanced by circulatory dis-
very little improvement in the alveolar-arterial oxygen
advantages due to the inevitable rise in mean intrathoracic
tension (see Chapter ll). Other situations in which the
 pressure.
normal relationships between ventilation may be upset
Both disease and drugs have profound effects on the
occur in all animals where the expansion of one lung or
circulatory response to a rise in mean intrathoracic pres-
part of a lung is limited by surgical procedures such as
sure due to PEEP (or CPAP). In animals with poor lung
packing off and retraction of lung lobes during intratho-
 compliance much of the applied end-expiratory pressure
racic surgery.
will be opposed by the excessive pulmonary transmural
IPPV should remove CO, from the animal's lungs and
pressure thus minimizing the increase in intrathoracic
it is possible, over a period of time, to remove either too
pressure Thus, the stiffer the lungs, the safer is the applica-
much or too little causing the animal to suffer from either
tion of PEEP or CPAP likely to be To summarize, PEEP
respiratory alkalosis or acidosis. Respiratory acidosis
and CPAP may confer respiratory advantages and circula-
(hypercapnia) is characterized by sympathetic overactivity.
cutaneous vasodilation, a rise in arterial blood pressure
rendering it necessary to make direct measurements of the
and a bounding pulse. Respiratory alkalosis (hypocapnia)
relevant physiological functions to ensure that overall
may, it has been claimed, lead to cerebral damage from
benefit results.
cerebral vasoconstriction because the calibre of the cere-
 The results of PEEP and CPAP during veterinary anaes-
bral blood vessels depends on the PaCO2. However, con-
thesia have been variable. Colgan et al. (l97l) showed
vincing evidence of cerebral damage due to hypocapnia
that PEEP produced no change in the alveolar-arterial
has yet to be produced. However, severe hypocapnia
gradient in anaesthetized dogs. Hall and Trim (1975)
reduces cardiac output in horses (Hall et al., 1968), and
failed to demonstrate any benefit from PEEP in spontane-
can make it diffcult to maintain arterial blood pressure at
ously breathing anaesthetized horses, and broadly similar
an adequate level.
results were obtained by Beadle et al. (1975). In experi
Administering IPPV via a facemask instead of through
 an endotracheal tube results in forcing gases down the
tained with 1% or 1.5% minimum alveolar concentration
oesophagus into the stomach, and this mode should only
(MAC) of sevoflurane (Polis et al., 2001). PEEP of
be used in emergency situations. An inflated stomach
 5 cmH2O always reduced shunt and arterial-alveolar gra-
limits ventilation, and regurgitation of gastric fluid is a
dient but, while cardiac output and arterial blood pressure
distinct possibility. Gas accidentally forced into
the
were unchanged at 1 MAC, at 1.5 MAC, the imposition of
 stomach should be removed as soon as possibleby passing
PEEP resulted in significant depression of these parame.
a stomach tube.
ters. In dogs undergoing one lung ventilation for thoracos-
copy. 1.5 and 5 cmHO of PEEP improved oxygenation
and reduced alveolar-arterial PO2 differences without
PEEP, CPAP AND RECRUITMENT
altering blood pressures but cardiac output was not
measured in this study. Where available, the use of
MANOEUVRES
PEEP together with IPPV often is routine in equine
anaesthesia.
 In the above paragraphs, the problems of airway trapping
and closure and of the influence of respiratory pressures
Recruitmentmanoeuvres
on the circulation have been outlined. It is now recognized
that, in many conditions, particularly in advanced lung
The technique of 'sighing'- applying a single high tidal
disease, the imposition of an expiratory threshold has
ly (anssaid Aoiesu y e samban ym) ain
been shown to have benefcial effects on the PaO2. Adding
one breath to open up a collapsed lung - has been around
daad se umouy s! Addl suunp ionsisai Aioieidxa ue yons
for a very longtime, but was developed with the term 'open.
201
Section
1
Principles and procedures
lung' in relation to human patients suffering from acute
Overdistended at each inspiration, afferent impulses from
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Lachmann, 1992;
pulmonary receptors inhibit the medullary centres.
Amato et al., 1995, 1998). The idea is to open the col-
O uau 'sanssand Aroieisu uiu um aeole pasde
prevent re-collapse by the use of PEEP and this was taken
Manual ventilation
forward to human anaesthesia by Tusman et al. (l999)
Manual squeezing of the reservoir bag [a procedure often
Moens & Bohm [20ll), in a brief editorial review, explain
known as bagging the animal') can be used to provide
that the two strategies most commonly used in humans
IPPV. This should be done gently and rhythmically. Once
as e aie (sa ym suad insn iso u)
the desired degree of lung inflation has been produced.
breath at a peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 40 cmHO.
the bag should be released and the lungs allowed to empty
the lungs held inflated for 40 seconds, or a series of nor-
freely, allowing (as would a ventilator) the expiratory
mally timed inspirations at the PIP of 40 cmHzO with a
PEEP of 20 cmH20. However, in ARDS patients, PIPs of up
pause to be longer than the time for inflation and the
airway pressure to decrease to zero. The rate of lung ven-
to 80 cmHzO are sometimes required.
tilation should be faster than the normal anaesthetized
In veterinary anaesthesia, recruitment manoeuvres are
respiratory rate of the animal and the chest wall move-
most relevant to equine anaesthesia, but many authorities 
ment produced should be more obvious than in normal
have been concerned that the circulatory effects may be
breathing. Care is needed to avoid overinflation. Most
o a  sss tu i  
patients can be ventilated with inflation F
nary damage. Wettstein et al. (2006). in horses under
pressures
<25 cmHzO and lower pressures may be adequate for
intravenous anaesthesia, used a stepwise manoeuvre,
 small patients. A pressure gauge on the machine and cap-
using PEEP and then PIPs of 45, 50 then 55 cmHzO; 0xy-
 nography are useful aids for the anaesthetist during this
genation was improved and pulmonary shunt reduced
procedure During thoracotomy, expansion of the lung
and, although there was a fall in arterial blood pressure
beyond the limits of the wound indicates that excessive
and heart rate, cardiac output was unchanged. In horses
inflation on the lungs is being produced. Manual ventila-
undergoing anaesthesia for colic, Hopster et al. (20ll)
tion is usually carried out for very short periods of time
(e.g. following apnoea at anaesthetic induction) but can
recruitment modifcation; one breath with a PIP of 60, one
also be useful to give immediate control; the anaesthetist
with a PIP of 80, then a third at PIP 60 cmHzO, each held
can alter the rate, rhythm and character of lung inflation
inflated for 10-12 seconds while maintaining PEEP at
to suit the convenience of the surgeon at any particularly
10 cmHz0 or higher. Blood pressure and heart rate were
critical stage of an operation, and the presence of respira-
only minimally affected, but cardiac output was not meas.
tory obstruction is immediately obvious.
ured. To date, fears that the horses might suffer pulmonary
damage from these high inflation pressures have not been
founded, but numbers are still small.
Lung ventilators
In summary, PEEP, CPAP and recruitment manoeuvres
are used widely in human anaesthesia; PEEP, at least, is
There are now a large number of ventilators available com-
used a great deal when ventilating horses, but there is need
mercially for use in veterinary anaesthesia, and a descrip-
for more evidence before recommendations can be made
tion of all is quite outside the scope of this book. For
for the best, most effective overall, strategies for use in
explanation oftheir mode of working, the respiratory cycle
veterinary anaesthetic practice.
 of a ventilator can be divided into four parts:
1. The inspiratory phase provided by either flow
 generators or pressure generators. With fow
generators, the tidal volume delivered to the patient is
MANAGEMENT OF IPPV
independent of factors outside the ventilator - if, for
example, the patient's airway resistance rises then the
 Assisted IPPV ventilation can be carried out on any anaes-
inflation pressure increases. The flow is not
thetized animal but, for full control to be achieved, and
necessarily constant and is adapted according to the
the animal not to ventilation 'fight' the imposed ventila-
circumstances. Pressure generators maintain a constant
tion all spontaneous breathing movements have to be
 pressure during the inspiratory phase of the
abolished. This occurs (1) with neuromuscular block (see
respiratory cycle, often by a weight acting on a
  s   )  
concertina bag (eg. the Manley Ventilator - for
depressed by relative overdose of anaesthetics or other
many years the 'workhorse' of human and small
agents; (3) hyperventilation, by increasing minute volume
animal anaesthesia).
with assisted ventilation, to lower PaCO2: [4) reflex inhibi-
 2. The changeover from inspiratory to expiratory phase,
tion of the respiratory centres by regular rhythmical lung
i.e. the manner in which the ventilator cycles, may
inflation. It is believed that if the lungs are slightly
 be (a) time cycled, in which inspiration is
202
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
MERLIN
patient. It is microprocessor-controlled, can be pressure, volume, or time cycled and has a tidal volume range 1-8o0 ml. It also
enables assisted ventilation.
Photograph courtesy of Keith Simoson, Vetronic Services, Abbotskerswell Devon, UK.
terminated after a set time; (b) volume cycled, where
Ventilator performance in the presence of changed
 inspiration is terminated after a preset volume has
 parameters in the patient is extremely complex and anyone
 been delivered; or (c) pressure cycled, in which case
contemplating the use of an unfamiliar ventilator is
inspiration ceases as soon as a preset pressure is
well advised to read any instructions provided by the
reached. Not all machines conform to this
manufacturer and become thoroughly conversant with its
dassification in that some show mixed cycling with
mode of operation before attempting to employ it As a
hybrid cycling mechanisms.
guide, provided a machine meets the following require-
3. In the expiratory phase, the commonest arrangement
ments it should be adequate in most circumstances no
is to expose the patient's airway to atmospheric
matter what its mode of operation or mechanism of
pressure.
cycling may be.
4. The changeover from the expiratory to the
inspiratory phase may be time cycled or patient
triggered. In the patient-triggered ventilator, a slight
Essential dharacteristics
 inspiratory effort by the patient triggers the
All such ventilators should be able to provide a high peak
changeover to the inspiratory phase.
flow so that the inspiratory period is short, with a longer
The gas to be delivered to the patient may be held in a
Aioiedsu au ieu os asned Aioenxa (aqeidepe pue)
bellows (that represents the bag) in an airtight surround
expiratory ratio can be altered. This would be a minimal
(bottle) or in a cylinder. With cylinders (e.g. the Merlin
requirement. However, other points to consider when
ventilator [Fig. 9.7]: and Tafonius, see Chapter 1l). the
making a choice include:
power to drive the piston is electricity. In most ventilators
1. Is the ventilator suffciently versatile for the use
that use bellows, the power to squeeze the bellows is com-
required? Are respiratory rates and tidal volumes
pressed gas, which may be derived from the oxygen source
correct for the species concermed? Tidal volumes for
on the machine or from an outside source of compressed
most domestic species need to be in the range of
gas. Usually control is then by an electrically driven proc-
10 mL/kg but with the ability to use higher volumes
essor (e.g. the Hallowell 2000 [Fig. 9.8] and the Mallard,
if required. Most modern ventilators are very
see Chapter ll). However, ventilator control units can also
versatile In systems such as those shown in Figures
be time and pressure cycled, requiring no electricity. An
9.8 and 9.9, the bellows size may be changed to suit
example is the Bird Mark 7 (Fig. 9.9).
the patient, thus increasing versatility.
203
Section
1
Principles and procedures
bellows and housings enable it to deliver accurate tidal volumes of from 20 to 3000 ml at safe working pressures of
10-60 cmmHzO with respiratory rates of 6-40 breaths per minute. It can be fitted to all anaesthesia systems with out-of-circuit
vaporizers.
Photographs courtesy of Hallowe/l EMC, 63 Eagle Street, Pitsfielo, Massachusetts 01201, U5A.
Figure 9.9 The Bird Mark 7 ventilator. This is a versatile unit which can be used for small animal respiratory care, but is also
adapted to drive a large animal bag in a bottle' type ventilator. The system can be 'patient triggered', so it assists ventilation
if the patient breathes in; if there is too long a respiratory pause the 'time cycling' takes over and IPPV occurs. IPPV can be set
as preference by increasing the pressure needed to trigger the device.
204
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
2. Can it include PEEP (and are you going to want
by slowing (but not stopping) the ventilation rate; (3) in
this)?
ases where hypoventilation has been established by the
3. Is it easy to use? When you change one parameter on
use of centrally acting drugs such a opioids or Q2-
the 'settings', do others also change? If so, it can
adrenoceptor agonists, IPPV should be continued until
make it more difficult to use Is it easy to clean
spontaneous breathing is adequate or antagonists have
(including the bellows)? Is it sufficiently quiet?
been given.
4. Is there a means of ventilating by hand should the
 driving force fail? This is particularly important for
machines where compression of the bellows is
Other modes of lung ventilation
 electrically powered. Gas driven machines with
High frequency lung ventilation
electrically powered consoles should have a back-up
battery.
High frequency lung ventilation (HFV) is the term used
For large animal use a ventilator should be able to
for ventilation at a very high rate with tidal volumes of less
deliver a tidal volume up to 20 L with a cycling rate of
than the anatomical dead space. This can provide ade-
 between 4 and 15/minute and an inspiratory phase of 2-3
quate gas exchange in the lungs. The means of achieving
seconds duration. The ventilator should be capable of
this are not immediately obvious but there have been
ay u1 (ed 9) ohu 09 0 dn go sanssaid Buueins
many models advanced as explanation (Khoo et al., 1984;
upper airway during inspiration, although it must be
Solway et al., 1984; Slutsky & Drazen, 2002). The theoreti-
noted that Shatzmann (1988) reported that peak inspira-
cal advantages of the systems are that by limiting tidal
tory pressures above 20 cmH2O lead to overdistension of
volume and inflation pressure they may cause less baro-
lung tissue in the apical regions of the horse's lungs and
trauma, and have less severe circulatory effects compared
with conventional IPPV. A defnite advantage is that a
to discharge of unidentified fluid out of the lungs during
recovery from anaesthesia. The inspiratory:expiratory
standard endotracheal tube is not necessary, useful for
ratio should be at least 1:2.
investigations of the airway,. and some of the systems can
be used at a tracheostomy making them very suitable for
intensive care The major uses of HFV in humans are for
Ventilator settings
intensive care of neonates, and in patients with ARDS. A
A survey of the literature reveals wide variations in the
full description and analysis of HFV is beyond the remit
recommendations for tidal and minute volumes of respi-
of this book.
ration when IPpV is used. There are no generally agreed
 There are a number of types of HFV (Sykes, 1985). The
values for the production of adequate levels of ventilation 
original conventional method is high frequency positive pres-
in horses and, even in dogs, where more studies have been
sure ventilation (HPPpV). In this, intermittent (high fre-
done, published fgures range from 10 to 20 mL/kg (tidal
 quency - in humans 60-150 breaths/minute) flow of gas
volume) and from 400 to 600 mL/kg (minute volume).
is delivered to the endotracheal tube or via a catheter
so it is clear that numbers such as these can only be
 passed down until the tip is just above the carina. Exhala-
regarded as a very rough guide. In horses and cattle, it is
tion is passive, so where a catheter has been used, it frees
 suggested that a tidal volume of 10 mL/kg at a rate of 8-12
the airway for procedures such as bronchoscopy. In high
 aa s  rim 'n  s
frequency jet ventilation (HFIV), a high pressure gas source
ratio of 1:2 and a peak airway pressure not exceeding
flows into the airway during part of the respiratory cycle.
30 cm HzO should provide suitable initial settings for
usually 20-35% of the cycle time, through a narrow diam-
IPPV, although these may need to be modifed as anaes-
eter tube usually at tracheal level. Air is entrained as a
thesia proceeds. For both small and large animals, ideally.
result of this. Once again exhalation is passive. In high
the end tidal concentration of carbon dioxide should be
frequency oscillatory ventilation [HFOV), there is a constant
monitored and ventilation may be adjusted to yield a
distending airway pressure with oscillations, produced by
normal PaCO2.
an electromagnetic valve, at a very high rate [400-2400/
minute). This results in very small tidal volumes but gas
exchange occurs through enhanced molecular diffusion
Weaning from IPPV
and coaxial airway flow.
It is essential that before any attempt is made to wean the
 The experimental model of HFV appears to be the dog.
animal off the ventilator the anaesthetist is absolutely
 and there are very many published papers on the subject.
certain that any neuromuscular block is fully reversed (see 
 The systems have uses in veterinary anaesthesia, in particu-
Chapter 8) and that depth of anaesthesia is not that which 
 lar in relation to techniques such as bronchoscopy (Bjor-
would inhibit respiration. If both these criteria are con-
ling et al., 1985), but clinical reports are very limited. In
firmed, then spontaneous respiration can be restored by:
 an experimental study in dogs, Bednarski & Muir [1989)
(1) breaking the rhythm of lung inflation (through venti-
found that although HFOV was effective in ventilation,
lating by hand); (2) allowing some accumulation of CO2
 cardiac output was reduced to a greater extent than with
205
Section
1
Principles and procedures
conventional ventilation. HFJV has been used in a neona-
Ventilation in veterinary
tal foal (Bain et al., 1988) and experimentally in adult
anaesthesia: the future
horses (Dunlop et al., 1985) and HFOV used in three
sheep, a foal and a pony (Dodman et al., 1985). Although
uaa Aueu oi se aapamou jo Aned e suieuai aiau
in all cases ventilation was effective, the lack of more
tory parameters in anaesthetized domestic animals,
recent reports suggests that HFV is of limited value in
whether with spontaneous ventilation or with IPpV and
veterinary anaesthesia at this time.
little has been published about non-traditional ventilatory
patterms. This is partly due to the fact that the required
measurements have been difficult to obtain in the clinical
Lung ventilation in intensive care
setting. Some anaesthetic monitors now have the option
 In intensive care, long-term IPPV may be necessary over
of plethysmography which can be used even in horses
several days. In addition to choice of assisted or controlled
(Moens et al., 
 2009). Other respiratory measurement
ventilation, PEEP and CPAP, the intensive care unit venti-
methods, potentially applicable to clinical patients, are
lators may have additional capabilities, such as software
being investigated and validated. For example, Mosing and
 providing pressure-volume loops and compliance meas-
colleagues have investigated methods of measuring physi-
urements. IPPV is usually carried out with an air/oxygen
ological dead space in dogs in a clinical setting (Mosing
mixture [to avoid oxygen toxicity and to minimize alveo-
et al., 2010) and have evaluated volumetric capnography
lar collapse), the inspired O concentration being adjusted 
to yield an arterial O saturation of over 90% as shown by
(Mosing et al., 2012; Scheffzek et al., 2012). Work at
pulse oximetry. Sedation or low dose total intravenous
Vienna is investigating the use of respiratory ultrasonic
anaesthesia may be administered to ensure tolerance of
plethysmography in the horse (Russold et al., 2013:
the endotracheal tube A tracheostomy may be needed.
Schramel et al., 20l2). By the next edition ofthis book, it
Foals may be ventilated via a nasotracheal tube. Humidi-
may be possible to give more evidence-based recommen-
fication of the inspired gases is necessary.
 dations as to the most effective ventilator strategies.
REFERENCES
Amato, M.B., Barbas, C.S., Medeiros,
ventilation during bronchoscopy in a
ponies. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 15.
D.M., et al., 1995. Beneficial effects
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 187.
174-179.
of the 'open lung approach' with low
1373-1375.
Hall, L.W., Gillespie, J.R., Tyler, W.S.,
 distending pressures in acute
Colgan, F.J., Barrow, R.E., Fanning, G..
1968. Alveolar-arterial oxygen
respiratory distress syndrome. A
1971. Constant positive pressure
tension differences in anaesthetized
prospective randomized study on
breathing and cardiorespiratory
horses. Br I Anaesth 40,
mechanical ventilation. Am ↓ Resp
function. Anesthesiology 34:
560-568.
Crit Care Med 152, 1835-1846.
145-151.
Hopster, K., Kastner, S.B., Rohn, K..
Amato, M.B., Barbas, C.S., Medeiros,
Dodman, N.H., Lehr, J.L., Spaulding.
et al., 201l. Intermittent positive
D.M., et al., 1998. Effect of a
G.L., 1985. High frequency
pressure ventilation with constant
 protective-ventilation strategy on
ventilation in large animals.
positive end-expiratory pressure and
mortality in the acute respiratory
Proceedings of the 2nd
alveolar recruitment manoeuvre 
distress syndrome. New Engl I Med
International Congress of
during inhalation anaesthesia in
338.347-354
Veterinary Anaesthesia, Sacramento,
 horses undergoing surgery for colic.
Bain, F.T., Brock, K.A., Koterba, A.M.,
pp.186-187.
and its influence on the early
1988. High-frequency jet ventilation 
Dunlop, C., Steffey, E.P., Daunt, D.
recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg
in a neonatal foal. J Am Vet Med
et al., 1985. Experiences with high
38, 169-177.
Assoc 192, 920-922.
frequency jet ventilation in
Khoo, M.C., Slutsky, A.S., Drazen, I.M.,
Beadle, R.E., Robinson, N.E., Sorensen,
conscious horses. Proceedings of the
et al., 1984. Gas mixing during
PR., 1975. Cardiopulmonary effects
 2nd International Congress of
high-frequency ventilation: an
of positive end-expiratory pressure in
Veterinary Anaesthesia, Sacramento,
improved model. I Appl Physiol:
 anesthetized horses. Am J Vet Res 36,
pp.190-191.
Resp Environ Exercise Physiol 57.
1435-1438.
Hall, L.W., Trim, C.M., 1975. Positive
493-506.
Bednarski, R.M., Muir, W.W., 3rd, 1989.
end-expiratory pressure in
Lachmann, B., 1992. Open up the lung
Hemodynamic effects of high-
anaesthetized spontaneously
and keep the lung open. Intensive
frequency oscillatory ventilation in
breathing horses. Br I Anaesth 47.
Care Med 18, 319-321.
halothane-anesthetized dogs. Am J
819-824.
Lehane, I.R., Jordan, C., Jones, J.G.,
Vet Res 50, 1106-1109.
Hall, L.W., Young, S.s., 1992. Effect of
1980. Influence of halothane and
Bjorling, D.E., Lappin, M.R., Whitfield,
inhalation anaesthetics on total
enflurane on respiratory airflow
J.B., 1985. High-frequency jet
respiratory resistance in conscious
resistance and specifc conductance
206
 Pulmonary gas exchange: artificial ventilation of the lungs
Chapter
9
in anaesthetized man. Br J Anaesth
mode (spontaneous ventilation.
Slutsky, A.S., Drazen, J.M., 2002.
52, 773-781
IPPV and PEEP) on cardiopulmonary
Ventilation with small tidal volumes.
Michaelson, E.D., Grassman, E.D..
parameters in sevoflurane
New Engl J Med 347, 630-631.
Peters, W.R., 1975. Pulmonary
anaesthetized dogs. I Vet Med A:
Solway, I., Gavriely, N., Kamm, R.D.,
mechanics by spectral analysis of
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 48,
et al., 1984. Intra-airway gas mixing
forced random noise. I Clin Invest
619-630.
during high-frequency ventilation. J
56, 1210-1230.
Purchase, I.FH., 1965a. Function tests
Appl Physiol: Resp Environ Exercise
 Moens, Y., Bohm, S., 2011. Ventilating
on four large animal anaesthetic
Physiol 56, 343-354.
 horses: moving away from old
drcuits. Vet Rec 77, 913-919.
Sykes, M.K., 1985. High frequency
paradigms. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
Purchase, I.F.H., 1965b. Some
ventilation. Thorax 40, 161-165.
165-168.
respiratory parameters in horses and
Tusman, G., Bohm, S.H., Vazquez de
Moens, Y.P., Gootjes, P., Ionita, I.C.
cattle. Vet Rec 77, 859-860.
Anda, G.F., et al., 1999. 'Alveolar
et al., 2009. In vitro validation of a
Russold, E., Ambrisko, T.D., Schramel,
recruitment strategy' improves
Pitot-based flow meter for the
J.P., et al., 2013. Measurement of
arterial oxygenation during general
measurement of respiratory volume
tidal volume using Respiratory
 anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 82, 8-13.
 and flow in large animal anaesthesia.
Ultrasonic Plethysmography in
Watney, G.C.G., Jordan, C., Hall, L.W.,
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 209-219.
anaesthetized, mechanically
1987. Effect of halothane, enflurane
Mosing, M., Iff, I., Hirt, R., et al., 2012.
ventilated horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
and isoflurane on bronchomotor
Evaluation of variables to describe
40.48-54.
tone in anaesthetized ponies. Br J
 the shape of volumetric capnography
Schatzmann, Ul., 1988. Artificial
Anaesth 59, 1022-1026.
aurves during bronchoconstriction in
ventilation in the horse. Advances in
Watney, G.C.G., Jordan, C., Hall, L.W,.
dogs. Res Vet Sci 93, 386-392.
Veterinary Anaesthesia: Proceedings
Nolan, A.M., 1988. Effects of
Mosing, M., Staub, L., Moens, Y, 2010.
of the 3rd International Congress of
xylazine and acepromazine on
Comparison of two different
Veterinary Anaesthesia, Brisbane, pp.
bronchomotor tone of anaesthetized
methods for physiologic dead space
29-34.
ponies. Equine Vet }20, 185-188.
measurements in ventilated dogs in
Scheffzek, S., Mosing, M., Hirt, R., et al.
Wettstein, D., Moens, Y., Jaeggin-
a clinical setting. Vet Anaesth Analg
 2012. Volumetric capnography curves
Schmucker, N., et al., 2006. Effects
37.393-400.
 as lung function test to confirm
of an alveolar recruitment maneuver
Nyktari, V, Papaioannou, A., Volakakis.
bronchoconstriction after carbachol
 on cardiovascular and respiratory
N., et al., 2011. Respiratory resistance
 challenge in sedated dogs. Res Vet
parameters during total intravenous
during anaesthesia with isoflurane.
Sci 93. 1418-1425.
anesthesia in ponies. Am J Vet Res
sevoflurane, and desflurane: a
Schramel, I., van den Hoven, R., Moens,
67, 152-159.
randomized clinical trial. Br J
Y., 2012. In vitro validation of a new
Young, S.S., Hall, L.W., 1989. A rapid,
Anaesth 107, 454-461.
respiratory ultrasonic
non-invasive method for measuring
Polis, I., Gasthuys, F, Laevens, H., et al.
plethysmograph. Vet Anaesth Analg
total respiratory impedance in the
2001. The influence of ventilation
39, 366-372.
horse. Equine Vet J 21, 99-105.
207
10
lapter
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
 Administration of intravenous agents
209
209
ADMINISTRATION OF
Syringes, needles, and catheters
211
INTRAVENOUS AGENTS
Intraosseous needles
Vascular access ports
213
 Infusion apparatus
213
Agents that are intended to reach the central nervous
aey eisausaeue io sisosieu anpoid pue (sno) uaiss 
Administration of inhalation agents
214
the most direct route by intravenous {IV) injection.
Anaesthesia workstation
215
However, it must be remembered that IV administration
Gases and cylinders
215
results in a more rapid onset and intense effect of drug
Pressure gauges
217
action than achieved by other routes. Precise control of
dnug administration is essential and this can be influenced
Regulators
217
by the size of needle or syringe chosen and the use of
Flowmeters
217
syringe pumps and fluid infusion pumps.
Vaporizers
218
Any superficial vein may be used for IV injection and
220
detailed descriptions of the techniques of venepuncture
Oxygen flush valve
 are given in chapters describing anaesthesia in the various
Common gas outlet
220
species of animal.
Injection vaporization
220
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
compatible machines
220
Syringes, needles, and catheters
Delivery (breathing) systems
220
Syringes used in veterinary medicine vary in size from
Rebreathing circuits
221
0.5 mL (insulin syringes) to 60 mL capacity. The nozzles
of the syringes may be centred, or eccentrically placed to
Non-rebreathing circuits
227
facilitate percutaneous venepuncture. Hypodermic dispos-
Patient devices
229
able needles are sharp but the bevels on catheter needles
Facermasks
229
may be shorter to aid placement within the vein. Desen-
Anaesthetic induction chambers
229
sitization of the skin in small animals prior to venepunc-
Endotracheal intubation
231
ture may be achieved by application of a cream containing
lidocaine and prilocaine to the skin and covering the area
Laryngeal mask airways
233
with an occlusive bandage for 30 minutes. In large animals,
Laryngoscopes
234
desensitization is achieved by injection of an intradermal
Flters and humidity and moisture exchangers
234
 Or subcutaneous bleb of 2% lidocaine with a 25 gauge
Scavenging waste anaesthetic gases
235
needle.
Administration of supplemental doses of anaesthetic
Clinical use of the anaesthesia
agents to prolong anaesthesia or administration of fluids
workstation
238
and antibiotics during anaesthesia requires a venous
Troubleshooting the delivery circuits
239
access. The simplest version is to place a needle in the vein
Cleaning and sterilizing of anaesthetic equipment 239
and leave it with the loaded syringe taped to the patient.
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
209
Section
1
Principles and procedures
needle' catheters are available There is some variation on
their general shape and some have small handles to aid
insertion. Most have plastic needle hubs (flash chamber)
 Or caps through which blood can be seen when the needle
enters the vein. Long catheters are chosen for placement
in the jugular or saphenous veins.
The choice of catheter size depends on the size of the
animal and the purpose for which it is intended. The flow
of liquid through a tube is proportional to the driving
pressure, which is equal to the pressure difference between
the two ends of the tube, and to the internal diameter of
the tube flow being directly proportional to the fourth
Figure 10.1 Butterfly' or 'small vein set' or 'infant scalp
power of the radius, and inversely proportional to the
vein' set. The winged needles aid insertion and subsequent
length of the bore. Flow is also inversely proportional to
fixation to the patient. The attached plastic tubing allows
the viscosity of the fluid, since the more viscous it is the
injection without disturbing the needle.
harder it will be to force it through the tube. Thus, for
'anssad uaai Aue ie pimbi uaai Aue jo mo wnx
the tube should be short and the diameter large Further-
more, a small change in diameter has a great effect on flow
velocity.
At very high flow rates, the resistance to flow may be
disproportionately high. There is a critical flow velocity at
-i sunq suanqim on ieaui uoy satueuo moy yium
 bulence, the driving pressure is largely used up in creating
the kinetic energy of the turbulent eddies. The flow no
longer depends on the viscosity of the fluid but on its
density. The critical velocity at which turbulence occurs
depends on the viscosity and density of the fluid and the
radius of the tube through which it is flowing. Turbulence
will also occur at points in the infusion apparatus where
 the internal diameter abruptly changes.
Figure 10.2 Disposable 'catheter over the needle'. The point
The viscosity of blood is greater than that of water, and
increases with increased haematocrit (packed cell volume).
of the hollow metal needle projects beyond the tapered end
of the catheter.
Viscosity is also increased at low temperatures and the
viscosity of blood at 4°C is about 2.5 times as great as at
37°C. Warming blood prior to transfusion will increase
flow rate as well as decrease the impact on body
Not uncommonly the needle is displaced from the vein
temperature.
Skin preparation before insertion of the catheter, secur-
mation, injection of drugs perivascularly, and failure of
ing the catheter, and attentive catheter maintenance are
ability to inject anaesthetic agents when needed. Improved
essential to avoid catheter-related blood stream infection.
security is achieved using a needle with wings on the hub
Chlorhexidine is recommended as the best skin antiseptic
and a variable length of extension tubing (Fig. 10. 1). These
for providing protection against catheter colonization
 needles are usually restricted to short anaesthetic proce-
(Norwood & McAuley, 2005). The catheter should be
dures or specific needs.
securely attached to the skin because movement of the
A safer practice is to place a catheter in a vein before
catheter in and out of the site of skin insertion increases
induction of anaesthesia (Fig. 10.2). The catheters availa-
bacterial contamination. When catheters are to remain in
ble are purchased in sterile packs and are available in a
place for an extended time, they should be protected from
variety of materials, such as polyvinylchloride, polypropyl-
the environment by sticky pads or bandaging. The catheter
ene polyethylene polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon). and
 site should be checked at least daily for signs of redness,
polymerized silicone (silastic). Catheters constructed of
swelling, or discomfort for the animal. Wet or soiled band-
polyvinylchloride, polyethylene and polypropylene are
ages should be changed whenever contamination occurs.
flexible, catheters of silastic or polyurethane have extreme
Recommendations for changing catheters vary and while
flexibility, and Teflon catheters have minimal flexibility.
some recommend every 72 hours to decrease the risk of
The catheter materials exhibit varying thrombogenicity.
with silastic having none Many patterns of ‘over the
longer retention time is acceptable if the site of catheter
210
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
observed. Catheter-associated infection rates of 15-49%
Box 10.1 Steps for placement of an IV catheter
have been reported in dogs and cats. A positive culture rate
of 24.5% out of 10l central and 50 peripheral catheters in
 Clip hair and clean skin with 3 alternating applications
NOl ue ul sinoy 8t jo unuuju e Bueis se pue ssop
of chlorhexidine surgical scrub and isopropyl alcohol
unit was recently reported (Marsh-Ng et al., 2007). Since
Topical application or injection of lidocaine (or similar).
this was a prospective study, careful attention to aseptic
where applicable
technique and bandaging was observed. The three most
 Wear sterile surgical gloves when placing a central
common bacteria isolated from the catheter tips were not
venous catheter, when catheter placement involves an
normal skin flora and it was deduced that transmission of
introducer and Seldinger wire, or when catheter is to
bacteria from human hands to the catheter hub or con-
remain in place for long-term care
tamination of the catheter cap were most likely causes.
Select appropriate catheter size; flushing with
 There were no differences in contamination rates between
heparinized saline is optional
the types and location of catheters. Another investigation
Small incision in skin over the vein in some patients
identifed contamination in 23 of 99 (23.2%) of periph-
with the point of a hypodermic needle (thick-skinned
eral catheters removed from dogs and cats, most com-
dogs or cats) or scalpel blade (adult cattle)
monly Staphylococcus aureus and S. intermedius [Jones
 Occlude vein distal to puncture site
et al., 2009). None of the usual variables associated with
Hold needle hub for insertion
catheter contamination, such as number of attempts at
 Insert needle and catheter through the skin at an
insertion and duration of placement, was associated with
angle of 45° to the skin and into vein
contamination and, although the statistical analysis was
 Observe blood flow at the hub of the needle,
not conclusive, it appeared that catheters fitted with a
decrease angle of insertion to 30° and introduce
Y-connector were 10 times less likely to be contaminated
needle 0.5 om further into the vein
than catheters with a T-connector. The authors postulated
 Hold needle stationary and slide catheter over the
that the reason may be that there is a greater distance
needle and deeper into the vein
from the injection port and the catheter when using a
Remove needle and blood should be flowing from
Y-connector.
catheter
 Techniques of catheter insertion differ slightly between
When the catheter is above heart level, do not allow
species, and are described in the species-specific chapters,
aspiration of air
but basic principles are described in Box l0.1. In some
Attach catheter cap (or T-port, or 3-way stopcock, or
patients, insertion of the needle and catheter through the
fluid line)
skin results in crimping, fraying or expansion of the end
Flush with heparinized saline
of the catheter and, in these cases, a small incision in the
Secure catheter to patient (tape, sutures, glue)
skin before insertion may be necessary. When venepunc-
ture is unsuccessful, even when the needle has been only
partially withdrawn from the catheter, the needle should
not be reinserted into the catheter when still in the patient.
If the catheter has been bent, reinsertion of the needle will
or without a flexible J-tip. is threaded through the catheter
result in the needle penetrating the side of the catheter and
into the jugular vein and then the catheter is removed
 may even shear off the end of the catheter. Safe practice
while the guide wire is held stationary. A scalpel blade can
involves removal of the needle and catheter and starting
 be used minimally to enlarge the skin incision around the
again.
guide wire. A tapered tissue dilator is threaded over the
Catheters inserted into jugular veins of dogs, cats, and
guide wire into the vein using a partial back and forth
 payipou e guisn paseid Auanbay aie sleuue uey leus
rotation about its longitudinal axis to enlarge the path
Seldinger technique that requires inserting a guide wire
through subcutaneous tissue, and then removed. The cath-
 into the vein to facilitate subsequent insertion of the cath-
eter then is introduced into the jugular vein over the guide
eter. Hair is clipped from an area over the jugular vein and
wire, which is then removed. The catheter is secured with
the skin is prepared as for surgery. Sterile gloves are worn
sutures to the skin. The Seldinger technique using a guide
and a sterile drape with a hole in the centre is applied to
wire can also be used to insert catheters into arteries, and
isolate the site for catheter insertion. Jugular catheters may
the catheter guide wire can be purchased individually or
have one, two or three lumina for infusion of fluids, drugs
and blood sampling (Fig. 10.3). Before inserting the cath-
eter, the proximal and medial lumina should be flushed
-uieiua ie juaaand on padde pue aues paziueday yim
Intraosseous needles
ment. A catheter, or a needle, is inserted into the jugular
An intraosseous {IO) needle is used in animals in which
vein pointing towards the heart. A spring guide wire with
venous catheter placement is particularly diffcult, such as
211
Section
1
Principles and procedures
involving a short catheter, a flexible guide wire (not shown), and a tapered tissue dilator.
very small puppies and kittens and birds, and for emer-
 gency resuscitation. This route can be used for administra-
tion of crystalloid and colloid solutions, blood, and
resuscitation drugs. Speed of infusion is limited. However.
Spinal needle
administration of fluids may expand the peripheral circu-
lation sufficiently to facilitate subsequent intravenous
catheterization. An IO needle should not be inserted
through infected skin or into a fractured bone or pneu-
matic bone in birds. Aseptic technique must be employed
to prevent introduction of bacteria and osteomyelitis. In
dogs and cats, the sites of needle insertion most com-
monly used are the trochanteric fossa of the femur, the
 greater tubercle of the humerus, and the medial surface of
the proximal end of the tibia (Fig. 10.4). In birds, the
needle is inserted into the proximal end of the ulna. Local
 infltration of local anaesthetic solution or general anaes-
thesia should be administered. Purpose-made IO needles
are commercially available Other options are 22, 20, 0r
18 gauge spinal needles, hypodermic needles for extremely
 small patients, and bone marrow needles for large dogs. A
Pelvis
stab skin incision with a scalpel blade may be needed to
assist insertion of the needle The needle should be intro-
duced with pressure using a partial back and forth rotation
about its longitudinal axis achieved by rolling the needle
hub between thumb and forefinger. Loss of resistance may
Femur
indicate penetration of the cortex. The stilette of the needle
is removed and a 3 mL syringe attached. Confirmation of
 placement is by aspiration of bone marrow into the syringe
Figure 10.4 Intraosseous (IO) catheterization: anatomical
and then easy injection of heparinized saline with no
landmarks, viewed from the caudal aspect, and needle
swelling occurring subcutaneously. A catheter cap Or
 approach to the femur of a dog.
212
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
T-port should be attached to the needle Antibiotic oint-
ment can be smeared at the site of skin insertion and the
Box 10.2 Calculation of fluid infusion rates
needle should be secured with tape or sutures. The flow
rate of fluid through the needle is not significantly altered
Drops/minute
by using a large needle size but is dependent on flow
Bodyweight
 Infusion rate 、 Infusion set calibration
through the bone marrow. Pressurizing the source of the
(kg)
mL/hour
(drops/mL)
fluid doubles the rate of fluid infusion but should be used
60 (minutes in an hour)
cautiously. More details about IO infusion have been pre-
viously published (Giunti & Otto, 2009).
When fluids are administered under the influence of
gravity, the speed of infusion depends more on the cross-
Vascular access ports
sectional diameter of the needle or catheter than on the
Vascular access ports may be used in patients that need
 pressure (height of the fluid container above the needle or
long-term daily intravenous medications, frequent blood
catheter). Doubling the diameter of the needle or catheter
sampling, or multiple anaesthetic episodes for radiation
results in a 16-fold increase in the flow rate whereas a
therapy. A soft catheter is inserted into a vein, usually the
fourfold increase in pressure is required to double the flow
jugular vein, using either a surgical incision and a venot-
rate. In circumstances where the maximum size of the
 Omy or percutaneously using a wire introducer (Seldinger
catheter is limited, the flow rate can be increased by pres-
technique). The catheter is connected to a small chamber
 surizing the system. Bottles can be pressurized by pumping
(port) that is inserted subcutaneously. After the incision is
 air through the air inlet This procedure carries a high risk
dlosed, a hypodermic needle can easily penetrate the
of producing air embolism if the supply of fluid runs out,
chamber by percutaneous puncture There are several pub-
 so it should be used with caution and the infusion should
lications in the veterinary literature identifying complica-
not be left unattended. Pressure can be applied to plastic
tions of vascular access ports, including seroma formation,
bags of fluid by manually squeezing them or by placing
catheter blockage, infection, and incision dehiscence, but
them within a plastic or fabric bag that can be inflated by
the complication rate is low (Culp et al., 2010).
 pumping in air (pressure infuser). Air embolism can only
occur with the latter system if the fluid bag contains air.
Infusion apparatus
Air embolism should not occur when fluid is administered
by gravity flow through an administration set.
10 sseq oseld uoy paaysuenl sl Adeiau Al ioy Pimd
 Accurate control of infusion rate is possible using an
bottles, 500 mL up to 10 L through tubing known as
electronic infusion pump attached to the administration
administration sets' Essentially, an administration set
set (Fig. 10.5). These pumps control flow rate in several
consists of a sharp rigid plastic end, that may or may not
-u  ue e Aq u nq sm
include an air inlet with its own flter, that is inserted
tion of flow through the infusion line based on the param-
into the outlet of the fluid container, a drip chamber, a
 eters manually entered into the pump. The pumps can be
filter in sets used for blood products, and a length of
programmed to deliver a set volume per hour and may
tubing that leads to the venous catheter. Most administra-
display the total volume delivered and the volume remain-
tion sets also have one or more rubber-capped injection
ing. Infusion pumps that control flow rate by monitoring
sites on the tubing. Some administration sets have two
 the drip chamber are rendered less accurate because they
or four bag attachments for fluid loading. prolonged
cannot compensate for variations in drop size. Some
administration, or use in large animals. The inlet to the
 pumps require use of specially designed administration
drip chamber from the fluid bag is available in different
sets that are substantially more costly than standard
diameters to control the number of drops in l mL of
administration sets.
fluid, for example paediatric sets deliver 60 drops/mL
Electrically driven syringe drivers (syringe pumps) are
and adult sets deliver either 15 or 10 drops/mL. The flow
useful for accurate administration of small volumes, such
rate is controlled by means of a roller clamp and can be
as crystalloid or colloid solutions to small patients or
calculated from the number of drops that pass through
anaesthetic agents, such as propofol, fentanyl, or lidocaine
the drip chamber in one minute (Box 10.2). Administra-
(Fig. 10.6). Extension sets between the syringe and the
tion sets that have a 150 mL container 'dosage burette'
 patient can be regular IV extensions with an internal
proximal to the drip chamber can be used to control the
volume of 3 mL/30 cm (12 inches) of line, or microexten-
fluid volume delivered to small patients. A volume of
 sion sets of 1.7 metres (5 feet) with an internal volume of
fluid, for example 20 mL, is let into the burette and the
0.3 mL. The device may require manual entry of the man-
inlet manually closed. The rate of infusion of the fixed
ufacturer or size of the syringe as well as the volume to be
volume is adjusted (60 drops/mL) but when the chamber
delivered per hour and the volume limit The cross-
is empty a flap valve closes and shuts off the administra-
sectional diameter of different syringes is preprogrammed
tion set.
in the device to allow accuracy of volume delivery. The
213
Section
1
Principles and procedures
DONOT REMOVEFROM O.R.:
RATE
MACRO
VTBI
10-P
TIME
TPN
MIC
ml. /hr.
PIGY
SELECT
PRIME
CLEAR
RUN
HOLD
MHESKA
SA ANESTHESIA
Figure 10.5 Volumetric or constant infusion pump. Devices may warn of the presence of air or occlusion of the infusion line.
Buq si piy ieu uyuo on paa Aeinan aq isnu
delivered intravenously and not subcutaneously or into
surrounding bandage or drapes.
01 Allenueu pasueup aq Aeu aei dund uoisnyui au
 adjust administration of anaesthetic agents. A target con-
trolled infusion pump (TCl) is available for administra-
tion of propofol where the anaesthetist sets a target blood
 or effect-site concentration and the computerized infusion
anei uoisnyui aul on sasueup Aressanau au sayeuu aia
(Chapter 1). This device is expensive and the benefits of
TCI over manual control of propofol administration have
not yet been confirmed (Leslie et al., 2008). Nonetheless,
 protocols are being developed for use of this modality in
veterinary patients.
Figure 10.6 Syringe driver (syringe pump). Many types of
electrically driven syringe drivers are available. Some must be
used with a specified size of syringe, others can be used
ADMINISTRATION OF
with a variety of syringe sizes.
INHALATION AGENTS
barrel of the syringe is stationary and the unit controls
the rate of plunger travel to ensure an accurate volume
The anaesthesia machine can be complex or simple in
delivery.
appearance (Fig. 10.7). The essential components are the
Although many infusion pumps have audible alarms
same in all machines: the anaesthesia workstation and a
that indicate line occlusion, infusion into perivascular
pue (o) uaxa youm yano i Aaap ruaed
a ot aunssad ynoua yu e aaaiuoe jou Aeu sanss
anaesthetic gas are delivered to the patient via a mask or
the occlusion alarm. Thus, the site of catheter placement
tracheal tube.
214
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
110
Anaesthesia workstation
pressure at the O, source, and an emergency 'flush' valve
will deliver Oz directly from the outlet of the regulator to
The anaesthesia workstation comprises an Oz source, a
the patient breathing circuit (Fig. 10.8).
  'a e ( a)  as
vaporizer(s). In addition, a pressure gauge measures
Gases and cylinders
There are many different sizes of cylinders [also known as
tanks) for different gases. Each cylinder is coded by a letter
of the alphabet, and the type of gas by the colour of the
cylinder (Table 10.1). although availability of cylinder
sizes differs between countries and colour coding of the
cylinders is not universal (see later). A new standard gov-
erning the colour coding of transportable gas cylinders is
in transition in Europe. Designed to improve safety stand-
ards, the cylinder shoulders [the curved part at the top of
the cylinder) are painted to warn of potential hazards:
 bright green is an inert gas, light blue is an oxidizing gas.
 yellow is a toxic gas, red is flammable, and white is oxygen.
The product label must always be checked to identify the
cylinder contents and the medical gas cylinders have dis-
tinctive colouring.
Flowmeter
Vaporizer
Regulator
Pressure
Common
gauge
gas outlet
Emergency
oxygen
supply
"flush"
Oxygen
cylinder
Figure 10.7 Anaesthesia machine for small animals.
Figure 10.8 Components of an anaesthesia workstation.
Table 10.1 Characteristics of medical oxygen cylinders
Cylinder code
Ea
E
Fa
H
Contents (L)
680
625
1360
7100
Approximate dimensions
mm
865 × 102
660 × 108
930 × 140
1320 × 178
1295 × 235
inch
34 × 4 
26 × 4.25
36.6 × 5.5
52 × 7
51 × 9.25
Valve cutlet connection
 Pin-index
 Pin-index
Bullinose 
 Bullnose
Bullnose
wwww.bocmedical.co.uk; bAirgas South, Inc., Georgia, USA
215
Section
[1
Principles and procedures
Small cylinders are commonly attached to small animal
practices that have multiple anaesthesia machines and
anaesthesia workstations whereas large cylinders must be
utilize oxygen cages, mechanical ventilators, or offer
aeod e un panodns 'lem aul on sueuo Aq panoas
hyperbaric chamber O therapy.
cradle, or placed in a room distant from the patient pro-
cedures. The cylinder outlets are of several designs but two,
Nitrous oxide
the pin-index and bullnose are commonly used in veteri-
Nitrous oxide (NzO) is available in cylinders that are
nary medicine. Cylinders with the pin-index system have
colour-coded blue or, in Europe with a dark blue shoulder
holes in the head of the cylinder with an arrangement that
is specific to each gas. Pins on the yoke that includes the
and white body. During the filling process, NzO is com-
exandde si iapu ly e ie os pimi e oi passaid
reducing valve and outlet attachment must exactly match
one-third liquid and two-thirds gas and exerts a pressure
the pin-index arrangement on the cylinder, thus making it
of approximately 760 psi (USA) or 44 bar (UK). As N,O
impossible to connect an incorrect cylinder. The bullnose
is used during anaesthesia, liquid is vaporized to replace
connections screw into place, are tightened with a wrench,
the lost gas and pressure is maintained constant. Use of a
and do not require a sealing washer. The DISS (diameter
high flow of N,O may be accompanied by formation of
index safety system) system employs different diameter
connections and different screw threads.
ice crystals on the outside of the cylinder and a slight fall
ui on seman apu au uam ranssnd iapun u
temperature, the cylinder pressure returns to 760 psi or 44
Oxygen
bar if there is any liquid remaining. Consequently, the
Medical grade oxygen cylinders are colour-coded white in
 pressure gauge cannot be used to determine the volume
Europe and Canada and green in the USA. The cylinders
of contents, as all the liquid is not vaporized until the
contain compressed oxygen to a pressure of2000-2200 psi
 cylinder is approximately 80% used, at which point the
uaum (an) ieq Ze1 io (vsn) (youi aienbs iad spunod)
 pressure reading decreases. Nitrous oxide is also available
full. Oxygen in the cylinder is in gaseous phase and the
in different sizes of cylinders.
cylinder pressure decreases linearly as oxygen is used. Con-
sequently, a half-full cylinder has a pressure of half the full
Air
 pressure. Observation of the pressure gauge on the cylin-
 der and knowledge of the cylinder capacity permits an easy
 Compressed medical grade air containing 21% oxygen is
calculation of the current contents. Veterinary hospitals
available in cylinders for use blended with oxygen for
with high O, usage may have a series of several large O2
long-term ventilation of dogs and cats in the Intensive
(or nitrous oxide) H cylinders that are attached to a mani-
Care Unit or for inhalation anaesthesia. In Europe, the
fold and automatically switch from one cylinder to
colour code of medical grade air is a white and black
another cylinder as the contents are depleted, or from one
shoulder with a white body.
series (bank) of cylinders to another.
Carbon dioxide
Liquid oxygen
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is available in cylinders colour-
Bulk oxygen supply in the form of a cylinder of liquid
coded grey or a grey shoulder with a white body. Currently.
uasAxo pinbi sleidsoy aaiel Aq uasoup uayo st uasAxo
CO, is more commonly used in veterinary practice inde-
'panensul ue si ieul iapu oiuaoi e ul paiois si
 pendently of the anaesthesia machine to produce pneu-
vacuum-jacketed, pressure container equipped with
 moperitoneum during laparoscopy.
pressure-relief valves and rupture discs to protect the cyl-
inder from increased pressure The capacity of the cylinder
Helium-Oxygen
jo ainssaid e ie uasAxo pinb!l yo 7 ost pue 0g uaamqaq s!
Helium-0xygen (Heliox) 65:35, 70:30, or 80:20 mix-
350 psi and, at 20°C (68*F), the expansion ratio, liquid
tures are available in cylinders for special anaesthesia cir-
to gas, is 1 to 860. Strict adherence to safety protocols is
qumstances, such as anaesthesia or ventilation of people
essential to avoid personal injury when handling the
with respiratory distress from airway obstruction where
storage cylinder.
turbulence of airflow in the trachea or bronchi produces
resistance to breathing. The density of helium is lower
Oxygen generators
 than oxygen and the lighter helium-oxygen mixture tends
 Oxygen generators that produce a continuous supply of
 to maintain laminar flow in the airways, increase flow rate.
 medical grade 93% O are available for veterinary practice.
and decrease work of breathing. The improved airflow in
Convenience, safety, and decreased cost per litre are sug-
 and out of the lungs may support improved blood gases.
gested reasons for using a generator, but it is essential to
Use of helium in anaesthesia is not widespread as although
be certain that Oz can be generated at a sufficient rate for
-dns aimean ueuny ui sodan ases pausiqnd aie anau
an emergency situation. Oxygen generators are available
porting beneficial effects of helium use studies in larger
in the USA that can generate sufficient O for those
 groups of patients are not conclusive (Harris & Barnes,
216
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
PressureGauge
Regulator
Yoke
02
Out
02 Cylinder
Figure 10.9 A yoke connects an oxygen cylinder to the regulator.
2008; Maggiore et al., 2010). The pressure in a full cylinder
to prevent mixing gas supplies are in the form of different
is 2000 psi (USA) or 137 bar (UK).
sized screw threads for attachment of hoses on the anaes-
-a ym sudno pauuon-pmh Aq io sauoeu eisa
ent configurations. A pressure drop along the pipes
Pressure gauges
generally occurs, consequently, the origin outlet pressure
Cylinders are connected to pressure gauges that register the
must be adjusted to maintain the pipeline outlet pressure
pressure of gas within the cylinder from which the anaes-
at slightly higher than the workstation regulator outlet
thetist may be able to determine the volume of cylinder
pressure Some large animal mechanical ventilators are
contents (Fig. 10.9). Pipeline pressure gauges must also be
unable to function properly if the Oz pressure decreases.
installed close to the locations of use when the gas supply
cylinders are situated at a distance.
Howmeters
Gas flows to the patient breathing circuit are controlled by
Regulators
flowmeters. These are calibrated for each gas in mL/min
Delivery of pressure as high as in the O cylinder directly to
or L/min as the density and viscosity of each gas deter-
the patient will cause lung damage and, therefore, a regula-
 mines rate of flow (Fig. 10. 10). The calibrations range from
tor [also known as a reducing valve) is necessary to
 10 mL/min to 10 L/min for small animals and up to 10 or
decrease the pressure to a safer workable pressure The
 15 L/min for large animals. The rotameter type of flow.
regulator decreases the pressure to 50 psi (4 bar, 350 kPa)
meter consists of a glass tube inside which a rotating
 and maintains the outlet pressure constant for flows up to
bobbin is free to move up and down, allowing gas to flow
15 L/min. Further, the outlet pressure is maintained as the
around it (Fig. 10.1l). The tube is tapered with the diam-
 pressure decreases inside the cylinder. The regulator attach-
eter of the tube gradually increasing from the bottom to
ment (yoke) that is placed around a pin-index cylinder
the top so that the annular space between the tube and
head (see Fig. 10.9) or into the outlet of larger cylinders is
rotameter (orifice) becomes wider as the rotameter rises
designed to fit only a cylinder of a specific gas. Where large
in the tube, allowing the flow of gas to increase. The rotam-
O2 cylinders are situated away from the operating room,
 eter has an upper rim that is of a diameter slightly greater
regulators, similar to those on the simple workstation,
than that ofthe body, and in which specially shaped chan-
reduce the pressure to a working level. Gas is then trans-
 nels are cut. The gas flowing through the channels causes
ported from the remote site through pipes to the hospital
the rotameter to spin with the result that it rides on a
rooms where they exit the walls or ceilings. Safety features
cushion of gas thereby eliminating errors due to friction
217
Section
1
Principles and procedures
ystems
Integra
N2O
AIR
J
MI
5
0
4
3-
0
700
60
600
500
400
400
25
1.5
0.5
Figure 10.11 Schematic design of a rotameter flowmeter.
molecules out to the patient. In the early days of anaes-
U sasueu on alqns pue aduis aiam siazoden 'eisa
output according to the gas flow, temperature of the liquid,
 surface area in contact with O2, and pressure changes gen-
erated by artificial ventilation. Simple vaporizers are used
today in specific circuits that involve the patient breathing
through them (draw-over) such as the Komesaroff or
 Stephens machines. More commonly. vaporizers have
 been designed to compensate for extraneous factors (pre-
Figure 10.10 Oxygen and nitrous oxide flowmeters each
cision vaporizers) and accurately deliver the dialled con-
have two tubes on this anaesthesia machine, one is 
centration (Fig. 10.12). The surface area is standardized by
expanded flow O-1 L/min for accuracy and the other
use of a wick inside the vaporizer and temperature changes
1-10 L/min. Gas flow is read from the top of the rotameter.
a rai re ii sea  r  a
The air flowmeter is a single tube.
inflow or outlow of O through the vaporizing chamber.
As vaporizers are designed for use in human anaesthesia,
the accuracy ofthe vaporizer is guaranteed only over a very
between the tube and the bobbin. Flow is read accurately
limited temperature range close to 20"C (68°F). The
from the top of the rotameter against a scale etched on the
actual specification depends on the make and model but
outside of the glass tube. Flow is accurate (± 2%) for the
many vaporizers may be unable to compensate for low
calibrated gas if the flowmeter [anaesthesia machine) is
operating room temperatures of around 17°C (63°F)
absolutely upright.
 resulting in low anaesthetic output and inadequate anaes-
Ball flowmeters, like the rotameter, are also tapered and
thetic depth. Even more dangerous is the potential for
are, therefore, variable orifice meters. Flow rate is read
higher than expected concentrations when working at
from the middle of a ball when there is only one, or when
high ambient temperatures. The anaesthetic output
there are two balls, from the point of contact between the
decreased progressively during high O, flow rates (10 L/
two balls.
min) and to a greater extent from some sevoflurane vapor-
izers (exceeding 20% of the dial setting) than from isoflu-
rane vaporizers (Ambrisko & Klide, 20ll). The output
Vaporizers
concentration from sevoflurane vaporizers that were only
Vaporizers for volatile liquid anaesthetic agents consist of
 am  m in on rs sm  a
a chamber through which O, flows and carries anaesthetic
Supplying heat by wrapping the vaporizer in a warm cloth
218
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
S
H
1)1.323)_3.1
5)5.68
5)5.38
2).3384)
2)20
4）
6)6.2
PLEXIFLO,INC
6
PLEXIFLO,INC
-20-10
77.18
FILLONLYWITH
SevoFlo
Figure 10.12 Precision vaporizers for isoflurane and sevoflurane. The dials indicate % output of each vaporizer. The
handwritten labels below the dials note the actual % delivered at each setting at the time of the last scheduled machine check
will increase anaesthetic output but can result in an exces-
isoflurane or sevoflurane and will minimize spilling. New
sive depth of anaesthesia. A check valve on the outlet side
Jo ao an anaum sod su pay, aay siazodea
of the vaporizer is used to prevent back-pressure from the
anaesthetic agent is attached directly to the vaporizer or
patient circuit during artifcial ventilation altering vapori-
by using an adapter that is totally closed.
zation and output concentration. The output from preci-
 Desflurane is a colourless liquid below a temperature of
sion vaporizers must be measured for accuracy at regular
22.8°C. It requires an expensive specialized vaporizer in
intervals which, in some countries, may be a specific time
which the chamber holding the liquid is heated electrically
interval.
to above boiling point. The vaporizer is a dual gas blender
The maximum concentration of an anaesthetic agent at
(O2 and desflurane vapour) with the output from the
 a given temperature depends on the vapour pressure of the
ue iaaap on panensai ainssand iaquer uoezonea
agent. Isoflurane and sevoflurane have sufficiently differ-
accurate percentage to the patient circuit Special care must
 ent vapour pressures that they must be used in specifically
be taken to follow manufacturer's instructions when flling
manufactured vaporizers. The vapour pressure of isoflu-
 a desflurane vaporizer as a number of potentially harmful
rane is similar to that of halothane, an older agent since
accidents have been reported.
discontinued in many countries, and halothane vaporizers
A number of devices, such as the 'Selectatec', are avail-
can be serviced professionally, cleaned and recalibrated for
able to enable vaporizers to be easily attached to or
use with isoflurane.
removed from the back bar' of the workstation, allowing
The fluid level in the vaporizer can be checked through
convenient exchange of vaporizers for changing anaes-
a clear window on the side of the vaporizer. Filling
thetic agent, for removal for filling elsewhere, and when a
of vaporizers is invariably accompanied by loss of anaes-
vaporizer has to be sent away for service. Tipping the
thetic vapour into the room. An inexpensive non-
disposable flling spout can be attached to the bottle of
moving the vaporizer or rocking the anaesthesia machine)
219
Section
1
Principles and procedures
may result in a surge of high anaesthetic concentration
agent is the Anaesthetic Conserving Device, AnaConDa"",
when the vaporizer is first turned on. To avoid accidental
 s0 named because very little agent is used The AnaConDa
overdose, it is advisable to flush the vaporizer and hoses
is a modifed heat and moisture exchanger that is con-
with oxygen before connecting to a patient.
nected to the patient at the endotracheal tube. Liquid
Simple, low internal resistance, draw-over vaporizers for
sevoflurane is supplied continuously from a syringe driver/
isoflurane or sevoflurane are situated within the circle
 pump to the patient side of the device, where it is imme-
delivery circuits of the Komesaroff and Stephens anaesthe-
diately vaporized and delivered to the lungs on inspiration
sia machines. The dials of the vaporizers are not calibrated
(Soro et al., 2010; Nishiyama et al., 2012). The sevoflurane
au yanoiy guissed seg jo uouodoid aun Aiea Aidus pue
infusion rate is altered periodically to adjust the depth of
vaporizers. The outputs of the vaporizers are largely deter-
anaesthesia.
mined by the magnitude of the patient's ventilation that
flows through the circuit.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
compatible machines
Oxygen flush valve
 The static magnetic field inside the MRI scanner will exert
This valve is situated between the regulator and the flow-
an attractive force on ferromagnetic objects. The degree of
meter. Activation causes a flow of oxygen at a pressure of
attraction depends on the strength ofthe magnet, the mass
55 psi (400 kPa) and 60 L/min to the delivery circuit,
of the object, shielding. and the distance to the magnet
by-passing the precision vaporizer[s). The flush valve
but can be of sufficient force to generate a projectile effect
should never be employed for a non-rebreathing circuit
with potential damage to the magnet, the patient, and to
with a 0.5 L bag when an animal is attached because of
the anaesthetist It must be remembered that the magnet
the high risk of rupturing the lungs. With a small animal
is continuously on even when no imaging is occurring.
circle circuit, depending on the duration of flush and the
 Special non-ferrous anaesthesia machines and monitoring
size of the rebreathing bag. use of the flush valve may not
equipment are commercially available and must be used
be fatal. Two consequences will occur: pressure within the
for patients in the MRI scanner. An exception may be made
circle increases and the patient's lungs will be inflated; and
if the anaesthesia machine can be located in an adjacent
secondly, O2 without anaesthetic agent is delivered and
room and either the breathing circuit has really long tubes
thus the circle anaesthetic concentration will decrease. If
 Or a long tube carries Oz and anaesthetic gas to an MRI
the depth of anaesthesia is too light, operating the flush
compatible circuit (such as the Humphrey ADE) located
valve to fill the reservoir bag will further lighten
near the scanner. Equipment may be designated MR con-
anaesthesia.
ditional, MR safe, or MR unsafe (Farling et al., 20l0). MR
conditional applies to equipment that has been demon-
strated to pose no known hazards with specified condi
Common gas outlet
tions of use in an MR environment. The anaesthetist
The mixture of gases leaves the workstation at the common
should be familiar with the manufacturers' instructions
gas outlet, to which the patient circuit is attached. The
related to all equipment used in MRl. Monitors should
outlet configuration and size may differ between machine
have visual warming alarms as auditory alarms may not be
manufacturers and countries.
heard. All personnel remaining in the scanning room
should wear ear protection.
Injection vaporization
Delivery (breathing) systems
Injection of liquid isoflurane, sevoflurane or desflurane
into a chamber or anaesthesia circuit by-passes the use of
A breathing circuit is used to deliver O, and anaesthetic
conventional vaporizers (Olson et al., 1993; Boller et al.
gas from the workstation to the patient The circuit may
2005; Hodgson, 2006). The technique involves calculation
be designed to allow partial or complete rebreathing of
 of priming and maintenance doses based on the desired
exhaled gases after removal of exhaled CO2. Recycling of
anaesthetic concentration, volume of the circuit, and the
gses allows the O2 inflow to be decreased, even as low
size of the patient, using equations proposed for closed
as the volume of Oz needed to supply only metabolic
 system anaesthesia (Lowe & Emst, 1981). Vaporization
 demand of the patient. Low O flows are economical and
and uptake of anaesthetic agent by the CO, absorbent
 rebreathing circuits with low O, flow maintain humidity
may alter the final anaesthetic percent, consequently.
u ssol ieay luaaad oi diay Ae pue sase pansun jo
monitoring of anaesthetic gases during liquid injection
patients (Table 10.2). Circuits that have no rebreathing
technique is recommended. This technique is utilized
deliver fresh gases to the patient for each breath. The
by the Zeus@ workstation (Draeger, UK) that employs
higher Oz flow required for these circuits results in
computer control of the injection of the inhalation agent.
wastage of significant amounts of volatile anaesthetic
 A form of disposable vaporizer using liquid anaesthetic
gs and increased expense (Table 10.3). Consequently.
220
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
non-rebreathing circuits are primarily used in small
filled with granules, short strands, or spheres, of absorbent
patients such as small cats and dogs, rats, rabbits, small
flled from large containers or airtight foil-lined bags or by
birds, and small wildlife, where required O, flow rates
insertion of prepackaged disposable cartridges. The gran-
are low.
ules for an anaesthetic circuit must be of a size that will
Breathing circuits are available made of heavy-duty
 allow gas to flow through easily but with sufficient surface
materials that are intended for long-term use or made of
 area exposed to ensure effective absorption. Sometimes
light plastic materials intended for disposable or semi-
efficiency is reduced when the settling of granules forms
disposable use. The 'disposable' circuits are lightweight
channels through which the exhaled gases can pass
and less likely to drag on the endotracheal tube and cause
without all CO, being removed. Furthermore, some
accidental extubation. The hoses are available in different
absorbents contain dust that mixes with water formed
lengths and may be manufactured with a colour coding.
from the chemical reaction with COz and forms a paste
with the fresh gas being delivered via the blue or green
(caking) which may also interfere with absorption by
tube. Plastic hoses are transparent and the inside can be
filling spaces between granules. The standard commonly
observed easily when cleaning. Tubing with a smooth
used absorbent is sodalime (such as Sodasorb@) that con-
intralumenal wall has better flow characteristics than a
sists of 80% calcium hydroxide, 2% sodium hydroxide
wall that is corrugated. Heated hoses are also available in
's3zis ier pue sop
Rebreathing circuits
All partial or complete rebreathing circuits must have a
means of absorbing exhaled COz before delivering the
gases back to the patient (Fig. 10.13). The absorber canis-
ter consists of one or two transparent plastic canisters
Table 10.2 Rebreathing circuits
Advantages
Disadvantages
Low Oz inflow
Hoses and COz absorbent offer
1. decreases volume of
resistance to breathing
waste gases
 Deadspace in hoses may be
2. decreases cost
 greater than in non-
3. retains water vapour and
rebreathing circuits
facilitates humidification
Circuit concentration slow t0
of inspired gases
 change
 Inspired concentration may be
lower than vaporizer % when
low Oz inflow rates are used
Figure 10.13 A canister containing granules of COz
absorbent is an essential component of a rebreathing circuit.
Table 10.3 Non-rebreathing circuits
Advantages
Disadvantages
 Minimal resistance to pa tient's breathing
 Inhaled gas is dry and cold, potentiating hypothermia and
Inspired anaesthetic concentration equals vaporizer setting. facilitating
mucosal dessication
control of depth of anaesthesia
 High Oz flow results in relatively more vaporization of
Inspired anaesthetic concentration changes within seconds of changing
anaesthetic gases and that
vaporizer %
1. requires increased pollution management
Circuits with small internal volume of connector to endotracheal tube
2. increased cost due to wastage of anaesthetic gas and O2
(apparatus deadspace) minimize COz rebreathing
No COz absorbent
1. decreases cost
2. no dust
 3. no anaesthetic agent breakdown
 Disposable system can be discarded after bacterial contamination
221
Section
1
Principles and procedures
(NaOH), <1% potassium hydroxide (KOH), and water.
circuit when the O inflow exceeds the patient's metabolic
However, carbon dioxide absorbents that contain strong
Oxygen requirement. These valves consist of a simple disc-
bases (NaOH and KOH) promote the formation
of
type valve that can be closed by tightening the screw onto
Compound A (2-(fluoromethoxy)-1,1,3,3,3-pentafluoro-
the disc. When this screw is not tightened, the valve is
l-propene) from sevoflurane and also of carbon monox-
designed to remain closed and prevent leakage of gas from
ide (CO) and other toxic compounds from isoflurane and
thecircuituntil thecircuit pressureincreasesto 1 -2 cm HO,
desflurane (Clarke, 2008). Under a set of specific condi-
at which point it opens, allows excess gas to exit, and the
tions CO can be formed from sevoflurane. Compound A
circuit pressure decrease to 0 cmHzO. The valve can be
is nephrotoxic in rats but there have been no reports of
 screwed down when an increase in circuit pressure gener-
 damage in our domestic species. An absorbent containing
ated by squeezing the reservoir bag. is to be maintained
barium hydroxide (Baralyme?) was found to have exces-
for artifcial ventilation of the patient's lungs. If the valve
sive product breakdown particularly when dessicated
is left closed when the O flow exceeds metabolic oxygen
(Steffey et al., 1997). and has now been withdrawn.
requirement the reservoir bag will exceed its normal capac-
Sodalime breakdown is accelerated by use of dry absorb-
ity and the circuit pressure will no longer return to zero
ent and by increasing temperatures. Absorption of COz is
between breaths. This is a life-threatening situation as the
an exothermic reaction so that the temperature of sodal-
increase in intrathoracic pressure decreases return of
ime increases and, at high temperatures, high concentra-
venous blood to the heart and cardiac output and blood
tions of CO may be produced. Newer absorbents such as
 pressure will progressively decrease to zero. Pop-off valves
Sodasorb@ LF (low flow), Amsorb@ Plus, and Loflosorb@
may be adjustable pressure limiting (APL) valves that will
are available that are 75-85% or more calcium hydroxide
automatically discharge when pressure exceeds 60 cm H,O
 and lack strong bases. A number of published investiga-
(adult) or 30 cmH,O (paediatric). This safety mechanism
tions have sought to determine differences in CO and
may avoid pulmonary barotrauma should the circuit pres-
Compound A production from different absorbents and
sure abruptly increase following activation of the O flush
comparison of moist versus dessicated absorbents (Stab-
valve but cardiovascular collapse will occur before these
ernack et al., 2000; Versichelen et al., 200l; Kharasch
 pressures are reached when circuit pressure builds slowly
et al., 2002; Yamakage et al., 2009). Only absorbents
with O, inflow from the flowmeter. It is recommended
without both potassium and sodium hydroxide (eg. Soda-
that, if adjustable pressure is a feature, the APL valve be
sorb@ LF Amsorb@ Plus, LoFloSorb@) do not produce
 manually set to discharge 5 cmHO above the inspiratory
compound A.
pressure needed for a normal lung inflation. Another
Carbon dioxide is absorbed by a series of chemical reac-
 safety mechanism available is a pop-off valve with an alter-
tions. First, COz and water form carbonic acid, and then
native method of closing other than screwing it closed.
the acid reacts with the hydroxide to form carbonate.
Either the head of the valve or a button on the exit side of
water, and heat. A pH indicator, ethyl violet, is added to
the pop-off valve can be temporarily depressed to occlude
the absorbent to indicate when the absorbent is exhausted.
gas outflow (Fig. 10.14). This feature can be employed
The indicator is colourless at a high pH but, as CO, is
-enopua ue ioy isal ol sgunl s,juaned au sueyul uaum
absorbed, the pH decreases and the indicator changes to
cheal tube cuff leak, or when sighing the patient, and can
a violet colour, resulting in an absorbent colour change
be used during manual artificial ventilation. An additional
from white to violet. Once the absorbent has been
safety device inserted into the circle circuit will provide a
exhausted, as indicated by a change in colour, it is no
high-pressure audible alert. The device may have an adjust-
longer functional. Absence of visible colour change in a
able trigger pressure and be battery powered.
circuit without a patient attached is no guarantee that the
absorbent is unused because the violet colour may fade
Circlecircuit
shortly after disconnection of a patient due to temporal
 The components of a circle circuit are arranged in a circle
deactivation and deactivation by fluorescent lights.
(Fig. 10. 15) and two unidirectional valves (one-way valves)
Rebreathing circuits must have a bag to act as a reservoir
ensure that the exhaled gas passes through the CO2
of gas (reservoir bag, rebreathing bag) to supply the next
absorber before returning to the patient (Fig. l0.16).
inhalation. Bag sizes vary from 250 mL to 40 L and are
Placement of the reservoir bag in relation to O, inlet and
chosen to match the size of the patient The bag should
CO absorber varies between machine models. One
be large enough to accommodate a deep breath. Con-
 concept is that ideally the reservoir bag should be on the
versely, excessively large bags (1) increase the volume of
inhalation side of the circuit so that there is least resistance
the circuit and slow rate of change of anaesthetic agent
to inhalation, and the CO, absorber should be on the
concentration, and (2) obscure assessment of ventilation
exhalation side because the granules offer the most resist-
as small tidal volumes produce small movement in
ance to gas flow. The circle circuit usually has corrugated
large bags.
breathing hoses to decrease the risk of occlusion when
Rebreathing circuits must have a spring-loaded adjust-
bent Most hoses are corrugated on the inside and tend to
able valve ('pop-off valve) to prevent pressure rising in the
create turbulent gas flow. Some hoses are corrugated on
222
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
110
Figure 10.14 The anaesthetist is depressing the 'quick-close' button of the pop-off valve with the thumb of one hand while
squeezing the reservoir bag to inflate the dog's lungs with the other hand.
the outside and smooth within the lumen and this feature
O2 flow rate is less than the metabolic O demand of the
facilitates increased airflow. Hose diameter varies accord-
patient, the reservoir bag will progressively collapse [when
ing to the size of the patient from 5 om diameter for
O, alone is the carrier gas) and when empty. the patient
horses to 15 mm or 22 mm for small animals to 7 mm
becomes hypoxaemic. A closed system of administration
for animals <2 kg (Fig. 10.17). The volume of gas within
is when O, flowing into the circuit exactly equals O, used
the Y-piece connector to the patient constitutes the appa-
so that there is no excess to leave by the pop-off valve.
ratus deadspace of the circle because it contains exhaled
 Note that the pop-off valve does not have to be screwed
CO that will be breathed in as part of the next inhalation.
closed to operate a closed system. A higher flow of Oz will
As the deadspace volume increases in relation to the
S! s!ui pue aaiea yo-dod au yanoiyt suiaeal sea u! lnsal
patient's tidal volume the greater the impact on PaCO2.
called a semi-closed system of administration. A semi-
The coaxial circle circuit (Universal-F UniFlo) is
cosed system of administration can use low, medium or
designed with the inspiratory hose positioned within the
high O, flows. Medium and high O, flow rates are com-
expiratory hose (Fig. 10.18). Advantages are that the two-
hoses-in-one is less cumbersome when positioning the
 to compensate for the initial high uptake of anaesthetic
animal and, potentially, the inspired gases are warmed by
agent by the patient and the CO, absorbent, and dilution
the warm expired gases in the surrounding hose. A disad-
by air in the circuit. The vaporizer dial percentage and O2
vantage is the resistance to breathing is increased as the
flow rate are subsequently decreased for maintenance of
diameters of the tubes are less than those of conventional
anaesthesia. Continued use of high flows increases the
parallel systems. These circuits should not be used for
 amount of liquid anaesthetic agent that is vaporized and
animals accommodating an endotracheal tube size with
the wastage is costly. Low flow rates for small animals are
an internal diameter that is larger than the internal diam-
in the range of 10-20 mL/kg/min.
eter of the inspiratory hose.
The addition of N,O automatically requires use of high
 Oxygen inflow to circle circuits should be no lower than
 gas flows because of the risk of the inspired concentration
the patient's metabolic oxygen demand, approximately
of O, decreasing below 30%. Insertion of an oxygen
6 mL/kg/minute for anaesthetized dogs and cats and
monitor into the inspiratory limb of the circle is recom-
3 mL/kg/minute for anaesthetized horses and cattle. If the
mended for improved safety. Nitrous oxide has low
223
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Fresh gas
Inspiratory
flow
Expiratory
unidirectional
Adjustable unidirectional
valve
pressure-
valve
limiting valve
co,
absorber
Reservoir
bag
Inspiratory
Expiratory
tube
tube
Figure 10.15 (A) Schematic design of
a circle rebreathing circuit showing
gas movement during spontaneous
Y-piece
inhalation. During inhalation, the 
A
Patient
negative pressure in the inspiratory
tubing opens the inspiratory
Fresh gas
unidirectional valve allowing flow of 
Inspiratory
flow
Expiratory
gas (mixture of fresh gas and exhaled
 unidirectional
Adjustable
unidirectional
gas with CO removed) from the
valve
pressure-
valve
reservoir bag. FGF = fresh gas flow,
limiting valve
APL = adjustable pressure-limiting
valve (or pop-off valve), P = patient,
→ = fresh gas, - - -> = exhaled gas.
(B) Schematic design of a circle
rebreathing circuit showing gas
movement during spontaneous
cO2
exhalation. During early exhalation,
absorber
the exhaled gas passes through the
expiratory tube, through the
expiratory unidirectional valve,
through the COz absorber, and into
Reservoir
the reservoir bag.Fresh gas continues
bag
to flow into the reservoir bag.
Inspiratory
Expiratory
Towards the end of exhalation, the
tube
tube
reservoir bag becomes full, exhaled
gas ceases to flow through the
absorber, and when the circuit
pressure rises above 12 cmHO
pressure, excess gas exits through the
APL to the scavenger. FGF = fresh gas
flow, APL = adjustable pressure-
Y-piece
limiting valve (or pop-off valve),
B
P = patient,
→ = fresh gas, - -
Patient
exhaled gas.
224
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
110
Box 10.3 Is it safe to leave the reservoir bag
on a circle circuit full?
Yes, if the pop-off (APL) valve is open.
 Explanation: The pop-off valve is designed to remain
closed until the reservoir bag is full; it will open at
2 cmHzO pressure which is too low to cause resistance to
the patient's breathing. The reservoir bag will fill any time
the flowmeter is set at a value exceeding metabolic
oxygen consumption. The circuit pressure gauge can be
checked to confirm that the circle pressure is low.
EXPIRATION
Box 10.4 Is it safe to empty the reservoir bag
by squeezing it while dog or cat is connected?
Only if the pressure generated by the squeeze does not
exceed pressure normally used to ventilate artificially that
size animal and only if duration of squeeze is not more
than 2-3 seconds.
Explanation: Squeezing the bag increases the circuit
pressure and inflates the patient's lungs. High pressure
can rupture alveoli. Increased intrathoracic pressure
decreases flow of blood to the heart, followed by
decreased stroke volume and arterial pressure.
Maintaining increased intrathoracic pressure for
5-7 seconds decreases blood pressure.
INSPIRATION
anaesthetic leaving the vaporizer, and so the inspired iso-
Figure 10.16 Inspiratory and expiratory one-way valves in a
flurane concentration progressively increases with time.
rebreathing circuit direct expired gases through the COz
Consequently, a low FGF such as 100 mL/min is com-
absorber.
monly used because a higher flow of O would dilute the
circle isoflurane concentration. Monitoring the patient for
solubility and equilibrates with the pulmonary blood
depth of anaesthesia is used to assess the need to adjust
within several minutes, at which point uptake slows dra-
the vaporizer. These vaporizer-in-circle (VIC) systems are
matically. Commonly used mixtures Oz:NO are 1:1 or
chosen because they are economical to use and produce
1:2. Supplying a 40:60 mixture of Oz and NzO at low
less waste anaesthetic gases. Isoflurane and sevoflurane
flows results in the bulk of the O, being absorbed for
can be used in these machines. One investigation found
metabolic needs with little N,O absorption. As the minutes
that the Komesaroff machine did not reliably maintain
pass, the proportions of O and NzO within the circle
surgical anaesthesia with sevoflurane in dogs (Laredo
change from 40: 60 towards an ever decreasing concentra-
et al., 200l) but this fnding was not confrmed by Straker
tion of O2, even to the point of an hypoxic mixture The
et al. (2004) who found the system effective and economi-
recommended gas flows for a small animal circle circuit
 cal in dogs over 10 kg body weight Disadvantages included
are O2 30 mL/kg/min with NzO added to that flow. For an
 an empty vaporizer and exhausted CO absorbent before
adult horse connected to a large animal circle, 4 L each of
the surgery was completed. Artificial ventilation of a
O2 and N,O generally will maintain 40-50% O, concen-
patient connected to a system with the vaporizer-in-circle
tration in the circle, however, presence of an O, monitor
within the circle is a safety factor. Circle systems such as
One investigation of controlled ventilation in dogs con-
the Komesaroff and Stephens machines have vaporizers
nected to a Komesaroff machine documented that
placed within the circle circuit. With each recycling of
increased respiratory rates increased circuit anaesthetic
gases around the circle, O, containing isoflurane by-passes
-o  s  i  s
the vaporizer and joins with an increased concentration of
duced unnecessarily high anaesthetic concentrations
225
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Airway
Pressure
Hallowei
CmH-O
Oxygen
2-6
30
28
Anesthesia WorkStation
Figure 10.17 Hallowell workstation for animals <2 kg.
(Laredo et al., 2009). The transition from induction to
maintenance of anaesthesia was made with the vaporizer
full-on, then the vaporizer was decreased to 1/4 for isoflu-
rane and 1.5/4 or 2.0/4 for sevoflurane which generally
achieved end-tidal anaesthetic concentrations between 1
and 1.2x minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) value.
The end-tidal anaesthetic agent concentration measure-
ments also confirmed that deeper anaesthesia was achieved
when 14 breaths/min were used compared with 9 breaths/
min.
To-and-Fro
In a to-and-fro circuit, the animal's exhaled gases pass
through the CO, absorbent into a bag and return through
Figure 10.18 Coaxial circle circuit. I = connects to inspiratory
the absorbent during inhalation without the use of uni-
valve, E = connects to expiratory valve, P = connects to
directional valves (Fig. 10.19). The circuit is cumbersome
endotracheal tube. The inner tube is inspiratory.
because the CO absorber is located close to the patient.
226
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Fresh
Reservoir
bag
gas
Patient
Adjustable
flow
pressure-
co2
limitingvalve
absorber
A
Patient
Patient
Fresh gas
flow
Fresh
Figure 10.19 To-and-fro rebreathing circuit. FGF = fresh gas
gas flow
flow, APL = adjustable pressure-limiting valve (or pop-off)
valve, P = patient.
Patient
Inhalation of absorbent dust is more likely to occur with
C
this confguration than in a circle circuit.
Fresh
gas flow
Non-rebreathing circuits
Patient
Non-rebreathing circuits contain no valves and no CO2
absorbent to offer resistance to breathing (see Table 10.3).
D
High O, flows are used to prevent rebreathing of exhaled
Fresh
CO and provide fresh gas for each breath. A decrease in
gas flow
O, flow required to eliminate CO, for a given body size
can be achieved by rearranging the components of the
Patient
labiel ul asn ioy Arqiseaj suseaut Aqaau siimin
animals. Many circuits are available but they are all
E
variations of those originally classified by Mapleson
Fresh
(Fig. 10.20) (Mapleson, 1954).
gasflow
T-piece
Patient
The simplest circuit is the T-piece [Mapleson E) which is
F
commonly used today in its modifed form with a reser-
Fresh
voir bag attached (Mapleson F, Jackson-Rees) (Fig. 10.21).
gas flow
The T-endotracheal tube adapter can be replaced with an
 adapter (Norman elbow) that delivers the fresh gas directly
Figure 10.20 The Mapleson classification of patient delivery
to the endotracheal tube and eliminates all circuit dead-
circuits A to F. FG=fresh gas flow, P=patient.
space. The constant flow of fresh gas enters close to the
endotracheal tube connector and flushes the patient's
cats and medium-sized dogs have measured MV as approx-
exhaled gas through a cormugated tube into the reservoir
imately 230 mL/kg/min (Issa & Bitner, 1993; Kirschvink
bag and through the exit hole into the waste anaesthetic
et al., 2006; Fraigne et al., 2008).
 gas scavenger. The patient inhales fresh gas from the cor-
 The exit hole from the bag into the scavenger may be
rugated tube and there is no rebreathing provided that the
too small to accommodate O, flows higher than 3 L such
volume ofthe tube exceeds one tidal volume ofthe patient
that pressure builds up in the circuit and interferes with
(Fig. 10.22). The fresh gas flow high enough to flush the
the animal's breathing. Larger animals fair better when
 corrugated tube between breaths must be 2.5 to 3 times
 attached to a different non-rebreathing circuit that func-
the patient's minute volume [MV, breaths per min x tidal
tions with a lower/kg flow rate, such as the Lack circuit, or
volume). or at least 450 mL/kg bodyweight/min. The
attached to a paediatric circle circuit.
origin of this FGF calculation has been previously refer-
enced (Hall & Clarke, 1983). The FGF required to prevent
Baincircuit
CO rebreathing in cats in a more recent investigation was
The Mapleson D circuit functions similarly to the Maple-
455 ± 77 mL/kg/min (Holden, 2001). Recent evaluations
son E and F circuits. The Mapleson D incorporates a pop-
of respiratory parameters in unsedated young and adult
off valve between the corrugated tube and the reservoir
227
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Adjustable
pressure-
limiting valve
Fresh
gas
Patient
flow
Expiratory tubing
Reservoir
bag
Figure 10.23 Bain circuit (coaxial version) modification of
Mapleson D. Note that the bag is on the expiratory limb.
The Bain is also available as a parallel system where the
inspiratory tubing is a separate, wide-bore corrugated tube.
FGF = fresh gas flow, APL = adjustable pressure-limiting valve
Figure 10.21 A modified T-piece non-rebreathing circuit.
(or pop-off) valve, P = patient.
Oxygen and anaesthetic agent flow to patient in tube
(A) and waste gases leave the circuit in tube (B)
(side-by-side) or coaxial, where the inspiratory tube is
inside the expiratory tube. The Bain circuit terminates in
Fresh gas
a block comprising the reservoir bag, the pop-off valve,
flow
 aq u ie a assad e inam o 
mounted on the anaesthesia machine. The FGF required
Early
(A)
inspiration
260 mL/kg/min (Almubarak et al., 2005). Inspiratory and
expiratory resistances are low with this system, but increase
with increasing FGF
Fresh gas
flow
Magill and Lack circuits
Late
 The Magill circuit (Mapleson A) incorporates a reservoir
?
inspiration
bag on the inspiratory limb, wide bore corrugated tubing.
and a pop-off valve leading to a scavenging system.
Rebreathing is prevented by maintaining the FGF slightly
Fresh gas
in excess of the patient's respiratory minute volume. The
flow
animal inhales from the bag and wide bore tubing: the
exhaled mixture passes back up the tubing displacing
Early
the gas in it back into the bag until it is full. The exhaled
C
expiration
gases never reach the bag because the capacity of the
tubing is too great and once the bag is distended the
Fresh gas
increased pressure inside the circuit causes the pop-off
flow
valve to open so that the terminal part of expiration (the
alveolar gas high in CO2) passes out of the valve into the
Late
scavenger system (Fig. 10.24). During the pause following
expiration
D
expiration and before the next inspiration, fresh gas from
the workstation pushes the rest of the exhaled gases from
Anatomic
Alveolar
deadspace
the corrugated tube through the pop-off valve.
gas
The Lack circuit is a modification of Mapleson A that
gas
has an expiratory tube running from the patient to the
Figure 10.22 Function of the T-piece system in preventing
pop-off valve (Fig. 10.25). The tubes may be parallel (side-
rebreathing when the fresh gas flow exceeds at least twice
by-side) or coaxial where the expiratory tube runs inside
the patient's minute volume
the inspiratory tube (opposite arrangement to the Bain
circuit). The FGF required to prevent rebreathing is of the
bag. The Bain circuit is a modification in which the cor-
order of 130 mL/kg/min. A smaller version of the parallel
 nugated tube has been lengthened and the inspiratory and
form (mini-Lack) is suitable for small patients.
expiratory gases confned to separate tubes (Fig. 10.23).
The Maxima circuit is also a modification of Mapleson
The reservoir bag and pop-off valve remain on the expira-
A with a 15 mm expiratory tube parallel to the 22 mm
tory side of the circuit. The tubes may be parallel
inspiratory tube and no valve. Evaluation of the circuit
228
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Fresh
the trachea and large bronchi containing no CO2 passes
Early
gas
back to the bag in the early part of exhalation before the
flow
inspiration
FGF sweeps the remainder of the exhaled gas into the expir-
atory limb and scavenger. The recommended FGF for this
circuit for cats and dogs <7 kg body weight is 70-100 mL/
kg/min. The inside surfaces of the hoses are smooth, not
A
corrugated, and that facilitates higher gas flow rates without
turbulence (less resistance for large dogs). The FGF becomes
Late
inspiration
uneconomical in larger dogs but then the cirauit may be
attached to a CO absorber for use as a rebreathing system,
 and the FGF rate can be decreased accordingly.
B
Patient devices
Early
Inhalation anaesthetic agents are usually delivered to the
expiration
patient through a tracheal tube to avoid dilution with air
and to limit exposure of personnel to waste anaesthetic
gases. Facemasks are used to supply Oz during induction
?
and recovery from anaesthesia, to administer inhalation
in small animals, young large animals, and in pigs. and
Late
 si ls a u is j  r
expiration
which tracheal intubation may be difficult.
Facemasks
?
Alveolar
Deadspace
gas
gas
Facemasks are available in a variety of sizes and shapes
(Fig. 10.26). The body or dome of the mask may be
Figure 10.24 Magill circuit (Mapleson A) showing the
opaque or transparent. The rim of the mask that contacts
disposition of fresh gas and exhaled gases (anatomic
the face may be rigid or a soft cushion, or fitted with a flat
rubber seal. The connector is a short 15 mm or 22 mm
internal diameter tube that fts into small animal rebreath.
with anaesthetized adult cats determined that an FGF of
ing or non-rebreathing circuits. A mask should be chosen
242 mL/kg/min should prevent rebreathing in 95% of cats
to be airtight and to conform as best as possible to the
(Holden, 200l). The author noted that a higher FGF
shape of the face to minimize deadspace Care should be
 taken when using a facemask to avoid damage to the eyes
should be used in small cats to ensure accuracy of output
of the precision vaporizer.
and to avoid obstruction at the nostrils, especially in
'sey se us 'sia iesu aeo ae re saass
Hazards of coaxial circuits
In some cases, the internal or external tubing of coaxial
Anaesthetic induction chambers
circuits is of such a small bore that it imposes excessive
 Boxes used for induction of anaesthesia of cats or other
resistance to the animals' breathing. In that case, the
 small animals are usually made oftransparentplastic, so that
circuit should not be used when the internal diameter (ID)
the animal can be closely observed for movement or abnor-
of the hose is less than the tracheal tube ID size. Also
 mal position that might result in airway obstruction. There
dangerous, the inner tube may become detached from the
is an inlet connector for administration of Oz and inhalation
anaesthesia machine or the patient connector resulting in
 agent and an outlet for connection to the waste anaesthetic
rebreathing of CO2. Coaxial systems should be inspected
 gas scavenger. A much higher concentration than required
before use and pressure checked.
for anaesthesia is administered because the volume of air in
the chamber dilutes the inflowing anaesthetic Therefore it
Humphrey ADE circuit
is important to judge accurately the time for removal of the
The Humphrey ADE circuit is so named because it functions
 patient from the chamber otherwise overdosage will occur.
as a Mapleson A circuit during spontaneous breathing and
 After the animal is anaesthetized, the animal is removed and
as a Mapleson D or E mode during controlled ventilation.
 anaesthesia maintained by endotracheal tube or facemask
The reservoir bag is situated on the inspiratory side of the
and a standard delivery cirauit. Opening the chamber to
cirauit and, therefore, during spontaneous breathing, gas in
 remove the animal results in considerable room pollution.
229
 Section
1
Principles and procedures
Adjustable
pressure-
limiting valve
Expiratory tubing
Fresh
Patient
>>
gas
flow
Inspiratory tubing
Reservoir
bag
APL
To scavenger
Expiratory
FGF
Inspiratory
B
Figure 10.25 (A) and (B) Lack circuit (parallel version) modification of Mapleson A. Note that the bag is on the inspiratory 
limb. FGF = fresh gas flow, APL = adjustable pressure-limiting valve (or pop-off) valve, P = patient.
Photo courtesy of Dr / Cremer.
Figure 10.26 Facemasks are available in different designs to fit a variety of head shapes.
230
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Cuff
Radiopaque line
Endotracheal intubation
Murphy
Connector
The history of endotracheal intubation in animals is older
eye
to circuit
than that of anaesthesia. In 1542, Vesalius passed a tube
into the trachea of an animal and inflated the lungs by
means of a bellows to keep the animal alive while the
anatomy of its thoracic cavity was demonstrated.
Tracheal tubes may be made of red rubber, poly-
vinylchloride, or silicone. Red rubber tubes are opaque
Bevel
One-way
Pilot
which makes it difficult to ensure thorough cleaning. They
valve
balloon
may also kink if the patient's head and neck are flexed.
Figure 10.27 Standard endotracheal tube.
Polyvinylchloride tubes are least expensive, fairly rigid
which facilitates intubation, and are less likely to kink.
Silicone tubes are soft which makes manipulation of the
lubricant, such as KY gel, on the cuff will facilitate tube
tube during intubation more difficult. The size of an
insertion.
endotracheal tube is denoted by its internal diameter (ID)
 Tracheal mucosa perfusion pressure is 20-30 mmHg
in millimetres. The French scale size [three times the
(26-40 cmH,O) and high endotracheal tube cuff pressure
outside diameter in millimetres) is used by some manu-
 can cause tracheal damage Distension of the pilot balloon
facturers. The thickness of the wall of the endotracheal
reflects the degree of cuff inflation, however, palpation of
tube varies between types of tubes and manufacturers such
the pilot balloon is a fairly inaccurate means of estimating
that two tubes with the same outside diameter may have
cuff pressure The usual cuff inflation pressure is achieved
different lumen sizes. The lengths of the tubes increase
by injecting incremental amounts of air into the pilot
with increasing ID. The ID increases by 0.5 mm for
balloon until no leak of Oz or anaesthetic gas can be
endotracheal tubes from 2 to 10 mm, by 1 mm for tubes
 detected by sound of escaping gas or leak detector when
10-16 mm, and by 2-5 mm for larger tubes. This wide
the patient's lungs are manually inflated to 25 cmHO.
selection of tubes enables choice of a tube diameter that
 Higher cuff pressures up to 35 cmHO may be necessary
closely approximates the trachea size of the patient. Use
peu uosod e ui aie Aaui uaum Aenoed 'sop aie ul
of an endotracheal tube with an ID substantially smaller
compromises lung inflation, such as in a prone, head-
than that of the trachea results in restriction of airflow and
down position for surgery. Overdistension of the cuff may
'ue suneanq Aisnoaueuods e u uoeuaodu
 cause airway obstruction by compressing the lumen of the
Excessive length of tube projecting beyond the incisors
endotracheal tube (Fig. 10.28). Distension of the cuff may
increases apparatus deadspace and COz rebreathing. The
change with time (either increase or decrease) due to dif.
tubes can often be cut short at the circuit end without
fusion of gases in (nitrous oxide) and out of the cuff and
destroying the cuff inflation tube, in order to accommo-
relaxation of the trachea. In large animals, correlation
date short necks and muzzles in some breeds of dogs and 
between intracuff pressure and lateral tracheal wall pres-
cats. The centimetre marks on the side of the tube inform
sure has not been defined and the pilot balloon pressure
of how much of the tube is in the patient and may warn
 may be much higher than the 25 cmHO circuit pressure
of excessive depth of insertion and possible bronchial
required to inflate the lungs. Estimation of adequacy of
intubation. The ability to choose the correct endotracheal
cuff inflation while avoiding cuff overinflation is diffcult
tube size and length develops with experience, for example,
in adult horses and cattle, and a pressure gauge can be
4.0 or 4.5 mm ID and 12-14 cm measured at the incisors
attached for accurate pressure measurement (Fig. 10.29).
for cats 3-4 kg. and 30 mm ID endotracheal tubes for
One investigation in anaesthetized horses noted that infla-
500 kg horses.
tion of the endotracheal tube cuff to 80-100 cmH,O pres-
The standard type endotracheal tube is a tube with a
sure was necessary to prevent leakage around the cuff
 gentle curvature, a hole in the wall of the tube at the bron-
(Touzot-Jourde et al., 2005). Blind inflation of the cuff
chial end (Murphy eye), a cuff that can be inflated to
generated pressures of 120 cmHO. At pressures of 80 and
provide a seal within the trachea, a connector to the anaes-
100 cmHzO, gross and histological evidence of tracheal
thesia circuit, and centimetre markings along the length
epithelial erosion was observed in seven out of 10 horses
of the tube (Fig. 10.27). A one-way valve on the pilot
and the severity of damage was greater at the higher
balloon prevents deflation of the tracheal cuff after it has
pressure.
 been inflated. The Murphy eye is present to permit airflow
 Different types of endotracheal tube cuffs have been
should the bevel of the tube become obstructed by contact
devised to minimize tracheal mucosa ischaemia and
with the wall of the trachea. When the cuff is inflated, all
damage. Large volume cuffs may distribute the pressure
respired gases must pass through the lumen of the tube
more evenly and over a wider area of tracheal contact
avoiding either dilution of inspired gases with room air or
 generating a low impact pressure (large volume, low pres-
pollution of the room with expired gases. A thin layer of
sure cuffs). Small volume cuffs may result in a smaller area
231
Section
1
Principles and procedures
60
50
70
40
08
CUFFSLOW
30
90
20
100
120
Figure 10.28 Radiograph showing occlusion of an
endotracheal tube due to overdistension of the inflatable
cuff.
of contact at a greater pressure that, although decreasing
the risk of pulmonary aspiration of fluid, increase the risk 
of mucosal damage (small volume, high pressure cuffs).
In the latter tubes, high intracuff pressure may be required
to achieve an airtight seal within the trachea.
Some tracheal tubes have cuffs that contain poly-
urethane foam. Air must be aspirated out of the cuff before
tube insertion. Allowing air to enter the cuff results in
 inflation and a seal. Cuff pressure is not usually monitored
Figure 10.29 A device that attaches to the pilot balloon of
with this type of tube because the foam should conform
an endotracheal tube to measure pressure in the cuff and
inflate or deflate the endotracheal tube cuff as needed
to the trachea and result in a low wall pressure.
(Posey? cufflator).
Plain endotracheal tubes without cuffs are used for
endotracheal intubation of puppies, kittens, rabbits and
birds (Fig. 10.30). The tube will not form an airtight seal
Fig. 10.30). These tubes are available with or without cuffs
and leakage is to be expected when controlled ventilation
and up to 12 mm ID. This type of tube is floppy and a
is employed. A Cole tube is a modification of the cuffless
stilette threaded down the centre of the tube will facilitate
endotracheal tube comprising of a narrow distal portion
placement ofthe tube in the trachea. Care should be taken
to be inserted into the trachea and a wider proximal
when using a stilette to ensure that it does not emerge
portion in the pharynx with the 'shoulders' of the tube
from the end of the endotracheal tube and lacerate the
forming an airtight seal at the entrance to the larynx. The
trachea. A potential disadvantage of this type of tube is
tube has excellent pressure-flow characteristics and pro-
that ifthe metal spiral is crimped (during insertion, during
vides less resistance to breathing than a tube of small
surgery, by the dog or cat biting down on it), it will remain
diameter extending its whole length. Cole tubes are useful
kinked and an obstruction to airflow. Further, the thick-
for cats and rabbits, although thin-walled cuffed tubes are
ness of the wall of the tube is greater to accommodate the
now available in small sizes.
metal so that a tube must be used with a smaller ID than
Endotracheal tubes with a metal spiral within the tube
would be possible using a standard tube.
wall (known as guarded tubes) are designed to prevent
A tracheotomy tube is a short tube with a right-angled
kinking of the tube even with extreme flexion of the
bend for insertion through an incision through the skin
head and neck or bending of the endotracheal tube (see
over the trachea and through a hole in the trachea.
232
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
110
b
d
Figure 10.30 Endotracheal tubes for small animals: (A) cuffed tube 3.0 mm ID, 4.2 mm OD: (B) uncuffed metal spiral tube
2.5 mm ID, 4.0 mm OD: (C) uncuffed tube 3.0 mm ID. 4.0 mm OD: (D) uncuffed tube 2.5 mm ID, 3.3 mm OD: (E) Cole tube
2.5 mm ID (the narrow end inserts into the trachea)
Tracheotomy tubes may or may not have a cuff, and may
that is inserted into the pharynx to cover the epiglottis and
have an internal sleeve that can be removed for cleaning
entrance to the larynx (Fig 10.31). A supraglottic airway
while the major part of the tube remains in the animal.
device with a rim that is not inflatable (the i-gel) is also
 Endotracheal tubes used for one lung ventilation during
available. Use of the LMA avoids tracheal wall damage that
thoracotomy in dogs and cats most commonly are single
may be associated with endotracheal intubation and is
lumen tubes witha bronchialblocker. The bronchial
easier to insert than an endotracheal tube in some species.
blocker consists of a balloon on the end of a narrow tube
There are numerous publications describing use of LMA
that can be inserted under direct endoscopic view into the
in humans, dogs, cats, pigs, rabbits, and rodents. Laryngeal
bronchus of the lung to be collapsed. Inflation of the
mask airways that are designed for human use are not
balloon obstructs airflow into that lung. The endotracheal
necessarily a perfect fit in other species so that the device
tube then directs gases to the ventilated lung.
does not always produce an airtight seal. Wiederstein &
Laser beam contact with a standard endotracheal tube
Moens [2008) achieved successful placement and function
may result in rupture of the tube and ignition of oxygen.
of the LMA in 19 out of 30 dogs (63.3%) but a leak at a
Special laser-resistant endotracheal tubes are available for
lung inflation pressure of 10 cmHzO was present in the
specifc laser types. An approved product for laser protec-
others. Evidence linking use of the LMA and gastro-
tion by wrapping a standard endotracheal tube is a two-
 Desophageal reflux (GOR, GER) in humans is conflicting.
layered sheet of surgical sponge and adhesive backed silver
varying from no association to a two- to threefold increase
foil (Dorsch & Dorsch, 2008)
 in the incidence of reflux compared with use of an endotra-
cheal tube or a facemask. In contrast to an investigation
of the use of a LMA in adult cats (Cassau et al., 2004),
Laryngeal mask airways
kittens anaesthetized with isoflurane experienced a high
Supraglottic airway devices are available in a variety of
incidence of gastric reflux and the use of an LMA was
designs and sizes. The classic laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
associated with an increased occurrence (Sideri et al.,
consists of a tube connected to an elliptical spoon-shaped
2009 ). The mechanism of the association is unclear but is
mask at a 30° angle with an inflatable low pressure cuff
presumably related to a decrease in lower oesophageal
233
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Figure 10.31 Laryngeal mask airway.
sphincter (LOS) pressure. Very young animals have low
LOS pressure and it is possible that sustained distension
of the pharynx by the inflated LMA may have induced
further LOS relaxation (Sideri et al., 2009)
Supraglottic airways marketed for infants are usually too
large for the smaller animal species, resulting in failure to
seal the airway and subsequent complications of abdomi-
nal distension or aspiration of refluxed gastric fluid
(Bateman et al., 2005). In 2005, Imai et al. reported on the
development of an airway device specifically designed for
small laboratory animals. The device was made from sili-
cone moulded from post-mortem anatomy of rabbits,
ferrets, rats, and mice, and consisted of a mask to fit over
thelarynx with an inflatableballoon projection thatentered
the oesophagus, all connected to a tube with a continuous
metal spiral in its wall. The device was tested in rabbits
anaesthetized with isoflurane and positive pressure ventila-
tion was accomplished without obvious gas leakage. Crotaz
[2010) described re-shaping of the Size l igel for rabbits
and called the prototype the v-gel. The v-gel is now com-
mercially available in six sizes each for cats and rabbits.
Laryngoscopes
Figure 10.32 Laryngoscope with detachable Macintosh
A laryngoscope has detachable blades of different sizes,
blade - a wide variety of patterns and lengths of blade are
a light source, and dry electric batteries in the handle
available.
(Fig 10.32). A laryngoscope greatly facilitates the process
of intubation in many animals by providing sufficient
light to view the laryngeal entrance and a blade to depress
endotracheal tube before the scope is used to view the
the tongue; a manoeuvre that moves the epiglotis and
entrance to the larynx, whereupon the endotracheal tube
exposes the larynx. Tracheal intubation can be accom-
is moved off the scope and advanced into the trachea.
plished in most dogs with good overhead lighting and
Techniques of intubation are described in the species
horses are intubated (blind) without viewing tube inser-
chapters.
tion. However, a laryngoscope provides better laryngeal
exposure in certain breeds and species, such as brachyc-
Filters and humidity and
ephalic dogs, small ruminants, and pigs. A rigid fbreoptic
moisture exchangers
laryngoscope or flexible fibreoptic endoscope is useful for
intubation of difficult cases and routinely for intubation
A bacterial biofilm rapidly forms on the inside surface of
of rabbits. The fibreoptic scope is placed inside the
the endotracheal tube after intubation, and fragments of
234
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
110
the biofilm can detach spontaneously. Human and animal
the effect of an HmE in anaesthetized artificially ventilated
studies have shown that anaesthetic circuit or ventilator
 guueaqai-uou e ot paauuos saop leiuaada
tubing can be colonized within a few hours. Investigations
with FGF of 5 L/min or a circle circuit with FGF of 1 L/
using endotracheal tubes that are internally coated with
min. Lower relative (37%) and absolute humidity
bacteriocidal agents in polyurethane have demonstrated
(9 mgHzO/L) was measured in dogs connected to the
absence of bacteria in the endotracheal tube and circle
non-rebreathing circuit with high FGF The addition of a
tubing in contrast to colonization with multiple bacterial
HME to both circuits increased the humidity of inhaled
species when standard endotracheal tubes are used ( Berra
gs, with relative humidity reaching 90-94% and absolute
et al., 2004). The possible origin of the bioflm is leakage
humidity 22-24 mgHO/L. These values with the HME
of accumulated secretions from above the cuff into the
are within the recommended lower limit (>20 mgHO/L)
  s    a 
for absolute humidity during anaesthesia. The circle circuit
tubes and supraglottic devices for alternatives to airway
without HME reached an average absolute humidity of
management Evidence supporting which ones are most
17.8 mgHzO/L after 3 hours. Histological changes were
effective at preventing pulmonary aspiration of fluid is
observed in the mucociliary system of the tracheobron-
confusing despite many research publications because the
chial tree in dogs connected to the non-rebreathing
methods of testing are so variable (Rai & Popat, 20ll).
 systerm without HME and these effects were less or absent
Low volume high pressure cuffs on endotracheal tubes
with HME. Body temperature was not significantly
 are more likely to cause tracheal mucosa pressure damage.
increased when HME was included. In a clinical study
yet the high volume, low pressure cuffs are more likely to
of dogs anaesthetized for orthopaedic surgery with iso-
seg 1o [eio jo agessed pue yeal e isuiee paoid oi l]
flurane via a cirde, decreases in body temperature
bacteria into the trachea.
were not different when a HME was used [Hofmeister
Contamination of the anaesthetic circuit is more likely
et al., 2011).
to occur in rebreathing systems with low FGF than in non-
Principles and use of these devices have been recently
 Or partial-rebreathing systems. Condensation within the
reviewed (wilkes, 20lla,b). Possible complications to use
tubes of a rebreathing system may collect bacteria and
of these devices are resistance to airflow, obstruction
 movement of the tubes during repositioning may result in
due to accumulation of fluid, increased apparatus dead-
the bacteria traversing into the patient Excess contamina-
 space, and altered capnography waveform. The increased
tion of the circuit in human anaesthesia was associated
deadspace and increase in resistance to airflow may impair
with increased duration of anaesthesia and with the
CO, elimination. The recommended lowest patient body-
 patient coughing, generally at the time of extubation (Rees 
weight for use of these devices in human anaesthesia
et al., 2007; Dugani et al., 20l0). An investigation of the
is 2.5 kg.
 parallel Lack circuit used for short duration anaesthesia in
small animals recovered minimal bacterial growth and the
Scavenging waste anaesthetic gases
data indicated that bacteria present within the circuit died
 provided that time was allowed for the circuit to dry out
 One of the earliest indications that exposure of operating
before use on the next patient (Pelligand et al., 2007).
 personnel to waste anaesthetic gases during the process of
 A breathing system filter may prevent bacterial coloniza-
 providing anaesthesia was cause for concerm was a publica-
tion of anaesthetic tubing and protect the patient from
tion in 1967 from Russia that documented a high inci-
bacteria in a previously used circuit, however, clinical
 dence of miscarriages and congenital defects in children
investigations have provided evidence of a wide range in
of anaesthesiologists. Many surveys were performed,
e    
including one published in 1974 that analyzed question-
filters (Wilkes, 20lla). A clinical trial in people demon-
strated that hydrophobic (pleated) filters perform better
increased risk for spontaneous abortion, cancer, and chil-
-oeq jo uoisssuen sunuaaaid ui siany seisoaia u
dren with congenital malformations. Nitrous oxide has
teria (Dugani et al., 2010).
been shown to be directly teratogenic in experimental
Placement of a tracheal tube or supraglottic device
 animals, causing fetal resorption and skeletal abnormali-
bypasses the nasal cavity. Inhalation of dry air may cause
ties in rats. In humans, the most susceptible time of preg-
impaired mucociliary function in the trachea and even
nancy for teratogenesis is the first trimester. A meta-analysis
cell damage (Wilkes, 201la). During anaesthesia, as com-
of studies in 1985 confirmed increased risk for spontane-
pared with intensive care, the short periods of low humid-
ous abortion, congenital abnormalities, liver and kidney
ity are unlikely to cause severe respiratory dysfunction
disease and cervical cancer. Since there were questions
and, for longer surgeries, suffcient humidity may be pro-
raised relating to collection of data in these studies, it was
vided in a circle circuit with low FGF The addition of a
believed that the argument that waste anaesthetic gases
heat and moisture exchanger (HME) to humidify inspired
produce adverse effects was not confirmed. A recently pub-
gases may be advisable for long surgeries involving non-
lished questionnaire-based survey of Australian veterinar-
rebreathing systems. Bisinotto et al. (1999) investigated
ians exposed to clinical veterinary work while pregnant
235
Section
1
Principles and procedures
identified an increased prevalence for birth defects, most
commonly cardiovascular, in female veterinarians com-
pared with the general population (Shirangi et al., 2009).
The risk of birth defects was highest in veterinarians who
used pesticides at work and who were exposed to radiation
and those women who worked long hours per week. There
was no significant association between birth defects and
maternal exposure to anaesthetic gases. Personal and pub-
lished experiences leave no doubt that room pollution
results in headaches, fatigue and decreased judgement
and coordination.
UCON
Since the early 1980s, scavenging waste anaesthetic
f/air
gases has become accepted practice and is endorsed by
the European College of Veterinary Anaesthesia and Anal-
gesia and the American College of Veterinary Anesthesia
ort
and Analgesia (http://acva.org/docs/Waste_Gas). Current
opinion is that there is no increased risk for pregnancy
paid to minimize leaks from the anaesthetic circuit This
does not rule out the risk of miscarriage due to stress or
long working hours. Sensible precautions for pregnant
women include giving up on-call duty and avoiding long
periods of standing, avoiding situations where pollution
can occur despite use of a scavenging system, such as
avoiding anaesthesia administered by facemask and flling
of vaporizers, avoiding use of N,O, and no lifting of heavy
dogs or equipment Some pregnant female personnel
tized patients but these can impair breathing and be added
discomfort Temporary assignment to duties outside the
operating room and recovery area, if possible, would
Figure 10.33 Charcoal canister for scavenging waste
remove risk of exposure to inhaled anaesthetic agents.
anaesthetic gas.
Attention to minimizing waste gas pollution is essential at
alltimes for the health of all personnel, including limiting
exposure prior to the diagnosis of pregnancy. Vigilance
must be maintained to avoid accidental pollution, such as
A scavenger system that consists of wide-bore tubing can
forgetting to turn on the scavenger suction or leaving the
be used passively to transport gas to outside the building.
vaporizer and oxygen on after disconnection of a patient.
 The potential problem with this system is that the patient's
 A scavenging system consists of a means to collect and
breathing is responsible for moving the gas down the tube
dispose of anaesthetic gases exiting from the patient deliv-
and the distance of tubing to the outside is likely to offer
ery circuit The hoses leading from the breathing systerm
signifcant resistance to breathing. Further, debris, insects,
have been 19 mm diameter but new international stand-
 Or a strong wind may occlude the building outlet.
ards have increased the size to 30 mm. Gases travel in this
 aiae yo sa e a s s A
hose passively. The simplest form of scavenger is a canister
air down the tube either by suction or by propulsion.
containing activated charcoal that will absorb 50 g of
There must be an interface (also known as an air brake)
halogenated anaesthetic agents, but not nitrous oxide
 between the patient breathing circuit and the active systerm
(Fig. 10.33). The canister should be weighed before use.
for patient safety Interfaces can be either closed, with a
and the date and weight written on the side The canister
reservoir bag and valves, or open and valveless [Figs 10.34.
should be discarded when the weight has increased by
10.35). The purpose of the interface is to prevent
50 g as, at this point, anaesthetic gases will be escaping
the suction apparatus from aspirating gas from the
into the room. Unfortunately, different brands of com-
patient's breathing circuit and, conversely, to prevent
 mercially available activated charcoal canisters may have
different scavenging capacities and anaesthetic agent may
circuit and compromising breathing. There should also be
  o eai au aoaq ssi au yin ssd
a valve or adjustable clamp between the interface and
gin (Smith & Bolon, 2003).
suction unit to control the degree of vacuum applied.
236
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Negative pressure
Positive pressure
valve
valve
门
Waste anaesthetic
Waste anaesthetic
gases from
gases from
breathing circuit
ventilator
Adjustable
Suction
//
screw to
regulate suction
Reservoir bag
B
Figure 10.34 (A) Closed interface (air brake) for active scavenging of waste anaesthetic gases. A: Inlet and outlet pressure
relief valves; B: exhaust from anaesthetic breathing circuit; C: suction; D: exhaust from anaesthetic gas analyzer: E: adjustable
screw for suction; F: exhaust from ventilator bellows. (B) Schematic design of closed interface.
Waste
anaesthetic
Box 10.5 Prevention of room pollution with
gases
anaesthetic gases
 Use of scavenging equipment
Inspection of hoses and bags for holes
 Tightening of connections
Suction draws in
 Circuit check before anaesthesia to identify leaks
air through holes
· Emptying the reservoir bag into the scavenging system
 at the end of anaesthesia
 Avoiding mask administration of anaesthesia
whenever possible
 Scavenging ventilators and gas analysers
 Fill vaporizers at end of day. or in another room
Using a key-filler system to fill vaporizers 
 Turn off flowmeters when not in use
Turn off NzO cylinder when not in use
Suction
situations (Box l0.5). Prevention of pollution involves
attention to all the details listed, keeping up with mainte-
nance on the anaesthesia machine and, above all, training
Figure 10.35 Schematic design of an open interface for
new employees in the importance of attention to details
active scavenging of waste anaesthetic gases.
 and correct operation of the scavenging system.
 In many countries, health and safety regulations require
Current recommendation is that scavenger vacuum hoses
monitoring of waste anaesthetic gas concentrations at set
be light purple in colour.
intervals, even when scavenging systems are in operation.
The presence of a scavenger system on the anaesthesia
m     u uum 
 machine does not guarantee lack of pollution in the room.
anaesthetic concentrations is a sensible precaution, for
 Pollution with anaesthetic gases can occur in a variety of
example, in practices that perform chamber inductions or
237
Section
1
Principles and procedures
maintenance of anaesthesia by facemask because these
counterclockwise to check for leaks and to confirm the
techniques can result in considerable room pollution.
 presence of O in the cylinder. Leakage of O around the
Aaa e aey saedo ains juauna pausa
yoke of a pin-index cylinder may be corrected by using a
of monitoring aids, including an anaesthetic detection
new washer (Badcock seal). Although the pin-index and
badge or dosimeter which is analogous to a radiation
bullnose fittings are different configurations, the princi-
badge, and air monitoring that can be either instantaneous
ples of cylinder change are the same.
samples from a room that is in use or continuous collec-
When O2 is supplied from a remote site through a
tion of air sample over 1-8 hours that are then sent to a
laboratory for analysis. Different countries have different
gauge (located in the wall or on the workstation)
recommendations for the maximum allowed exposure
should be checked for an adequate line pressure of
(http://www.osha.gov//SLTC/wasteanestheticgases)
50-55 psi (350-400 kPa). A staff member should have
(Barker & Abdelatti, 1997) but no recommendations
the daily responsibility of checking the adequacy of O2
for sevoflurane or desflurane The occupational exposure
supply and the anaesthetist should ensure that there is a
standards (OES) set by the Control of Substances Hazard-
back-up supply of Oz immediately available.
ous to Health (COSHH) regulations for the UK are based
The flowmeters should be turned on to confirm that O2
on an 8-hour time-weighted average and are 50 ppm for
is flowing. When turning off the flowmeter, the knob
isoflurane, l00 ppm of nitrous oxide. The acceptable
should be only gently tightened because it consists of a
values for other European countries are similar for nitrous
fine point that can easily shear off. The vaporizer should
oxide but less for isoflurane. In the USA, the National
be checked for adequate liquid anaesthetic.
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has
Patient delivery circuits should be examined for cracks
recommended that exposure to halogenated anaesthetic
 and broken parts. The one-way valves should be examined
gases should not exceed 2 ppm or 0.5 ppm when breathed
for the presence of the flap valves and their correct posi-
in combination with nitrous oxide over a period not to
tioning. The circuit must be checked for leaks before
exceed 1 hour. Exposure to nitrous oxide alone should not
induction of anaesthesia. For a rebreathing circuit, the
exceed 25 ppm.
pop-off/APL valve should be closed or the exit to the
scavenger occluded, a thumb or specifc occluder (or a
stopper for large animal circle circuits), placed over the
Clinical use of the anaesthesia
endotracheal tube connector and the circuit filled with
workstation
O, from the flowmeter or the emergency O, flush (Fig.
10.36). The reservoir bag should be flled to a pressure
The most important function of the anaesthesia worksta-
of 30 cmHO and, with the flowmeter turned off, should
tion is to supply oxygen to the patient. It is essential to
hold that pressure for 10 seconds to determine any leakage
ensure that the workstation supply, whether pipeline, cyl-
ssaoxa ul yeal e ieu st uoepuauosai aui 'uasxo go
inder on the machine, or oxygen concentrator, is correctly
of 100 mL/min at 30 cmHzO pressure is unacceptable.
connected and functional and that the spare cylinder on
It is important that the flowmeter should be off during
the anaesthesia machine has sufficient oxygen for back up.
the pressure test otherwise the inflow of oxygen will
When changing an oxygen cylinder, the cylinder should
obscure leakage. An altermative technique is to close the
first be turned off using a cylinder wrench (also known as
pop-off/APL valve and occlude the patient connector, fill
a cylinder key). The O flush lever/button should be
the reservoir bag with Oz and pressurize it to 30 cmHO
depressed to release pressure in the hoses and then the
while adjusting the O2 flowmeter so that the pressure
screw of the yoke (depending on the type of connector)
can be maintained. The resultant flow on the flowmeter
loosened to enable the cylinder to be removed. A cylinder
is the magnitude of the circuit leak. Leaks may be detected
should never be left standing upright without secure
by application of soapy water over junctions and obser-
support because if it falls, cracking the casing, it will
vation of bubbles when the circuit is pressurized. The
resemble a launched missile. It has been recommended in
pop-off/APL valve should always be opened after a pres-
the past that a new cylinder should be partially opened
sure test to avoid an accidental high pressure when frst
before connection to the anaesthesia machine This is
used. A non-rebreathing circuit should also be tested for
known as 'venting. the purpose of which is to blow out
leaks by occluding patient and expiratory outlets and
dust particles that would otherwise become trapped inside
 pressurizing the reservoir bag.
the hoses of the anaesthesia machine. Venting has the
With some absorbents, the indicator in the CO, absorb-
jo jal e uaum Aniu [euosiad snonas susne ioy leuao
ent will change back to its original colour within
 Oxygen impacts on a person's hands or arms. Furthermore,
15 minutes of cessation of anaesthesia. Consequently, at
venting is unnecessary when new cylinders are delivered
the end of anaesthesia, the level of used absorbent should
with plastic or metal covers on the outlets. The new cylin-
be noted or the hourly duration of use should be written
der is lifted into position, the yoke is tightened and the
On the canister. Exhausted absorbent feels brittle to handle
cylinder opened by turning the key or wrench
but texture is an imprecise guide Rate of use of absorbent
238
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Table 10.4 Locating a leak in a breathing circuit
Preanaesthesia check
During anaesthesia
Check hoses and bag for holes
Oesophageal intubation
Tighten connections
 Leak around endotracheal tube
Leak arcund COz absorber due
cuff
to dust on washers
 Scavenger suction too high and
 Covers on turret type
 opening the pop-off valve
unidirectional valves not 
Patients forceful breathing
tight/cross-threaded
causing gas to exit circuit
 Circuit not connected
 and not enter reservoir bag
 Prolonged manual ventila tion
causing small holes at the
neck of the bag 
latrogenic pneumothorax
likelihood for troubleshooting during anaesthesia. Use of
checklists decreases the risk of forgetting a vital step. A
common problem is collapse of the reservoir bag and that
is due to insufficient O entering the circuit, due to a leak,
or too great a suction from the scavenger. Once it has been
determined that there is O flowing through the flowme-
ter, the circuit should be examined (Table 10.4).
Cleaning and sterilizing of
anaesthetic equipment
Figure 10.36 Delivery circuits must be tested for leaks
There are two mechanisms involved in the transmission
before use by checking that pressure can be maintained at
of pathogens by anaesthesia procedures: transmission
30 cmHzO with <100 mL/min Oz flow.
between patients by the veterinarian, nurse, or assistant,
and transfer from contaminated equipment Veterinary
personnel play an important part in transfer of disease and
 ed a o ao a u aa lm
hand hygiene is essential. Hand washing with liquid soap
the absorber, the size of the patient, and the flow rate of
 and water should be done between patients and ideally
O2: exhaustion of absorbent occurring most rapidly in a
non-sterile gloves worn for routine tasks. An antimicrobial
closed system. Loose granules of absorbent should not be
hand rub may be used if there is no visible hand soiling.
changed in the operating room because the proces may
Anaesthesia equipment can be a vector. Transfer of bacte-
 generate a cloud of dust with some products. Leaks in a
ria easily occurs during induction and maintenance of
circle circuit are often caused by absorbent dust on the
anaesthesia when the patient is touched for intubation or
Pis sm a ae e ai a  sa
assessment of depth of anaesthesia and the same hands
be cleaned before the canister is closed.
touch the anaesthesia machine hoses and reservoir bag.
Oxygen cylinders should be turned off and pipelines
vaporizers, and flowmeter knobs. Pre-existing factors, such
disconnected at the end of the day to prevent continued
as old age, diabetes, and renal failure may be present in
small leakage during the night. After the cylinders are
-osou ioy ysu aulaseaisu ieu Aagins suogiapun shuaed
turmed off, the pressure in the lines should be depleted by
comial infections. Results of one investigation in a human
 pressing the oxygen flush valve in order that the next
hospital confirmed a high recovery of positive cultures
person using the machine is made aware that there is no
growing pathogenic bacteria taken from the surface of
O2 supply. Ideally, the vaporizer(s) should be filled after
 anaesthesia machines, despite the fact that each anaesthe-
the last patient of the day, after personnel have left the
sia machine was cleaned at the end of the day (Baillie
 room, so that they are less exposed to waste gases.
et al., 2007). A significant decrease in positive cultures was
documented when each anaesthesia machine was wiped
with a detergent wipe between cases. When animals with
Troubleshooting the delivery circuits
infectious disease must be anaesthetized, the anaesthetist
Patient safety is improved when the anaesthesia machine
should wear a disposable gown, shoe covers, and gloves.
is checked out before anaesthesia, decreasing the
The person recording data on the anaesthetic record
239
Section
1
Principles and procedures
should not be the same person handling the animal and
Endotracheal tubes should be thoroughly washed and
 anaesthesia machine.
the lumens cleaned with a soft bristle brush. Protein
Breathing circuits that are reused are potential sources
 deposits are particularly diffcult to remove from laryngeal
of cross infection between patients. Plastic circuits labelled
mask airways (Clery et al., 2003). Methods of steriliza-
‘for single use only' in human anaesthesia have an accept-
tion will depend on the material of the tube. Whatever
able limited reuse value. However, guidelines established
method is employed, care must be taken that no steriliz-
by the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and
ing solution remains on the tube or tracheal irritation
Ireland in 2008 recommend that a new bacterial/viral
 and damage will result. Ethylene oxide (ETO) is an effec-
breathing circuit flter should be used for every human
tive method of sterilization for most tubes but strict
patient (Gemmell et al., 2008). This is not yet economi-
adherence to the aeration time specified by the equip-
cally feasible for all veterinary patients and it is common
 ment manufacturer is essential to avoid life-threatening
in veterinary practice to reuse circuits to the point of dys-
tracheal and organ damage from contact with ETO residue
function. Positioning an animal with its head down,
.or
(Trim & Simpson, 1982). Several animals suffered tracheal
 animals that cough during anaesthesia, are likely to induce
damage on the same day as the patient described in
contamination of the breathing circuit Breathing circuits
Trim & Simpson (1982), including a cat that required
used for patients with infectious diseases should either be
resection of several tracheal rings to restore airway patency.
discarded or thoroughly washed, dried, and sterilized
Laryngoscope blades should also be cleaned between
before being used on the next patient. Corrugated hoses
 patients and the outside of the handle wiped with anti-
should be dry before being reused.
septic solution.
REFERENCES
Almubarak, A., Clarke, K.w., Jackson,
exchangers in dogs. Can J Anaesth
undergoing fractionated
T.L., 2005. Comparison of the Bain
46. 897-903.
radiotherapy: 172 cases (1996-
 system and Uniflow universal
Boller, M., Moens, Y., Kastner, S.B.N.,
2007). I Am Vet Med Assoc 236,
anaesthetic breathing systems in
et al., 2005. Closed system
1322-1327
 spontaneously breathing young pigs.
 anaesthesia in dogs using liquid
Dorsch, JA., Dorsch, S.E., 2008.
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 314-321.
sevoflurane injection; evaluation of
 Understanding Anesthesia
Ambrisko, T.D., Klide, A.M., 2011.
the square-root-of-time model and
Equipment. Lippincott williams &
Accuracy of isoflurane, halothane.
the influence of CO2 absorbent. Vet
Wilkins, Philadelphia.
and sevoflurane vaporizers during
Anaesth Analg 32, 168-177.
Dugani, S., Kumar, A., Wilkes, A.R.,
high oxygen flow and at maximum
Cassu, R.N., Luna, S.P., Teixeira Neto.
2010. Influence of patient factors on
yaporizer selting. Am I Vet Res 72.
EJ., 2004. Evaluation of laryngeal
 the efficacy of breathing system
751-756.
mask as an alternative to
filters at preventing contamination
Baillie, J.K., Sultan, P., Graveling, E.
endotracheal intubation in cats
of breathing systems. Anaesthesia 65.
et al., 2007. Contamination of
anaesthetized under spontaneous or
468-472.
 anaesthetic machines with
controlled ventilation. Vet Anaesth
Farling, PA., Flynn, PA., Darwent, G..
pathogenic organisms. Anaesthesia
Analg 31, 213-221.
et al., 2010. Safety in magnetic
62.1257-1261
Clarke, K.W., 2008. Options for
resonance units: an update.
Barker, J.P., Abdelatti, M.O., 1997.
inhalation anaesthesia. In Practice
Anaesthesia 65, 766-770.
Anaesthetic pollution. Anaesthesia
30, 513-518.
Fraigne, J.l., Dunin-Barkowski, W.L..
52, 1077-1083
Clery, G., Brimacombe, I., Stone, T.
Orem, J.M., 2008. Effect of
Bateman, L., Ludders, I.W., Gleed, R.D..
et al., 2003. Routine cleaning and
 hypercapnia on sleep and breathing
et al., 2005. Comparison between
autoclaving does not remove protein
in unanesthetized cats. Sleep 31,
 facemask and Jaryngeal mask airway
deposits from reusable laryngeal
1025-1033.
 in rabbits during isoflurane anesthesia.
mask devices. Anesth Analg 97,
Gemmell, L., Birks, R., Radford, P.,
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 280-288.
1189-1191
et al., 2008. Infection control in
Berra, L., De Marchi, L., Laquerriere, P.
Crotaz, I.R., 2010. Initial feasibility
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 63.
et al., 2004. Endotracheal tubes
investigation of the v-gel airway:
1027-1036.
 Coated with antiseptics decrease
an anatomically designed
Giunti, M., Otto, C.M., 2009.
bacterial colonization of the
supraglottic airway device for use in
Intraosseous catheterization. In:
ventilator circuits, lungs, and
companion animal veterinary
Silverstein, D.C., Hopper, K. (Eds.),.
endotracheal tube. Anesthesiology
anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
100, 1446-1456.
579-580.
Saunders Elsevier, St Louis,
Bisinotto, F.M.B., Braz, J.R.C.,
Culp, W.T.N., Mayhew, P.D., Reese, M.S.,
pp.263-267.
Martins, R.H.C., et al., 1999.
et al., 2010. Complications
Hall, L.W., Clarke, K.W., 1983.
Tracheobronchial consequences of
associated with use of subcutaneous
Veterinary Anaesthesia. Bailliere
the use of heat and moisture
vascular access ports in cats and dogs
Tindall, London.
240
Apparatus for administration of anaesthetics
Chapter
10
Harris, P.D., Barnes, R., 2008. The uses
manually-controlled infusion of
Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
of helium and xenon in current
propofol for general anaesthesia or
anaesthesia in the kitten:
dinical practice. Anaesthesia 63.
sedation in adults. Cochrane
comparison between use of a
284-293.
Database Syst Rev 3, CD006059.
laryngeal mask airway or an
Hodgson, D.S., 2006. An inhaler
Lowe, D., Ernst, E.A., 1981. The
endotracheal tube. Vet Anaesth Analg
device using liquid injection of
Quantitative Practice of Anesthesia.
36, 547-554.
isoflurane for short term anesthesia
Williams & wilkins, Baltimore.
Smith, J.C., Bolon, B., 2003.
in piglets. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
Maggiore, S.M., Richard, I.-C.M.,
Comparison of three commercially
207-213.
Abrough, F., et al., 2010. A
available activated charcoal
Hofmeister, E.H., Brainard, B.M., Braun,
multicenter, randomized trial of
canisters for passive scavenging
C., et al., 20ll. Effect of a heat-
noninvasive ventilation with
 of waste isoflurane during
moisture exchanger on heat loss in
 helium-oxygen mixture in
conventional rodent anesthesia.
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs
exacerbations of chronic
Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 42.
undergoing single-limb orthopedic
obstructive lung disease. Crit Care
10-15.
procedures. I Am Vet Med Assoc 239,
Med 38, 1-7.
Soro, M., Badenes, R., Garcia-Perez,
1561-1565
Mapleson, W.w., 1954. The elimination
M.L., et al., 2010. The accuracy of the
Holden, D.1., 2001. A comparison of the
 of rebreathing in various semi-closed
anesthetic conserving device
'Maxima' and the modifed Ayre's
anaesthetic systems. Br I Anaesth 26,
[Anacondao) as an alternative to
 the classical vaporizer in
T-piece breathing systems in
323-332.
spontaneously breathing cats. Vet
Marsh-Ng. M.L., Burney, D.P., Garcia, J.
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 111,
Anaesth Analg 27, 50-53.
2007. Surveillance of infections
1176-1179.
Imai, A., Eisele, P.H., Steffey, E.P., 2005.
associated with intravenous catheters
Stabernack, C.R., Brown, R., Laster, M.J..
A new airway device for small
in dogs and cats in an intensive care
et al., 2000. Absorbents differ
laboratory animals. Lab Anim 39,
unit. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43.
enormously in their capacity to
111-115.
13-20.
produce compound A and carbon
Issa, FG., Bitner, S., 1993. Effect of
Nishiyama, T., Kohno, Y., Ozaki, M.,
monoxide. Anesth Analg 90,
 route of breathing on the ventilatory
et al., 2012. Usefulness of an
1428-1435
and arousal responses to
anesthetic conserving device
Steffey, E.P., Laster, M.J., Ionescu, P.,
hypercapnia in awake and sleeping
[AnaConDa") in sevoflurane
et al., 1997. Dehydration of
dogs. I Physiol 465, 615-628.
anesthesia. Minerva Anestesiol 78,
 Baralyme increases Compound A
310-314.
resulting from sevoflurane
Jones, I.D., Case, A.M., Stevens, K.B.,
et al., 2009. Factors contributing
Norwood, S., McAuley, C.E., 2005.
degradation in a standard
Vascular catheter-related infections.
anesthetic circuit used to
to the contamination of
In: Fink, M.P, Abraham, E., Vincent,
anesthetize swine. Anesth Analg 85.
peripheral intravenous catheters
in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 164.
J-L., et al. (Eds.), Textbook of
1382-1386.
616-618.
Critical Care. Elsevier Saunders,
Straker, D.j.M., Almubarack, A.l.,
Philadelphia, pp. 1239-1248.
Alibhai, H.l.K., et al., 2004. A
Kharasch, E.D., Powers, K.M., Artru,
Olson, K.N., Klein, L.V., Nann, L.E., et
comparison of anaesthesia in dogs
A.A., 2002. Comparison of Amsorb,
al., 1993. Closed-circuit liquid
with sevoflurane or isoflurane
 sodalime, and Baralyme degradation
delivered from a Komesaroff
of volatile anesthetics and formation
 injection isoflurane anesthesia in the
 of carbon monoxide and compound
horse. Vet Surg 22, 73-78.
vaporizer in-circle system
[Abstract). Vet Anaesth Analg 31,
a in swine in vivo. Anesthesiology
Pelligand, L., Hammond, R., Rycroft, A..
96, 173-182.
280-281.
 2007. An investigation of the
Touzot-Jourde, G., Stedman, N.L..
Kirschvink, N., Leemans, I., Delvaux, F..
bacterial contamination of small
Trim, C.M., 2005. Endotracheal
et al., 2006. Non-invasive assessment
animal breathing systems during
intubation in horses: a study of 2
of growth, gender and time of day
routine use. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
 related changes of respiratory pattern
190-199.
cuff inflation pressures, correlation
with liquid aspiration and tracheal
in healthy cats by use of barometric
Rai, M.R., Popat, M.T., 2011.
wall damage. Vet Anaesth Analg 32.
whole body plethysmography. Vet J
Evaluation of airway equipment:
23-29.
172, 446-454.
man or manikin? Anaesthesia 66.
Trim, C.M., Simpson, S.T., 1982.
Laredo, F.G., Cantalapiedra, A.G., Agut.,
1-3.
Complication following ethylene
A., et al., 2001. The Komesaroff
Rees, L.M., Sheraton, T.E., Modestini, C.,
oxide sterilization: A case report.
 anaesthetic machine for delivering
et al., 2007. Assessing the effcacy of
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18,
sevoflurane to dogs. Vet Anaesth
HME filters at preventing
507-510.
Analg 28, 161-167.
contamination of breathing systems.
Versichelen, L.F.M., Bouche, M.-P.L.A..
Laredo, F.G., Belda, E., Escobar, M..
Anaesthesia 62, 67-71.
Rolly, G., et al., 2001. Only
2009. Mechanical ventilation of six
Shirangi, A., Fritschi, L., Holman, C.D.
crbon dioxide absorbents free
dogs anaesthetized with isoflurane
et al., 2009. Birth defects in
of both NaOH and KOH do
or sevoflurane delivered by a
offspring of female veterinarians. J
not generate compound A
Komesaroff anaesthetic machine. Vet
Occup Environ Med 51,
during in vitro closed-system
Rec 164, 751-754.
525-533
sevoflurane: Evaluation of fve
Leslie, K., Clavisi, O., Hargrove, I., 2008.
Sideri, A.l., Galatos, A.D., Kazakos,
absorbents. Anesthesiology 95,
Target-controlled infusion versus
G.M., et al., 2009.
750-755
241
Section
1
Principles and procedures
Wiederstein, I., Moens, Y.PS., 2008.
intensive care. Part 1 - history.
with paediatric patients. Anaesthesia
Guidelines and criteria for the 
principles and efficiency. Anaesthesia
66. 40-51.
placement of laryngeal mask airways
66, 31-39.
Yamakage, M., Takahashi, K.,.
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
Wilkes, A.R., 2011b. Heat and moisture
Takahashi, M., et al., 2009.
374-382
exchangers and breathing system
Performance of four carbon dioxide
Wilkes, A.R., 2011a. Heat and moisture
filters: their use in anaesthesia and
 absorbents in experimental and
exchangers and breathing system
intensive care. Part 2 - practical use,
clinical settings. Anaesthesia 64,
flters: their use in anaesthesia and
 including problems, and their use 
287-292.
242
Anaesthesia of the horse
Introduction
246
Mental nerve block
261
Sedation of the standing horse
247
Supraorbital nerve block
261
Phenothiazines
247
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
262
Acepromazine
247
Palmar/plantar nerve block
262
αz-Adrenoceptor agonists
247
The complete desensitization of the forelimb
below the carpus
248
264
Xylazine
Detomidine
249
The complete desensitization of the
distal hind limb
264
Romifidine
249
Local analgesia for castration
265
Other αz-agonists
250
 Paravertebral analgesia
266
Practical use of cz-adrenoceptor agonists
250
General anaesthesia
266
Infusions of αz-agonists
250
Problems relating to size and
αz-Agonists as analgesics
252
temperament
266
Sedative and sedative-opioid
Disturbances in cardiopulmonary function
267
combinations
252
Cardiovascular effects
267
Benzodiazepines
253
 Pulmonary changes
268
Diazepam, midazolam, climazolam and zolazepam 253 
Preventive methods and/or treatments
Analgesia
253
270
Muscle and nerve damage
271
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
analgesics (NSAIDs)
253
Preparation for general anaesthesia
274
Opioid analgesics
255
General considerations
274
Additional routes of administration of
Intravenous techniques
275
opioid agents
256
Catheterization of the jugular vein
276
Other drugs used as analgesics
257
Premedication and co-induction
277
Local analgesia
258
Anticholinergics
277
Epidural and intrathecal (spinal) analgesia
258
Sedatives
277
Caudal epidural injection and catheterization
258
Analgesics
278
Subarachnoid injection and catheterization
259
Induction of anaesthesia
278
Drugs used by epidural and intrathecal routes
260
Facilities for induction
278
Specific Nerve Blocks
260
Methods of control at anaesthetic induction
278
Infraorbital nerve block
260
Intravenous regimes for anaesthetic
Mandibular nerve block
261
induction
279
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
245
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Dissociative agents
280
Treatment of circulatory depression
296
Ketamine-αz-agonist
280
Increase in circulating fluid volume
296
 Other ketamine combinations
282
Positive inotropes
296
Tiletamine/zolazepam
282
Anticholinergic agents
297
Hypnotic/anaesthetic agents
283
Intermittent positive pressure
 Thiopental
283
ventilation (IPPV)
298
Use of muscle relaxants
298
Propofol
283
Alfaxalone
 Centrally acting muscle relaxants
284
298
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Other induction techniques
284
298
 Neuromuscular blocking drugs
Etorphine (mmobilon)
284
299
Maintenance of anaesthesia
284
Termination of neuromuscular block
299
284
Anaesthetic recovery period
300
Endotracheal intubation
 Positioning for surgery
285
Assisted recovery
300
Anaesthesia for horses with colic
301
Apparatus for administration of
 oxygen and for ventilation
287
Anaesthesia in the foal
Agents for the maintenance
Practical sedation and anaesthesia of foals 305
of anaesthesia
287
Intravenous agents: total IV
anaesthesia (TIVA)
287
INTRODUCTION
TIVA for short procedures (up to 30minutes)
288
Agents used to extend the duration
Probably no other species of animal presents as many
of anaesthesia
289
special problems to the veterinary anaesthetist as the
TIVA for medium duration procedures
horse Perioperative (7 day) mortality rate in relation to
290
 general anaesthesia in apparently healthy horses is around
(30-90minutes)
1% (Johnston et al., 1995) and has remained constant
 αz-Agonist/guaifenesin/ketamine -
to that time over at least 30 years [Hall, 1983) despite
the 'Triple Drip'
291
increasing sophistication of anaesthetic techniques and
α2-Adrenoceptor
monitoring. The situation may be improving as a number
 agonist/benzodiazepine/ketamine
291
of more recent surveys have posted lower mortality rates.
 Chloral hydrate/barbiturate
291
Of particular note, Bidwell et al. (2007), in a retrospective
TIVA for long procedures (2 hours and more)
292
survey of nearly 18 000 anaesthetics from a referral prac-
Anaesthetic maintenance with
tice, reported a mortality rate of 0.12 % directly related to
inhalation agents
292
anaesthesia, which increased to 0.24 % taking 7-day sur-
vival into account. Limited improvement in survival rates
Volatile agents
292
[eiins Aueu jo uoeinp iasuol au wuoiy Auu sjnsan
Halothane
293
procedures that, without the advances that have occurred,
Isoflurane
293
would have been impossible to perform. Increased dura-
Sevoflurane
293
tion of anaesthesia significantly increases the risk.
The veterinary anaesthetist is faced with numerous dis-
Desflurane
294
turbances of cardiopulmonary and skeletal muscle func-
Nitrous oxide
294
tion in the equine patient associated with general
General points in relation to maintenance 
anaesthesia, many of which are only very incompletely
of anaesthesia using volatile agents
294
understood. Their certain prevention is currently impos-
294
sible, and measures designed to overcome one problem
 Practical administration
 often only result in exacerbation of another. Developments
Supplementary analgesia
295
in the provision of reliable sedation has enabled a wider
Partial intravenous anaesthesia (PIVA)
295
range of procedures to be carried out under local analgesia
Lidocaine
295
than was once considered practicable, but general anaes-
thesia still remains the only option in many cases.
αz-Agonists
295
To the time of Johnston's et al's studies (1995), pro-
Opioids
296
longed anaesthesia was usually maintained with inhala-
Ketamine
296
tion agents and, although in the USA isoflurane was often
246
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
used, halothane was still the agent in routine use in
doubled, but the level of sedation does not always increase,
Europe. Over the past 15 years, new inhalation agents are
although the duration will. Acepromazine (in paste Or
used, but also a very wide variety of injectable drug com-
tablet forms) also may be given orally at maximally recom-
binations have been employed, both on their own as total
mended doses of 0.1 mg/kg. Oral availability in horses is
intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) and as supplements to
high and can be equal to that of the IM route [Hashem &
inhalation anaesthesia. Some of these combinations have
Keller, 1993). Acepromazine is very long acting, and elimi-
a good evidence base for their use; others have not. Cer-
nation may be further delayed in old or sick animals,
tainly, there is need for a new epidemiological study to see
 particularly in those with even mild liver disease.
aney Allean Aipiqiou pue Aieou ui siuauaaondu j!
Acepromazine at the doses recommended has little
taken place.
effect on ventilation, but causes hypotension through
There is no ideal method of anaesthesia in the horse
vasodilation (Kerr et al., 1972). Hypovolaemic horses may
even the two authors do not always agree on which is best.
faint Tachycardia may result from the fall in arterial blood
This chapter will attempt to give the reader the background
 pressure, but sometimes frst degree atrioventicular block
knowledge to understand some of the major causes of the
is seen. A very small proportion of horses [the authors
problems that occur, how to avoid or correct them and to
have seen two such cases) show aberrant reactions, and
 assess whether regimens suggested in publications may or
 may become recumbent without any apparent cardiovas-
may not have a part to play in improving safety. It will
 cular cause; these reactions were more common with other
then suggest some regimens which have a good evidence
phenothiazine agents. In stallions and geldings, effective
base for use and/or that the authors have found useful.
sedation with phenothiazine derivatives is associated with
protrusion of the flaccid penis or, on very rare occasions,
 priapism. In either case, physical damage to the penis must
be avoided. In a very small proportion of horses, pro-
SEDATION OF THE STANDING HORSE
longed prolapse occurs. Treatment of this complication is
by manual massage compression bandage and replace-
It frequently is necessary to sedate horses to enable proce-
ment in the prepuce followed by suture of the preputial
 orifce. It is the opinion of the authors, and of many vet-
dures to be carried out easily and safely. Horses are not
good subjects for sedation for if they experience a feeling
erinarians (Driessen et al., 20ll) that the low incidence of
of muscle weakness or ataxia they may panic in a violent
this complication coupled with the possibility of immedi-
ate treatment means that where a phenothiazine agent is
manner. Historically, the most effective sedative was, for
many years, chloral hydrate Introduction of the mood-
the drug of choice its use is not contraindicated in stallions
altering 'neuroleptic agents, in particular the phenothi-
or geldings.
azine, acepromazine, followed in 1969 by xylazine [Clarke
 Acepromazine has proved a very safe agent in the horse.
& Hall, 1969), and more recently other 02- adrenoceptor
The calming and low-level sedative effects it produces
agonists (α2-agonists) has revolutionized equine sedation
make it the agent of choice for interventions such as
and, with the addition of local analgesic techniques, many
shoeing. and when used in young animals it appears to
procedures can now be performed in the standing animal.
assist in training the horse to tolerate many future proce-
However, even with modern agents, sedated horses must
dures without sedation. When acepromazine is combined
 be handled with caution for they may be aroused by stim-
with opioid agents, deep sedation is achieved and such
combinations may be used in cases where Qz-agonists
ulation and when disturbed can respond with a very well
aimed kick.
would be inappropriate. Acepromazine is an excellent pre-
 medicant before general anaesthesia; it calms the horse
Currently. sedation of the standing horse usually is
achieved with combinations of acepromazine, and/or an
prior to the insertion of catheters, lengthens the action of
Qz-agonist plus a small dose of an opioid (see sedative/
the anaesthetic agents, reduces pulmonary 'shunt' fraction
opioid combinations below).
[Marntell et al., 2005a) and statistically reduces the overall
risk of anaesthesia and surgery (Johnston et al., 1995). Its
Phenothiazines
a quiet recovery.
Acepromazine
Acepromazine is the phenothiazine derivative most widely
α2-adrenoceptor agonists
used in horses for both its mood-altering and its sedative
actions. Intravenous (IV) doses of 0.03 mg/kg or intramus.
Three Q2-agonists, xylazine detomidine and romifidine
cular (IM) of 0.05 mg/kg exert a calming effect within
 are marketed for equine sedation and anaesthesia. Two
20-30minutes of injection and, although at these dose
 O2-agonists marketed for small animals have also been
rates obvious sedation may only be apparent in 60% of
used in this species. The general properties of all these
horses, they become much easier to handle. Doses may be
agents are described in Chapter 4.
247
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 properties, particularly in colic (reviewed by England &
Xylazine
Clarke, 1996) and, in colic cases, analgesia is associated
Following the introduction of xylazine it rapidly gained
with the marked reduction in gut movement caused by
in popularity because of the reliable sedation produced in
dnugs of this class. Horses sedated with xylazine alone
horses. Doses of 0.5-1.l mg/kg IV are followed within
remain very sensitive to touch and the apparently well-
2 minutes by obvious signs of effect The horse's head is
sedated horse may, if disturbed, respond with a very
lowered and the eyelids and lower lip droop (Clarke &
sudden and accurate kick.
Hall, 1969; Kerr et al., 1972). Although the horse may
 Investigations into the effects of xylazine in horses have
sway on its feet, cross its hind legs or knuckle on a foreleg.
been reviewed (England & Clarke, 1996). There is a tran-
with xylazine alone, it will remain on its feet and show no
sient rise in arterial blood pressures. Mean arterial pressure
panic.Sedation is maximal after about 5 minutes and
(MAP) peaks 1-2 minutes after IV injection; the pressure
lasts 30-60 minutes depending on the dose Doses of
  s      
 2-3 mg/kg IM give similar effects, maximal sedation being
depressed for at least one hour (Fig. 1ll.1). Concurrent
achieved 20 minutes after injection. Xylazine has analgesic
with the hypertensive phase, there is profound bradycardia
Heart rate
200-
 Mean arterial blood pressure
40
blood
30
art
Hww
100
20
10
2
5
1015304560
2
5
1015304560
Time from injection (min)
Time from injection (min)
120-
Muzzle to floor distance
20-
Ataxia (sum of scores)
100-
o
ies
muzzle
5
80-
pOrT
60
0
XE
E
40
T
20-
10
15
30
45
60
5
10
15
30
45
60
Time from injection (min)
Time from injection (min)
Xylazine Img/kg
Detomidine 0.02mg/kg (20 μg/kg)
Romifidine 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg)
Figure 11.1 Comparison of some of the sedative and cardiovascular effects of IV doses of xylazine (1 mg/kg),. detomidine
A yo as aun io pn ae s 3 sod  wo eea (y o) ui pue (by o)
Data as revieweo by England ano Clarke.
248
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
coupled with both atrioventricular and sinoatrial heart
When given in food, the effect is less reliable as the drug
block. Heart block is at its most intense in the first few
is extensively metabolized by frst pass through the liver.
minutes and, in many cases, disappears as the heart rate
The property of easy absorption across mucous mem-
increases. Changes in blood pressure are dose dependent
branes must, for reasons of personal safety, be taken into
in intensity and duration and, following IM injection,
 account when handling the dnug.
changes are similar but less marked. Cardiac output (CO)
 The type of sedation produced by detomidine is identi-
is significantly reduced, probably because of the bradycar-
cal to that produced by xylazine; in blind trials comparing
dia; IV doses of 1.1 mg/kg cause falls of 20-40% of normal
IV xylazine (1 mg/kg) IV and detomidine 20 μg/kg IV
resting values of CO. The changes in MAP result from a
(England & Clarke, 1996), all parameters assessed and
balance between peripheral vasoconstriction and the cen-
measured except duration of action were identical (see
trally mediated fall in heart rate and CO (see Chapter 4).
Fig. 11. 1). As with xylazine, horses under detomidine seda-
At doses ofup to 1. 1 mg/kg, xylazine does not cause severe
tion are sensitive to touch and may kick. Lower doses of
respiratory depression although there may be a small rise
detomidine do not always result in maximal sedation, but
in PaCO2 and a slight decrease in PaO2. However, some
 may prove useful where a short period of action is required.
upper airway obstruction may occur; horses may snore if
 Detomidine premedication reduces the dose of anaes-
left in the head down position for any length of time.
 thetic agents subsequently required.
- Suuem si uoepas se jems Ae sasiou paneoo AAea
The cardiovascular properties, bradycardia, peripheral
most commonly seen if atmospheric temperatures are
vasoconstriction and changes in arterial blood pressure
high. Other side effects are those typical of o.2-agonists [see
(see Fig. ll.1) are also as described for xylazine above
Chapter 4) and include hyperglycaemia, diuresis, gut stasis 
(Short, 1992). With higher doses, the hypertensive phase is
and increase in uterine tone; this latter makes it theoreti-
considerably more prolonged (Short et al., 1986). At clini-
cally preferable not to use xylazine in pregnant mares.
cally used doses, respiration is slowed and PaO2 is slightly
Changes in insulin production and hyperglycaemia do not 
decreased. Some horses snore. The authors have noted
appear to be a feature of xylazine action in neonatal foals
Occasional horses (usually but not always those suffering
(Robertson et al., l990).
from toxaemic conditions) becoming tachypnoepic for
When used as a premedicant, xylazine greatly reduces
some 10-15minutes after the administration of detomi-
the amount of both injectable and volatile anaesthetic
dine and similar reactions have been reported after other
agents subsequently required. In the 30 years since its
02-agonists (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1999; Kendall
launch, xylazine has become the'gold standard’ for equine
et al., 20l0). The condition appears self-limiting and does
sedation  and  premedication,  particularly 
in North
 not require treatment. Other side effects include reduction
America. In Europe, until the advent of generic forms and
aseau ue pue uams 'aaiiady Kiou ing u
 alternative agents forced prices to reduceto a realistic level.
 in urination. Doses above 60 μg/kg may cause swelling of
its use was limited by much higher pricing.
aun suiddod Aq paiuaaaid aq ue ualqoid siut peay a
head in a normal position. Occasionally urticarial reac-
tions have been noted; these are self-limiting and regress
Detomidine
without treatment. Moderate doses of detormidine are
Detomidine, a very potent Q2-agonist was first used as a
caimed to be safe in pregnancy (Jedruch et al., 1989) and
sedative and analgesic agent in 1982 and, since its intro-
many mares have received multiple doses throughout ges-
duction, has gained great popularity for sedation and pre-
 unsan u ieag io jeuaeu Aue jnoum uoe
medication of all types of horse (Vainio, 1985; Alitalo.
The actions of detomidine [and ofother O2-adrenoceptor
1986; Clarke & Taylor, 1986; Short, 1992). Initially, very
agonists) can be reversed by the specific antagonist, ati-
high doses (up to 160 μg/kg) of detomidine were recom-
 pamezole. Dose rates from 60 to 200 μg/kg have been
mended but it soon became obvious that maximal seda-
used, that required depending on the degree of residual
tive effects were obtained with IV doses of 10-20 μg/kg
 sedation (Nilsfors & Kvart, 1986; Bettschart-Wolfensberger
(0.01-0.02 mg/kg) and that higher doses increased the
et al., 200lb; Hubbell & Muir, 2006). At the doses of
duration rather than depth of sedation. Slightly higher
detomidine recommended, it is rare that antagonism is
doses appear necessary to provide good analgesia (Hamm
required, but the authors have been grateful of its availa-
et al., 1995). The concentrated but non-irritant form of
bility in cases of overdosage of o2/opioid combinations
10 mg/ml in which detomidine [as Domosedan or Dor-
where a horse has become severely ataxic or even recum-
mosedan, and now generics) is provided makes it very
bent, and in one case of a massive overdose of detomidine
suitable for IM injection, doses approximately twice those
(Di Concetto et al., 2007).
given IV being required to produce the same effect.
Detomidine has some effect when injected subcutane-
Romifidine
ously (SC) and is also absorbed through mucous mem-
branes and there is now a gel form available for this
 The type of sedation produced by romifidine differs from
purpose (Gardner et al., 20l0; Kaukinen et al., 2011).
that produced by the other Q2-agonists; the horse's head
249
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 does not hang so low, and there is considerably less ataxia
 and on personal preferences. For example, all three agents
(Voetgli, 1988; England & Clarke, 1996), although (Ringer
provide excellent analgesia in cases of colic, although the
et al., 2013) found no difference from xylazine when com-
bradycardia and lack of gut motility induced must be con-
paring the drugs given by constant rate infusion (CRI).
sidered in the subsequent assessment. Before a definitive
Despite the apparent reduced sedation, romifidine at
diagnosis has been made in a colic case, it is preferable to
doses of from 40 to 120 μg/kg (0.04-0.12 mg/kg) IV
 use xylazine or a low dose (up to 15 μg/kg) of detomidine
enables a range of clinical procedures to be performed; the
for sedation and analgesia, as high doses may mask signs
effect [and the ataxia) is enhanced by combination with
indicating the requirement for surgery. Following a deci-
opioids. In clinical practice, romifidine has proved very
 sion that surgery is required, the longer acting romifdine
popular where ataxia is particularly unwelcome e.g. for
with its lack of ataxia, may be the most suitable analgesic
shoeing. The pharmacological actions of romifidine other
for transportation. Although there are no scientific studies
than sedation are similar to all oz-agonists. Romifidine
 of combining different O2-agonists, in practical clinical
reduces gut motility, the duration of this effect being dose
use there are many reports of changing from one to
dependent (Freeman & England, 2001). Self-limiting urti-
another at subsequent dosing: the effects appear to be
carial reactions may occur occasionally. The degree of anal-
additive as expected.
gesia produced by romifdine has been questioned; the
 Q2-Agonists have marked cardiopulmonary side effects,
results appear to depend on the nociceptive stimulus used
 and it is not surprising that occasional cases of collapse,
(England & Clarke. 1996). Spadavecchia et al. [2005)
 Or even of death have been reported following their use.
found good reliable antinociception, Voetgli (1988) that
Some reported cases may have resulted from intracarotid
antinociception was not dose related or consistent, and
injection, but where there is a delay between injection of
Hamm et al. (1995) claimed there was no analgesic activ-
the drug and the unexpected event, then such a reaction
ity. Rohrbach et al. (2009) compared the antinociceptive
aun saziiisuas aunzeiax 'sop ul anpui shp aiqeqoid si
effects of romfidine, xylazine and detomidine; all three
heart to adrenaline-induced arrhythmias but, in horses,
Q2-agonists provided equal antinociception, although
 such sensitization has not been proved (w.w. Muir, per-
duration was drug dependent. In equine practice, romifi-
sonal communication). However, there are anecdotal
dine is widely used for premedication and, as part of
 ui uaaq a oium sasi ui seno jo soa
anaesthetic combinations, it reduces the dose of anaes-
O2-agonist when in a high state of excitement. Unfortu-
thetic agents subsequently used.
nately, immediate sedation is necessary in many such situ-
ations and, in these cases, suffcient time must be left after
Other α2-agonists
drug administration before further stimulation is applied.
In such situations, the authors prefer combinations with
Medetomidine's use has been investigated in horses ( Bryant
acepromazine which may reduce the risk. Clinical reports
et al., 1991; Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1999). Doses
have suggested that combinations of Q2-agonists and
of 5-7 μg/kg (0.005-0.007 mg/kg) IV are suffcient to cause
potentiated sulphonamides should be avoided, although
very deep sedation with severe ataxia, and higher doses may
 any scientifc basis for these observations is unproven.
result in recumbency. The marked hypnotic properties
Some veterinarians premedicate horses with an anti-
make the agent unsuitable for routine use as a sedative in
cholinergic agent [atropine 0.0l mg/kg or glycopyrrolate
horses. However, it appears to be short acting. having a
0.01 mg/kg) prior to the administration of an Q2-agonist,
half-life of elimination of 29 minutes (Grimsrud et al.
but use of such combinations is controversial. Anticholin-
2012) and its excellent analgesic and muscle relaxant prop-
ergic drugs will prevent or reverse the bradycardia caused
erties mean that it has become quite widely used as a CRI
by O2-agonists and will improve CO but will result in
during anaesthesia (see Box ll. 1). Bettschart-Wolfensberger
hypertension (Pimenta et al., 20ll ). Anticholinergic drugs.
et al. (2005) showed that dexmedetomidine at 3.5 μg/kg IV
if used, must be given an adequate time prior to sedation;
in the horse had similar effects as medetomidine.
giving the two drugs together is not a rational choice.
Practical use of αz-adrenoceptor
Infusions of α2-agonists
agonists
Where Qz-agonists are being used to provide sedation for
The majority of the sedative, cardiopulmonary and other
surgery, sometimes it is necessary to increase their dura-
 side effects appear similar with all three Oz-agonists com-
tion of action. Intermittent dosing, each increment being
monly used in horses (see Fig. ll.1). The exceptions are
25-50% of the original dose administered, is effective, but
the different manifestation of sedation and less of ataxia
a constant rate infusion (CRI) provides a more level and
with romifidine, and the fact that xylazine appears to have
controllable plane of sedation. Usually, the agent used is
the greatest ecbolic effect, so is not the preferred choice for
diluted in a saline drip then, following the initial loading
 pregnant mares. Otherwise, the choice will depend on the
dose, is infused to effect. Infusions have been used alone,
duration of action required, the route of administration,
with opioids (see opioid combinations below) and as an
250
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
 Box 11.1 A summary of some reported c2-agonist infusions
Xylazine doses are in mg (milligrammes)/kg and mg/kg/h
All other drug doses are given in μg (microgrammes)/kg and μg/kg/h
LD = Loading dose. CRl = continuous rate infusion.
Qz-agonist infused alone.
With no opioid, despite apparent deep sedation, the horse may still respono to stimulus.
Xylazine
LD 0.5 mg/kg
CRI 0.55 mg/kg/h
Authors'experience
 Xylazine
LD 1.0 mg/kg
CRI 0.69 mg/kg/h
Ringer et al., 2012b
Detomidine
LD 7.5 ± 1.9 μg/kg
CRI 36 μg/kg/h, for 15 mins,
Wilson et al., 2002 Retrospective clinical study
halving dose every 15 minutes.
Romifidine
LD 80 μg/kg
CRI 30 μg/kg/h
Ringer et al.. 2012a
Medetomidine
LD 7 μg/kg
CRI 3.5 μg/kg/h 
Bettschart-wolfensberger et al., 1999
 Qz-agonist infusions used during general anaesthesia with inhalation agents.
Loadfing doses taken as that used for an αz-ketamine anaesthetic induction
Xylazine
CRI 0.50 mg/kg/h
Authors' experience
 Detomidine
CRI 10 μg/kg/h
Wagner et al., 1992
CRI 5.0 μg/kg/h
Schauvliege et al.. (2011)
Medetomidine
CRI 3.5 μg/kg/h
Bettschart-Wolfensherger et al., 200 1b
Dexmedetomidine
CRI 1.75 μg/kg/h
Gozalo-Marcilla et al., 2013
Romifidine
CRI 40 μg/kg/h
Devisscher et al., 2010
Infusion techniques of αz-agonists with opioids useful for longer sedation for standing surgery
NB local anaesthesia stifl used for surgical site
(a) LD Detomidine 10 μg/kg. butorphanol 20 μg/kg
Authors'experience
CRI detomidine to effect but around 6-12 μg/kg/h
(b) LD Detomidine 10 μg/kg. buprenorphine 6 μg/kg
van Dijk et al., 2003
CRl Detomidine to effect - but around 6-11 μg/kg/h
Need to await the onset of buprenorphine (> 30 mins)
(c) LD Medetomidine 5 μg/kg
Solano et al.., 2009
after 10 minutes morphine 50 μg/kg - after a further 10 mintues
CRI Medetomidine 5 μg/kg/h and morphine 30 μg/kg/h
Satisfactory for laproscopy
(d) LD Xylazine 1 mg/kg. butorphanol 18 μg/kg
Ringer et al. 2012b
CRI Xylazine 0.69 mg/kg/h, butophanol 25 μg/kg/h
Too high for general clinicar use as some horses felf.
(e) LD Romifidine 80 μg/kg. butorphanol 18 μg/kg
Ringer et al. 2012a
CRI Romifidine 40 μg/kg/h, butorphanol 25 μg/kg/h
Too high for general cfinicar use as some horses fefl
(f)ACP premed. LD Xylazine 0.5 mg/kg. butorphanol 18 μg/kg
Benredouane et al., 2011
 CRI Xylazine commenced at 0.65 mg/kg/h but then reduced to
0.4 mg/kg/h, butorphanol 24 μg/kg/h
adjunct to general anaesthesia (see PIVA below). Some
a dose that would give a steady level of sedation was elu-
doses that have been used in these circumstances are
cidated, then the result confrmed with pharmacokinetic
summarized in Box 1ll.1. Of these, the most thorough
studies. However, doses from experimental studies are
exploration of suitable dose rates were those of Bettschart-
only a guide in the clinics; sometimes they are inadequate
Wolfensberger et al. (1999) for medetomidine and Ringer
or too high for the individual clinical case, and the infu-
et al. (20l2a,b) for xylazine and romifidine, as in each case
sions should always be given 'to effect:
251
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Q2-Agonists as analgesics
particular with combinations with O2-agonists, is that
ataxia is also increased and, occasionally, a horse may
All z-agonists have analgesic properties, those agents that
become recumbent. Opioid 'excitement' reactions, often
are most specifc in their actions [i.e medetomidine and
manifest by 'walking forward despite attempts of restraint,
dexmedetomidine) probably providing the greatest effects.
or by twitching of the superficial muscles of the head, may
Used as infusions, their use in conscious horses, for
occur when sedation becomes inadequate and it is irra-
example in the postoperative period, is limited by the
tional to combine a short-acting sedative such as xylazine
sedation they induce but, given intraoperatively by infu-
 sion as described above to anaesthetized horses, contrib-
ln auydiouaidnq se yns suoie suol ym spioido ym
high doses of morphine. Acepromazine has a very long
ute both to analgesia and to hypnosis. For example a
single dose of 0.5 or 1 mg/kg xylazine reduced isoflurane 
action so problems are less when this is part of the com-
bination. The incidence of opioid-induced excitement
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) by 25% and
34% respectively (Steffey et al., 2000). A loading dose
Occurring can be reduced by administering sedatives first
followed by opioids once sedation is apparent, although
of 3.5 μg/kg dexmedetomidine followed by a CRI of
this is not always practicable and, if the opioid concerned
1.75 μg/kg/hour reduces the MAC of sevoflurane in horses
is one which has a delayed onset of action (eg. buprenor-
by over 50% (Gozalo-Marcilla et al., 2013).
The O2-agonists provide analgesia by central actions,
phine), this is neither necessary nor desirable.
Table ll.1 lists some of the sedative/opioid combina-
acting at spinal and supraspinal levels. They are therefore
tions that have been used satisfactorily, but there are many
very effective when given by the epidural or subarachnoid
other potential combinations that are likely to be as good.
 The dose of opioid required is considerably less than that
(2010) ). Details of the extensive investigations carried out
producing analgesia [and with these combinations, local
into the analgesic and systemic effects in horses of xylazine
analgesia should still be employed for surgery). In the
and detomidine given by this route by R Skarda & Muir
UK. the combination of IV detomidine (10 μg/kg) or
are included in the above reviews.
 In clinical practice, when Oz-agonists are given epidur-
romifdine (40-80 μg/kg) and butorphanol (0.02 mg/kg)
has proved very successful, particularly for clipping
ally to horses, they are usually combined with local anal-
fractious horses. Caution is needed to prevent cross con-
gesics and/or opioids in order to obtain the optimum
tamination of the drugs in their multidose bottles; the
onset of action and duration of effect (see epidural anal-
authors have seen several cases of gross overdosage (the
gesiabelow).
 Intrasynovial administration and even local nerve infl-
horse becoming very ataxic, or recumbent) where this has
occurred.
tration of o2-agonists have been claimed to provide anal-
Acepromazine (0.02-0.05 mg/kg) and 02-agonists such
gesia in humans and animals (Valverde, 2010); possible
as xylazine (0.5-1.0 mg/kg), detomidine (10-20 μg/kg)
reasons for effectiveness by these routes could be systemic
or romifidine (50-l00 μg/kg) have often been used
absorption or, in the case of xylazine, the perceived (but
together for sedating horses with or without the addition
not proven) local analgesic effect. Evidence of direct effec-
tiveness by these routes is, as yet, unconvincing.
of opioids. The prolonged calming action of acepromazine
is useful, particularly if the horse was very excited prior
to sedation. Some North American sources have consid-
Sedative and sedative-opioid
ered that acepromazine and the 02-agonists should not be
used together. The pharmacological reasoning rests on the
combinations
fact that acepromazine causes hypotension and the O2-
In the search for a completely reliable, safe method of
agonist causes bradycardia. However, the maximal brady-
producing sedation in standing horses, a number of mix-
cardia occurs within 1-2minutes of injection, and at this
tures of drugs have been used. Appropriate doses of many
time is accompanied by hypertension. If detomidine is
of these have proved to have a more certain and profound
given to horses already sedated with acepromazine, there
effect than can be regularly obtained from the use of any
is still a hypertensive response, albeit starting from a lower
single drug.
base (Muir et al., 1979). The authors have administered
The pharmacological basis for combination of sedatives
 O2-agonists to over 4000 horses already sedated with ace-
with opioids has already been discussed (see Chapter 4).
promazine with no ill effects [other than an increase in
Their use in the horse is not new [Martin & Beck, 1956;
ataxia) and, providing both drugs are given at suitable
Klein, 1975) and a very large number of such combina-
doses, there is no reason why the combination cannot
tions have been investigated and advocated for use in this
be used.
 species of animal. The addition of opioids, which are often
at subanalgesic doses, appears to enhance sedation dra-
matically and, in particular, diminishes the response to
Infusions of sedative-opioid combinations
touch, thus reducing the likelihood of provoking well-
Intravenous infusions of o2-agonists coupled with opioids
directed kicks from the horse. The disadvantage in
are used to provide prolonged sedation for surgery. The
252
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Benzodiazepines
Table 11.1 Some of the sedative/opioid
combinations, most of which have been
Diazepam, midazolam, climazolam
satisfactorily used by the authors; there are many
and zolazepam
other combinations which are likely to be as
satisfactory. All usually intravenous (Iv), but can also
 The anxiolytic properties of diazepam are not obvious in
be given by the intramuscular (IM) route (at the
horses and the drug should not be used on its own as it gives
higher end of the scale)
rise to ataxia, sometimes associated with panic, possibly
through its muscle relaxing properties (Muir et al., 1982).
Sedative 1
Sedative 2
Opioid
Another benzodiazepine climazolam, has been found to
have similar properties and the antagonist sarmazenil has
Acepromazine,
Methadone,
0.05-0.10 mg/kg
0.05-0.10 mg/kg
been used to reverse its effects. Although not useful as seda-
 tives in adult horses, the benzodiazepine agents can be used
or Butorphanol,
0.02-0.04 mg/kg
in foals which will usually become recumbent following IV
0.1-0.25 mg/kg of diazepam or midazolam (a water-
Acepromazine,
 Xylazine, 0.5 mg/kg
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
or Detomidine,
soluble benzodiazepine). The muscle relaxation induced
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
 by benzodiazepine agents is useful during anaesthesia, and
(10-20 μg/kg) or
benzodiazepines such as diazepam, climazolam, mida-
Romifidine,
zolam and zolazepam have all been incorporated into
0.04-0.1 mg/kg
anaesthetic regimens used in adult horses.
(40-100 μg/kg)
Acepromazine,
Xylazine, 0.5 mg/kg Butorphanol.
0.02-0.06 mg/kg
Or Detomidine,
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
0.01 mg/kg
or Methadone,
ANALGESIA
(10 μg/kg) or
0.05 mg/kg
Romifidine,
As with all species, the perioperative analgesic require-
0.04-0.08 mg/kg
(40-80 μg/kg)
[eiansuu Aq au ra ae asu a ui s
analgesics, opioid analgesics and local analgesics. In
Xylazine,
Butorphanol,
certain circumstances, Oz-agonists, agents used as anaes-
0.5-0.6 mg/kg or
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
Detomidine.
or Methadone,
thetic agents such as ketamine, and gabapentin, also play
0.010-0.015 mg/
0.05-0.10 mg/kg.
a part in the provision of analgesia.
kg (10-15 μg/kg)
The assessment of analgesic activity is very diffcult.
or Romifidine,
Horses respond differently to different types of pain; there
0.04-0.08 mg/kg
may be a violent response such as common (but not invar-
(40-80 μg/kg)
iable) in colic, or the horse may just 'suffer' and stand
Xylazine 0.7 mg/kg
Morphine 0.3 mg/kg*
quietly. A variety of experimental models, such as thermal
(hold off feed)
and mechanical thresholds (Love et al., 20ll) or pressure
from balloons in the colon, are used to assess antinocicep.
NB. All doses above are in mg/kg (and in μg/kg for detomidine
tion, but response ofthese to analgesics does not necessar-
and romifidine). For those used to doses of drugs being quoted
ily reflect what will happen in any clinical circumstance.
as μg/kg; there are 1000 μg in 1 mg. As an example, 0.01 mg/kg
detomidine = 10 μg/kg
Wagner (20l0) has drawn up a list of equine 'pain
*Very deep sedation - Morphine may be increased to 0.7 mg/kg
behaviours'; the ones relevant to the condition of the
(Klein, 1975) but beware of severe respiratory depression.
horse (eg. lameness if there is a damaged leg) form the
basis for a mode of pain assessment.
One form of analgesia often neglected is to remove the
most usual method is to use a loading dose of o2-agonist
cause; simple treatments such as stabilizing a damaged leg
and of opioid at the doses suggested in Table ll.1, then
can make a horse seem to be surprisingly comfortable The
just to infuse the 02-agonist at the doses discussed above
reduction of painful swelling by non-steroidal anti-
and as shown in Box ll.l, with no further opioid unless
the surgery is very prolonged. Such doses of opioid do not
inflammatory analgesics (NSAIDs) almost certainly pro-
vides a major contribution to their analgesic actions.
provide analgesia and local analgesic blocks are needed for
surgery. The danger of higher opioid doses, which might
be reached if the opioid is infused, is that the heavily
Non-Steroidal Anti-inflammatory
sedated horse becomes recumbent. This did happen in the
Analgesics (NSAIDS)
experimental studies of Ringer et al. (20l 2a,b). In the clin-
ical situation, infusion doses are given to effect and those
NSAIDs are widely used in horses for the provision of
given in Box ll.l can only be a guide.
analgesia foracutepain, for their anti-inflammatory action
253
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 11.2 Half-life of elimination and doses of NsAlDs, as per product information, for horse in the UK
Dose
Half-life of elimination
Carprofen
0.7 mg/kg per 24 h
14-31 h 
IV, PO for up to 9 days
Meloxicam
0.6 mg/kg per 24 h
3 h
IV, PO for up to 14 days
Ketoprofen
2.2 mg/kg per 24 h IV for up to 3-5 days
0.7-1 h
 Phenylbutazone
4.4 mg/kg per 12 h for 4 days followved by 2.2 mg/kg each 2448 h
4.5-9 h
IV, PO
 Flunixin 
1.1 mg/kg per 24 h IV, PO for up to 5 days
1.6-2.1 h
Suxibuzone
6.25 mg/kg every 12 h for 2 days, then V2 dose. Ponies: use Vz horse dose PO only
Vedaprofen
2 mg/kg loading dose then 1 mg/kg twvice a day PO for up to 14 days
 Firocoxib
0.09 mg/kg IV then 0.1 mg/kg PO per 24 h for up to 14 days
4 OE
Naproxen *
5 mg/kg IV, then PO 10 mg/kg twice a day for up to 14 days
NB Licensed doses should not be exceeded. IV: intravenous; PO: by mouth. *Not available for horses in the UK.
Information gained from Compendium Data sheets; from Cunningham and Lees, 1995; McKellar et al., 1991; Kvaternick et al., 2007;
Letendre et al., 2008.
taken into account with concurrent/subsequent NSAID administration.
in injury and disease, for anti-endotoxaemic actions and
The major problem with NSAIDs is their high toxicity
for the provision of analgesia in chronic pain. Although
and fairly low therapeutic index although. in theory.
anieiadoeiui Aue apiaoid on umous uaaq iou aaey Aau
the newer COX 2 sparing agents and the coxibs (see
analgesia, they are often administered at premedication or
Chapter 5) should cause fewer problems. The major sites
intraoperatively so that their analgesic and anti-
of toxicity of the NSAIDs are the gastrointestinal tract,
inflammatory actions will be effective at the time of recov-
kidneys, liver and the blood cells. In horses, the gastroin-
ery. A detailed description of the NSAIDs currently
testinal tract appears the organ most affected, overdose of
available for veterinary use is given in Chapter 5, and some
the agent causing stomach ulceration, and also damage to
licensed dose rates given there and in Table 1l.2.
other areas, including the large bowel, leading to diar-
For many years, phenylbutazone was the NSAID of
rhoea. In the horse, renal damage, even in the presence of
choice for equine use, and it still remains an inexpensive
hypotension, is not common, and NSAIDs are adminis-
and very effective agent that may be given by injection in
tered before or during anaesthesia without apparent prob-
the immediate perioperative period, then orally for con-
lems. Liver damage due to NSAIDs has been reported in
tinuing postoperative care. Currently, in the UK at least,
old horses maintained on NSAIDs, and blood dyscrasias
suxibuzone a phenylbutazone prodrug, is often used for
have occurred in horses given high doses of phenylbuta-
the follow-up oral  administration
[see Chapter
5）
zone Many of the injectable preparations are contraindi-
Although phenylbutazone can cause toxic reactions, these
cated for IM use in the horse as they cause local irritation.
are well known, and can be avoided with correct dosing
At least one IV preparation of phenylbutazone can cause
 schedules. However, currently in Europe, phenylbutazone
severe cardiac arrhythmias if injected too fast (probably
may not be used in food animals and, in many countries,
because of the solvent, rather than the dnug) so, in the
this includes horses. Other older agents used in the horse
absence of evidence to the contrary, it is best that all IV
include meclofenic acid and metamizole (dipyrone). In
admministrations of NSAIDs are given slowly, especially in
the last 20 years, the most popular NSAID for use in the
anaesthetized horses.
horse has been flunixin meglumine which gives excellent
The pharmacokinetics of NSAIDs vary greatly between
analgesia in a wide variety of circumstances. Several of the
species. In normal horses, the half-lives of some of the
newer, very effective and potentially less toxic NSAIDs
commonly used agents are shown in Table 1l.2. Break-
including carprofen, vedaprofen, ketoprofen and, most
down products of some agents are themselves active.
recently, the coxib, frocoxib, are now marketed in oral
Knowledge of the half-life is necessary to assess dosing
and/or injectable formulations for horses.
schedules but efficacy may outlast effective blood levels as.
254
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
in some cases, the NSAID is concentrated in the inflam-
doses of opioids (such as the etorphine in Immobilon),
matory fluid at the site of injury. Toxic effects, most
the cardiovascular response is tachycardia and arterial
commonly manifest by diarrhoea, are usually due to
hypertension rather than the bradycardia that occurs in the
cumulation, and are most likely to occur some days into
 dog. Another perceived disadvantage in horses is that the
the postoperative period. It is therefore very important not
effects of opioids on gut motility might lead to impacted
to exceed the data sheet recommendations for doses and
 colic. As for all species, opioids do cause dose-related res-
frequency of dosing. and to realize that if more than one
piratory depression.
NSAID is employed, their toxic effects will be additive.
When given during anaesthesia, opioids do not reduce
Even if the manufacturers guidelines are kept, toxicity may
 MAC consistently: in any one study MAC will reduce in
be greater than expected in a sick horse, for example in
 some animals but increase in others, presumably because
shocked animals, or in hypoproteinaemia (NSAIDs are
of motor stimulation.
highly protein bound). The metabolism of NSAIDs varies
Clutton (2010) has presented an analysis ofthe evidence
greatly between species, even within equids. For example,
for and against the use of opioids in horses. The stimula-
Sinclair et al. (2006) demonstrated that the pharmacoki-
tion effects are dose dependent and can be avoided by
netics of meloxicam differed markedly between horses and
cautious dosing, but Clutton points out that a problem is
donkeys.
that behavioural effects of pain may mimic these stimula-
NSAIDs are widely used as analgesics for colic but the
tion effects, making it diffcult to assess over- and under-
response may be variable - sometimes there is complete
dosage. The excitement effects can be minimized with
relief from pain, even in cases where there is non-viable
 sedative agents; acepromazine is particularly effective This
intestine, while another case with an identical lesion may
efficacy was always thought to be due to dopamine antago-
show no remission of symptoms. NSAIDs prevent the
nism, but Pascoe & Taylor [2003) showed that specific
onset of symptoms of endotoxaermia, such as the increase
dopamine antagonists did not reduce the walking response
in pulse rate and packed cell volume (PCV). Prevention of
to alfentanil administration. It has always been believed
these changes coupled with analgesia may prevent recog-
that the presence or absence of stimulation depended on
nition of the onset of 'shock' and diagnosis of surgical
whether or not the horse is in pain at the time of their
conditions. Thus, it is better if NSAIDs are not given to
administration; Clutton (2010) believes this, but agrees
horses with colic until there is a defnitive diagnosis, and a
that it is unproven. Clutton also concluded that the evi-
decision for surgery (or not) is made. When using NSAIDs 
dence suggested that the use of opioids at relatively
in the postoperative period in colic cases, consideration
 conservative doses did not increase the incidence of post-
must be given to the effect of altered blood protein levels,
operative colic, nor did it result in poor quality recovery
for anaesthesia. In summary, he concluded that the use of
pharmacokinetics. It is difficult to distinguish whether
 perioperative opioids at the correct doses was benefcial to
diarrhoea following surgery for colic is due to endotoxae-
the horse.
mia or is, itself, due to the toxicity of the NSAIDs used.
Table ll.3 lists suggested doses for some opioids com-
 monly used perioperatively in the horse Their pharmacol-
Opioid analgesics
 Ogy has been discussed in Chapter 5. Agonists primarily
acting at the μ receptor include morphine, methadone, mepe-
Opioid analgesics are now widely used in the horse to
ridine (pethidine) and fentanyl. Morphine has been used
 provide analgesia during and after surgery, as well as in
combination with sedative agents for restraint. However,
ridine differs from the others in that it has antispasmodic
there is some controversy over their use at analgesic doses
 actions on the gut, making it the opioid of choice for treat-
 ment of spasmodic colic, although it is very short acting
s asenupesp paaiaiad ioteu aul saads siu u saae
(up to 2 hours). A small but significant number of horses
that in horses the stimulatory effect of opioids dominates
 suffer severe anaphylactoid reactions in response to mepe-
the depressive actions, resulting in a dose-related 'excite-
ridine manifest by severe sweating. shaking. pulmonary
ment' response. Excitement is manifest in various ways
oedema and even collapse (Clutton, 1987). Anaphylac-
from simple muzzle twitching, muscular spasms, ataxia,
toid reactions are less common and less severe, and excite-
snatching at food, head pressing, uncontrollable walking
ment reactions less likely when meperidine is given by IM
through to violent excitement. Tobin & Combie (1982)
injection so this route should be considered the one of
developed a ‘'step-counting’ method of measuring the
choice.
walking or locomotor response and obtained dose-
Recently, there has been renewed interest in the use of
response curves very similar to those obtained for analge-
fentanyl to provide analgesia in horses. Although fentanyl
sia. It is probable that many of these responses primarily
did not provide antinociception to thermal or pressure
 are due to stimulation of μ receptors, although the K ago-
stimuli (Sanchez et al., 2007),. such experimental work
nists, such as butorphanol, do also cause these 'excite-
does not necessarily mimic clinical pain. Fentanyl patches
ment' effects. Stimulation also means that, with very high
have been used for analgesia in horses; Taylor & Clarke
255
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 11.3 Doses of some opioids used for analgesia
Opioid
Dose and route
Notes
Morphine 
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV or IM 
The higher doses may increase the risk of side effects
Up to 0.3 mg/kg IM*
Methadone
0.1 mg/kg IV or IM 
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.3 mg/kg IV or IM 
Meperidine (Pethidine)
12 mg/kg IM only
Antispasmodic to gut
Occasional anaphylactoid reactions - hence IM only.
Butorphanol
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV or IM 
Infusions of 0.013 mg/kg/h (13 μg/kg/h) are used for analgesia**
Jof s1s1uo6e-2zo 4m uo1euiqwo0 u! (4/6y/6r sz) 4/6x/6w sz00 e o1 dn
sedation***
Buprenorphine
0.006-0.01 mg/kg IV or IM 
Slow onset effect (>20 minutes after IV) Do not re-dose before giving time to work
Some motor activity in experimental horses **# *
ane sasoa (l'll alqel aas) suoeuiqwoo aiepas u! pasn aq Aew saten sasop jamon suooean uawatoxa, jo ysu aut saziwuiw uoalus ll
in mg/kg by intravenous (IV) and/or intramuscular (IM) injection.
(2102) 1e 1a a07 **** (9e 2102) e 1a Ja6ud *** (t002) e 1a U05** (0102) u0111x
 uo syed  o1 aan on auo puaoan (oo)
minimal side effects in horses, which had just had a coe-
cipped thin skinned area inaccessible to the horse (most
liotomy. Buprenorphine, another partial agonist, gives anal-
usually the neck). Thomasy et al. (2004) used fentanyl
gesia for about 8 hours although, even after IV injection,
no payom sinoy t iaao gusop ieuy ieu yons saued
onset of analgesia requires at least 15 minutes. Anecdotal
as from 39 to 1l10 μg/kg on horses in which pain had not
reports suggest that 0.0l mg/kg (10 μg/kg) IM provides
responded to NSAIDs, and found it reduced pain scores
good analgesia for several hours. Love et al. (20l2) com-
(but not lameness). A pharmacokinetic study
using
pared the effect of 0.1 mg/kg butorphanol with doses
patches intended to deliver 60-70 μg/kg showed that peak
of 5. 7.5 and 10 μg/kg buprenorphine on thermal and
concentrations were reached at around 12 hours, but
mechanical nociceptive thresholds; all buprenorphine
uptake was very variable, plasma concentrations never
doses increased thermal thresholds for more than
reaching analgesic levels in some individuals (Orsini et al.,
7 hours; no severe side effects were noted but, despite
lods mau e jl aas ol anamoy 'Busaiaul aq lm ll (9007
premedication with acepromazine, walking behaviour
 on' preparation which has just become available for dogs
made testing mechanical thresholds diffcult following
 provides a more stable uptake (Freise et al., 2012; Linton
both butorphanol and buprenorphine at any dose. Penta-
et al., 2012). Evidence to date suggests that, in contrast to
zocine is another opioid that has been used in horses in
 most other species, fentanyl does not reduce the MAC of
North America. Dose recommendations are very variable.
inhalation agents in the horse (Thomasy et al., 2006;
but 0.3-0.5 mg/kg IV appears acceptable.
Knych et al., 2009); earlier studies suggesting that it could
There are anecdotal reports of the clinical use in horses
do so were not repeatable.
of ramadol, a synthetic analgesic dnug thought to be a
The advantage of the partial agonist opioid drugs is that
weak μl agonist. At IV doses of 2 mg/kg it failed to give
they are often less addictive in man and, therefore, in some
 antinociception in response to thermal stimuli (Dhanjal
countries, subject to less control regulations than are pure
et al., 2009), but side effects were minimal. By parenteral
agonist agents. Butorphanol is used widely to provide anal-
use, it appears to be very short acting in the horse and oral
gesia in premedication, during surgery, for postoperative
availability is poor (Stewart et al., 20ll). It has been used
analgesia and in sedative/opioid combinations. The
by the epidural route (see below).
licensed dose for analgesia is 0. 1 mg/kg IV, but experimen-
tal work suggests that this is insuffcient for longer effective
Additional routes of administration
pain relief (Kalpravidh et al., 1984). All studies of its use
of opioid agents
in pain-free animals found it to produce behavioural
effects - nose twitches, ataxia, shivering, box walking and
The transdermal use of fentanyl has been described above.
restlessness at doses of 0.1 mg/kg IV. However, clinically.
Morphine is administered into joints following arthros-
it has been proved satisfactory (Sellon et al., 2004), infu
 copy. This is effective in humans presumably through its
sions of 13 μg/kg/hour providing good analgesia with
action on specifc opioid receptors in the synovium. Two
256
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
recent studies examined the effect of morphine in horses
morphine [approx. 0.2 mg/kg) was used, onset of analge-
in which a synovitis had been induced with lipopolysac-
sia was faster (6 hours). lasted longer (19 hours) and
charide (Lindegaard et al., 20l0; van Loon et al., 2010).
spread further (sometimes as far as T9), but the signs of
Intra-articular morphine gave analgesia which was slow in
 sedation, presumably through systemic absorption of the
5'1 Aq iaa aos suaq aiayl - gusel suol inq lasuo
drug. were greater. In clinical practice, a useful degree of
hours, the effect increasing with time to maximal at 6
 analgesia appears to be present earlier than the experimen-
hours, and there being excellent analgesia for 224 hours.
tal evidence would suggest.
Combination with local analgesia (ropivicaine) led to
As morphine is available in a preparation which does
effective rapid onset, long-lasting analgesia (Santos et al..
not contain preservatives, and can give very prolonged
2009).
analgesia, it has become the opioid most used. The dose
Opioids are used widely for caudal epidural analgesia.
most commonly used is 0.l mg/kg. A rare, but serious
either alone or in combination with Q2-adrenoceptor ago-
disadvantage of epidural morphine is pruritus, as horses
nists with or without local analgesia. Their use and the
manifesting this can damage themselves, sometimes quite
difference between drugs, has been reviewed by Natalini
badly (Burford & Corley, 2006: Kalchofner et al., 2007).
[20l0). Speed of onset and duration of action depend on
In practice frequently morphine is used in combination
lipid solubility, hence a very slow onset of action for mor-
U sauisaeue ieol io/pue sisuose-zo rsuase iauno u
phine. Natalini & Robinson [2000) compared the effects
 order to get rapid but long acting pain relief. Some suit-
 of some epidurally administered opioids, using an electri-
 able dose regimens are given in Box ll.2.
cal nociceptive stimulus. Butorphanol did not appear to
give effective antinociception. Tramadol and morphine
gave complete antinociception; onset and duration of
Other drugs used for analgesia
action for tramadol was 30 minutes and 4 hours and for
morphine 6 hours and 5 hours respectively. Robinson
Gabapentin
et al. [(1994) found that caudal epidural injection of
Gabapentin is used in people to treat neuropathic pain. In
 jo  i  ao  io x
horses, reports of its use to date are anecdotal (Davis et al.
resulted in analgesia of at least five dermatomes. Analgesia
2007). However, a study has examined the pharmacoki-
lasted for 17 hours, but time to maximal analgesic effect
 netics and the behavioural effects in normal experimental
was delayed for up to 8 hours. When a higher dose of
horses of 20 mg/kg IV and by mouth (Terry et al., 2010)
Box 11.2 Some drugs and drug combinations used by caudal epidural injection
NB preferably preservative free - otherwise need to be
Detomidine: 20-60 μg/kg: onset 10-15 mins: duration
certain that the preparation is not neurotoxic. Many
2-3 h. Systemic side effects.
other combinations may be satisfactory.
Volumes are for a 450 kg horse unless otherwise
Opioids
stated. Larger vofumes may affect more anterior
Volumes may be diluted to 10-30 mL
dermatomes.
Morphine: 0.1 mg/kg: slow onset (6-8 h): very prolonged
Local anaesthetics
duration (12-19 h). Very occasional pruritus.
 Overdose with any will cause ataxia through motor block.
Tramadol: 1 mg/kg: onset 30 mins: duration 8-12 h
Lidocaine (2%): 5-8 mL: onset 5-20 mins: duration 1-2 h
n s  iso :  (%) ai
Combinations
1.5-3 h
6x 00 40, 7 - u1 6y/6 900 :(%50) au1d0g
dermatomes affected.
ponies; onset 10 mins; duration 5 h. Variable ataxia.
Lidocaine 0.22 mg/kg plus xylazine 0.17 mg/kg: onset 5-15
L-bupivicaine (0.5%): as for racemic bupivacaine above
mins: duration 5-6 h
Ropivicaine 0.1 mg/kg but made up to 10 ml: onset
Lidocaine 2%: 5-8 ml plus morphine 0.1 mg/kg: onset
 approx. 12 mins: duration 3-4 h. Some slight ataxia.
 5-15 mins: duration up to 19 h
Xylazine 0.17 mg/kg plus morphine 0.1 mg/kg: onset
α2-agonists
10-20 mins: duration up to 19 h
Xylazine: 0.17-0.25 mg/kg: onset 10-20 mins: duration
Detomidine 10-30 μg/kg plus morphine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg:
3-5 h. Mild ataxia.
onset 20-30 mins: duration 20-24 h
Information obtained from Grubb et al. (1992); Skarda & Muir (1996);: Sysel et al. (1996), Robinson & Natalini (2002); Derossi et al. (2005):
Natalini (2010); Valveme (2010) and van Loon et al. (2012)
257
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Plasma elimination half-life was 8.5 hours after IV and 7.7
hours after oral administration. Oral bioavailability was
only l6%. Behavioural effects were some sedation and an
increase in drinking.
Lidocaine
 Lidocaine infusions are administered during anaesthesia;
their use in this capacity is discussed later [see PIVA
below). Lidocaine infusions are used after colic surgery.
mq Aaou ina suoid ui iaa iiau ioy Aeud
with the hope that they also provide additional analgesia
(Doherty, 2009). In conscious horses, Robertson et al.
(2005) found that lidocaine infusion resulted in minimal
visceral nociception but did have a small effect in reducing
response to thermal stimulation.
Figure 11.2 Caudal epidural block in the horse. The needle
 may be inserted at right angles to the skin surface between
the first and second caudal vertebrae (B), or it may be
LOCAL ANALGESIA
second coccygeal vertebra and inclined at an angle of about
30° to the horizontal to advance up the neural canal (A).
Local analgesia can provide total analgesia and often
muscle relaxation of the area concerned. while in many
animals local techniques to cover a whole limb are
asioy aulieulainsua ot Aessanau s!ll 'sasioy u! 'pahoiduua
Caudal epidural injection and
can stand, so blocks need to be more specific. Many tech-
catheterization
niques of very specific nerve block are used in horses for
The caudal epidural block is performed by entering
purely diagnostic purposes and those and also the methods
for producing intrasynovial desensitization will not be
between the first and second coccygeal vertebrae
(Fig. 1l.2), the spinal cord and its meninges ending in
considered here. Those to be described here are only the
the midsacral region. The depression between the first and
ones which the authors have found useful in operative
second coccygeal dorsal spinous processes can usually be
surgery or for giving pain relief.
felt with the finger when the tail is raised, even in the
heavy breeds, about 2.5 om cranial to the commencement
of the tail hairs although, in fat animals, it may be impos-
EPIDURAL AND INTRATHECAL
sible to detect any of the sacral or coccygeal dorsal spinous
processes. Upward flexion at the sacrococcygeal articula-
ANALGESIA
tion is seldom discernible; in fact, in many animals this
joint is fused. A line drawn over the back joining the two
In the last 10-15 years, epidural analgesia in the horse has
coxofemoral joints crosses the midline at the level of the
become used very widely for several purposes, not only in
 sacrococcygeal joint. Immediately behind this may be pal-
relation to the perioperative period, but for the provision
pated the dorsal spinous process of the frst coccygeal
 of longer-term pain relief in a number of circumstances.
bone and the site for insertion of the needle is the space
At one time the technique was limited to the use of epi-
immediately caudal to this. It may be difficult to locate in
dural lidocaine for perineal surgery: increasing the dose of
well developed or fat animals; 'pumping' the tail may help.
local analgesic solution would lead to motor block and
Local anaesthetic is injected intradermally at the site. A
the horse would become recumbent. The combination of
spinal needle (20 G, 6-10 cm) is inserted in the midline
low doses of local analgesic and/or O2-agonist with mor-
at right angles to the skin (Fig. ll.3A). A 'popping' sensa-
phine enables long-acting analgesia to be achieved without
tion may be felt as the interarcual ligament is penetrated.
ataxia; the use of catheters means that blocks can be
The needle is pushed on until it hits the bony floor of the
topped up' or extended to more anterior dermatomes. In
canal, then slightly withdrawn. If a commercial spinal
the horse, the meninges end in the midsacral region and,
needle with a stylet has been used, then the stylet is with-
although less used, subarachoid injection/catheterization
drawn; air may heard entering as there should be a nega-
is practicable at this point. Some methods of carrying out
tive pressure, or if a drop of saline has been placed on the
the procedures and drugs used have recently been reviewed
hub, it will be drawn in (hanging drop method). Another
(Natalini, 20l0). For all epidural or spinal blocks, asceptic
test that it is the correct place is the almost complete
precautions are essential.
absence of resistance to injection of a test saline injection
258
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
111
A
B
C
(D)
infiltration of the site of injection, the long spinal needle (or Tuohy needle if catheterizing) is inserted perpendicular to the
yonoui anauien e buipeal () aunies buaui Ag auensisan po yel buau (a) ieuen peuids ai oui paueape pue us
the needle and (D) the catheter has been sealed with a suitable injection port and is anchored to the skin.
Photographs from Tayfor, PM., Clarke, K.W., 2007. Hanobook of Equine Anaesthesia. 2no eon, E/sevier Lto, with permission.
(Fig. ll.3B). It is probably preferable not to use air for the
where the block is required. Catheters inserted in the coc-
test injection as, in dogs, this has been shown to block
 Cygeal region may be advanced at least as far forward as
subsequent spread of radiopaque dye (Iseri et al., 2010).
the lumbosacral junction (Sysel et al., 1996). The catheter
is then sealed with a suitable injection port and anchored
Catheterization
in a way that will keep the site clean (see Fig. ll.3D).
An epidural catheter is useful for the provision of longer-
term analgesia. Very strict aseptic precautions are neces-
Subarachnoid injection and catheterization
sary. Disposable epidural packs are available. The technique
is as above, but instead of the epidural needle, a Tuohy
Natalini [20l0) describes the technique of intrathecal
needle is employed. The catheter is threaded through this
injection in detail. Strict aseptic precautions are even more
at least 4-6 cm (see Fig. 1l1.3C) and more depending on
important and he advises sedation for the procedure. He
259
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
suggests that the lumbosacral space is located by palpating
Specific Nerve Blocks
the caudal borders of the tuber coxae, the cranial borders
of the tuber sacrale and the midline depression between
Infraorbital nerve block
the sixth lumbar and second sacral vertebrae Local anaes
The infraorbital nerve is the continuation of the maxillary
thesia of skin and muscle atthe site of injection is required.
division of the Vth cranial nerve and is entirely sensory.
A spinal needle with stylet is inserted perpendicularly, and
During its course along the infraorbital canal it supplies
advanced until it penetrates the spinal canal. When the
branches to the upper molar, canine and incisor teeth on
stylet is withdrawn, cerebrospinal fluid can be withdrawn.
that side, and their alveoli and contiguous gum. The
For catheterization, a reinforced epidural catheter is
nerves supplying the first and second molars (PMl and 2),
inserted and sealed as described above.
the canine and incisors, arise within the canal about
2.5 om from the infraorbital foramen and pass forwards
Drugs used by epidural
in the maxilla and premaxilla to the teeth. The nerves to
and intrathecal routes
cheek teeth three to six (PM3, Ml, 2 and 3) pass directly
from the parent nerve trunk in the upper parts ofthe canal.
 Commonly, three types of drugs are used by the epidural
After emerging from the foramen the nerve supplies
route: local anaesthetics, Q2-adrenoceptor agonists and
sensory fibres to the upper lip and cheek, the nostrils and
opioids. The combination of two or all three aims to
lower parts of the face.
obtain rapid onset, suffcient analgesia and adequate dura-
The infraorbital nerve may be approached at two sites:
tion for the procedure in hand. This may be for surgery or
1. At its point of emergence from the infraorbital
may be to provide postoperative or other longer duration
foramen: the area desensitized will comprise the skin
analgesia. Ketamine also is occasionally included in com-
binations but will not be considered further.
of the lip. nostril and face on that side up to the
level of the foramen
Local analgesics give complete and fairly rapid onset
2. Within the canal, via the infraorbital foramen when,
analgesia (it can take up to 20 minutes with lidocaine and
in addition, the frst and second premolars, the
longer with bupivicaine) but, for anything other than a
canine and incisor teeth with their alveoli and gum,
caudal block [i.e. just sufficient for perineal surgery), there
and the skin as high as the level of the inner canthus
is a danger of motor effects and recumbency. They cer-
tainly should be avoided for intrathecal use for this reason.
of the eye will be influenced (Figs ll.4, 11.5).
The lip of the infraorbital foramen can be detected
depending on dnug and dose, are effective for 2-3 hours.
readily as a bony ridge lying beneath the edge of the flat
Skarda & Muir (1996) reported that while xylazine
levator nasolabialis muscle When it is desired to block the
(0.25 mg/kg) provided analgesia adequate for perineal
 nerve within the canal, it is necessary to pass the needle
surgery and variable bilateral analgesia as far forward as
up the canal about 2.5 cm. To do this, the needle must be
 S3 with minimal systemic effects, with epidural detomi-
inserted through the skin about 2 cm in front of the
dine, doses of 60 μg/kg were required, which resulted in
foramen after reflecting the edge of the levator muscle
variable spread of analgesia sometimes extending to the
upwards. An insensitive skin weal is an advantage For the
thoracic region, and systemic effects also occurred.
perineural injection a needle 19 gauge (1.1 mm), 5 cm
However, when given by the midsacral subarachnoid
long. is suitable. The quantity of local analgesic solution
route, 30 μg/kg detomidine gave good analgesia from the
required will vary from 4 to 5 mL. For blocking the nerve
coccyx to the lumbar region with minimal systemic effects.
With either of the O2-agonists, onset of perineal analgesia
Occurred within 15 minutes. Skarda & Muir (1996) sug-
gested that xylazine was exerting a local anaesthetic effect,
hence the low doses required in comparison to those used
when the dnug is given systemically.
Morphine, as discussed above, gives prolonged analge-
sia, but has a slow onset.
The combination most commonly used is that of xyla-
zine and lignocaine (Grubb et al., 1992) but many similar
combinations have been employed. Opioids have also
been combined with local analgesics. Box ll.2 gives some
dnugs/dnug combinations that the authors have found
useful and/or have good evidence base. For a more exten-
sive list and combinations suitable for very prolonged
analgesia, the reader is referred to Natalini's (20l0) exten-
Figure 11.4 Sites for insertion of the needle to block the
sive review.
supraorbital, infraorbital, mental and mandibular nerves.
260
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
111
A point is selected on the caudal border of the mandible
about 3 cm below the temporomandibular articulation.
After penetrating the skin, the needle is allowed to lie in
the depression between the wing of the atlas and the base
?
of the ear. The needle is advanced as its point is depressed
until it passes deep to the medial border of the ramus. It
is then advanced further in the direction of the point of
intersection of the previously mentioned lines, keeping as
close as possible to the medial surface of the mandible
but, as the nerve lies medial to the accompanying artery
and vein, the needle does not need to follow the bone
closely. Following this method, the needle should lie par-
Figure 11.5 Area of skin desensitized after blocking the
allel with the nerve for a distance of 3-4 cm. About 5 mL
infraorbital nerve within the canal (mid blue), the
of analgesic solution is injected along this length. German
supraorbital nerve (light blue) and the mental nerve
writers describe a modification: the foramen is approached
(darkerblue)
from the ventral border of the ramus, just in front of the
angle The point of the needle must penetrate a distance
of 1.0-1.5 cm to reach the foramen.
at its point of emergence from the canal, the needle is
The chief indications are molar dental interferences in
introduced until its point can be felt beneath the bony lip
 the lower jaw, but most surgeons today prefer to carry out
of the foramen. From 4 to 5 mL of 1% mepivacaine is
all dental surgery under general anaesthesia and this nerve
injected, withdrawing the needle slightly as injection pro-
block will only be used when, for some reason, general
ceeds. Loss of sensation should follow in 15-20 minutes
 anaesthesia is impracticable.
and last a further 30-40minutes if the solution injected
contains a vasoconstrictor.
Mental nerve block
Injections at site l may be employed for interferences
about the lips and nostrils, such as suturing of wounds,
Suturing of wounds of the lower lip may be conveniently
removal of polypi, etc. Extraction of canine or incisor teeth
carried out under mental nerve block. The nerve can be
is seldom required in horses and, for extraction of molar
 injected as it emerges from the mental foramen and anal-
teeth, general anaesthesia is usually preferred. For trephin-
 gesia of the lower lip on that side will ensue [see Figs l1.4,
ing the facial sinuses, local infltration analgesia offers a
11.5). Attempts may be made to pass the needle along a
 good alternative.
canal a distance of 3-5 cm [in which case the canine and
incisor teeth will also be desensitized) but this is not easily
 Mandibular nerve block
performed.
 The mental foramen is situated on the lateral aspect of
The alveolar branch of the mandibular division of the Vth
the ramus in the middle of the interdental space It can be
cranial nerve enters the mandibular foramen on the
palpated after deflecting the pencil-like tendon of the
medial aspect of the vertical ramus of the mandible under
depressor labii inferioris muscle upwards. The nerve may
cover ofthe medial pterygoid muscle. It traverses the man-
be detected as an emerging thick straw-like structure. From
dibular canal, giving off dental and alveolar branches on
this point, the technique is the same as that outlined for
that side, and emerges through the mental foramen. From
the infraorbital nerve.
this point, it is styled the mental nerve The nerves supply-
ing the canine and incisor teeth arise from the parent trunk
Supraorbital nerve block
within the canal 3-5 cm behind the mental foramen, and
pass to the teeth within the bone.
Suturing of wounds involving only the upper eyelid is
 If the mandibular alveolar nerve is injected at its point
easily possible after block of the supraorbital nerve (see
of entry into the mandibular canal at the mandibular
Fig. ll.4). The supraorbital (or frontal) nerve is one of the
foramen, practically the whole of the lower jaw and all the
terminal branches of the ophthalmic division of the Vth
teeth and alveoli on that side will become desensitized
cranial nerve. It emerges from the orbit accompanied by
(see Figs 1l.4, 1l1.5).
the artery through the supraorbital foramen in the supraor-
The technique is difficult and uncertain, for the nerve
 bital process. It supplies sensory fibres to the upper eyelid
enters the canal high up on the medial aspect of the verti-
and, in part, to the skin of the forehead. The nerve is
cal ramus. The foramen lies practically opposite the point
injected within the supraorbital foramen.
of intersection of a line passing vertically downwards from
 The upper and lower borders ofthe supraorbital process,
the lateral canthus of the eye, and one extending back-
close to its junction with the main mass of the frontal
wards from the tables of the mandibular molar teeth.
bone is palpable. The foramen is recognized as a pit-like
261
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
depression midway between the two borders. The skin is
over the artery before uniting, and it terminates in the
 prepared and an insensitive weal produced. A needle, 19
sensitive laminae and the coronary cushion. The palmar
gauge (1.1 mm), 2.2 cm long. is passed into the foramen
branch lies close behind the artery, except at the metacar-
to a depth of 0.5-1.0 om and 5 ml of analgesic solution
 pophalangeal joint, where the nerve is almost superposed
injected.
to the artery. It accompanies the digital artery in the hoof.
and passes with the palmar branch of that vessel to be
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
distributed to the distal phalanx and sensitive laminae.
The lateral palmar nerve is formed by fusion of the
The auriculopalpebral nerve is a terminal branch of the
termination of the ulnar nerve with one of the terminal
facial division of the trigeminal (Vth) cranial nerve inner-
branches of the median. In the metacarpal region it occu-
vating the orbicularis oculi muscles. Blocking it prevents
 pies, on the outside of the limb, a position on the flexor
voluntary closure of the eyelids but does not in any way
tendons analogous to that of the medial palmar nerve on
 desensitize them. In conjunction with topical analgesia of
the inside. Unlike the latter nerve, however, it is accompa-
the conjunctiva, it is most useful for examination of the
nied by only a single vessel - the lateral palmar vein -
eye, as well as for the removal of foreign bodies from the
which lies in front of it. (A small artery - the lateral palmar
cornea and other minor eye surgery. It may be blocked by
 metacarpal artery - accompanies the nerve and vein from
placing 5 ml of 2% mepivacaine solution subfascially at
the carpus to the metacarpophalangeal joint on the lateral
the most dorsal point of the zygomatic arch. A 2.5 am, 22
 aspect of the limb). At the level of the sesamoid bones, it
gauge (o.7 mm) needle is a convenient size for this
divides into three digital branches exactly as does the
injection.
medial palmar nerve already described.
 In the hind limb, plantar nerves result from bifurcation
Palmar/plantar nerve block
 of the tibial nerve when it gains the back of the tarsus.
They accompany the deep digital flexor tendon in the
The nerves confer sensibility to the digit (Fig. ll.6). The
tarsal sheath and, diverging from one another, they
medial palmar nerve of the forelimb is one of the terminal
descend in the metatarsal region, one at each side of the
branches of the median nerve. At the level of the proximal
deep digital flexor tendon. Each is accompanied in the
sesamoid bones, the trunk of the nerve divides into three
metatarsus by the metatarsal vein of that side and by a
digital branches, and all three branches are in close rela-
slender artery from the vascular arch at the back of the
tionship with the digital vessels. The dorsal branch in front
tarsus. A little below the middle of the metatarsus, the
of the vein distributes cutaneous branches to the front of
medial nerve detaches a considerable branch that winds
the digit, and terminates in the coronary cushion. The
obliquely downwards and outwards behind the flexor
middle branch, which is small and irregular, descends
tendons to join the lateral plantar nerve about the level of
between the artery and vein. It is generally formed by the
the button of the fourth metatarsal bone At the metatar-
union of several smaller branches which cross forwards
sophalangeal joint, each nerve, coming into relation with
the digital vessels, resolves itself into three branches for
the supply of the digit.
 In the hind limb, the main artery - the dorsal metatarsal
Suiddip Aq snsieieau aui jo ypeq aul ot sassed - Arae
under the free end of the fourth metatarsal bone, and
finally bifurcates above the fetlock, between the two divi-
sions of the suspensory ligament, to form the digital arter-
ies. In the pastern region, the disposition ofthe nerves and
vessels is the same as in the forelimb. Plantar nerve block
does not give the same results as palmar block in the
forelimb. The skin and deeper tissues on the dorsal aspect
of the hind fetlock and pastern are innervated by terminal
branches of the fibular nerve. This may be important from
a surgical standpoint although less important from a diag-
nostic point of view (S. Dyson, personal communication,
1991).
Technique for paimar/plantar
(abaxial sesamoid) injection
Injection in both fore- and hind limbs is where the
Figure 11.6 Area of skin desensitized after bilateral plantar
nerves course just proximal to the metacarpophalangeal/
or palmar nerve block.
 metatarsophalangeal joint. Although the nerves divide up
262
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
into three branches at about this point, the injection of
it is necessary to work around the opposite leg. With the
2-3 ml of local analgesic solution medially and laterally
puey auo sassed ioiiado aul Kjaienbs guspueis asiou
still produces complete desensitization of the entire foot
around the front of the adjacent leg for inserting the
(see Fig. ll.6) An advantage of this site is that when the
needle, while the other is passed behind the limb for
limb is held up and the joint flexed, the nerves and their
holding the syringe to the needle.
associated vessels can be palpated so their accurate loca-
The most likely cause of failure is that the solution was
tion is easy.
injected into the subcutaneous connective tissue, and not
A strict aseptic technique must be practised and the
beneath the fascia. Fortunately, the skin at the site is now
lateral and medial sites should be clipped and prepared as
desensitized and a second and deeper injection can be
for an operation. In thin-skinned horses, a 25 gauge
made without restraint.
(0.5 mm), 2.5 am long needle is used; disposable needles 
About 2.5-5.0 ml of 1% mepivacaine or 0.5% bupi-
can usually be introduced through the skin without the
vacaine solution is commonly injected around each nerve.
horse showing resentment.
 The average 500 kg horse is given 3 ml over each nerve In
After the injections have been completed, the animal is
the hind limb, the technique is similar, except that the
allowed to stand quietly for 10-15minutes. At the end of
Kniu jo ysu ianeai e ot oieado au sasodxa ainpanoid
this time, the limb is tested for sensation by tapping on 
especially when dealing with a nervous animal. Thus.
the skin with a blunt-ended spike on the end of a short
 not only must the animal be twitched, but the forelimb
pole This is a better way of detecting loss of deep sensa-
 raised in addition if the operation is to be carried out with
tion than pricking with a needle Any response to tapping
the animal standing on the affected limb. Should the
around the coronet and heel indicates failure to block the
operator feel indisposed to make the injection with
nerve on that side. One indication of sensation is sufficient
the hind leg free, it may be raised by an assistant, but the
to prove this, and successive trials only serve to agitate the
 needle must be inserted sufficiently deeply to penetrate
animal. It may be necessary to cover the animal's eye to
the fascia.
 prevent it seeing the approach of the test instrument.
Technique of blocking paimar
Technique of paimar/plantar metacarpal!
terminal digital nenves
metatarsaf injection
 The terminal divisions of the palmar and plantar nerves
may be subjected to medial and lateral perineural injec-
An alternative site for blocking the palmar/plantar
digital nerves is from 5 to 7cm proximal to the
tion in the pastern region. The site for injection is midway
between the fetlock joint and coronet The palmar or volar
metacarpophalangeal/metatarsophalangeal  joint at the
level of the distal enlargements of the second and fourth
border of the frst phalanx is located, and the dorsal edge
metacarpal or metatarsal bones. This ensures that the anal-
of the (at this point flattened) deep digital flexor tendon
 gesic solution is in contact with the nerve proximal to its
is palpated. The nerve lies immediately dorsal to the
 point of division. The local analgesic is injected into the
tendon. About 2 ml of 1% mepivacaine or 0.5% bupi-
groove between the deep digital flexor tendon and the
vacaine solution is injected SC just proximal to the col-
lateral cartilages. The area desensitized is limited to the
suspensory ligament The nerve lies deep to the subcutane-
 palmar or volar part of the foot and heel on that side.
ous fascia immediately in front of the deep flexor tendon.
A25 gauge (0.5 mm) needle 1.2 cm long is used. The skin
 Over the site is clipped and cleansed. In the great majority
indications for paimar/plantar block
of cases, the needle can be inserted without movement on
Palmar/plantar block is commonly used to aid diagnosis
the part of the animal. With the animal standing on the
 of the site of lameness, but it is also very useful to relieve
limb, the skin and subcutaneous fascia are tense, and it is
the pain of acutely painful lesions about the foot, and to
easy to penetrate the latter and thus ensure that the sub-
paneadan aq Aeu aieid aul san on leue au moe
sequent injection is in direct contact with the nerve. If the 
daily for a few days in severe cases. Longest pain relief is
limb is held raised during insertion of the needle, the flac-
obtained by using bupivacaine with a vasoconstrictor such
cidity of the skin may cause the point to enter the subcu-
as adrenaline at a concentration of 1: 200 000.
taneous connective tissue and the method will fail. If
The nerve blocks allow the painless performance of
blood escapes from the needle, it should be partially with-
 palmar and plantar neurectomy and of operations about
drawn, redirected and reinserted. It may be decided, frst,
the foot, coronet and heel, such as exposure of a corn or
to provoke an insensitive skin weal, and then pass the
gathered nail track, partial operations for quittor and
uiod si r aue aeoide auie s yn aaau
sandcrack. Even when operations about the foot are per-
lies beneath the fascia.
formed under general anaesthesia, palmar and plantar
When it is intended to block both sides of the limb
blocks can provide analgesia intraoperatively and in the
supplied by these nerves, the opposite side of the leg is
recovery period. The desensitization of the foot which they
similarly dealt with. When dealing with the medial nerve
 produce does not seem to be an obstacle to the animal
263
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
regaining its feet after general anaesthesia or to contribute
to ataxia immediately afterwards.
The complete desensitization of the
forelimb below the carpus
Simultaneous block of the median, ulnar and musculocu-
taneous (cutaneous branch) nerves desensitizes the entire
manus.
Median nenve
The best site at which to inject the median nerve is the one
used for the operation of median neurectomy, i.e the
 point on the medial aspect of the limb about 5 om distal
to the elbow joint, where the nerve lies immediately
caudal to the radius and cranial to the muscular belly of
the internal flexor of the metacarpus, deep to the caudal
superficial pectoral muscle and the deep fascia.
With the animal standing squarely, the administrator
stoops adjacent to and slightly behind the opposite fore-
limb. The caudal border of the radius where it meets the
distal edge of the caudal superficial pectoral muscle is
located with a fnger The point of insertion of the needle
is immediately proximal to the finger. A needle 19 gauge
(1. 1 mm), 2.5-3.0 cm long, is suitable. It is directed proxi-
Figure 11.7 Areas of skin desensitization after block of
mally and axially at an angle of 20° to the vertical, to
the ulnar (darker blue) and median nerves (light blue)
ensure penetration of the pectoral muscle and the deep
(S. Dyson, personal communication, 1991).
fascia; 7.5-10.0 ml of local analgesic solution is injected.
To facilitate insertion of the needle to the proper depth, it 
is best first to induce an insensitive skin weal.
removal of cutaneous sensation. Westhues and Fritsch
The indications for blocking the median nerve alone are
[1960) described techniques for blocking the tibial and
limited, for the surface area desensitized is little more than
 peroneal (fbular) nerves.
that obtained with medial palmar block (see Figs ll.6
and 11.7).
Tibial nerve
Uinar nerve
Injection is made about 1.5 cm above the point of the
tarsus, in the groove between the gastrocnemius and the
This nerve may be blocked by injection of 10 ml of local
deep digital flexor tendons. Palpation of the nerve at this
 analgesic solution in the centre of the caudal aspect of the
site is facilitated by holding up the foot and slightly flexing
limb, about 10 cm proximal to the accessory carpal bone,
the leg. although the injection is best made with the limb
 in the groove between the tendons of the ulnaris lateralis
bearing weight Care must be taken to inject deep to the
and flexor carpi ulnaris, and beneath the deep fascia.
subcutaneous fascia or only the superficial branch of the
nerve will be affected. Some 20 ml of local analgesic solu-
Musculocutaneous nerve
tion should be injected at this site through a 2.5 cm, 20
This nerve is blocked on the medial aspect of the limb
guge (0.9 mm) needle that has been placed beneath the
where it lies on the surface of the radius halfway between
fascia.
the elbow and carpus, immediately adjacent to the cephalic
vein. At this site, it can easily be palpated just cranial to
Peroneal (fibular) nerve
the cephalic vein and blocked by the injection of 10 ml of
The superficial and deep branches of this nerve are best
local analgesic solution.
blocked simultaneously in the groove between the tendons
 ofthe long and lateral digital extensors about 10 cm proxi-
mal to the lateral malleolus of the tibia. First, a 3.75 cm,
The complete desensitization of the distal
hind limb
22 gauge (0.7 mm) needle is introduced subcutaneously
and 10 ml of the local analgesic solution injected through
The technique of nerve block of the hind limb sometimes
it to block the superficial nerve The needle must then be
works extremely well but is unreliable, especially for
pue eisey daap au anenauad on u e-z iauoue paau!
264
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Lateral
Medial
Achilles tendon
Long digital fl.
Figure 11.8 Sites for injection about the peroneal nerve on
the lateral aspect and the tibial nerve on the medial aspect
of the horse's hind limb.
about l.0-l.5 ml of local analgesic solution injected
(Fig. ll.8) around the deep branch.
Saphenous nerve
The deposition of 5 ml of local analgesic solution on the
dorsal aspect of the median saphenous vein proximal to
the tibiotarsal joint will effectively block the saphenous
Figure 11.9 Injection into the substance of the testicles after
nerve.
linear infiltration of the scrotal tissues.
 Block ofthe tibial nerve above the hock, and ofthe deep
 peroneal (fbular) nerve, desensitizes the plantar metatar-
sus, the medial and lateral aspects ofthe fetlock and whole
depending on the size of the testicles, up to 35 ml of 2%
digit. To produce a complete block distal to the hock, these
lignocaine injected. When an adequate amount of ligno-
saues a ym raa a u aq i saa o
caine has been injected the testicle feels firm. The proce-
nerve, the superficial peroneal (fbular) nerve and the
dure is repeated for the left testicle, and local analgesic
caudal cutaneous nerve (a branch of the tibial nerve).
solution is injected along the median raphe ofthe scrotum.
After about l0 minutes has elapsed castration can be
carried out painlessly.
Local analgesia for castration
Method 2. The spermatic cord is grasped with the fingers
There are three methods in common use for desensitizing
just above the testicle and a 5 cm 19 gauge (1.1 mm)
the scrotum, testicle and spermatic cord by injection of
needle thrust into the subcutaneous tissues of that region.
local analgesics but, for all of them, it is essential that the
 The needle is kept stationary to avoid penetration of blood
animal is properly restrained or sedated if the operator is
vessels and up to 20 ml of 2% lignocaine injected around
not to be injured when carrying them out on the standing
each spermatic cord. The scrotal skin is injected along the
animal. The animal is placed with its right side against a
line of the proposed incisions. This method does not seem 
wall or partition and, if not sedated, a twitch is applied to
as effective as the one described above.
its upper lip. After preparation of the skin of the scrotum,
Method 3. A long (12-15 cm) 19 gauge (1.1 mm) needle
prepuce and medial aspect of the thighs, the operator
is thrust through the testicle and directed into the sper-
stands with his left shoulder pressed lightly against the
matic cord while up to 25 ml 2% lignocaine are being
caudal part of the animal's left chest wall. The neck of the
injected. After treatment of both spermatic cords, the
scrotum on the right side is gripped with the left hand and
scrotal skin is infltrated. To infltrate the scrotal skin it is
the testicle drawn well down until the skin of the scrotum
important that the direction of the needle shall be almost
is tense (Fig. ll.9).
parallel to the skin to ensure that its point lies in the sub-
Method 1. A 19 gauge (1.1 mm) needle is quickly thrust
cutaneous connective tissue, for if it enters the dartos or
into the substance of the testicle to a depth of 3-4 cm and,
the substance of the testicle itself, difficulty may be
265
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
experienced in injecting the solution and, what is more
to block nerves Ll and Tl3. The sites for injection are
important, the skin does not become analgesic. The
 located by measuring 5-6 cm anterior from the previous
animal usually moves as the needle is inserted and
 site [less in ponies), and confirmed by the needle imping-
the operator must be prepared for this.
 ing on a transverse process of the vertebrae.
Some right-handed operators prefer to stand on the
With practice, the technique is simple and reliable.
night side of the horse, with the left hand holding the
although on occasions analgesia of the ventral area of the
scrotum or spermatic cord, so that the lef arm is against
paralumbar fossa is inadequate for surgery, and local infl-
the stifle and affords some measure of protection against
 tration become necessary.
a kick. The person holding the twitch should stand on the
same side as the operator.
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
Paravertebral analgesia
A thoracolumbar paravertebral block of Tl8, Ll and L2
General anaesthesia in horses appears beset with more
segmental nerves provides useful anaesthesia of skin.
ap an a u pan a u si
muscles and peritoneum of the paralumbar fossa, and it
animal. In particular, cardiopulmonary dysfunction, nerve
is an excellent method of analgesia for procedures such as
and ischaemic muscle damage appear more pronounced
flank laparotomy or for laparoscopy in the standing horse
and can be diffcult to avoid. The problems are often inter-
(Moon & Suter, 1993). L3 should not be blocked as, in
related and seem to follow directly from the actions of the
horses, it provides some innervation to the hind limbs.
anaesthetic agents themselves, or from interference with
and its block may cause ataxia.
mechanisms existing in conscious horses to compensate
The basic anatomy of the spinal nerves resembles that
for respiratory or cardiovascular changes induced by
of cattle, each nerve bifurcating shortly after leaving the
recumbency. Other problerms relate to the horse's size, its
spinal canal, the dorsal branch supplying the skin and
temperament and its tendency to panic. It is necessary to
superficial tissues, while the ventral branch passes beneath
anticipate the problems from the beginning of the anaes-
the inter-transverse ligament, and innervates the muscle
PIoAe ol Aiessanau uojoe ayel cl iapio ul losoioid sau
layers and peritoneum. Thus, as with cattle, it is necessary
Or reduce them; hence they will be considered in general
to block both dorsal and ventral branches of each spinal
at this stage.
nerve if adequate analgesia is to be obtained. In cattle, the
landmarks for injection are found by palpation of the
transverse process of the lumbar vertebrae, but these are
Problems relating to size
almost impossible to locate in horses. However, Moon and
and temperament
Suter [1993) point out that a line from the most caudal
portion of the last rib (easily located in almost all horses)
When handing horses, the safety not only of the horse,
and perpendicular to the long axis of the spine passes
but also of the handlers must be considered, and methods
across the transverse process of L3. Thus, to block the
of control used must reflect the temperament of the horse
spinal nerve L2, the site chosen is over the transverse
 and availability of well-trained personnel. Sedative pre-
process of L3, and approximately 5-6 cm lateral to the
medication aids placement of catheters and the smooth.
midline. A small bleb of local anaesthetic is placed in the
ness of induction of anaesthesia. The sheer weight and
skin, then 5 ml of 2% lignocaine [or other suitable local
 bulk of a large horse makes it difficult to handle, transport
analgesic agent) infiltrated in the muscle. A long spinal
or position for surgery without adequate manpower or
needle (e.g 18 G x 7-15 cm) is then introduced vertically
 mechanical aids. Many unconscious horses are transported
until it impinges on the transverse process; it is withdrawn
for short distances [e.g. from the operating table to recov-
a little, then redirected slightly cranially, until the inter.
ery box) suspended in a net or by their hobbled legs from
transverse ligament between L2 and L3 is penetrated (felt
an overhead hoist. Other methods of moving unconscious
as an increase, then sudden decrease in resistance). Fol-
horses include trolleys, which may constitute the floor of
lowing aspiration to ensure that the needle is not in a
the anaesthetic induction box and may then become the
blood vessel, 20 ml of 2% lignocaine is slowly infiltrated,
operating table top.
half 2.5 cm below the inter-transverse ligament, and the
 In clinical practice, anaesthesia in the adult horse is
remainder 2.5 om above to block the dorsal branch of the
 almost always induced by IV agents. Breed is often allied
paaiap si siu pue auoia au aua oi asea sill 'aau
to temperament and must not be ignored in the selection
by a loss of resistance [as it penetrates the transverse liga-
of an anaesthetic technique. Ideally, the horse should
ment) and sometimes by hearing air being aspirated
regain its feet as rapidly as possible at the frst attempt,
through the needle. Should this happen, the needle should
with minimal ataxia. Unfortunately. this is not easily
be withdrawn to a retroperitoneal position, before the
achieved following prolonged anaesthesia. Although pro-
local anaesthetic is deposited. The procedure is repeated
longed recumbency is not desirable, it is now appreciated
266
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
that, in some cases, ultra-fast recoveries may be of poor
agents depress the equine heart in a dose-dependent
quality because the horse tries to arise while still disorien-
fashion, but there are differences at equipotent concentra-
tated. The best quality recoveries are seen where the dnugs
tions between agents. With halothane, MAP falls mainly
given during anaesthesia are eliminated in such a manner
as a result of a fall in CO, even at 1 MAC concentrations.
that the horse does not try to rise until it is ready. It may
Accommodation occurs and, at a given end-tidal concen-
be necessary to use sedation to increase the duration of
 tration, CO and heart rate rise as anaesthesia progresses.
recumbency, and considerable recent research has concen-
The time course of this accommodation is more prolonged
trated on the quality of recovery and how to improve it.
(over five or more hours) than would be encountered
 Animals which are unused to people may try to rise too
during normal clinical practice (Steffey et al., 1990).
soon. Ponies exhibit poor quality recovery as often as do
Accommodation is more pronounced in spontaneously
large horses, but it is the heavier animal which is most
'eiudesiaday jo insan e se kiqeqoid 'sieue suuiean
likely to suffer from serious injury as a result. Other causes
 Anaesthesia with isoflurane, sevoflurane or desflurane also
of poor quality of recovery from anaesthesia include nerve
results in a dose-related hypotension, mainly arising from
and muscle damage induced during anaesthesia, and
vasodilation as, at eqi-MAC values, CO is better main-
untreated postoperative pain.
tained than with halothane However, the degree of hypo-
tension at MAC, in particular in spontaneously breathing
horses, is not as great as that seen in many clinical situa-
tions With the newer agents, increasing the concentration
DISTURBANCES IN
still results in a dose-related fall in CO.
CARDIOPULMONARY FUNCTION
-ieud inyasn apiaoid anoqe paeiap se suauadxa yons
macological information about the volatile anaesthetic
Disturbances of cardiopulmonary function have long been
agents in horses, but are not typical of normal clinical
recognized in anaesthetized horses but, in spite of much
anaesthetic practice in which anaesthesia is induced
research, their cause remains uncertain. Because general
with IV agents. With the IV techniques most commonly
anaesthesia necessarily involves recumbency, there has
employed, the transition to the volatile anaesthetic agent
been some debate as to the relative importance ofthe roles
results in marked hypotension; in experimental situations
of recumbency and of anaesthetic agents in their genesis
where nothing is done to prevent it, mean arterial blood
but, in conscious experimental animals, the cardiopulmo-
pressure (MAP) sometimes falls to below 40 mmHg
nary disturbances produced by lateral recumbency have
(Gleed & Dobson, 1990; Lee et al., 1998a) even with
been found to be minimal (Hall, 1984). However, distur-
halothane, although with the newer agents, once again it
bances, at least of pulmonary function, are more severe
following supine rather than lateral recumbency in anaes-
onset of increased systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
thetized horses. It is probable that while various postures
(Wagner et al., 1992). The fact that an induction tech-
may magnify effects they do not initiate them.
nique itself does not cause cardiovascular depression does
From the evidence available today, it seems likely that
Im juae aeion e yim uoeuiquos sii ieu uea nou
any disturbances resulting from recumbency are mini-
not do so. With many total IV techniques, blood pressure
mized in conscious animals by the operation of compen-
is well maintained, but this does not mean that there is
satory mechanisms that fail or become depressed when an
no cardiovascular depression.
anaesthetic is administered. Their failure or depression is
One factor rarely discussed in relation to anaesthetic-
 manifested in several ways but probably the most impor-
induced cardiovascular depression in horses is the influ-
tant results which affect equine anaesthetic morbidity and
ence of heart rate on CO. Although stroke volume can
mortality are cardiovascular depression, the development
 increase to compensate for bradycardia, there is a limit to
 of a large alveolar-arterial oxygen tension gradient ((A-a)
the extent to which this can compensate. O.2-Agonists cause
PO2) and, probably resulting from the frst two factors.
bradycardia and CO falls, although not in proportion to
 postanaesthetic myopathy.
 heart rate changes suggesting some compensation ( Wagner
et al., 199l). Many, but certainly not all, treatments that
Cardiovascular effects
are successful in raising CO under anaesthesia increase, Or
at least maintain heart rate (Lee et al., 1998a,c). Certainly.
Horses in which anaesthesia is maintained using volatile
this author (KC) considers that the effect of bradycardia
anaesthetic agents often suffer from hypotension, which
in the pathogenesis of low CO in equine anaesthesia has
may be the result of vasodilation and/or a fall in CO.
been neglected and deserves further consideration.
A number of studies have investigated the effects of vola-
tile anaesthetics alone, i.e including volatile anaesthetic
induction [review by Steffey. 2002; Santos et al., 2005;
Tissue blood flow versus arterial blood pressure
Steffey et al., 2005a,b). These investigations have demon-
Blood pressure is easy to measure, CO is not, although the
strated that all the currently used volatile anaesthetic
development of the lithium dilution technique has started
267
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
to make it more practicable in the clinical patients. As
0i sisoue iog uoooun jou si ll 'satanbasuoo snoas
described above in clinical practice, although surgical
be observed in the recovery period if oxygen is not admin-
stimulation causes MAP to rise this is due to vasoconstric-
istered, although it must be remembered that cyanosis
tion, and CO may fall, probably because of the increased
cannot become apparent if the blood flow to the mucous
afterload (Wagner et al., 1992). To maintain blood flow.
membranes is inadequate. To improve the situation, O2
an adequate perfusion pressure must be coupled with
must be insufflated at a minimum rate of 15 L/min. The
Aie pidei e pue sauiqau snon yud oo poos
PaO2 apparently recovers to normal levels as soon as the
refll time indicate good peripheral blood flow. Venous
animal regains its feet.
blood oxygen values also give a guide as to the adequacy
of perfusion. Although, ideally, mixed venous samples are
ute to the large (A-a)PO2 include diffusion defects in the
necessary. in the horse the oxygen tension of jugular
venous blood approximates (wetmore et al., 1987) and
matching of ventilation and perfusion in the lungs, atel-
values above 5 kPa (37.5 mmHg) indicate the adequacy
ectasis and a fall in CO without a corresponding fall in
 of oxygenation and therefore of perfusion of the periph-
tissue oxygen consumption.
eral tissue If the horse is being ventilated, end-tidal CO2
is another indicator of CO.
Diffusion impairment
In clinical practice, a number of different regimens are
used to maintain MAP (see Treatment of circulatory
There is no evidence that diffusion impairment occurs
so this must be regarded as an unlikely cause of
depression below). When considering the rationale of
these treatments their effect on CO and tissue blood flow
hypoxaemia.
needs consideration (see Fig. ll.13 below).
Atelectasis
In horses, the (A-a)PO2 develops very soon after the
Pulmonary changes
induction of anaesthesia and thereafter usually but not
always remains relatively constant. There is no doubt,
A major problem encountered in equine anaesthesia is
however, that atelectasis does occur for total collapse of
that the arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) is always much
regions of the dependent lung is commonly seen at
lower than might be expected from the inspired oxygen
autopsy of horses dying while anaesthetized (Fig. 1l.10).
tensions (PiOz), i.e there is a large (A-a)PaO2. A normal
This collapse is presumably due to compression of the
(A-a) of about 18 mmHg (2.4 kPa) in standing horses
lungby overlying abdominal and thoracic viscera. A totally
breathing air is doubled in anaesthetized, laterally recum-
collapsed lung acts as a venous-arterial shunt and can
bent animals. Most investigations concerned with (A-a)
cause marked arterial hypoxaemia. A shunt of 15% of the
PO2 gradients have been carried out under halothane/
total pulmonary blood flow has been found in laterally
oxygen anaesthesia, but similar differences have been
recumbent horses under halothane anaesthesia, compared
found during general anaesthesia with other agents. The
with about 5% in the standing animal (Gillespie et al.
increased (A-a)POz may be the result of a combination of
1969). Decrease in lung volume short of collapse may not
several factors and these have been, and still are the subject
have all that an adverse effect on alveolar ventilation for
of many investigations.
the alveolar compliance curve predicts that a small alveo-
The PaOz depends on the size of the animal and its
lus will expand proportionally more for any given change
position during anaesthesia (Hall, 1983), but it is rela-
in intra-alveolar pressure.
tively unaffected by the degree of respiratory depression
Radiographic studies (McDonell et al., 1979) and blood
produced by the anaesthetic agent. There has been shown 
to be no statistically significant difference in (A-a)PO2 in
catheters in conscious and anaesthetized animals in lateral
a series of animals anaesthetized once with spontaneous
decubitus (Hall et al., 1968a; Hall, 1979) have afforded
breathing and on another occasion with IppV to normo-
further confirmation of the impairment of function in the
capnia (Hall et al., 1968a,b). The (A-a)PO2 gradient does 
lower lung. Radiographic appearances (Fig. 11.1l) are sug-
not always increase significantly with time ( Gillespie et al.
gestive of a greatly reduced volume of the lower lung in
1969) although, in many clinical situations, it appears to
laterally recumbent animals (McDonell et al., l979;
'0s Op
Nyman et al., l990). When a horse lies on its side, a
When a horse is disconnected from a breathing circuit
diffuse radiographic opacity of the lower lung develops
containing an Oz-rich mixture of gases and allowed to
within 20 minutes and may be due to alveolar collapse,
breathe air. PaO2 of around 50 mmHg (6.5 kPa)
15
regional pulmonary congestion and/or interstitial oedema.
common. This may represent a blood O2 saturation of
Spontaneous deep breaths or forced expansion of the lung
around 90% (Clerbaux et al., 1986) but the steep part of
by compression of an anaesthetic reservoir bag, both of
the dissociation curve starts about here and any accident,
which might be expected to re-expand collapsed alveoli,
such as temporary obstruction of the airway, can have very
fail to alter the radiological appearance.
268
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
111
Figure 11.11 Opacity of the lower lung seen in a radiograph
taken at full expiration after 20 minutes of halothane
anaesthesia in right decubitus.
Figure 11.10 Slices of the lungs of a Shire horse that died
following anaesthesia. The horse had undergone 3 hours of
From McDonell WN, Half LW, jeffcote L8 (1979), with permission.
surgery in dorsal decubitus, then been placed in lateral
decubitus for recovery. The lung dependent during lateral
decubitus (lower picture) shows a large region of total
to those regions of the lung which are already overventi-
collapse, while the lung which was uppermost in recovery
lated in relation to their perfusion, i.e those contributing
still shows considerable areas of collapse around the hilar
to the physiological deadspace The increased ventilation
U s aso au yu uaul yo poad aui wo uoa
will remove carbon dioxide from the lungs and keep the
dorsal decubitus.
PaCO2 within normal limits but it will not greatly increase
the PaO2.
Venousadmixture
Effectofcardiacoutput
It would seem unlikely that total collapse of lung regions
CO is usually reduced under anaesthesia but tissue O2
resulting in right-to-left vascular shunting accounts for all
consumption may remain substantially unchanged. The
of the venous admixture which occurs in anaesthetized
resulting arterio-mixed venous PaO2 tension difference,
horses. A substantial amount must be due to the occur-
[A-V)PO2, thus increases, and venous blood passing
 rence of gross mismatching of ventilation and perfusion
through the anatomical shunt or regions of lung collapse
in the lungs. Some indication of this may be obtained
has a greater effect on the (A-V)PO2. As already discussed,
from the physiological dead space:tidal volume ratio. In
 reduction in CO does not necessarily relate to MAP. IPPV
most mammals, this ratio is about 0.3 but, in anaesthe-
may reduce CO. Indeed, the oxygen tension in mixed
tized horses, it is over 0.5 (Hall et al., 1968a,b).
venous blood from the pulmonary artery (PvO2) is lower
 The large physiological dead space:tidal volume ratio
when IPPV is used despite a slight increase in PaO2, pre-
partially explains why IPpV is relatively ineffective in
 sumably because of an increased extraction of oxygen
decreasing the (A-a)POz in horses. The augmented tidal
from the blood by the tissue - necessitated by the
 reduced CO - and hence rate of tissue perfusion. Because
269
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
night-to-left intrapulmonary shunt increases from the
although anatomical studies indicate that this is possible,
normal 5% in the standing. awake horse to about 15%
it is unlikely to occur in horses. The conclusion was that
umder halothane anaesthesia (Gillespie et al., 1969), the
recumbency rather than anaesthesia was responsible for
effect of the shunted blood of lower than normal POz will
the reduction of lung volume found in anaesthetized
be to produce noticeable reduction in the mixed PaO2 of
ponies.
the blood in the left atrium (PaO2).
Confirmation of serious impairment of expansion of
the lowermost lung has been obtained from histological
Lung volume
examination of very rapidly frozen lung regions. Also,
The largerthe lung the greaterthe stretch across the airways
from the histological appearances, it would seem that a
and the less tendency for closure to occur on expiration.
reduction of the tethering effect of lung parenchyma on
The lung volume at which airway closure starts to occur
extra-alveolar vessels might well be responsible for
('the closing volume') is important for,if airways close, gas
the increased resistance to blood flow in this lung
trapped distal to the point of closure soon becomes
(Hall, 1979).
depleted of oxygen and the blood perfusing the region gets
through unoxygenated to join the blood from other
Preventive methods
regions and reduces the mixed PaO2. Studies strongly
and/or treatments
 suggest that during general anaesthesia the horse's lung
volume is reduced to a level at which airway closure may
A number of strategies have been investigated to attempt
occur and that the reduction in lung volume in the later
to prevent or treat the hypoxaemia, and resultant hypoxia
ally recumbent horse was not equally distributed between
that occurs under anaesthesia. For example, acepromazine
the lower and upper lungs (Hall, 1983). In both right and
premedication has been found to decrease pulmonary
left lateral decubitus, there was a greater reduction in the
shunt (Marmtell et al., 2005a). As has been explained
u layago ssal aui gund pue 'guml lamol aul jo aumioa
above, improving CO and tissue blood flow not only
hobbles reduced lung volume still further.
reduces tissue hypoxia, but improves PaO by reducing the
The effect of airway closure on PaOz might be mitigated
effect of the 'shunt. Some other strategies are as follows
by collateral ventilation from neighbouring alveoli but,
and are summarized in Box ll.3.
Box 11.3 Prevention or treatment of hypoxia under anaesthesia (variable success)
See text for more detail
Drug-based treatments
Ventilatory strategies
1. Premedication with acepromazine reduces pulmonary
1. Inspired gas (Fi) of 30-50% oxygen (remaining nitrogen
shunt
or helium)
2. Beta-agonists:
Hypothesis is that nitrogen is the 'skeleton of the lung
a. clenbuterol by injection
 and prevents alveolar collapse
b. salbutamol (albuterol) by inhalation: 2 puffs
Successfut experimentally: variabte resuts clinicaly
(during inspiration) of commercial aerosol
Measure Fioz ano blood gases. Increase FiOz if
per 100 kg
partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO) is below
Clenbuterol - too many side effects
100 mmHg (13.3 kPa).
Satbutamot (atbuterot) - variabte results but appears to
2. Use of IPPV - no extra strategies
do no harm
This reduces hypercarbia but usually fails to improve
 3. Nitric oxide - pulsed delivery
PaOz. fnouces cardiovascufar changes.
Very successfut in raising PaOz and in maintaining the
3. Use of positive-end-expiratory pressures (PEEP)
advantages during recovery but not currentily
Fails with spontaneous breathing. some success with
practicable as a standard clinicar treatment.
IPPV but most successfuf if commenced immeoiatety
the horse becomes recumbent.
Grculatory based treatments
PEEP of 5-10 cmHzO now often used with IPPV
1. Improve cardiac output (choice of anaesthetic and 
4. Recruitment manoeuvres. Increasing inspired positive
ionotropes)
pressure for several breaths. Various strategies - see
Very effective in improving tissue oxygenation by
text.
increasing oxygen delivery.In turn.PaOz wilrise
 Controversiat; can be very successfuf but concern over
as. by raising PvOz it will reduce the effect of
potential puimonary damage (see text).
the shunt.
270
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Inspired oxygen concentrations
dld   e uay 'g dld m auo '09 y dld e qm
It has been usual to use oxygen as the carrier gas for the
60 cmHzO, each held inflated for 10-12 seconds while
maintaining PEEP at 10 cmH0 or higher. Blood pressure
volatile anaesthetic agents but, although counterintuitive,
it may be that using such high concentrations of oxygen
and heart rate were only minimally affected, but cardiac
increases atelectasis. If there is airway trapping, all the
 output was not measured. There remain concerns over
 Oxygen is absorbed, the alveolus becomes collapsed, and
 potential pulmonary damage, but it would seem time that
it is then difficult to re-inflate. Using nitrogen in the
recruitment manoeuvres were re-investigated to find the
inspired mixture may prevent such collapse. Marntell et al.
most effective mode.
(2005b) demonstrated that, indeed, high oxygen concen-
Pharmacological treatments
trations increased intrapulmonary shunt. Using a helium/
Oxygen mixture in a similar manner was even more effec-
Gleed and Dobson (1990) reported that the β2-agonist
tive (Stafferi et al., 2009). Many anaesthetists now com-
clenbuterol (0.8 mg/kg) was effective in increasing PaO2
mence with an inspired oxygen of 40%: if PaO2 falls, the
in dorsally recumbent halothane anaesthetized horses.
FiO2 can be increased. This strategy is only safe to employ
Other studies failed to reproduce these results (Dodam
if there is the ability to measure both inspired and arterial
et al., 1993; Lee et al., 1998a). In some cases, the injection
oxy gen.
of clenbuterol is followed by a transient fall in PaOz, pre-
sumably because of the increased O2 demand associated
Ventilatory strategies
with the side effects of sweating and tachycardia. However,.
salbutamol (albuterol), which is available as an aerosol,
It has already been explained that IPpV does not markedly
can be given via the endotracheal tube. The usual dose
improve the PaO2. nor reduce the [A-a)PO2 gradient,
used for around a 500 kg horse is 10 puffs of the human
probably as it only 'over-ventilates' the already expanded
 strength aerosol (each puff is l00 μg) timed at inspiration.
alveolae. Another strategy is to increase the expiratory
Results are again variable, but side effects are rare.
airway pressure to above atmospheric pressure (positive
 In contrast to the variable results from using P2-agonists,
end-expiratory pressure or PEEP) which, in theory, will, by
the pulsed delivery (for a % of the inspiratory time) of
increasing the lung volume to an amount equal to the
nitric oxide (NO) has to date always been successful in
product ofthe total compliance and the pressure, decrease
the tendency for airways to close and thus raise the PaO2.
 tained during recovery after NO administration has ceased
As described in Chapter 9, the concern is that this increase
(Nyman et al., 20l2:; Gnubb et al., 20l3). As yet, this
in thoracic pressure will lead to a reduction in cardiac
system is not available for routine clinical use but it has
output. Imposition of a 10 and 20 cmHzO expiratory
 potential for the future.
resistance by the insertion of a water trap in the expiratory
 Respiratory stimulants such as doxapram are ineffective
limb of a circle absorber fails to improve the PaO2 in
at improving oxygenation in anaesthetized horses. At the
horses breathing spontaneously under halothane/oxygen
end of anaesthesia, doxapram can be used to stimulate
 anaesthesia (Hall & Trim, 1975)and, indeed, usually pro-
 breathing in cases of refractory apnoea, but will also awake
duced immediate respiratory arrest. Broadly similar results
the horse.
were obtained in horses under barbiturate/guaifenesin
anaesthesia (Beadle et al., 1975). In contrast, if PEEP of
Muscle and nerve damage
became recumbent, it was more effective [Moens & Bohm,
2011). Thus, despite disappointing experimental results
There used to be an incidence of up to 6.4% of lameness
 Al a  sise a 
following anaesthesia in the horse (Klein, 1978: Richey
PEEP
et al., 1990), much of which is due to damage to nerves
 In Chapter 9, the use of recnuitment manoeurres was
 and muscles during recumbency. In the clinical situation,
also discussed. Moens & Bohm review their use in both
it is not always easy to distinguish between the two syn-
people and horses. Such manoeuvres have been used in
dromes [hence the term 'radial paralysis' was once used to
horses previously but usually as one sustained inflation
describe the condition now known to be caused by a
sy si pue dla) ansad Aoensui aasod yly ie
triceps myopathy; Fig 11.12)and it is probable that it some
often resulted in bradycardia and a fall in CO. However.
cases both occur together. Postanaesthetic myopathy is
Wettstein et al. (2006) used a stepwise procedure using
now rare but only because precautions are taken to
PEEP and then PIPs of 45, 50 then 55 cmH2O; oxygenation
avoid it.
was improved, pulmonary shunt reduced and, although
there was a fall in MAP and heart rate, cardiac output was
Postanaesthetic myopathy (rhabdomyofysis)
unchanged. In horses undergoing anaesthesia for colic.
It is now generally accepted that the common form of
Hopster et al. (20ll) used, with success in improving oxy-
postanaesthetic myopathy is due to muscle ischaemia
genation, another recruitment modification; one breath
cused by inadequate muscle perfusion (Trim & Mason.
271
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 11.12 Postanaesthetic myopathy shown in the forelimb. Characteristic posture of pain with head thrown back and up
when made to walk. In this case, there was hard swelling of the shoulder muscles and triceps. The posture due to pain varies
with the muscles involved.
1973: Lindsay et al., 1980, 1989). Clinical surveys [Klein,
50 mmHg positioning on a soft surface reduces this
1978; Richey et al., 1990) have demonstrated that the
(Lindsay et al., 1980). However, the weight of a
incidence of the condition is increased by duration of
horse or of one of its limbs can compress veins
anaesthesia and by periods of hypotension. In experimen-
while patent arteries allow blood to flow into muscle
aanun) paguojoid Aq pasnpul aq ueo ll 'sanueisunou [el
capillaries, thus resulting in a rapid increase in
plus hours) of hypotensive anaesthesia (Grandy et al.
intracompartmental pressure to that of arterial
1987: Lindsay et al., 1989). The failure of perfusion to the
pressure (Taylor & Young, 1990) and the total failure
muscles is a typical 'compartmental syndrome', i.e.
of all muscle perfusion; this is probably the reason
increased pressure within the space limited by the fascial
for myopathy in the non-dependent (or upper)
sheath of the muscle compromises the circulation. When
limbs of laterally recumbent horses
intracompartmental muscular pressure increases to the
3.
 Blood supply to the muscles should be increased. It
point at which the local circulation fails, the muscle will
has been routine to assume that this means
become ischaemic. Damage will occur at reperfusion and
increasing MAP and, certainly, it is necessary to raise
this results in swelling and a further increase in compart-
this above the'closing pressure' within the muscle
 mental pressure, thus worsening the situation. The poten-
compartment However, once MAP is above this
tial for continuing damage at reperfusion explains why
'closing pressure', then further improvement in
horses may appear unaffected when they frst rise the
muscle blood flow depends on increasing CO
condition becoming apparent over the ensuing hours.
(Lee et al., 1998a,b,c). Positive inotropes such as
In order to limit the occurrence of myopathy, three
dobutamine improve CO, MAP and muscle blood
factors are necessary:
flow while vasoconstrictor agents increase MAP but
1. The time of anaesthesia should be kept as short as
have no action on peripheral perfusion (Fig. ll.13).
 possible and anaesthetic time should never be
The condition described above fails to explain all cases
wasted
of myopathy and it is probable that the condition is mul-
2. Intracompartmental pressure should be reduced to
tifactorial. Kein [1978) considered that there were two
the minimum. The intracompartmental pressure in
distinct types of anaesthetic-induced myopathy, the com-
the triceps muscles of the dependent limb in a horse
partmental syndrome and a more generalized form which
positioned on a hard surface may reach as high as
she considered was more likely to occur in very fit animals;
272
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
120-
 Mean arterial
Figure 11.13 Cardiac index, mean arterial blood pressure
blood pressure
(MAP) and intramuscular blood flow in the dependent triceps
muscle in 6 halothane-anaesthetized ponies. On different 
100-
occasions, the ponies were given increasing doses of
infusions of one of the following: saline (control).
pr'
80-
phenylephrine or dobutamine. Dobutamine increased MAP.
cardiac index and intramuscular blood flow, but while
HE
60-
phenylephrine was equally effective in increasing MAP, it
#
failed to improve either cardiac index or intramuscular blood
flow.
arter
40-
Adapteo from YH. Lee et al., 1998c.
ean
20-
10
the authors have seen two cases of acute generalized rhab.
-20
0
20
40
60
domyolysis occurring in horses 1-2 days after anaesthesia,
80
-edoau aimdes palquasai saupuy uaou-sod ypm u
thy. The condition has much in common with equine
7-
Cardiac index
azoturia. It has been postulated that the nutritional status
 is a factor involved, but no survey has found a significant
6-
would appear the generalized condition is sporadic and
5
unpredictable in occurrence.
The treatment for myopathy is mainly symptomatic:
名
 analgesia (the condition is very painful), sedation if neces-
sary, prevention of further damage, fluids (to prevent renal
damage) and a great deal of tender loving care As much
of the damage occurs at reperfusion, there could be a role
for the administration of free radical scavengers but, as yet,
there is no evidence as to their effcacy. It is probable that
by the time the condition is diagnosed, the damage is
already present.
-20
20
40
60
80
Neuropathy
400-
Intramuscular
 Nerves may be damaged during the anaesthetic process by
bloodflow
the effects of pressure, of stretching., and by ischaemia.
Peripheral neuropathies (such as facial nerve damage
8
+
time
through pressure from the head collar, Fig 1l.14) are easy
bloo
from
to diagnose, but other cases (e.g. femoral nerve damage)
may be diffcult to differentiate from myopathy and,
2
indeed, it is probable that the two conditions frequently
200
 Occur concurrently. Neuropathy is not painful but, if it
involves the motor supply to more than one limb, the
horse will be unable to rise Contused nerves may regain
100-
their function once the surrounding swelling has sub-
sided, so symptomatic treatment should be combined
with good nursing.
A very occasional but disastrous occurrence following
-20
20
40
60
80
anaesthesia is spinal malacia. The problem has only been
Time (min)
reported to occur in young horses positioned on their back
for a short procedure. Most, but not all cases have occurred
in heavy horses (Brearley et al., 1986; Lam et al., 1995;
Control
Dobutamine
Trim, 1997). Sometimes the horse fails to regain its feet
following anaesthesia, other times it will stand, but an
Phenylephrine
ascending paralysis commences. The condition appears
totally painless; many cases have been maintained by
 good nursing for several days, but the condition always
273
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
authorities like to ‘let down' extremely fit horses, reducing
their plane of nutrition. Horses brought in from lush
grazing develop abdominal distension if not adequately
fasted. Just prior to anaesthesia, the horse's mouth should
be washed out to prevent food being dislodged from the
teeth and pushed into the airway by the endotracheal tube.
Shoes should be removed before anaesthesia, or at least
covered with adhesive plaster, to prevent damage to floor-
ing or the animal itself in the recovery period. The horse
may receive prophylactic treatment for tetanus. Surgeons
jo uonpul au ot iod uaaig aie soique isanbai Aeu
anaesthesia, some of which may influence subsequent
events. Gentamicin and other antibiotics ofthis group will
increase the length of action of neuromuscular blocking
agents, and are toxic to the kidneys. The IV injection of
penicillin causes marked hypotension (through vasodila-
tion) for approximately 40 minutes (Hubbell et al., 1987),
and the cardiovascular effects of many other antibiotics are
unknown. Although ideally they should be avoided just
prior to anaesthesia, current thinking is that high blood
levels of antibiotics during surgery prevent infection, and
Figure 11.14 Facial nerve paresis resulting from pressure. In
their IV use may be considered essential to the overall
this case, the damage resulted from inadequate padding on
success of the case.
the operating table but, more typically, it results from
 In emergencies, the aim of preparation for anaesthesia
pressure exerted by a head collar.
is to improve the physical status of the horse as much as
possible and to make any preparations which may reduce
progresses and euthanasia is inevitable The cause of this
the risk of the perioperative process. To detail all such
condition is unknown.
 preparations is beyond the scope of this chapter. Briefly.
orthopaedic cases may need support to the limb to prevent
damage at anaesthetic induction, and analgesia and seda
PREPARATION FOR GENERAL
tion should be chosen to avoid excessive ataxia. Most acute
thoracic crises are the result oftrauma and horses suffering
ANAESTHESIA
from chest injuries may be agitated, restless and dysp-
noeic, and may require an analgesic both for its sake and
The preanaesthetic examination and the general principles
to reduce the risk of injury to attendants. Air and/or fluid
of preparation prior to anaesthesia described in Chapter 1
 should be removed from the pleural cavity by the insertion
are of course, applicable to horses, but there are some
of a chest drain before general anaesthesia is induced. In
 aspects of preanaesthetic preparation of these animals that
most emergency cases, hypovolaemia needs to be cor-
warrant further consideration.
rected before induction of anaesthesia. However, where
blood loss is acute and the potential for further loss is still
present (eg. haemorrhage from the guttural pouch) such
General considerations
replacement should be limited prior to anaesthetic induc-
Horses do not vomit, so a totally empty stomach prior to
aul ul lnsan Ae ainssaid pooiq ul aseaiun ue se uon
anaesthesia is less important than for small animals.
commencement of severe and uncontrollable haemor-
However, most anaesthetists fast horses for around 8-14
rhage In such cases, the agents used for sedation and
hours ('food out at midnight’) but leave in water until at
analgesia should have minimal effects (in either direction)
least 2 hours prior to anaesthesia, or even until premedica-
on blood pressure Oncethe horse has been anaesthetized,
tion. There is no good evidence to back these recommen-
blood pressure will almost certainly be reduced, and it
dations but, particularly in dorsal recumbency. a full
may then be necessary to administer rapidly high volumes
stomach will limit ventilation as discussed previously. This
 of fluids. The most common emergency requiring prean-
aesthetic treatment is the ‘colic' (see Anaesthesia for
example in some colics. Fasting is not usually employed
horses with colic' below).
(or often not practicable) for very short surgery such as
Mares nursing foals should not be separated from their
normal castration carried out in the field. Over-long
offspring in the preanaesthetic period. If it is necessary to
starvation is thought to increase the incidence of postop-
operate on the mare, the need for sedation is greatly
erative impacted colic. If surgery is elective many
reduced if anaesthesia is induced in the presence of the
274
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
foal. Similarly, the presence of a foal's sedated mother
contributes to the smooth induction of anaesthesia in the
foal.
Ideally, the weight of the horse should be determined
by actual weighing, as visual estimation can be very inac-
curate. If weighing facilities are not available, the formulae
below were validated in over 400 horses at Cambridge
University:
Girth² [inches) ×length (inches)
Weight (lb) =
1320
or
Girth² (cm)x length (cm)
Weight (kg) =
10815
A
 Commercially available weigh-tapes base their calcula-
tion on the girth measurement only, but still provide a
useful estimate of weight, and also are often 'calibrated' to
the type of horse (Thoroughbred or Warmblood)
Intravenous techniques
In horses, IV injections are usually made into the jugular
vein about half way down the neck. The horse should be
handled quietly, as once forcible restraint (such as the
twitch) is used, many will tense their neck muscles and
obscure the jugular furrow, making the danger of acciden-
tal intracarotid injection more likely. The usual aseptic
 precautions should be taken prior to insertion of a needle
Or catheter, the size of which depends on personal prefer-
aipaau auy les y papalui aq ol si ieum uo pue anua
(e.g. 23 G) does not necessarily cause the horse less pain
than one of 19 G, but will reduce the damage to the vein
a suoau yns u jn  aq  y
anticipated.
The vein is distended by pressing the thumb into the
B
jugular furrow just below the site of venipuncture
(Fig. ll.15A). This tenses the skin and the distended vein
Figure 11.15 Injection into the jugular vein of the horse.
is easily palpable. Two methods of placement of a needle
(A) The vein is raised by digital pressure on the jugular grove,
may be used. In the first, the point of the needle is directed
and the needle inserted at an angel of 45°. (B) A catheter
at an angle of 45° to the vein, slid through the skin, into
placed towards the head is inserted in a similar manner. For
the vein then advanced up the vein towards the head. This
catheterization, aseptic precautions are taken; and a bleb of
is the author's (KC) personal preference In the second
local anaesthetic, a small hole through the skin, and
method, the needle is held at an angle of 90° to the vein,
 pre-laying the anchoring sutures are helpful
thnust into it, then turmed 90° so that it can be advanced
up the vessel. A good length of needle (or catheter) should
rapidly. A free flow of blood indicates that the needle is
be introduced into the vein otherwise there is a risk that,
well placed in the lumen of the vein. If only a few drops
as the vein subsides on the release of pressure, it will
of blood fall either (l) the needle is in a perivascular
retract away from the needle or that the slightest move-
haematoma or (2) the needle is in the vein but its lumen
ment will cause the needle to leave the vessel. Some prac-
is partially blocked. If red blood spurts, or blood is very
titioners leave the pressure on the vein as they inject the
free flowing then the needle may be in the carotid artery
 drug, this is dangerous as it leaves irritant agents in contact
 and should be withdrawn, the fist being placed hard into
with the lining of the vein, and also means when the pres-
the jugular furrow over the point of injection and main-
sure is removed, the drug enters the circulation very
 tained there for at least 5minutes in order to prevent the
275
Section
[2
Anaesthesia of the species
formation of a haematoma. Unfortunately, intracarotid
 precautions are taken. It is usually helpful to desensitize
injection may not be recognized if a small bore needle is
the skin by injecting a bleb of local anaesthetic subcutane-
employed, but will be if any dnug is injected, as a dramatic
 ously via a very fine needle, or by using an intradermal
response is almost immediate Once the needle is in situ,
 pressure injector. It is also helpful to make a small'prick'
its hub and the syringe should be held and pressed gently
incision so that the delicate plastic tip of the catheter
and continuously against the animal's neck during any
ensemble is not buckled during its passage through the
injection so that should the animal move its neck the hand
skin.
[and needle) will move with the horse and thus overcome
 Catheters may be placed going up the neck towards the
any tendency for the needle to be pulled out of the vein.
head (see Fig ll.l5B). or down towards the heart
(Fig. ll.16). To place a catheter up towards the head, the
technique is as for the jugular IV injection as described
Catheterization of the jugular vein
above. Once the catheter ensemble is in the vein, the
 Catheters, using over-the needles catheter as described in
plastic sheath is advanced into the vein to its maximum
Chapter l0, are now routine for the administration of
length, then secured in position with a partial skin thick-
IVanaesthetic agents in the horseNormalantiseptic
 e d ua ao yoio e p i s
A
B
C
Figure 11.16 This series demonstrates insertion of a jugular catheter towards the heart. (A) The vein is held raised by a
thumb in the jugular groove. There is a bleb of local anaesthetic over the insertion site and a pin-prick hole has been made in
vein to its full length. (B) Blood can be seen coming out of the catheter as the vein is still raised (this may take a second
person) and is maintained so until the catheter is sealed, thus reducing the chance of air emmbolism. (C) The catheter has been
sealed with a valved extension. A sticky-tape butterfly was pre-laid around this extension, and sutured to the skin
Photograohs from Taylor, PM., Clarke, K.W., 2007. Hanobook of Equine Anaesthesia. Zno eon, Esevier Lto, with permission.
276
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
catheter may be kept patent by periodically flushing with
operation and the nature of the anaesthetic technique to
heparin saline solution (lo IU/mL). Ideally, the skin
be employed. Some anaesthetists favour heavy sedative
suture should be laid before venepuncture is attempted so
 premedication which decreases the quantities of sedatives
that it may be tied securely around the catheter without
 and anaesthetics administered later, while others habitu-
risk of displacing this from the vein but, otherwise, the
ally use light premedication and more of the anaesthetic.
catheter may be fixed in place with a drop of acrylate glue
 In the hands of their exponents, both regimens appear to
which will hold it while the suture is completed. Catheters
produce similar results.
placed towards the head are perfectly adequate for anaes-
thesia unless large volumes of irritant drugs (e.g. guaifen-
Anticholinergics
esin) are to be infused.
Where the catheter is to stay in place for some days or
In current practice, anticholinergic drugs are not used in
where large volumes of fluids are to be infused, slightly
the routine premedication of horses, partly to avoid
longer catheters are placed towards the heart. Several
-z juanbasqns ol asuodsan ul dvn ul saseanou anisse
makes of ‘over-the needle' catheters of suitable length
agonists. Anticholinergics may be administered if required
are available for the purpose and it is now not usual to
 Once the horse is anaesthetized, for example if the surgery
need to use the ‘over the wire' Seldinger technique,
is likely to provoke vagal reflexes or should bradycardia
although this can be useful where catheterization is diff-
 develop. Atropine (0.005-0.02 mg/kg) and glycopyrrolate
cult. Figure 1l.16 describes the process of placing a jugular
(0.005-0.010 mg/kg) have both been used satisfactorily by
catheter towards the heart. Care must be taken to avoid air
IV injection (Singh et al., 1997). Hyoscine (0.1 mg/kg IV)
embolism as the tip of the catheter is at a lower pressure
is often used by the surgeons prior to rectal examination
than its hub, predisposing to the aspiration of air if the
and, although this dose is short acting and conservative
hub is not closed off. A very secure 'cap' to the catheter is
(Borer & Clarke 2006). it will increase heart rate for
essential; it must be impossible for it to be accidentally
around 15 minutes.
displaced and a three-way tap is not advisable. There are
anecdotal reports of horses being found dead in their box,
Sedatives
the catheter open to air. Very little air needs to be aspirated
to cause the horse to collapse - the authors have seen one
Premedication with sedative agents while the horse is still
case resulting in collapse where aspiration was heard to
in its accustomed accommodation greatly improves the
process of anaesthetic induction as it keeps the horse calm,
occur for less than one second through a 23 G catheter.
 The resistance of a catheter to infusion of fluids is gov-
reduces apprehension and fear, and makes procedures
erned by Poiseuille's equation; i.e. resistance is propor-
such as the placement of catheters more pleasant for both
tional to length and inversely proportional to the diameter
horse and anaesthetist.
Thus, if fast fluid infusion is needed, relatively short wide
Acepromazine
catheters should be chosen. When catheters are left in
place there is a danger of infection and subsequent throm-
In many cases, acepromazine (0.03-0.05 mg/kg IM or
bophlebitis so full sterile precautions are required for their
0.03 mg/kg IV) given 30-60 minutes prior to anaesthesia
placement and in subsequent handling of the injection
is ideal for premedication; it calms the horse without
ports.
making it ataxic and its effects usually last throughout the
whole perioperative period, and so contributes to a calm
recovery. Acepromazine reduces the dose of the parenteral
anaesthetics used and reduces MAC of volatile anaesthetic
PREMEDICATION AND
agents (Heard et al., 1986). If 02-agonists are also used,
CO-INDUCTION
their effect on MAC overwhelms that of acepromazine but,
as their effect wanes usually affter 60-90 minutes, the influ-
At one time, sedative premedication was given some time
ence of acepromazine premedication becomes obvious;
prior to induction of anaesthesia. Currently, this may still
without acepromazine the depth of anaesthesia lightens
be so, or the traditional premedicant drugs may be admin-
very suddenly, necessitating a rapid increase in the inspired
istered either immediately before, or in combination with
levels of volatile anaesthetic agents. The use of acepro-
the anaesthetic induction agents. How, and to some extent
mazine for premedication significantly reduces the overall
which, agents used are a matter of personal preference,
anaesthetic risk (Johnston et al., 1995).
but whichever system, or combination of systems are
employed, the additive effect of all agents administered
αz-Adrenoceptor agonists
should be considered together.
Xylazine detomidine and romifdine are widely used as
The choice and dose of any premedicant drug will
part of the anaesthetic co-induction process and they
depend on the physical condition and temperament of the
reduce markedly the dose ofboth IV and inhalation anaes-
horse the likely duration of the proposed examination or
thetic agents. However, they may also be used as classic
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
premedicants' in which case their residual action must be
Facilities for induction
taken into account when deciding on doses to be used at
anaesthetic induction. Doses used IV for premedication
are approximately half those used for sedation (i.e. xyla-
anaesthesia should never be induced in horse without
zine at 0.5 mg/kg. detomidine at 10 μg/kg and romifdine
there being available the necessary apparatus to resuscitate
the horse should it become necessary. Such apparatus
at 50 μg/kg) so that the horse is able to walk to the anaes-
thetic induction area. Intramuscular use of these agents is
includes endotracheal tubes, methods to administer O2
often neglected; 1 mg/kg xylazine or 20 μg/kg detomidine
 and apply IPPV, and the drugs likely to be needed should
 IM give excellent sedation after approximately 20 minutes.
cardiac arrest occur. In the hospital setting, the apparatus
If the horse is exceptionally diffault to handle,
40-
needed to administer volatile anaesthetic agents (anaes-
 50 μg/kg detomidine (chosen because of the low volume
thetic machine and absorber circuit) will fulfl this role.
involved) with or without butorphanol may be given IM,
For feld anaesthesia, a portable source of O2 will be
the horse left quietly for at least 20 minutes, after which
required. IPPV of the lungs can be satisfactorily provided
time, in the authors' experience IV injection has always
by the use of a stream of oxygen directed into the trachea
become possible although occasionally only with the aid
for the Venturi effect using the ‘overide' facility on a
of a twitch. In such horses, IM injection may be given at
demand valve, or using an easily portable to-and-fro
any convenient site (the horse often does not anticipate
circuit.
an injection in the pectoral muscles) as swelling at the site
The cardiopulmonary system of the anaesthetized horse
 of injection rarely occurs after the use of these drugs.
must be monitored continuously throughout anaesthesia.
but the degree of sophistication with which this will be
Benzodiazepines
done will depend on the facilities available and, in the
field, may be limited to those of continuous observation,
Diazepam and midazolam are used as part of a co-
palpation of the pulse, and possibly the use of a battery
induction process (see below) rather than as classical
operated pulse oximeter. The favoured site for the oxime-
premedicants.
ter probe is across the nasal septum, as it is without hair,
usually without pigment, and sufficiently thin. If inhala-
Analgesics
tion agents are being employed, monitoring must be of
a high standard and should also include the electrocar-
If not already given, NSAIDs may be administered so that
diogram and (preferably directly measured) MAP (as
they will be effective by the postoperative period. In the
described in Chapter 2). A peripheral pulse monitor, end-
horse (in comparison with the dog), at licensed doses,
tidal gases and arterial and venous blood gases are very
NSAIDs do not appear to cause renal damage despite
helpful.
intraoperative hypotension.
Opioid analgesics may be used to provide preoperative
pain relief if necessary. when full analgesic doses are
required, although as discussed earlier, their use is contro-
Methods of control at anaesthetic induction
versial. Opioids can also be used with the O2-agonist to
Free fal!
improve the level of sedation (see Table ll.1). Full doses
 In this simplest method of control, one person holds the
may be required for difficult horses, although there is a
horse's head as it becomes recumbent If the horse leans
danger the horse may become recumbent The two drugs
are often mixed in the same syringe; this is not recom-
back as anaesthesia takes hold, the handler holds the head
down, which steadies the fall and prevents the horse going
mended by the manufacturers as the necessary tests to
ensure chemical stability have not been performed but,
over backwards (Fig. ll.17). With the type of induction
with diffcult horses, there may only be one opportunity
which occurs following use of the dissociative agents, this
to carry out the injection.
is less necessary, and the handler simply has to steady the
head. If induction is in a padded box, the horse may be
placed with its rump to a wall so that the wall takes the
weight; this makes induction very smooth, but occasion-
INDUCTION OF ANAESTHESIA
ally results in a hind leg becoming trapped beneath the
horse.
The free fall method requires the minimum of staf and
aa ui sa ia s au si t is a
is the only practicable method in the feld.
anaesthesia, but a routine method suitable for every situ-
ation has yet to be discovered. The anaesthetist must
choose a suitable method with regard to the size, health
Gate method
and temperament of the individual horse, the cost of the
This method is again simple, and is probably the most
 procedure and the facilities and staff available.
widely used in hospital situations. The horse is positioned
278
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Ring in
padded wall
Swinging
gate
Applied
pressure
Breast
restraining
Halter rope
rope
Figure 11.17 Control of a horse during induction of
 anaesthesia using the 'free-fall' method.
 against a wall of the induction box, and restrained there
by a gate. A rope, which can easily be released, holds the
Figure 11.18 Control of a horse during induction of
gate in place and prevents the horse moving forward
anaesthesia using the 'gate' or 'swinging-door' method.
(Fig. ll.l8). When available, several people may press
Induction to recumbency is aided by two or three people
against the gate to support it. As anaesthesia is induced,
applying pressure to the gate as the horse sinks towards the
the rope is released and the gate opened so that the horse
floor. An assistant restrains the horse's head and prevents the
may sink to the ground.
horse from falling forwards or backwards. The breast control 
A variation of this method manages without the gate,
rope which prevents the horse from walking forwards is
the horse being held against the wall by a number of
slackened off as the horse becomes recumbent.
people. The horse is restrained and its weight supported
as it becomes recumbent by head and tail ropes attached
to rings in the wall of the induction box.
Intravenous regimens for
anaesthetic induction
Tilting table
In normal clinical practice anaesthesia in adult horses is
In this method, the operating table top is tilted to the
 induced with IV agents. The dose of anaesthetic required
vertical position; the adequately premedicated or quiet
in the healthy horse will depend on the amount of seda.
animal is restrained against the table top by straps
tive and opioid analgesic it has received both as premedi-
(Fig. 1ll.19). As the horse loses consciousness during the
cation and just prior to anaesthetic administration. The
[iael oui iuoous usnoiq st il ssanond uosnpu
number of possible combinations of sedative and anaes-
recumbency by restoring the table top to its normal hori-
thetic agents which are suitable for anaesthetic induction
zontal position. The method usually works very well but
is enormous, and the choice will depend on facilities, the
it is only possible where an adequate number of trained
state of the horse, and on personal preference. However.
 personnel are available, and trouble occurs if the horse
the majority of induction techniques are based on a com-
 panics or a fault develops in the table mechanism at a
bination of sedative drugs either with dissociative agents
critical stage of induction. Once the horse is unconscious,
such as ketamine or with hypnotic/anaesthetic agents such
padding must be placed underneath it, so the method
as thiopental or alfaxalone Either method may be also
does not remove the necessity to lift the horse The horse
include the use of centrally acting muscle relaxants such
may be allowed to recover on the horizontal table top and
as benzodiazepine agents or guaifenesin. The following
placed on its feet as soon as it is judged able to stand by
section and Table 1l.4 discuss some combinations which
rotating the top to vertical; or the horse may be transferred
the authors have found satisfactory - there are many
to a padded recovery box.
others that are equally satisfactory. If the horse is not
279
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
only the 02-agonists and the benzodiazepines have proved
to be of any real value.
The dissociative anaesthetic agents are not effective in a
single brain circulation time, and therefore where sedation
with an Q2-adrenoceptor agonist has preceded the IV injec-
tion of ketamine, a large horse may take as long as 3
minutes to become recumbent. The method of achieving
e sael uayo euue aun rssanoid ienpeig e si Auaquna
step or two sideways or backwards, its legs buckle under
it, it sinks back on its haunches into sternal recumbency.
It then rolls gently over on to its side and may make one
Or two quite vigorous limb movements before becoming
still. Once laterally recumbent, the animal settles much
A
more quickly and the onset of unconsciousness is more
rapid when no attempt is made forcibly to restrain the
head - if this is done, the horse may even try to rise and
an be very diffcult to restrain.
Ketamine-α2-agonist
Ketamine, following premedication with an Q2-agonist
produces excellent induction of anaesthesia followed by a
 spectacularly rapid, but usually very quiet, recovery. Xyla-
zine 1.0-1.1 mg/kg. detomidine 15-20 μg/kg or romif-
dine 80-100 μg/kg is given IV and then, once maximum
e "(sanuu s kiaexndde) padoaap sey uoeis
bolus of ketamine (2.2-2.5 mg/kg) is injected IV. Lateral
recumbency is assumed in 1-3 minutes after the ketamine
B
injection, the longer time occurring with the larger
 animals. Anaesthesia continues to deepen for 1-2 minutes
Figure 11.19 Induction of anaesthesia using a tilting table
after the horse becomes recumbent, and even when eye
top. The sedated horse is restrained against the table which
movements cease, relaxation of the jaw muscles is not
is rotated to a horizontal position as the animal becomes
always good and it may be necessary to prise the mouth
unconscious and relaxed.
open for the passage of an endotracheal tube Relaxation
will occur if more time is allowed.
Relaxation can be improved by the administration of a
healthy, modifications may have to be made to these pro-
benzodiazepine agent IV (usually diazepam or midazolam
tocols. For example there may be times when the side
0.01-0.05 mg/kg), but this is not essential (Muir et al.
effects of the Oz-adrenoceptor agonists are contraindi-
aul suraig pateope aey sisayisaeue shouea (226l
ated, and conditions such as toxaemia or hypoproteinae-
 benzodiazepine before, mixed with (midazolam only) or
 mia reduce the quantity of anaesthetic agent required.
after the ketamine injection; this author will not give it
 The regimens suggested below involve premedication or
before as if anything happens to prevent the rapid follow
co-induction using Q2-agonists. Additional premedication
up of ketamine, the horse becomes weak from the muscle
with acepromazine, or the addition of butorphanol (0.01-
 relaxation and is very diffcult to control. Benzodiazepines
0.02 mg/kg) does not appear to reduce the doses of agents
do cause further respiratory depression and should be
subsequently needed to induce anaesthesia, although they
used with caution in situations where facilities for IPPV
may influence subsequent maintenance and/or recovery.
are not readily available If for any clinical reason it is
desirable to give a lower dose of Q2-agonist, then the
Dissociative agents
dose rate of the benzodiazepine can be increased to
compensate.
When the dissociative agents, ketamine or tiletamine, are
The classic signs and stages of anaesthesia are not rec
given on their own to horses, they cause stimulation rather
 ognizable; nystagmus and tear formation may be observed
than depression of the central nervous system, with a form 
 and the surest guide to the depth of anaesthesia is the
of excitement in which there is poor muscle relaxation,
 presence or absence of response to surgical stimulation.
tremors and even convulsions. Many drugs have been used
When no other anaesthetic is given, depending on the
in attempts to suppress these most undesirable effects but
 degree of surgical stimulation, horses first raise their heads
280
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Table 11.4a Common regimens using dissociative agents (ketamine or tiletamine) suitable for the induction of
anaesthesia prior to maintenance with volatile agents, or by TlvA
Premedication *
Anaesthetic
Maintenance by further IV
(including drugs given a few
agents (TlvA) for short duration
minutes before anaesthetic)
(20-30 mins) only
Xylazine, 1 mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.2-2.5 mg/kg
Xylazine and ketamine; increments of half
plus (optional)
 original dose- as required* **
diazepam 0.01-0.05 mg/kg
Or
**Diazepam can be given at same time or
Triple drip' (see text)
 immediately foll cwing ketamine.
Cr
 Midazolam (0.01-0.03 mg/kg) can replace
Thiopental 1-2 mg/kg boli as required****
diazepam in any of the regimens.
Detomidine 0.015-0.02 mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.2-2.5 mg/kg
Ketamine 0.5-1 mg/kg as required **x,
(15-20 μg/kg)
plus (optional)
 After 2030 minutes may need a further half
diazepam, 0.01-0.05 mg/kg
 original dose of detomidine 
as above
Or
Triple drip`*****
Or
Thiopental 1-2 mg/kg boli as required**#*
Romifidine 0.08-0.1 mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.2-2.5 mg/kg
Romifidine 25% original dose and ketamine
(80-100 μg/kg)
plus (optional)
1 mg/kg as required (Data sheet
diazepam, 0.01-0.05 mg/kg
recommendation)***
as above
Or
,dup adul
Or
Thiopental 1-2 mg/kg boli as required****
Xylazine, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
Tiletamine, 0.05-1.0 mg/kg IV and Zolazepam,
Or
 0.5-1 mg/kg (Tiletamine and zolazepam are
Detomidine, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg
 supplied as a fixed 50:50 ratio combination)
(10-20 μg/kg)
Xylazine, 1 mg/kg
 Guaifenesin infused (approximately
Ketamine 1 mg/kg
Cr
15-30 mg/kg) until ataxia, then ketamine.
Cr
Detomidine, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg
1.5-2.0 mg/kg
 Thiopental, 1 mg/kg
(10-20 μg/kg)
as required****
Cr
Romifidine, 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg)
All drugs given IV unless otherwise stated. Anaesthesia results from a combination of the effects of the sedative premedicant drugs and of
the induction agents. Many combinations other than those listed here can be used safely
onpu! jo asop an anpal pou l by/w coozo'o loueudonq jo/pue (by/w soo>) auizewodae yt uoeipawand leuopp*
agent required, but may lengthen the duration of action.
**The benzodiazepine is optional but improves relaxa tion. It is given with (if compatible) or immediately after the ketamine. Midazolam is
thought to be more potent than diazepam; being water soluble it can be administered with the ketamine.
** * Some veterinarians recommend giving ketamine based 'top ups' at set intervals but no evidence base for safe schedule.
** *In some countries, thiopental is no longer available. In the future, propofol or alfaxalone may replace thiopental in these regimens (see 
text), but it is not yet 'routine' practice.
*** **For details of triple drip' see Box 11.4 and Table 11.5
10-30 minutes after the ketamine injection, roll into
regimen for use in horses. It is not without disadvantages.
stermal recumbency some minutes later and stand 5 or 6
The very abrupt end of surgical anaesthesia when no other
minutes after this. Termination of surgical anaesthesia is
agents are given can lead to difficulties and, indeed, this
very abrupt but recovery is remarkably free from excite-
rapid 'awakening may become evident even when anaes-
ment and horses usually stand at the frst attempt. Once
thesia is continued with volatile anaesthetic agents,
standing there is very little evidence of ataxia.
although the problem is less evident with isoflurane or
Ketamine after O2z-agonists appears very safe and, with
sevoflurane than it was with halothane, as their uptake is
various adaptations, has become the most standard
much faster.
281
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 11.4b Regimens using hypnotic agents (thiopental) suitable for the induction of anaesthesia prior to
maintenance with volatile agents, or by TIVA
Premedication*
Anaesthetic
Maintenance by further IV
(including drugs given a few
agents (TlvA) for short duration
minutes before anaesthetic)
(20-30 mins) only
Xylazine, 0.5 mg/kg
Thiopental, 7-8 mg/kg*x
Thiopental, 1 mg/kg as required**
Or
Recovery may be prolonged and of poor quality
Detomidine, 0.01 mg/kg (10 μg/kg)
if total thiopentone dose exceeds 12 mg/kg
Or
'Triple drip***
Xylazine, 1 mg/kg
Thiopental, 5.5 mg/kg* *
As above
Cr
 Detomidine, 0.015-0.020 mg/kg
(15-20 μg/kg)
Or
Romifidine 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg)
Acepromazine, 0.03-0.05 mg/kg IM or
Guaifenesin infused (approximately 25-50 mg/
Thiopental, 1 mg/kg ** maximal dose as above.
IV
kg) until ataxia, then thiopental, 5 mg/kg**
 Extra guaifenesin may be infused, but
maximal doses should not exceed 50 mg/kg.
or recovery may be delayed
Xylazine, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
 Guaifenesin infused (approximately 25-50 mg/
As above
Or
kg) until ataxia, then thiopental 5 mg/kg**
Detomidine, 0.01 mg/kg (10 μg/kg)
Or
Romifidine, 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg)
*Additional premedication with acepromazine and/or an opicid will not reduce the induction doses required but may lengthen recovery.
aeda  aexe jo loodod anng ul suiqo a jo ue ui leuad aeda u (adon jo e o e) leax*
thiopental in these regimens but their use is not yet common practice.
***For details of 'triple drip' see Box 4 and Table 11.5.
Other ketamine combinations
One study utilizing midazolam/ketamine found that even
after 3 hours of subsequent halothane anaesthesia, recov-
Ketamine may also be used with other premedicant
ery was complicated by muscle weakness and, in some
 agents or in other combinations. Acepromazine premedi-
cases, it was necessary to antagonize the residual mida-
cation alone is inadequate prior to ketamine induction.
Many dose schedules, for example utilizing guaifenesin
zolam. The poor quality of induction and recovery with
these benzodiazepine/ketamine combinations is unfortu-
together with O2-adrenoceptor agonists and ketamine
nate as during subsequent maintenance with volatile
have been recommended, some of which are listed in
agents, heart rate, MAP and CO are maintained at a con-
Table 1l.4.
siderably higher value than when Qz-adrenoceptor ago-
Ketamine/benzodiazepines
nists are used in the induction protocol (Luna et al.
1997).
Ketamine can be given with benzodiazepine agents alone
[i.e. with no Q2-adrenoceptor agonists). In foals, diazepam
Or midazolam (0.10-0.25 mg/kg IV) followed by keta-
Tiletamine/zolazepam
mine [2.2 mg/kg IV) gives a very satisfactory anaesthesia;
The idea behind the combination of tiletamine with
usually foals lie down following the benzodiazepine drug.
zolazepam is that there is already a benzodiazepine
However, in adult horses, the combination is more diff-
present to ensure muscle relaxation during subsequent
cult to employ. Neither agent should be given alone. As
anaesthesia. In the horse, however, this combination has
both have a variable onset of action, when administered
always been used following the administration of an Q2-
together the quality of induction is very variable depend.
adrenoceptor agonist. This combination is used after xyla-
ing on which agent takes effect first (Clarke et al., 1997).
zine (Hubbell et al., 1989) or detomidine premedication
282
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
[Muir et al., 1999). It produces reasonably safe 'short-term
to cause excitement. Xylazine l mg/kg. or detomidine
anaesthesia' of a little longer duration than that seen after
 20 μg/kg given IV 5 minutes prior to induction reduces the
xylazine/ketamine/diazepam.
necessary dose of thiopental to about 5.5 mg/kg. Follow-
ing doses of xylazine of 0.5 mg/kg or detomidine at
Hypnotic/anaesthetic agents
10 μg/kg IV, the dose of thiopental required is about
8 mg/kg. Anaesthesia lasts for 15-20 minutes (sufficient
The manner in which a horse becomes recumbent is
to enable castration) and, if no further drugs are adminis-
similar following the injection of any of the hypnotic/
tered, the horse will regain its feet after 30-40 minutes. As
yet, there is little published information available as to the
Following injection of thiopental, the horse tries to
combination doses of romifidine and thiopental, partly as
lean backwards and to lift its head, which must be
 by the time romifidine was available, thiopental was less 
 restrained to prevent the horse losing its balance and pos-
used than ketamine. Recovery to standing [in the absence
sibly 'going over backwards: With restraint the horse
 of maintenance agents) occurs in 30-40 minutes, and
sinks gently to the ground. Premedication with the 02-
with less ataxia than when higher doses of thiopental are
adrenoceptor agonists slows the circulation in a dose-
employed.
dependent manner and the onset of unconsciousness is
delayed for 40-120 seconds after completion of the thio-
Thiopental/guaifenesin
pental injection. The horse may make paddling or gallop-
After premedication with acepromazine, and/or Q2
ing movements when it first becomes recumbent; these
 adrenoceptor agonists, guaifenesin (at concentrations of
5-15% depending on the personal preferences of the
sciousness deepens.
 anaesthetist and the preparations available) is infused into
the jugular vein until the horse shows marked ataxia (after
Thiopental
approximately 35-50 mg/kg). A bolus IV dose of about
3.5-5 mg/kg of thiopental then produces recumbency and
Thiopental is a hypnotic/anaesthetic agent which has been
 apparent unconsciousness. It is also possible to combine
commonly employed in equine anaesthesia. The dose
 guaifenesin and thiopental solutions for infusion into the
required to induce anaesthesia in the horse depends on
jugular vein to produce recumbency but there is much less
the amount of sedation present (see Table ll.4). As recov-
 control over anaesthesia when this is done and profound
on
respiratory depression can be produced. Recovery from
redistribution rather than elimination, reduction in the
these agents alone occurs in 30-40 minutes, but there may
dose leads to a faster and better quality recovery. Prior to
be some residual muscle weakness if high doses of guaife-
the use of o2-agonists, a number of combinations were
nesin are used. Where anaesthesia subsequently is main-
used, and still may be in certain circumstances. Thiopental
tained with other agents, the effects of guaifenesin have
at 15 mg/kg IV can be given rapidly to unsedated colts for
time to wane.
castration; induction is adequate but recovery, although
rapid, may be very violent and this method cannot be
recommended. Following premedication with acepro-
Propofol
mazine [0.03-0.05 mg/kg) given at least 30 minutes prior
Early studies demonstrated that a rapid injection of pro-
to anaesthesia, thiopental, at a dose of ll mg/kg IV is a
 pofol (2 mg/kg IV) appears to be just adequate for induc-
satisfactory induction technique The horse 
becomes
tion of anaesthesia when given 5 minutes after IV
umconscious and recumbent 25-30 seconds after the thio-
Q2-agonists such as xylazine 0.5 mg/kg. detomidine
 pental injection and anaesthesia lasts for an adequate time
15-20 μg/kg, or medetomidine 7 μg/kg (Nolan & Hall,
either to enable a short procedure such as castration, or to
1985; Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 200lb). At these
provide a smooth transition to an inhalation agent If no
doses of propofol, anaesthesia appears to last for approxi-
maintenance agents are given, the horse regains its feet in
mately 10 minutes, with recovery to standing within 30
approximately 30-40 minutes and, although there may be
 minutes. Without premedication, a dose of 4 mg/kg pro-
some ataxia, recovery is usually calm. The dose ofthiopen-
pofol is necessary to induce anaesthesia and even then
tal is critical; under dosage through underestimation of
horses show some excitement and paddling (Mama et al.,
log 'pue uonpu sunp juamaxa on peal Ae uiam
1995; 1996). Brosnan et al. (20l) infused guaifenesin for
this reason, it used to be common practice to follow the
3 minutes (approximately 73 mg/kg) before administer-
injection of thiopental with a small dose (0.1 mg/kg) of
 ing propofol at 2.2 mg/kg and found this reduced the side
succinyl choline, but this agent is now used rarely.
effects and was satisfactory for induction prior to mainte-
The use of IV o2-agonists just prior to anaesthetic induc-
nance of anaesthesia with inhalation agents. With the
tion reduces the dose of thiopental required in a dose-
 standard 1% preparations of propofol available, it is dif-
dependent manner, and also increases the therapeutic
index of the drug, meaning that it is rare for underdosage
which explains some of the poor quality anaesthetic
283
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
inductions (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 200lb). Muir
anaesthesia ensue. Animals made recumbent with Immo-
et al. (2009) used a l0% solution of propofol and inves-
bilon are very stiff, with muscle tremors, severe respiratory
tigated doses required for induction with and without
depression, cyanosis, tachycardia and hypertension. In
xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) premedication. Without xylazine,
 male animals, priapism is not uncommon. The effects of
quality of induction was unacceptable; after xylazine
Immobilon last about 45minutes. The actions of Immo-
3-5 mg/kg propofol provided good quality induction.
bilon may be antagonized by the injection of Revivon, a
Propofol is also used by infusion to provide TIVA (see
blue solution containing 3 mg/mL of diprenorphine
below) and is proving useful for sedation to improve
hydrochloride A quantity of Revivon equal to the total
recovery (see below).
volume of Immobilon injected should be given IV as soon
as possible after the required period of restraint is com-
Alfaxalone
plete Most (but not all) horses regain their feet within a
few minutes of this injection. Undesirable hyperexcitabil-
Following premedication with romifdine 100 μg/kg and
ity may be associated with the injection of the antagonist
butorphanol 50 μg/kg. alfaxalone 1 mg/kg in combina-
 and enterohepatic cycling may occur, causing excitement
tion with diazepam 0.02 mg/kg (all IV) provided good
and compulsive walking 6-8 hours after remobilization.
quality of anaesthetic induction in ponies, and further boli
 An extra half dose of Revivon given subcutaneously at
of alfaxalone 0.2 mg/kg provided adequate anaesthesia for
the time of initial reversal may reduce the incidence of
castration (Leece et al, 2009; Kloppel & Leece, 2011).
this delayed excitement, but should it still occur, a further
's se aede sm ss rn a A
half dose of Revivon must be given. The product informa-
Keates et al. (20l2) found alfaxalone at doses of 1 mg/kg
tion states that horses must be kept stabled for at least 24
satisfactory following xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) and guaifen-
hours after the administration of Immobilon. Donkeys
esin (35 mg/kg): recovery to standing was 24-47 minutes.
appear particularly susceptible to delayed excitement with
The pharmacokinetics of alfaxalone in the horse after this
Immobilon, and the current product information no
regimen were a plasma half-life of elimination of 33
longer gives any recommendations for this species. The
minutes, clearance of 37 mL/min/kg and volume of distri -
dangers of etorphine to the life of the anaesthetist have
bution of 1.6 L/kg (Goodwin et al., 20ll). These values
been expressed forcibly in Chapter 18. Any veterinarian
make alfaxalone suitable for infusion. Goodwin et al.
using Immobilon should be thoroughly familiar with the
[20l3) proved this by. following a very similar (but not
latest treatment measures set out in the product informa-
identical) induction procedure, satisfactorily maintaining
tion sheet, ensure that adequate supplies of (in date)
anaesthesia with infusions of alfaxalone (2 mg/kg/h) and
naloxone are to hand and that another qualifed person
medetomidine (5 μg/kg/h). Recovery times were a mean
is present.
(SD) 37 (13.5) minutes. In all these studies, cardiopulmo-
nary parameters were in the ranges expected for equine
Anaesthetic induction with inhalation agents
anaesthesia.
Although induction of anaesthesia in adult horses with
volatile agents of anaesthesia is possible in experimental
Other induction techniques
circumstances, it is not practicable for clinical use with the
The dose of methohexital required to induce anaesthesia
very limited exception of chloroform by Cox's mask.
 appears to be half that for thiopental. The non-cumulative
However, in foals, anaesthesia can be induced with any
pharmacokinetics of methohexitone make it very useful
suitable volatile anaesthetic agent (see Anaesthesia for the
for infusion, and it was used in combination with chloral
Foal below).
hydrate sedation to provide anaesthesia of up to an hour's
duration, without lengthening recovery.
Etomidate has apparently not been used in horses, and
it is probable that current preparations would result in the
MAINTENANCE OF ANAESTHESIA
volume required being too large to be practicable.
Endotracheal intubation
Etorphine (lmmobilon)
In horses, the passage of an endotracheal (ET) tube
Etorphine has marketing authorization in horses as 'Large
 presents no great problem. Three types of cuffed ET tubes 
Animal Immobilon', a yellow solution containing 2.45 mg
are commercially available; those made of red rubber, of
etorphine hydrochloride with
auzodae B ol
plastic, and of silicone. Prior to insertion, the integrity of
maleate per mL. The minimum dose for horses is 0.5 mL
the cuff should be confirmed over a period of time to
of the solution IV per 50 kg body weight The IM route
ensure that there is no slow leak. Each anaesthetist has
should only be used in dire emergencies since it results
their own 'knack' of inserting the ET tube and the below
in a period of marked excitement before sedation and
 advice is generalized.
284
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
With the anaesthetized horse in lateral recumbency, the
the smaller versions for foals, sheep etc. may require an
head is moderately extended on the neck, the mouth
'introducer' before they can be inserted, those designed for
opened, a suitable gag or bite block put in place and the
adult horses are suffciently stiff to enable endotracheal
tongue pulled forward. The tube, lubricated on its outside 
intubation to be performed easily. Static charges on the
with a suitable lubricant is introduced into the mouth.
silicone attracts dust, and it is important that after use and
With red rubber tubes, it helps if the concave side of the
cleaning it is not placed where it will attract such dirt
 curve is directed towards the hard palate The tube is then
during the induction process.
advanced, keeping to the midline, until its tip is in the
 As the horse has poor laryngeal tone, the cuff of the ET
 pharynx. It is then rotated so that the concavity of its curve 
tube must be adequately inflated if IPpV is to be carried
is towards the tongue (Fig. 1l.20A) and, at the next inspi-
out, and a good seal is exceptionally important in cases of
ration, it is pushed rapidly on into the trachea. The rota-
 colic to prevent inhalation of regurgitated material. Cuffs
tion of the tube disengages the palate from the epiglottis.
should therefore be checked for leaks by leaving them
With the straighter shaped silicone tubes, the head needs
inflated for a period of time prior to use.
to be more extended (Fig. ll.20B). It is often easier to
An uncuffed tube, the 'Cole-pattern tube', has been used
insert the tube with its concavity towards the tongue, then
in horses but these tubes have to be of the exact size
to rotate the tube 360° once in the pharynx, once again
 needed for any given animal, and accurately placed in the
disengaging the soft palate from the epiglottis. The com-
larynx if they are to provide a gas tight atraumatic seal and
monest causes for failure of the tube to enter the trachea
asn iiaul iae paodai uaaq sey euapao ieaguiel ainoe
are that the alignment of the head and neck is incorrect,
(Trim, 1984).
that the tube is not in the midline of the orotracheal axis,
 Or that the tip of the tube is sited ventral to the epiglottis:
Positioning for surgery
should any of these occur, the tube should be withdrawn
 Practically the aim in positioning is:
to clear the epiglottis, and redirected for a further attempt.
Once in the correct position, the tube should advance
1.
To reduce to the minimum possible the pressure at
down the trachea with minimal resistance; force should
all points in order to enable adequate blood
 not be used. Resistance to passing the tube suggests either
perfusion to muscles and to decrease the chance of a
the endotracheal tube is too large, or that oesophageal
compartmental syndrome occurring
intubation has occurred.
2.
 To ensure that major veins are not obstructed. If this
 Intubation through the mouth permits the use of the
happens then pressure in the area drained by these
largest tube which will comfortably fit the trachea. A
veins will increase until it reaches arterial values,
16.0 mm diameter tube is suitable for ponies up to about
after which time there will be no further perfusion to
150 kg body weight, while a 25-30 mm tube is adequate
the area
for most thoroughbreds. Heavy hunters and warmbloods
3.
 To avoid putting anything under tension. Nerves are
often take surprisingly large tubes.
particularly easily damaged by stretching as well as
ET tubes can be passed through the inferior nasal
by direct pressure
4. To allow surgical access.
meatus (see Fig. ll.24). Lubrication is essential, and the
introduction and removal of nasal tubes entails the risk of
The first three aims are often at odds with the fourth,
damaging the turbinate bones, although with the modern
necessitating compromise and some sacrifice of surgical
soft silicone tubes this risk is reduced. Despite the limita-
convenience for the benefit of the horse.
tions, nasal intubation can be very useful in cases where
It is now generally accepted that the best method to
the surgeons require unobstructed access to the mouth. In
reduce pressure on the horse's body is to position it on a
young foals and in donkeys. the nasal passages are rela-
 soft foam mattress sufficiently deep to allow the horse to
tively much larger than in adult horses and tubes of ade-
sink right in (thus reducing the unit weight at any one
 quate size can be introduced through the nostril.
 point) without bottoming' on the hard undersurface. The
 The cuffs of ET tubes are often damaged by contact with
(i'l Su) ieapi si snseuus u pasn suu yo adk
the horse's teeth even when a reliable mouth-gag is used
but is diffcult to keep clean. Alternatives are air or water
to keep the mouth open during intubation and extuba-
mattresses which may be partially inflated under the horse
tion. Red-rubber cuffed tubes are very expensive, but punc-
(Figs 1l.21B, 1l.22). It is very important that air mattresses
tured cuffs should not be repaired with home-made
 are not fully inflated - the horse must still be able to sink
 patches which may become detached in the airway during
in or no reduction in pressure is achieved. This is one of
anaesthesia. Plastic tubes have met with only partial
 the times when compromise from the surgeon is necessary
success; either the plastic is so hard that atraumatic intuba-
 as operating on a horse which is lying on a soggy water or
tion is difficult or, when they reach body temperature, they
air bed is not conducive to the performance of any delicate
soften so much that they become obstructed when the
surgery.
head is flexed on the neck. Siliconized latex rubber cuffed
The edges of tables or overinflated air or water beds can
tubes are more succesful, can be recuffed and, although
cause pressure points and result in nerve or muscle
285
Section
[2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
the soft palate. With red rubber tubes, introduction with the concave cure pointing dorsally will do this; the tube is then
sufficiently is usually more effective.
Photograph (8) from Taylor, PM., Clarke, K.W., 2007. Hanobook of Equine Anaesthesia. Znd eon, Elsevier Lto, with permission.
damage. Operating tables may have such 'edges' in associa-
limbs. Supine horses may be supported by a V-shaped
tion with sections which slide out, and if so, suitable pads
back support, often inflatable The legs may be supported
and matting to cover these pressure points are essential.
 On a hoist or tied to pillars but extending both hind legs.
 and in particular locking the stifle joints of dorsally recum-
the under front leg should be pulled forward, and both 
 bent horses, should be avoided unless absolutely essential
upper legs should be supported parallel to the body
 to the surgery, as it may result in severe hind limb lame-
(see Fig. ll.2l). This support reduces pressure on the
 ness (see Fig 1l1.22). This lameness is thought to be due to
triceps muscles, brachial vessels and nerves, and also pre-
femoral nerve damage, but there may also be a component
vents obstruction of the venous drainage of the upper
 of gluteal myopathy. If bilateral, the horse will be unable
286
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
to rise The problem is unrelated to weight - the authors
have seen it in miniature Shetland ponies, and it can occur
after a comparatively short time.
 The head is very liable to damage at pressure points and
to avoid damage to the masseter muscle facial nerve and
eyes, care must be taken to ensure that the face is not
allowed to fall over the edge of the table top or to remain
in contact with sharp edges of halters or head collars.
Whether in lateral decubitus or supine the head must not
be over-extended (this leads to laryngeal paralysis) nor
rotated on the neck. If possible, the head should be slightly
aseuieip snouan poos ansua ol eisauisaeue Suunp pasiel
and to avoid intense vascular congestion of the nasal pas-
lae uoionunsqo Aioteidsal iaddn ssoia oi Bupeal sages
extubation. When the anaesthetized horse has to be
moved, the head should be supported in a normal posi-
A
tion in relation to the neck.
Under feld conditions, the facilities may not be avail-
able to position the horse as suggested above. However, a
horse in lateral recumbency may have adduction of the
upper limbs prevented by supporting them on straw bales,
and the undermost foreleg may be drawn as far forward
as possible to minimize pressure on the brachial vessels
and nerves.
Apparatus for administration
of oxygen and for ventilation
As stated earlier, even for a short field anaesthetic, there
should be the provision for giving oxygen and providing
IPPV should respiration fail. In the hospital situation, the
apparatus for delivering inhalation anaesthetic agents will
provide this, whether or not anaesthetic maintenance is by
TIVA or by inhalants. The basic requirements of the
machines are as described in detail in Chapter 10. Anaes-
thetic circuits are either to-and-fro [which are portable and
an be very satisfactory) but more usually are circle
systems. There are now a number of commercially avail-
able large animal machines with circle systems, many of
which incorporate a ventilator system. Figure ll.23 shows
two relatively sophisticated examples of these, the Tafon-
ius (Fig. ll.23B) also incorporating patient monitoring as
well as machine monitoring facilities. However, many
B
simpler systems can be adapted to enable IPpV by the
addition of a suitable ventilating unit.
Figure 11.21 Well positioned horses in lateral recumbency.
snui (paq le Ahbos, io) weot aui ou! yuis sasioy au
reducing pressure at any one point. The upper limbs are
supported so that venous drainage is not impaired, and the
AGENTS FOR THE MAINTENANCE
other forelimb is drawn right forward. While (B)
OF ANAESTHESIA
demonstrates positioning with a well-designed operating
table, in (A) the same effect is achieved with more primitive
facilities
Intravenous agents: total IV
anaesthesia (TIVA)
Total IV anaesthesia for short procedures in the field (such
as castration) has been used for many years but with
287
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 11.22 A well positioned horse in dorsal recumbency. The air-bed, which holds the horse in position, is not fully inflated 
stifles are not locked. The pad under the head keeps it slightly flexed to ensure that there is no strain on the laryngeal nerves.
The bucket collects the urine from the catheterized bladder.
Photograph courtesy of Anorea Schwarz.
modern drugs which are rapidly metabolized and elimi-
castration (up to 30 minutes) and which result in a very
nated, TIVA can be used for more prolonged procedures
rapid recovery: those suitable for more prolonged use
as the duration of recovery is no longer than after anaes-
(up to 1.5-2.0 hours); and those which could be extended
thesia with volatile agents.
indefinitely should the surgery demand. Procedures
The use of TIVA does not reduce the need for apparatus 
may last far longer than anticipated and, if necessary.
 Or for experienced staff. Most IV anaesthetic techniques
anaesthetists must be prepared to change technique (eg.
cause as much, if not more respiratory depression, than
to introduce volatile agents, or change to different drug
do volatile anaesthetics and, indeed, overdose commonly
combinations) if required.
causes respiratory arrest. Certainly, if it is being used in
hospital conditions, it is still necessary to have a means of
delivering oxygen to the horse and of providing IPPV if
TIVA for short procedures (up to 30 minutes)
required. MAP is better maintained than with volatile
The techniques for IV induction anaesthesia described
agents, but this does not necessarily mean that there is no
above (see Table ll.4) provide adequate anaesthesia for
cardiovascular depression; CO still may be reduced and
procedures lasting 10-15 minutes and anaesthesia can be
peripheral perfusion poor. Adequate cardiopulmonary
topped up' with increrments of IV drugs for a period of
monitoring is as necessary with IV as with volatile agents.
time before cumulation occurs. The most commonly used
 The current limitations to techniques of TIVA are those
combinations for short-term anaesthesia are combina-
of duration and of expense. Many dnugs or combinations
tions of the Qz-adrenoceptors with ketamine. Anaesthesia
are long acting and cumulative, so extending length of
is then extended with incremental doses of ketamine, or
action with more dnug may result in a prolonged and poor
if available, thiopental.
quality recovery. The ideal agents for use by infusion (pro-
 If no additional agents are given, recovery from
pofol and some of the 02-agonists) have pharmacokinetics
ketamine-based methods occurs within  20-25 minutes
and is usually very smooth and well controlled. However.
qumulative whatever the duration of administration. In a
recovery can be abrupt and sometimes the horse may
compromise between expense and the ideal agents, the
[euassa si ll os Buuem an yim Aasins Bunp ueme
techniques suitable for TIVA can be considered in three
that a rapid means to deepen anaesthesia is to hand. The
categories: those suitable for short procedures such as
duration of surgical anaesthesia can be increased by the
288
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
B
respiratory parameters, including PEEP, to be set. The horse can breathe spontaneously from the bellows, or a rebreathing bag
may be added. This unit has an additional small animal system - very useful for foals.
(Photograph courtesy of Sanora Sanchis.)
(B) Tafonius. This has a cylinder in place of the bellows, and the system is driven (very quietly) by electricity, and is governed by
a very sophisticated microprocessor. With spontaneous breathing. the cylinder fills and empties, but resistance is minimal as the
motor does the work (via the microprocessor). With IPPV, all respiratory parameters required can be set very accurately. The unit 
incorporates airway monitoring: the unit pictured had additional patient monitoring. but units without this are available
Photograph courtesy of Keith Simpson, Vetronic Services Lto ano Stetson Halflowell, Hallowell EMC.
use of local anaesthesia; this technique is particularly suit-
and guaifenesin has proved effective in providing anaes-
able for castration (Portier et al., 2009). Choice of the
thesia for castration.
Q2-agonist (xylazine, detomidine or romifidine) utilized
prior to ketamine does not influence the quality and dura-
Agents used to extend the
tion of anaesthesia, or the speed and quality of recovery
duration of anaesthesia
(Kerr et al., 1996).
With thiopental-based methods, recovery is slower
Any of the methods described below which are suitable
(30-40 minutes), there is some hind limb weakness, and
for medium-term anaesthesia can be adapted for a shorter
often more that one attempt to rise is required. Neverthe-
duration. However, while CRIs are preferable, in the field,
extension of the induction regimen is usually by 'top-up'
calm. Although the horse may still move in response to
01 uodo poog e sl eisayisaeue [esol 'uiese] Aiasins
Ketamine
prevent this), it is easy to anticipate, and the abrupt awak-
Anaesthesia induced with 0z-agonists/ketamine mixtures
enings seen with ketamine do not occur.
 may be prolonged with additional ketamine, but there is
Propofol and alfaxalone were discussed in a previous
a danger of undesirable excitatory effects unless the 02-
section (IV induction). Alfaxalone either following
 adrenoceptor induced sedation is still adequate. In clinical
romifidine/diazepam predication, or following xylazine
practice, incremental doses of half the original dose of
289
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
both xylazine and ketamine are given as required (see
quality of recovery depend on the total dose. Thus, if initial
Table ll.4) or at set time intervals. There will be a delay
anaesthetic induction was with ketamine, more increments
before these agents will be effective, so if the anaesthesia
of thiopental may be given than is advisable following
becomes too light, then it may be necessary to give a hyp-
induction using thiopental. A total dose of 10 mg/kg still
notic agent (e.g. thiopental) to regain control, as these are
results in a calm recovery in an acceptable time; higher total
effective more rapidly. With detomidine/ketamine combi-
 doses may be safe but will lengthen recovery.
nations only a further dose of ketamine (l mg/kg) is
Methohexital (0.5 mg/kg IV) can be given to extend
required initially to extend the duration, although if keta-
mine increments are to be given more than 30 minutes
tal would otherwise be used. However, it is very respiratory
after anaesthetic induction, it is probably advisable also to
 depressant and recovery is violent if the horse is not well
administer a small dose of detomidine (approximately
sedated.
5 μg/kg). With romifidine/ketamine combinations,
.the
 It is probable that propofol or alfaxalone could replace
product information sheet suggests that incremental doses
the barbiturate and extend anaesthesia but, at this time,
of 25% of romifidine but 50% of ketamine original doses
the evidence is not available for any recommendations.
are needed to extend anaesthesia.
To date, there are no scientifc reports as to the use of
TIVA for medium duration procedures
ketamine [1 mg/kg IV) to lengthen the duration of anaes-
thesia induced with Oz-adrenoceptor agonist/thiopental,
(30-90 minutes)
(with or without guaifenesin), although anecdotal reports
Anaesthesia which needs to be prolonged for more than
 Suggest that the method is practicable.
30 minutes is usually achieved by combinations of 02-
agonists, ketamine and a centrally acting muscle relaxant
Barbiturates - thiopental and methohexita!
- guaifenesin or a benzodiazepine (Table ll.5). Ideally.
Small doses (0.5-1.0 mg/kg) IV may be given to extend
 any dnug used for infusion to provide long-term anaesthe-
anaesthesia that has been induced with either thiopental
sia should have a short half-life of elimination so that
or with ketamine. The major advantage of thiopental is that
there is no cumulation. Not all these agents have the ideal
it acts in a circulation time and is ideal to bring an awaken-
kinetics, hence their limitations for use beyond 90 minutes
ing animal quickly back under control. However, overdose
[although some extension may be possible at the expense
may cause apnoea and, as the drug is cumulative, speed and
 of a more prolonged recovery).
Table 11.5 Some regimens of total intravenous anaesthesia (TivA) suitable for providing anaesthesia from 30 to
90 minutes duration
Premedication
Anaesthetic
Maintenance
 Xylazine, 1 mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg
The Triple Drip', a combination of guaifenesin,
Or
Qz-adrenoceptor agonist and ketamine infused to effect. For
Detomidine, 0.02 mg/kg
details of how to prepare suitable mixtures, see Box 11.4
(20 μg/kg)
Or
Romifidine, 0.08-0.1 mg/kg
(80-100 μg/kg)
Xylazine, 1 mg/kg
Ketamine, 2.0-2.2 mg/kg, midazolam
Infusion of midazolam (0.002 mg/kg/min), ketamine (0.03 mg/
0.1 mg/kg
kg/min) and xylazine (0.016 mg/kg/min) (Hubbell et al., 2012)
For details of another similar combination, and antagonism of
midazolam with flumazenil, see Box 11.4.
Acepromazine, 0.03-
 Chloral hydrate (10%) infused until ataxia
Thiopental, 1 mg/kg (maximal total dose 12 mg/kg) or
 0.05 mg/kg IM or IV
(50-60 mg/kg), then thiopental, 5-6 mg/
methohexital, 0.5 mg/kg. If anaesthesia needs to be extended
kg or methohexital, 2.5-3.0 mg/kg
beyond 45minutes, more chloral hydrate may be required
All agents are given IV unless otherwise stated. Many variations of these combinations can be used safely. Additional premedication with
acepromazine (<0.05 mg/kg) may also be used. Additional premedication with an opioid (e.g. butorphanol 0.02-0.03 mg/kg) will not reduce
the doses of anaesthetic induction agents.
Regimens including propofol or alfaxalone have not been included here as available concentrations and costs involved mean that they are
not practicable for clinical use, but see text for details.
Thiopental, methohexital and chloral hydrate are not available in all countries but information on the combination remains as, where
available, it hias proved a useful field’ method when fa cilities are very limited.
290
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
111
Xylazine and detomidine have adequately rapid kinet-
Box 11.4 The 'Triple Drip'
ics, but residual guaifenesin will cause muscle weakness in
recovery, so methods that reduce the dose of this compo-
Guaifenesin may be available in plastic bottles as stabilized 
nent are preferred. If benzodiazepines are used, then they
solutions of 10% or 15%, or as a solid that is made up to
can be antagonized at the end of surgery - this is expen-
the strength required (usually 5%). The more concentrated 
sive. Theoretically, ketamine is not cumulative, but if used
the solutions the more likely to cause thrombophlebitis.
by infusion for periods of more than 90 minutes, pro-
Guaifenesin is cumulative. Doses totally over
-laoa Aroeunley Auaedde Alenb iood pue paguo
100 mg/kg result in a prolonged and ataxic recovery. It is
ies have been seen (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1996).
preferable that the method used to induce anaesthesia
It is postulated that the cause of these poor quality recover-
does not include guiaphenesin (see Table 11.4).
ies is the cumulation of the active metabolite, norketa-
There are a number of different recipes; all appear to
mine The cumulation of norketamine will depend on
be satisf actory.
total dose of ketamine rather than on time, so combina-
10% Guaifenesin (Taylor and darke, 2007)
tions which can reduce the rate of infusion of ketamine
To 500 ml of 10% guaifenesin, add 1000 mg (1 g) of
may be used for a longer period.
ketamine and one of the following: 500 mg of xylazine
The ideal agents for anything but short-term anaesthesia
or 10 mg detomidine or 25 mg romifidine.
is propofol; that will be considered below in the section
 Following induction of anaesthesia, the Triple Drip is
for prolonged TIVA.
anaesthesia is 1 mL/kg/h. Higher rates may be needed
α2-Agonist/guaifenesin/ketamine -
earlier in procedure and rates should be reduced towards
the Triple Drip'
the end of surgery.
The Triple Drip' was frst used by Greene et al. (1986)
5% Guaifenesin (Author (CT)'s preference)
who used IV xylazine (1.1 mg/kg) followed by ketamine
To 1 L (1000 ml) of 5% guaifenesin add 1300 mg of
2.2 mg/kg for anaesthetic induction, then maintained
ketamine and 650 mg of xylazine. This recipe has a lower
anaesthesia with an IV infusion of 2.75 mL/kg/h of a
% of guaifenesin and relatively more xylazine and
guaifenesin/ketamine/xylazine mixture containing 50 mg
ketamine. Infusion rate is approximately 2 mL/kg/h.
guaifenesin, 1 mg ketamine and 0.5 mg of xylazine/mL of
Benzodiazepine-Triple Drip' (*Auer, 2013)
5% dextrose in water. This technique, and adaptations of
To 500 mL of saline add 15 mg midazolam, 1000 mg 
it using different Q2-adrenoceptor agonists are now widely
ketamine and 250 mg xylazine or 1.4 mg detomidine.
used in operations of up to 90 minutes of duration.
Infusion rate is approximately 1.2 mL/kg/h. 15 minutes 
Anaesthetic induction should preferably avoid guaifen-
after the infusion is stopped, 0.001-0.002 mg/kg
esin in order to reduce the total dose of this long-acting
(1-2 μg/kg) flumazenil may be given to reverse midazolam.
agent There are several recommended combinations for
This recipe gives a relatively lower dose of midazolam than
making up the mixture which is then infused to effect
that recommended by Hubbell et al. (2012)
(Box 11.4).
Recovery from prolonged infusion of the Triple Drip is
personal communication to Kc.
not fast (often more than one hour) but is usually calm.
Romifidine has been used as the Q2-adrenoceptor agonist
have waned (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 1996). A rel-
component of the combination (McMurphy et al., 2002.
atively similar protocol was recently reported by Hubbell
Gasthuys, 2011).
et al. [20l2). Following induction of anaesthesia with
xylazine (1 mg/kg), midazolam (0.1 mg/kg) and keta-
Q2-Adrenoceptor agonist/
mine (2.2 mg/kg). they infused a combination of mida-
zolam (0.002 mg/kg/min), ketamine (0.03 mg/kg/min)
benzodiazepine/ketamine
and xylazine (0.0l6 mg/kg/min) for anaesthesia lasting
The replacement of guaifenesin by a benzodiazepine agent
 around 60 minutes. Some horses required additional keta-
can improve the quality of recovery. The system has been
 mine boli, but anaesthesia and recovery were satisfactory.
most widely used in Switzerland, where both the ben-
A similar combination (Box ll.4) has been used exten.
zodiazepine climazolam and its antagonist sarmazenil
 sively in Switzerland and Austria [Ulrike Auer, personal
have been available. Anaesthesia is induced with xylazine
communication to KC, 2013), both for 'field anaesthesia'
and ketamine, then climazolam is given at 0.2 mg/kg IV.
Or, at approximately half the infusion rate, as an adjunct
Anaesthesia is maintained with an infusion of climazolam
to inhalation anaesthesia (Mosing, 2007: Ambrisko et al.
0.4 mg/kg/hr and ketamine 6 mg/kg/h. Infusion ceases
 2012). At the end of anaesthesia, a period of 15 minutes is 
at the end of surgery, but the benzodiazepine is not
allowed for reduction of ketamine effects, then 1-2 μg/kg
antagonized with sarmazenil (o.04 mg/kg IV) for 20
flumazenil given very slowly IV over 60 seconds. Recovery
minutes in order to give time for the ketamine effects to
is usually of good quality.
291
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Chloral hydrate/barbiturate
on the fact the horse appeared very lightly anaesthetized,
 yet did not respond to surgery.
Chloral hydrate lost favour due to its irritant nature if
 Betschart-Wolfensberger (200la) investigated the use of
injected outside the vein and to the fact that if used alone
cntinuous propofol and medetomidine infusions to
recovery is very slow. However, in combination with the
barbiturates, it gives good moderate-term anaesthesia and
provide 4 hours of anaesthesia in ponies. Medetomidine
was chosen for its kinetics and its marked analgesic prop-
administration through long IV catheters reduces the risk
erties. Anaesthesia was induced either with medetomidine/
of perivascular injection. A l0% solution is infused until
propofol or medetomidine/ketamine and an infusion of
the horse becomes ataxic (after 40-60 mg/kg have been
medetomidine  at  3.5 μg/kg/hour  commenced.
administered) when thiopental (5 mg/kg) or methohexi-
The
asudsan suaaid o panban uisnyu loodoid unuuu
tal (2.5 mg/kg) is injected IV as a bolus. Surgical anaesthe-
to a noxious stimulus ranged from 0.06 to 0.1l mg/kg/
sia is maintained by injection of increments of barbiturates
min and cardiovascular parameters were well maintained
(thiopental 1 mg/kg or methohexital 0.5 mg/kg). If anaes-
thesia is to extend for more than 45 minutes, it may prove
hypoxia. Following 4 hours anaesthesia recovery occurred
necessary to give more chloral hydrate (approximately
10 mg/kg but to effect). If no further chloral hydrate is
Mama et al. (1998) investigated the use of xylazine infu-
given, the horse will stand some 50-60 minutes after
sions of 35 μg/kg/min together with propofol at either
 anaesthetic induction and recovery is usually calm. Cardio-
u ar u sn y sad an
0.15 or 0.25 mg/kg/min for one hour; anaesthetic quality
been investigated, but while anaesthetized, respiration is
was excellent but, at the higher doses, there was marked
well maintained, the pulse is strong and mucous mem-
hypoxia and recoveries were delayed. Flaherty et al. (1997)
maintained anaesthesia in ponies with an infusion of keta-
branes are a healthy pink with a fast capillary refill time.
mine [40 μg/kg/min) and propofol (0.124 mg/kg/min);
all suggesting that there is minimal cardiovascular depres-
 anaesthesia was adequate for castration and recovery was
sion with this combination.
smooth. Umar et al. (2007), in horses which had received
medetomidine ketamine and midazolam in the induction
TIVA for long procedures (2 hours and more)
regimen, compared propofol TIVA (0.22 mg/kg/min) with
a group receiving a CRI of propofol (0.14 mg/kg/min),
Propofol combinations
ketamine (1 mg/kg/h) and medetomidine (1.25 μg/kg/h):
The only anaesthetic agent which has undergone sufficient
 both regimens gave adequate anaesthesia but heart rate
investigation and is suffciently non-cumulative in the
and resultant CO were reduced in the group where
horse to be used for very prolonged anaesthesia is propo-
medetomidine had been infused.
fol (Nolan et al., 1996). Propofol, however, has several
These and other propofol combinations have been used
drawbacks: it is a poor analgesic, it produces severe respira-
successfully in clinical situations but, although the price
tory and moderate cardiovascular depression, and its
of propofol has reduced, the regimen is still too expensive
carrier results in accumulation of triglycerides in blood. In
for routine clinical use. Likewise alfaxalone may well be
the horse, there are additional disadvantages with existing
suitable for prolonged TIVA, but as yet would be imprac-
ns e 'pue pan ane saa ale 'suand
ticable in the horse.
volumes, it becomes very expensive. There must also be
some concern as to the dangers of triggering hyperlipae-
mia in susceptible individuals, although to date, this com-
ANAESTHETIC MAINTENANCE WITH
plication has never occurred. Nevertheless, if TIVA is ever
to become practical for anaesthesia of unlimited time in
INHALATION AGENTS
the horse, propofol is the agent most likely to be involved.
 In ponies, premedicated with xylazine, Nolan and Hall
Volatile agents
[1985) required infusion rates of propofol of up to
0.2 mg/kg/min. In a very recent pharmacokinetic study.
The four volatile agents suitable for and most used for
Boscan et al. (2010) maintained anaesthesia with a propo-
maintenance of anaesthesia in the horse are isoflurane.
fol infusion of approximately 0.14 mg/kg/min. However,
sevoflurane, desflurane and, still in use in many parts of
 sas jo iaqu a e 'sie o is an ia
the world, halothane. Their main properties relating to
looked at methods to reduce the dose of propofol by
uptake and elimination and cardiopulmonary changes
providing analgesia and further sedation (Nolan & Hall.
have been described in Chapter 7. and will only be briefly
1985; Nolan et al., 1996: Flaherty et al., 1997: Mama
revised here.
et al., 1998; Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 200la; Mat-
For all four agents, judgement of depth of anaesthesia
thews et al., 1999; Ohta et al., 2004, Umar et al., 2006,
is diffcult in the horse, especially if an O2-agonist has been
2007). Most combinations utilize O2-agonists, with or
without ketamine. In all studies, the authors commented
it most usually has. Ideally. at least one eye should be
292
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
rotated slightly forward, and eyes should be moist. Nys-
lsoflurane
tagmus may be seen if anaesthesia is very light, but also
with ketamine, and if the horse is on the point of death.
Isoflurane has been used for anaesthesia in horses for
Decreases in MAP can give an indication of increasing
nearly 30 years (Steffey, 2002). In many ways, it is very
depth of anaesthesia, but modern practice of treating
similar to halothane, and the signs of depth of anaesthesia
 in horses and the potential for a sudden responseto surgery
hypotension with positive inotrope agents will counteract
are identical with both agents. The major differences are
this fall and remove this sign. Often, the first sign of inad-
that theuptake and elimination of isoflurane are faster than
equate anaesthesia is that the horse starts to move; there
may be no warning increase in pulse rate or MAP It is
of halothane; although blood pressure falls, it is mainly
through vasodilation, and CO is better maintained (Steffey
advisable to have a bolus of rapidly acting IV anaesthetic
to hand. Supplementary local anaesthetic nerve blocks.
& Howland, 1978; Lee et al., 1998b; Raisis, 2005). Isofu-
where practicable, reduce the chance of the horse kicking
rane is more respiratory depressant than is halothane and
it is often necessary to use IPpV on isoflurane-anaesthetized
in response to surgical stimulation (Haga et al., 2006).
horses as slow respiration prevents uptake of the agent early
Monitoring of end-tidal anaesthetic agent is very helpful
in anaesthesia. This latter problem could also be caused by
as it provides a measure of the alveolar and therefore the
 arterial concentration of the anaesthetic and if that should
the irritant nature of isoflurane on the airways. The MAC
 be adequate for the maintenance of anaesthesia.
of isoflurane is around 1.3-1.4%. Its kinetics mean that
idei aie eisauisaeue jo qdap ui saueu pue uonpu
 and recovery is impressively quick. However, the quality of
Halothane
recovery can be poor (Rose et al., 1989) and it is usual to
Halothane's advantages in equine anaesthesia are reason-
administer a further dose of an Q2-agonist or other sedatives
(see Anaesthetic Recovery period) at the end of anaesthesia
    o ii 
during induction or recovery, adequate reflex suppression
to delay recovery and improve its quality.
and sufficient muscle relaxation to allow most surgery to
In horses, there is no evidence that isoflurane is safer
than halothane for anaesthesia; indeed, the multicentre
be performed, and ease with which anaesthesia can be
survey of equine deaths associated with anaesthesia
controlled. The disadvantages are dose-dependent fall in
directly comparing the two agents showed that while
MAP and CO due to a direct depressant effect of the agent
horses anaesthetized with halothane were more likely to
on the myocardium [Hall et al., 1968). There is a marked
 die on the table, those with isoflurane were more likely to
respiratory acidosis in spontaneously breathing halothane-
die afterwards, and that the overall mortality did not differ
anaesthetized horses and, while this can be overcome by
(Johnston et al., 2004).
'uemoh  aas] o u ley aqiny e sasn sie Addll
1978). Schatzmann (1982) showed that hypoxaemia
Sevoflurane
causes a respiratory drive in horses anaesthetized with
halothane in air, thus demonstrating that hypoxia can
MAC of sevoflurane in the horse is 2.3% [Aida et al.,
 Overcome halothane-induced respiratory depression.
1994). Like other volatile anaesthetic agents, sevoflurane
The MAC value for halothane is about 0.9%. The end-
causes dose-related depression of respiration, CO and
tidal concentration of halothane required for surgery
MAP (Aida et al., 1996; Steffey. 2002; Steffey et al., 2005a)
depends on the sedative premedication and anaesthetic
but clinically, following anaesthetic induction with inject-
e  i a auan un
able agents, the cardiopulmonary depression is similar in
to 0.9-1.1%.
extent to that caused by isoflurane (Grosenbaugh & Muir.
Halothane is a poor analgesic; horses which are appar-
1998). Driessen et al. (2006) found that horses anaesthe-
 ently well anaesthetized may respond suddenly to surgical
 tized with sevoflurane needed less cardiovascular support
stimulation. Many of such responses are spinal reflexes.
than those anaesthetized with isoflurane The speed with
 Horses normally regain their feet within about 30-40
 which anaesthesia can be deepened means there is rarely
minutes following the termination of halothane adminis-
a need to give additional injectable anaesthetic agents
tration after induction with xylazine/ketamine; after ace-
during anaesthesia. However, the rapidity of uptake is such
promazine premedication and thiopental induction,
that care must be taken not to overdose in the early stages
recovery takes about twice as long. Shivering is often seen
 of anaesthesia. Recovery from anaesthesia is very fast, but
during recovery; the reason is unknown. Quality of recov-
 its quality is variable. Without further sedation, the authors 
ery depends on the injectable drugs which have been
 have found it to be poor, but if xylazine is administered
administered, on the surgery performed and the presence
 to horses as soon as sevoflurane is terminated acceptable
 Or absence of pain. Horses may take several attempts to
 quality recovery occurs in about 30 minutes, and is often
rise, and show a measure of incoordination after recovery
better than following isoflurane anaesthesia (Matthews
from halothane, but usually remain calm. However, horses
et al., 1998). Leece et al. (2008) found no difference in
should not be made to walk (e.g. from recovery to loose
either time to or quality of recovery in horses following
box or stall) within 10- 15 minutes of standing up.
isoflurane or sevoflurane anaesthesia.
293
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Over the past 10 years, sevoflurane has become very
clinically, but as yet there are few peer-reviewed published
asejueape ioteu si 'eisausaeue auinba ul asn ioy ieindod
reports.
being seen as the ease of maintaining a stable level of
anaesthesia, coupled with a rapid recovery.
Nitrous oxide
 The use of NzO is controversial. Its analgesic properties
Desflurane
ensure that less of the volatile agents which lack analgesic
The few studies that have been performed suggest that
 properties are required. The disadvantage lies in the poten-
desflurane has major advantages for use in horses (Jones
tial for causing hypoxia. NzO will reduce the PiOz and
et al., 1995; Clarke et al., 1996; Tendillo et al., 1997). The
particular care needs to be taken when it is used in a
kinetics of desflurane are such that the end-tidal concentra-
rebreathing system. NO also passes into the gut spaces,
tion reaches inspired concentrations in a matter of minutes,
increasing their volume and reducing FRC, thus resulting
even in a large horse, and recovery is equally as fast. Con-
in a greater fall in PaOz than can be explained by
sequently, control of anaesthesia is very easy. The MAC of
the reduction in PiOz alone [Lee et al., 1998a). The use
desflurane in the horse is approximately 8%: following IV
of NO at the phase of transfer from IV induction to
induction, the horse is connected to the circle circuit which
maintenance speeds uptake of the volatile agent by the
has been primed with 8% desflurane in O2. In the first 10
'second gas effect: However, with the rapid kinetics of the
minutes the circle system is emptied twice to reduce the
volatile agents in use, this effect is no longer necessary.
contained Nz concentration but, after this time, the circuit
NzO can provide useful analgesia but in the horse, it
can be run closed - the fresh gas flow rate still containing
should be used only in situations where it is possible to
8% desflurane, together with enough O2 to replace that
monitor inspired oxygen concentrations and arterial
lost by utilization and by leaks from the circuit (usually
blood gases.
about 3 L/min in a large horse). The low flow rates used
throughout mean that desflurane becomes comparatively
General points in relation to
inexpensive to use. If anaesthesia is too light, the bag is
maintenance of anaesthesia using
emptied and refilled with a concentration 1% above the
previous level, and depth of anaesthesia changes within a
volatile agents
very short space of time. Horses anaesthetized with desflu-
Practical administration
tion but, occasionally, if anaesthesia is too light they
As illustrated above [see Fig. 1l.23), in equine anaesthesia,
exhibit muscle tremor and it is sometimes necessary
to
volatile anaesthetic agents are administered via a circle or
increase inspired desflurane concentration to as much as
 to-and-fro absorption system using an out-of circuit vapor-
10% to stop this. Recovery from anaesthesia is also very fast
izer and, for reasons of economy, they should be used with
- unsedated animals attempt to rise within 6-10 minutes
as low a flow of fresh gas as is practicable The limitations
of withdrawal of desflurane and, although they remain
to the use of minimum flows in the early phase of anaes-
calm, are still weak and may fall forward. It is now routine
thesia are: (1) the necessity to remove nitrogen from the
to administer a small dose of IV xylazine (0.1- 0.2 mg/kg.)
animal and the breathing system; and (2) the need to
or xylazine/propofol (Steffey et al., 2009) at the end of
maintain adequate inspired concentrations of volatile
noqe ul laay iiau ot ia sasioy yum iae 'eisauisaeue
agent at a time when it is being taken up by the animal
15-20 minutes in a calm and coordinated manner.
[see Chapter 3). For halothane or isoflurane, at the outset,
The use of desflurane is not without its problems. Car-
the anaesthetic system should be primed with O2 or an
 diopulmonary depression is dose dependent and is similar
air/Oz mixture and up to 4% of the volatile agent (less in
to that of equipotent doses of isoflurane (Clarke et al.
animals with circulatory dysfunction). Following anaes-
1996, Steffey et al., 2005b). At alveolar concentrations suf
thetic induction, the horse is connected to the system with
ficient for surgery, CO is well maintained, although there
fresh gas flow of 6-8 L/min (still carrying up to 4% of the
is marked hypotension. The rapid kinetics and very fast
anaesthetic agent). The excess of gas is vented via the
change in depth of anaesthesia mean that is easy to over-
(scavenged) exhaust valve, thus keeping the inspired
dose and, in early work, before it was realized that the
anaesthetic agent concentration at an adequate level. The
initial inspired concentration of desflurane needed to be
vaporizer setting is reduced in accordance with the clinical
very little higher than MAC, some horses became very
 needs of the animal. At the end of 10-15 minutes, pro-
hypotensive (Jones et al., 1995).
vided the reservoir bag is filling well, the fresh gas flow can
The rapid and complete nature of recovery from
be reduced to about 4 L/min. At these flows rates, with a
desflurane means that it is an excellent anaesthetic
large horse given halothane, the inspired concentration
agent in horses, the major problem being its need for a
will be approximately half that of the vaporizer seting. a
little higher with isoflurane. The reason for this is that the
personal communication to KC, 20l2), it is being used
mass of halothane or isoflurane delivered to the circuit at
294
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
this low flow rate is insufficient in the first few hours of
include analgesic infusions and are discussed below
the anaesthetic period to make up the net losses from the
 (partial IV anaesthesia, or PIVA; also known as supplemen-
breathing system to the animal's tissues. Reducing the flow
tary IV anaesthesia)
rate still further (the minimum needed is that required to
keep the reservoir bag filled) will increase the difference
Partial intravenous
between inspired concentrations and the vaporizer setting.
anaesthesia (PIVA)
If the depth of anaesthesia needs to be altered, the reser-
voir bag should be emptied and the new concentration of
The hypothesis behind PIVA is that volatile anaesthetic
agent given with a high flow of Oz until the required depth
agents cause cardiovascular depression; if you can reduce
is achieved
the amount of volatile agent, you will reduce the depres-
The more insoluble the anaesthetic, the shorter the time
sion. The problem is that often the infusions also cause
required for the tissues to become saturated and therefore
cardiovascular depression, and the overall result is no
the closer is the inspired concentration to the vaporizer
better, and sometimes worse than with volatile agent
setting. As isoflurane is less soluble than halothane the
alone. Many IV techniques maintain a good MAP, but
vaporizer setting and the flow rates can be reduced a little
through vascoconstriction, and CO may well be reduced. A
more rapidly; with sevoflurane, these changes occur even
wide variety of combinations has been used; far too many
faster and, with desflurane, inspired settings are close to
to cover all here. Knowledge of the effects of some infu-
those ofthe vaporizer within minutes, even when very low
sions has an adequate experimental base, but others and
flow rates are used throughout.
their combinations appears to have been 'trialled' in the
With all volatile anaesthetic agents, difficulty can be
clinical situation. The main infusions used are as follows.
-onpul iae eisausanue ot uoisuenl aul u panuanaxa
tion by an IV technique. When the horse is first connected
to the breathing system, respiratory arrest frequently
Lidocaine
 Occurs as a result of drug-induced respiratory depression,
Lidocaine infusions reduce MAC (Doherty & Frazier, 1998;
removal of the hypoxic drive through high PiO2 (Steffey
Rezende et al., 20ll)and the volatile agent'sparing' action
et al., 1992) and, possibly. the sudden imposition of
has been confirmed in all clinical studies. Reported doses
expiratory resistance The problem can be overcome by
used are in the region of a loading dose of 1.3-2 mg/kg
IPPV, but careful monitoring is needed to ensure that over-
given slowly over 10-15 minutes followed by a CRI of
dose does not occur. Attempts to hasten the uptake by
 50 μg/kg/min. Lidocaine also improves gut motility, and
the administration of high-inspired concentrations can
it therefore is often used during surgery for colic. It is
 provoke cardiovascular collapse.
recommended that lidocaine infusions cease 30 minutes
prior to stopping the volatile agent in order to improve
Supplementary analgesia
quality of recovery and reduce ataxia (Valverde et al.,
2005). However, CO and other cardiovascular parameters
Ideally, additional analgesia should be provided to horses
did not differ between horses in which anaesthesia was
prior to the start of painful surgery Local nerve blocks.
with sevoflurane alone, or with a lidocaine infusion and
where practicable, totally reduce response to surgery and
sevoflurane such that MAC equivalents were the same in
may also provide postoperative analgesia. NSAIDs are
both groups (Wagner et al., 20ll). Thus, at least with
sevoflurane, lidocaine infusions do not improve the car-
no evidence that their use reduces MAC. The place of
diovascular status under inhalation anaesthesia.
opioids is controversial; many anaesthetists consider
that butorphanol (0.02-0.04 mg/kg) or morphine (0.1-
0.2 mg/kg) improve the quality of anaesthesia and prevent
α2-Agonists
 movement in response to surgery but, in some individual
Many Q2-agonists have been infused to provide analgesia
animals, even under anaesthesia, their effect is to produce
during both TIVA and inhalation anaesthesia. Doses which
excitement' and the dose of volatile anaesthetic needs to
have been used are given in Box ll.1. αz-Agonists consist-
be increased to counteract this. Experimental studies have
ently reduce MAC (Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 200lc
failed to demonstrate an action of opioids on MAC in the
Gonzalo-Marcilla et al., 20l2). In many, but not all, clini-
horse (reviewed by Clutton, 20l0). Once the horse has
cal studies the isoflurane or sevoflurane-saving properties
responded to surgery, a small dose of thiopental (0.5-
 remained; the exceptions probably relating to the judge-
1 mg/kg) will rapidly regain control, although it may
 ment of clinical anaesthetic depth. All studies comment
cause a fall in MAP and transient apnoea. Incremental
 on the good quality of recovery. Arterial blood pressure
doses of ketamine (0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV) may be given for
has always been well maintained. However, Q2-agonists
additional analgesia, but the total dose of increments
 reduce heart rate, and the studies in which CO has been
should preferably not exceed 2 mg/kg, and should not be
measured, have found that CO in the Q2-agonist group.
limited towards the end of anaesthesia. Other options
 although satisfactory, is usually less than the comparison
295
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
group (Ringer et al., 2007). Thus Oz-agonist infusions are
more than one of these methods of support may be
useful to maintain a stable level of anaesthesia, to increase
needed. Few studies have examined such treatments in
blood pressure, to improve recovery, but not to reduce
horses anaesthetized with IV agents, although it is now
overall cardiovascular depression.
recognized that cardiovascular support still may be
required if good peripheral perfusion is to be
Opioids
maintained.
As already discussed, opioids do not reduce MAC of inha-
Increase in drculating fluid volume
lation anaesthetic agents in horses. This lack of 'sparing
effect also occurs during clinical anaesthesia. Studies have
It is usual practice to infuse fluids (Hartman's or similar)
used butorphanol infusions (loading dose 25 μg/kg, CRI
throughout anaesthesia at a rate of 10 mL/kg/hour. There
25 μg/kg/h) or morphine (loading dose 0.15 mg/kg, CRI
appears to be no evidence base for this figure, and at this
rate it does not prevent the hypotension induced by the
was also supplemented by other agents; there was no 'vola-
volatile anaesthetic agents. In the author's experience, if
tile agents sparing effect' but also no differences in
given for a long period (4 hours plus) to anaesthetized
cardiovascular parameters nor in recovery
quality
(Bettschart-Wolfensberger et al., 20ll; Villalba et al.,
eral oedema. It does, however, maintain an 'open vein' and
2011).
 provide a port for IV drug adminstration.
The hypothesis behind the administration of fluid to the
Ketamine
anaesthetized horse is that an increase in the circulating
fluid volume to match the increased volume of the dilated
Muir & Sams (1992) demonstrated that ketamine, infused
vascular bed will restore the venous return. It is difficult
t0 produce set target plasma concentrations, reduced
tD give an adequate bolus to achieve this with electrolytes.
halothane MAC. MAC reduction started at plasma values
The use of hypertonic saline [4 mL/kg) in anaesthetized
>1 μg/mL and had maximal effect [a 37% reduction) at
horses is used frequently. When given prior to anaesthesia
approximately 10 μg/mL. Cardiac output was increased,
and followed by a slower infusion of lactated Ringer it
with other cardiovascular parameters unchanged. In most
improves blood pressure during anaesthesia (Dyson &
clinical studies, ketamine infusions have been combined
Pascoe, 1990). However, Gasthuys et al. (1994) found that
with other infusions making it difficult to assess the influ-
when hypertonic saline was given to halothane anaesthe-
ence of ketamine alone (eg. Enderle et al., 2008: Villalba
tized ponies, the improvement in CO and MAP was sig-
et al., 20ll; Hubbell et al., 20l2). No loading dose is
nificant only at a time point 5 minutes after the cessation
needed as ketamine is used to induce anaesthesia. Infu-
of infusion. During the actual infusion of hypertonic
sion doses are then 0.03-0.05 mg/kg/min; with the higher
 saline MAP fell, and these workers suggest that the method
doses reducing infusion rate after 50 minutes.
is not ideal where hypotension is already severe. Gelatin-
based compounds are not suitable as volume expanders
Treatment of circulatory depression
in the normovolaemic horse (Taylor, 1998) as the volumes
required are too great and, indeed, some ponies developed
In the horse, hypotension is common during anaesthesia
pulmonary oedema. Hallowell & Corley (2006), in a clini-
0 Asea st ianaied sil se 'pue siua aeion y
cal study in horses undergoing surgery for colic, found that
measure, it has usually been routine practice to equate
CO under anaesthesia was higher in horses given pentas-
such hypotension  with cardiovascular  depression.
tarch solutions than those given hypertonic saline. An
However, it is now realized that, although it is essential
experimental study in which endotoxin was injected into
that MAP is adequate to perfuse vital organs, once this
horses failed to confirm the advantage of hetastartch over
'opening' pressure is reached then, as discussed above,
hypertonic saline (Pantaleon et al., 2006).
perfusion and peripheral blood flow depend on CO.
Improving MAP by vasoconstriction may result in a fall in
Positive inotropes
CO. presumably as the result of increased afterload
(Wagner et al., 1992; Lee et al., 1998c). The aim of cardio-
Many of the sympathomimetic agents are easily oxidized
vascular support is, therefore, to increase ABP to an accept-
to inactive compounds on exposure to air, and thus should
able level (usually taken as a MAP of 65-70 mmHg) by
be prepared to the required dilution just prior to use. This
the improvement of CO and blood flow. A number of
property may explain differing results and differing recom-
mendations as to dosage and efficacy. Fortunately, in clini-
and investigated in horses anaesthetized with volatile
cal practice, some changes in potency are acceptable as the
agents. Often the findings concerning effcacy and dosage
 dnugs are administered to effect by infusion.
at different centres do not agree, probably because of dif-
The pharmacological action of dopamine dobutamine
fering responses in individual animals. In clinical practice,
 and similar agents is to increase heart rate yet, if given too
296
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
fast to anaesthetized horses, bradycardia or even heart
recovery was poor and, in one study, two horses developed
block may occur. This appears to be a vagally-mediated
 postanaesthetic colic. The cardiovascular effects of dopex-
reflex to the improving MAP and, if these drugs are given
amine are ideal for circulatory support, and the side effects
 after treatment with an anticholinergic agent, tachycardia
 almost certainly result from overdosage, but considerably
and a rise in MAP occurs with very low doses of the
more experimental work is required to elucidate the
sympathomimetic.
 correct dose before this agent can be recommended for use
in clinical practice.
Dopamine
Phenylephrine and methoxamine
Dopamine is a naturally occurring precursor of noradrena-
line which exerts its action at O, β and β2, and dopamin-
Phenylephrine and methoxamine both act as Q2-
ergic adrenoceptors. In horses, infusions of 2.5-5.0 μg/kg/
 adrenoceptor agonists, and increase arterial blood pressure
min improve CO while causing vasodilation. Renal per-
by vasoconstriction. An infusion dose of phenylephrine
fusion is increased (Trim et al., 1985, 1989) and both CO
of 0.25-2.00 μg/kg/min in anaesthetized horses raises
and ABP improved in horses with endotoxic shock (Trim
blood pressure but CO and muscle blood flow fall are
et al., 1991). Higher doses may cause vasoconstriction via
unchanged (Lee et al., 1998c). These vasoconstrictor
O activity. Signs of overdose are tachycardia and associ-
 agents should not routinely be used to treat hypotension
ated arrhythmias, and trembling (Lee et al., 1998c) but
in anaesthetized horses but may have a role where all
these effects cease as soon as the infusion rate is reduced.
other methods have failed.
Dobutamine
Norepinephrine
Dobutamine exerts its actions at both o- and β-
In cases (usually colic cases) which do not respond to the
 adrenoceptors (βactions predominating at low doses), but
above inotropes, norepinephrine can be infused cau-
is devoid of action at dopaminergic receptors. In anaesthe-
tiously to effect [in addition to dobutamine). Doses are
tized horses, infusions of from 0.5 to 5.0 μg/kg have been
0.05-1.0 μg/kg/min; most horses respond at the lower
found to improve both CO and MAP (Donaldson, 1988;
 doses (Brainard - personal communication to CT, 2012).
Gasthuys et al., 1991a; Lee et al., 1998c). Overdose of dob-
 The ECG should be observed continually and the infusion
utamine causes tachycardia with associated arrhythmias
 stopped if there are arrhythmias.
(which may be dangerous in the presence of hypercapnia)
but lack of dopaminergic activity means that muscle
Calcium
tremors do not occur.
The use of calcium to counteract anaesthetic-induced car-
diovascular depression has been advocated for many years
Dopexamine
but much of the evidence as to dose and effcacy is anec-
 dotal, and the differing availability of elemental calcium
Dopexamine is a synthetic catecholamine which has
d ie uoe iassal e uim sioidasad ie aiae paie
in preparations of different calcium salts sometimes ma kes
and dopaminergic sites. It improves CO through a positive
comparisons between studies diffcult (Gasthuys et al.
inotropic effect, while causing vasodilation, reducing
1991b). Calcium borogluconate, being readily available in
afterload and improving renal perfusion. Muir [1992a,b)
veterinary practice, is a common choice and up to 300 mL
of a 40% w/v solution may be given prior to or during
demonstrated in conscious and anaesthetized horses that
anaesthesia by slow IV infusion. Another recommenda-
at doses of 1 μg/kg/min or more, CO and HR increased,
while systemic vascular resistance decreased. In conscious
tion is an infusion of 0.25-2.00 mL/kg/min of 10%
horses, ABP changes were minimal but, in anaesthetized
alcium gluconate (Daunt 1990). In clinical practice,
animals, dopexamine infusion caused a dose-dependent
calcium infusions tend either to be very effective or almost
increase. These advantageous cardiovascular effects in
totally ineffective in improving MAP and peripheral blood
anaesthetized horses have been confirmed by other
flow. The rationale of the use of calcium is that plasma
calcium levels fall during anaesthesia with volatile agents.
workers (Young et al., 1997: Lee et al., 1998c) but, in these
later studies under halothane anaesthesia, dopexamine
Whether calcium has any effect in improving CO depressed
by IV agents is not known.
was found to cause unacceptable side effects. The initial
response to infusion of the drug was a fall in end-tidal
anaesthetic agent (presumably because the vasodilation
Anticholinergic agents
au dn yoon uau upium seaie pasnyadapun pauado peu
halothane) and great diffculty was encountered in keeping
Glycopyrrolate, atropine, hyoscine
the animals unconscious. Higher doses caused sweating.
 The advantages and disadvantages of the use of anticholin-
tachycardia and tremor. When infusion was stopped, MAP
 ergic agents in equine anaesthesia have been discussed
and heart rate continued to rise, and side effects did not
above However, during anaesthesia with volatile anaes-
abate for a considerable period of time. The quality of
thetic agents, bradycardia may contribute to the fall in CO
297
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
and this is particularly likely to be the case if O2-
marked fall in MAP, probably through a negative inotropic
adrenoceptor agonists have been used in the anaesthetic
effect.
aeodosg 1o (8y/3u 10'o-s000) audov los0od
(0.005 mg/kg) given IV often do not increase heart rate
Benzodiazepines
but, following their use, small doses of dopamine or dob-
Benzodiazepines may also be administered intraopera-
utamine do, with a spectacular effect on CO. Hyoscine
tively for their muscle relaxant properties. However, when
0.1 mg/kg increased heart rate for 10-15 minutes (Borer
given to horses already anaesthetized with volatile anaes-
& Clarke, 2006).
thetic agents, benzodiazepines cause marked respiratory
depression.
Intermittent positive pressure
ventilation (IPPV)
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Until the last 15 years, IPpV was used sparingly in anaes-
For many years, neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA)
thetized horses, partly through concern about induced
have been used sparingly in equine anaesthesia (other
circulatory changes (see Ventilatory strategies, above), but
than suxamethonium at induction of anaesthesia), the
partly as many people did not have suitable ventilators.
major fear being that residual muscle weakness when the
While with halothane spontaneous breathing was satisfac-
horse tried to rise would adversely affect the quality of
tory, with the newer agents, respiratory depression is
recovery. The advent of the short-acting. easily reversed
greater and IpPV is now usually employed if the apparatus
competitive relaxant atracurium, changed this, and neu-
is available.
romuscular blocking agents are now widely used not only
When IPPV is employed, it is advisable to retain a degree
to aid abdominal, ophthalmic and thoracic surgery, but in
of hypercarbia, as this helps, at least under halothane
 general and orthopaedic surgery to prevent the sudden
anaesthesia, to maintain MAP (Khanna et al., 1995)
reflex responses which sometimes occur.
Ideally, monitoring of end-tidal COz will enable adjust-
The rules for the use of neuromuscular blocking agents
ments to be made to the imposed tidal volume and/or rate
are, as for any species and as explained in Chapter 8: (1)
of ventilation so that an adequate PaOz is maintained with
that the facilities which enable immediate and sustained
a normal or slightly elevated PaCO2.
IPPV are available; and (2) that it is possible to be certain
Usual settings for the ventilator are to deliver a tidal
that the horse will be unconscious throughout the dura-
volume of around 10 mL/kg, at a respiratory frequency
tion of their effect.
between 8 and 10 breaths/min, the airway pressure should
There is a wide variation among individuals in the
 be kept as low as is consistent with adequate expansion of
response to a given dose of neuromuscular blocking agent
the chest wall and the inspiratory time should be between
and in rate of recovery from blockade. Also, some antibi-
2 and 3 seconds. The question of the use or otherwise of
otic agents such as gentamicin greatly reduce the dose of
PEEP has already been discussed. Reduction of respiratory
relaxant required. For this reason, no attempt should be
rate to 5-6/minute with the same tidal volumes usually
made to administer them in fixed doses; they should
enables spontaneous breathing to return.
always be given so as to produce just the desired effect. An
Assisted ventilation, in which the horse triggers the ven-
incremental dosage regimen enables this to be done;
tilator which then delivers a prescribed tidal volume, is a
about one-half the anticipated full dose is given initially
very useful compromise in equine anaesthesia as long as
 and further increments of half this initial dose are given
the ventilator has a 'fail safe' mechanism, whereby if the
at 3-5-minute intervals until the desired degree of relaxa-
horse does not trigger a breath within a certain time the
 tion is obtained. Only small doses are needed to suppress
ventilator switches to automatic mode.
uwanted muscle movements during general anaesthesia
(e.g. in eye surgery) but large doses will be required to
produce the nearly complete blockade demanded by some
surgical procedures. In every case, the aim should be to
USE OF MUSCLE RELAXANTS
use only a minimum dose and to ensure a complete recov.
ery of neuromuscular function before the termination of
anaesthesia. If unwanted muscle tone is returning towards
Centrally acting muscle relaxants
the end of a surgical procedure, it is usually wiser to restore
Guaifenesin
relaxation by a slight deepening of anaesthesia rather than
The use of guaifenesin as part of the anaesthetic induction
the administration of more neuromuscular blocker.
technique has been discussed above. Doses of guaifenesin
of 5-10 mg/kg may be given to the anaesthetized horse
Monitoring the block
and will produce some relaxation without interfering with
In equine anaesthesia, clinical monitoring of neuromus-
respiratory activity but, when given in this way, it causes a
cular block using a peripheral nerve stimulator as described
298
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
111
in Chapter 8 should be considered mandatory. The stimu-
 study in isoflurane anaesthetized horses, but found great
lator is usually used on various branches of the facial, the
variations between individual animals, these individual
radial or the superficial peroneal nerves. The reader is
variations being confirmed with clinical experience
referred to Chapter 8 for details and diagrams of nerve 
(Martin-Flores et al., 2012a). Testing used the TOF The
stimulation points. The strength of contraction of the rel-
lowest dose 0.025 mg/kg (25 μg/kg). did not cause
evant muscles is estimated by manual sensing at the
any Tl depression, and while the highest dose used,
muzzle or toe, or better still, by acceleromyography. If this
0.1 mg/kg (100 μg/kg). caused an incomplete block, the
facility is not available, myoneural block may be moni-
0l dn - susel suol sem pasnpoid sem zeu yooiq [eed
tored by careful observation of the breathing and general
2 hours, requiring reversal with neostigmine.
muscular activity of the anaesthetized horse Signs of
partial blockade include brief, weak inspiratory move-
Rocuronium
ments without holding of inspiration, and feeble, unsus-
A dose-response study in horses demonstrated that
tained withdrawal responses to painful stimulation. One
rocuronium at doses of 0.4-0.6 mg/kg IV resulted in a full
extremely simple objective test is measurement of airway
neuromuscular block; time to return of Tl of the train of
pressure with a water manometer when the endotracheal
four was 38 and 55 minutes respectively [Auer et al.,
tube is occluded before an inspiratory effort. No signif-
2007). Doses of 0.3 mg/kg were suffcient for ophthalmic
cant degree of myoneural block is present if the horse can
surgery and clinical duration of block was 32 ± 18.6
 generate a pressure in the occluded airway of more than
minutes (Auer & Moens, 20ll). Rocuronium NMB can be
25 cm HO (2.5 kPa) below atmospheric pressure. If a
 antagonized by sugammadex (4 mg/kg IV) (Miosing et al.
degree of block is present during anaesthetic recovery, the
2010).
horse is unable to stiffen the neck or hold up the head
when attempting to sit in sternal recumbency, or it may
Pancuronium bromide
 make brief, weak attempts to stand followed by shaking
Pancuronium has now been used for many years in horses.
 of the limb muscles and collapse.
During light anaesthesia, doses of 0.06 mg/kg produce
complete relaxation with apnoea of about 20 min dura-
Neuromuscular blocking drugs
tion, but it is more usual to give doses of 0.1 mg/kg to be
certain of producing apnoea with complete relaxation of
Atracurium
respiratory muscles so that IPpV can be performed with
The relatively short duration of action of activity and the
the lowest possible airway pressures (Hildebrand &
lack of cumulative neuromuscular blocking effect make
Howitt, 1984).
atracurium particularly suitable for use in horses in doses
of 0.12-0.20 mg/kg (Hildebrand et al., 1986: Hildebrand
Suxamethonium chloride
& Hill, 1989). The authors recommend an initial dose of
The use of suxamethonium for casting and restraint of
0.1 mg/kg followed, if this does not produce the desired
horses is considered by the vast majority of veterinary
 degree of relaxation as indicated by train-of-four stimula-
s ll aeid aueunu kiaanxa ue aq on sisausaeue
tion, by doses of 0.0l mg/kg at 2-minute intervals until
unnecessary and it is unsafe on pharmacological grounds.
the block is judged to be adequate (reduction of initial
 In the past, suxamethonium (o.1 mg/kg IV) had a place
twitch height). Edrophonium 0.5-1.0 mg/kg will antago-
in the provision of short-term muscle relaxation in anaes-
nize any residual neuromuscular blocking effects at the
thetized horses but it has now been replaced by the short-
end ofthe procedure for which it is given and prior admin-
 acting competitive blocking agent atracurium.
istration of atropine or glycopyrrolate is unnecessary pro-
minute. Atracurium has also been given by continuous
Termination of neuromuscular block
infusion at 0.17 mg/kg/h after an initial bolus dose of
There is no effective antidote to suxamethonium, but
0.05 mg/kg (Hildebrand &Hill, 1989). Cardiovascular sta-
neostigmine is an efficient antidoteto the non-depolarizing
bility is good but there may be some slowing of heart
relaxants. In horses, its use should be preceded by the
rate after an initial increase in ABP in response to
IV injection of 0.01 mg/kg atropine or glycopyrrolate,
edrophonium.
[eiol e oi dn sasop [ejuauaioul ul uaaig uaul s! l! pue
dose 0.02 mg/kg. A period of 2-3minutes should be
Vecuronium
allowed between increments and the effect of each care-
Doses of 0.l mg/kg produce neuromuscular block of
fully assessed before the next is given. Edrophonium
some 20-30 minutes' duration in horses lightly anaesthe-
(0.5-1 mg/kg) or neostigmine should be given while IPPV
tized with halothane. However, recent experience has sug-
is continued so that there is no danger of hypoxia Or
 gested that its action is unreliable in horses. Martin-Flores
et al. (2012b) conducted a vecuronium dose-response
 animals neostigmine may cause serious arrhythmias.
299
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
ANAESTHETIC RECOVERY PERIOD
General points
Ideally, horses should recover from anaesthesia calmly and
quietly, and in as fast a time as possible, but these aims
annot always be achieved. The quality of recovery will
depend on a number of factors including the sedative and
anaesthetic drugs used throughout the perioperative
proces, the degree of postoperative pain, the comfort of
the horse its temperament, and limitation to standing
caused by surgery or onset of anaesthetic induced myopa-
thy or neuropathy.
In the last 10 years, there have been a large number of
 publications which have tried to assess quality of recovery.
and then apply it to the regimen under study. Assessment
Figure 11.24 A purpose made uncuffed nasal tube with a
of quality of recovery is very subjective, and ease of use
bulbous end to prevent the danger of inhalation.
tends to go with imprecision (Suthers et al., 20ll). Never-
From Tayfor, PM., Clarke, K.W. 2007. Hanobook of Equine
theless, such scoring systems will highlight an excess of
Anaesthesia. Znd eon, Eisevier Lto, with permission
umacceptable recoveries.
Simple nursing factors thought to assist in obtaining
good quality recoveries are the provision of adequate (but
not too sedative) analgesia, and ensuring that the horse
congestion has occurred (i.e at the start of the proce-
has an empty bladder. The recovery box floor needs to be
dures). If this was not done, a phenylephrine spray into
sufficiently soft for comfort, but hard enough for the horse
the nostrils will relieve the congestion.
to feel safe when it stands. Most importantly, it should not
be slippery. This author (KC) has found the floor surface.
Sedation
Linatex, shown in Figure ll.26 to be successful with these
It is important that the horse does not try to rise until it
aims. The best size for a recovery box is also contentious
is able to do so. Following prolonged anaesthesia with
- too big and the horse can crash around - too small it
volatile agents it is now common practice to adminis-
gets 'cast: The recovery box should be quiet and it was
ter additional sedation (e.g. xylazine at increments of
always considered that it should be darkened, but Clarke-
0.1 mg/kg up to 0.5 mg/kg IV) in the early recovery
 Price et al. (2008) found that lighting did not influence
period. Most regimens which have used a medetomidine
aul jo isanbal aul ie Alensn st gujuoisod Aenb Aianonal
infusion, whether for TIVA or PIVA, have been reported to
surgeon but, if the horse has been in dorsal recumbency.
result in good quality recoveries.
placing it left side down allows the larger lung to be
 Recently, there have been a number of investigations
uppermost.
 into suitable combinations of drugs to help ensure a good
recovery. Wagner et al. (20l2), in a cross-over study, com-
Ensuring adequate oxygenation
pared recovery from sevoflurane anaesthesia without
and a patent ainway
further sedation with that where xylazine and ketamine
It is usually routine to deliver oxygen at 15 L/min to the
were infused for the last 30 minutes of anaesthesia, and a
horse once it has been detached from the anaesthetic
third treatment where infusion of xylazine and propofol
machine with the intention of reducing the hypoxaemia
was given for the last 15 minutes of anaesthesia. Recover-
that otherwise might occur at this time. The oxygen can be
ies were worst with no sedation; recoveries in the propofol
simply delivered to the end the ET tube, or while the horse
groups were superior. However, while Steffey et al. (2009)
is still intubated, a self-demand valve can be used.
found that xylazine/propofol infusions after 4 hours of
To ensure a patent airway, some anaesthetists leave the
 desflurane anaesthesia improved the quality of recovery, it
e iou si siu inq spueis asioy au iun aoeid ui aqnt 1a
also caused a degree of respiratory depression.
guarantee; ifthe gag is displaced, the horse may bite down
and obstruct the tube Horses are obligate nasal breathers,
Assisted recovery
and once the ET tube is removed it is necessary to ensure
Rope-based
that the nasal passages are not blocked and oedematous.
Nasal congestion occurs when the horse is positioned on
A number of rope-based systems have been used so that
the operating table with its head lower than its body. A
the horse can be assisted to its feet. All are based on head
nasal ET tube (Fig. ll.24) can be placed easily before the
 and tail ropes. Figure ll.25 demonstrates how the rope
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
 presented for surgical treatment have already been treated
medically and it is important to consider the drugs used,
their route of administration, doses and time of dosing.
for they can influence the response to subsequent anaes-
thesia. Pain is usually indicative of gastric and/or intestinal
Allow enough this
distension and of acute ischaemia. Its severity may make
dool poo e Joj pua
the horseunmanageableuntilitbecomes utterly exhausted,
or it pulls out
and pain must be controlled, although this is not always
easy. NSAIDs, in particular flunixin, are widely used and
can be so effective in reducing both the pain of colic and
the signs of toxaemia as to mask the need for surgery.
Opioids which are often used include butorphanol, meth-
adone and morphine. Xylazine and detomidine are usually
the most effective agents to provide analgesia in colic, but
doses should be kept low both to limit their duration of
action, and their cardiopulmonary effects in an already
stressed horse. The effect of these agents on gut motility is
 probably unimportant other than related to diagnosis, as
it is comparatively short acting. Acepromazine, being an
Pull tight
0-adrenergic blocker, will contribute to hypotension in
dehydrated or shocked animals and is generally not
 Pull on this end
advised if surgery will be necessary, although doses of up
Figure 11.25 A recommended method of tying the tail hitch.
to 0.05 mg/kg are unlikely to do any harm.
From Tayfor, PM., Clarke, K.W., 2007. Hanobook of Equine
 The main problem in the preanaesthetic preparation of
Anaesthesia. Zno eon, Esevier Lto, with permission.
most colic cases is the replacement of fluids in the dehy-
drated and shocked animal. Fluid replacement is extremely
may be fixed to the tail. when horses are supported by
urgent in surgical cases if any consistent measure of success
this, it is difficult to understand why the tail does not
is to be obtained. Unfortunately, diagnosis is very impre-
break; anecdotally it does happen but it would appear to
cise and there is an understandable reluctance on the part
be very rare.
of both owners and veterinarians to spend a considerable
 The helpers on the ropes may well be unable to support
lnede ie Ae ypium sse uo a pue Aauou jo ns
the weight unaided and if in the recovery box are them-
 omy prove to be inoperable To overcome this reluctance
 selves at risk. A systerm developed by H. Wilderjans uses a
some acceptable routine which does not involve replace-
system of blocks and pulleys to give mechanical advantage
ment of the major part of the fluid deficit prior to anaes-
and also to lead the ropes out of the recovery box. The
thesia is clearly desirable Also, it is important to remove
system uses quick-release systems either from climbing or
the source of any endotoxin (eg. dead gut) as soon as
sailing equipment (Fig. 1l.26), and enables the helpers to
 possible. Our experience indicates that if really vigorous
give support while remaining in safety. Few helpers are
replacement is carried out once the surgeon has confirmed
needed - one person can handle all the ropes. Its use does
that surgical treatment is possible, a successful outcome is
not always ensure a perfect recovery, but the fact it is now
 quite as likely as in cases treated before the induction of
used in very many clinics shows that it is the most satisfac-
anaesthesia. Thus, it is possible that 'minimal' preparation
tory of the simple systems developed to date.
can be justifed on both surgical and economic grounds
but it must be emphasized that for success it must be
Swimming poo!
carried out in a rational manner.
Swimming pools (Fig. 1l.27) are the ultimate in recovery
 Whenever possible anaesthesia should not be induced
systems. Although no doubt superior to all else for recover-
 in a colic case until hypovolaemia has been improved and
ing horses with fractures, they do need a large experienced
the packed cell volume (PCV) decreased. Tachycardia may
team of helpers for their use.
persist, due to pain or toxaemia, even after the blood
volume has been restored to normal. Hypertonic saline
(4 mL/kg IV of 7.5%) followed by large quantities of Ring-
ANAESTHESIA FOR HORSES
er's lactate provides an inexpensive method of treating
the hypovolaemia rapidly. The starches (e.g. pentastarch)
WITH COLIC
may be more effective in maintaining circulating fluid
(Hallowell & Corley, 2006). Other methods include the
The most common equine emergency case presented to
 transfusion of plasma. Acid-base disturbances are seldom
the anaesthetist is that of colic Most cases of colic
a problem in the preoperative period and there is no need
301
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
Figure 11.26 Horses can be recovered with head and tail ropes. (A) Head and tail ropes go through pulleys to outside the
box. (B) The ropes are tightened to support the horse as it rises - ropes are locked’ tight using quick release systems (in this
se Aajad yuom sele jou saop i llem aul A paioddns s! l! os sasu ashoy aut Aleapl () (buis io, paubisap asoul ase
shown on the screen in B).
Photograph courtesy of Alan Taylor.
to administer bicarbonate at this stage The administration
relieving intra-abdominal pressure to be kept to the
of bicarbonate intraoperatively results in a very high
minimum.
PaCO2, and the rapid exhaustion of the carbon dioxide
The actual method of anaesthesia, within reason, is the
absorbent of the anaesthetic circuit. Even in cases compli-
anaesthetist's choice - dnug doses will need to be adapted
cated by septic shock, the routine administration of glu-
to the state of the animal, and familiarity enables this to
cocorticoids before operation is of doubtful value. NSAIDs.
be done far more safely than any advantage from use of a
if not already given, are usually administered both for
theoretically safer anaesthetic agent. During anaesthesia.
their analgesic and antitoxaemic effects.
lidocaine infusions (loading dose 1-2 mg/kg over 10-15
 Regardless of whether preoperative fluids are to be given
minutes, followed by a CRI of 0.05 mg/kg/min) can be
to a colic case, at least one relatively short wide bored
 given as these are prokinetic and thought to improve gut
reliable IV line must be introduced into the jugular vein.
motility. Blood pressure needs to be supported with fluids 
A stomach tube should be passed through one nostril
-qop ot puodsal ol sl!ey ainssaid poolq j! sadonouo! pue
before the horse is anaesthetized and the stomach decom-
utamine infusions, norepinephrine may be given as well.
pressed. Gastric decompression will minimize the likeli-
If hypotension is very severe (and MAPs less than
hood of regurgitation immediately on induction before
40 mm Hg are not uncommon in these animals) then phe-
ET intubation can be achieved. Whenever possible, the
 nylephrine can be used despite the vasoconstriction that
surgical site should be clipped and prepared while the
it will induce. Often the colic horses are exhausted and
animal is conscious and standing, enabling the time from
will remain recumbent for some time after surgery: no
induction of anaesthesia to opening the abdomen and
attempt should be made to try to make them rise too soon.
302
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
B
C
?
its feet do not touch the ground. (C) It starts to take weight on its feet, the head needs less support; (D) the water is slowly
drained out. With this system the floor then rises so the horse can walk out.
Photograohs courtesy of Regula Bettschart-W/offensberger, University of Zurich.
Where there are suitable facilities, assistance to recovery is
1995). Although this may reflect the fact that many of
helpful.
those requiring surgery at that age have life-threatening
illnesses such as ruptured bladder or septicaemia, others
are healthy and are anaesthetized for correction of ortho-
 paedic problems, and should not be at special risk.
ANAESTHESIA IN THE FOAL
Foals are born relatively mature compared to many
 Other mammals. Renal function is very mature. Immatu-
Foals less than l week old are 20 times, and 1-4 weeks
3a] siuae auos zeu ueaw Aeuu saazua iaa jo A
old 4.3 times more likely to die during or following anaes-
NSAIDs) may be more cumulative therefore potentially
thesia and surgery than an adult horse [Johnston et al.,
more toxic (Crisman et al., 1996; Wilcke et al., 1993;
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
1998). However, increased duration of action does not
often is sufficient to make them lie down. Oz-Agonists are
appear to be a major clinically significant problem with
best avoided to reduce bradycardia, but as the foal grows
the common agents given for general anaesthesia.
older [and bigger or more boisterous) they may be given
However, low body fat and low plasma albumin affect
 at doses in the lower range of those given to adults. Deto-
 pharmacokinetics and initital volume of distribution may
midine (up to 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg) if IM) is particularly
differ from adults (see Chapter 3). There is less protein to
useful because ofthe small volume required. Low to mod-
bind agents such as propofol, so duration of action may
erate doses of acepromazine (0.02-0.05 mg/kg) may also
be prolonged for these reasons. Lack of fat also means
be used for premedication in older foals.
 responses to changes in inspired concentrations (increased 
 For anaesthesia, in neonatal or sick foals premedication
or decrease) of inhalation agents occur very rapidly. Tem-
is not necessary.
Anaesthesia may be induced using
Aiody aosaq Aeu sieoy rood st uoeinsai ameiad
sevoflurane, isoflurane or halothane This may be admin-
caemic during or after anaesthesia.
istered by mask, remembering that the foal is an obligate
The cardiorespiratory system in the newborn has just
 nasal breather. An alternative is to pass an endotracheal
jou keu ssunl au 'saueup jeuouny oeu auosiapun
tube into the trachea via one nostril and administer the
be fully expanded, and the responses to hypoxia, hyper-
anaesthetic through this. Neonatal Thoroughbred foals
carbia, hypotension and hypertension are immature. Foals
an accommodate tubes of 7-9 mm internal diameter and
can only increase their cardiac output by increasing heart
in 6-week old foals 1l mm tubes can be passed with ease.
rate; bradycardia during anaesthesia is life threatening and
Passage of the tube is greatly facilitated by prior prepara-
often does not appear to respond to anticholinergic drugs.
tion of the ventral nasal mucosa with lidocaine ointment
The stress of anaesthesia and surgery frequently cause
or gel and lubrication of the tube with the same prepara-
gastric ulcers. The changes with age from neonatal are
tion. Induction is usually very calm; the foal sinks down.
 progressive, so choices of methods of anaesthesia increase
Once orotracheal intubation is accomplished anaesthesia
accordingly: in general foals over 3-6 months may be
is maintained with the inhalation agent delivered by
anaesthetized as for adults, but large and boisterous foals
equipment suitable for the foal's size. Johnston et al's
 below this age may require a similar protocol for control.
[1995) survey suggested that foals were more likely to die
if anaesthesia was induced with inhalation agents than
Practical sedation and anaesthesia
with IV drugs, but this may reflect the clinical condition
of foals
of the foals where this technique was chosen. However, in
very young foals anaesthesia also can be induced with
First, the mare and foal should be considered a 'unit' and
diazepam or midazolam (o.2 mg/kg) and ketamine
if possible kept together as long as the foal is conscious to
(2.5 mg/kg). Monitoring is as for adult animals. Breathing
avoid fear. Mares should be sedated, preferably with ace-
 may be spontaneous but IPPV is usually needed to avoid
promazine (0.05 mg/kg IV) combined with an 02-agonist
hypercarbia and acidosis. Heart rate must be kept ade-
with or without an opioid; doses should be chosen to
 quate and a low dose of an anticholinergic (e.g. atropine
avoid ataxia. Young foals are left with the mare and do not
at 0.005-0.01 mg/kg) may be given. Hypotension should
need to be starved. The condition of 'sick' foals should be
 be treated with fluids and dobutamine as for adult horses.
assessed (eg plasma K' in cases of bladder rupture; fluids
Hypothermia should be prevented by the methods
for toxaemia) and wherever possible stabilized prior to
described in small animal chapters. Opioids give analge-
surgery.
sia; doses of morphine or methadone at 0.1 mg/g have
Foals are very 'needle-shy' and it is easy to accidentally
been used. NSAIDs should be used with caution with
hit the carotid artery while attempting jugular puncture.
dosing less frequently than for adults. Recovery is usually
Intradermal or subcutaneous local anaesthesia makes
rapid, and young foals can be helped to their feet. As soon
jugular catheterization easier, and IM sedation in older
as it is safe to do so they should be returned to the mare
foals can be useful.
 so that they can suckle. Gastro-protectants such as sucral-
Young foals may be sedated with diazepam or mida-
fate 20 mg/kg orally three times a day are required the day
zolam, (0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV) with or without opioids; this
of surgery and some days after.
REFERENCES
Aida, H., Mizuno, Y, Hobo, S., et al.
sevoflurane inhalation in horses.
effects of sevoflurane anesthesia in
1994. Determination of the
I Vet Med Sci 56, 1161-1165.
horses. Vet Surg 25, 164-170.
minimum alveolar concentration
Aida, H., Mizuno, Y., Hobo, S., et al..
Alitalo, I., 1986. Clinical experiences
[MAC) and physical response to
1996. Cardiovascular and pulmonary
with Domosedan in horses and
304
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
cattle. A review. Acta Vet Scand Suppl
 medetomidine for the anaesthesia of (
Clarke, K.W., Hall, L.W., 1969.
82.193-196
ponies. Vet Rec 148, 264-267.
'Xylazine'- a new sedative for horses
Ambrisko, T.D., Coppens, P., Kabes, R..
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R..
and cattle. Vet Rec 85, 512-517.
et al., 2012. Lithium dilution,
Freeman, S.L., Bowen, I.M., et al.
Carke, K.W., Taylor, P.M., 1986.
 pulse power analysis, and
 2005. Cardiopulmonary effects and
Detomidine: a new sedative for
continuous themodilution cardiac
pharmacokinetics of i.v.
horses. Equine Vet J 18, 366-370.
output measurements compared
dexmedetomidine in ponies.
Clarke, K.W., Freeman, S.,
with bolus thermodilution in
Equine Vet I 37, 60-64.
Alibhai, H.l.K., et al., 1997.
anaesthetized ponies. Br J Anaesth
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., Dicht, S..
Cardiopulmonary actions of alpha 2
109, 864-869
Vullo, C., et al., 201l. A clinical study
adrenoceptor agonists administered
Auer, U., Moens, Y., 2011.
 on the effect in horses during
 to ponies during anaesthesia.
Neuromuscular blockade with
medetomidine-isoflurane
 Proceedings of the Gth International
rocuronium bromide for ophthalmic
anaesthesia, of butorphanol constant
Congress of Veterinary
surgery in horses. Vet Ophthalmol
rate infusion on isoflurane
 Anaesthesiology, p. 123.
14,244-247.
requirements, on cardiopulmonary
Clarke, K.W., Song, D.Y., Alibhai, H.l.,
Auer, U., Uray, C., Mosing, M., 2007.
function and on recovery
et al., 1996. Cardiopulmonary effects
 Observations on the muscle relaxant
characteristics. Vet Anaesth Analg 38,
 of desflurane in ponies, after
rocuronium bromide in the horse
186-194.
induction of anaesthesia with
- a dose-response study. Vet Anaesth
Bidwell, L.A., Bramlage, L.R..
xylazine and ketamine. Vet Rec 139.
Analg 34, 75-81.
Rood, W.A., 2007. Equine
180-185
Beadle, R.E., Robinson, N.E.
perioperative fatalities associated
Clerbaux, T., Serteyn, D., willems, E..
Sorenson, PR., 1975. Cardiopulmonary
with general anaesthesia at a
et al., 1986. Determination of the
effects of positive end-expiratory
private practice - a retrospective
standard oxyhemoglobin
 pressure in anesthetizedhorses.Am]
case series. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
dissociation curve in horses. Efects
Vet Res 36. 1435-1438.
23-30.
of temperature, pH and
Benredouane, K., Ringer, S.K., Fourel, I.
Borer, K.E., Clarke, K.W., 2006. The
diphosphoglycerate. Can J Vet Res
et al., 2011. Comparison of
effect of hyoscine on dobutamine
50, 188-192.
 xylazine-butorphanol and xylazine-
 requirement in spontaneously
Clutton, R.E., 1987. Unexpected
morphine-ketamine infusions in
breathing horses anaesthetized with
responses following intravenous
horses undergoing a standing
halothane. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
pethidine injection in two horses.
surgery. Vet Rec 169, 364.
149-157.
Equine Vet I 19, 72-73.
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R.,
Boscan, P., Rezende, M.L.
Cutton, R.E., 2010. Opioid analgesia in
Taylor, P.M., Sear, I.W., et al., 1996.
Grimsrud, K., et al., 2010.
horses. Vet Clin N Am Equine Pract
Physiologic effects of anesthesia
Pharmacokinetic
26,493-514
induced and maintained by
profile in relation to anaesthesia
Qunningham, F.M., Lees, P., 1995.
intravenous administration of a
 dimazolam-ketamine combination
characteristics after a 5% micellar
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
microemulsion of propofol in the
drugs. In: Higgins, A.., Wright, I.M..
 in ponies premedicated with
horse. Br J Anaesth 104, 330-337.
acepromazine and xylazine. Am J Vet
(Eds.), Equine Manual. w.B.
Brearley, J.C., Jones, R.S., Kelly, D.F.,
Saunders, London, pp. 229-237.
Res 57, 1472-1477.
et al., 1986. Spinal cord
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R..
Daunt, D.A., 1990. Supportive therapy
 degeneration following general
Clarke, K.w., Vainio, O., et al., 1999.
in the anaesthetized horse. Vet Clin
 anaesthesia in a Shire horse. Equine
 Pharmacokinetics of medetomidine
N Am 6, 557-574.
Vet J 18, 222-224.
in ponies and elaboration of a
Davis, J.L., Posner, L.P., Elce, Y., 2007.
 medetomidine infusion regime
Brosnan, R.J., Steffey, E.P., Escobar, A..
Gabapentin for the treatment of
which provides a constant level of
et al., 2011. Anesthetic induction 
neuropathic pain in a pregnant
sedation. Res Vet Sci 67, 41-46.
with guaifenesin and propofol in
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 231,
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R.,
adult horses. Am I Vet Res 72.
755-758.
Bowen, M.l., Freeman, S.L., et al.
1569-1575
Derossi, R., Miguel, G.L., Frazilio, F.O.,
2001a. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Bryant, C.E., England, G.C.,
et al., 2005. L-Bupivacaine 0.5% vs.
prolonged anesthesia via propofol-
Clarke, K.w., 1991. Comparison
racemic 0.5% bupivacaine for caudal
medetomidine infusion in ponies.
of the sedative effects of
epidural analgesia in horses. J Vet
Am J Vet Res 62, 1428-1435.
medetomidine and xylazine in
Pharmacol Ther 28, 293-297
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R..
horses. Vet Rec 129, 421-423.
Devisscher, L., Schauvliege, S..
Freeman, S.L., Jaggin-Schmucker, N..
Burford, J.H., Corley, K.T., 2006.
Dewulf, J., et al., 2010. Romifdine as
etal., 2o01b. Infusion ofa combination
 Morphine-associated pruritus after
a constant-rate infusion in isoflurane
 of propofol and medetomidine for
 single extradural administration in a
anaesthetized horses: a clinical study.
long-term anesthesia in ponies. Am J
horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 33,
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 425-433.
Vet Res 62, 500-507.
193-198.
Dhanjal, J.K., Wilson, D.V., Robinson,
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R..
Clark-Price, S.C., Posner, L.P.,
E., et al., 2009. Intravenous
Jaggin-Schmucker, N., Lendl, C.
Gleed, R. D., 2008. Recovery of
tramadol: effects, nociceptive
et al., 2001c. Minimal alveolar
horses from general anesthesia in a
properties, and pharmacokinetics in
concentration of desflurane in
 darkened or illuminated recovery stall.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 36,
combination with an infusion of
VetAnaesth Analg 35,473-479.
581-590.
SOE
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Di Concetto, S., Michael Archer, R.
gastrointestinal motility, assessed by
Gozalo-Marcilla, M., Hopster, K.,
Sigurdsson, S.F., et al., 2007.
transrectal ultrasonography Equine
Gasthuys, F., et al., 2013. Effects of a
 Atipamezole in the management of
Vet I 33, 570-576.
constant-rate infusion of
 detomidine overdose in a pony.
Freise, K.l., Newbound, G.C., Tudan, C.,
dexmedetomidine on the minimal
Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 67-69.
et al., 2012. Pharmacokinetics and
alveolar concentration of sevoflurane
Dodam, J.R., Moon, R.E., Olson, N.C.,
the effect of application site on a
in ponies. Equine Vet J 45, 204-208.
et al., 1993. Effects of clenbuterol 
novel, long-acting transdermal
Grandy, J.L., Steffey, E.P., Hodgson, D.S.,
hydrochloride on pulmonary gas
fentanyl solution in healthy
et al., 1987. Arterial hypotension
exchange and hemodynamics in
Jaboratory Beagles. J Vet Pharmacol
and the development of
anesthetized horses. Am I Vet Res 54.
Ther 35 (Suppi 2), 27-33.
postanesthetic myopathy in
776-782.
Gardner, R.B., White, G.W.
halothane-anesthetized horses. Am ↓
Doherty, T.j., 2009. Postoperative ileus:
Ramsey, D.S., et al., 2010. Effcacy of
Vet Res 48, 192-197.
 pathogenesis and treatment. Vet Clin
sublingual administration of
Greene, S.A., Thurmon, J.C.
North Am Equine Pract 25.
detomidine gel for sedation of
Tranquilli, W.J., et al., 1986.
351-362.
horses undergoing veterinary and
Cardiopulmonary effects of
Doherty, T.j., Frazier, D.L., 1998. Effect
husbandry procedures under feld
continuous intravenous infusion of
of intravenous lidocaine on
conditions. J Am Vet Med Assoc 237.
guaifenesin, ketamine, and xylazine
halothane minimum alveolar
1459-1464.
in ponies. Am I Vet Res 47.
concentration in ponies. Equine Vet J
Gasthuys, F., 2011. How to use the
2364-2367
30,300-303
Triple Drip in horses. Abstracts from
Grimsrud, K.N., Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P.,
Donaldson, L.L., 1988. Retrospective
the European Veterinary Conference
et al., 2012. Pharmacokinetics and
 assessment of dobutamine therapy
Voorjaarsdagen Chapter 6.
phamacodynamics of intravenous
for hypotension in anesthetized
www.voorjaarsdagen.org/index.php
medetomidine in the horse. Vet 
horses. Vet Surg 17, 53-57.
Accessed 5ih November 2012.
Anaesth Analg 39, 38-48.
Gasthuys, F., De Moor, A., Parmentier, D.,
Grosenbaugh, D.A., Muir, w.w., 1998.
Driessen, B, Nann, L., Benton, R., et al.,.
1991a. Cardiovascular effects of low
Cardiorespiratory effects of
2006. Differences in need for
sevoflurane, isoflurane, and
hemodynamic support in horses
dose calcium chlonide infusions
halothane anesthesia in horses. Am ↓
 anesthetized with sevoflurane as
during halothane anaesthesia in
dorsally recumbent ventilated ponies.
Vet Res 59, 101-106.
compared to isoflurane. Vet Anaesth
Analg 33, 356-367.
Zentralbl Vet Reihe A 38, 728-736.
Grubb, T., Edner, A., Frendin, J.H., et al.
2013. Oxygenation and plasma
Driessen, B., Zarucco, L., Kalir, B., et al.
Gasthuys, F., de Moor, A., Parmentier, D.
199ib. Influence of dopamine and
endothelin-1 concentrations in
 2011. Contemporary use of
dobutamine on the cardiovascular
healthy horses recovering from
 acepromazine in the anaesthetic
isoflurane anaesthesia administered
 management of male horses and
depression during a standard
with or without pulse-delivered
ponies: a retrospective study and
halothane anaesthesia in dorsally
inhaled nitric oxide. Vet Anaesth
opinion poll. Equine Vet I 43.
recumbent, ventilated ponies.
Analg doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2995.
88-98.
Zentralbl Vet Reihe A 38, 494-500.
2012.00735.x. [Epub ahead of print]
Dyson, D.H., Pascoe, PJ., 1990.
Gasthuys, F., Messerman, C.,
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W., Huber, M.J..
Influence of preinduction
Moor, A.D., 1994. Cardiovascular
effects of 7.2% hypertonic saline
1992. Comparison of lidocaine.
methoxamine, lactated Ringer
xylazine, and xylazine/lidocaine for
solution, or hypertonic saline
solution in halothane anaesthetised
cudal epidural analgesia in horses.
 solution infusion or postinduction
ponies. J Vet Anaesth 21, 60-65.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 201, 1187-1190.
dobutamine infusion on anesthetic-
Gillespie, J.R., Tyler, W.S., Hall, L.W..
 induced hypotension in horses. Am J
Haga, H.A., Lykkjen, S., Revold, T.,
1969. Cardiopulmonary dysfunction
et al., 2006. Effect of intratesticular
Vet Res 51, 17-21
in anesthetized, laterally recumbent
injection of lidocaine on
Enderle, A.K., Levionnois, O.L.
horses. Am I Vet Res 30, 61-72.
cardiovascular responses to
Kuhn, M., et al., 2008. Clinical
Gleed, R.D., Dobson, A., 1990. Effect of
castration in isoflurane-anesthetized
waluation of ketamine and lidocaine
 denbuterol on arterial oxygen
stallions. Am I Vet Res 67, 403-408.
intravenous infusions to reduce
tension in the anaesthetised horse.
Hall, L.Q., Senior, J.E., Walker, R.G..
isoflurane requirements in horses
Res Vet Sci 48, 331-337.
1968a. Sampling of equine
umder general anaesthesia. Vet
Goodwin, W.A., Keates, H.L.,
pulmonary vein blood. Res Vet Sci 9.
Anaesth Analg 35, 297-305.
Pasloske, K., et al., 2011. The
487-488.
England, G.C., Clarke, K.W., 1996.
pharmacokinetics and
Hall, L.W., 1979. Oxygenation of
Alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonists in the 
pharmacodynamics of the injectable
pulmonary vein blood in conscious
horse - a review. Br Vet I 152.
anaesthetic alfaxalone in the horse.
and anaesthetized ponies. Equine Vet
641-657.
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 431-438.
111,71-75
Flaherty, D., Reid, I., Welsh, E., et al.
Goodwin, W.A., Keates, H.L.
Hall, L.W., 1983. Equine anaesthesia:
1997. A pharmacodynamic study of
Pearson, M., et al., 2013.
discovery and rediscovery. Equine Vet
propofol or propofol and ketamine
Alfaxalone and medetomidine
115, 190-195.
infusions in ponies undergoing
intravenous infusion to maintain
Hall, L.W., 1984. Cardiovascular and
surgery. Res Vet Sci 62, 179-184.
anaesthesia in colts undergoing
pulmonary effects of recumbency in
Freeman, S.L., England, G.C., 2001.
feld castration. Equine Vet | 45.
two conscious ponies. Equine Vet ↓
 Effect of romifidine on
315-319.
16, 89-92.
90E
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Hall, L.W., Trim, C.M., 1975. Positive
midazolam-ketamine-xylazine
Kendall, A., Mosley, C., Brojer, I., 2010.
emd-expiratory pressure in 
infusion for total intravenous
 Tachypnea and antipyresis in febrile
anaesthetized spontaneously
anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res
horses after sedation with alpha-
breathing horses. Br J Anaesth 47.
73. 470-475.
agonists. JVet Int Med 24, 1008-1011.
819-824.
Hubbell, JA., Bednarski, R.M..
Kerr, C.L., McDonell, w.N., Young. S.S..
Hall, L.W., Gillespie, J.R., Tyler, W.S..
Muir, w.w., 1989. Xylazine and
1996. A comparison of romifdine
1968. Alveolar-arterial oxygen
 tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia in
and xylazine when used with
tension differences in anaesthetized
horses. Am J Vet Res 50, 737-742.
diazepam/ketamine for short
horses. Br I Anaesth 40, 560-568.
Hubbell, J.A., Muir, W.W..
duration anesthesia in the horse.
Hallowell, G.D., Corley, K.T., 2006.
Robertson, J.T., et al., 1987.
Can Vet J37,601-609
Preoperative administration of
Cardiovascular effects of intravenous
Kerr, D.D., Jones, E.W., Holbert, D.,
hydroxyethyl starch or hypertonic
sodium penicillin, sodium cefazolin,
et al., 1972. Comparison of the
saline to horses with colic. J Vet Int
and sodium citrate in awake and
effects of xylazine and
Med 20, 980-986.
anesthetized horses. Vet Surg 16,
acetylpromazine maleate in the
Hamm, D., Turchi, P., Jochle, W., 1995.
245-250.
horse. Am I Vet Res 33, 777-784.
Sedative and analgesic effects of
Iseri, T., Nishimura, R., Nagahama, S.,.
Khanna, A.K., McDonell, W.N.,
detomidine and romifdine in
et al., 2010. Epidural spread of
Dyson, D.H., et al., 1995.
horses. Vet Rec 136, 324-327.
iohexol following the use of air or
Cardiopulmonary effects of
Hashem, A., Keller, H., 1993.
 saline in the 'loss of resistance' test.
hypercapnia during controlled
Disposition, bioavailability and
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 526-530.
intermittent positive pressure
dinical efficacy of orally
Jedruch, I., Gajewski, Z., Kuussaari, I.
ventilation in the horse. Can J Vet
 administered acepromazine in the
1989. The effect of detomidine
Res 59, 213-221.
horse. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 16.
hydrochloride on the electrical
Klein, L.V., 1975. Standing sedation in
359-368.
activity of uterus in pregnant mares.
 the horse using xylazine and
Heard, D.J., Webb, A.l., Daniels, R.T.,
Acta Vet Scand 30, 307-311.
morphine. Proceedings of the 20th
1986. Effect of acepromazine on the
Johnston, G.M., Eastment, J.K.,
World Veterinary Congress 2, 739.
anesthetic requirement of halothane
Taylor, P.M., et al., 2004. Is
Klein, L., 1978. A review of fifty cases of
in the dog. Am I Vet Res 47.
isoflurane safer than halothane in
post-operative myopathy in the
2113-2115.
equine anaesthesia? Results from a
horse. Am Assoc Equine Practit 24.
Hildebrand, S.V., Howitt, G.A., 1984.
 prospective multicentre randomised
89-94.
Dosage requirement of pancuronium
controlled trial. Equine Vet | 36.
Koppel, H., Leece, E.A., 2011.
in halothane-anesthetized ponies:
64-71.
Comparison of ketamine and
a comparison of cumulative and
Johnston, G.M., Taylor, P.M., Holmes,
alfaxalone for induction and
 single-dose administration. Am J Vet
M.A., et al., 1995. Confdential
maintenance of anaesthesia in
Res 45, 2441-2444.
enquiry of perioperative equine
ponies undergoing castration.
Hildebrand, S.V., Hill, 3rd, T., 1989.
fatalities (CEPEF-1): preliminary
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 37-43.
Effects of atracurium administered
results. Equine Vet J 27, 193-200.
Knych, H.K., Steffey, E.P., Mama, K.R.,
by continuous intravenous infusion
Jones, N.Y., Clarke, K.w., Clegg, P.D..
etal.,2009. Effects of high plasma
in halothane-anesthetized horses.
1995. Desflurane in equine
fentanyl concentrations on minimum 
Am J Vet Res 50, 2124-2126.
anaesthesia: a preliminary trial.
alveolar concentration ofisoflurane in
Hildebrand, S.V., Howitt, G.A..
Vet Rec 137, 618-620.
horses. Am J Vet Res 70, 1193-1200.
Arpin, D., 1986. Neuromuscular and
Kalchofner, K., Price, J., Bettschart-
Kvaternick, V., Pollmeier, M., Fischer, J..
cardiovascular effects of atracurium
Wolfensberger, R., 2007. Pruritus in
et al., 2007. Pharmacokinetics and
 in ponies anesthetized with
two horses following epidurally
metabolism of orally administered
halothane. Am I Vet Res 47.
 administered morphine. Equine Vet
frocoxib, a novel second generation
1096-1100.
Educ 19, 590-594.
coxib, in horses. J Vet Pharmacol
Hopster, K., Kastner, S.B., Rohn, K..
Kalpravidh, M., Lumb, W.V., Wright, M.,
Ther 30, 208-217.
et al., 201l. Intermittent positive
et al., 1984. Analgesic effects of
Lam, K.H., Smyth, J.B., Clarke, K., et al.
pressure ventilation with constant
butorphanol in horses: dose-
1995. Acute spinal cord degeneration
positive end-expiratory pressure and
response studies. Am I Vet Res 45.
following general anaesthesia in a
alveolar recruitment manoeuvre
211-216.
young pony. Vet Rec 136, 329-330.
during inhalation anaesthesia in
Kaukinen, H., Aspegren, J., Hyyppa, S.
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K.W., Alibhai, H.l..
 horses undergoing surgery for colic.
et al., 2011. Bioavailability of
1998a. The cardiopulmonary effects
and its influence on the early
detomidine administered
of clenbuterol when administered to
recovery period. Vet Anaesth Analg
sublingually to horses as an
dorsally recumbent halothane-
38.169-177
oromucosal gel. J Vet Pharmacol
anaesthetised ponies - failure to
Hubbell, J.A., Muir, W.w., 2006.
Ther 34.76-81.
 increase arterial oxygenation. Res Vet
Antagonism of detomidine sedation
Keates, H.L., van Eps, A.W.
Sci 65.227-232
in the horse using intravenous
Pearson, M.R., 2012. Alfaxalone
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K.W., Alibhai, H.l.,
tolazoline or atipamezole. Equine
compared with ketamine for
1998b. Effects on the intramuscular
Vet J 38, 238-241.
induction of anaesthesia in horses
blood flow and cardiopulmonary
Hubbell, J.A., Aarnes, T.K., Lerche, P.,
following xylazine and guaifenesin.
function of anaesthetised ponies of
et al., 2012. Evaluation of a
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 591-598.
 changing from halothane to
LOE
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
isoflurane maintenance and vice
thresholds in horses. Equine Vet J
function in laterally recumbent
versa. Vet Rec 143, 629-633.
44, 221-225.
anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J 11,
Lee, Y.H., Clarke, K.W., Alibhai, H.l.,
Luna, S.P., Taylor, PM., Massone, F.
24-32.
et al., 1998c. Effects of dopamine.
1997. Midazolam and ketamine
Mckellar, Q.A., Bogan, J.A..
 dobutamine, dopexamine.
induction before halothane
von Fellenberg, R.L., et al., 1991.
phenylephrine, and saline solution
anaesthesia in ponies:
Phamacokinetic, biochemical and
on intramuscular blood flow and
rdiorespiratory, endocrine and
tolerance studies on carprofen in the
other cardiopulmonary variables in
metabolic changes. J Vet Pharmacol
horse. Equine Vet J 23, 280-284.
halothane-anesthetized ponies. Am ↓
Ther 20, 153-159.
McMurphy, R.M., Young, L.E.,
Vet Res 59, 1463-1472.
Mama, K.R., Pascoe, PJ., Steffey, E.P.,
Marlin, D.J., et al., 2002.
Leece, E.A., Corletto, F., Brearley, I.C..
et al., 1998. Comparison of two
Comparison of the cardiopulmonary
 2008. A comparison of recovery
techniques for total intravenous
effects of anesthesia maintained by
times and characteristics with
anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res
continuous infusion of romifidine.
 sevoflurane and isoflurane
59.1292-1298
guaifenesin, and ketamine with
 anaesthesia in horses undergoing
Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P., Pascoe, PJ..
anesthesia maintained by inhalation
magnetic resonance imaging. Vet
1995. Evaluation of propofol as a
of halothane in horses. Am J Vet Res
Anaesth Analg 35, 383-391.
general anesthetic for horses. Vet
63, 1655-1661.
Leece, E.A., Girard, N.M., Maddern, K.,
Surg 24, 188-194.
Moens, Y., Bohm, S., 2011. Ventilating
2009. Alfaxalone in cyclodextrin for
 horses: moving away from old
Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P., Pascoe, P.J..
induction and maintenance of
1996. Evaluation of propofol for
paradigms. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
 anaesthesia in ponies undergoing
general anesthesia in premedicated
165-168.
feld castration. Vet Anaesth Analg
horses. Am I Vet Res 57, 512-516.
Moon, PF., Suter, C.M., 1993.
36.480-484
Martin, J.E., Beck, J.D., 1956. Some
Paravertebral thoracolumbar
Letendre, L.T., Tessman, R.K.,
anaesthesia in 10 horses. Equine Vet
effects of chlorpromazine
McClure, S.R., et al., 2008.
hydrochloride in horses. Am J Vet
125.304-308
Pharmacokinetics of frocoxib after
Res 17, 678-686.
 Mosing, M., 2007. Klinische Evaluation
 administration of multiple
Marntell, S., Nyman, G., Funkquist, P.,
eines Anasthesieprotokolls mit
consecutive daily doses to horses.
Ketamin, Midazolam und einem von
et al., 2005a. Effects of acepromazine
Am J Vet Res 69, 1399-1405.
 drei a2-Adrenorezeptoragonisten
on pulmonary gas exchange and
(Detomidin, Medetomidin, Xylazin)
Lindegaard, C., Thomsen, M.H..
drculation during sedation and
in Kombination mit Isofluran zur
Larsen, S., et al., 2010. Analgesic
dissociative anaesthesia in horses.
Kastration beim Hengst.
eff cacy of intra-articular morphine
Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 83-93.
Pferdeheilkunde 23, 388-397.
 in experimentally induced
Marntell, S., Nyman, G., Hedenstierna,
radiocarpal synovitis in horses. Vet
Mosing, M., Auer, U., Bardell, D., et al.,.
G., 2005b. High inspired oxygen
Anaesth Analg 37, 171-185.
2010. Reversal of profound
concentrations increase
rocuronium block monitored in
Lindsay, W.A., McDonell, W.
intrapulmonary shunt in
three muscle groups with
Bignell, W., 1980. Equine
anaesthetized horses. Vet Anaesth
sugammadex in ponies. Br J Anaesth
postanesthetic forelimb lameness:
Analg 32, 338-347.
105. 480-486.
intracompartmental muscle pressure
Martin-Flores, M., Campoy, L..
Muir, 3rd, W.w., 1992a. Cardiovascular
changes and biochemical patterns.
Gleed, R.D., 2012a. Further
Am JVet Res 41, 1919-1924.
effects of dopexamine HCl in
experiences with vercuronium in the
conscious and halothane-
Lindsay, W.A., Robinson, G.M.
horse. Vet Anaesth Analg 39,
anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J
Brunson, D.B., et al., 1989. Induction
218-219.
Supplement, 24-29.
of equine postanesthetic myositis
Martin-Flores, M., Pare, M.D.,
Muir, 3rd, w.w., 1992b. Inotropic
 after halothane-induced hypotension.
Adams, W., et al., 2012b.
mechanisms of dopexamine
Am J Vet Res 50, 404-410.
 Observations of the potency and 
hydrochloride in horses. Am J Vet 
Linton, D.D., wilson, M.G., Newbound,
duration of vecuronium in
Res 53.1343-1346.
G.C., et al., 2012. The effectiveness of
isoflurane-anesthetized horses.
Muir, 3rd, w.w., Sams, R., 1992. Effects
 a long-acting transdermal fentanyl
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 385-389.
of ketamine infusion on halothane
solution compared to buprenorphine 
 Matthews, N.S., Hartsfeld, S.M..
minimal alveolar concentration in
for the control of postoperative pain
Hague, B., et al., 1999. Detomidine-
horses. Am J Vet Res 53, 1802-1806.
in dogs in a randomized,
propofol anesthesia for abdominal 
Muir, 3rd, w.w., Gadawski, J.E.
multicentered clinical study. J Vet
surgery in horses. Vet Surg 28,
Pharmacol Ther 35 (Suppl 2),
Grosenbaugh, D.A., 1999.
196-201.
53-64.
Cardiorespiratory effects of a
Matthews, N.S., Hartsfield, S.M., Mercer.
tiletamine/zolazepam-ketamine-
Love, E.J., Murrell, I., Whay, H.R., 2011.
D., et al., 1998. Recovery from
detomidine combination in horses.
 Thermal and mechanical nociceptive
sevoflurane anesthesia in horses:
Am J Vet Res 60, 770-774.
threshold testing in horses: a review.
comparison to isoflurane and effect
Muir, w.W., Lerche, P., Erichson, D..
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 3-14.
of postmedication with xylazine.
2009. Anaesthetic and
Love, E.J., Taylor, PM., Murrell, I., et al.,.
Vet Surg 27, 480-485.
cardiorespiratory effects of propofol
2012. Effects of acepromazine.
McDonell, W.N., Hall, L.W..
at 10% for induction and 1% for
butorphanol and buprenorphine on
Jeffcott, L.B., 1979. Radiographic
maintenance of anaesthesia in
thermal and mechanical nociceptive
evidence of impaired pulmonary
horses. Equine Vet J 41, 578-585.
805
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
Muir, W.W., Sams, R.A., Huffman, R.H.
Pantaleon, L.G., Furr, M.O.
Robertson, S.A., Carter, S.W.,
et al., 1982. Pharmacodynamic and
McKenzie, 2nd, H.C., et al., 2006.
Donovan, M., et al., 199o. Effects of
 pharmacokinetic properties of
Cardiovascular and pulmonary
intravenous xylazine hydrochloride
diazepam in horses. Am I Vet Res 43.
effects of hetastarch plus hypertonic
on blood glucose, plasma insulin 
1756-1762
saline solutions during experimental
 and rectal temperature in neonatal
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T., Milne, D.W.,
endotoxemia in anesthetized horses.
foals. Equine Vet J 22, 43-47.
 1977. Evaluation of xylazine and
J Vet Int Med 20, 1422-1428
Robertson, S.A., Sanchez, L.C.,
ketamine hydrochloride for
Pascoe, PJ., Taylor, PM., 2003. Effects of
Merritt, A.M., et al., 2005. Effect of
anesthesia in horses. Am J Vet Res
 dopamine antagonists on alfentanil.
systemic lidocaine on visceral and
38. 195-201.
induced locomotor activity in horses.
somatic nociception in conscious
Muir, W.W., Skarda, R.T., Sheehan, W.
Vet Anaesth Analg 30, 165-171.
horses. Equine Vet J 37, 122-127.
 1979. Hemodynamic and respiratory
Pimenta, E.L., Teixeira Neto, F.J..
Robinson, E.P, Natalini, C.C., 2002.
effects of a xylazine-acetylpromazine
Sa, PA., et al., 2011. Comparative
Epidural anesthesia and analgesia in
drug combination in horses. Am J
study between atropine and
horses. Vet Clin N Am Equine Pract
Vet Res 40, 1518-1522.
hyoscine-N-butylbromide for
18.61-82.
Natalini, C.C., 2010. Spinal anesthetics
reversal of detomidine induced
Robinson, E.P, Moncada-Suarex, I.R.,
and analgesics in the horse. Vet Clin
bradycardia in horses. Equine Vet J
Felice, L., 1994. Epidural morphine
N Am Equine Pract 26, 551-564.
43, 332-340.
analgesia in horses. Vet Surg 23, 78.
Natalini, C.C., Robinson, E.P., 2000.
Portier, K.G., Jaillardon, L., Leece, E.A.,
Rohrbach, H., Korpivaara, T.,
Evaluation of the analgesic effects of
et al., 2009. Castration of horses
Schatzmann, U., et al., 2009.
under total intravenous anaesthesia:
 Comparison of the effects of the
alfentanii, butorphanol, tramadol,
analgesic effects of lidocaine. Vet
 alpha-2 agonists detomidine.
and U50488H in horses. Am J Vet
Anaesth Analg 36, 173-179.
romifdine and xylazine on 
Res 61, 1579-1586.
Raisis, A.L., 2005. Skeletal muscle blood
nociceptive withdrawal reflex and
Nilsfors, L., Kvart, C., 1986. Preliminary
flow in anaesthetized horses. Part Il:
 temporal summation in horses.
report on the cardiorespiratory
effects of anaesthetics and vasoactive
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 384-395.
effects of the antagonist to
 agents. Vet Anaesth Analg 32,
Rose, R.J., Rose, E.M., Peterson, P.R..
detomidine, MPV-1248. Acta Vet
331-337.
1989. Clinical experiences with
Scand Suppl 82, 121-129.
Rezende, M.L., Wagner, A.E.,
isoflurane anaesthesia in foals and
Nolan, A., Reid, I, Welsh, E., et al..
Mama, K.R., et al., 2011. Effects of
adult horses. Am Assoc Equine
 1996. Simultaneous infusions of
intravenous administration of
Practit 34, 555-569
propofol and ketamine in ponies
 lidocaine on the minimum alveolar
Sanchez, L.C., Robertson, S.A.
premedicated with detomidine: a
concentration of sevoflurane in
Maxwell, L.K., et al., 2007. Effect of
pharmacokinetic study. Res Vet Sci
horses. Am I Vet Res 72, 446-451.
fentanyl on visceral and somatic
60, 262-266.
Richey, M.T., Holland, M.S., McGrath,
nociception in conscious horses. J
Nolan, A.M., Hall, L.W., 1985. Total
C.., et al., 1990. Equine post-
Vet Int Med 21, 1067-1075.
intravenous anaesthesia in the horse
anesthetic lameness. A retrospective
Santos, L.C., de Moraes, A.N..
with propofol. Equine Vet J 17,
study. Vet Surg 19, 392-397.
Saito, M.E., 2009. Effects of
394-398.
Ringer, S.K., Kalchofner, K., Boller, I.-
intraarticular ropivacaine and
Nyman, G., Funkquist, B., Kvart, C.
et al., 2007. A clinical comparison of
 morphine on lipopolysaccharide-
et al., 1990. Atelectasis causes gas
two anaesthetic protocols using
induced synovitis in horses. Vet
exchange impairment in the
 lidocaine or medetomidine in
Anaesth Analg 36, 280-286.
anaesthetised horse. Equine Vet J 22.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
Santos, M., Lopez-Sanroman, I..
317-324.
257-268
Garcia-lturralde, P, et al., 2005.
Nyman, G., Grubb, T.L., Heinonen, E.,
Ringer, S.K., Portier, K., Torgerson, P.R.
Cardiopulmonary effects of
et al., 2012. Pulsed delivery of
et al., 2013. The effects of a loading
desflurane in horses. Vet Anaesth
inhaled nitric oxide counteracts
dose followed by constant rate
Analg 32, 355-359.
hypoxaemia during 2.5 hours of
infusion of xylazine compared with
 Schatzmann, Ul., 1982. The respiration 
inhalation anaesthesia in dorsally
romifdine on sedation, ataxia and
of the horse under different
recumbent horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
response to stimuli in horses.
anaesthetic medications. Proc Assoc
39,480-487
Vet Anaesth Analg 40, 157-165.
Vet Anaesth 10 (Suppl), 112-118.
Ohta, M., Oku, K., Mukai, K., et al.
Ringer, S.K., Portier, K.G., Fourel, I.,
Schauvliege, S., Marcilla, M.G..
2004. Propofol-ketamine anesthesia
et al., 2012a. Development of a 
Verryken, K., et al., 201l. Effects of a
for internal fixation of fractures in
romifdine constant rate infusion
constant rate infusion of detomidine
racehorses. I Vet Med 66.
with or without butorphanol for
 on cardiovascular function,isoflurane
1433-1436
standing sedation of horses. Vet
requirements and recovery quality in 
Orsini, J.A., Moate, P.J., Kuersten, K..
Anaesth Analg 39, 12-20.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
et al., 2006. Pharmacokinetics of
Ringer, S.K., Portier, K.G., Fourel, I.,
544-554.
fentanyl delivered transdermally in
et al., 2012b. Development of a
Sellon, D.C., Roberts, M.C.
healthy adult horses - variability
xylazine constant rate infusion with
Blikslager, A.T., et al., 2004. Effects
among horses and its clinical
 or without butorphanol for standing
of continuous rate intravenous
implications. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
 sedation of horses. Vet Anaesth
infusion of butorphanol on
29.539-546.
Analg 39, 1-11.
physiologic and outcome variables
605
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
in horses after celiotomy. J Vet Int
horses during fve hours of constant-
Taylor, PM., Young, S.s., 1990. The
Med 18, 555-563.
dose halothane anesthesia. Am J Vet
effect of limb position on venous
Short, C.E., 1992. Alpha 2-agents in
Res 51, 11-16
and intracompartmental pressure in
 animals. Sedation, analgesia and
Steffey, E.P., willits, N., Woliner, M.,
the forelimb of ponies. I Assoc Vet
anaesthesia. Veterinary Practice
1992. Hemodynamic and respiratory
Anaesth 17, 35-37.
Publishing Company, Santa Barbara.
responses to variable arterial partial
Tendillo, FJ., Mascias, A., Santos, M.
pp. 21-39.
pressure of oxygen in halothane-
et al., 1997. Anesthetic potency of
Short, C.E., Matthews, N., Harvey, R..
anesthetized horses during
desflurane in the horse:
et al., 1986. Cardiovascular and
spontaneous and controlled
determination of the minimum
pulmonary function studies of a new
ventilation. Am J Vet Res 53.
alveolar concentration. Vet Surg 26,
sedative/analgetic [detomidine/
1850-1858.
354-357.
Domosedan) for use alone in horses
Steffey, E.P., Pascoe, PJ., Woliner, M.J..
Terry, R.L., McDonnell, S.M., Van Eps.
 Or as a preanesthetic. Acta Vet Scand
et al., 2000. Effects of xylazine
A.W., et al., 2010. Pharmacokinetic
Suppl 82, 139-155.
hydrochloride during isoflurane-
profle and behavioral effects of
Singh, S., McDonell, W., Young, S..
induced anesthesia in horses. Am J
gabapentin in the horse. J Vet
et al., 1997. The effect of
Vet Res 61, 1225-1231.
Pharmacol Ther 33, 485-494.
 glycopyrrolate on heart rate and
Steffey, E.P., Mama, K.R., Galey, F.D.,
Thomasy, S.M., Slovis, N., Maxwell, L.K.,
intestinal motility in conscious
et al., 2005a. Effects of sevoflurane
et al., 2004. Transdermal fentanyl
horses. J Vet Anaesth 24, 14-19.
dose and mode of ventilation on
combined with nonsteroidal
Sinclair, M.D., Mealey, K.L.,
cardiopulmonary function and
anti-inflammatory drugs for
blood biochemical variables in
Matthews, N.S., et al., 2006.
analgesia in horses. J Vet Int Med 18.
 Comparative pharmacokinetics of
horses. Am I Vet Res 66, 606-614.
550-554.
meloxicam in clinically norma]
Steffey, E.P., Woliner, M.J., Puschner, B.,
Thomasy, S.M., Steffey, E.P., Mama, K.R.,
horses and donkeys. Am J Vet Res
et al., 2005b. Effects of desflurane
et al., 2006. The effects of i.v.
67.1082-1085.
and mode of ventilation on
fentanyl administration on the
cardiovascular and respiratory
Skarda, R.T., Muir, 3rd, W.W., 1996.
functions and clinicopathologic
minimum alveolar concentration of
 Comparison of antinociceptive.
isoflurane in horses. Br J Anaesth 97.
variables in horses. Am I Vet Res 66.
cardiovascular, and respiratory
232-237
669-677
effects, head ptosis, and position of
Tobin, T., Combie, J.D., 1982.
 pelvic limbs in mares affter caudal
Steffey, E.P., Mama, K.R., Brosnan, R.J..
Performance testing in horses:
epidural administration of xylazine
et al., 2009. Effect of administration
a review of the role of simple
 and detomidine hydrochloride
of propofol and xylazine
behavioral models in the design of
solution. Am J Vet Res 57.
hydrochloride on recovery of horses
performance experiments. I Vet
1338-1345.
after four hours of anesthesia with
Pharmacol Ther 5, 105-118.
desflurane. Am I Vet Res 70.
Solano, A.M., Valverde, A., Desrochers.
956-963
Trim, C.M., 1984. Complications
A., et al., 2009. Behavioural and
associated with the use of the cuffless
cardiorespiratory effects of a constant
Stewart, A.J., Boothe, D.M..
endotracheal tube in the horse. J Am
rate infusion of medetomidine and
Cruz-Espindola, C., et al., 2011.
Vet Med Assoc 185, 541-542.
morphine for sedation during
Pharmacokinetics of tramadol and
Trim, C.M., 1997. Postanesthetic
metabolites O-desmethyltramadol 
standing laparoscopy in horses.
and N-desmethyltramadol in adult
hemorrhagic myelopathy or
Equine Vet J 41, 153-159.
horses. Am J Vet Res 72, 967-974.
myelomalacia. Veterinary Clin N Am
 Spadavecchia, C., Arendt-Nielsen, L..
Equine Pract 13, 73-77.
Suthers, J.M., Christley, R.M..
Andersen, O.K., et al., 2005. Effect of
Clutton, R.E., 2011. Quantitative and
Trim, C.M., Mason, I., 1973. Post-
romifidine on the nociceptive
qualitative comparison of three
anaesthetic forelimb lameness in
withdrawal reflex and temporal
scoring systems for assessing recovery
horses. Equine Vet I 5, 71-76.
summation in conscious horses. Am
quality after general anaesthesia in
Trim, C.M., Moore, J.N., Clark, E.S.
JVet Res 66, 1992-1998.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 38.
1989. Renal effects of dopamine
Stafferi, F., Bauquier, S.H., Moate, P.J.,
352-362.
infusion in conscious horses. Equine
et al., 2009. Pulmonary gas exchange
Sysel, A.M., Pleasant, R.S..
Vet ↓ Suppl 124-128.
in anaesthetised horses mechanically
Jacobson, 1.D., et al., 1996. Efficacy
Trim, C.M., Moore, J.N., White, N.A.,
ventilated with oxygen or a helium/
 of an epidural combination of
1985. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Oxygen mixture. Equine Vet I 41,
morphine and detomidine in
dopamine hydrochloride in
747-752.
alleviating experimentally induced
anaesthetised horses. Equine Vet J
Steffey, E.P., 2002. Recent advances in
hindlimb lameness in horses. Vet
17.41-44.
inhalation anesthesia. Vet Clin N Am
Surg 25, 511-518.
Trim, C.M., Moore, I.N., Hardee, M.M.
Equine Pract 18, 159-168.
Taylor, PM., 1998. Endocrine and
et al., 1991. Effects of an infusion of
Steffey, E.P., Howland, Jr., D., 1978.
 metabolic responses to plasma
dopamine on the cardiopulmonary
 Cardiovascular effects of halothane
volume expansion during halothane
effects of Escherichia coli endotoxin
in the horse. Am I Vet Res 39.
anesthesia in ponies. J Vet Pharmacol
in anaesthetised horses. Res Vet Sci
611-615.
Ther 21, 485-490.
50, 54-63.
Steffey, E.P., Kelly, A.B., Hodgson, D.S.
Taylor, PM., Clarke, K.W., 2007. A
Umar, M.A., Yamashita, K., Kushiro, T.,
et al., 1990. Effect of body posture
Handbook of Equine Anaesthesia.
et al., 2006. Evaluation of total
on cardiopulmonary function in
second ed. Saunders- Elsevier.
 intravenous anesthesia with propofol
OLE
Anaesthesia of the horse
Chapter
11
or ketamine-medetomidine-propofol
van Loon, I.P., Menke, E.S..
Wagner, A.E., Muir, 3rd, w.W.
combination in horses. J Am Vet
Doornenbal, A., et al., 2012.
Hinchcliff, K.W., 1991.
Med Assoc 228, 1221-1227.
Antinociceptive effects of low dose
Cardiovascular effects of xylazine
Umar, M.A., Yamashita, K., Kushiro, T..
lumbosacral epidural ropivacaine in
and detomidine in horses. Am J Vet
et al., 2007. Evaluation of
healthy ponies. Vet J 193, 240-245.
Res 52, 651-657.
cardiovascular effects of total
Villalba, M., Santiago, I., Gomez de
Westhues, M., Fritsch, R., 1960. Die
intravenous anesthesia with propofol
Segura, I.A., 2011. Effects of constant
narkose der Tierre. Paul Darey.
 Or a combination of ketamine-
rate infusion of lidocaine and
Berlin.
medetomidine-propofol in horses.
ketamine, with or without morphine.
Wetmore, L.A., Derksen, FJ., Blaze, C.A.
Am J Vet Res 68, 121-127.
 on isoflurane MAC in horses. Equine
et al., 1987. Mixed venous oxygen
Vainio, O., 1985. Detomidine, a new
Vet I 43, 721-726.
tension as an estimate of cardiac
sedative and analgesic drug for
Voetgli, K., 1988. Studies on the
output in anesthetized horses. Am J
veterinary use. Pharmacological and
sedative and analgesic effects of an
Vet Res 48, 971-976.
dinical studies in laboratory animals,
alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonist (STH
Wettstein, D., Moens, Y.
horses and cattle. PhD thesis.
2130) in horses. DVet Med Thesis.
Jaeggin-Schmucker, N, et al., 2006.
University of Helsinki, Helsinki.
University of Berne, Berne.
Effects of an alveolar recruitment
Valverde, A., 2010. Alpha-2 agonists as
Wagner, A.E., 2010. Effects of stress on
maneuver on cardiovascular and
pain therapy in horses. Vet Clin N
pain in horses and incorporating
 respiratory parameters during total
Am Equine Pract 26, 515-532.
pain scales for equine practice.
 intravenous anesthesia in ponies.
Valverde, A., Gunkelt, C., Doherty, T.J..
Vet Clin N Am Equine Pract 26.
Am J Vet Res 67, 152-159.
et al., 2005. Effect of a constant rate
481-492.
Wilcke, J.R., Crisman, M.V., Sams, R.A..
infusion of lidocaine on the quality
Wagner, A.E., Dunlop, C.l., Heath, R.B..
et al., 1993. Pharmacokinetics of
of recovery from sevoflurane or
et al., 1992. Hemodynamic function
phenylbutazone in neonatal foals.
 isoflurane general anaesthesia in
during neurectomy in halothane-
Am J Vet Res 54, 2064-2067.
horses. Equine Vet J 37, 559-564.
 anesthetized horses with or without
Wilcke, I.R., Crisman, M.V.,
van Dijk, P, Lankveld, D.P.,
 constant dose detomidine infusion.
Scarratt, w.K., et al., 1998.
Rijkenhuizen, A.B., et al., 2003.
Vet Surg 21, 248-255.
Pharmacokinetics of ketoprofen in
Homonal, metabolic and
Wagner, A.E., Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P.,
healthy foals less than twenty-four
physiological effects of laparoscopic
et al., 2011. Comparison of the
hours old. Am J Vet Res 59, 290-292.
surgery using a detomidine-
ardiovascular effects of equipotent
Wilson, D.V., Bohart, G.V., Evans, A.T.,
buprenorphine combination in
anesthetic doses of sevoflurane alone
et al., 2002. Retrospective analysis of
standing horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
and sevoflurane plus an intravenous
detomidine infusion for standing
30,72-80.
infusion of lidocaine in horses. Am J
chemical restraint in 51 horses. Vet
van Loon, J.P., de Grauw, J.C., van
Vet Res 72, 452-460.
Anaesth Analg. 29, 54-57.
Dierendonck, M., et al., 2010.
Wagner, A.E., Mama, K.R., Steffey, E.P.,
Young, L.E., Blissitt, K.l., Clutton, R.E..
Intra-articular opioid analgesia is
et al., 2012. Evaluation of infusions
et al., 1997. Temporal effects of an
effective in reducing pain and
 of xylazine with ketamine or
infusion of dopexamine
 inflammation in an equine LPS
 propofol to modulate recovery
hydrochloride in horses anesthetized
induced synovitis model. Equine
following sevoflurane anesthesia in
with halothane. Am J Vet Res 58,
Vet ↓ 42, 412-419.
horses. Am J Vet Res 73, 346-352.
516-523.
LLE
(
Anaesthesia of cattle
Introduction
313
General anaesthesia
332
Restraint
315
Anaesthetic techniques
332
Sedation and analgesia
316
 Intravenous injection
333
Agents used in bovine species
316
Endotracheal intubation
333
Xylazine
316
Injectable anaesthetic agents
334
Detomidine
317
 Thiopental
334
Medetomidine
317
 Thiopental-guaifenesin
335
Antagonists of αz-agonists
318
 Pentobarbital
336
Acepromazine
318
Ketamine
336
Chloral hydrate
318
Ketamine-guaifenesin
336
 Sedative-opioid combinations
319
Tiletamine-zolazepam
337
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
319
 Propofol
337
Local analgesia
319
Inhalation anaesthesia agents
337
Techniques
320
Adjunct agents
338
 Auriculopalpebral nerve block
320
Anaesthetic management
339
Cornual nerve block
320
Positioning
339
 Petersen eye block
321
Fluid therapy
339
 Peribulbar and retrobulbar block
322
Monitoring
339
Inverted L block
322
 Recovery from anaesthesia
340
 Paravertebral nerve block
322
Pudendal nerve block
325
Local analgesia for castration
326
Caudal epidural block
326
INTRODUCTION
Lumbosacral epidural block
329
 Lumbar epidural block
329
 Cattle are by no means good subjects for heavy sedation
Digital nerve blocks
330
 Or general anaesthesia. Regurgitation followed by aspira-
Intravenous regional analgesia
331
tion of ruminal contents into the lungs can easily
Intranasal local analgesia
332
occur. Once a ruminant animal is in lateral or dorsal
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
313
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
recumbency, the oesophageal opening is submerged in
An additional procedure to prevent regurgitation that
ruminal material, normal enuctation cannot occur, and gas
has been tried but not often used is to pass a modifed
accumulates. The degree of bloat depends on the amount
stomach tube as far down the oesophagus as possible. The
of fermentation of the ingesta and on the length of time
tube has a balloon firmly attached to its end that can be
that gas is allowed to accumulate. Gross distension of the
inflated to obstruct flow of ingesta from the rumen into
rumen becomes a hazard if anaesthesia or recumbency is
the pharynx.
prolonged and regurgitation can follow from this. In addi-
Regurgitation occurs during both light and deep anaes-
tion, the weight of the abdominal viscera and their con-
thesia so that it is probable that two mechanisms are
tents prevents the diaphragm from moving freely on
Pisahut 'eisauisaeue juai suna ssanaid aui u panau
inspiration and ventilation becomes shallow, rapid and
nsai e se xuAieud aul cui snseydosao au dn ssed Aeu
inefficient for gas exchange within the lungs.
of an active, but uncontrolled, reflex mechanism. It is then
The danger of regurgitation and inhalation of ingesta is
a matter of chance whether or not the protective reflexes.
always present but the likelihood of it occurring can be
eg. laryngeal closure coughing, etc, are active and can or
minimized by:
cannot prevent aspiration. Fortunately, laryngeal closure
1. Withholding all food for 24-48 hours before
often occurs but, as hypoxia develops, at some point, the
anaesthesia. Optimum duration for starvation is up
animal will take a large breath and any ingesta accumu-
for discussion, with some recommending that 24
lated in the pharynx will be aspirated. The order in which
 hours is not only sufficient but also produces the
the reflexes of laryngeal closure coughing, swallowing.
best consistency of rumen contents to minimize
and regurgitation disappear as anaesthesia is deepened
differs from one anaesthetic drug combination to another
regurgitation. A longer period of starvation may
result in formation of a more liquid ruminal content
but the relative safety of the various agents is not docu-
mented. During deep anaesthesia, on the other hand,
which may be regurgitated more easily.
2. Withholding water for 8-12 hours before
jo aosn pae au 'ssai aaisse e si uoein
anaesthesia. The ideal time of withholding water is
the oesophagus loses its tone and any increase in the
 not documented scientifically, however, hungry cattle
intraruminal pressure - whether from pressure on the
will drink water and subsequently regurgitate it
abdominal wall from a rope or belly band or from gas
during induction of anaesthesia.
accumulation in the rumen itself - may force ingesta up
3. When the animal is in lateral recumbency during
into the pharynx. The protective reflexes are not active and
anaesthesia arranging that the occiput is above
aspiration may occur easily.
general body level and that the head slopes so that
saliva and any regurgitated material runs freely from
Regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration is a real and
the mouth (Fig. 12.1).
serious hazard in sedated or anaesthetized cattle.
4. At the end of anaesthesia, cleaning solid material
from the pharynx and leaving the endotracheal tube
Tracheal intubation is not always performed in all
in the trachea with the cuff inflated until the animal
sedated or anaesthetized recumbent bovine animals and
is in stermal recumbency, is swallowing and, most
regurgitation
does not always occur. However, some
importantly, can withdraw its tongue back into its 
animals will regurgitate, and this has an unreasonably
high risk for fatal outcome. Should regurgitation occur
mouth.
during the induction of anaesthesia before endotracheal
intubation has been accomplished, the endotracheal tube
may be immediately passed into the oesophagus and its
qff inflated so that the regurgitated material passes along
the tube and out of the mouth. The trachea can then be
intubated with a second tube, taking care to cover the end
of the tube to avoid scooping material into its lumen. In
actuality, the presence of one endotracheal tube in the
pharynx often makes passage of a second tube nearly
impossible due to the small size of the bovine pharynx.
One option is to intubate the trachea with a stomach tube
 and attempt to feed the second endotracheal tube over the
stomach tube. An alternative is to wait until the flow of
ingesta stops, remove the tube from the oesophagus and
to rapidly intubate the trachea. However, if the conditions
Figure 12.1 Animal's head inclined over a support to allow
saliva and any regurgitated ruminal content to drain out of
thorax and abdomen have not been removed, or the depth
the mouth.
of anaesthesia is light, regurgitation may recommence
314
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
during the removal of the endotracheal tube from the
min (mean ±SD) for heart rate, 150 ±27 mmHg for mean
oesophagus.
arterial pressure (MAP). and 64 ± 14 mL/kg/min for
Salivation continues as a copious flow throughout
cardiac output (CO) (Wagner et al., 1990). Withholding
 general anaesthesia but the loss of saliva is unlikely to
feed for 48 h has been determined to cause significant
produce a significant effect on acid-base status. Antisiala-
decreases in heart rates in cattle (Rumsey & Bond, 1976;
gogues are not of much use for they make the secretion
McGuirk et al., 1990). Normal values in calves 2-26 days
more viscid in nature and do not significantly reduce its
old have been measured at approximately ll2 beats/min,
production. It is important to arrange the head of the
117-127 ± 16 mmHg for systolic arterial pressure (SAP),
anaesthetized animal so that saliva drains from the mouth
77-83 ± 15 mmHg for diastolic pressures (DAP). on
and does not accumulate in the pharynx. Intubation with
average 94-98 mmHg for MAP, and on average 150 mL/
a cuffed endotracheal tube will prevent inhalation of
kg/min for CO (Kerr et al., 2007). Normal values meas-
saliva.
ured in calves 25-53 days old were on average heart rates
 In two reports involving restraint of unsedated cows or
105-125 beats/min, 84-96 mmHg for MAP, and 205 mL/
 bulls in dorsal or lateral recumbency a decrease in PaO2
kg/min for CO (Meyer et al., 2010).
from an average standing value of 11.4 kPa (86 mmHg) to
less than 9.3 kPa (70 mmHg) was measured, with a
Restraint
decrease to below 6.6 kPa (50 mmHg) in some individu-
als (Semrad et al., 1986: Kein & Fisher, 1988). Arterial
 The majority of bovine clinical surgery is carried out under
PCO2 remained at or slightly below 5 kPa (38 mmHg). In
local analgesia, frequently in the standing animal. Surgical
   o    o
procedure is made easier by use of appropriate sedation
withheld for 18 h, mean PaOz in standing animals was
and/or restraining 'crushes' or 'chutes: Ropes are useful
14.5 kPa (109 mmHg) (Wagner et al., 1990). Significant
additions for restraining sedated or unsedated cattle and
decreases in PaOz occurred in both lateral and dorsal posi-
anyone in cattle veterinary practice soon becomes expert
tions but only in dorsal recumbency did values decrease
at tying quick-release knots, tying bowline knots for rope
 loops, applying Reuffs method of casting a mature bovine
even in unsedated cattle, recumbency creates abnormali-
by squeezing with a neck loop and two half-hitches
ties of ventilation and perfusion that are not counterbal-
around the body. and assembling fgure of eight ties to
anced by normal compensatory mechanisms.
secure flexed front and hind limbs.
 In contrast, when calves 25-53 days of age that had milk
replacer withheld for 12 hours were restrained in dorsal
Electroimmobiization
 recumbency for 95 minutes, the cardiopulmonary changes
Electrical devices are available in some countries to immo-
ssal yonu aram uoisod Apoq ui aueuo au Aq paonpu
bilize cattle by causing muscle tetanus from application of
than previously described for adult cattle, perhaps due to
an electrical current between electrodes at the lip and
the lesser weight of the abdomen on the diaphragm or the
rectum. There are concerns that this technique is neither
caudal vena cava[
(Meyer et al., 2010). Cardiac output 
humane nor analgesic. Holstein cows trained to be led
decreased by 15%. O2 delivery decreased with no change
with a halter and enter a set of stocks were observed for
in O2 extraction ratio, and respiratory rate (RR) and sys-
 behavioural and physiological responses to either immo-
temic vascular resistances increased. PaOzand PaCO2 were
bilization by application of an electric current for 30 s
unchanged.
from a commercially available electroimmobilizer or to an
Withholding feed before sedation and anaesthesia may
intramuscular injection with an 18 gauge needle (Pascoe,
reduce pressure on the diaphragm, limit lung collapse and
1986). The electrical immobilization was associated with
modify the decrease in PaOz. In a study of fed and non-fed
 significant aversive behaviour and evidence of distress and
cows anaesthetized with halothane and breathing oxygen,
the results led the author to believe that electroimmobili-
 cows fed before anaesthesia had a progressive decrease in
zation was a strong noxious stimulus that was remem-
PaO2, reaching hypoxaemic levels after an hour of anaes-
bered for several months.
thesia, whereas cows that were starved before anaesthesia
were well oxygenated (Blaze et al., 1988). Severe hyper-
aseaul latea e yim snoi yioq u pansea sem eiude
 measured in the fed cows. Thus, hypoxaemia may develop
SEDATION AND ANALGESIA
in recumbent non-starved cattle even when inhaling high
O2 concentrations but supplementation of inspired air
Cattle may not strongly exhibit behavioural signs com-
with Oz may prevent hypoxaemia if the cow has been
starved first. Respiratory acidosis usually develops in
mistaken perception that bovine animals and young
anaesthetized cattle.
calves do not require analgesia such as is afforded to
Normal values for cardiovascular parameters in unse-
horses, dogs, and cats. Administration of sedatives and
 dated healthy adult cattle are approximately 73 ± 14 beats/
analgesics, including local nerve blocks and non-steroidal
315
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
be extended to at least 60 hours (Sellers et al., 20l0). Per-
 moral obligation to provide analgesia during surgical pro-
sistence of plasma concentrations will be altered by dose
cedures but also may increase the safety of the veterinary
administered such that a terminal half-life of approxi-
practitioner during performance of the procedure These
 mately 30 minutes was measured following a subanaes-
factors must outweigh the economic concern of the cost
thetic doseof ketamine, 0. 1 mg/kg IV, given in combination
and increased time involved in administration of analgesic
with a sedative dose of xylazine for castration in 4-6
agents to the large numbers of calves that must be cas-
month old Angus calves (Gehring et al., 2008). In Europe.
trated and dehorned, and for other disabilities and surger-
if the dnug has a licence for any food animal (including
ies. Surveys completed by practitioners who work with
 the horse) then withdrawal times for a food animal species 
l siuoeid Aq ssauaeme paseau ue aepu a
for which it does not have a licence are [at the time of
the need to provide analgesia in this species (Huxley &
writing) 28 days for meat and 7 days for milk. However.
Whay, 2006; Hewson et al., 2007: Thomsen et al., 2010;
any animal that has received certain drugs may never go
Fajt et al., 201l). Commonly expressed comments were
for human consumption. For example, phenylbutazone in
that administration of analgesic dnugs makes it safer to
cattle of any age (UK) or cattle >20 months of age (USA)
work with cattle that the potency and duration of action
(Davis et al., 2009). In this chapter, information on the
of available drugs were considered very important, and
 pharmacological effects of various agents and their com-
that there is a shortage of analgesic drugs available that are
binations is given in order that informed decisions can be
both long acting and cost effective. When analgesics were
made about their use in all situations. Some of the anaes-
administered, they most commonly were NSAIDs, local
thetic agents mentioned may be unsuitable in some coun-
anaesthetics, and oz-adrenergic receptor agonists.
tries for use in animals for subsequent slaughter.
 Respondents to the questionnaires were asked to assign
Knowledge of withdrawal times is important to avoid
pain scores to a variety of disease conditions and surgical
anaesthetic agent residues in animals and animal
procedures and although moderate pain scores were
products intendedfor human consumption.
assigned for castration, a high proportion of respondents
 in North America did not provide analgesia for castration
[Fajt et al., z
2011). Even when a high pain score was
Agents used in bovine species
assigned, for example for claw amputation, caesarian
 section, and umbilical hernia repair, only approximately
Xylazine
60% of practitioners administered NSAIDs for postopera-
Xylazine has been used as a sedative in cattle for a long
tive pain control (Huxley & Whay, 2006; Fajt et al., 2011).
time. The dose rate of xylazine in cattle, 0.02-0.20 mg/kg.
Current updates on analgesia practices must include con-
with the highest dose intended for IM use, is one-tenth of
sideration that administration of local anaesthetics and
that used in horses (Table 12.l). Intravenous injection
 sedatives at the time of the procedure does not guarantee
results in deeper sedation than IM administration. Cattle
 analgesia postoperatively.
may assume recumbency even at the lowest dose rates,
 Choice of drugs may be influenced by current legislature
although breed differences in sensitivity to xylazine have
concerning use of anaesthetic agents in food-producing
been reported. In an investigation comparing Hereford
animals. The licensing of withdrawal periods is done by
and Holstein cattle, 84% of Herefords spontaneously lay
national agencies so that not only are the kinetics of indi-
down after xylazine administration, whereas only 22% of
vidual drugs considered but also regional practices and
Holsteins did so (Raptopoulos & Weaver, 1984). Further-
requirements. Human ingestion of drug residues of anaes-
more the average duration of recumbency in the Here-
thetic agents at injection sites has the potential of inducing
fords was 90 min compared with 50 min in the Holsteins.
toxicities or allergic reactions. Requirements of national
 Thus, in some situations, the dose rate in Holsteins may
licensing authorities are not universal. The food safety
be increased to 0.3 mg/kg. Even higher doses may be nec-
 approach of European agencies specifes a withdrawal
essary for free-ranging cows to be immobilized using a dart
period based on a whole-of-life maximal residue limit
gun in order to overcome the high circulating catecho-
whereas USA, Canada, and Australia evaluate the risk
lamine concentrations induced by excitement. The envi-
based on acute exposure (Reeves, 2007).
ronmental conditionsunder whichxylazineis administered
Many of the anaesthetic agents are administered to
may influence the response. In a study comparing the
attle as extralabel use for example ketamine and some
effects of xylazine in Holstein heifers under a thermone-
countries offer recommended withdrawal times for meat
utral condition compared with a hot environment (tem-
and milk. In the USA, recommended withdrawal after
perature approximately 33°C and relative humidity 63%),
ketamine is 3 days for meat and 48 hours for milk,
the time to standing was increased from 41 min to an
however, recent pharmacokinetic measurements after
average of 107 min during heat stress (Fayed et al., 1989).
administration of ketamine, 5 mg/kg IV, to lactating Hol.
Xylazine may cause mild to severe decreases in PaO2
stein cows indicate that milk withdrawal probably should
and moderate increases in PaCOzin mature cattle ( DeMoor
316
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
 Table 12.1 Dose rates of sedative, analgesic agents, and antagonists
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Route
Comments
Xylazine
0.02-0.2
IM, IV 
 Lowest dose rate for very young calves and standing adults; dose-dependent
 sedation; recumbency with high dose rate
 Detomidine 
0.01-0.04
IM, IV
Low dose for standing: high dose for recumbency
 Tolazoline 
0.5-2.0
IM, IV 
 Xylazine antagonist; inject slovvly if IV; suggest half IM and half IV
Atipamezole
90°0-520°0
IM, IV
Antagonist for xylazine, detomidine, medetomidine; excitement in some cattle;
 relapse to sedation may occur 1-4 hours after administration
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05
IM, IV
 Mild sedation 
Butorphanol
0.025-0.05
IM, IV
 Adjunct to sedative
Ketamine
0.1-0.4
IM, IV 
 Adjunct to sedative; low dose for standing
& Desmet, 197l: Raptopoulos & Weaver, 1984). A more
techniques or nerve blocks should be utilized to ensure
detailed discussion of the effects of α2-agonists on pulmo-
sufficient analgesia.
nary function is in the following chapter. Xylazine admin-
istration induces bradycardia, decreased MAP and CO, and
increased peripheral resistance (Campbell et al., 1979.
Detomidine
Rioja et al., 2008). Campbell et al. (1979) also noted
In contrast to xylazine, the dose rates for detomidine in
second degree atrioventricular heart block in one out of
five calves receiving xylazine.
cattle are similar to those used in horses. In Europe, deto-
midine is licensed for cattle at doses of 0.01-0.04 mg/kg
Xylazine has a number of side effects that may have an
 adverse effect on the animal. It abolishes the swallowing
IM or IV, with (at the time of writing) withdrawal times
reflex so that regurgitation can result in pulmonary aspira-
of 12 hours for milk and 2 days for meat. At the higher
doses, cattle may lie down. One study (Lin & Riddell,
tion. The inability of the cow or bull to withdraw its tongue
2003) documented that detomidine, 0.01 mg/kg. IV in
into its mouth and swallow may persist until after the
Holstein cattle resulted in greater sedation than xylazine,
animal regains the standing position. Thus, it is advisable
to withhold food and water from cattle before giving xyla-
0.02 mg/kg, during which the cows remained standing.
Elimination is mainly by metabolism as there is negligible
zine. Gastrointestinal motility is decreased and bloat may
excretion of the drug in urine. No detomidine was detect-
develop. while diarrhoea may be observed 12-24 hours
able in milk 23 h after dosing and tissue concentrations
after sedation (Hopkins, 1972). Hyperglycaemia may
measured 48 hafter dosing were less than 3% of the origi-
persist for about l0 hours. Increased urine production
nal dose (Salonen et al., 1989). Detomidine, 0.04 and
occurs within 30 minutes of administration and continues
0.06 mg/kg. increases electrical activity of the bovine
for 2 hours (Thurmon et al., 1978). Use of xylazine in
utenus (Vainio, 1988). A lower dose rate of detomidine,
animals with urethral obstruction may be responsible for
0.02 mg/kg, decreased electrical activity of the uterus and
rupture of the urinary bladder or urethra. Xylazine causes
sedation at this dose rate may be safe in the pregnant
contraction of the bovine utenus similar to oxytocin
animal (Vainio. 1988).
(LeBlanc et al., 1984), and premature birth has been
 The pharmacological effects of detomidine in cattle are
reported after administration to heavily pregnant cows.
very similar to those of xylazine in that it causes bradycar-
Administration of xylazine 0.04 mg/kg IV, to pregnant
 dia, hyperglycaemia, and increased urine production. An
cows between 219 and 241 days of gestation was followed
 Exception is that detomidine causes a transient increase in
by a decrease in uterine arterial blood flow by 56% from
blood pressurethat is dose dependent in duration, whereas
baseline values associated with an initial 59% reduction in
 xylazine decreases blood pressure in cattle.
O2 delivery (Hodgson et al., 2002). The impact on uterine
blood flow progressively lessened but was stillsignificant at
45 minutes. Consequently, use of xylazine in pregnant cows
 in the last trimester of pregnancy is not recommended.
Medetomidine
Minor surgical procedures have been
performed
Deep sedation without recumbency can be obtained with
on cattle sedated with xylazine but local infltration
intravenous doses of medetomidine 0.005 mg/kg. while
317
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
0.01 mg/kg produces recumbency and sedation equivalent
detection after tolazoline administration was reached in
to that obtained with intravenous doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
96 hours for meat and 48 hours for milk, leading to a
xylazine (England GCW & Clarke KW, unpublished
recommended withholding time (in New Zealand) for
observations). Duration of sedation of medetomidine,
tolazoline of 7 days for cattle meat and offal (Delehant
0.03 mg/kg. IV in calves lasted significantly longer than
etal.,2003)
xylazine, 0.3 mg/kg IV with the mean times to sternal
Atipamezole has been used to reverse sedation induced
recumbency and to standing after agent administration
by administration of o2-agonist sedatives in cattle with a
being 66 and 242 minutes, and 19 and 128 minutes,
wide range of dose rates, 0.025-0.2 mg/kg. Atipamezole,
respectively (Rioja et al., 2008). In a separate experiment, 
0.025, 0.03, 0.04, and 0.05 mg/kg (25-50 μg/kg). has
with calves suspended in the upright position, injection of
been used to reverse the effects of xylazine, 0.2-0.3 mg/kg
medetomidine, 0.03 mg/kg, IV resulted in hypoxaemia
(Thompson et al., 199l; Rioja et al., 2008). Atipamezole,
and hypercarbia at 5 and 15 minutes, significant decreases
0.06-0.08 mg/kg, IV effectively reversed within 2 minutes
 in heart rates and CO, and increases in MAP, systemic
free-ranging cattle immobilized by darting with xylazine,
vascular resistance, and central venous pressure Adminis-
0.55 mg/kg. or medetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg (Arnemo &
tration of atipamezole, 0.1 mg/kg. IV 20 minutes after
Soli, 1993). Of interest, eight out of 26 cows administered
medetomidine satisfactorily reversed the sedation and the
high doses of xylazine or medetomidine were in the last
respiratory and cardiovascular effects, including hypoxae-
2 months of pregnancy and were observed subsequently
mia. In contrast, atipamezole was not effective in revers-
to calve normally. Atipamezole has been used at different
ing hypoxaemia in sheep when given more than 5
dose rates to reverse the effects of medetomidine in cattle
minutes after medetomidine administration. Medetomi-
and calves. In one study (Raekallio et al., 1991), atipam-
dine 0.015 mg/kg. has been administered by epidural
ezole, 0.06 mg/kg. given either IV or half IV and half IM
injection for analgesia in cows (Lin et al., 1998).
t antagonize medetomidine in calves resulted in a rapid
smooth recovery to ambulation and, in another (Rioja
et al., 2008), atipamezole 0.1 mg/kg. IV had the same
Antagonists of α2-agonists
effect. Ranheim et al. (1999) reversed sedation in calves
As prolonged recumbency causes so many problems in
 given medetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg. by injecting atipame-
attle, the availability of O2-agonist antagonists is of par-
zole, 0.2 mg/kg. however, the authors' recommendation
ticular value These antagonists not only cause the animal
was that this dose should not be exceeded. Time of admin-
to awaken, they also antagonize the majority of the
istration of atipamezole to standing has been reported
side effects of the agonists, including restoring ruminal
from 2 to 12 minutes. Relapse to sedation or recumbency
motility to normal and allowing release of gas from the
at times varying from 80 minutes to 2 to 3-4 hours after
numen.
administration of atipamezole have been reported
Almost all the 02-agonist antagonists have been used in
(Amemo & Soli, 1993; Ranheim et al., 1998, 1999). Ati-
cattle sedated with xylazine Yohimbine, 0.125 mg/kg.
pamezole given to unsedated cattle or as sedation is
with aminopyridine, 0.3 mg/kg, will awaken cattle sedated
with 0.2-0.3 mg/kg of xylazine, but will not restore a
kicking and bucking.
normal state of consciousness. Tolazoline, 0.5 mg/kg, was
 documented to be superior to yohimbine for antagonizing
Acepromazine
xylazine sedation in cattle (Hikasa et al., 1988). Tolazo-
line at 0.2 mg/kg reverses the suppression of ruminal
Acepromazine may be given in doses of 0.02-0.05 mg/kg
motility induced by xylazine but higher doses, 0.5-2.0 mg/
IV or 0.1 mg/kg IM to induce mild tranquillization. Ace-
kg, are required for full reversal of sedation. Xylazine seda-
promazine will decrease the dose rate of subsequently
tion, 0.3 mg/kg. IM in 6-month old Holstein Friesian
administered anaesthetics and may increase the risk of
calves was rapidly reversed within minutes by IV injection
regurgitation.
of tolazoline 1 and 2 mg/kg. with a more rapid return to
normal gait following the larger dose rate (Powell et al.,
Chloral hydrate
1998). Care must be taken to administer tolazoline slowly
as there are anecdotal reports that intravenous injection
Chloral hydrate has been used as a sedative for adult cattle
has been associated with abrupt adverse haemodynamic
administered orally or by IV injection. To obtain a recum-
changes. In one study, reversal of xylazine sedation in
bent, very lightly unconscious adult cow, the drug can be
calves with tolazoline caused transient sinus bradycardia
administered by drench or by stomach tube in doses of
and sinus arrest, accompanied by severe systemic arterial
30-60 g as a 1 in 20 solution in water. Sedation attains its
hypotension (Lewis et al., 1999). Withholding times are
maximum depth in 10-20 minutes and local analgesics
increased after administration of tolazoline. Xylazine is
 may be injected for nerve blocks while sedation is develop-
below the limits of detection in meat and organs by 72
ing. The degree of sedation is not predictable in an excited
hours and in milk by 12 hours whereas the limit of
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
an inducement for the animal to drink medicated water
veterinarian must adhere to local laws. Use of phenylbuta-
Intravenous injection of chloral hydrate can be given with
zone in cattle is prohibited.
the cow standing or after casting with ropes. The dose
required is between 80 and 90 mg/kg of a 10% solution
and the infusion should be stopped before reaching the
LOCAL ANALGESIA
desired level of sedation because narcosis will continue to
deepen after the IV injection is completed. The induction
and recovery periods are excitement free. Chloral hydrate
 A number of local anaesthetic agents (see Chapter 4), with
should be used cautiously in debilitated cows as rapid IV
 or without the addition of epinephrine, may be used, the
administration can cause cardiovascular collapse.
choice being influenced by desired duration of action,
irritancy, volume, and cost. Lidocaine and mepivacaine are
Sedative-opioid combinations
considered to be agents of intermediate duration and
bupivacaine and ropivacaine as longer acting. Lidocaine is
Administration of butorphanol to healthy unsedated cows
not approved for use in animals, other than horses.
anu Aeu pue uoepas anu Aqeoiaid iou lm
intended for human consumption in EU member coun-
behaviour changes including restlessness and bellowing.
tries; in the USA the recommended meat and milk with-
Butorphanol may provide sedation in cattle that are sick
drawal time after administration of lidocaine to cattle is
or in pain and may increase the quality of sedation when
24 hours or one day. However, in adult Holstein cows
administered in conjunction with xylazine or detomidine.
injected with 100 mL 2% lidocaine (approximately
Reports of use of butorphanol with xylazine in healthy
3.5 mg/kg) in a flank inverted L-block pattern, the last
cattle have conflicting results on the degree of contribution
measurable time of lidocaine detection in milk was 32.5
of butorphanol to analgesia. Comparisons in adult cows
± 16.2 hours with a mean concentration of 46 ± 30 ng/
between xylazine, 0.02 mg/kg. detomidine, 0.01 mg/kg.
mL (Sellers et al., 2009). Three of nine cows showed resi-
with or without butorphanol, 0.05 mg/kg. all adminis-
dues at 48 hours with no detectable residues at 60 hours.
tered IV, revealed no differences in duration or degree of
 The authors calculated withdrawal time for meat for safety
sedation induced by the addition of butorphanol, and that
at 10 times the tyb. as 4 days and for milk as 3 days for
the greatest sedation was observed after detomidine alone
 this dose of lidocaine. No lidocaine was detected in serum
(Lin & Riddell, 2003). Sedation was accompanied by
 Or milk after caudal epidural administration of lidocaine,
impaired swallowing indicated by drooling saliva and, in 
2.2 mg/kg.
some cows, lowering of the head; all cows remained stand-
Complications following local analgesia include sys-
ing. A combination of xylazine, 0.02-0.05 mg/kg, butor-
 temic toxicity, infection if aseptic precautions are not fol-
phanol, 0.025 mg/kg. and ketamine, 0.1-0.4 mg/kg. IM
lowed, and neurological injury. Accidental intravenous or
has been used to restrain cattle with the low doses admin-
 intra-arterial injection should be avoided by syringe aspi-
istered for standing restraint and the higher doses when 
 ration before injection of a local anaesthetic. Recommen-
recumbency is desired (Anderson, 2008). The duration of
dations of maximum doses of local anaesthetic have
effect is about 45 minutes and tolazoline, 2 mg/kg, IM was
limited evidence base in cattle but clearly depend on the
recommended when reversal of xylazine was desired.
site, volume and speed of administration, and uptake
9e on dn ig i an u paaap aq ues pourng
into the systemic circulation. The recommended limit of
hours following administration (Court et al., 1992).
6 mg/kg for lidocaine for local infiltration may be valid as
Minimal information is available on the use of μ opioids
 obvious sedation and recumbency may be observed when
in cattle. A thermal nociceptive device applying heat to the
a larger dose has been administered, for example by
coronary band of the forefoot of cattle was devised to test
repeating paravertebral nerve blocks following initial
multiple IV doses of morphine, 0.1-0.4 mg/kg (Muchado
failure Cardiovascular collapse will occur when a tourni-
et al., 1998). No conclusion was reached about the anal-
 quet dislodges soon after IV injection of a smaller dose of
 gesic effect except that individual variation was noted and
lidocaine for intravenous regional analgesia. Metabolism
no increased locomotion was observed.
 of ester-linked local anaesthetics, such as procaine begins
in the blood before the distribution phase and therefore
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
relatively higher doses may be used. The site of injection
signifcantly influences the plasma concentrations, and a
drugs (NSAIDs)
 hyperdynamic circulation and local vasodilation increase
The beneficial effects of NSAIDs in ameliorating signs of
 speed of uptake Epinephrine (1:200 000) may be added
 post-surgical pain in cattle have been well documented,
to local anaesthetics to cause local vasoconstriction and
for example, use of ketoprofen, meloxicam, flunixin, and
 reduce the peak plasma concentrations, such that in many
 saleo jo sdnoia aaiel ul paipns uaaq aney uajoidie
countries the maximum official recommended doses of
subjected to castration or dehorning. Not all NSAIDs
   s   s 
are licensed for use in cattle in all countries and the
epinephrine is added (Rosenberg et al., 2004). Rarely.
319
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
tissue and skin necrosis has been observed in cattle fol-
lowing local infltration of tissues with lidocaine with
epinephrine. Epinephrine included with lidocaine or
mepivacaine prolongs the duration of epidural block in
the more caudal segments of the spinal cord, but is not
 of added beneft to the duration of bupivacaine or ropi-
vacaine (Bernards, 2006). The mechanism by which
epinephrine increases the duration of epidural lidocaine
is not clear but is thought to be partly due to dural vaso-
constriction, without an effect on spinal cord blood flow,
slowing lidocaine elimination and partly due to an inhibi
tory effect [hyperpolarization) of sensory and motor
neurons.
 Neurological injury is rare but might occur following
direct trauma from the needle or from introduction of
bacteria into the perineural space Case reports and studies
Figure 12.2 Auriculopalpebral nerve block
of human patients developing persistent paraesthesias
and motor weakness following spinal anaesthesia have
occurred more commonly with lidocaine than with other
anaesthetics. Lidocaine is known to be neurotoxic and
legislative reasons (see Chapter l), procaine is still often
nerve injury after intrathecal or epidural injection may
used in Europe and, although requiring a slightly longer
result from pooling of undiluted lidocaine resulting in a
time for onset of action, appears to be equally satisfactory
prolonged neural contact. Maldistribution of lidocaine
as lidocaine for procedures where the addition of epine-
after injection may be observed in the patient by detection
phrine is acceptable.
of failed or uneven analgesia. Efforts at redistributing the
Most clinical surgery in cattle is carried out under
Buneadai ueui iaue uoisod zuaed suaie Aqaueopl
local anaesthesia with or without sedation,frequently
local anaesthetic administration have been suggested to
in the standing animal.
decrease the risk of neural toxicity (Bernards, 2006).
Adjuncts to local anaesthetics may contribute to nerve
damage but evidence is conflicting. Addition of epine-
Techniques
cally (subarachnoid) in rats increased the extent of sensory
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
block over lidocaine alone (Hashimoto et al., 2001). Sen-
The auriculopalpebral nerve is a branch of the facial nerve
sation in the rats' tails was decreased at 4 and 7 days
(VIIth cranial nerve) supplying motor fibres to the orbicu-
after injection of lidocaine or lidocaine-epinephrine. Sub-
laris oculi muscle. The nerve runs from the base of the ear
sequent histological examination revealed nerve injury in
 along the facial crest, past and ventral to the eye, giving
the rats that received lidocaine that was significantly worse
off its branches on the way. This block is used to prevent
in rats given lidocaine-epinephrine compared with no
eyelid closure during examination or surgery of the eye. It
functional or morphological effects of epinephrine alone.
does not provide analgesia to the eye or eyelids and should
These data raise concern for adverse effects from intrathe-
be used in conjunction with topical analgesia or other
cal use of lidocaine with epinephrine. In an in vitro model
 nerve blocks for painful procedures.
of lidocaine-induced toxicity on neuronal cells and astro-
The needle is inserted in front of the base of the ear at
cytes, epinephrine did not influence the neurotoxicity of
the end of the zygomatic arch until its point lies at the
lidocaine indicating that epinephrine may act through its
dorsal border of the arch (Fig. 12.2). About 10 mL of 2%
vasoconstrictive effects in vivo and not by a direct toxic
lidocaine is injected beneath the fascia at this point.
effect (Werdehausen et al., 20ll). However, this study
evaluated several commonly used adjuncts and deter-
Cornual nerve block
mined that the addition of ketamine to lidocaine increased
cell toxicity in an additive manner and addition of mida-
The horm corium and the skin around its base derive their
zolam increased toxicity to a lesser extent. The mechanism 
sensory nerve supply from a branch of the zygomaticotem-
of toxicity of lidocaine and ketamine is the same, namely
poral branch of the Vth cranial nerve. The nerve emerges
activation of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis [a
from the orbit and ascends just behind the lateral ridge of
programmed cell death process).
the frontal bone (Fig. 12.3). This latter structure can be
The techniques described below will describe doses of
readily palpated with the fingers. In the upper third of the
lidocaine as this, with or without epinephrine, is the agent
ridge, the nerve is relatively superficial, being covered only
most commonly employed in cattle. However, for various
by skin and a thin layer of the frontalis muscle.
320
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
Coronoid process
of mandible
Zygomatic process
Site to block the
of frontal bone
zygomatic branch or the
auriculopalpebral nerve
Foramen
(on the zygomatic arch)
orbitorotundum
Figure 12.3 Cornual nerve block.
The site for injection is the upper third of the temporal
ridge, about 2.5 am below the base of the horn. The needle
(18 gauge, 2.5 om) is inserted so that its point lies
Frontal process of
Needle direction
0.7-1.0 cm deep, immediately behind the ridge, and 5 mL
zygomatic bone
for Petersen block
of 2% lidocaine solution injected. The needle must not be
inserted too deeply otherwise injection will be made
Figure 12.4 Schematic drawing of the Petersen nerve
beneath the aponeurosis of the temporal muscle and the
method will fail. In large animals with well-developed
 orbitorotundum.
horns, a second injection should be made about l cm
behind the first to block the posterior division of the nerve.
attenuates cortisol response during and immediately after
 Loss of sensation develops in 10-15 minutes and lasts up
the procedure. Cortisol levels increase some hours after the
to 2 hours. This nerve block has been widely used for the
effects of local anaesthesia have dissipated and, although
dehorning of adult cattle but the block is not always com-
the plasma cortisol concentrations decrease by 9 hours
plete. The infratrochlear nerve, a branch of the Vth cranial
 after dehorning, the calves graze and ruminate less between
nerve, appearing at the dorsal margin of the orbit may also
24 and 48 hours after dehorning than they do between 48
reach the cormual process. Another injection is advisable in
and 72 hours or compared with animals that were not
 adult cattle with well-developed horns caudal to the horn
dehorned. Extension of the duration of analgesia by fol-
base to block the cutaneous branches of cervical nerves.
lowing the lidocaine injection with bupivacaine may
Thus, a cornual nerve block plus infiltration of lidocaine
eliminate the cortisol response (delay onset of pain).
around the base of the horn is commonly employed.
Administration of an NSAID (eg. ketoprofen or meloxi-
 The legislation relating to dehorning and disbudding of
am, but not phenylbutazone) with a lidocaine nerve
calves differs between countries, for example, in the UK
 block was documented to provide more effective analgesia
 and Sweden, disbudding is not permitted without the use
and continue pain relief beyond the 2-3 hours provided
of local anaesthesia ± sedation, whereas in North America,
by lidocaine (Stafford & Mellor, 2005; Stewart et al., 2009;
local anaesthesia is not always provided to all calves for
Duffield et al., 20l0). Xylazine alone was not effective in
dehorning: with the conundrum that fewer calves 
eliminating the cortisol response to dehorming.
months of age receive analgesia than calves >6 months of
 age and beef calves are less likely to receive analgesia than
Petersen eye block
dairy calves [Stafford & Mellor, 2005: Hewson et al., 2007:
Fajt et al., 20ll). In one survey, cattle producers were less
A 22 gauge 2.5 cm needle is used to infltrate local anal-
likely than veterinary practitioners to include analgesia
 gesic solution subcutaneously, about 5 mL of 2% lido-
when dehorning their calves, indicating a need for client
caine, within the notch formed by the joining of the
education (Misch et al., 2007).
zygomatic process of the frontal bone and the frontal
 In the last 15 years, the impact of dehorning and dis-
process of the zygomatic bone cranially, the zygomatic
budding on cattle has been investigated extensively
arch ventrally and the coronoid process of the mandible
(Stafford & Mellor, 2005). Local anaesthesia significantly
caudally (Fig. 12.4). A 12 or 14 gauge, 2.5 cm needle
321
Section
[2—
Anaesthesia of the species
placed as far rostral and ventral as possible in the desen-
sitized skin of the notch serves as a cannula and an 18
gauge, 10 or 12 cm needle is introduced through it. The
long needle is directed in a horizontal and caudal direc-
tion until it strikes the coronoid process of the mandible.
It is then redirected into the orbit just rostral to the
orbitorotundum foramen at a depth of about 8-10 cm
Incision
from the skin and 10-15 mL of 2% lidocaine solution
injected. This blocks the oculomotor, trochlear, abducens
nerves and two branches of the trigeminal nerve as they
emerge from the foramen orbitorotundum. The needle is
withdrawn to the subcutaneous tissue and redirected cau-
dally and laterally to block the zygomatic branch of the
auriculopalpebral nerve on the zygomatic arch by the
injection of 5-10 mL of the local analgesic solution. The
e ueu uojad ot lys aiou sainban aniual uasiaad
Figure 12.5 The inverted L block used for analgesia for
retrobulbar block but it may be safer.
flank coeliotomy involves infiltration of local anaesthetic
uoisu! pasodoud aul ot Allelue n pue Allesiop uoiinjos
Peribulbar and retrobulbar block
Retrobulbar injection of the eye is achieved by introduc-
tion of a curved needle through the skin about l om lateral
Inverted L block
to the lateral canthus, or through the conjunctiva. The
needle is first directed straight back and away from the
Infltration of the skin, subcutaneous and deeper tissues
eyeball until the point is beyond the globe and then
in an inverted L shape with 60 mL of 2% lidocaine solu-
turmed inward to penetrate the muscle cone. When no
tion is a commonly used technique to provide analgesia
blood is obtained after aspiration, lidocaine is deposited
for a flank laparotomy in a standing cow (Fig. 12.5). It is
behind the eye.
also used in recumbent animals to block the site for a
 Peribulbar anaesthesia is produced by inserting the
paramedian incision, or repeated in a mirror image to
needle in 2 to 4 quadrants of the eye and injecting lido-
form an inverted U shape and analgesia for a midline
caine within the orbit but outside the ocular muscles.
incision. Injections must be made both subcutaneously
Injection of a total of 20-30 mL of 2% lidocaine [or its
and down to the peritoneum to produce a total block. The
equivalent) for an adult cow or bull will produce corneal
block can be achieved by making isolated injections at
analgesia, mydriasis, and proptosis and paralysis of the
intervals of about 1 om, which relies on lateral diffusion
eyeball. Anaesthesia is produced after spread of the anaes-
of the analgesic solution. Alternatively. a wall of local
thetic agent thus a larger volume of lidocaine is required
analgesic solution can be created by inserting a long
for peribulbar anaesthesia, the onset of block is longer.
needle to its depth, and injecting anaesthetic solution in
and the larger volume of solution causes a greater increase
 a steady stream as the needle is withdrawn.
in ocular pressure.
Recommendations vary over the use of sharp hypodermic
Paravertebral nerve block
or blunt (eg. spinal needle) needles for ocular blocks, but
penetration of the globe has been reported in human
Paravertebral block involves the perineural injection of
patients with both sharp and blunt needles (Hay, 1991)
local analgesic solution about the spinal nerves as they
Wong, 1993). Visual outcome is not a factor when penetra-
emerge from the vertebral canal through the intervertebral
tion of the globe occurs during nerve block for enucleation.
foramina. This technique is commonly used to provide
However, bacterial contamination of the orbit is possible.
analgesia for laparotomy. It offers a major advantage over
Potentially adverse effects of both the Petersen block
use of local infiltration in that the abdominal wall includ-
and the retrobulbar block include bradycardia, hypoten-
ing the peritoneum is more likely to be uniformly desen-
sion, asystole, respiratory depression, apnoea, perforation
sitized. Additionally, the abdominal wall is relaxed.
of the globe and intraorbital or retrobulbar haemorrhage.
The area of the flank bounded cranially by the last
Symptoms of local anaesthetic spread to the central
rib, caudally by the angle of the ilium and dorsally by
uis [ensn e si isae Aioiedsan inq Aien uasis snoaiau
the lumbar transverse processes, is innervated by the
of brainstem anaesthesia. When the block is used for other
thirteenth thoracic and first and second lumbar nerves.
purposes, care must be taken to ensure that the corneal
The third lumbar nerve, although it does not supply the
surface does not become dry because of loss of tear forma-
flank, gives of a cutaneous branch that passes obliquely
tion for several hours.
backwards in front of the ilium. Operations involving the
322
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
Spinal needle
12
3
T12
TI3
LI
Figure 12.6 Location of the last two thoracic and first three lumbar segmental nerves. The needle indicates position for
paravertebral injection of local anaesthetic to block T13
abdominal ventral midline will require additional desen-
The number of nerves to be blocked will depend on
sitization of the dorsal nerves cranial to the thirteenth. The
the site and extent of the proposed incision. The areas
last thoracic and frst lumbar intervertebral foramina in
involved by blocking of respective nerves are illustrated in
cattle are occasionally double The last thoracic foramen
 Figure 12.7. Therefore, for rumenotomy, using an incision
lies immediately caudal to the head of the last rib and on
parallel with and about 7 cm caudal to the last rib, anal-
a level with the base of the transverse process of the first 
gesia of the thirteenth thoracic (T13) and first (Ll) and
lumbar vertebra (Fig. 12.6). The lumbar foramina are large
 second (L2) lumbar nerves is required. The third lumbar
and are situated between the base of the transverse pro-
nerve [L3) must be blocked for a more caudal incision and
cesses and approximately on the same level. The spinal
for relaxation of the internal oblique muscle. The hair
nerves, after emerging from the foramina, immediately
must be clipped from over the injection sites and the skin
divide into a smaller dorsal and a larger ventral branch.
cleansed with a surgical preparation before insertion of the
The dorsal branch supplies chiefly the skin and muscles of
needle. A number of different techniques for blocking the
the loins, but some of its cutaneous branches pass a con-
 respective nerves have been described but the most reliable
siderable distance down the fank. The ventral branch
relies on directing the needle towards the cranial border
passes obliquely ventrally and caudally between the
of the transverse process of the vertebra behind the nerve
muscles and comprises the main nerve supply to the skin,
to be blocked. For example, to block the Ll, the needle
muscles, and peritoneum of the flank. The ventral branch
should be directed to strike the cranial border of L2 about
is also connected with the sympathetic system by a ramus 
5-6 om [(2 inches) from the animal's midline. At such
communicans. Paralysis of the nerves at their points of
 sites, the cranial borders of the transverse processes are
emergence from the intervertebral foramina will provoke
usually in the same cross-sectional plane of the body as
desensitization of the whole depth of the flank wall and
the most prominent parts of their lateral borders. Alterna-
complete muscular relaxation. Block of the rami commu-
tively, the cranial corner ofthe tip of the transverse process
nicantes will result in splanchnic vasodilation and poten-
can be used as a landmark whereby vertical insertion of a
tial for hypotension.
needle 5-6 cm from the animal's midline will direct the
323
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 12.7 Regions of the flank involved after paravertebral
block of the respective nerves.
Figure 12.8 Unilateral analgesia with either a paravertebral
block or lumbar epidural producing spinal curvature towards
needle to drop off the caudal edge of the previous trans-
the blocked side.
verse process. To block the T13, Ll, L2, and L3 nerves
subcutaneous blebs of local anaesthetic solution should
be made in line with the most prominent parts of the
the edge of the processes may cause their points to lie well
extremities of the transverse processes of L2, L3 and L4 at
away from the course of the nerves. Successful infiltration
a distance 5-6 cm from the dorsal midline. Location of
around the nerves is indicated frst by the development of
the transverse process of Ll can be diffcult (particularly
a belt of vasodilation which causes a distinct and appreci-
in well-muscled or obese animals) so another bleb
is
able rise in skin temperature. Full analgesia develops in
inserted cranial to Ll a distance equal to that between Ll
about 10 minutes and when lidocaine with epinephrine
and L2. A 14 gauge needle is inserted through each skin
1 : 400 000 is used it persists for about 90 minutes. When
bleb and the underlying longissimus dorsi muscle infl-
a unilateral block is fully developed it produces a curvature
trated with 5 mL of 1-2% lidocaine or other local analge-
of the spine, the convexity of which is towards the analge-
sic solution (preferably without epinephrine to avoid
sic side (Fig. 12.8).
necrosis) as it is advanced to a depth of about 4 cm from
 An alternative method of lumbar paravertebral block is
the skin surface This infiltration will reduce the cow's
to approach the nerves horizontally at the tip of the trans-
movement during the rest of the procedure, but can be
verse processes of Ll, L2, L3 and L4 to block T13, L1, L2,
omitted. A 14 gauge needle is reintroduced through the
and L3 nerves. A 14 gauge, 5 cm hypodermic needle is
first bleb and used as a guide for introducing a longer
inserted horizontally at the centre of the tip of a transverse
needle (18 gauge, 10-14 cm) through the longissimus
 process and directed beneath the process as close as pos-
dorsi muscle The needle is advanced to strike the cranial
sible to the bone. About 10 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected
border of the transverse process and then redirected crani-
 into the area, moving the needle by slightly withdrawing
ally over the edge of the transverse process and advanced
and advancing to achieve a fan-like disposition ofthe local
until it is felt to penetrate the intertransverse ligament.
anaesthetic The needle is then withdrawn until it is just
Injection of 15 mL 2% lidocaine is made immediately
under the skin and redirected over the top ofthe transverse
below the ligament and a further 5 mL is injected after the
process to needle depth, as close as possible to the bone.
 needle is withdrawn to just above the ligament. During
and an additional 10 mL lidocaine injected in a similar
final withdrawal of the needle, the skin is pressed down-
fashion. This technique will not cause sympathetic vasodi-
wards to prevent separation of the connective tissue and
lation or curvature of the spine.
aspiration of air through the needle. The procedure is
It is inevitable that partial failure to block these nerves
repeated at the other sites.
will sometimes occur because the nerves course obliquely
It is important to ensure that the needles are vertical
and location may be variable with different sizes and con-
when contact is first made with the cranial border of the
formations of cattle It should also be remembered that
transverse processes for, if they are not, redirection over
although the flank may be analgesic, signs of discomfort
324
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
6
15
12
Figure 12.9 Pudendal nerve block. Lateral view of the pelvis with the sacrosciatic ligament enhanced and showing distribution
of the sacral spinal nerves. 1: pudendal nerve; 2: middle rectal nerve; 3: caudal rectal nerve; 4, 5: proximal and distal
cutaneous branches of pudendal nerve; 6: deep perineal nerve; 7: nerve that becomes the dorsal nerve of the penis; 8: sciatic
nerve; 9: branch connecting sciatic nerve with branch of pudendal nerve 7: 10: pelvic nerve; 11: internal pudendal artery: 12:
coccygeal vertebra: 18: needle in position.
may be observed following traction on the mesentery
lesser ischiatic foramen. The pudendal nerve can be felt,
during manipulation of organs.
 the size of a straw, dorsal to this point After clipping and
cleaning the skin, the site of insertion of the needle is at
the point of deepest depression of the ischiorectal fossa
Pudendal nerve block
and the needle should be directed rostral and slightly
A useful nerve block to produce analgesia of the penis for
ventral. During the whole procedure a hand is kept in the
examination and surgical procedures without causing
rectum. When the needle has penetrated to a depth of
hind limb ataxia is a bilateral pudendal nerve block. The
5-7 cm, it will be palpable through the rectal wall and its
pudendal nerve consists of fibres arising mainly from the
 point should be directed to the position of the nerve just
ventral branch of the third (2-4) sacral nerve The nerve
described. Lidocaine, 20-25 mL of 2% (or its equivalent).
 passes ventrally and caudally on the medial surface of the
is injected. A further 10-15 mL is injected a little caudal
broad sacrotuberous ligament to cross the lesser ischiatic
and dorsal to this point to block also the middle rectal
foramen where it is accompanied by the internal pudendal
'siuad au oi saiqy sauedus auuos Ae Aeu eu aiau
artery (Fig. 12.9). The pudendal nerve sends fibres to the
A third injection should be made after redirecting the
caudal cutaneous femoral nerve and provides sensory
needle a little ventrally just inside the lesser ischiatic
innervation around the skin of the anus and perineal
foramen where the ventral branch of the pudendal nerve
regional and motor fibres to the penis, vulva, coccygeal
 can be palpated distal to its anastomosis with sciatic nerve
and levator ani muscles, and intermal and extermal anal
branches. The onset of penile prolapse may take 30-45
sphincters (Liebich et al., 2009). Between the sacrotuber-
 minutes. Another approach to pudendal nerve block is a
ous ligament and the rectum in the area of approach to
lateral one. One injection is made over the pudendal nerve
the nerve lies the sheet-like coccygeal muscle. The puden-
just as it passes medial to the dorsorostral quadrant of the
dal nerve lies between the ligament and the muscle.
paoyiad s uoalu puosas e pue uaueioy seis iassa
The pudendal nerve is located per rectum with a hand
between the caudal rectal and pudendal nerves. This latter
being introduced as far as the wrist andthe fngers directed
 injection necessitates penetration of the broad sacrotuber-
laterally and ventrally to detect the lesser ischiatic foramen.
Ous ligament. The site of insertion of the needle is deter
The outline of this foramen may not be clearly identifiable
 mined by using the cranial tuberosity of the ischial tuber
but its position is recognized by the softness and depress-
as a fixed point and the length of the broad sacrotuberous
ability of the pelvic wall. The internal pudendal artery can
ligament as a radius. The distance is used to establish the
be palpated 2-3 cm rostral to the cranial dorsal end of the
 site on a line drawn parallel to the midline cranial to the
325
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
fixed point After clipping, cleaning and disinfecting the
was infltrated into the spermatic cord and around the neck
skin the site is marked by the SC injection of 2 mL of 2%
of the scrotum 20 minutes before castration. Calves receiv-
lidocaine or equivalent dnug solution. This injection
ing local analgesia struggled significantly less, had lower
makes subsequent manipulations less painful and renders
 peak cortisol concentrations, and responded less to palpa-
the animal more amenable to handling. Either hand is
tion of the site after the procedure. The authors concluded
then introduced into the rectum and the lesser ischiatic
that calves <l week of age perceived and responded to pain
foramen located. A needle (18 gauge, 12 cm) is introduced
of castration, that Burdizzo castration was not completely
through the skin site and directed towards the middle
painless even with local analgesia, and that sensitivity to
finger held in the foramen until it can be felt to lie along-
local palpation increased in the hours following castration,
side the nerve. About 10 mL of the local analgesic solution
presumably due to inflammation and waning effect of
is injected at this point. The needle is withdrawn 4-5 cm
local analgesia.
and redirected caudally and dorsally so that it penetrates
The impact of castration by the application of bands in
the broad sacrotuberous ligament at a point about 2.5 cm
7.5-month-old Angus calves was evaluated for 3 weeks
above and behind the frst site of injection. About 5 mL
before and for 6 weeks after banding (Gonzalez et al..
of solution is injected at this point, the needle is with-
20l0). Saliva cortisol concentrations were measured to
 drawn and the sites massaged to spread the solution in the
quantitate the stress of band application and other param-
tissues. Similar injections are carried out on the other side
eters such as feed intake, average daily gain, feeding behav-
of the animal.
iour, faecal E. coli concentration, duration of recumbency.
and length of stride when walking through a long chute,
were used as measurements ofthe calves' well-being. It was
Local analgesia for castration
found that caudal epidural xylazine, 0.07 mg/kg. and flu-
Handling of calves may provoke a stress response but the
nixin meglumine IV administered before banding signif-
 procedure of castration may cause acute and chronic pain,
cantly decreased salivary cortisol concentrations and
exhibited by changed individual and social behaviour.
reduced the time the calves spent lying down on the day
Pain behaviours in cattle include restlessness, altered dura-
of banding. Average daily gain was decreased by castration
tions of standing, walking, play activity, and recumbency.
but not influenced by analgesic medication. However, the
or eating and rumination, and other signs such as lame-
animals' responses attributable to pain were greatest in the
ness, short strides, foot stamping, head shaking, and tail
third and fourth weeks after application of bands. Further
wagging. Even though young calves may not exhibit strong
research is needed to address chronic pain management
signs of discomfort, evidence from studies of neonatal
for this method of castration.
humans and animals supports the conviction that the very
   i   n
young also experience pain
    i  sa   a i
There are several techniques used for castration of calves,
Germany, 2 months in the UK, 9 months in New Zealand,
surgical excision, crushing the neck of the scrotum (Burd-
and calves of all ages in Switzerland and Austria (Boesch
izzo), or banding (rubber band, elastrator) to produce
et al., 2008). Currently used analgesic techniques for calf
testicular ischaemia, and each technique may cause differ-
castrations are local infltration of the spermatic cord and
ent degrees and duration of pain. Castration by surgical
subcutaneous tissues, caudal epidural nerve block with
excision in calves 2-4 months old was evaluated by use of
local anaesthetic or xylazine, and parenteral administra-
pedometers, stride length and video recording. and a sub-
tion of an NSAID.
jective visual score (VAS) for up to 24 hours (Currah et al.,
2009). The calves received either a lidocaine with epine-
Caudal epidural block
phrine caudal epidural nerve block, 0.6 mg/kg delivered
using an 18 gauge 3.75 om (1.5 inch) needle inserted at
The spinal cord and meninges end at the third sacral ver-
the sacrococcygeal junction, an epidural nerve block and
tebra in calves and the frst sacral vertebra in adult cattle.
flunixin, 2.2 mg/kg, IV, or saline alone. The results indicate
The diameter of the neural canal as it passes through the
that the calves exhibited behaviours associated with pain
sacrum is approximately l.8 cm in the caudal part and
after castration, that the calves castrated without analgesia
2 cm in the cranial. In the lumbar regions, the dimensions
were less mobile after castration and were more likely to
of the canal are much greater, its width at the last segment
be assessed as in more pain by independent observers, and
being 4 cm. This helps to explain why paralysis of the
that calves administered flunixin evidenced more analgesia
spinal nerves as far forward as the first sacral is effected
than other calves for 8 hours after castration but that the
with comparatively small quantities of local analgesic
effect had worn off by 24 hours. Burdizzo castration of
 solution whereas paralysis of the cranial lumbar nerves
 2-7-day-old calves was evaluated by recording behaviours
necessitates the injection of much larger quantities.
and measuring plasma cortisol concentrations the day
Caudal epidural block is performed by insertion of
before and the day of the procedure (Boesch et al., 2008).
the needle between the sacrum and first coccygeal vertebra
Ten mL of either 2% lidocaine, 0.5% bupivacaine, or saline
(S5-Cl) or between the first and second coccygeal
326
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
spines, taking care that it is precisely in the midline The
needle is advanced ventrally and cranially at an angle of
15 ° with the vertical. If the point of the needle impinges
On the floor of the canal, contact with a caudal nerve may
cause the animal to move suddenly. and the practitioner
should be prepared for this. Assessment of correct place-
ment of the needle can be done using the hanging drop'
 and/or loss of resistance methods. To utilize the 'hanging
drop', a drop of saline or local anaesthetic solution can be
placed on the hub of the needle. As the needle is advanced
into the epidural space negative pressure within the space
will suck the liquid into the needle. After insertion of the
 needle, an empty syringe should be attached to the needle
and the syringe plunger aspirated to ensure that the needle
is not in a blood vessel. Then a small amount of air or
saline or local anaesthetic solution is injected and no
Figure 12.10 Caudal epidural injection made into the first
resistance to injection should be felt when the needle is in
intercoccygeal space.
the epidural space. If the needle is introduced too far.
crossed the epidural space and penetrated the interverte-
bral disc, there will be resistance to injection.
vertebrae (Cl-C2), i.e. beyond the termination of the
spinal cord and its meninges (Fig. 12.10). One or more of
Lidocaine, 5 mL of 2%, is commonly used for caudal
the following methods may be used:
analgesia in adult cows. Skin analgesia will develop in the
tail and croup as far as the mid-sacral region, the anus,
1. The tail is gripped about 15 om from its base and
vulva and perineum and the posterior aspect of the thighs.
raised 'pump-handle' fashion. The frst obvious
Paralysis of motor fibres will cause the anal sphincter to
articulation behind the sacrum is the frst
relax and the posterior part of the rectum to balloon.
intercoccygeal space.
Defaecation will be suspended, stretching of the vulva will
2. Standing on one side of the animal and observing
 produce no response and the vagina will dilate. During
the line of the croup, the prominence of the sacrum
parturition straining ceases but uterine contractions are
is seen. Moving the eye back towards the tail, the
uninfluenced. Motor control of the hind limbs should be
next prominence to be observed is the spine of the
retained although mild ataxia may be evident.
frst coccygeal bone. The site for Cl-C2 is the
 The onset of muscular paralysis of the tail occurs from
depression immediately behind it.
60 to 90 seconds after injection and is evidence that the
3. The caudal prominence of the tuberosity of the
injection has been made correctly. Lidocaine analgesia
ischium is palpated and the point 10-ll cm in front
 attains its maximum extent over 5-10 minutes, and per-
 of it selected. A line drawn directly over the back
 sists for about an hour after which there is progressive
from this point passes, in a medium-sized animal,
recovery. The block completely disappears by the end of
through the depression between Cl and C2 spines.
the second hour from the time of injection.
The dimensions of the opening in the dorsal wall of the
Caudal epidural analgesia can be used to cause relaxa-
neural canal in adult cattle are approximately 2 cm trans-
tion and exposure of the penis in bulls, however, the dose
'a un u 5'o ioqe pue Aeoi u 5'z iasi
 necessary for penile extrusion is very close to that causing
yaim iauiaot saaiau iepnes xis Aq paidnsso si ieues au
motor incoordination of the hind limbs.
a vein on each side The aperture between the two vertebral
Many other drugs are commonly administered into the
 arches is closed by the interarcuate ligament and the space
epidural space at the caudal site. However, it should be
between the spines occupied by connective tissue Sur-
 remembered that many of the dnugs have not undergone
 mounting the spines is a variable amount of fat covered
safety testing for the potential to cause neurological
by skin. The floor comprises, about the centre of the space,
damage, and that preservatives and solvents present in the
the intervertebral cartilaginous disc and, in front and
formulations may increase the damage. Xylazine, 0.05 mg/
behind this, the surface of the vertebral centrum.
kg diluted to 5 mL in 0.9% saline, has been used to
An insensitive skin weal can be made with the object of
provide analgesia of the perineum and to reduce straining
preventing movement during insertion of the injection
during parturition. Xylazine will induce bilateral analgesia
needle and thus ensuring that the latter is introduced in
of dermatomes supplied by the caudal, caudal rectal, peri-
the correct position and direction. For insertion of the 
neal, pudendal, and caudal cutaneous femoral nerves
epidural needle, the tail is allowed to hang naturally. The 
(StJean et al., 1990). Analgesia develops by 12 minutes
point of the needle (18 gauge 3.75 om, 1.5 inch) is
after administration and persists for 4 hours (Grubb et al.,
applied to the centre of the depression between Cl-C2
2002). The tail will be flaccid and mild ataxia may be
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
present. Sufficient xylazine is absorbed to induce mild
by application of electrical stimulation. Sedation, includ-
sedation, decreased ruminal motility (bloat), bradycardia
 ing swaying of the hind limbs, lowered head, and recum-
and decreased MAP. These side effects may have a signif-
 bency in some animals, developed within 10 minutes and
cantly adverse effect in sick animals. The combination of
 persisted for 6 hours. Analgesia was variable between indi-
lidocaine, 0.22 mg/kg, with xylazine, 0.05 mg/kg. diluted
viduals, peaked at 25 minutes and lasted 12 hours. One
to 5.7 mL administered to adult cows resulted in the same
lou Aeu io Aeuu jeu sisaied quil puu padolaap Mon
time of onset as lidocaine and a longer duration (average
have been related to the epidural injection and was eutha-
5 hours) of analgesia as determined by pin pricks (Grubb
nized. The level of analgesia was not tested for surgical
et al., 2002). Cutaneous analgesia was more extensive
incision and the side effects from this romifidine dose
than from lidocaine alone and extended to Tl3. As with
were considered to be unacceptable.
xylazine alone, the combination resulted in mild to mod-
 Large volumes of anaesthetic agents injected epidurally
erate sedation and ataxia. A slightly higher dose of xyla-
at S5-Cl or Cl-C2 have been used in calves to achieve
zine, 0.07 mg/kg in 7.5 mL of 0.9% saline, has been used
 analgesia sufficiently cranial to allow umbilical hernia
by caudal epidural injection to provide analgesia for cas-
repair or flank surgeries [Meyer et al., 2007). A prelimi-
tration in mature bulls (Caulkett et al., 1993). Sedation
nary trial revealed that 0.4 mL/kg of contrast agent
was evident in these animals and moderate ataxia with
01 Aeiue peaids Im (sy os suualam jie e u Tu oz)
recumbency was observed in 14%. Surgery was performed
the twelfth thoracic vertebra. Because analgesia at the
30 minutes after injection and surgical analgesia was
umbilicus was not adequate following injection of lido-
judged to be good in 8l% of animals but pain or discom-
caine alone, subsequent surgeries on clinical patients were
fort during emasculation was apparent in the remaining
performed using xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg, diluted with 2% lido-
bulls. Either lidocaine, 0.6 mg/kg, with or without epine-
caine or 2% procaine to a final volume of 0.5-0.6 mL/kg
phrine, or xylazine, 0.07 mg/kg, injected into the S5-C1
Such a large volume must be injected slowly (0.5 mL/s)
epidural space have been used for analgesia for castration
to avoid an increase in CSF pressure and seizures or col-
in calves. Epidural administration of ketamine 0.5 mg/kg
lapse A follow-up study investigated the cardiopulmonary
in a mean volume of 4 mL, at Cl-C2 was found to provide
effects of dorsal recumbency and high volume caudal epi-
similar duration (approximately 35 minutes) and extent
dural in healthy experimental calves (Meyer et al., 2010).
of analgesia without ataxia as lidocaine, 0.2 mg/kg or
Calves that were 25-53 days old and average bodyweight
50:50 ketamine and lidocaine in 2-year-old heifers
of 58 kg were divided into four groups of seven calves.
(DeRossi et al., 2010). Caudal epidural administration of
One group had no treatment and the others received
tramadol, 0.5 mg/kg in mean volume of 5 mL, was com-
caudal epidural injections of saline, 2% lidocaine
pared with lidocaine, 0.22 mg/kg. and 50:50 tramadol
8 mg/kg, or xylazine 0.1 mg/kg diluted to 0.4 mL/kg. The
and lidocaine in experimental cows in which analgesia
calves were restrained in dorsal recumbency for 95
was tested with a haemostat clamp (Bigham et al., 2010).
minutes. No significant differences were measured in
Onset of analgesia was longer with tramadol at 14 minutes
calves given saline or lidocaine from calves with no treat-
compared with 4-5 minutes for injections containing
ment. As expected, xylazine was absorbed from the epi-
lidocaine but duration of analgesia was considerably
dural space and decreased cardiac output by 36%.
longer with tramadol at 307 minutes compared with 174
decreased HR, RR, and O delivery, and increased systemic
minutes for the tramadol-lidocaine combination or 70
vascular resistances, PaCO2 and O2 extraction ratio. The
minutes for lidocaine alone Mild ataxia was observed in
Al io Wl Aq paunoui sagueup ueui sal aiam sasueup
the cows receiving lidocaine The longer duration of anal-
administration of xylazine No calf was hypoxic. Motor
gesia from tramadol warrants investigation of its value for
control of the hind limbs was lost for 4 hours in the
uo i sil jo pue ued aadoisod jo iaa
lidocaine epidural calves and no signs of toxicity were
spinal cord tissue.
observed. The authors cautioned that this volume is only
Medetomidine, 0.015 mg/kg diluted with 0.9% saline
 suitable for calves of this size In a similar study (Offnger
to a volume of 5 mL, has been evaluated for epidural
et al., 20l2). epidural analgesia was provided in calves
analgesia in cows (Lin et al., 1998). Results of this inves-
with xylazine, 0.2 mg/kg. and procaine, 12 mg/kg. com-
tigation showed that medetomidine induced analgesia
bined to a total volume of 0.6 mL/kg and injected slowly
within 10 minutes and lasted 412 ± 156 min (mean ± SD)
at the sacrococcygeal junction. Procaine 2%. 0.5 mL/kg
- significanty longer than lidocaine 0.2 mg/kg, which
was injected circumferentially around the umbilicus to
lasted 10-115 min (mean 43 ± 37 min). Systemic effects
facilitate surgical extirpation and flunixin was adminis-
of absorbed medetomidine included mild to moderate
tered. HR, MAP, and CO were decreased initially, not dis-
sedation and mild ataxia.
similar to xylazine-ketamine-isoflurane anaesthesia, and
Romifidine, 0.05 mg/kg, and morphine, 0.1 mg/kg.
 MAP increased slightly during surgery. Calves were sedated
were diluted with 0.9% saline to 30 mL and administered
by absorption of xylazine from the epidural space but
to experimental Holstein Friesian cows through Cl-C2
blood gases were acceptable values. The calves were stand-
(Fierheller et al., 2004). Analgesia of the flank was tested
ing within 3.5 hours of epidural administration.
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
A
S.'?.
Hgure 12.11 Segmental lumbar epidural block
(A) First four lumbar vertebrae viewed from
above. 1: Point of insertion of spinal needle
through skin; 2: articular process; 3: transverse
process; 4: spinous processes. (B) Transverse
section through the joints between the articular
processes of the 1st and 2nd lumbar vertebrae.
The body of the 1st lumbar segment is viewed
from its caudal aspect. 1: Needle in position;
2: spinal cord surrounded by meninges; 3: left
1st lumbar nerve; 4: body of 1st lumbar
vertebra; 5: spinous process; 6: transverse
?
process; 7: sectioned interlocking articular
processes.
Lumbosacral epidural block
is not easy to perform, however, recently there have been
 several publications describing the technique in more
When lumbar epidural block is required in adult bovines
detail to facilitate successful nerve block.
it is not always possible to produce satisfactory cranial
The original technique is described as follows. With the
spread from the caudal injection site Injection of local
Adase us pue padd si iiey au suuiis ieue
 anaesthetic solution at the lumbosacral junction will cause
prepared over the dorsal midline next to the first and
analgesia but also motor paralysis of the hind limbs and,
therefore, is a technique only rarely performed in cows.
second lumbar vertebrae The site for insertion of the
needle is just to the right of the lumbar spinous process
The technique for producing epidural analgesia by injec-
on a line l.5 cm behind the cranial edge of the second
tion at the lumbosacral space in calves is performed simi-
lumbar transverse process (Fig. 12.llA). An initial skin
larly to the description given for sheep and goats in the
following chapter.
weal is made by SC injection of local anaesthetic solution
and the skin should be punctured using a 12 or 14 gauge
Lumbar epidural block
hypodermic needle. The spinal needle (14 gauge, 12 cm)
is directed ventrally and medially at an angle of 10-13°
to the vertical for a distance of 7.5 cm - at which point
 described the technique of desensitization of the flank in
the needle enters the neural canal. Resistance to needle
cattle by epidural injection of local analgesic solution into
the vertebral canal in the cranial lumbar region [Hall,
supraspinous ligament running over the tips of the spinous
1991). Other reports soon followed from Russia, the UK
processes and then again by the interarcuate ligament that
and the USA employing procaine or lidocaine to produce
lies over the spinal canal. Needle penetration of the inter-
a belt of analgesia around the animal's trunk without
 uam ua 'u aq on sae l 
interfering with control of the hind limbs. The technique
anaesthetic has been injected before insertion, and the
329
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
animal must be adequately restrained. The intervertebral
The technique just described was tested with lidocaine,
 space through which the needle must pass to enter the
xylazine, and xylazine and lidocaine and the combination
epidural space is actually an interosseous canal formed by
was found to have the best effect with an average onset
the bases of the spinous process cranially and caudally
time of ll minutes and five spinal segments blocked (Lee
and by the intervertebral articular processes laterally
et al., 2004b). Subsequently, the technique was utilized at
(Fig. 12.11B). Immediately the needle is felt to penetrate
a bovine referral clinic for analgesia in standing adult cows
the interarcuate ligament the stilette is withdrawn and if
primarily for omentopexy in treatment of abomasal dis-
air is heard to enter the needle it is certain that the epidural
placement and for a small number of caesarian sections
 space has been entered. Alternatively, in the absence of air
(Hiraoka et al., 2007). Out of 130 cows, 90 cows were
aspiration and if no fluid flows from the needle, a trial
injected with 1 mL xylazine, approximately 0.025 mg/kg.
injection is made. If the needle is correctly placed in the
and 3 mL 2% lidocaine, approximately 0.1 mg/kg, and
epidural space very little pressure will be needed to depress
another 18 cows that were in poor condition received
the syringe plunger. If on removing the stilette CSF fluid
0.5 mL xylazine and 3 mL lidocaine. Local flank infiltra-
flows from the needle the needle should be withdrawn
tion (line block) was resorted to in 22 cows (17%) due to
until flow of fluid ceases and then injection made
failure to achieve lumbar epidural block. Analgesia was
Lee et al. (2004a, 2006) have addressed two important
suffcient for surgery in almost all cattle, except for 15 cows
 points in this technique. The distance from the skin to the
that moved and occasionally kicked during surgery and
interarcuate ligament varies depending on the breed, size
 One that required a line block. Light sedation and swaying
and body condition of the animal. In one report, the
was observed in some cows and five cows assumed sternal
distance in adult cattle weighing >400 kg was 8 cm
recumbency. Decreasing the xylazine dose to 0.5 mL
(7-9 cm) and in young animals less than 2 years of age
avoided ataxia and recumbency.
and weighing 276 ± 86 kg was 5.7 om (5-7.3 cm) (Lee
et al., 2006). Once the interarcuate ligament is penetrated,
Digital nerve blocks
 greatest success is achieved ifthe local anaesthetic solution
is deposited below the epidural fat and next to the dura
The nerve supply of the digits of cattle is more complex
mater. Lee et al. (2006) propose that a Tuohy needle (see
than in the horse and regional analgesia is more diffcult
Fig. 13.4) (16 gauge, 12 cm) be used, introduced within
to produce. The skin below the carpus and tarsus is tense
0.5 cm of dorsal midline, advanced to just when resistance
and the subcutaneous tissue fbrous, so that precise loca-
to insertion is felt at the level of the interarcuate ligament,
tion of the nerves is not easy.
and that the hanging drop' technique be employed to
 Analgesia may be produced in the forelimb by injection
confrm accurate placement Thus, before penetration of
 at the sites indicated in Figure 12.12. The dorsal metacar-
the interarcuate ligament, the stilette is removed and a
pal nerve is located by palpation at about the middle of
drop of saline is placed on the needle. The needle is
the metacarpus, medial to the extensor tendon. The dorsal
 advanced slowly and on penetration of the epidural space,
branch ofthe ulnar nerve is blocked about 5 cm above the
negative pressure sucks the saline into the needle After
fetlock on the lateral aspect of the limb, in the groove
about l minute the needle is then advanced slowly about
between the suspensory ligament and the metacarpal
1 cm deeper to penetrate epidural fat and watching the
bone At this point, the palmar branch of the ulnar nerve
animal closely for flinching or dipping of the back that
may also be blocked, the two nerves being respectively
indicates pressure on the dura and spinal cord. Injection
situated in front of, and behind the suspensory ligament.
of local anaesthetic solution at this site is likely to be
The axial palmar aspect of the digits may be rendered
beneath the epidural fat.
analgesic by an injection in the midline just above the
_at
Med.
Med
Mer
-Ulnar n.
Median n.
Radial n.
D
A
Figure 12.12 Nerve block of the
forelimb. To block the whole digit,
injections must be made at A, B, C, D.
and E. To block the medial digit, inject
at A, D, and E. To block the lateral
digit, inject at points B, C, D, and E.
DEE
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
fetlock. The injection will reach the lateral branch of the
median nerve before it divides, or if it has already divided.
its two branches will still be close to each other. The two
branches may also be simultaneously blocked on the
midline just below the level of the dew claws, i.e. after they
0A
have passed from below the fibrous plate of the dew claws.
The medial branch of the median nerve is blocked on the
OB
medial side of the limb in the groove between the suspen-
sory ligament and the flexor tendons about 5 cm above
the fetlock. Blocking the median nerve higher up the limb
before it divides is not practical as, at this point, the nerve
lies beneath the artery and vein.
An alternative technique that is less precise is to perform
a ring block of the limb with local anaesthetic solution in
an attempt to block all nerve branches at the same level.
This technique should work well in calves.
 The hind limb can be blocked to provide loss of sensa-
tion below the hock. The peroneal nerve is blocked imme-
diately behind the caudal edge of the lateral condyle of
the tibia, over the fbula. The nerve is blocked before it
Figure 12.13 Nerve block of the distal part of the hind limb.
dips down between the extensor pedis and flexor metatarsi
(A) Injection of the superficial peroneal nerve; (B) injection of
muscles to divide into the deep and superficial peroneal
the deep peroneal nerve: (C) injection of the plantar
nerves. The bony prominence can easily be palpated in
metatarsal nerves.
 most animals and, in some, the nerve itself can be rolled
against the bone as it passes superficially, obliquely down-
wards and cranially, at this point An 18 or 20 gauge.
suspensory ligament and the flexor tendons, about 5 cm
2.5 am, needle is inserted through the skin, the subcutane-
proximal to the fetlock joint and deep to the superficial
ous tissue and the aponeurotic sheet of the biceps femoris
fascia (see Fig. 12.13). Five mL of local analgesia solution
until its point just touches the bony landmark. Lidocaine,
is injected over each nerve.
 approximately 20 mL of 2% for an adult, is injected at this
point. Onset of analgesia is in 20 minutes.
Intravenous regional analgesia
The tibial nerve is blocked about 10-12 om above the
summit of the calcaneus on the medial aspect of the limb,
Intravenous regional analgesia (IVRA, Bier block) is a
just in front of the gastrocnemius tendon. The gastrocne-
simple and commonly used technique to provide analge-
mius tendon is grasped between the thumb and index
sia of the limb or digits. It is achieved by injecting local
fnger of one hand while a needle about 2.5 am long. is 
analgesic solution, without epinephrine into a superficial
inserted immediately below the thumb until its point can
vein in a limb isolated from the general circulation by a
be felt just under the skin by the index finger. About 15 mL
tourniquet. The limb distal to the site of application of
 of local analgesia solution is injected at this site A further
the tourmiquet becomes analgesic and remains so until the
 5 mL of solution should be injected on the lateral side of
tourniquet is released.
the leg to block a small cutaneous nerve. The block takes
The animal is restrained in lateral recumbency, with or
15 minutes to develop.
without sedation. The hair over a prominent vein on the
An altermative method for desensitization of the hind
 relevant limb is clipped and the skin prepared for injection
limb below the fetlock involves blocking the superficial
(Fig. 12.14). A tourniquet of rubber tubing or a wide flat
and deep peroneal nerves separately. The superficial pero-
rubber band is applied above the carpus or hock, or above
neal nerve is blocked in the upper third of the metatarsus 
the fetlock, to occlude arterial blood fow. The flat tourni-
where it lies subcutaneously over the midline of the dorsal
quet is preferable as it appears to cause the animals less
aspect of the metatarsal bone (Fig. 12.13). The deep pero-
discomfort than rubber tubing: consequently, they are less
 neal nerve accompanies the dorsal metatarsal vessels in a
likely to be restless. When the tourniquet is to be placed
 groove on the cranial aspect of the metatarsal bone under
on the hind limb above the hock in an adult animal, rolls
cover of the extensor tendons. Injection is made halfway
of bandage should be placed either side of the limb
between the hock and the fetlock. The needle is inserted
beneath the tourniquet in the depression between the tibia
from the lateral aspect of the bone and the point directed
 and the gastrocnemius tendon to ensure occlusion of all
beneath the edge of the tendon.
blood vessels (Fig. 12.14). An 18-19 gauge needle (for an
The plantar metatarsal nerves are blocked on the medial
adult bovine) or butterfly needle is inserted into a vein
 and lateral sides of the limb in the depression between the
with its point towards the foot. If the limb is to be
LEE
Section
/2
Anaesthesia of the species
Intranasal local analgesia
Lidocaine, 1.5 mg/kg, sprayed in the ventral nasal meatus
and  pharynx facilitated  rhinotracheobronchoscopy  in
adult cows [Dadak et al., 2008). Cows treated with lido-
caine exhibited quieter behaviour and less swallowing
during insertion of the bronchoscope into the trachea.
Peak serum concentrations of 1.2l ± 0.73 μg/mL were
measured at 2 minutes after administration, decreasing to
<150 ng/mL by 60 minutes.
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
Clearly, choice of technique depends in large part on the
circumstances surrounding the need for sedation or anaes-
thesia. For example management of a dairy cow for caesar-
(1)
(2)
ian section is different from management of a beef or
feedlot heifer that has not been handled. Sedating a bull
Figure 12.14 Easily recognized veins of the distal parts of
for a foot trim or radiographs may be more difficult when
limbs that can be used in placing needles or catheters for
done on the farm than when performed in the clinic.
intravenous regional analgesia. (1) Medial view of the
Regurgitation during anaesthesia is a real hazard with
right foreleg. A: radial vein; B: medial palmar digital vein.
potential consequence of pulmonary aspiration of ruminal
(2) Lateral view of the left hind leg. C: lateral branch
fluid and material, asphyxia, pulmonary abscesses, Or
of lateral saphenous vein; D: lateral plantar vein; E: lateral
 plantar digital vein.
pneumonia.Food is customarily withheld from cattle
older than 3 months of age before elective anaesthesia for
ai a5 0n 's1 71-g g 1 's1y (t-7) 99
volume of the rumen contents. This reduction in gastroin-
exsanguinated by application of an Esmarch bandage the
testinal volume has an added benefit of improving oxy-
vein may be difficult to locate after application of the
genation during recumbency. Animals less than 2 months
bandage; an option is frst to place the needle and flush
of age are likely to develop hypoglycaemia if food and
with heparin-saline solution. In adult cattle, 30 mL of 2%
milk are withheld for several hours. One recommendation
lidocaine (without epinephrine to avoid ischaemia) is
is to prevent the calves from eating solid food for several
injected into the vein after first aspirating blood to confirm
hours and to withhold milk or milk replacer for 30 to 60
location of the needle within the lumen of the vessel.
minutes before anaesthesia.
Some veterinarians may follow that injection with saline
au yni asaue le a o peais aua o
limb. Analgesia distal to the tourniquet will develop in
Anaesthetic techniques
15-20 minutes and persist until the tourniquet is removed.
Provided that 10 minutes or more have elapsed since the
Anaesthesia can be induced in the standing animal with
injection, no adverse effect from the local analgesic solu-
 only one assistant holding the head during injection, or
tion should be observed when the tourniquet is removed.
the cow or bull can be first cast with ropes or strapped to
Analgesia dissipates very rapidly in almost all animals.
a tilting table and anaesthetized in standing or lateral
Occasionally, the foot is analgesic everywhere except for
position. There is a clinically obvious difference in
the skin between the digits. This can be blocked by injec-
response to anaesthetic drugs between Bos taunus breeds
tion of 5 mL of 2% lidocaine midline on the dorsal aspect
and breeds crossed with Bos indicus. Dairy breeds in par-
of the fetlock and a further 5 mL of solution on the caudal
ticular are relatively tolerant of the effects of anaesthesia.
 aspect of the fetlock between the dew claws.
Breeds such as the Beefmaster, Santa Gertrudis, and
The duration of analgesia is limited only by the time it
Brahman often require a much lower dose of anaesthetic
is considered safe to leave a tourniquet in place. Intrave-
agents.
nous regional analgesia is safe for up to at least l.5 hours
Premedication is not essential prior to injection of
and this is long enough for most procedures done on the
thiopental or thiopental-guaifenesin. Administration of
bovine foot.
acepromazine or xylazine will decrease the dose rate
The volume of lidocaine to be injected for IVRA in calves
of induction agent, alter the cardiovascular parameters,
is 4 mg/kg.
 and slow recovery from anaesthesia. Premedication with
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
xylazine or detomidine is usual prior to anaesthesia with
subcutaneous abdominal (milk) vein should only be used
ketamine, except in young calves in which anaesthesia can
 in emergency in female cattle.
be induced with diazepam-ketamine.
Unmaneageable cows and bulls that are confined in a
Endotracheal intubation
stall but cannot be approached for an IV injection or
restrained in a head gate or on a tilting table will have to
 There is a variety of techniques that can be used to facilitate
be given sedative[s) by IM injection achieved by a creative
endotracheal intubation in adult cattle. In cattle up to
approach appropriate to the situation and facilities, for
 about 300 kg, intubation can be accomplished under direct
example, when the bull is walking through a chute imme-
vision ofthe larynx using a laryngoscope with a blade suit-
diately prior to exiting into a pen, by lasso and halter of
 able for intubating a large dog. The animal is supported in
the animal's head that is then pulled tightly against the
 sternal position, the headandneck extended, andthelaryn-
 pen wall, or by administration of drugs by pole syringe.
 goscope positioned at the corner of the animal's mouth
Various drug combinations not routinely used may
with the tip of the blade on the dorsum of the tongue. The
be appropriate such as a combination of xylazine-
trachea is intubated with an endotracheal tube using a
detomidine-low dose ketamine. Once sedated, one to two
technique similar to that used in dogs and a l0-ll mm
halters can be applied and the animal's head pulled close
internal diameter (ID) tube for most newborn calves up to
to the bars of the stall to facilitate IV injection of addi-
18 or 20 mm ID for 300 kg calves. Care must be taken in
tional agents.
 smaller calves not to use the blade ofthe laryngoscope as a
lever with the incisor teeth acting as a fulcrum.
 In large bovine animals, a longer laryngoscope blade
Intravenous injection
will be needed to view the laryngeal opening. A stiff
Use of an indwelling catheter is preferable to avoid perivas-
stomach tube or a plastic introducer or a 2 m metal rod
cular injection of irritant drugs, such as thiopental or
with a blunted end is passed through the mouth and into
guaifenesin, and to facilitate supplemental injections. A 14
the trachea. The laryngoscope is withdrawn and the
gauge, 13 cm long catheter is suitable for insertion in the
endotracheal tube is fed over the tube or introducer and
jugular vein, although a l0 gauge catheter is better for
into the trachea, whereupon the tube or introducer is
administration of guaifenesin solutions in bulls. The skin
removed. One problem is that the tube may catch on the
of bulls may be 0.5-1.0 cm thick over the jugular vein and
 epiglottis unless it is rotated at the appropriate moment.
insertion of the catheter is easier through a small incision
Intubation by palpation is a technique commonly
made with a scalpel blade through an intradermal bleb of
employed for cows and bulls. The mouth of the anaes-
local analgesic solution. After the catheter needle has pen-
thetized animal must be held open securely using a
etrated the jugular vein (with the catheter directed towards
wedge-shaped gag inserted between the molar teeth or
the heart), both needle and catheter must be advanced
any other gag suitable for ruminants. and the head
until the catheter has also entered the vein. The catheter
is advanced about l cm over the needle and then both
 needle and catheter advanced together until the catheter
is used for adult cattle The anaesthetist grasps the end
is introduced to its full length (in contrast to usual practice
of the endotracheal tube guarding the cuff as best as
in other species and because catheter support is needed to
possible, and inserts the arm and tube into the cow's
counter the friction caused by thick skin). The needle is
 mouth, taking care to remain midline so that the endotra-
removed and a catheter cap (plug) attached to the catheter.
cheal tube cuff does not brush against the sharp edges
Sutures in the skin are cross-tied around the catheter or
of the molar teeth and tear (Fig. 12.15). The forefinger
lo pans uaul s ieul aaue aul ot paupee aei aum
is used to depress the epiglottis and the free hand is
stapled to the skin. Smaller catheters can be more easily
used to advance the endotracheal tube onto the epiglottis.
inserted in young calves. A 14 gauge catheter can also be
The arm inside the mouth is then advanced a further
inserted into a cephalic vein in bulls and cows that are
5 cm and the forefinger and middle finger are used to
restrained in lateral recumbency. When placement of a
spread the arytenoids and open the larynx. The free hand
jugular catheter is not feasible an 18 gauge 7.5 om catheter
is used to advance the endotracheal tube into the larynx
can be inserted into an auricular vein for administration
and trachea. If the endotracheal tube catches at the
of xylazine and ketamine. Once anaesthetized, a jugular
entrance of the larynx, the forefinger should be swept
vein can be catheterized for fluid administration or
around the tube to free it for insertion. The anaesthetist's
infusion of guaifenesin-ketamine for maintenance of
arm is removed and the endotracheal tube inserted its
anaesthesia.
full length. The endotracheal tube cuff should be inflated
The tail vein is often used for IV injection of non-irritant
immediately and the tube secured with gauze to the
low volume agents such as xylazine. However, accidental
 speculum, the halter, or by lengths of gauze or plastic
intra-arterial injection is common and, even after xyla-
tubing around the head or horns. When there is insuf-
zine, there have been reports of sloughing tails. The
ficient room for both the anaesthetist's arm and the
EEE
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Arytenoid
cartilages
piglottis
Epiglottis
2012UGARF
A
Figure 12.15 Intubation by palpation. The mouth is opened with a speculum wide enough to allow passage of a hand
holding the endotracheal tube and the forearm. The epiglottis is depressed with a finger and the tip of the tube advanced 
onto it. Then two fingers are used to spread the arytenoids so that the endotracheal tube can be pushed into the trachea.
@ 2000-2012 University of Georgia Research Founoation, Inc. Art by W/illiam Kip' Carter (University of Georgia), with permission from Wofters
Kluwer, Trim, C.M., 1987. Soecial anesthesia considerations in the ruminant. In: Short, C.E., (Eo.). Princiofes & Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia.
Williams & Wikins. Baltimore, po. 285300.
endotracheal tube, a stomach tube or introducer can be
 maintained by inhalation agents. In the unpremedicated
inserted in a manner just described and then the endotra-
animal, thiopental, 5% or 10% solution, is injected over
cheal tube fed over the tube or introducer and into the
15 seconds into the jugular vein in a dose of 1l mg/kg
trachea after removal of the anaesthetist's arm. Assessment 
estimated body weight: if xylazine premedication has been
of adequate cuff inflation without overinflation can be
used a dose of 5-6 mg/kg is usually adequate. The animal
difficult in large cattle and use of a pressure measuring
sinks quietly to the ground within 20-30 seconds of injec-
device is recommended (see Fig. 10.29).
tion and there is a brief period of apnoea. Apnoea seldom
Endotracheal tubes may be passed blind' by the anaes-
lasts for more than 15-20 seconds and artificial respira-
thetist gripping the larynx with one hand and feeding the
tion is not required. Surgical anaesthesia of about 10
endotracheal tube into the larynx with the other hand.
minutes is followed by recovery that is complete within
This is not an easy technique but the success rate of this
45 minutes. Recovery is usually quiet and free from excite-
technique increases with practice.
ment. The animal can be propped up and will maintain a
 The lubricant applied to any endotracheal tube used in
position of sternal recumbency about 12-l5min after
ruminant animals should never contain a local analgesic
injection of the drug. The period of surgical anaesthesia is
dnug to avoid desensitization of the mucous membrane of
brief but adequate for operations of very short duration or
the trachea and larynx after the tube is withdrawn. When
for endotracheal intubation prior to maintenance of
the protective cough reflex is absent, foreign material may
 anaesthesia with an inhalation agent.
be inhaled into the bronchial tree.
Use of thiopental alone may be associated with a higher
incidence of regurgitation during induction of anaesthesia
than other induction protocols. Overdosage may occur when
Injectable anaesthetic agents
there is a gross error in estimation ofbody weight Underdos-
age is more frequent and the animal may remain standing.
Thiopental
but excitement rarely occurs. Failure to induce anaesthesia
Thiopental may be used in adult cattle either alone or after
may be the result of the injection being made too slowly or
 premedication to provide full anaesthesia for operations
because of perivascular injection. Additional thiopental may
of short duration or to induce anaesthesia that is then
be injected IV immediately to achieve anaesthesia provided
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
Thiopental-guaifenesin
that IV access can be guaranteed. Perivascular injection
should be treated by infltration of the area with 1-2 mg/kg
Approximately 80-100 mg/kg of 5% guaifenesin alone is
 of 2% lidocaine and several hundred mL of 0.9% saline in
needed to produce recumbency in cattle. Guaifenesin
 an attempt to avoid tissue necrosis and abscesses.
provides no sedation or anaesthesia and should be com-
Thiopental should not be administered by this rapid
bined with at least thiopental or ketamine when used for
injection technique to sick animals or animals with
immobilization. A solution of 2 g thiopental in 50 g
impaired cardiovascular function. Young calves up to 2.5
guaifenesin is run rapidly into a catheterized vein (perivas-
-saeue leuadoiul ioy spalqns poog jou aie ate jo syuo
cular injection of >5% guaifenesin can cause tissue necro-
thesia and the use of even small doses for induction of
sis, abscesses, and skin sloughing) to produce recumbency
 anaesthesia cannot be recommended.
and muscle relaxation (Table 12.2).
 Table 12.2 Dose rates of some anaesthetic agents and combinations (adjustment should be made for body
condition and health status)
Drug
Dose
Comments
Adult cattle
Thicpental
 11 mg/kg IV
 Premedication decreases dose rate
Adult cattle
Guaifenesin 5%
50-100 mg/kg IV
Dose rate decreases >600 kg body weight;
+
 premedication decreases dose rate
Thiopental 2.5-5%
3-4 mg/kg IV
Calves <150 kg
 Xylazine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM
Calves <2 months of age may be satisfactorily
 sedated with lower doses of xylazine
Ketamine
4-6 mg/kg IV or 10 mg/kg IM 
Calves 150-350 kg
 Xylazine
 0.1 mg/kg IM
20 min duration
Ketamine
4 mg/kg IV or 6 mg/kg IM 
Adult cattle
 Xylazine
0.1 mg/kg IM or IV
Diazepam or midazolam 0.05 mg/kg can be added
+
to ketamine for induction; 15-20 min duration;
Ketamine
2.2 mg/kg IV
for prolongation see belov
 Prolongation of preceding xylazine-
Infuse 1.5-2.0 mL/kg/h IV
Tracheal intuba tion recommended; Oz
 ketamine combination
 supplementation recommended; dose rate
Add 1 g ketamine to 1 L of 5% 
adjusted to depth required and reduced in very 
 guaifenesin 
young, old, and large
Calves
Add 100 mg xylazine and 1 g 
Induction 0.5 mL/kg and maintenance
Tracheal intubation recommended; Oz
ketamine to 1 L of 5% guaifenesin
2.5 mL/kg/h IV
 supplementation recommended
Calves
 Diazepam (or midazolam)
0.25 mg/kg
Small increments of this dose rate can be used to
 combined in the same syringe with
induce sedation; full dose can be used for short
Ketamine
 5 mg/kg IV 
duration (10-15 min) anaesthesia or tracheal
+
intubation prior to inhalation anaesthesia
Butorphanol
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM 
Calves
 Xylazine
0.1 mg/kg IM 
Oz supplementation recommended
+
Tiletamine-zolazepam
4 mg/kg IM 
Calves
Propofol
 5-6 mg/kg IV
Unpremedicated calves.
3 mg/kg IV
When premedicated with xylazine 0.1 mg/kg
335
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
The dose rate of guaifenesin 5%-thiopental (50 g2 g)
xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 10 mg/kg. can be
Aaeuixodde si sy oos on dn ae paiepauaidun u
given IM at the same time, or ketamine, 2-6 mg/kg.
2 mL/kg and this rate decreases substantially on a mL/kg
may be administered IV a few minutes after xylazine Intra-
basis with increasing body weight, with large bulls seldom
muscular administration of xylazine and ketamine will
requiring more than 1500 mL of the mixture for anaesthe-
provide 25-30 minutes of anaesthesia. Anaesthesia can be
sia adequate for endotracheal intubation. Administra-
maintained after any of these combinations by intermit-
tion of xylazine premedication greatly reduces the dose
tent injections or infusion of guaifenesin-ketamine, 1 g of
rate required for anaesthesia. The drugs may also be
ketamine in l L of 5% guaifenesin, or by inhalation
isiy st usauajine ase uum u aeiedas paaisuie
agents.
infused IV at 50 mg/kg followed by a bolus injection
The combination of diazepam and ketamine will
of 2-4 mg/kg of thiopental and then increments of guaife-
 produce less cardiovascular depression in calves than xyla-
nesin and thiopental to reach the desired effect.
zine and ketamine Diazepam (or midazolam). 0.2-
Guaifenesin-thiopental administration decreases the
0.25 mg/kg. and ketamine, 5 mg/kg can be combined
respiratory tidal volume and blood pressure, and increases
and injected intravenously as a bolus or in increments to
respiratory and heart rates.
achieve the desired effect. This combination will provide
about 15 min of anaesthesia. Butorphanol, 0.05 mg/kg.
can be included with this combination to increase analge-
Pentobarbital
 sia and muscle relaxation. Anaesthesia may be prolonged
Toosey (1959) found that pentobarbital, 1.9-3.8 mg/kg
by intermittent injections of diazepam and ketamine, or
IV, produced sedation in adult animals which remained
by inhalation agents. Endotracheal intubation and admin-
istration of Oz is advisable.
standing, but swaying, on their feet. Thirty years later,
Valverde et al. (1989) confirmed that 2 mg/kg IV produces
Medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg. and ketamine 0.5 mg/kg.
given together IV is a combination that has been described
reliable sedation in standing adult cattle These doses
 produce moderate sedation for 30 minutes and mild seda-
to produce deep sedation lasting 30 min in calves that
 could be combined with local analgesia for surgery (Raeka-
tion for a further 30 minutes. Respiratory rate is signif-
llio et al., 1991). As might be expected, hypoxaemia devel-
cantly decreased but no changes have been measured in
arterial blood gases.
oped in the calves in dorsal recumbency. Administration
 There are safer agents than pentobarbital for producing
of
atipamezole, 0.02-0.06 mg/kg (20-60 μg/kg). pro-
duced a rapid smooth recovery. It should be noted that in
general anaesthesia in cattle and this agent must not be
another study of medetomidine sedation in calves, injec-
used in calves.
tion of atipamezole, 0.2 mg/kg (200 μg/kg). to reverse
sedation induced transient severe hypotension and even
sinus arrest [Ranheim et al., l998). Therefore, reversal
Ketamine
agents should be given cautiously while monitoring the
Ketamine alone will not cause seizures in cattle but the
 patient closely. Relapse of sedation may occur 90 minutes 
quality of anaesthesia obtained by it is poor. Premedica-
to 3 hours later.
tion with xylazine before injection of ketamine produces
quiet, smooth induction of anaesthesia with good muscle
Ketamine-guaifenesin
relaxation and a smooth recovery from anaesthesia. In
young calves, premedication with xylazine may be substi-
Anaesthesia can be induced and maintained by IV infu-
tuted with diazepam or midazolam or acepromazine, with
sion of xylazine, guaifenesin and ketamine (GKX). Xyla-
or without butorphanol. The dose rate of ketamine is
zine, 100 mg and ketamine 1000 mg are added to 1 L of
usually higher in calves than in mature animals.
5% guaifenesin and the mixture infused IV at 1-2 mL/kg
Xylazine is given to adult cattle either IM at 0.l-0.2
in adult cattle. Alternatively, after induction of anaesthesia
mg/kg or IV at 0.05-0.10 mg/kg to produce deep sedation,
with xylazine and ketamine, anaesthesia can be main-
often with recumbency. Ketamine is then given IV at
tained by intermittent or continuous infusion of a mixture
2 mg/kg to induce anaesthesia, either immediately after
 of guaifenesin-ketamine [ 1000 mg ketamine added to 1 L
xylazine or up to 10 minutes later. Endotracheal intuba-
of 5% guaifenesin) at approximately 1.5-2 mL/kg/h
tion can be performed in some animals soon after the
there is no need to add xylazine to the maintenance anaes-
xylazine injection and before ketamine administration.
thetic combination for anaesthesia lasting up to an hour
The duration of anaesthesia from xylazine-ketamine is
because in cattle the duration of effect of xylazine is longer
about 15 minutes.
than ketamine Control of the infusion rate of GK or GKX
In smaller animals of about 200-350 kg body weight,
is best using an infusion pump but counting the drip rate
xylazine, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, is given IM 5-8 min before keta-
s sq e w moy a ym jas usue ue u
mine at either 6 mg/kg IM or 4 mg/kg IV. In young calves,
also a viable alternative. Supplementation with O2 is
9E8
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
advisable to prevent hypoxaemia when general anaesthe-
month-old calves weighing on average 2l8 kg was
sia is maintained with guaifenesin-ketamine Signifcant
evaluated at three dose rates using a pin-prick in the
hypercarbia is likely to develop with time.
perineal region and an electrical stimulus to the tail base
Equivalent quality of anaesthesia between GKX and iso-
(Re et al., 20ll). The drugs were combined by adding
flurane was recorded for experimental abdominal laparos-
40 mg detomidine and 500 mg ketamine to a vial of
copy in calves 2-26 days of age (Kerr et al., 2007).
lyophilized tiletamine-zolazepam to produce a final solu-
Anaesthesia was induced by 0.5 mL/kg of GKX adminis-
tion of 9 mL containing 4.4 mg/mL of detomidine and
tered IV over 20 seconds (plus a little more in some calves
55.5 mg/mL of each ketamine and tiletamine-zolazepam,
to accomplish endotracheal intubation) and maintained
and administered IM at 1.0, 1.3, or 1.5 mL/100 kg. The
by continuous infusion of GKX at approximately 2.5 mL/
depression of responses to noxious stimuli were dose
kg/h. Anaesthesia was induced and maintained with iso-
dependent with maximum effect between 10 and 20
flurane at an end-tidal isoflurane concentration of 1.6%
minutes after administration and a longer duration of
(1.3-1.8%) in another group of calves for comparison. All
depression at the medium (35 minutes) and high dose [55
calves were intubated and artificially ventilated with
minutes) rates. Heart rates decreased non-significantly.
oxygen. Heart rates were lower and systolic arterial pres-
MAP significantly increased, and respiratory rates remained
 sures were higher in calves receiving GKX, but cardiac
high. Severe hypoventilation and hypoxaemia were meas-
outputs were similar. MAP was lower during the frst 15
ured by blood gas analysis at 10 minutes after administra-
minutes of isoflurane, presumably because a higher con-
 tion with an improvement in some animals noted at the
centration is required for tracheal intubation. In another
 next measurement time of 40 minutes. Recumbency lasted
investigation, administration of xylazine, 0.2 mg/kg. IM
1 hour after the low dose and 2 hours with the higher dose
in l-week-old calves decreased cardiac index by 40%
rates. The authors concluded that DKTZ was effective for
but cardiac output gradually increased during infusion of
immobilization and for minor surgical procedures, with
GKX, 1.l mL/kg/h, IV for maintenance of anaesthesia
or without local analgesia. Oxygen supplementation
(Picavet et al., 2004). MAP decreased after the frst 30
should be available.
minutes to 64 ± 6 mmHg. The calves were in lateral
recumbency breathing spontaneously at approximately 40
Propofol
breaths/min and blood gas analysis revealed moderate to
severe hypoventilation and some calves were hypoxic.
Although propofol is being used for induction of anaes-
Nasal insufflation of O2 4 L/min restored SpO2 from
thesia in calves, there are few reports in the scientific litera-
<90% to 97%. At the end of anaesthesia, xylazine was
ture Administration of propofol to calves is similar to
reversed by administration of tolazoline, 0.5 mg/kg, half
that in other small species, with an induction dose of
IV and half IM. Infusion of GKX is a feasible technique for
5-6 mg/kg in unpremedicated calves and a reduction in
use in the field with the caution that the rate of infusion
dose rate when premedication is used. Premedication with
must be monitored to avoid overdose and O2 supplemen-
xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg IM, decreased the propofol dose rate
tation is advisable. A resuscitator (AMBU) bag can be used
to 3 mg/kg IV in 3-7-month old calves anaesthetized for
to achieve some artifcial breaths for a calf. Xylazine,
umbilical hermia repair (Cagmardi et al., 2009). Propofol
 guaifenesin and ketamine are not licensed for use in cattle
anaesthesia is short lived but provides good relaxation for
in most countries and appropriate regulatory agencies
endotracheal intubation.
 should be consulted for withdrawal times.
Hypoventilation and hypoxia occur commonly in
sedated or anaesthetized cattle.
Tiletamine-zolazepam
The combination of tiletamine-zolazepam [Telazol or
Inhalation anaesthesia agents
Zolatil), 4 mg/kg, and xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg, injected IM in
sequence produced anaesthesia within minutes in calves
Anaesthesia circuits used for large dogs are suitable for
(Thurmon et al., 1989). Analgesia lasted on average
maintaining inhalation anaesthesia in calves up to a body
70 min and the calves were able to walk in 130 ± 18 min
weight of approximately 140 kg or that are intubated with
from the time of the last injection. When higher doses of
 an endotracheal tube of 16 mm internal diameter or less.
xylazine were used in another group of calves some
Calves or cattle that can accommodate an endotracheal
became apnoeic. Although not measured in this study.
tube ≥l8 mm ID should be connected to a large animal
clinical experience has been that calves anaesthetized with
machine such as is marketed for use in horses.
tiletamine-zolazepam become hypoxic when placed in
Endotracheal intubation is generally accomplished after
dorsal recumbency.
administration of injectable agents. In contrast to its use
Injection of a combination of detomidine-ketamine-
in other species, xylazine alone has long been a favourite
tiletamine-zolazepam (DKTZ) into experimental
8
agent to facilitate endotracheal intubation in cattle
LEE
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
[Adetunji et al., 1984). After the animal has become
isoflurane because the circuit concentration remains
recumbent orotracheal intubation is accomplished as pre-
considerably lower. When connecting a cow or bull to a
viously described. Xylazine abolishes the swallowing reflex
large animal circle circuit, the initial Oz flow rate should
although coughing usually occurs as the endotracheal tube
be 8-10 L/min for 15-20 minutes to wash out expired
is inserted. Other common alternatives are diazepam-
nitrogen and rapidly increase the circuit anaesthetic
ketamine IV for calves, xylazine-ketamine IV, IM, or IM
oncentration before reducing the flow to 3 L/min (or
followed by IV top-up, or xylazine-guaifenesin-ketamine
similar) for maintenance. An isoflurane vaporizer setting
or guaifenesin-thiopental. Regurgitation during induction
 of 3.5% or sevoflurane vaporizer of 4.5% should be suf
of anaesthesia is always a possibility, especially in adult
ficient initially. Cantalapiedra et al (2000) measured a
cattle, and management of this event should be pre-
mean MAC concentration of 1.14% (sea level) for isoflu-
planned. A ruminant should never be rolled over before
rane in adult Holstein-Friesian cattle Cattle tend to
endotracheal intubation is successful.
breathe fast and shallow, limiting uptake ofthe inhalation
Mask induction with inhalation anaesthetic agents is
 agent. Connecting the patient to a mechanical ventilator,
possible with little diffculty in calves up to 3 months
when available, from the beginning of anaesthesia removes
of age. A small animal circle system can be used to
the problem of inadequate exposure of pulmonary capil-
deliver O2 and anaesthetic initially through a well-
laries to anaesthetic gas for uptake. A respiratory rate of
fitting mask (mask with a rubber diaphragm). The calf
10 breaths/min and tidal volume of 10 mL/kg should
can be unpremedicated or sedated with a combination
ensure normocarbia. Artificial ventilation will probably be
of diazepam or midazolam, 0.l mg/kg. butorphanol,
necessary for small calves and values of 12-15 breaths/
0.05-0.10 mg/kg. and xylazine, 0.02 mg/kg. For induc-
 min and tidal volume of 15 mL/kg are satisfactory in this
tion of anaesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane in the
size patient
standing calf, the mask is applied with the Oz flowing
Tracheal intubation is associated with increased circulat-
at 3-4 L/min and after starting the vaporizer setting at
tricular complexes may develop in some animals after
to 4% for isoflurane and 5.5% for sevoflurane. As its legs
intubation, particularly when anaesthesia is not deep and
begin to relax, the calf is allowed to subside to the ground
aui saznisuas ieu suase ue 'isauisaeue aueuioiey suunp
where it is supported in stermal recumbency until the
myocardium to catecholamines (Semrad et al., 1986). The
endotracheal tube is inserted and the cuff inflated. The
prevalence of arrhythmias decreases over 15 minutes.
trachea is intubated under direct vision of the larynx
using a laryngoscope. The mouth can be held open using
Nitrous oxide
lengths of gauze looped around the upper and lower
NzO/O2 mixtures are not often used in cattle because of
jaws and the tongue pulled to the opposite side of the
the progressive movement of NzO into the rumen and
mouth to the laryngoscope. After intubation, the tube is
intestines resulting in bloat NzO is not sufficiently potent
au punoie (a aiqeims iayno io) azne gu Aq panoas
 to induce or maintain anaesthesia when given on its own
tube and around the back of the calfs head or bottom
and it is usually administered with another inhalation
jaw and then the cuff is inflated. Subsequently, the calf
agent.
can be positioned or lifted onto the operating table. Two
similar studies evaluated mask induction with sevoflurane
and desflurane in unpremedicated 8-12-week-old Hol-
Adjunct agents
stein calves. The time from mask induction to tracheal
Neuromuscularblocking agents
intubation with sevoflurane 7% in O2 6 L/min was an
average of 3.7 minutes and the time to intubation was
The fact that in cattle peripheral nerve blocks are easily
an average of 2.5 minutes for desflurane delivered as
used to produce skeletal muscle relaxation means that
18% in Oz 6 L/min (Greene et al., 2002; Keegan et al.,
neuromuscular blocking drugs are seldom necessary in
2006). Induction with desflurane was free of struggling
 clinical anaesthesia. Such further muscle relaxation as may
or breath-holding and it was noted that there was ade-
 be needed is usually provided by the IV injection of
quate time for intubation.
guaifenesin.
O2 flow rates for a small animal circle circuit can be
In experimental studies, pancuronium (0.1 mg/kg)
2-4 L/min initially. The vaporizer setting for isoflurane,
produces relaxation of 30-40 min duration. Pancuro-
sevoflurane, or halothane depends on the CNS depressant
nium, 0.043 mg/kg. produced a 90-99% reduction of
effect of the agents used for premedication and induction
hind limb extensor twitch lasting on average 26 minutes
of anaesthesia, and the relative potency of the agent used.
(Hildebrand & Howitt, 1984). As in horses, but in contrast
but closely resemble values that would be used for anaes-
to other species of animal, the facial muscles are more
thetizing a large dog. The Oz flow rate can be reduced to
resistant to neuromuscular block than are the limb
1 L/min (or less) for maintenance of anaesthesia but the
muscles. Monitoring of block should, therefore, be carried
vaporizer setting is usually fairly high, for example 2-3%
out by stimulation of nerves to limb muscles.
8E8
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
Anaesthetic management
Respiratory rate may be rapid (20-40 breaths/min) and
the depth shallow. Mature bulls and cows breathing
Positioning
spontaneously develop high PaCO2 during inhalation
Correct positioning and padding is important as radial
 anaesthesia and IPPV is usually necessary to prevent severe
nerve damage may develop in the underneath forelimb in
hypercapnia.A rate of 10 breaths/min and a tidal
log un ieiaie u l uaaq a en a
volume of 10 mL/kg (5-6 L for an adult cow or bull) will
more than about 20 minutes. Radial nerve paralysis may
usually maintain a PaCO2 of around 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg).
develop after any form of general anaesthesia, injectable
-aody Aisnoias Aensn sale sueanq Aisnoaunuods
or inhalational. Padding [eg. inflated tractor tyre inner
entilate when supine and IPpV with tidal volumes of
tubes, foam pads, air- or water-filled bags) should be
12-15 mL/kg. at rates of 12 breaths/min and an inspira-
inserted under the shoulder and forearm. Position of the
tory pressure of up to 30 mmHg may be necessary to keep
limbs in cattle is the same as in anaesthetized horses, but
the PaCO2 at about 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg). Oxygenation
the difference in the anatomy of the shoulders makes it
when anaesthesia is being maintained with IV agents can
difficult to pull the lower forelimb forward to the same
be provided by endotracheal intubation and connection
 Extent The upper limbs should be elevated into a horizon-
to an anaesthesia machine or a demand valve with an O2
tal position. The head should be positioned with a pad
 supply for assisted or controlled ventilation. Insuffation
under the poll so that the nose is lower than the crown,
of O2 at 15 L/min through a small bore tube down an
allowing saliva and any regurgitated material to drain
endotracheal tube may prevent hypoxaemia.
from the pharynx. Positioning is facilitated when the sur-
Mature bulls and cows usually maintain HRs of 60-80
gical table has a head board with a downward slope that
beats/min during anaesthesia. Tachycardia may develop
can be attached. The horns should be protected from
in response to hypercarbia, hypotension, or light anaes-
thesia. Bulls and adult cows may develop hypertension
breakage. As a safety precaution against excessive move-
ment in cattle that are positioned on an elevated table, the
during inhalation anaesthesia and systolic pressures of
belly bands and halter, although loosened, should remain
>200 mmHg and diastolic pressures >120 mmHg are not
tied to the table.
uncommon. Premedication with xylazine results in lower
 pressures. Values obtained by indirect methods of meas-
Aftention to positioning ofadultcattle during
urement in adult cattle are often incorrect, but blood
injectable or inhalation anaesthesia may prevent
pressure is easily and accurately measured by direct means
radial nerve paralysis.
using a 20 or 22 gauge catheter placed in the middle or
caudal auricular artery (see Fig 2.18) and connected to a
Fluid therapy
manometer or electrical transducer. Hypotension should
be treated in the usual manner, namely, by decreasing
 For prolonged anaesthesia or major surgery, it is common
the rate of anaesthetic administration, infusing balanced
practice to give 5-10 mL/kg/h of balanced electrolyte solu-
electrolyte solution and administration of dopamine,
tion IV. Calves less than 3 months of age should be given
dobutamine, or ephedrine.
3-5 mL/kg/h of 5% dextrose in water in addition to
Blood pressure values in calves are similar to those
3-7 mL/kg/h balanced electrolyte solution to prevent
measured in other small ruminant animals. The MAP
the development of hypoglycaemia. Hypertonic saline,
should be >60 mmHg and values less than this warrant
2-4 mL/kg, IV over 10-20 minutes may be required for
treatment. Cardiovascular values obtained using different
 acute blood volume expansion in cases of severe haemor-
monitors and under different study designs may not be
rhage or endotoxic shock.
directly comparable but the information may be useful.
Mean values in awake calves obtained 30 minutes after
isoflurane anaesthesia for instrumentation were HR 1ll
Monitoring
beats/min, systolic diastolic, and mean pressures were
Monitoring the anaesthetized animal is discussed in
123/77 (93) mmHg. respectively. and cardiac index (CI)
Chapter 2 but there are some differences from the general
was 175 mL/kg/min (Kerr et al., 2007). Mean values
 descriptions that should be noted. The bovine eye rotates
obtained  during  subsequent  isoflurane  anaesthesia
with increasing depth of anaesthesia into a ventral rather
without surgery were HR 92 beats/min, blood pressures
than rostroventral position and only the sclera can be 
87/49(63) mmHg. and CI 134 ml/kg/min. Blood pres-
seen; it then rotates back into a central position during
sures increased after the start of surgery. Similar values
deep anaesthesia. The pupil usually constricts to a hori-
were obtained in calves anaesthetized with xylazine-
zontal slit but some pupillary dilation may occur after
ketamine-isoflurane, with low MAP before the start of
ketamine administration. The presence of a palpebral
 surgery and an increase during surgery accompanied by
reflex indicates that anaesthesia is light. During ketamine
severe hypoventilation and respiratory acidosis [Offinger
anaesthesia, increased muscle tone may result in a cen-
et al., 20l2). In two similar experimental studies, mean
trally placed eye and strong palpebral reflex.
values obtained in 8-12-week-old Holstein calves
688
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 12.16 Adult cows and bulls must be supported in sternal position as soon as anaesthesia is finished. A halter will help
maintain sternal recumbency by bending the animal's head around to face the hind limbs. The animal must be able to pull its 
tongue back into its mouth before the endotracheal tube is removed.
anaesthetized with an end-tidal concentration of 3.8%
endotracheal tube should not be removed until the animal
sevoflurane and IPPV were HR 72 beats/min, MAP
 is swallowing and voluntarily withdraws its tongue into
91 mmHg. and CI 92 mL/kg/min (Greene et al., 2002).
its mouth. This may not occur for some time after cough-
and in calves anaesthetized with an end-tidal 9.7% des-
ing and chewing movements return. O2 administration
flurane HR 87 beats/min, MAP 75 mmHg. and CI
by insufflation (15 L/min in an adult) down the endotra-
124 mL/kg/min (Keegan et al., 2006). The range of values
cheal tube, or through a facemask, or by nasal tube may
was wide for each measurement. The authors estimated
 be necessary when breathing is too shallow. In animals
that the sevoflurane and desflurane concentrations were
that have been intubated, the tube should be removed
approximately 1.3 MAC.Premedication with
with the cuff still partially inflated to withdraw saliva that
mazine or xylazine may contribute to low blood pressure.
may have collected above the cuff. If regurgitation
Systolic pressures may be measured non-invasively by
 Occurred during anaesthesia, an attempt should be made
oscillometric or Doppler ultrasound technique with the
to remove any wads of food from the pharynx and to
cuff placed above the carpus or on the tail. Blood glucose
flush the oral and nasal cavities with water before extuba-
should be measured at least once during anaesthesia of
tion. The animal's nose must be dependent to ensure
calves <3 months of age.
drainage. The halter can be removed when the animal is
judged to be able to maintain sternal recumbency. If the
animal assumes lateral recumbency it must be pushed
back into sternal position. Mouth breathing in a bovine
Recovery from anaesthesia
during recovery from anaesthesia is indicative of hypox-
Ruminants should be moved into sternal recumbency and
aemia and will occur when some ruminal fluid has been
propped up in this position as soon as anaesthesia is
aspirated.(
Oxygen must be supplied. Antibiotics are
terminated to allow expulsion of accumulated ruminal
administered if aspiration is the cause Cattle often remain
gases that impair respiratory function. When an adult
sitting for some time after consciousness has returned
cow or bull is confined in a stall for recovery, it can be
 and the process of standing is usually much more deliber-
pushed into a sternal position using support at the shoul-
ate than it is in horses. After sevoflurane anaesthesia
der and pulling on a halter. The animal's head is posi-
recovery to standing is often rapid.
tioned with the head turmed towards the hind limbs to
Cattle may be allowed to eat and drink within a few hours
the point where the nose may be touching the floor near
of recovery to consciousness, the precise time depending, to
the hind feet (Fig. 12.16). The halter rope is pulled almost
some extent, on the anaesthetic agents administered. Calves
fully caudally to maintain the animal in this position.
 are usually prevented from nursing for an hour. Hypogly-
The mouth speculum can be removed at this time. The
cemia should be ruled out if recovery is slow.
340
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
REFERENCES
Adetunji, A., Pascoe, P.J.
Caulkett, N.A., MacDonald, J.E.D.
attitudes about analgesia in cattle
McDonell, W.N., et al., 1984.
Cribb, PN., et al., 1993. Xylazine
among bovine practitioners in the
Retrospective evaluation of xylazine/
hydrochloride epidural analgesia:
United States. I Am Vet Med Assoc
halothane anesthesia in 125 cattle.
a method of providing sedation and
238.755-767
Can Vet I 25, 342-346.
analgesia to facilitate castration of
Fayed, A.H., Abdalla, E.B., Anderson,
Anderson, D.E., 2008. Chemical
mature bulls. Comp Cont Educ 15.
R.R., et al., 1989. Effect of xylazine
 restraint in cattle: new thoughts for a
1155-1159
in heifers under thermoneutral or
new era. Proceedings Colorado State
Court, M.H., Dodman, N.H., Levine.
heat stress conditions. Am J Vet Res
University G9th Annual Conference
H.D., et al., 1992. Pharmacokinetics
50.151-153
for Veterinarians. Fort Collins, CO,
and milk residues of butorphanol in
Fierheller, E.E., Caulkett, N.A..
USA.
dairy cows after single intravenous
Bailey, J.V., 2004. A romifdine and
Amemo, I.M., Soli, N.E., 1993.
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
morphine combination for epidural
Chemical capture of free-ranging.
15.28-35.
analgesia of the flank in cattle. Can 
cattle: immobilization with xylazine
Currah, J.M., Hendrick, S.H.,
Vet I 45, 917-923.
or medetomidine, and reversal with
Stookey, J.M., 2009. The behavioral
Gehring, R., Coetzee, J.F., Tarus-Sang. J..
atipamezole. Vet Res Commun 17.
assessment and alleviation of pain
et al., 2008. Pharmacokinetics of
469-477.
associated with castration in beef
ketamine and its metabolite
Bernards, C.M., 2006. Epidural and
calves treated with flunixin 
norketamine administered at a
 spinal anesthesia. In: Barash, PG..
meglumine and caudal lidocaine
sub-anesthetic dose together
Qullen, B.F., Stoelting, R.K. (Eds.),
epidural anesthesia with
with xylazine to calves prior to
Clinical Anesthesia, 5th edn.
epinephrine. Can Vet J 50, 375-382.
castration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 
Lippincott williams & wilkins,
Dadak, A.M., Franz, S., Jager, W., et al.
32, 124-128.
Philadelphia, pp. 691-717.
2008. Pharmacokinetics and clinical
Gonzalez, L.A., Schwartzkopf-Genswein,
Bigham, A.S., Habibian, S., Ghasemian,
efficacy of lidocaine in cattle after
K.S., Caulkett, N.A., et al., 2010.
F, et al., 2010. Caudal epidural
 intranasal administration during
Pain mitigation after band
injection of lidocaine, tramadol, and
rhinotracheobronchoscopy. I Vet
castration of beef calves and its
lidocaine-tramadol for epidural
Pharmacol Ther 32, 300-302.
effect on performance, behavior.
anesthesia in cattle. J Vet Pharmacol
Davis, J.L., Smith, G.W., Baynes, R.E.,
Escherichia coli, and salivary
Ther 33, 439-443.
et al., 2009. Update on drugs
cortisol. I Anim Sci 88,
Blaze, C.A., LeBlanc, P.H.,
 prohibited from extralabel use in
802-810.
Robinson, N.E., 1988. Effect of
food animals. J Am Vet Med AssoC
Greene, S.A., Keegan, R.D., Valdez, R.A..
withholding feed on ventilation
235.528-534
et al., 2002. Cardiovascular effects of
 and the incidence of regurgitation
Delehant, T.M., Denhart, J.W..
sevoflurane in Holstein calves. Vet
during halothane anesthesia of
Lloyd, w.E., et al., 2003.
Anaesth Analg 29, 59-63.
adult cattle. Am J Vet Res 49.
 Pharmacokinetics of xylazine.
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W.
2126-2129.
2,6-dimethylaniline, and tolazoline
Crisman, R.O., et al., 2002.
Boesch, D., Steiner, A., Gygax, L., et al..
 in tissues from yearling cattle and
Comparison of lidocaine.
2008. Burdizzo castration of calves
milk from mature dairy cows after
xylazine, and lidocaine-xylazine
less than l-week old with and
sedation with xylazine hydrochloride
for caudal epidural analgesia in
without local anaesthesia: Short-term
and reversal with tolazoline
cattle. Vet Anaesth Analg 29, 64-68.
 behavioural responses and plasma
hydrochloride. Vet Ther 4, 128-134.
Hall, L.W., 1991. Anaesthesia of the ox.
cortisol levels. Appl Anim Behav Sci
DeMoor, A., Desmet, P., 1971. Effect of
In: Hall, L.W., Clarke, K.W. (Eds.)],
114,330-345
Rompun on acid-base-equilibrium 
Veterinary Anaesthesia, 9th edn.
Cagnardi, P., Zonca, A., Gallo, M., et al..
 and arterial Oz pressure in cattle. Vet
Balliere Tindall, London,
 2009. Pharmacokinetics of
Med Rev 2, 163-169.
pp. 236-259.
propofol in calves undergoing
DeRossi, R., Zanenga, N.F., Alves, O.D..
Hashimoto, K., Hampl, K.F.,
abdominal surgery. Vet Res
et al., 2010. Effects of caudal epidural
Nakamura, Y, et al., 2001.
Commun 33 (Suppl 1), S177-
ketamine and/or lidocaine on heifers
 Epinephrine increases the neurotoxic
S179.
during reproductive procedures:
potential of intrathecally
Campbell, K.B., Klavano, PA..
A preliminary study. Vet J 185,
administered lidocaine in the rat.
Richardson, P, et al., 1979.
344-346.
Anesthesiology 94, 876-881.
Hemodynamic effects of xylazine in
Duffeld, T.F., Heinrich, A..
Hay, A., 1991. Needle penetration of the
the calf. Am J Vet Res 40.
Millman, S.T., et al., 2010. Reduction
globe during retrobulbar and
1777-1780.
in pain response by combined use of
 penibulbar injections.
Cantalapiedra, A.G., Villaneuva, B.
local lidocaine anesthesia and
Ophthalmology 98, 1017-1024.
Pereira, J.L., 2000. Anaesthetic
systemic ketoprofen in dairy calves
Hewson, C.J., Dohoo, I.R., Lemke, K.A..
potency of isoflurane in cattle:
dehorned by heat cauterization. Can
et al., 2007. Canadian veterinarians'
determination of the minimum
Vet J 51, 283-288.
use of analgesics in cattle, pigs, and
alveolar concentration. Vet Anaesth
Fajt, V.R., Wagner, S.A., Norby, B., 2011.
horses in 2004 and 2005. Can Vet J
Analg 27, 22-26.
Analgesic drug administration and
48, 155-164.
341
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Hikasa, Y, Takese, K., Emi, S., et al..
dorsolumbar epidural anesthesia in
Picavet, M.-T.J.E., Gasthuys, M.R.,
1988. Antagonistic effects of
cattle. J Vet Sci 7, 69-72.
Laevens, H.H., et al., 2004.
alpha-adrenoceptor blocking agents
Lewis, C.A., Constable, PD., Huhn, J.C.,
Cardiopulmonary effects of
on reticuloruminal hypomotility
et al., 1999. Sedation with xylazine
combined xylazine-guaiphenesin-
induced by xylazine in cattle. Can J
and lumbosacral epidural
ketamine infusion and extradural
Vet Res 52, 411-415.
administration of lidocaine and
[inter-coccygeal lidocaine)
Hildebrand, S.V., Howitt, G.A., 1984.
xylazine for umbilical surgery in
anaesthesia in calves. Vet Anaesth
Neuromuscular and cardiovascular
Galves. I Am Vet Med Assoc 214,
Analg 31, 11-19.
 effects of pancuronium bromide in
89-95.
Powell, I.D., Denhart, J.W., Lloyd, W.E.,
clves anesthetized with halothane.
Liebich, H.-G., Konig, H.E., Maierl, J.
1998. Effectiveness of tolazoline in 
Am J Vet Res 45, 1549-1552.
2009. Hindlimbs or pelvic limbs 
reversing xylazine-induced sedation
Hiraoka, M., Miyagawa, T..
[membra pelvina). In: Konig, H.-E..
in calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212.
Kobayashi, H., et al., 2007.
Liebich, H.-G. (Eds.), Veterinary
90-92.
 Successful introduction of modifed
Anatomy of Domestic Mammals.
Raekallio, M., Kivalo, M., Jalanka, H.,
dorsolumbar epidural anesthesia in
Schattauer, New York, pp. 215-276.
et al., 1991. Medetomidine/ketamine
a bovine referral center. J Vet Sci 8.
Lin, H.-C., Riddell, M.G., 2003.
sedation in calves and its reversal
181-184.
Preliminary study of the effects of
with atipamezole. J Vet Anaesth 18.
Hodgson, D.s., Dunlop, C.l.,
xylazine or detomidine with or
45-47.
Chapman, P.L., et al., 2002.
without butorphanol for standing
Ranheim, B., Arnemo, J.M., Ryeng. K.A..
Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine
sedation in dairy cattle. Vet Ther 4.
1999. A pharmacokinetic study
and acepromazine in pregnant cows
285-291.
including some relevant clinical
in late gestation. Am j Vet Res 63.
Lin, H.C., Trachte, E.A., DeGraves, F.J..
effect of medetomidine, and
1695-1699
et al., 1998. Evaluation of analgesia
atipamezole in lactating dairy cows.
Hopkins, T.j., 1972. The clinical
 induced by epidural administration
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 22, 368-373.
pharmacology of xylazine in cattle.
of medetomidine to cows. Am J Vet
Ranheim, B., Soli, N.E., Ryeng, K.A..
Aust Vet J 48, 109-112.
Res 59, 162-167.
et al., 1998. Pharmacokinetics of
Huxley, J.N., Whay, H.R., 2006. Current
McGuirk, S.M., Bednarski, R.M.
 medetomidine and atipamezole in
 attitudes of cattle practitioners to
Clayton, M.K., 1990. Bradycardia in
dairy calves. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 21,
 pain and the use of analgesics in
attle deprived of food. J Am Vet
428-432.
cattle. Vet Rec 159, 662-668.
Med Assoc 196, 894-896.
Raptopoulos, D., Weaver, B.M., 1984.
Keegan, R.D., Greene, S.A., Valdez, R.A..
Meyer, H., Kastner, S.B.R..
Observations following intravenous
et al., 2006. Cardiovascular effects of
Beyerbach, M., et al., 2010.
xylazine administration in steers. Vet
 desflurane in mechanically ventilated
Cardiopulmonary effects of dorsal
Rec 114, 567-569.
calves. Am J Vet Res 67, 387-391.
recumbency and high-volume caudal
Re, M., Blanco-Murcia, F.J..
Kerr, C.L., Windeyer, C., Boure, L.P.,
epidural anaesthesia with lidocaine
Gomez de Segura, I.A., 2011.
et al., 2007. Cardiopulmonary effects
or xylazine in calves. Vet I 186.
Chemical restraint and anaesthetic
of administration of a combination
316-322.
effects of a tiletamine-zolazepam/
solution of xylazine, guaifenesin,
Meyer, H., Starke, A., Kehler, W., et al..
ketamine/detomidine combination
and ketamine or inhaled isoflurane
2007. High caudal epidural analgesia
in cattle. Vet I 190, 66-70.
in mechanically ventilated calves.
with local anaesthetics or Qy-agonists
Reeves, P.T., 2007. Residues of veterinary
Am J Vet Res 68, 1287-1293.
in calves. J Vet Med A 54, 384-389.
drugs at injection sites. J Vet
Klein, L., Fisher, N., 1988.
Misch, L.., Duffeld, T.F., Millman, S.T.,
Pharmacol Ther 30, 1-17.
Cardiopulmonary effects of restraint
et al., 2007. An investigation into the
Rioja, E., Kerr, C.L., Enouri, S.S., et al..
in dorsal recumbency on awake
practices of dairy producers and
2008. Sedative and cardiopulmonary
cattle. Am J Vet Res 49, 1605-1608.
veterinarians in dehorning dairy
effects of medetomidine
Leblanc, M.M., Hubbell, J.A.E..
alves in Ontario. Can Vet I 48.
hydrochloride and xylazine
Smith, A.C., 1984. The effects of
1249-1254.
hydrochloride and their reversal with
xylazine hydrochloride on
Muchado, L.C.P., Hurnik, J.F., Ewing.
atipamezole hydrochloride in calves.
intrauterine pressure in the cow.
K.K., 1998. A thermal threshold
Am J Vet Res 69, 319-329.
Theriogenology 21, 681-690.
assay to measure the nociceptive
Rosenberg, P.H., Veering, B.T.,
Lee, I., Yamagishi, K., Oboshi, K., et al.
response to morphine sulphate in
Urmey W.F., 2004. Maximum
2004a. Comparison of xylazine,
cattle. Can J Vet Res 62, 218-223.
recommended doses of local 
lidocaine and the two drugs
Offinger, I., Meyer, H., Fischer, I., et al.
anesthetics: a multifactorial concept.
combined for modifed dorsolumbar
2012. Comparison of isoflurane
Regional Anesth Pain Med 29.
epidural anaesthesia in cattle. Vet Rec
inhalation anaesthesia, injection
564-575.
155. 797-799
anaesthesia and high volume caudal
Rumsey, TS., Bond, I., 1976.
Lee, I., Yamagishi, N., Oboshi, K., et al.
 epidural anaesthesia for umbilical
Cardiorespiratory patterns, rectal
 2004b. Eliminating the effect of
surgery in calves; metabolic, endocrine
temperature, serum electrolytes and
epidural fat during dorsolumbar
and cardiopulmonary effects. Vet
packed cell volume in beef cattle
epidural analgesia in cattle. Vet
Anaesth Analg 39, 123-136.
deprived of feed and water. J Anim
Anaesth Analg 31, 86-89.
Pascoe, Pl., 1986. Humaneness of an
Sci 42, 1227-1238.
Lee, I., Yamagishi, N., Oboshi, K., et al.
electroimmobilization unit for cattle.
Salonen, J.S., Vaha-Vahe, T., Vainio, O..
2006. Practical tips for modifed
Am J Vet Res 47, 2252-2256.
et al., 1989. Single-dose
342
Anaesthesia of cattle
Chapter
12
pharmacokinetics of detomidine in
 dehorning. I Dairy Sci 92.
Trim, C.M., 1987. Special anesthesia
the horse and cow. J Vet Pharmacol
1512-1519.
considerations in the ruminant.
Ther 12, 65-72.
StJean, G., Skarda, R.T., Muir, W.W.,
In: Short, C.E. (Ed.), Principles &
Sellers, G., Lin, H.C., Riddell, M.G..
et al., 1990. Caudal epidural
 Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia.
et al., 2009. Pharmacokinetics 
 analgesia induced by xylazine
Williams & wilkins, Baltimore,
of lidocaine in serum and milk
administration in cows. Am J Vet Res
pp. 285-300.
of mature Holstein cows.
51, 1232-1236.
Valverde, A., Doherty, T.l., Dyson, D.H.,
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 32.
Thompson, J.R., Kersting, K.W..
et al., 1989. Evaluation of
446-450.
Hsu, W.H., 1991. Antagonistic effect
 pentobarbital as a drug for standing
Sellers, G., Lin, H.C., Riddell, M.G.
of atipamezole on xylazine-induced
sedation in cattle. Vet Surg 18,
et al., 2010. Pharmacokinetics of
 sedation, bradycardia, and ruminal
235-238
ketamine in plasma and milk of
atony. Am JVet Res 52, 1265-1268.
Vainio, O., 1988. Detomidine [letter to
mature Holstein cows. J Vet
Thomsen, PT., Gidekull, M.,
the editor). Vet Rec 123, 655.
Pharmacol Ther 33, 480-484.
Herskin, M.S., et al., 2010
Wagner, A.E., Muir, W.w..
Semrad, S.D., Trim, C.M., Hardee, G.E..
Scandanavian bovine practitioners'
Grospitch, B.J., 1990.
1986. Hypertension in bulls and
attitudes to the use of analgesics in
Cardiopulmonary effects of position
steers anesthetized with guaifenesin-
cattle. Vet Rec 167, 256-258.
in conscious cattle. Am J Vet Res 51.
thiobarbiturate-halothane
Thurmon, J.C., Lin, H.C., Benson, G.J..
7-10.
combination. Am J Vet Res 47,
et al., 1989. Combining telazol and
Werdehausen, R., Braun, S..
1577-1582.
xylazine for anesthesia in calves. Vet
Hermanns, H., et al., 2011. The
Stafford, K.J., Mellor, D.J., 2005.
Med 84, 824-830.
influence of adjuvants used in 
Dehorning and disbudding stress
Thurmon, J.C., Nelson, D.R.,
regional anesthesia on lidocaine-
 and its alleviation in calves. Vet J
Hartsfield, S.M., et al., 1978. Effects
 induced neurotoxicity in vitro.
169.337-349
 of xylazine hydrochloride on urine
Regional Anesth Pain Med 36.
Stewart, M.C., Stookey, J.M.,
in cattle. Aust Vet J 54, 178-180.
436-443.
Stafford, K.J., et al., 2009. Effects of
Toosey, M.B., 1959. The uses of
Wong, D.H.W., 1993. Regional
local anaesthetic and a nonsteroidal
 concentrated pentobarbitone sodium
 anaesthesia for intraocular
 antinflammatory drug on pain
solution in bovine practice. Vet Rec
surgery. Can J Anaesth 40,
responses of dairy calves to hot-iron
71,24-27.
635-657.
343
(
Anaesthesia of sheep, goats, and
other herbivores
SHEEP AND GOATS
346
Etomidate
360
Ketamine
360
Introduction
346
Ketamine and guaifenesin
Local analgesia
346
(glyceryl guaiacolate, GGE)
361
Applications for local anesthesia
347
 Pentobarbital
361
 Cornual nerve blocks for dehorning
347
 Propofol 
361
Epidural and intrathecal nerve block
348
 Thiopental
362
Caudal epidural nerve block
352
Tiletamine-zolazepam 
362
Paravertebral nerve block
352
Inhalation anaesthesia
362
Inverted L block
352
Potencies of isoflurane, sevoflurane,
Forelimb digital nerve blocks
352
and desflurane
363
Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks
352
Nitrous oxide
364
Peroneal and tibial nerve blocks
352
Adjunct agents
364
Intravenous regional analgesia
353
Opioids
364
Intra-articular local analgesia
353
Lidocaine
364
Infiltration and topical analgesia
354
Ketamine
364
Sedation
354
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
364
 Sedative agents employed in sheep
Neuromuscular blockade
365
and goats
354
 Anaesthetic management
365
Acepromazine
355
Positioning
365
αz-Agonists
355
 Fluid therapy
365
Benzodiazepines
356
Monitoring
356
365
Dissociative anaesthetics
Treatment of hypotension
356
367
Opioids and analgesia
Recovery
357
367
General anaesthesia
 Preparation
357
 Assessment of pain
367
Anaesthetic techniques
358
Intr avenous injection
358
Endotracheal intubation
358
CAMELIDS
368
Injectable anaesthetic agents
360
Introduction
368
Alfaxalone
360
Local analgesia
368
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
345
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Applications for local anaesthesia
368
sedation and general anaesthesia. Tracheal intubation can
368
be technically difficult particularly in large rams and goats
Caudal epidural analgesia
with large curled horns, because extension of the head and
Local analgesia for castration
369
neck may be restricted and because the animals' narrow
Caesarian section
369
jaws leave little room to view the larynx during insertion
General anaesthesia
369
of the endotracheal tube Two factors should be consid-
Preparation for anaesthesia
369
ered in selection of anaesthetic protocols for these rumi-
Anaesthetic techniques
nants. First, dose rates of some anaesthetic agents differ
370
from those in other species. Secondly, animals that are not
Venepuncture
370
used to being handled or isolated may not exhibit signs
Endotracheal intubation
370
commonly associated with sickness or pain. If these
Anaestheticagents
371
animals are sick they will have a reduced requirement for
anaesthesia and failure to recognize this may result in
Sedatives
371
overdosage.
Opioids
372
This chapter describes techniques and drug combina-
Guaifenesin
372
tions that can be used to anaesthetize sheep, goats, and
Ketamine
372
camelids in a variety of settings. Local analgesia is useful
Propofol
373
in these species and details of the techniques are included.
Alfaxalone
The anaesthetic agents listed in this chapter may not be
373
available in all countries and many are not licensed for
Tiletamine-zolazepam
373
use in small ruminants. In some countries, ruminants
Inhalation agents
373
 given unapproved drugs cannot be used for food and, in
Anaesthetic management
373
others, some anaesthetic agents have approved withdrawal
times. Current information on approved drugs. with-
DEER
374
 drawal times and extralabel drug use in North America has 
recently been published (Fajt, 20ll). Choice of agents will
Introduction
374
also depend on whether the animal is intended for food,
Anaesthetic agents
374
its health, procedure to be performed, and where the pro-
Xylazine
375
cedure will be performed (e.g. owner's farm, veterinary
clinic, or research facility). Some information on methods
Xylazine and ketamine
375
of anaesthesia of deer, camels, and elephants has been
Medetomidine combinations
375
provided in the latter part of the chapter.
Tiletamine-zolazepam
375
Accidental human injection of potent opioids, such as
etorphine or carfentanil, 02-agonist sedatives, such as xyla-
CAMELS
376
zine, detomidine and romifdine, and dissociative anaes-
thetics such as ketamine and tiletamine-zolazepam, can
Introduction
376
have serious consequences and even result in death (Hay-
Anaesthetic agents
376
merle et al., 20l0). Preventative measures, such as wearing
Local analgesia
377
gloves and eye protection, particularly when working with
darts, should be routine. Naloxone is the recommended
ELEPHANTS
377
 antagonist for etorphine (25 ampoules should be availa-
ble) and naltrexone is an alternative Atipamezole is not
Introduction
377
licensed for use in humans at this time.
Anaesthetic agents
377
Inhalation anaesthesia
378
LOCAL ANALGESIA
Sheep and Goats
Local analgesia techniques are highly useful in sheep and
 goat practice because equipment involved is inexpensive,
cardiovascular and respiratory depression are less than
INTRODUCTION
produced by general anaesthesia, and the risk of regurgita-
tion and aspiration is decreased. The immediate post-
Anaesthetic management of sheep and goats is usually
surgical recovery time may or may not be shorter than after
umcomplicated with the notable exception that regurgita-
 general anaesthesia, depending on the agents and tech-
tion followed by pulmonary aspiration is always a risk of
pixol aonpul Aeu sjuase yauisaeue leon 'pasn sanbiu
346
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
excessive volume of local anaesthetic solution is injected.
Limiting the initial administration of lidocaine to less
than 6 mg/kg and bupivacaine to less than 2 mg/kg has
been found to be safe Bupivacaine is highly cardiotoxic
and must never be injected IV. In Europe, at the time of
writing [2012), the only agent with a marketing authoriza-
tion for ruminants as food animals is procaine. In one
investigation testing the effects of six local anaesthetic
 agents in ewes, cardiovascular toxicity in conscious animals
was manifested initially as decreased contractility that
was followed by seizures and tachycardia, progressing to
ventricular tachycardia and, in some individuals, to car-
diovascular collapse and death. Seven out of 36 sheep died
after receiving slow IV administration of bupivacaine
2.1 mg/kg. levobupivacaine 2.6 mg/kg or ropivacaine
3.2 mg/kg (Copeland et al., 2008). None of the sheep
given lidocaine or mepivacaine, 7.4 mg/kg, died. Anaes-
thetized sheep given these agents developed profound
cardiovascular depression and all survived despite plasma
Figure 13.1 Nerve blocks for dehorning of goats. The
concentrations of local anaesthetic twice that achieved in
corneal branches of both the lacrimal and infratrochlear
nerves must be blocked. Care must be taken in young 
conscious animals.
animals to ensure attempts to block both nerves do not lead
Ropivacaine was introduced into the human medical
to injection of toxic quantities of local anaesthetic solution.
market to offer a safer alternative to bupivacaine as the
toxicity is lower (Leone et al., 2008). The toxicity of ropi-
vacaine in herbivores has yet to be determined.
(Fig. 13.1). The needle should be inserted as close as pos-
Options to extend the duration of epidural or spinal
sible to the caudal ridge of the frontal process of the
analgesia include addition of an opioid, such as morphine
'seog inpe ul u s'I-o'I yo yidap e oi auoq sneuoskz
or buprenorphine, or an Q2-adrenoceptor agonist, such as
The syringe plunger should be withdrawn before injection
xylazine or dexmedetomidine Controlled-release of bupi-
to check that the tip of the needle has not penetrated the
vacaine and dexamethasone from polymer micropheres
large blood vessel located at this site The site for blocking
and liposomes is being investigated for prolonged (days)
the cormual branch of the infratrochlear nerve is at the
neural blockade (Drager et al., 1998).
dorsomedial margin of the orbit (Fig. 13.l). In some
animals, the nerve is palpable by applying thumbnail pres-
sure and moving the skin over this area. The needle should
Applications of local anaesthesia
be inserted as close as possible to the margin of the orbit
Cornual nerve blocks for dehorning
and under the muscle to a depth of about 0.5 cm.
Local analgesic solution such as 2% lidocaine without
The cornual branches of the zygomaticotemporal (lac-
 epinephrine, should be injected at each site, about 2 mL/
rimal) and infratrochlear nerves provide sensory innerva-
site for adult animals or up to a maximum of 6 mg/kg.
tion to the horns. The cormual branch of the lacrimal nerve
Care must be taken with young animals not to exceed
emerges from the orbit caudal to the frontal process of the
the toxic dose of lidocaine by limiting the total dose to
zygomatic bone (root of the supraorbital process). The
 4 mg/kg, or inadvertently to inject local anaesthetic intra-
nerve, covered by a thin layer of muscle, divides into
venously. Cornual nerve blocks are frequently combined
several branches that innervate mainly the lateral and
with xylazine sedation, such as 0.05 mg/kg for adults and
caudal parts of the horn. The main trunk of the infratro-
0.025 mg/kg for kids. A subcutaneous line block with
chlear nerve emerges from the orbit dorsomedially and
lidocaine may be required on the caudal border of
divides into several branches. The cormual branch soon
mature horns.
divides, one division coursing to the dorsal aspect of the
Procaine is marketed in the UK as a 5% solution with
 base of the horn and ramifying dorsally and dorsomedi-
 epinephrine In an evaluation of procaine for disbudding
ally. The other division passes to the medial aspect of the
aam (8yY E'S uBiam ueipau) spI Ie 'sp!Y ieos Auiep 66
base of the horn and gives off branches to the medial and
injected with a total of 2 mL 5% procaine with epine-
caudomedial parts of it.
phrine (12.2-28.6 mg/kg) as subcutaneous horn ring
The site for producing block of the cornual branch of
blocks (Pollard, 2008). At least 20 minutes were allowed
the lacrimal nerve is caudal to the frontal process of
before start of disbudding and analgesia was satisfactory
the zygomatic bone (root of the supraorbital process)
for the procedure to be performed in the majority of
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 animals. Muscle twitching and lethargy was observed in a
uul ul aedied on Asea si uoounl jenoesoqunl au
few animals after the procedure but the cause was not
animals but recognition of landmarks will be necessary to
confirmed.
identify the point of needle insertion in muscled or fat
 Alternative analgesic techniques for dehorning include
animals. Epidural block can be performed with the sheep
 production of light general anaesthesia with diazepam or
midazolam and ketamine, or other injectable or inhala-
line between the cranial borders of the ilium crosses
tion anaesthetic agents. It must be remembered when
between the spinous processes of the last lumbar vertebrae
inhalation anaesthesia is employed, to discontinue oxygen
(Fig 13.2). The caudal borders of the ilium, where the
and remove the facemask before application of a hot iron.
angle bends to parallel midline, are level with the cranial
edge of the sacrum. The point of needle insertion is
midline halfway between the spinous process of the
Epidural and intrathecal nerve block
seventh lumbar vertebra and the sacrum. If the spinous
High epidural block can be produced by injection of local
process of the last lumbar vertebra can be palpated, the
anaesthetic solution into the epidural space at the lum-
next depression caudal to it is the lumbosacral space This
bosacral junction. Complete analgesia and paralysis can
 area must be clipped and the skin prepared with a surgical
be induced in the hind limbs and abdomen to allow
scnub. A spinal needle should be used because it has a
surgery, depending on the volume of local anaesthetic
stilette to prevent injection of a core of subcutaneous
injected (Trim, 1989). The dose rates for different drugs
tissue into the epidural space The notch on the hub of the
and their times for onset of action are listed in Table 13.1.
needle indicates the direction of the bevel and thus the
The dose rates listed are to produce analgesia for flank
anaesthetist can ensure that injection of local anaesthetic
laparotomy. The dose should be decreased if the animal is
solution is towards the head of the animal.
old, obese, or pregnant A lower dose of lidocaine, such as
When epidural nerve block is to be performed on the
2% at l mL 7 kg. is suffcient for perineal or hind limb
conscious animal,
1-3 mL 2% lidocaine should be
surgical procedures, and for caesarian section. The long
injected subcutaneously with a fne needle at the site
duration of hind limb paralysis from bupivacaine block
intended for insertion of the spinal needle. For lambs.
for caesarian section interferes with nursing of the newborn
kids, and pygmy goats, a 22 gauge 3.7 cm spinal needle
and, for that reason, lidocaine with l:200000 epine-
can be used. For adult animals, a sturdier needle, such as
 phrine is preferred.
a 20 or 18 gauge 6.25 am spinal needle, is recommended.
The intention behind inclusion of epinephrine with a
 The needle should be inserted midline perpendicular to
local anaesthetic is to increase the intensity of sensory and
the curvature of the hindquarters and perpendicular to the
motor block by decreasing uptake from the epidural space
midline sagittal plane of the animal, i.e. not necessarily
by local vasoconstriction. An added effect would be
parallel or perpendicular to the floor or table top (Fig.
improved safety because the plasma concentrations of
13.3). If analgesia of one side or leg is required, the animal
local anaesthetic agent would be lower. Addition of epine-
should be placed in lateral recumbency with the side to
phrine has a signifcant impact on the duration of action
be desensitized underneath for the duration of the injec-
of lidocaine, and has been documented to increase uptake
tion. Even though bilateral analgesia will develop, hyper-
of bupivacaine into cerebrospinal fluid (CsF), but has less
baric solutions such as bupivacaine will travel more
effect on ropivacaine, presumably because ropivacaine has
cranially on the down side After injection the spinal
intrinsic vasoconstrictor properties (Ratajczak-Enselme
needle is withdrawn, the animal should be positioned so
et al., 2007).
that the vertebral column is horizontal. If standing. the
 goat or sheep should not be allowed to progressively 'dog-
sit', otherwise analgesia does not fully develop cranially.
Considerable pressure may be needed to introduce the
Table 13.1 Epidural analgesia for flank laparotomy
l! pue quauea snouidseidns pue uys aui yanoit aipaau
in goats
may be preferable to puncture the skin first with a larger,
sharp hypodermic needle Once introduced, the spinal
Treatment
OnsetI
Duration
Standing
 needle should be advanced gently for two reasons. First,
(min)
(h)
(h)
to be able to appreciate the resistance then penetration of
the interarcuate ligament which lies over the epidural
Lidocaine 2% with
25
2
3.5-5.0
 space, described as a 'pop', and secondly, to control intro-
epinephrine, 1 mL/5 kg 
duction of the tip of the needle into the epidural space so
Bupivacaine, 0.5% or
45
4-6
8-12
that movement of the needle can be stopped immediately.
0.75%, 1 mL/4 kg
Further introduction of the needle will penetrate the
spinal cord and the animal, if conscious, will jump and
A lower dose rate, such as 1 ml/7 kg, is sufficient for analgesia
of the hind limbs or perineal surgery.
may dislodge the position of the needle If the tip of the
needle strikes bone and the needle does not appear to be
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
Figure 13.2 Black pen has been used to identify the landmarks used to locate the lumbosacral space in a goat. An imaginary
line between the cranial edge of the ilium crosses midline between the spinous processes of the last two lumbar vertebrae.
The wings of the ilium angle obliquely towards midline and the sacrum (S).
containing a small volume of saline or air (up to 0.5 mL
for large sheep/goats) should be attached to the spinal
needle and the plunger withdrawn to test for CSF Or
blood. Attempts at aspiration should reveal only a vacuum
and aspiration of air means that the syringe is not tightly
attached to the needle When no CSF or blood is aspirated,
a test injection of a small amount of saline or air should
be made ('loss of resistance' test). Injection should be easy
when the needle is in the epidural space After confirma-
tion of correct placement of the needle, the 3 mL syringe
should be detached and the syringe containing the local
anaesthetic solution attached. Injection of the drug should
be made over at least 30 seconds. Faster injections result
in increased intracranial pressure which, if the animal is
conscious, manifests as opisthotonus, nystagmus, and
collapse.
Air has been used for many years for the “loss of resist-
ance' test of placement of a spinal needle in the epidural
space. The injected air forms bubbles that interfere with
Figure 13.3 Direction of insertion of needle for lumbar
even spread of the local anaesthetic solution, conse-
epidural injection in sheep in lateral recumbency.
quently, as small a volume as possible should be used. Use
 of saline or local anaesthetic solution (being mindful of
the total dose injected) instead of air facilitates spread of
deep enough to be in the epidural space, the needle should
subsequently injected local anaesthetic solution for nerve
be withdrawn until the tip is just under the skin and redi-
block.
rected in a cranial direction. If unsuccessful, the procedure
A 'hanging drop' technique can be used to locate the
should be repeated with the needle advanced in a caudal
epidural space when the animal is standing or positioned
direction.
in sternal recumbency. The preparation of the skin, land-
After correct placement of the needle, the stilette should
marks, and insertion of the spinal needle is the same as
 be removed and placed on a sterile surface. A 3 mL syringe
 just described. The spinal needle is advanced until the tip
349
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 is close to but not penetrating the interarcuate ligament.
The stilette is removed and a drop of local anaesthetic
solution or saline placed on the hub of the needle. When
Tuohy
the needle is advanced through the interarcuate ligament,
the drop of liquid will be sucked into the needle. This
needle\
manoeuvre is used as confirmation of accurate placement
 of the needle in the epidural space, although failures may
Catheter
occur.
The spinal cord may project into the sacrum in sheep
and goats and penetration of the dura will result in aspira-
tion of CSF Injection into the subarachnoid space of the
same volume of local anaesthetic intended for epidural
analgesia will result in the block extending further crani-
 ally and, potentially, respiratory arrest. Usually, the volume
Figure 13.4 Catheter emerging from tip of Tuohy needle.
for subarachnoid injection is half the epidural dose. It is
The tip of a Tuohy needle is curved to aid bending of a
fairly common practice after accidental penetration of the
catheter from the needle into the epidural or subarachnoid
subarachnoid space partly to withdraw the spinal needle
space.
and redirect it into the epidural space a few millimetres
distant from the original insertion. Although initially CSF
will leak into the epidural space because of the pressure
guide wire to facilitate advancement of the catheter into
difference, an experimental study in sheep where dural
the desired space (modified Seldinger technique). The
punctures were made one hour prior to epidural injection
needle is removed and the catheter threaded over the guide
of morphine demonstrated that CSF concentrations of
wire that is then removed. Extreme care must be taken to
secure the catheter to the skin at the site of entry and to
hole was made with a 25 gauge needle (Swenson et al.
ensure sterile injections by covering the skin insertion with
1996). The concern with use of morphine was respiratory
bandage and protecting the free catheter end - capped and
depression developing several hours later.
wrapped in sterile gauze for example.
Entry of the needle into a venous sinus should be
Epidural  and  intrathecal  analgesia
arenottotally
detected by aspiration of blood, an important manoeuvre
without risk. The incidence of complications is probably
 as intravenous injection of local anaesthetic agent or mor-
very low but has not been documented in these species
phine will result in cardiovascular depression. The local
or other large animals (Trim, 2007). Potential complica-
anaesthetic solution should be warmed when epidural
tions include spinal haematoma, meningitis, or abscess
injection is to be made in the conscious animal. Injection
 associated with technique, and pruritus with morphine.
of a cold solution will stimulate receptors in the spinal
Continuous infusions of opioids through intrathecal cath-
cord and the animal will jerk, possibly dislodging the
eters are frequently used for long-term control of non-
needle.
cancer pain in humans and there is increasing concern
about the development of inflammatory masses adjacent
to the tip of the catheters that compress the spinal cord
Epidural and intrathecalcatheters
and cause neurological deficits (Yaksh et al., 2002; Follett,
Catheters can be placed in the epidural or subarachnoid
2003: Bedforth & Hardman, 20l0). The inflammatory
(intrathecal) spaces to facilitate administration of agents
masses that develop in humans commonly do not mani-
for surgical procedures and to continue regional analgesia
fest until after a year of use, however, experimental studies
postoperatively. Spinal catheters are available in a variety
in dogs and sheep have identified inflammation, masses,
of materials and designs. The end of the catheter can be
 and functional motor defcits occurring within 28-30 days
open or it can be closed with lateral holes [eyes) a few
of continuous infusion of morphine (Coombs et al.,
millimetres back from the tip. The opposite end can have
1994; Gradert et al., 2003; Yaksh et al., 2003). The data
an attached luer-lok adapter or an adjustable adapter that
are confusing at present. Morphine appears to be associ-
snaps onto the catheter tubing. Using sterile technique a
ated with inflammation, with the degree increasing with
Tuohy needle (Fig. 13.4) is inserted at an angle through
increasing dose and concentration and worse with con-
the skin at the lumbosacral junction until the tip is in the
tinuous infusion compared with interrupted boluses twice
epidural space or advanced deeper to penetrate the menin-
daily. Hydromorphone has been associated with inflam-
 ges, allowing free flow of CSF when the stilette is removed.
mation and, in one study (Johansen et al., 2004), even
The catheter is inserted through the needle and advanced
Aq pasn u iea nou sm uoui yno
approximately 10 cm from the tip of the needle, where-
saline injections, all the sheep exhibited gait deficits and
upon the needle is removed carefully without dragging the
biting behaviour over the dorsal lumbar area at the site
catheter. An alternative technique is to insert a flexible
of injection.
350
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
Epiduraland intrathecal opioids
Management
Epidural injection of morphine, 0.l mg/kg. at the lum-
Placement of a venous catheter is a sensible precaution
bosacral junction will produce analgesia without paralysis.
when epidural analgesia is to be used for surgery Epidural
Preservative-free solution, l mg/mL, will not cause irrita-
injection of local anaesthetic solution causes paralysis of
tion of the meninges. This technique can be used to
the sympathetic nerves and results in a decrease in blood
decrease requirement for inhalation anaesthetic agent and
pressure. Hypotension may develop. especially in hypo-
to provide analgesia postoperatively. In one study in goats
volaemic animals, such as for caesarian section, or animals
after stifle surgery, it was observed that goats that were
poolq jo sulood anouoid ol se Aem e qpns u! pauoisod
 given epidural morphine vocalized less and were less likely
in the hind limbs. In these animals, treatment should
to grind their teeth than goats that were not (Pablo, 1993).
include expansion of blood volume with intravenous
The duration of pain relief appears to be variable but
administration of balanced electrolyte solution and injec-
provided relief for 6 hours after abdominal surgery ( Hen-
tion of ephedrine 0.06 mg/kg, to induce vasoconstriction.
drickson et al., 1996).
An animal with urethral obstruction given epidural anal-
Intrathecal injection of 2% lidocaine, 2 mg/kg, with
buprenorphine, 0.005 mg/kg, in tranquillized adult goats
have a distended urinary bladder at risk for rupture. None-
provided sufficient analgesia to perform a 30-minute
theless, administration of fluid intravenously is important
orthopaedic stifle surgery, and duration of analgesia lasted
to restore blood volume and cardiovascular function. One
option is to decrease the size of the bladder by cystocen-
goats given lidocaine with xylazine, 0.05 mg/kg (Staffieri
tesis. Alternatively, fluid infusion can begin at the time of
et al., 2009). The time from subarachnoid injection to
epidural administration so that surgical relief of disten-
start of surgery was on average 13 minutes and the goats
sion can be accomplished before a substantial increase in
were standing in approximately 90- 100 minutes. Analge-
urine production occurs.
sia lasted for 3 hours after lidocaine-buprenorphine and
Approximately 5o% of human patients experience
2 hours after lidocaine-xylazine, with a waning effect over
visceral pain during caesarian section under epidural
24 hours.
block with bupivacaine and describe the pain as poorly
localized, dull pain, or as a feeling of heaviness Or
squeezing (Alahuhta et al., 1990). Sheep or goats may
Epidural andintrathecalxylazine and
respond by movement or vocalization to manipulation
dexmedetomidine
of viscera during laparotomy under epidural analgesia
Xylazine has been used for epidural or intrathecal analge-
with lidocaine or bupivacaine. The animals may be made
sia at dose rates ranging from 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg or higher.
more comfortable by IV administration of butorpha-
Xylazine 0.05 mg/kg, diluted with saline to 0.1 mL/kg or
nol, 0.1 mg/kg, diazepam or midazolam, 0.05 mg/kg.
added to other agents, may be used for epidural analgesia
Or xylazine, 0.02 mg/kg. Disadvantages of adjunct drug
 as an adjunct to general anaesthesia for surgery. Systemic
administration include respiratory depression, pharyngeal
 effects of sedation and decreased gastrointestinal motility
relaxation that may promote regurgitation and pulmonary
 may accompany epidural administration of xylazine in
 aspiration, and depression of the lambs or kids delivered
 ruminants. A higher dose of xylazine, 0.4 mg/kg, has been
by caesarian section.
injected at the lumbosacral junction of rams to produce
Sensory block may extend several dermatomes cranial
analgesia for surgery involving lateral deviation of the
to the level of motor block. Limb movement is possible
penis (Aminkov & Hubenov, 1995). Analgesia extended to
even when the animal is sufficienty analgesic for surgery.
T5-T6 within 10 minutes and lasted for 120-140 minutes.
During recovery from epidural block, the ability to move
 Signs of systemic absorption were observed and hind limb
the hind limbs may develop before analgesia is lost,
motor block lasted an average of 224 minutes. In cattle,
although the ability to stand may not return until long
administration of atipamezole 0.025 mg/kg. reversed
after analgesia is gone.
sedation and flank analgesia after epidural block from
Respiratory paralysis can occur if local anaesthetic solu-
 xylazine, 0.05 mg/kg, but only epidural administration of 
tion travels cranially to the neck. This will occur iftoo large
atipamezole reversed the ataxia (Lee et al., 2003).
a volume is injected, e.g. inaccurate calculation of dose. In
An investigation of epidural and intrathecal admini-
this event, general anaesthesia must be quickly induced,
strations
of
dexmedetomidine, approximate
dose
the trachea intubated and controlled ventilation applied
0.0025 mg/kg. in sheep identified the potency of dexme-
until the animal is able to breathe again.
detomidine in the epidural space to be 10-fold higher than
During recovery from epidural block produced by local
when administered in the intrathecal space [Eisenach
anaesthetic solutions, the animal should be allowed to
et al., 1994). Both routes of administration resulted in
recover quietly. It will be able to maintain sternal recum-
rapid decreases in arterial pressure and the mechanism
bency but there is potential for injury to the hind limbs if
proposed was a direct effect on the spinal cord decreasing
 it makes uncoordinated attempts to rise.
sympathetic nervous system outflow.
351
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Caudal epidural nerve block
Forelimb digital nerve blocks
Injection of 2 (1-4) mL (0.5 mg/kg) of 2% lidocaine solu-
 Digital nerves are easily blocked with lidocaine at the sites
tion into the epidural canal through the sacrococcygeal
 described for cattle For total analgesia of the metacarpus
 space will provide caudal epidural analgesia for obstetrical
 and digits, lidocaine or lidocaine plus bupivacaine can be
procedures involving the vagina, vulva, and perineum.
infiltrated subcutaneously circumferentially at the carpal-
Xylazine, 0.07 mg/kg, may be added to the lidocaine for a
 metacarpal junction. Analgesia lasting over 12 hours can
prolonged effect up to 36 hours that would be useful in
be achieved by infiltration of 80% of a combination of
the treatment of vaginal prolapse after lambing (Scott
lidocaine, 1 mg/kg. and bupivacaine 0.5 mg/kg. mixed
1996). A smaller volume of local anaesthetic, 0.75-1.0 mL
well in the same syringe.
of 1% lidocaine, will provide analgesia for the docking of
lamb's tails. Strict attention must be paid to aseptic tech-
Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks
nique to avoid complications and several minutes must be
 allowed for analgesia to develop.
Recent publications have described use of femoral and
sciatic nerve blocks as adjunct analgesic techniques to
Frequently, the procedure is performed with the animal
restrained in a standing position. The wool must be
 general anaesthesia in sheep and goats (Adami et al., 201l;
clipped from over the sacrum and the base of the tail and
Wagner et al., 20ll). The nerves were located by insertion
a surgical scrub applied to the skin. The site for needle
of a 22 gauge nerve locator using a pulse width 0.5 ms.
placement is located by moving the tail up and down and
frequency 1-2 Hz, and an initial current of 2.0 mA. The
palpating the most cranial point of articulation. A 20
 sites for needle insertion are first clipped and cleaned with
 guge hypodermic needle is inserted midline approxi-
a presurgical preparation. With the animal in lateral
mately at a 45 ° angle to the curvature of the rump so that
-puel aul rsouaddn sal ieiins aul yiim Auaqunoan
the tip of the needle enters the vertebral column and may 
marks for the sciatic nerve are the greater trochanter of the
even thread for a few millimetres cranially.
femur and the ischiatic tuberosity. The needle is inserted
Continuous caudal block can be achieved by placement
on an imaginary line between these points at one-third of
of an epidural catheter as described in the previous section.
the distance from the greater trochanter and with the
Local analgesic solution is injected through the catheter
needle at a 60° angle to the skin with the tip of the needle
whenever the animal shows signs of returning sensation.
 directed towards the greater trochanter. Nerve location is
identifed when contraction of the quadriceps and exten-
described.
sion of the hip and tarsus are observed when the current
is reduced to <1.0 mA (generally 0.5 mA)
The femoral nerve is located in the area of the proximal
Paravertebral nerve block
medial thigh. This site can be accessed by abducting the
In sheep and goats, lumbar paravertebral nerve block is
[ewue au suum Aq 1o il gupuaxa pue %og bal [eoigins
over into the opposite recumbency. The femoral artery is
carried out using techniques similar to those employed in
palpated as proximally as possible and the nerve locator
cattle. For incisions through the flank, the thirteenth tho-
needle inserted cranial to the artery and perpendicular to
racic and first three lumbar nerves are blocked. For each
the skin. Contractions of the quadriceps and extension of
of these nerves, up to 5 mL of 1 or 2% lidocaine is used,
the stifle at a current of 0.5 mA identifies the site for injec-
divided and injected using a 20 gauge needle above and
below the transverse ligament, up to a maximum total
tion of bupivacaine.
Bupivacaine [0.5% or 0.75% solution) was injected at
dose of 6 mg/kg lidocaine. Onset of analgesia may be as
fast as 5 minutes. Duration of analgesia is an hour, or
0.5 mg/kg per site. The nerve blocks improved analgesia
'(sanuu sg-o au eisaysaeue ueau] Aiagins sunp
longer when lidocaine with epinephrine is used.
however, the benefit postoperatively was limited to the
first 24 hours in one study (Adami et al., 201l) and pro-
Inverted L block
vided no clear benefit in the other (Wagner et al., 20ll).
Motor blockade of the limb was present during recovery
Flank laparotomy can be performed using local infiltra-
from anaesthesia, lasting less than 4 hours in the sheep
tion of lidocaine in an inverted L pattern 2-3 cm cranial
(Wagner et al., 20ll) and for longer in the goats in which
and dorsal to the intended skin incision site Blebs of
anxiety and abnormal behaviour were observed (Adami
lidocaine must be injected subcutaneously and deep in the
et al., 2011).
abdominal muscle at approximately 1-1.5 om intervals
along the injection site. The maximum dose of lidocaine
Peroneal and tibial nerve blocks
to be injected at one time is 6 mg/kg and dilution of a 2%
-jns apiaoid o Aiessanau aq Aeu uonjos %I oi uonios
Analgesia of the hind limb below the hock can beachieved
ficient volume for injection. The duration of analgesia is
by peroneal and tibial nerve blocks. The peroneal nerve is
about 1.5 hours.
blocked by injection of 5 mL 2% lidocaine [in adult sheep
352
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
and goats, the tourmiquet or sphygmomanometer cuff is
usually placed on the forelimb above the elbow (taking
are not to pinch skin in the axilla) and on the hind
limb above the hock (leaving suffcient length of saphen-
ous vein for injection) (Fig. 13.6). The tourniquet must
be suffciently tight to block arterial flow without being
excessively tight. The animal is less likely to react adversely
to a flat band tourmiquet than a round nubber tube. If
using a sphygmomanometer cuff, it must be inflated to
above systolic blood pressure. Injection of 4 mg/kg
lidocaine without epinephrine should be made slowly
through a 25 gauge needle in the cephalic or saphenous
vein directed towards the foot. Care must be taken to
keep the needle immobile within the vein during injec-
tion. Blood should be aspirated before injection to
confirm needle placement within the vein. Onset of action
is in 15-20 minutes. Analgesia will persist as long as the
uan Aipiden im uonesuas inq aoeid u si ianbiunon
after the tourniquet is removed. The tourniquet should
not be released within 10 minutes of the initial injection
to allow time for the lidocaine to diffuse into tissues.
Thereafter, releasing the tourniquet has no clinical effect
on the animal. No long lasting effect has been noted in
sheep or goats when the tourniquet has been in place
for 2 hours.
Intra-articular local analgesia
The effcacy of intra-articular injection of local anaesthetic
 solution will depend on the nature of the surgery (because
analgesia is limited to intra-articular structures) and the
Figure 13.5 Peroneal and tibial nerve blocks produce
timing of administration. Intra-articular injection of lido-
 analgesia distal to the hock. The hock will straighten and
aine 40 mg. before arthrotomy in adult sheep and
the animal will stand on the dorsum of the fetlock.
another injection of bupivacaine, 10 mg. after joint closure
Z ol e saross uied iamoi Auesyiuais yr paneiosse aiam
hours postoperatively compared with sheep not receiving
 Or goats) where the nerve runs obliquely caudodorsally to
intra-articular analgesia (Shafford et al., 2004). Intra-
cranioventrally approximately 2.5 cm below the lateral
articular injection of 0.75 mg/kg of bupivacaine in anaes-
condyle of the tibia. The nerve can often be palpated by
thetized goats 30 minutes before the start of surgery
using thumbnail pressure to move the skin and underlying
 significantly modified the increases in heart rates and
tissues. Analgesia of the dorsum of the foot is obvious
 mean arterial pressure (MAP) that occurred in response to
from the animal's stance (Fig. 13.5).
stifle manipulation compared with animals injected with
The tibial nerve is blocked by infiltration of 4 mL of 2%
saline ( Krohm et al., 20ll ). However, the level of analgesia
lidocaine solution on the medial side ofthe leg at the hock 
-idnq jo uosalul lesigins-isod 1o -aid 1aua Aq papiaoid
between the flexor tendons and the gastrocnemius tendon.
vacaine was considered insufficient to eliminate the need
A further l mL is injected at a similar site on the lateral
for systemic analgesia.In experimental animals, 0.5%
side ofthe limb to block a small cutaneous nerve, a branch
bupivacaine was found to inhibit synthesis of articular
of the common peroneal nerve originating at the middle
cartilage and cause inflammation whereas exposure to
of the thigh. Onset of analgesia should be within 15
0.125% bupivacaine was indistinguishable from saline
minutes and is accompanied by straightening of the hock
(Webb & Ghosh, 2009). Lesser effects were produced by
[see Fig. 13.5]
lidocaine and ropivacaine. Chondrolysis is an uncommon
condition in humans that appears to develop after con-
tinuous administration of bupivacaine using a ‘pain
Intravenous regional analgesia
 pump' and not from a single injection. The potential for
Surgery on the limbs can be performed using intravenous
occurrence and significance in other species is yet to be
regional analgesia (also known as a Bier block). In sheep
determined.
353
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 13.6 Intravenous regional analgesia in the hind limb of a goat. A tourniquet is tied around the limb proximal to the
intravenous injection of lidocaine.
Infiltration and topical analgesia
(needle point is less sharp than a hypodermic needle) bent
to form a mild curvature to mimic the curvature of the
There has been considerable published research on anal-
globe within the orbit. It is important to deposit local
gesia in sheep for castration, tail docking. and mulesing
anaesthetic between the orbit and extraocular muscles and
[surgical removal of folds of perineal skin to minimize risk
to avoid penetration of the globe. Thus, the needle is
of fly strike). Analgesia may not be required in some coun-
inserted adjacent to the edge of the orbit and directed in
tries for castration of very young ruminants. However, one
a curve close to the bone until the tip is deep within the
study measuring EEG in lambs anaesthetized with haloth-
orbit The syringe must be aspirated before injection to
ane only for rubber-ring castration, identified a relatively
ensure that the needle is not in a blood vessel. The needle
low responsiveness of the cerebral cortex in the first few
should be removed with the same curving action used for
days of life with a progressive increase over the first 10 days
insertion, i.e. not in a straight line.
of life (Johnson et al., 2009). The supposition was that
this would represent the change in response to a noxious
stimulus perceived at different ages. Behaviour changes in
5-, 21-, and 42-day-old lambs after castration and increases
SEDATION
in plasma cortisol concentrations are all indicative of con-
siderable pain after castration in the absence of analgesia
Sedative agents employed in
[Molony et al., l993). Considerable effort has been
expended in the investigation of effective and practical
sheep and goats
analgesia for mulesing (Paull et al., 2007, Colditz et al.
Different sedatives and sedative-opioid combinations.
2009). While not yet defined, significant reduction in indi-
and even low doses of anaesthetic agents such as ketamine,
cators of pain associated with mulesing has been produced
can be chosen to provide the desired characteristics for
by use of topical local anaesthetic and injectable
sedation in a particular situation. Dose rates are listed in
carprofen.
Table 13.2. Descriptions and dose rates of drug combina-
Peribulbar  i
injection of lidocaine, approximately
tions are in the text.
1 mg/kg. or bupivacaine, approximately 0.25 mg/kg, is a
useful adjunct to general anaesthesia for eye enucleation.
Acepromazine
The artery at the medial canthus is easy to lacerate, there-
fore, insertion of the needle at the lateral canthus and
Acepromazine, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg. can be used to provide
mid-dorsal and ventral edges of the orbit is preferred, and
mild tranquilization in sheep and goats. Since acepro-
the total volume of local anaesthetic divided between the
mazine induces vasodilation, this agent should be used
three sites. Injection is made with a 22 gauge spinal needle
cautiously in animals that are dehydrated or hypovolaemic.
354
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
Table 13.2 Anaesthetic agent dose rates for sheep and goats*
Drug
Dose rate
Route
Effect
Acepromazine
0.02-0.1 mg/kg
IM, IV 
 Tranquillization
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
 IM
 Analgesia
Butorphanol
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
IM, IV 
 Analgesia
 Diazepam
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
IV
 Sedation 
 Fentanyl patch
2 μg/kg
Transdermal
Analgesia
 Methadone
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
IM, IV 
 Analgesia
 Midazolam
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
IM, IV 
 Sedation
Morphine
0.2-0.5 mg/kg
IM
 Analgesia
 Xylazine
0.02-0.2 mg/kg
IV lower dose, IM larger dose
 Sedation 
 Diazepam or midazolam
0.25 mg/kg
IV
 Induction of general anaesthesia
+ ketamine
5 mg/kg
Xylazine +
0.1 (-0.2) mg/kg
IM
 Premedication and induction of general anaesthesia
ketamine or
3-5 mg/kg
IV
ketamine 
10 mg/kg
 IM
 Propofol
2-6 mg/kg
IV
Induction of general anaesthesia
Thicpental
 5-20 mg/kg
IV
Induction of general anaesthesia
Tiletamine + zolazepam
2-12 mg/kg
IV
Induction of general anaesthesia
 Pentobarbital
15-25 mg/kg
IV slowly
Induction of general anaesthesia
 Preanaesthetic medication decreases the dose rate of induction and maintenance agents, calms the animal for induction, and provides a
more stable anaesthesia.
*Taylor (1998), Abu Serriah et al. (2007), Schauvliege et al. (2006), Ahern et al. (2009), Raske et al. (2010), Krohm et al. (2011), Wagner
et al. (2011)
premedication prior to induction of anaesthesia with
α2-Agonists
 other anaesthetic agents.
Xylazine, detomidine, medetomidine, dexmedetomidine.
This group of sedatives induces marked physiological
or romifidine provide light to heavy sedation according
changes. A comparison of IV administration of xylazine,
to the drug, dose rate, and route of administration. The
0.15 mg/kg. detomidine 0.03 mg/kg. medetomidine.
saiads iauo auos u pasn ueu suaiajip aie sasuei asop
0.01 mg/kg, and romifidine 0.05 mg/kg. to sheep main-
because ruminants are more sensitive to these agents.
tained in an upright position indicated that all drugs
Variation in the analgesic effects of xylazine has been
caused a significant decrease in PaO2 (hypoxaemia) for 45
noted in different breeds of sheep, for example analgesia
minutes that outlasted the duration of sedation, despite
after xylazine was less in Welsh mountain sheep than in
increased respiratory rates with no significant alteration in
Clun sheep (Ley et al., 1990). The authors hypothesized
PaCO2 (Celly et al., 1997). Thus, hypoxaemia could not
that the difference may have been the result of dosing
be attributed to hypoventilation or to a change in body
according to body weight rather than body surface area,
position. Route of administration may influence pharma-
but other factors such as different body compositions or
cological effects (IM less than IV) as medetomidine,
temperament may have been involved. Animals that are
Aoieiidsai ul patnsai daaqs ul Al paioa[ul y/su sio0
young or sick will require only a low dose to induce
depression and hypoxaemia (Raekallio et al., 1998)
sedation. The degree of sedation obtained from an O2-
whereas medetomidine 0.03 mg/kg. administered IM
agonist sedative can be intensified by combination with
induced a significant decrease in PaOz but hypoxaemia in
a benzodiazepine or an opioid or ketamine. Q2-Agonists
only one out of nine sheep (Kastner et al., 2003). The
can be used alone or in combination to provide satisfac-
duration of sedation was longer after IM administration,
tory sedation for restraint or they can be used for
with peak sedation occurring at 30-40 minutes and the
355
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
time to return of normal behaviour exceeded 6 hours.
may induce excitement (Kyles et al., 1995; Raekallio et al.,
Investigations of the pulmonary changes induced by xyla-
1998). Midazolam IV or IM and diazepam IV will signif-
zine or dexmedetomidine describe diffuse hyperaemia,
cantly increase the intensity of sedation when combined
severe pulmonary capillary congestion progressing to
with another sedative or opioid. Respiratory depression
extravasation of red blood cells into alveoli and moderate
will be increased and, when combined with medetomi-
to severe proteinaceous alveolar oedema at l0 minutes
dine, haemoglobin O2 desaturation will be worse (Raeka-
after IV administration (Celly et al., 1999; Kastner et al.,
llio et al., l
1998). The combination of midazolam,
2007). One study design incriminated a hydrostatic cause
0.25 mg/kg. and butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg. IM provides
of the pulmonary oedema associated with a two- to three-
good sedation in sheep for minor procedures such as radi-
fold increase in pulmonary artery pressure ( Kastner et al.
Ography or cast removal.
2007). Xylazine administration has occasionally been
 Diazepam has been incriminated in the development of
associated with the development of clinical signs of pul-
pulmonary oedema in a sheep (Stegmann, 2000). A 150%
monary oedema in sheep.
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance was measured
 Xylazine induces a short-lived decrease in heart rate and
in experimental sheep 3 minutes after IV injection of
a mild decrease in MAP Detomidine, medetomidine and
diazepam (Pearl & Rice 1989). The pulmonary vascular
romifidine induce significant bradycardia with a transient
 changes have been attributed to propylene glycol induced
(10 minutes) increase in MAP (Celly et al., 1997). Com-
release of thromboxane Az (Quinn et al., 1990).
parison of the effects of dexmedetomidine 2 μg/kg.
Flumazenil, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg, can be used to attenuate
administered IV in sevoflurane-anaesthetized sheep and
or reverse sedation and analgesia induced by benzodi-
 goats revealed similar changes although there was consid-
azepines (Kyles et al., 1995). Sarmazenil is an antagonist
erable variation between individual animals in haemody-
of diazepam and midazolam available in Europe.
namic response (Kutter et al., 2006). Cardiac output and
heart rate significantly decreased, MAP and systemic vas-
Dissociative anaesthetics
cular resistance (SVR) initially increased followed by a
decrease and MAP and central venous pressure (CVP)
A combination of diazepam, 0.25 mg/kg. and ketamine.
increased. Heart rates decreased and CVP increased more
5 mg/kg. can be mixed in the same syringe and adminis-
tered IV in small increments to achieve the desired level
in goats than in sheep. Thus, differences in pharmacologi-
of sedation for minor procedures.
cal effect between individuals are unpredictable and there
 may be a variation in response between anaesthetized and
Opioids and analgesia
conscious animals. No doubt the impact of these cardio-
vascular changes will depend on the dose rate of the agent.
Butorphanol, 0.05-0.20 mg/kg, IM or IV is useful to
concurrent administration of other anaesthetics, and the
increase sedation from acepromazine, O2-agonists, or ben-
physical status of the patient. The use and adverse effects
zodiazepines. Butorphanol has a rapid onset of action and
of Q2-agonists in sheep have been reviewed (Kastner,
 given 5-10 minutes before diazepam or midazolam and
2006).
ketamine facilitates a smooth and relaxed induction of
O2-Agonist sedatives cause decreased intestinal motility
anaesthesia. The duration of effect appears to be 1-2
and frequently result in ruminal bloat. Urine production
hours. The analgesic effects of butorphanol are not great
is increased and care must be taken when administering
and vary with the type of stimulus. For example, butorpha-
these agents to animals with urethral obstruction. Xylazine
nol is considered to provide unsatisfactory analgesia for
is not recommended for use in the last trimester of preg-
orthopaedic surgery.
nancy to avoid increasing contractility ofthe myometrium.
A variety of opioids have been administered to sheep
Blood glucose increases after administration but to a lesser
 and goats to provide analgesia. Meperidine (pethidine).
extent than in cattle.
2-4 mg/kg. IM has been used for many years as an adjunct
Antagonists of the effects of Olz-sedatives include tolazo-
to anaesthesia in sheep and goats. Methadone 0.05-
line, up to 2 mg/kg. or doxapram, 0.5 mg/kg, for xylazine,
0.5 mg/kg. in combination with midazolam, 0.3 mg/kg.
and atipamezole, 25-50 μg/kg. for all the agents. The
IM or IV has been used for premedication to general
antagonists can be administered IV (slowly in increments).
anaesthesia in sheep and goats (Schauvliege et al., 2006;
IM, or half IV and half IM.
Adami et al., 20ll; Krohm et al., 20ll). Morphine is com-
monly administered at a rate of 0.2-0.5 mg/kg (Wagner
Benzodiazepines
et al., 20ll). A higher dose of morphine, 2 mg/kg. IV
during anaesthesia in experimental goats decreased the
Intravenous administration of diazepam, 0.10-0.25
isoflurane requirement for claw clamping by 30%.
mg/kg. or midazolam, 0.10-0.25 mg/kg, may produce
however, the cardiovascular effects were not reported
some sedation, ataxia, and analgesia in sheep and goats
(Doherty et al., 2004).
for 15-30 minutes. The degree of sedation is unpredicta-
The value of buprenorphine as an analgesic agent in
ble in healthy animals and, in some animals, these agents
 small ruminants is in question. Clinical experience has
356
Anaesthesia of sheep, goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
shown that, in healthy sheep and goats, buprenorphine,
 A study comparing IM administered etorphine or carfen-
0.01 mg/kg. IM administered as a premedication agent
tanil, 10, 20, and 40 μg/kg of body weight, in instru-
 before induction of anaesthesia appears to cause no seda-
mented goats described similar effects for both dnugs
tion and minimal reduction in the isoflurane concentra-
(Heard et al., 1996). The goats were rapidly immobilized,
tion required to prevent response to a surgical procedure.
more quickly with carfentanil (≤ 5 minutes) than with
In contrast, administration of buprenorphine, 0.0l mg/kg.
etorphine (5-10 minutes) and etorphine always induced
Aq pabnl se uied aeiaale oi sieade Kiaaeadoisod
transient struggling. Immobilization was characterized by
behaviour change, such as muscle relaxation, cessation of
limb and neck hyperextension with occasional vocaliza-
teeth grinding and reversal of increased respiratory and
tion and bruxation. The goats were partially recovered by
heart rates. Buprenorphine is better given by the IM rather
an hour after etorphine administration but were unable to
than IV route when administered alone as premedication
 stand at 2 hours after carfentanil. Both drugs significantly
in healthy animals because IV administration may induce
increased blood pressure and decreased heart rates without
excitement
or restlessness. Despite pharmacokinetic
changing cardiac outputs. Arterial O2 content was not
studies that have shown that the terminal half-life of
 decreased and the goats did not regurgitate.
s ui ueun iaous si daaus pue sieog ui audouandnq
'e ia uossien-isesu) soop ul ueq 1aoys qonu pue
2007). buprenorphine, 0.01 mg/kg, IM is typically admin-
istered 45 minutes before anaesthesia and subsequently at
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
3-6 hour intervals. Buprenorphine given alone to healthy
animals may induce agitation, however, tolerance devel-
Preparation
Ops after the first injection such that the animals are
calmer after the second and subsequent injections ( Ingvast-
Withholding food and water from small ruminants before
Larsson et al., 2007).
 anaesthesia is not a universal practice. However, many
Experimental tests for analgesia are difficult to trans-
prefer to withhold food for 24 hours and water for 0-12
late to clinical practice. No antinociceptive activity was
hours before anaesthesia whenever possible to decrease
detected for approximately 45 minutes in sheep follow-
 pressure of the rumen on the diaphragm and aid ventila-
ing IV administration of buprenorphine 0.006 mg/kg
tion, to decrease the severity of bloat, and to decrease the
(Waterman et al., 1991). Buprenorphine, 0.0015 mg/kg.
 prevalence and volume of regurgitation. Lambs and kids
provided analgesia to the thermal threshold test for 3.5 h
should be prevented from nursing for 30-60 minutes
but neither this dose nor 0.012 mg/kg produced analge-
before anaesthesia. When heavy sedation or general anaes-
sia to a mechanical threshold test Pharmacokinetic data
thesia is to be administered to an unfasted ruminant.
confirmed that the drug was rapidly distributed in the
rapid-sequence induction of anaesthesia and intubation
body and that there was no correlation between plasma
of the trachea should be performed.
 concentration and analgesic activity. In these animals, IV
H is doubtful if atropine has any value as a general
injection of buprenorphine produced excitement exhib-
premedicant in sheep and goats. The doses necessary to
ited by rapid head movements and the sheep chewing
 on objects. In another study (Grant et al., 1996), sheep
undesirable tachycardia and ocular effects, while smaller
were tested with an electrical current and no analgesia
doses merely make the saliva more viscid and hence more
was detected after administration of buprenorphine,
difficult to drain from the oropharynx. Furthermore atro-
0.005 mg/kg, methadone, 0.6 mg/kg. or flunixin meglu-
mine 2.2 mg/kg, IM. Analgesia was detected after admin-
hours or days, predisposing them to bloat and delaying
istration of xylazine, 0.05-0.2 mg/kg, in a dose-dependent
return to eating. Bradycardia seldom develops during
manner using the same testing device. Another investiga-
anaesthesia, except when an 0z-adrenoceptor agonist sed-
se padde y/sy/sn z 'lueiuay paieduos daaus ul uon
ative has been administered. Severe bradycardia can be
transdermal patches 12 hours before anaesthesia with
treated by administration of atropine, 0.02 mg/kg. or gly-
buprenorphine, 0.0l mg/kg. administered at induction
copyrrolate 0.005 mg/kg, IV. These dose rates may be
and IM every 6 hours to sheep undergoing tibial oste-
 inadequate and repeat doses may be required depending
otomy (Ahern et al., 2009). There were no significant dif-
on the cause of bradycardia. Atropine up to 0.3 mg/kg has
ferences between the induction doses of thiopental and
yiim patepas daaus ul eipieskpeiq ieanl ol pasn uaaq
lidocaine or the isoflurane vaporizer percentages used.
 medetomidine (Clarke, personal communication).
The postoperative pain scores for sheep receiving fenta-
Premedication is not essential before induction of
nyl were significantly lower than those of sheep receiving
general anaesthesia with injectable agents in small
ruminants, as excitement at induction is uncommon.
rescue analgesia was required.
However, prermedication with an opioid and sedative,
Etorphine and carfentanil are potent opioids that gener-
either before or at the time of induction of anaesthesia
 ally are used for immobilization of non-domestic animals.
provides muscle relaxation and analgesia, and decreases
357
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
the dose rate of subsequently administered anaesthetic
agents. Administration of an opioid, such as butorphanol.
0.05-0.20 mg/kg, IM or IV or buprenorphine, 0.01 mg/kg.
IM will improve muscle relaxation and provide some anal-
gesia. Other opioids, as previously described, may be
selected to provide analgesia depending on the procedure
 to be performed.
Anaesthetic techniques
Intravenous injection
There are many sites available for venepuncture in sheep
and goats and the choice depends on the site of the surgi-
cal procedure and the personal preference of the anaes-
thetist. The jugular vein is a common site for placement
of a catheter. Adult sheep and goats are restrained standing
with their heads bent away from the side of catheter inser.
tion. Smaller animals can be restrained in lateral recum-
bency. The wool or hair must be clipped and surgical
preparation of the skin performed before insertion of a
catheter. A subcutaneous bleb of lidocaine at the site of
catheter insertion will decrease the likelihood of the
animal moving in response to the procedure. The vein
should be occluded at the base of the neck, and the cath-
eter (18 or 14 gauge, 7.6-13.3 am long for mature animals)
inserted into the jugular vein directed towards the heart.
The catheter should be capped, flushed with heparinized
saline, and sutured securely to the skin.
The cephalic vein in the forelimb and the saphenous
vein in the hind limb are easily viewed after the wool or
hair over them has been clipped. It should be noted that
Figure 13.7 The cephalic vein in a goat is short and oblique
the cephalic vein is more oblique on the limb than in the
across the forearm (black pen has been used to identify the
dog (Fig. 13.7). Sheep can be effectively restrained by
location on the left cephalic vein in this animal)
lifting them into a sitting upright position (Fig 13.8). The
sheep can be tilted slightly to one side to facilitate access
to the saphenous vein and the position conveniently
extends the hind limb for catheter placement. Goats are
head lowered to allow drainage. Regurgitated rumen mate-
better placed in sternal or lateral recumbency for venepunc-
rial should be quickly scooped out of the mouth before
ture of the cephalic or saphenous veins. A catheter [18
 tracheal intubation is attempted.
gauge, 5 cm long) can be inserted into either vein, capped.
 Endotracheal intubation is best performed under direct
flushed, and secured to the leg with adhesive tape around
vision with the aid of a laryngoscope. Full extension of the
the catheter and around the leg. A Butterfly needle (2l or
head and neck is essential to place the pharynx and trachea
19 gauge) can be used in the cephalic vein.
in a straight line (Fig. 13.9). Strips of gauze around the
The ear veins are easily observed after the hair is clipped,
upper and lower jaws may be used to hold them open and
especially in goats, and can also be used for intravenous
keep the assistant's fingers out of the anaesthetist's view.
injection.
 The assistant holds the tongue in a gauze square for better
grip and draws it out ofthe mouth through the interdental
Endotracheal intubation
 sa aissod se pim se se aun udo a
enormous difference to the ease of insertion of the
After induction of anaesthesia, the sheep or goat should
endotracheal tube into the larynx and trachea. Endotra-
be held in a sternal, head up position until the trachea is
cheal tubes with 1l-12 mm internal diameter (ID) are
intubated and the endotracheal tube cuff inflated to mini-
used for many adult sheep and goats, with sizes larger or
mize the likelihood of regurgitation and aspiration. If
 smaller depending on the breed. A metal or plastic covered
regurgitation occurs during induction of anaesthesia, the
stilette inside the endotracheal tube may be used to stiffen
 animal should be turned into lateral recumbency and the
it and provide more control over the tip of the tube The
8SE
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
qurved shape of 9 mm and 10 mm ID endotracheal tubes
commonly used in dogs facilitates insertion into the
larynx of smaller animals. A thin film of lubricating jelly
should be applied over the cuff of the tube to improve the
seal between the tracheal mucosa and cuff after inflation.
The laryngoscope blade should be used to depress the
dorsum of the tongue and the tip of the blade must be
positioned at the base of the tongue and ventral to the
epiglottis. Downward pressure on the length of the blade
will expose the laryngeal entrance Care must be taken to
avoid damage to the incisor teeth. The tip of the endotra-
cheal tube is placed on the epiglottis and used to flatten
it against the tongue before the tube is advanced into the
larynx and trachea. Slight resistance may be felt as the tube
 passes by the vocal cords. A length of gauze, or other type
of tie, is tied tightly around the tube behind the incisors
and then secured around the back of the head behind the
ears, or around the bottom jaw. The cuff is inflated to
 produce an airtight seal within the trachea when the lungs
are inflated to 25-30 cmHzO.
 An alternative method of intubation involves inserting
a half-metre blunt-ended, thin metal or plastic rod into
the trachea under direct vision, removing the laryngo-
scope then feeding the endotracheal tube over the rod
into the larynx and trachea, whereupon the rod is with-
drawn. The tube may have to be rotated 360° as it enters
the pharynx in order for the tip to pass over the epiglottis
and enter the larynx. Utilizing another method, some
anaesthetists are able to pass the endotracheal tube into
the trachea blindly. The endotracheal tube [which must
Figure 13.8 Restraint of a sheep for injection into the
cephalic vein (or saphenous vein).
have a good curvature to it) is introduced into the mouth
Figure 13.9 Intubation of the trachea is facilitated by extending the head and neck to form a straight line and use of a
laryngoscope to view the laryngeal opening. Note that traction on the tongue must not be used to depress the lower javw.
359
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
with one hand and the tip fed into the larynx, which is
administered IV over 2 minutes in adult sheep. The slow
 gripped externally by the anaesthetist's other hand.
injection of alfaxalone significantly increased heart rates
Tubes lubricated with an analgesic jelly may also be
3 0  91 0 1/2 1  5 1 3 1e y
passed through the nostril. The ventral nasal meatus is
min at l0 minutes and mean arterial pressure decreased
relatively large in sheep and goats and, although tubes
transiently during induction to 74 ± 14 mmHg but soon
passed asoul ueul ialleus aq isnu lusou aul eia passed
returned to a value not different from baseline [Andaluz
through the mouth, reasonably adequately sized ones can
et al., 2012). Respiratory rates and PaCO2 were unchanged,
be used. If the tube passed up the nostril cannot be passed
and the decrease in pHa, primarily metabolic was not
blindly into the larynx, a laryngoscope is used to view the
clinically significant. PaO2 values were between 9.6 and
tip of the tube in the pharynx. The tip of the tube is
12 kPa (72 and 90 mmHg). The duration of anaesthesia
grasped with forceps and assisted into the laryngeal
and time to standing were 6.4 ± 4 and 22 ± 1l minutes,
Opening as the tube is advanced through the nostril.
respectively (Andaluz et al., 2012). The other publication
was directed at evaluating intraocular pressure (IOP)
changes associated with induction of anaesthesia with
Injectable anaesthetic agents
alfaxalone or propofol, 6 mg/kg (Torres et al., 2012). The
Major surgery and prolonged diagnostic procedures in
eyes in both groups were in a rostroventral position, pupils
sheep and goats are usually performed under inhalation
were constricted, and with no change in IOP during the
anaesthesia using injectable agents for induction of anaes-
10 minutes of anaesthesia. The time to standing was
thesia to facilitate endotracheal intubation. The greatest
similar in both groups and averaged 15-16 minutes.
disadvantage to the use of injectable agents for mainte-
Alfaxalone was compared with ketamine for induction
nance of anaesthesia is the high likelihood of hypoxaemia
of anaesthesia in experimental sheep (walsh et al., 2012).
developing. Further, with the exception of propofol,
Alfaxalone, 2 mg/kg. with medetomidine 0.002 mg/kg.
extending anaesthesia time beyond 30 minutes with thio-
and ketamine, 10 mg/kg. with diazepam, 0.5 mg/kg. and
pental or ketamine is often accompanied by prolonged
pue juae rausaeue ype oaa ot, Al paialul aiam
recovery. Thus, total intravenous anaesthesia in sheep and
adjunct was mixed in the same syringe and half injected
goats most commonly involves a continuous infusion of
over 30 seconds, and after 15 seconds half of the remain-
propofol with endotracheal intubation and the animal
ing dose injected, and so on until the sheep was consid-
breathing oxygen. Preanaesthetic agents including an Q2-
ered ready for tracheal intubation. Cumulative dose rates
 nq papnpui kquouuos aie pioido ue io aaiepas isjuose
were on average 80% of the alphaxalone-medetomidine
they also contribute to greater respiratory depression.
mixture and 60% of the ketamine-diazepam. The authors
Administration of oxygen and endotracheal intubation,
commented that anaesthesia with alfaxalone was light,
-sae u ad ass are e a
either because the onset time of medetomidine is slower
thesia induced by any agent combination.
than that of alfaxalone or because drug injection was too
 Each injectable agent has a range of effective dose rates
slow, since their usual practice is to inject the whole cal-
(see Table 13.2). Most commonly. the dose rate must be
culated dose over 1 minute Times from injection to extu-
decreased when drugs administered for premedication
bation and standing were signifcantly shorter in the
result in moderate to severe sedation. Similarly, the dose
alfaxalone group at 5 min and 9 min compared with
rates must be decreased, even by 50-70%, in animals with
10 min and 22 min after ketamine. Oxygenation was
signifcant disease such as urethral obstruction and azo-
lower in the ketamine group.
taemia. Neonatal animals have a decreased requirement
for anaesthetic agents compared with adult animals as a
Etomidate
result of increased blood-brain permeability, decreased
plasma protein binding. and decreased efficiency of dnug
Etomidate is utilized for its lack of cardiovascular depres-
elimination.
 sion and rapid elimination and is most frequently used in
dogs and cats for induction of anaesthesia. There is one
Alfaxalone
report (Clutton & Glasby. 2008) that used etomidate,
0.5 mg/kg. and midazolam, 0.5 mg/kg, IV for induction
The older product of a combination of alphaxalone and
-aisaee j a o rd daaus ul eisasaee go
alphadalone (Saffan@) that was solubilized in Cremophor
sia with an inhalant agent.
EL was injected IV at 3-6 mg/kg to induce anaesthesia
lasting approximately 10 minutes. With the recent intro-
Ketamine
duction of the new formulation of alfaxalone in cyclodex-
trin, no doubt there will soon be many publications
Ketamine when injected alone induces anaesthesia with
concerning the use of this product in small ruminants.
 strong muscle tone and opisthotonus. Previous or concur-
Two recent publications from the same institution
rent administration of a sedative or opioid provides
have described the effects of alphaxalone, 2 mg/kg.
muscle relaxation to facilitate endotracheal intubation
09E
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
(see Table 13.2). A useful drug combination for induction
weight. Guaifenesin is not often used in sheep and goats
of anaesthesia is ketamine, 5 mg/kg. and diazepam or
because of its cost, but it can be used. In one report
midazolam, 0.25 mg/kg. given IV mixed in one syringe or
(Lin et al., 1993), sheep were anaesthetized by rapid
separated. In some animals, one-half to two-thirds of the
administration of 1.2 mL/kg of a mixture of guaifenesin,
calculated dose is sufficient to accomplish endotracheal
50 mg/mL, ketamine, 1 mg/mL, and xylazine, 0.1 mg/mL,
intubation but the remainder of the dose may have to be
combined in 5% dextrose in water and anaesthesia was
administered to facilitate a smooth transition to inhala-
maintained by a continuous infusion of 2.6 mL/kg/h. The
tion anaesthesia. The swallowing reflex may be present
sheep in this study were intubated, breathing air, and the
 and concurrent administration of an opioid will improve
average PaO2 was 4.8 kPa (36.4 mmHg). Administration
muscle relaxation and conditions for intubation. For
of oxygen during anaesthesia with these agents is advisa-
example, butorphanol, 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM 10 minutes
ble to prevent hypoxaemia.
before induction or IV at the time of induction, or hydro-
morphone, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM 15 minutes before induc-
Pentobarbital
tion, or buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg IM 45 minutes before
induction. Other premedication choices before adminis-
 Pentobarbital has been used in the past to induce anaes-
tration of ketamine, 3-5 mg/kg IV, are acepromazine,
thesia in sheep. Duration of anaesthesia is short - about
0.05 mg/kg IM 45 minutes before induction, or xylazine
15 minutes, in contrast to duration in dogs and cats,
0.02-0.1 mg/kg IM or IV 10 minutes before induction. In
 because detoxification of pentobarbital in sheep is rapid.
the case of difficult intubation, additional ketamine,
 The dose rate of pentobarbital without premedication is
1-2 mg/kg IV, can be injected in increments as needed.
20-30 mg/kg administered slowly IV over several minutes.
The combination of ketamine with xylazine is easy to
The dose rate for pentobarbital in goats is similar to
use and produces a longer duration of anaesthesia than
that in sheep with a variable but longer duration of
diazepam-ketamine In goats, onset of anaesthesia is
anaesthesia.
approximately 5 minutes after IM xylazine, 0.1 mg/kg. and
ketamine, 10-ll mg/kg. If attempts at intubation induce
chewing movements, an additional injection of xylazine.
Propofol
0.1 mg/kg IM, should induce complete relaxation. The
 Propofol has a licence for clinical use in dogs and cats. Its 
duration of surgical anaesthesia is 30-40 minutes. Alter-
chief advantage lies in its rapid detoxification and elimina-
 natively, xylazine can be administered IM 5 minutes before
tion resulting in rapid recovery from anaesthesia, even
induction of anaesthesia by ketamine, 2-4 mg/kg IV. The
after multiple supplements. Propofol, 3-7 mg/kg IV, in
duration of anaesthesia is shorter after IV compared with
unpremedicated sheep and goats will induce anaesthesia
IM administration. A disadvantage to the use of xylazine-
suffcient for endotracheal intubation (Pablo et al., 1997).
ketamine to diazepam-ketamine for induction to isoflu-
The dose needed will depend on the speed of injection,
rane anaesthesia is that the arterial blood pressure is
the breed, and the mental state of the animal (i.e calm or
considerably lower with the xylazine combination.
anxious). Premedication of sheep with acepromazine,
A combination of medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg. and
0.05 mg/kg, and papaveretum, 0.4 mg/kg (Correia et al.,
ketamine, 2 mg/kg has been used to anaesthetize sheep
1996). or detomidine 0.0l mg/kg. and butorphanol,
and the effects reversed by injection of atipamezole,
0.1 mg/kg, (Carroll et al., 1998), all given IM, or mida-
0.125 mg/kg (Laitinen, 1990; Tulamo et al., 1995). In
zolam, 0.3 mg/kg IV in goats, (Dzikiti et al., 2010)
one study. anaesthesia was continued by a further
decreased the dose of propofol for intubation in their
injection of medetomidine, 0.0l mg/kg, and ketamine
/  Aaiexade c saips
1 mg/kg (Tulamo et al., 1995). Administration of atipam-
Anaesthesia can be maintained with an inhalant or
ezole 45 minutes after induction of anaesthesia resulted
 maintained by continuous infusion of propofol (TIVA), or
in the sheep standing on average 15 minutes later. Hypox-
both. The cardiopulmonary effects during anaesthesia will
aemia and hypoventilation are consequences of adminis-
reflect the influence of the inhalant and premedication
tration of a combination of medetomidine and ketamine
agents. Intubation of the trachea and allowing the animals
(Caulkett et al., 1994; Tulamo et al., 1995). Cardiac arrest
to breathe oxygen during TIVA is recommended. Apnoea
at induction has been reported (Tulamo et al., 1995).
 may occur at induction of anaesthesia. Minimal (Dzikiti
et al., 20l0) or moderate to severe hypoventilation [Lin
Ketamine and guaifenesin (glyceryl
et al., 1997: Carroll et al., 1998) has been described
guaiacolate, GGE)
in sheep and goats during continuous propofol anaesthe-
sia. Blood pressure may be low after induction of anaes-
Maintenance of anaesthesia with an infusion of guaifen-
thesia with propofol due to decreased myocardial
esin and ketamine after induction of anaesthesia with
contractility and venodilation. Blood pressure will pro-
xylazine and ketamine is a common protocol for total
 gressively rise with time and should achieve an acceptable
intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) in cattle over 200 kg body
value during TIVA.
361
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
The infusion rate of propofol to maintain anaesthesia
after thiopental administration. The duration of anaesthe-
for a medical or diagnostic procedure or surgery is gener-
sia is short, at 5-10 minutes, depending on the dose of
ally within the range 0.2-0.3 mg/kg/min but depends on
thiopental administered. Recovery is usually smooth. Pre-
the premedication, concurrent infusion of adjunct anaes-
 anaesthetic sedation decreases the dose rate proportion-
thetic agents and the intensity of the surgical stimulus.
ately to the degree of sedation.
Propofol provides little analgesia and the animals will be
less responsive to surgical stimulus when they have
Tiletamine-zolazepam
received a sedative or sedative and opioid combination.
Recovery from anaesthesia is usually smooth and rapid,
Intravenous administration of tiletamine-zolazepam pro-
although evidence of CNS stimulation, exaggerated tail
wagging and restlessness, was observed in goats after infu-
Tiletamine-zolazepam may not provide sufficient analge-
sion of propofol and fentanyl, 0.02 mg/kg/h, for TIVA
sia for laparotomy and an additional dnug should be
(Dzikiti et al., 2010).
included for analgesia. Administration of tiletamine-
Combination of propofol with ketamine 'ketofol is an
zolazepam IV alone to sheep at 12 mg/kg resulted in rapid
alternative technique for TIVA that has been reported in
induction of anaesthesia and an average duration of 40
sheep (Correia et al., 1996). Induction was achieved with
minutes (Lagutchik et al., 199l). Apnoea occurred on
propofol, 3 mg/kg, and ketamine, 1 mg/kg. Anaesthesia
induction followed by mild hypoventilation and decreases
was maintained for the first 20 minutes with a combined
in oxygenation. Cardiac output decreased significantly by
infusion of propofol, 0.3 mg/kg/min, with ketamine,
30%, however, heart rates and mean arterial pressures were
0.2 mg/kg/min. This infusion rate was subsequently
not changed. The addition of butorphanol, 0.5 mg/kg. IV
decreased to 0.2 mg/kg/min of propofol and 0.1 mg/kg/
injected either l0 minutes before anaesthesia or at the
min of ketamine Recovery from anaesthesia was rapid and
time of induction resulted in greater respiratory depres-
free from excitement The theory behind this combination
 sion, hypoxaemia (approximately 10 minutes), and dura-
is that since TIVA with ketamine alone in sheep results in
tion of anaesthesia of 30-40 minutes [Howard et al.
-euiquos ul by/su 9'g ie uedazeoz-aueia (0661
rate by including propofol will result in more rapid recov-
tion with butorphanol or ketamine or ketamine and xyla-
ery. Furthermore, ketamine may provide analgesia while
zine results in transient or prolonged decrease in arterial
propofol does not, and ketamine may induce sympathetic
blood pressure or hypotension, 30% decrease in cardiac
stimulation to offset the cardiovascular depression induced
output, and increased pulmonary and systemic vascular
by propofol.
resistances
s [Lagutchik et al., 199l; Lin et al., 1994).
Continuous IV infusion of propofol during isoflurane
Apnoea may occur after induction of anaesthesia and
Or sevoflurane anaesthesia will decrease the vaporizer
 despite minimal change in respiratory rates, mild to mod-
 setting according to the agents used for premedication or
erate hypoventilation is present and hypoxaemia occurs
induction of anaesthesia. In goats anaesthetized with iso-
when the animals are breathing air. In one investigation
flurane only, administration of a bolus dose of propofol.
of tiletamine-zolazepam with or without butorphanol
2 mg/kg., followed by a continuous infusion of propofol
(Lin et al., 1994), anaesthesia time was 25-50 minutes,
at either 0.1 mg/kg/min or 0.2 mg/kg/min decreased iso-
with a longer duration of anaesthesia, 83 ± 27 min (mean
flurane requirement (minimum alveolar concentration
and standard deviation), and a protracted recovery.
[MAC] value) by 35% and 60%, respectively ( Dzilkiti et al.,
mean 4 hours, when ketamine, 6.6 mg/kg. and xylazine,
201la). Ventilation was controlled in this study.
0. 11 mg/kg, were included.
Thiopental
Inhalation anaesthesia
Thiopental has been extensively used to induce anaesthe-
 Inhalation anaesthesia is a popular and reasonably safe
sia in sheep and goats. Onset of action is fast and the dnug
technique for providing anaesthesia for surgery and
can be titrated to achieve the desired effect The dose rate
 medical diagnostic procedures. Halothane was used uni-
to induce anaesthesia in the unpremedicated animal is
versally but is only available now in a few countries. Iso-
wide, 7-20 mg/kg. and the low or high dose does not
flurane or sevoflurane with O2 are the most commonly
seem to correlate with any particular patient characteristic,
used inhalation anaesthetics in ruminants. They offer
not age nor conformation nor degree of ill health. To avoid
 advantages over injectable agents of easy control of depth
overdosage initially a dose of 5-7 mg/kg of 2.5% thiopen-
of anaesthesia, O2 that usually prevents hypoxaermia, facil-
tal should be injected. Within 30 seconds, the degree of
itation for artificial ventilation, and rapid recovery from
CNS depression can be assessed and further small boluses
of dnug administered every 20 seconds until the jaws are
tion agents cause respiratory depression and decreased
relaxed for endotracheal intubation. Endotracheal intuba-
 arterial blood pressure such that controlled ventilation
tion is recommended as regurgitation may occur shortly
and treatment with vasoactive drugs may be necessary.
362
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
Tracheal intubation prior to inhalation anaesthesia is
Potencies of isoflurane, sevoflurane,
commonly accomplished after anaesthesia is first induced
 and desflurane
with injectable agents. Induction of anaesthesia with the
inhalant delivered through a facemask is less desirable in
 The concentration required for anaesthesia (MAC) varies
an adult sheep or goat The longer time for induction
according to the species of animal and the testing condi-
allows accumulation of saliva in the pharynx and increases
tions. Published values for halothane MAC were 0.73-
the time before endotracheal intubation, during which
1.09% for sheep and 0.96-1.4% in goats (see Chapter 6).
regurgitation and aspiration can occur. Induction with an
 Published MAC values for isoflurane in adult non-pregnant
 inhalant to achieve endotracheal intubation requires deep
sheep are 1.42 ±0.19% (Okutomi et al., 2009) and goats 
anaesthesia, causing decreased arterial pressure. Further-
1.29 ± 0.11% and 1.32% (range, 1.29-1.36%) (Hikasa
 more, induction using a mask is often physically resented
et al., 1998; Dzikiti et al., 201ib). Anaesthetic require-
by the adult animal. In contrast, anaesthesia is easily
ments for inhalants are decreased by pregnancy, and a 21%
induced in young lambs and kids with isoflurane or
reduction in isoflurane to 1.02 ± 0.12% was measured in
sevoflurane via facemask.
pregnant sheep (Okutomi et al., 2009). MAC was reported
Anaesthetic breathing systems that are used for dogs can
to be 50% decreased in newborn lambs compared with
be used for sheep and goats. The initial vaporizer seting
adult pregnant sheep (Gregory et al., 1983), however,
will depend on the anaesthetic agents used for induction
MAC requirement increased in the first 12 hours of life.
of anaesthesia, the potency of the anaesthetic agent
 The MAC value reported for sevoflurane in sheep is 1.92
[MAC), and the type of breathing system. For example.
±0.17% and a decrease was measured to 1.52 ±0.15% in
after induction and intubation in animals anaesthetized
 pregnant sheep (Okutomi et al., 2009). The MAC value
with acepromazine and thiopental, or butorphanol or
reported for sevoflurane in adult non-pregnant goats is
buprenorphine, midazolam and ketamine, and connec-
2.33 ± 0.15% (Hikasa et al., 1998). The MAC value for
tion to a circle circuit, the vaporizer (precision vaporizer)
desflurane in sheep was measured as 9.5% (Lukasik et al.,
may be set at 1.5x MAC with an Oz flow rate of 1-2 L/
1998) and 10.5 ±2.4% for goats (Alibhai, 2001)
min. In contrast, after induction of anaesthesia with
 The cardiopulmonary effects of isoflurane, sevoflurane,
xylazine or dexmedetomidine and ketamine, or with
and desflurane have been investigated in sheep and goats
tiletamine-zolazepam, the CNS depression is greater and
(Hikasa et al., 1998, 2000; Mohamadnia et al., 2008;
the vaporizer setting should be lower, for example, 0.5-
Okutomi et al., 2009). In a light plane of anaesthesia,
1.0x MAC. In either case, as the depth of anaesthesia
 cardiovascular values remained within acceptable ranges
changes with time and onset of surgery, the vaporizer
 in isoflurane and sevoflurane anaesthetized goats ( Hikasa
 setting can be adjusted up or down as needed. After about
et al., 1998). Increasing depth of anaesthesia resulted in
20 minutes, when the blood anaesthetic concentrations
 progressive decreases in MAP and systemic vascular resist-
are more stable, O flow can be reduced to 1.0 L/min, or
ance and severe increases in PaCOz. Increasing depth of
less if desired, to limit wastage of inhalant agent It should
isoflurane or sevoflurane anaesthesia from 1 to 2 MAC in
be remembered that a consequence of a low O2 flow into
 goats during controlled ventilation significantly decreased
a circle circuit connected to a large (70 kg) animal is a
MAP, systemic vascular resistance, and cardiac index
circuit anaesthetic concentration that may be considerably
(Hikasa et al., 1998). Changes in cardiovascular parame-
less than the vaporizer setting. for example, 1% inspired
ters in anaesthetized sheep and goats were not different
isoflurane with a 1.5% vaporizer setting.
between isoflurane and sevoflurane. Recovery from desflu-
Small lambs and kids may be connected to a non-
rane and sevoflurane in goats was faster than from isoflu-
rebreathing circuit. The inspired anaesthetic concentration
rane (Alibhai, 200l). The characteristics and effects of
is the same as the vaporizer setting and thus during
 anaesthesia will vary according to which combination of
maintenance of anaesthesia should be 1.0-1.5x MAC,
injectable and inhalation agents is used. For example,
depending on the degree of preanaesthetic sedation and
 sheep were anaesthetized with xylazine and ketamine and
administration of adjunct drugs.
anaesthesia maintained for orthopaedic surgery with
 Supplementation during anaesthesia with bolus doses
mean end-tidal concentrations of either l.41% isoflurane.
of an opioid, or a continuous rate infusion (CRl) of an
2.1% sevoflurane, or 7.04% desflurane [Mohamadnia
opioid, lidocaine, or ketamine, or combination of these,
et al., 2008). During recovery, the times of return to swal-
will decrease the concentration of inhalation agents
lowing, extubation, and head lift were the same for all
required to prevent response to surgical stimuli and
three inhalation agents.
thereby decrease the negative impact on arterial pressure.
 An investigation of the effects of isoflurane and sevoflu-
aseau eu suaans pasn suae au uo suuada
jo sp 1i-ai ie daus uun u eisae a
or minimize respiratory depression. Addition of a neu-
gestation involved measurement of uterine blood flow
romuscular blocking agent is not common for general
using an ultrasonic flow meter (Okutomi et al., 2009). No
as u u aq  q sa a
 adverse changes were measured during administration of
investigations or complicated clinical surgeries.
0.5 or 1.0 MAC of either agent. With increasing depth of
E9E
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
anaesthesia, significant decreases in maternal and fetal
mean arterial blood pressure [MAP) and increased PaCO2
beneficial effect by this author and others [Ahern et al.,
occurred at 1.5 MAC; at 2.0 MAC, there were significant
2009; Raske et al., 20l0). To ensure continued attachment
decreases in matermal and fetal MAP matermal heart rate
of the patch to the skin, the area must be clipped, prepped
(HR), and pHa. Although the decrease in uterine blood
 as if for a surgical procedure and dried, and an occlusive
flow was not statistically significant, fetal arterial pressure
dressing placed over the patch.
decreased to a greater extent than maternal during deep
anaesthesia. Dose related changes in uterine blood flow
and maternal HR and MAP and fetal HR and MAP were
Lidocaine
not different between the two agents at all stages of meas-
Lidocaine infusion, 0.025-0.05 mg/kg/min (1.5-3 mg/
urement. Recovery was faster after sevoflurane than isoflu-
kg/h) can be used during inhalation anaesthesia to
rane anaesthesia.
decrease the % of inhalant agent required to prevent
movement or autonomic responses to surgical stimula-
tion. In an experimental investigation of lidocaine infu-
Nitrous oxide
sion, 100 μg/hg/min, MAC reduction was much less in
Nitrous oxide (NzO) can be used as an analgesic adjunct
anaesthetized goats than in dogs and horses (Doherty
to injectable anaesthesia or used to supplement and
et al., 2007). Interestingly, plasma concentrations of lido-
decrease the inhalant anaesthetic concentration. A major
caine were lower in the goats than measured in dogs for a
disadvantage of NzO is that it rapidly diffuses into the
given infusion rate.
rumen and causes bloat and respiratory compromise.
Therefore, NzO is rarely administered to ruminants
Ketamine
Ketamine infusions, 1.5 mg/kg/h, in experimental
Adjunct agents
isoflurane-anaesthetized goats
decreased
1isoflurane
requirement by 50% in response to a forceps claw clamp
Opioids
(Doherty et al., 2007). Recovery from anaesthesia was
Remifentanil.
0.75-2.0 μg/kg/min,1
100 μg/mL,
rapid and uneventful. In an investigation of sheep under-
was
 going experimental stifle surgery, infusions of ketamine,
anaesthetized for fetal surgery (Webster et al., 2005). Con-
0.6 mg/kg/h, and lidocaine, 1.2 mg/kg/h, significantly
trolled ventilation was required to treat hypoventilation
decreased the isoflurane requirement by approximately
and periodically the infusion rate had to be increased in
23% when compared with animals not receiving infusions
response to surgical stimulus in order to keep the vapor-
(Raske et al., 2010). Ketamine infusion, 1.2 mg/kg/h IV.
produced a decrease in isoflurane requirement in unstimu-
izer setting constant. All sheep were standing within an
lated experimental sheep anaesthetized with isoflurane
hour of discontinuation of anaesthesia.
 but it did not prevent the need to increase markedly the
Fentanyl infusions have also been used in sheep to
 allow lower isoflurane vaporizer settings. In an experimen-
vaporizer seting at the onset of surgical stimulus (Trim,
unpublished observations). Concurrent IV infusions of
tal study in goats (Dzikiti et al., 20llb), a 34% decrease in
isoflurane requirement was measured after a fentanyl
ketamine 1.2 mg/kg/h, and lidocaine, 3.0 mg/kg/h, with
bolus of 5 μg/kg followed by an infusion of fentanyl, 5 μg/
a loading dose of lidocaine, 1 mg/kg, in sheep that had
kg/h. Higher dose rates of 15 μg/kg fentanyl bolus with
fentanyl transdermal patches, 2 μg/kg. applied 12 hours
before anaesthesia, decreased the end-tidal concentration
15 μg/kg/h infusion or 30 μg/kg bolus with 30 μg/kg/h
infusion decreased isoflurane requirements by 57% and
of isoflurane to approximately 60% x MAC and provided
74%, respectively. Recovery from anaesthesia was described
satisfactory intraoperative analgesia for minor orthopaedic
as good although exaggerated tail wagging [indicative of
surgeries (Trim, unpublished observations). Hypoventila-
opioid stimulation) was observed in some goats that
tion was corrected by controlled ventilation. Recoveries
received the two higher dose rates. These goats received
from anaesthesia were good.
 only isoflurane and fentanyl, consequently, care should be
taken to avoid overdose with the higher dose rates of
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
fentanyl when other injectable agents are used for induc-
tion of anaesthesia.
Although carprofen, 2-2.2 mg/kg. or flunixin meglumine,
Variable plasma concentrations were measured in goats
1-1.1 mg/kg. SC do not block the effects of intense pain
in a pharmacokinetic study of fentanyl administered by
or cortisol response to pain, these agents provide some
transdermal patch (Carroll et al., 1999). However, fenta-
relief after surgical procedures as evidenced by ameliora-
nyl patches, 2 μg/kg/h, applied to the forelimb between
tion of behaviour (Grant et al., 1996: Paull et al., 2007:
carpus and elbow or elbow and shoulder have been used
Colditz et al., 2009).
364
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
Neuromuscular blockade
should also receive 5% dextrose in water at 2-5 mL/kg/h.
Occasionally, an adult ruminant develops hypoglycaemia,
Administration of atracurium, 0.5 mg/kg, or mivacurium,
 and this should be suspected any time that recovery is
0.2 mg/kg. IV as loading doses have been used to achieve
 more prolonged, or if the animal is more lethargic than
neuromuscular blockade in sheep, followed by one-third
 expected after recovery from the inmmediate effects of the
of the loading dose to prolong blockade when there was
anaesthetic agents. The haematocrit and total protein
evidence of return of neuromuscular transmission (Clutton
measurements decrease at the onset of inhalant anaesthe-
& Glasby, 2008). This study documented heart rates and
sia (Hikasa et al., 2000), similar to the effect measured in
 dogs and presumed due in part to splenic sequestration.
edrophonium for reversal of neuromuscular blockade In
contrast to humans and dogs, edrophonium increased,
and atropine decreased, these variables. The dnug combi-
Monitoring
mation that resulted in least autonomic change was atro-
 The position of the eyeball during inhalation anaesthesia
pine, 0.08 mg/kg, with edrophonium, 0.5 mg/kg.
ul paaiaqo uaed aun on ieus si daus pue steo u
anaesthetized dogs: the eye rolls rostroventral between
Anaesthetic management
light and medium depth anaesthesia, and returns to
central position during deep plane of anaesthesia (some
Positioning
variation with different agents). Occasionally, during light
A cuffed endotracheal tube should be inserted and the cuff
anaesthesia, the eye will rotate dorsally ('star gazing'). The
inflated while the animal is in sternal recumbency with
palpebral reflex is lost between medium to deep anaesthe.
the head elevated. After intubation and during anaesthe-
sia. The pupil should be a narrow slit during an adequate
sia, the head and neck should be positioned so that the
 plane of inhalation anaesthesia and dilates in light or deep
 anaesthesia. The pupil dilates after ketamine administra-
nose is lower than the pharynx for drainage of saliva and
any regurgitated ruminal fluid (Fig. 13. 10). Salivation will 
tion although, if the dose rate is low, the pupil may close
continue throughout anaesthesia. Saliva ceases to flow
down during inhalation anaesthesia.
 An anaesthetic gas analyser may be used to monitor
E asiaq i xueu au ui uene si i uaum Au
deep plane of anaesthesia has decreased production.
end-expired anaesthetic agent concentration. The highest
value that should be allowed is 1.5 times the MAC of the
u ssa enuiisqns i in rena uoanuo y ue
Fluid therapy
Balanced electrolyte solution, such as lactated or acetated
medetomidine or anaesthesia includes a continuous infu-
Ringer's solution at 5-10 mL/kg/h should be infused IV
 sion of opioid, propofol, ketamine, or lidocaine. Older
 anaesthetic gas analysers utilizing infrared technology
when surgery is being performed or when anaesthesia time
becomes extended. Animals less than 3 months of age
were inaccurate with halothane because they detected
methane in the ruminant's breath and counted it as
halothane. The problem occurs occasionally with isoflu-
rane and is minimal with sevoflurane and desflurane.
Respiratory rates are usually 15-30 breaths/minute.
Hypercarbia  caused by  hypoventilation  (primarily
decreased tidal volume) is common in anaesthetized
sheep and goats. Rumen bloat may develop during anaes-
aul uo ainssaid pue susey aaneiadoaid andsap eisau
diaphragm impairs ventilation and contributes to
increased PaCO2. One consequence of decreased ventila-
tion may be inadequate depth of anaesthesia despite a
high vaporizer setting, due to insufficient agent uptake in
the lungs. Tachycardia, and sometimes hypertension, may
develop as a consequence of the hypercapnia and these
parameters should return to normal values after the onset
of controlled ventilation. Hypercarbia causes portal vein
Figure 13.10 The head of this anaesthetized alpaca has
vasoconstriction that may contribute to hepatic ischaemia
been elevated to prevent nasal congestion and the head
[Box13.1]
Capnography is a non-invasive monitor of ventilation
drainage of saliva. A catheter in an ear artery was used for
and an end-tidal COz value of >55 mmHg is an indica-
direct measurement of arterial blood pressure. A pulse
tion for the need for artificial ventilation. Tidal volumes
oximeter probe is clipped to the tongue.
of 12-15 mL/kg at 8-12 breaths/minute with peak
365
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Right hindlimb
Box 13.1 Potential consequences of
(cranial view)
hypoventilation
Increased PaCOz (hypercarbia, hypercapnia, respiratory
Right forelimb
Cranial tibial
acidosis)
(palmar view)
artery
 Decreased arterial Oz content
 Inadequate uptake of inhalation anaesthetic agent
 Tachycardia
Radial artery
 Hypertension or hypotension
 Hepatic ischaemia
inspiratory pressures of 18-25 mmHg should maintain
Palmar
arterial CO2 concentration within normal values. Sheep
metacarpal
artery
animal is breathing spontaneously may reverse some of
the collapse Controlled ventilation started immediately
after induction of anaesthesia may limit lung collapse.
Applying positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) can also
 prevent lung collapse Bloating can often be relieved by
passage of a wide bore tube through the mouth and into
the rumen, however, the tube is easily blocked by ingesta.
Tachycardia as a result of rumen bloat will not disappear
until the rumen is decompressed.
Haemoglobin O saturation and pulse rate can be moni-
tored using a pulse oximeter probe on the tongue, lip, or
ear. Oxygenation is usually adequate when the inspired
 gas is O2 rich. Peripheral arteries that are easily palpated
or can be used for non-invasive methods of blood pressure
Figure 13.11 Schematic drawing of the arteries on the
measurement are on the caudomedial side of the forelimb
forelimbs and hind limbs for palpation of pulses and indirect
blood pressure measurement.
above or below the carpus and on the hind limb on the
dorsal surface of the metatarsus (Fig. l3.ll). Doppler
ultrasound and oscillometric methods are used for non-
invasive arterial blood pressure measurement (NIBP) and
A Butterfly needle or 22 or 20 gauge catheter can be
provide valuable information for management of anaes-
inserted for direct measurement of arterial pressure and
thesia. It must be remembered that the values obtained
for collection of blood for pH and blood gas analysis.
may not be accurate for all individuals. Comparison of an
 Some published normal values measured in awake sheep
oscillometric monitor (Surgivet Advisor) with invasive
are pHa 7.53 ±0.01, PaCO23.9 ±0.1 kPa (29 ±0.8 mmHg).
blood pressure measurement in isoflurane-anaesthetized
PaOz 13.4 ± 0.5 kPa (10l ± 4 mmHg) (Okutomi et al.,
sheep determined that correlation between the two
2009) and awake goats are pHa 7.48 ± 0.03, PaCO 4.8 ±
methods was good but that, in general, NIBP slightly over-
0.5 kPa (36 ± 3.7 mmHg). PaO 10.6 ± 1.3 kPa (80 ±
estimated systolic pressures and underestimated diastolic
10 mmHg). and base excess 3.3 ± 4.9 mmol/L (Hikasa
and mean arterial pressures (Trim et al., 2013). No differ-
et al., 1998).
ence was found between pressures obtained from cuffs on
Heart rates are most frequently between 60 and 120
the hind limb or forelimb. Measurement of SAP 80 mmHg
beats/minute, except that when an Q2-agonist has been
seue aos ui inq uoisuanoday yim panejaon ssal 1o
administered they are lower Heart rates less than 55 beats/
a MAP of 60 mmHg resulted in diagnosis of hypotension
min should be considered as bradycardia and heart rates
when there was none.
 greater than 140 beats/min should be investigated for pos-
Invasive measurement of arterial pressure involves cath-
sible abnormal cause Mean arterial pressure is generally
eterization of the auricular arteries located on the outside
75-95 mmHg during anaesthesia; less than 65 mmHg is
of the ear (see Chapter 2, Fig. 2.17: Fig. 13.10). When the
hypotension.
ear is folded along its natural crease, the median auricular
It is not uncommon for the animal's temperature to
artery can be observed just rostral to the edge of the fold.
decrease to 37.2°C (99°F) before anaesthesia after 24
99E
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
hours without food. Hypothermia may develop during
Recovery
anaesthesia and efforts should be made to prevent heat
The animal should be placed in a sternal position at the
loss. Sheep and goats require external application of
heat when rectal temperature decreases to 35.5°C
end of anaesthesia so that gas in the rumen can be voided
through the mouth while the endotracheal tube is in place.
(96 °F) to avoid prolonged recovery. Conversely, anaesthe-
 u hnsn  a n e u ei
Regurgitation during anaesthesia should not be a problem
when the endotracheal tube is in position and the cuff
Temperature in clinical patients can be monitored with
adequately inflated. If possible, the head should be posi-
a thermometer or probe inserted 3-5 cm into the
rectum, through the oesophagus into the thorax, or
tioned so that ingesta cannot accumulate in the nasal
meatus. Solid rumen material should be removed from the
inserted in the nasal meatus. Accuracy of peripheral tem-
pharynx before the end of anaesthesia. It must be remem-
perature measurements in comparison with pulmonary
bered that regurgitation may occur when the animal is
artery blood confirmed that rectal temperature accurately
wa king up. Consequently, the endotracheal tube must not
reflects core temperature in anaesthetized normovolaemic
be removed until the animal is chewing, swallowing and,
and hypovolaemic sheep, but is altered in the presence of
most importantly, can withdraw its tongue back into its
epidural nerve block (Mansel et al., 2008). Temperature
measured in the nose or ear will be lower than core
mouth; this may be a considerable time after the animal
is able to lift up its head. The endotracheal tube must be
temperature.
held to the front ofthe mouth as the cheek teeth are sharp
and easily lacerate the endotracheal tube or the tube con-
Treatment of hypotension
nected to the pilot balloon.
Recovery is usually quiet. If the sheep or goat starts to
Mean arterial blood pressures less than 65 mmHg should
rise too soon, pressure over the back and withers usually
be treated appropriately according to the suspected cause
of the hypotension. Anaesthetic agent-induced vasodila-
maintains the animal in stermal recumbency. Full control
of swallowing and gastrointestinal motility may not return
tion causing a relative hypovolaemia should frst be treated
 by decreasing the vaporizer setting. In some cases, this step
for several hours after xylazine or medetomidine admin-
might include administration of an adjunct dnug to
istration and feeding must be delayed. Hay or grass and
water may be allowed 3 hours after anaesthesia is discon-
provide additional analgesia while maintaining decreased
inhalation  agent administration. Circulating blood
tinued with most anaesthetic agents used in these species.
volume should be expanded with a 10 mL/kg bolus of
balanced electrolyte solution and/or infusion of hetas-
Assessment of pain
tarch, 5-10 mL/kg. over 15 minutes.
Cardiac contractility can be increased by IV infusion of
Clinical signs of pain can be masked by the animal's
dopamine or dobutamine, 5-7 μg/kg/min of a 100 μg/mL
 anxiety about surroundings, separation from the herd, and
solution in 0.9% saline. Dopamine will elevate blood
proximity of an unknown human. These may have a pro.
 pressure through vasoconstriction at the higher dose rate.
found effect on activity, respiratory rates and heart rates.
Once the desired MAP is reached, the infusion rate of
 Slow movements and familiarization with an individual
either agent can be reduced but generally has to be
will allow the animal to be calm and accept examination.
continued to the end of anaesthesia. Ephedrine, 0.06-
 Teeth grinding has been associated with discomfort or
0.10 mg/kg, injected as a bolus IV may increase blood
 pain but can also be a sign of anxiety as it may be observed
pressure by causing splenic contraction, vasoconstriction,
increased cardiac contractility and increased heart rate.
 decreased weight bearing and lameness are obvious signs
Ephedrine may be used alone or in conjunction with
 of discomfort Reluctance to stand may or may not be an
dopamine or dobutamine The duration of effect from a
 indication of pain, since this behaviour may become mod-
bolus of ephedrine varies from 10 to 40 minutes. Repeat
ified within several hours as the sheep become accustomed
doses may be administered but are not always as effective
to being handled. Conversely, sheep may be reluctant to
as the first (tachyphylaxis).
lie down and persist in standing with a hunched back.
Blood loss should be estimated by counting blood-
Sheep and goats normally eat voraciously after anaesthesia
 soaked gauzes or by estimating the volume of blood in a
and the lack of interest in eating is an obvious sign of lack
suction bottle or in a bucket placed under the surgery
of well-being.
table Blood volume of sheep and goats is 60 mL/kg and
A variety of clinical signs can be monitored in an
a significant decrease in cardiac output develops at a loss
attempt to determine the degree of postoperative discom-
of 15%. Up to that point, blood loss can be accommo-
fort and a number of pain scoring systems have been
dated by infusion of up to 2.5 times the volume of blood
published (Table 13.3). Sheep and goats may fail to show
lost with crystalloid fluid, with the addition of hetastarch,
clinically obvious signs of pain that more sophisticated
5-10 mL/kg, and hypertonic 7.5% saline solution,
techniques may detect. For example, sheep anaesthetized
2-4 mL/kg. if needed.
for experimental facial surgery (Abu-Serriah et al., 2007)
L9E
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 13.3 Example of a pain assessment score for sheep following limb surgery
Variable
Score
0
2
3
Mental assessment
 Normal and alert
Slight change or some 
No score
 Signs of depression
depression
Temperature*
 Normal
Abnormal
Heart rate*
 Normal
 Abnormal
Respiratory rate*
 Normal
 Abnormal
Recumbency
 Normal
No score
No score
 Sitting all the time
Ease of standing
 Normal, gets up easily
 Slighitly delayed rising
Requires encouragement to
 Unwilling or unable to stand
 stand
 Limb position
Weight bearing
Mostly weight bearing
 Occasionally bearing weight
 Unable or unwilling to bear
weight
 Shifting weight
 Normal
Mild or occasional
 Moderate
Constantly shifting
 Relationship to
 Normal - mostly nearby
No score
 Spends more time separately
 Stays away constantly
pen partner
Appetite
Interested in eating/cudding 
Mildly reduced interest 
 Moderately reduced interest
Inappetant
Palpation of
 No signs of pain but may lift
 Mild response
Moderate signs of pain,
 Severe signs of pain, startles
 surgical site 
foot in response to touch
avoidance response
 Scores
*Establish reference ranges for species, breed, in the recovery environment to be used. Identify a score that dictates use of rescue analgesia.
(Modified from Ahern et al., 2009)
were given lidocaine infiltration, morphine systemically
under the animal's thorax and caudal abdomen to prevent
during surgery, carprofen, and buprenorphine postopera-
 the animal assuming sternal recumbency. Most llamas and
tively for up to 24 hours after surgery. Despite apparent
alpacas tolerate a halter with a rope lead. Suggestions for
acceptable behaviour, it was determined that the sheep
manual restraint include holding the haltered head and
had developed hyperalgesia (exaggerated response to
exerting the full force of your weight on the hind limbs to
noxious stimuli applied remote from the injury) in the
force the animal into a sternal recumbent submissive posi-
fore limbs and allodynia (increased sensitivity to touch)
tion (Jessup & Lance, 1982). This works because the fore-
for 3 days after surgery.
limbs are the main weight bearers and the hind limbs
cannot be locked up. Tapping behind the knee of the
forelimb may help. Weanlings or yearlings should not be
tied as they may struggle and injure cervical vertebrae.
Camelids
Aggressive handling or striking an animal will result in
fear, distrust and spitting.
INTRODUCTION
LOCAL ANALGESIA
Lamas (Lama glama) may weigh up to 200 kg and live up
to 20 years. Alpacas (Lama pacos) commonly weigh
sue asa4 3y 001 0n dn 4aia Ae 1nq 3 08-59
Applications for local anaesthesia
should be handled with care as llamas can kick, swinging
Caudal epidural analgesia
the limb forward and out, and males may bite. Use of side
rails is not advised, as a leg can be broken. Some com-
Caudal epidural injection of lidocaine, xylazine, or a com-
 a r 'ss a s il 
bination of these has been evaluated in llamas (Gnubb
898
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
withdrawn. The lower dose of lidocaine is recommended
Table 13.4 Comparison of mean times for onset and
for llamas weighing less than 30 kg. These authors noted
duration of epidural analgesia with 2% lidocaine,
that llamas given butorphanol are not sedated but also
0.22 mg/kg, and diluted 10% xylazine, 0.17 mg/kg,
that they do not exhibit the signs of discomfort and rest-
in six llamas
lessness during the procedure that have been observed in
animals castrated with only local analgesia.
Treatment
Onset (min)
Duration (min)
Caudal epidural analgesia has also been used for castra-
Lidocaine
3
71
tion (see earlier).
 Xylazine
21
187
Caesarian section
Lidocaine/xylazine
4
326
Surgical approach through the left paralumbar fossa with
Grubb et al, 1993.
the animals sedated and restrained in right lateral recum-
bency has been recommended for caesarian section
[Anderson, 2009). Sedation can be provided by a low dose
of butorphanol and analgesia by lidocaine infiltration as
et al., 1993). Injections were made into the sacrococcygeal
 a line block or inverted-L. It was also stated that crias are
space where the epidural space is shallow and easily
minimally affected by maternal administration of a low
entered. The procedure was performed with a 20 gauge.
dose of xylazine. In contrast, this author's experience with
2.5 om long needle inserted at a 60° angle to the base of
other ruminants has been that maternal sedation with
the tail. Onset of action was rapid after injection of lido-
 xylazine results in significant sedation of lambs and calves
caine and analgesia lasted longest when a combination of
delivered by caesarian section.
lidocaine and xylazine was used (Table 13.4). Ataxia did
not develop, although the llamas tended to lie down. The
dose rate of xylazine used in this study was toward the
high end of the dose range used in ruminants and from
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
which some systemic effects are to be expected. Mild seda-
tion developed in half the llamas given epidural xylazine,
Preparation for anaesthesia
beginning 20 minutes after injection and lasting for 20-30
minutes. The synergistic effect on duration of analgesia
A number of publications are available documenting the
caused by combining xylazine with lidocaine is similar to
reference ranges for haematological and biochemical
that in horses
values in llamas and alpacas (Fowler & Zinkl. 1989;
Caudal epidural analgesia has been used during castra-
Hajduk, 1992). In comparison with common domestic
tion of alpacas aged 6 to 18 months (Padula, 2005). The
a    se  s '
-a lem e isie dn paunsn ane aiam seee
cyte counts (1l-14x1ol2/L) and small mean corpuscular
dural injection was made through a 22 gauge 1.5 inch
volume, with packed cell volumes of 0.25-0.45 L/L (25-
needle inserted in the first coccygeal space identified as the
45%). Blood glucose concentrations of 108-156 mg/dL
depression located by manipulating the tail up and down.
were measured in nursing 2-6-month-old llamas com-
Three combinations were compared: 1.5 mL of 2% lido-
 pared with 74-154 mg/dL in adult llamas.
caine, 1 mL 2% lidocaine with IM 20 mg 2% xylazine, and
 Preparation for anaesthesia is the same as for sheep and
0.75 mL of a 1: 1 combination of 2% xylazine and lido-
goats.
 Bloat, regurgitation, and aspiration can occur in
caine Some animals in each treatment group showed
llamas and, therefore, the animals should be fasted for 24
signs of inadequate analgesia of the spermatic c
cord during
hours and water withheld for 8-12 hours before elective
application of the emasculators, and supplemental lido-
 anaesthesia. Crias may take solid food as early as 2 weeks
caine infiltration was required.
but weaning may not occur until age 4-7 months. Fasting
is not usually done in paediatric patients because of the
Local analgesia for castration
risk for hypoglycaemia except that nursing is prevented for
30-60 minutes before anaesthesia. A rapid induction and
A technique for castration in the standing llama has been
intubation sequence with the animal in sternal or upright
performed in more than l00 animals without complica-
 position until tracheal intubation is accomplished is nec-
tions (Barrington et al., 1993). Butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg.
 IM was administered 15 minutes before applying a surgi-
fasted.
cal scrub to the perineal region. Lidocaine, 2-5 mL of a
Severe bradycardia was reported occurring during
2% solution, was injected into each testicle until it became
halothane anaesthesia and there is some preference for
turgid and a further 1-2 mL was deposited subcutane-
premedication with atropine, 0.02 mg/kg (Riebold et al.,
ously at the site of the proposed incision as the needle was
1989).
69E
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
-1
3-4 cm dorsal
to angle of ventral
border of mandible.
Skin is thick.
Cranial to the ventral
Figure 13.13 The long 35 cm Wisconsin laryngoscope blade
process of 5th cervical
vertebra. Carotid
is useful for intubation of adult llamas, seen here in
shop abel jo uoeanui iot pasn apeia e ym uoseduo
artery nearby.
When the carotid artery has been penetrated, pressure
should be immediately applied with a fist for 5 minutes
Figure 13.12 Schematic drawing showing the landmarks for
 91 1o a 1  y a e Pi 0
jugular vein puncture in llamas.
13 cm long catheter is inserted in adult llamas or alpacas.
Occasionally, threading the catheter may be hindered by
prominent valves in the vein. Other veins, such as an ear
Anaesthetic techniques
vein, cephalic vein, or saphenous vein can be used in
depressed, sedated, anaesthetized, or young animals.
Venepuncture
Jugular venepuncture for collection of blood or placement
Endotracheal intubation
of a catheter is not as easy as in sheep and goats. Two sites
are recommended (Fig. 13.12) (Amsel et al., 1987). One
The technique for endotracheal intubation is similar to
site is high in the neck at the level of the mandible An
that in sheep and goats. A clear view of the laryngeal
imaginary line is drawn continuous with the ventral
adoososuAiel e pue leuassa si seuell inpe ul guuado
border of the mandible and the point of needle insertion
with a long blade may be helpful (Fig. 13.13). A 10 mm
is 3-4 om dorsal from its angle in an adult animal. Disad-
 ID tube can be used in a 60 kg llama and a 12 mm in a
vantages to this site are that the overlying skin is very thick,
llama of 100 kg. Endotracheal tubes 10-12 mm ID should
and movement of the head may dislodge a needle or kink
be selected for adult alpacas. Intubation is made easier by
a catheter. The second site is lower on the neck where the
inserting a metal rod inside the endotracheal tube to
ventral processes of the ffth cervical vertebra can be pal-
stiffen it. The halter should be removed before attempted
pated. Placing a thumb in the depression just medial to
intubation as it will often limit how wide the jaws can be
the ventral process can raise the jugular vein. The overlying
opened.
skin is less thick, facilitating catheter insertion. A disad-
Llamas and alpacas are obligate nasal breathers and
vantage to the site is that the carotid artery is nearby and
airway obstruction may occur during anaesthesia in
can be penetrated. The skin over the selected area should
 animals that are not intubated due to dorsal displacerment
be clipped and aseptically prepared. A bleb of local anaes-
of the soft palate, and during recovery from anaesthesia
thetic solution should be injected subcutaneously at the
after extubation due to nasal mucosal congestion and
proposed site ofinsertion and a nick made in the skin with
oedema. Positioning the head above the body during
'aipaau yuapodky aiel e jo dn aui io apeiq jadies e
recumbency will help prevent nasal congestion (see
The insertion of the catheter should be directed towards
Fig. 13.10).
the heart. Camelid venous blood is significantly brighter
 Orotracheal intubation is satisfactory for most animals
red than observed in equine patients and colour should
Nasotracheal intubation has been recommended in llamas
 not be the only reason for assessing correct catheter place-
to provide a clear airway during any phase of anaesthesia
ment (Grint & Dugdale 2009). Observed pulsatile blood
(Riebold et al., 1994). A long tube will be needed, such as
flow through the catheter or needle confirms that the cath-
[enosu og pagnue saq guol u 55-ot a
eter is in the carotid artery and it should be withdrawn.
intubation in foals. The internal diameter will be about
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
2 mm less than the size of tube chosen for orotracheal
with the hook created on the tip of a malleable stilette.
intubation. The tube should be well lubricated, and lubri-
and directed into the larynx.
cant containing phenylephrine can be used to cause vaso-
 constriction in the nasal mucosa and limit haemorrhage.
The tip of the tube is inserted medially and ventrally into
Anaesthetic agents
the ventral nasal meatus, with the bevel directed laterally
Response to an anaesthetic agent or combination may be
 to minimize trauma to the conchae It is important to keep
different between species, and may be different between
a finger on the tube inside the nares to ensure that the tube
individuals due to the level of pre-injection excitement or
remains in the ventral meatus while the tube is advanced
anxiety. and the degree of absorption from an IM site
slowly and without twisting. If the tube is in the middle
(Table 13.5).
meatus it will impact on the ethmoid and cause significant
haemorrhage. A further obstruction to intubation in
llamas is the large diverticulum, l cm wide and 2 cm
Sedatives
deep. at the caudodorsal angle of the nasopharynx. If the
Xylazine is often used as a sedative in doses of 0.4-
tip of the tube is level with the pharynx and it cannot be
0.6 mg/kg IV. This dose will provide 30-45 minutes of
advanced then the tube should be withdrawn several cen-
 recumbency. Bradycardia will be induced with little change
timetres, redirected and advanced again. The arytenoid
in blood pressure. Sedation can be reversed by tolazoline
cartilages and epiglottis protrude above the soft palate into
but not doxapram. There have been reports of adverse reac-
the nasopharynx. Hyperextension of the head and neck
tions in llamas after administration of tolazoline. Adverse
may allow the nasotracheal tube to enter the larynx. Alter-
signs in a llama after a large dose of tolazoline included
natively, a laryngoscope can be inserted into the mouth to
 anxiety, convulsions, salivation, tachypnoea, hypotension
view the tip of the tube. While the tube is slowly and
and diarrhoea (Read et al., 2000). Recommendations
paooy ao say ym paa si d st 'pauepe aua
for tolazoline administration include maximum dose
Table 13.5 Anaesthetic and adjuncts agents used in healthy camelids
Drug
Dose rate
Route
Comments
Xylazine
0.25-0.6 mg/kg
IV, IM 
Provides sedation lasting 30-45 minutes
Medetomidine
0.01-0.03 mg/kg
IV
Dose-dependent sedation 1-2 hours
 Diazepam 
0.1-0.25 mg/kg
IV
Mild sedation, no analgesia. Adjunct to opicid or injectable
 anaesthetic agent
 Midazolam
0.1-0.25 mg/kg
NIA
Mild sedation, no analgesia. Adjunct to opioid or injectable
anaesthetic agent
Butorphanol
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
IV, IM
Mild sedation. Use to augment effects of other sedatives
 Morphine
0.25 mg/kg
 IM
Sedation and analgesia
Xylazine +
0.25 mg/kg
IV
Induction of general anaesthesia
ketamine
2.5 mg/kg
IV
Xylazine +
0.25 mg/kg
IV, IM
General anaesthesia. Higher doses may be required for alpacas
 ketamine
5 mg/kg
IM
Xylazine +
0.25 mg/kg
 IM
Induction of general anaesthesia. Diazepam or midazolam
ketamine with
2.5 mg/kg 
IV
 injected before ketamine or in the same syringe
midazolam or diazepam
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
IV
Guaifenesin +
0.25-0.5 mL/kg 5%
IV
Induction of anaesthesia following premedication with low
 ketamine 
2.5 mg/kg
IV
dose xylazine or butorphanol
 Propofol
2-4 mg/kg
IV
 Premedication with low dose xylazine or butorphanol and
 mid azolam. Induction of anaesthesia
Atipamezole
0.125 mg/kg
IV, IM
Reversal of xylazine or medetomidine
 Tolazoline
1-2 mg/kg
IV, half IV half IM
Reversal of xylazine. Slovv IV injection over minutes, titrate
LZE
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
rate of 2 mg/kg to be given slowly IV or IM. Medeto-
healthy and different effects could be obtained in llamas
midine produces dose-dependent light to heavy sedation
in pain.
in llamas, with 0.03 mg/kg IM inducing heavy sedation
for 1 to 2 hours. The sedative effects of medetomidine
Guaifenesin
can be reversed by IV atipamezole, 0.125 mg/kg. Mida-
zolam, 0.5 mg/kg. IV or IM has been observed to induce
Guaifenesin, up to 0.5 ml/kg of a 5% solution, is a useful
moderate sedation in alpacas [Aarmes et al., 20l2). Seda-
adjunct to anaesthetic induction with ketamine in adult
tion was induced almost immediately after IV adminis-
llamas and alpacas. Prermedication facilitates the proce-
tration and lasted up to 75 minutes. Onset of sedation
dure and can consist of a low dose of xylazine, or a com-
after IM injection was slower, about 15 minutes, and less
bination of diazepam, 0.1 mg/kg, and butorphanol.
intense.
 0.1 mg/kg, IV. Guaifenesin is most easily injected into the
jugular catheter using a 60 ml syringe and a 14 gauge
needle. The llama will usually assume sternal recumbency
Opioids
following injection of a half dose of guaifenesin, and keta-
In clinical patients, butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg IV or IM, is
mine, 2.5 mg/kg. with all or part of the remainder of
a useful adjunct to premedication to increase the degree
guaifenesin injected to complete induction of anaesthesia
of sedation and facilitate induction of anaesthesia. The
and relaxation suffcient for tracheal intubation. Dose
dose should be decreased to 0.05 mg/kg IV for severely
rates of anaesthetic agents must be decreased for animals
ill patients. The contribution of butorphanol to analgesia
that are ill, for example, with urethral obstruction, perito-
in camelids has not yet been defined. Butorphanol,
nitis, or intestinal obstruction. Xylazine should be avoided
0.1 mg/kg, IM in llamas produced some antinociception
in animals with urethral obstruction.
to experimental compression over the withers but not at
the metacarpus (Carroll et al., 200l). Heart rates were
Ketamine
decreased, MAP was unchanged, and rectal temperatures
increased. It appears that absorption of butorphanol from
 A common anaesthetic combination to provide 30 minutes
IM injection in llamas is rapid and complete, and clear-
 Of anaesthesia in healthy llamas is xylazine, 0.25 mg/kg
u ueu ssal iq smo pue sasioy un ueu iaiea si au
IV, followed in 10-15 minutes by injection of ketamine,
sheep and dogs (Carroll et al., 200l). The volume of
2.5 mg/kg IV or 5 mg/kg IM. Butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg IM,
distribution of butorphanol at steady state is smaller in
an be administered at the same time as the xylazine or
llamas and that means that a small dose is needed to
0.05 mg/kg IV, shortly before the ketamine An alternative
achieve a therapeutic concentration. The data support a
combination is xylazine premedication followed by induc-
slightly longer dosing interval for butorphanol in llamas
tion of anaesthesia with IV diazepam or midazolam,
than in dogs. Butorphanol also induces minimal cardio-
0.1-0.2 mg/kg. and ketamine 2.5 mg/kg.
vascular effects in alpacas (Garcia-Pereira et al., 2007).
A comparison of xylazine, 0.4 mg/kg, with ketamine,
Butorphanol,(
0.1 mg/kg, injected IV in isoflurane-
4 mg/kg, and xylazine 0.8 g/kg, with ketamine, 8 mg/kg.
anaesthetized alpacas caused vasodilation but no signif-
all administered IM to llamas revealed onset time to lateral
cant effects in heart rates, mean arterial pressures, cardiac
recumbency of 5-16 minutes, duration of lateral recum-
outputs, or blood gases.
bency that was variable for the low dose rates and 69- 106
Investigation of the pharmacokinetic and pharma-
minutes for the high dose rates (DuBois et al., 2004).
codynamic variables of morphine 0.25 mg/kg IV, and
Hypoxaemia was noted in llamas receiving the high dose
0.5 mg/kg IM and IV, in llamas identified a large apparent
rates and was corrected by nasal insufflation of Oz. Tola-
volume of distribution and high systemic clearance
 zoline, 2 mg/kg, IM shortened the duration of recovery.
(Uhrig et al., 2007). Intramuscular administration pro-
Alpacas may require higher dose rates of xylazine and
longed the terminal half-life but had no effect on bioavail-
ketamine than llamas. In one investigation of anaesthesia
ablity. Greater sedation and for longer, all <2 hours, was
in alpacas induced by combined IM injections of xylazine
achieved with the larger dose Antinociception was tested
and ketamine, doses of xylazine, 0.8 mg/kg, and ketamine,
using cutaneous electrical stimulation over the metacarpus
8 mg/kg. induced anaesthesia for an average of 23
or brachium, however, reliable analgesia could not be
(range 0-45) minutes whereas higher doses of xylazine,
demonstrated for any dose because of high individual
1.2 mg/kg. and ketamine, 12 mg/kg, induced anaesthesia
variability among the llamas. A dose-dependent increase
ao jo uoaxa a yi 's 7 g a ue r
in rectal temperature was measured, lasting up to 8 hours
alpaca that never assumed lateral recumbency (Prado
after administration of the highest dose Muscle tremors
et al., 2008b ). Lateral recumbency was assumed on average
were observed in llamas following administration of
aun isnoig yoq ui seedie xis yo ino aay ui sanu g Aq
0.5 mg/kg. therefore, the lower
dose of morphine,
'dnoia yoea u ieuue juaiap e sem esedie aisuodsaiun
0.25 mg/kg, was recommended for administration every 4
Heart rates decreased and mean arterial pressures were
hours. The authors pointed out that their animals were
maintained at satisfactory values. All animals in the high
Anaesthesia of sheep, goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
dose group were hypoxic after induction of anaesthesia
IM acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg. or butorphanol, 0.1 or
and, therefore, facilities to provide oxygen supplementa-
0.2 mg/kg, or acepromazine and butorphanol, 0.1 mg/kg.
tion should be available when using that protocol.
induced lateral recumbency for approximately 90 ± 10
A combination of medetomidine, 10 mg, ketamine,
 minutes and a time to standing of approximately 100 ± 1l
300 mg. and butorphanol, 30 mg, was administered IM
minutes ( Prado et al., 2008a). Antinociception, evaluated
by dart to seven male captive guanaco (Lama guanicoe)
by lack of movement in response to application of forceps
weighing 1l12 ± 10.9 kg (Georoff et al., 20l0). Mean time
on a digit, developed on average for 14-17 minutes for
to recumbency was 5 minutes [range 3-12 minutes) and
butorphanol-tiletamine-zolazepam anaesthesia and an
the animals were approached at 20 minutes. Heart rates 
average of 35-40 minutes when acepromazine was
were between 24 and 52 beats/minutes, mean blood pres-
included for premedication. Respiratory rates and MAP
 sure measurements (four animals) 105-182 mmHg, respi-
were unchanged whereas blood gas analysis after 5 and 15
ratory rates 20 to 44 breaths/minutes, and mean PaO2
minutes of anaesthesia revealed hypoxaemia during all
8.76 ±0.02 kPa (65.9 ± 14.8 mmHg) before oxygen sup-
agent combinations.
plementation.A
Anaesthesia reversal was successfully
Administration of xylazine, 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg. IM with
accomplished by IM atipamezole, 0.45 ± 0.04 mg/kg and
tiletamine-zolazepam, 2 mg/kg, IM to llamas provided
naltrexone, 2.7 ±0.25 mg/kg administered a minimum of
antinociception suitable for short procedures for 30 and
30 minutes after the initial injection of anaesthetic agents.
51 minutes, respectively (Seddighi et al., 20l2). Heart rates
The combination of ketamine, 5 mg/kg, and mida-
 decreased significantly and hypoxaemia was present for 15
zolam, 0.25 mg/kg. IV is also used for induction of anaes-
minutes in some of the llamas receiving xylazine.
thesia in alpacas prior to inhalation anaesthesia (Vincent
et al., 2009). This combination works well following pre-
Inhalation agents
medication with butorphanol.
Maintenance of anaesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane
Propofol
administered from a small animal machine with an adult
Propofol, 2.0-3.5 mg/kg IV, can be used for induction
circle circuit, a 5 L bag. and an oxygen flow of 1-2 L/min
of anaesthesia. Anaesthesia may be maintained with an
for adult llamas and alpacas. The MAC for isoflurane in
inhalation agent or by continuous infusion of propofol,
 llamas was measured at 1.05 ±0.17% (sea level equivalent
0.3-0.4 mg/kg/min. In an investigation of continuous
of 1.45% measured at the elevation of Fort Collins, CO.
propofol anaesthesia in llamas, MAP remained high and
USA) (Mama et al., 1999),. and MAC for sevofurane in
cardiac output was not depressed (Duke et al., 1997).
llamas was 2.3 ± 0.14% and in alpacas 2.3 ± 0.09% (Grubb
Hypoxaemia did not develop even though the animals
et al., 2003). Mean MAC for desflurane in llamas was 8 ±
were breathing air. Additional analgesia, systemic or local,
0.58% and in alpacas 7.8 ± 0.51% (Gnubb et al., 2006).
will be necessary if the procedure is painful.
Evaluation of six adult llamas anaesthetized with only
isoflurane identified a dose-dependent decrease in MAP
Alfaxalone
with increased depth of anaesthesia (Mama et al., 2001).
Administration of alfaxalone, 2.1 mg/kg, IV for anaesthe-
 Heart rates progressively increased with time, and that may
sia has been compared with propofol, 3.3 mg/kg. IV and
 partly be due to increased PaCOin spontaneously breath-
ing animals. Institution of controlled ventilation had no
ketamine-diazepam, 4.4 mg/kg-0.22 mg/kg, IV in alpacas
 significant effect on the measured cardiovascular paran-
(del Alamo et al., 20l2). Induction of anaesthesia was
 eters, although cardiac output tended to be lower than
good to excellent with all agents. Oxygen supplementation
when the animals were breathing spontaneously.
was judged necessary based on SpO2 <90% or ETCO2
-nid suad oeaed u Asea si uou y 
>60 mmHg initially in all but three anaesthetic episodes.
Duration of anaesthesia was signifcantly longer with
larly after premedication with diazepam or midazolam
alfaxalone mean 34 minutes compared with 19 minutes
and butorphanol.
with propofol and 25 minutes with ketamine-diazepam.
Of concern was the poor recovery from alfaxalone anaes-
Anaesthetic management
thesia that included paddling, twitching, and uncoordi-
Anaesthetic management is as for sheep and goats
nated rolling over. Inclusion ofa sedative for premedication
 Or transfer to inhalation anaesthesia is advisableto achieve
described previously in this chapter. The palpebral reflex
a better recovery.
is usually retained during anaesthesia adequate for surgery.
Crinkling of the lower eyelid is an indication of light
anaesthesia. Eyelid aperture increases with increasing
Tiletamine-zolazepam
depth of isoflurane anaesthesia (Mama et al., 200l). Since
Administration of tiletamine-zolazepam, 2 mg/kg., IM in
the eyes are protruberant, care must be taken to avoid
llamas premedicated 30 minutes before anaesthesia with
 corneal scratches by using eye lubricant and closing the
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
eye in contact with a hard surface, and lifting the head any
swallowing and chewing movements are observed. The
time the animal is moved. Llamas and alpacas breathe
animal should be in a sternal head-up position for
spontaneously at 15-25 breaths/minute and appear to
extubation.
ventilate better during anaesthesia than horses or adult
catte. Nonetheless, oxygen shouldbeavailable for admin-
istration by mask or nasal tube during total intravenous
Deer
anaesthesia. Haemoglobin O2 affinity of camelids is
higher than that of humans, dogs, and sheep (see Chapter
2). For example, O2 content of llama blood at PO 6.7 kPa
INTRODUCTION
[50 mmHg) is similar to that of sheep blood at 8 kPa
(60 mmHg) (Moraga et al., 1996). Despite this advantage.
There are detailed recommendations elsewhere for han-
O2 content is dependent in part on the position of the O2
dissociation curve and that will be shifted to the right
dling farmed deer, including recommendations for design
of deer yards and raceways, deer crushes and chutes, and
by hypercarbia during anaesthesia, and O2 delivery is
physical and chemical restraint (Chapman et al., 1987;
dependent on cardiac output, blood pressure and tissue
Fletcher, 1995). Some general guidelines for working with
 perfusion, all of which may be decreased during anaesthe-
deer include talking to the deer to alert them as to your
sia. Parameters for controlled ventilation that will achieve
location and to avoid walking through the middle of a
normocarbia are 10-12 breaths/minute at tidal volumes
group of deer (Fletcher, 1995). Recommendations arethat,
of 15 mL/kg. usually achieved at an inspiratory pressure
except for adult stags. deer are best examined in groups.
of 20 cmHzO. When capnography is available these
as they may become frantic when isolated. Deer may
parameters can be adjusted to maintain ETCOz at approxi-
become aggressive and kick with their forelimbs, and occa-
mately 40 mm Hg
sionally bite or kick backward with their hind limbs.
Heart rates are commonly between 60 and 80 beats/min
and MAP should be kept above 65 mmHg. Blood pressure
There are considerations of special significance to the
anaesthetist. Not only are there differences in responses
can be measured as described for sheep and goats. Bal-
between farmed deer and wildlife, in that wild deer will
anced electrolyte solutions should be infused at 5- 10 mL/
require higher doses, but also there are differences between
kg/h and, in addition in animals <3 months of age 5%
the species in their responses to both physical manage-
dextrose infused at 3 mL/kg/h. The infusion rate of dex-
ment and anaesthetic agents. An example given in a
trose should be adjusted based on measurement of blood
concise article on deer handling explains that fallow deer
glucose. A recent report of measurements of blood glucose
[Dama dama). unlike red deer (Cervus elaphus), respond
in alpacas compared results from three point-of-care
favourably to darkened holding pens (Fletcher, 1995).
Umong-uuan) suaanseau Aoeioqel yim siaia
Another author notes that while roe deer Capreolus capreo-
et al., 20ll). For glucose concentrations between 50 and
lus) or fallow deer may lie impassive when blindfolded
200 mg/dL, the limits of agreement were acceptable using
and with their legs tied, the technique is not suitable for
whole blood samples for the i-Stat [Abbott Point-of Care
muntjac [Muntiacus reevesi). Muntjac are small excitable
Inc., Princeton, NJ. USA) and the AlphaTrak (Abbott
deer that will writhe, struggle and jerk violently against
Animal Health, Abbott Park, Ill, USA) but only for plasma
restraint (Chapman et al., 1987). Axis deer (Axis axis)
samples with the Accu-Chek Aviva (Roche Diagnostics,
are also described as nervous and excitable (Sontakke
Indianapolis, Ind, USA).
et al., 2007).
Management of hypotension or decreased peripheral
perfusion should include a crystalloid fluid challenge of
10 mL/kg, and/or infusion of hetastarch 5-10 mL/kg over
ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
15 minutes, and/or IV infusion of a catecholamine such
as dobutamine, dopamine, or ephedrine. Infusion of dob-
utamine, 4 μg/kg/min, to alpacas anaesthetized with iso-
Anaesthetic agents for sedation are frequently adminis-
flurane resulted in increased heart rates, MAP, cardiac
tered by darts propelled by a gun or blowpipe or from a
output, and O2 delivery to tissues, and no further improve.
syringe attached to a pole Injection by hand will require
ment obtained by increasing the dose rate to 8 μg/kg/min
 considerable force and a moderately large gauge needle as
(Vincent et al., 2009). In the same study, norepinephrine.
the skin is tough. Responses to anaesthetic agents may be
0.3 and 1 μg/kg/min, IV produced similar effects.
different between free-ranging and tame deer. Whenever
 A progressive decrease in body temperature develops
possible food and water should be withheld similar to
during inhalation anaesthesia and efforts should be
preanaesthetic preparation for sheep and goats. Respira-
applied to maintain a normal temperature.
tory depression and hypoxaemia are common problems
Extubation after anaesthesia should be delayed, as in
during anaesthesia. Monitoring respiratory rates and
other ruminants, until the animal can withdraw its tongue
 measurement of haemoglobin O2 saturation with a pulse
into its mouth, and this may occur long after the frst
 Oximeter are valuable for detecting inadequate ventilation
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
and oxygenation, although black pigmentation of the
1990). Administration of yohimbine 30 minutes later pro-
mucosa or skin and vasoconstriction from medetomidine
 duced satisfactory reversal for release after several minutes.
may interfere with accurate readings. Administration of O2
 Another recommendation is to mix 400 mg of ketamine
by insufflation through a tube inserted in the nose at
with 500 mg of dry xylazine powder and to dose red deer
5-10 L/min, a facemask, or anaesthesia machine in the
at 1-2 mL, IM and fallow deer up to 3 mL (Fletcher,
clinic setting will increase arterial oxygenation. Simple
 1995). Xylazine and ketamine may be administered sepa-
devices for non-invasive measurement of blood pressure
rately. The deer are sedated frst with xylazine adminis-
are available and can be used in a feld environment.
tered by dart and ketamine, 1-2 mg/kg. is injected IV
Direct measurement of arterial pressure can be done with
when the deer is first approachable (Caulkett 1997). This
a catheter in an auricular artery. Deer may become hypo-
 decreases the dose of ketamine and there is less chance of
thermic or hyperthermic during anaesthesia and rectal
CNS excitement occurring when the xylazine sedation is
temperature should always be monitored.
reversed. Additional ketamine may be administered as
 There are several published anaesthetic protocols using
 needed. An investigation of different dose combinations
a variety of different dose rates. Most of them are directed
in Axis deer described xylazine, 0.5 mg/kg, and ketamine,
towards immobilization in the field for short procedures.
2.5 mg/kg, administered by dart and blowpipe as inducing
 Deer that are admitted to the clinic for diagnostic or surgi-
satisfactory anaesthesia in male deer in 7-8 minutes
cal procedures can be intubated and anaesthesia main-
(Sontakke et al., 2007). The authors preferred xylazine,
tained with an inhalation agent. The vaporizer settings are
1.0 mg/kg. and ketamine, 1.5 mg/kg, for female der as
initially low for maintenance of anaesthesia to adjust for
this combination resulted in longer duration, up to 40
the effects of the immobilizing doses of injectable anaes-
minutes, of anaesthesia. Immobilization was reversed by
thetic agents. Anaesthetic management is similar
to
IV injection of yohimbine, 5-10 mg. All deer survived.
that for sheep and goats and may include continuous
infusion(s) of lidocaine, ketamine, or an opioid, local
Medetomidine combinations
analgesia blocks, or morphine epidural, depending on the
location and type of surgical procedure. Medetomidine
Medetomidine, 0.06-0.08 mg/kg. IM administered with
used for premedication to inhalation anaesthesia appears
ketamine, 1-2 mg/kg, IM is a useful combination to
to persist into the recovery and administration of atipam-
sedate deer. The effects of medetomidine can be reversed
ezole may result in abrupt wakening from sedation.
by injection of atipamezole at a dose rate up to five times
Manual restraint of the deer may be difficult and the envi-
the medetomidine dose. Mule deer and mule deer hybrids
ronment for recovery should be devoid of projections that
were immobilized by medetomidine, 0.1 mg/kg, and keta-
might cause injury and must have walls high enough to
mine, 2.5 mg/kg, IM for 60 minutes followed by reversal
prevent escape.
with atipamezole 0.5 mg/kg, injected half IV and half
IM (Caulkett et al., 2000). Blood gas analysis revealed
Xylazine
hypoxaemia and the authors recommended use of sup-
plemental oxygen with this anaesthetic protocol. Other
The dose rate for xylazine varies between breeds and
studies [Mich et al., 2008; Miller et al., 2009) have evalu-
response to xylazine varies between individuals within a
ated in white-tailed deer a combination of butorphanol,
breed. Xylazine alone can be administered IM for sedation 
azaperone, and medetomidine, at approximate dosages
in penned red or fallow deer at 0.5-1.5 mg/kg (Fletcher,
of 0.43 mg/kg, 0.36 mg/kg. 0.14 mg/kg, or 0.34 mg/kg.
1995), 1 mg/kg for wapiti (North American elk; Cervus
0.27 mg/kg. 0.11 mg/kg. or 0.30 mg/kg. 0.16 mg/kg.
canadiensis), and 2-3 mg/kg for white-tailed deer (Odocoi-
0.20 mg/kg, respectively. Results from the third dose rate
leus virginianus) and mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus)
combination included times to sternal and lateral recum-
(Caulkett, 1997). A lower dosage of xylazine, 0.7 mg/kg.
bency on average 8 and 13 minutes, respectively. and an
was satisfactory for capturing 104 free-ranging mule deer
 excellent rated quality of induction. Respiration rates were
(Jessup et al., 1985). Reversal of sedation is achieved by
variable and hypoxaemia was identified using pulse oxi-
administration of yohimbine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, given half
 metry. Immobilization was reversed with naltrexone, tola-
IV and half IM, or tolazoline, 2 mg/kg. More recent pub-
zoline, and atipamezole Nasal oxygen supplementation
lications have recommended tolazoline and atipamezole
of 3-8 L/min was recommended for animals with respira-
 as more effective antagonists than yohimbine.
tory rates <15 breaths/min or SpO2 <90% at sea level; a
lower value at higher altitudes.
Xylazine and ketamine
Tiletamine-zolazepam
Xylazine and ketamine have been used to immobilize
deer. Dosages of xylazine, 4 mg/kg, and ketamine,
Tiletamine-zolazepam, 1.5 mg/kg, with xylazine 1.6 mg/kg.
4 mg/kg. administered IM in adult fallow deer induced
IM was compared with tiletamine-zolazepam, 1.0 mg/kg.
recumbency in less than 5 minutes (Stewart & English,
 and medetomidine, 0.099 mg/kg, IM administered to fallow
375
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
deer by darts delivered by a CO2-powered rifle {Fernandez-
biochemical blood values for camels (Camelus dromedar-
Moran et al., 200o). These combinations resulted in recum-
ius) have been published (Snow et al.. 1988; Nazef &
bent immobilization in most animals on average 6-8
Maleki, 1998). Measurements made after racing show that,
minutes after administration. Respiratory rates were low but
in contrast to dogs and horses, no significant increase in
hypoxaemia was not detected by pulse oximetry or blood gas
haematocrit occurs after exercise Although packed cell
analysis. Of the two drug combinations, tiletamine-
volume is on average 0.33 L/L (33%), camel erythrocytes
zolazepam with medetomidine produced a deeper plane of
 i    e 
anaesthesia suffcient for minor surgical procedures. White-
concentration,
tailed deer administered tiletamine-zolazepam, 220 mg.
Voluntary regurgitation of rumen contents may occur in
approximately 4.5 mg/kg. and xylazine, 1l10 mg. approxi-
 agitated camels and withholding of roughage for 48 hours.
mately 4 mg/kg, IM were immobilized to lateral recumbency
concentrate for 24 hours, and water for 12 hours before
in 3 minutes [Miller et al., 2004). Evaluation of yohimbine
anaesthesia has been recommended.
tolazoline and atipamezole for reversal of xylazine docu-
mented that tolazoline, 200 mg, 4.0 mg/kg. and atipame-
zole, 1l mg. 0.23 mg/kg.i
injected  half IV and  half
subcutaneously produced more rapid and effective reversal
ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
than yohimbine A previous investigation of this anaesthetic
protocol recorded hypoxaemia in the animals; average SpO2
Satisfactory anaesthesia  for tracheal intubation  was
85%, range 72-94% (Miller et al., 2003). Captive red deer
achieved in six camels (Camelus dromedarius) with a mean
weighing 90-135 kg were immobilized with xylazine, 1.79 ±
thiopental dose of 7.25 mg/kg (Singh et al., 1994). Sub-
0.29 mg/kg, and tiletamine-zolazepam, 1.79 ± 0.29 mg/kg.
sequent maintenance with halothane resulted in hypoven-
administered IM with a dart gun (Auer et al., 20l0). Anaes-
tilation and a significant decrease in blood pressure.
 thesia was maintained for surgical implantation of telenmetry
Aanoai sunp Aressanau sem uoeuaualddns uax
devices by continuous infusions of ketamine, midazolam,
from anaesthesia to prevent hypoxaemia. Anaesthesia can
and either xylazine or detomidine Ketamine 10o0 mg.
also be induced with a mixture of thiopental and guaife-
midazolam, 15 mg, and either xylazine, 250 mg or detomi-
nesin prior to inhalation anaesthesia. In camels injected
dine, 1.4 mg. were added to a 500 mL bag of saline and
IM with xylazine, 0.25 mg/kg, 30 minutes previously.
infused with an infusion pump at a rate of 1.2 mL/kg/h for
1.0-2.3 mL/kg of thiopental-guaifenesin (2 g thiopental
the frst 20 minutes followed by a 10% decrease in rate at
-yns panpoid Al Aipidei uaai (uisauajien s 7 I u
10-minute intervals. The deer were intubated and connected
cient relaxation for intubation (white et al., 1986). Con-
to an anaesthesia machine delivering 30-50% inspired O2.
trolled ventilation was employed to treat hypoventilation
Arterial pressures were satisfactory but capnography
pue
 and MAP was satisfactory.
blood gas analysis revealed moderate to severe hypoventila-
Xylazine, detomidine, medetomidine, and romifdine
tion. Recoveries were excellent after IV administration of
can be used for sedation in camels. Analgesia duration is
10 mg atipamezole and l mg sarmazenil (midazolam
shorter than duration of sedation. Maximal sedation, anal-
antagonist).
gesia and recumbency was achieved with romifdine,
0.125 mg/kg. IV in healthy camels [Marzok & El-Khodery.
2009). Sedation was induced within 3 minutes and lasted
 an average of 65 minutes; duration of analgesia was
Camels
an average of 45 minutes. Sedation was accompanied
by lowering of the head, pronounced ataxia, and recum-
bency. Lower doses produced sedation that was less
INTRODUCTION
intense and of shorter duration with minimal analgesia.
Decreased ruminal contractions, increased blood glucose,
Handling camels can be dangerous and particular caution
and increased urination during recovery were observed.
 must be observed during the breeding season when males
Sedation may be increased, or the dose rate of the O2-
may be intractable and vicious. Males may press a person
agent decreased, by the addition of butorphanol, 0.05-
'aa suus e Kpoq pue yau nau ym pun ay o
0.1 mg/kg.
or they may bite, causing severe, even fatal, injuries (Ogun-
Xylazine, 0.25 mg/kg. has been combined with keta-
bodede & Arotiba, 1997). Domestic camel may sit on
mine, 2.5 mg/kg, IM for sedation and anaesthesia in the
command (couched), which avoids the need for casting
dromedary camel (white et al., 1987). Loss of facial
or the risk of injury with ataxia or falling after administra-
expression, drooping of the lower lip, weaving of the head,
tion of anaesthetic agents.
and drooling of saliva (loss of swallowing reflex) occurs at
Heart rates in unsedated resting camels are 40-50
the onset of sedation. Most camels lay their head and neck
beats/min, mean arterial pressures 130-140 mmHg. and
on the ground and would assume lateral recumbency if
respiratory rates 6-16 breaths/min. Haematological and
 allowed. Anaesthesia can be deepened or maintained by
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
intermittent IV injections of diazepam, 0.05 mg/kg. and
will be slow in the presence of an Q2-agonist The camel
ketamine, 2 mg/kg. or by infusion of guaifenesin-keta-
should be moved into sternal position for recovery from
mine for TIVA or an inhalation agent Injectable anaes-
anaesthesia and extubation delayed until the tongue
thetic agents can be administered in low dosage to achieve
appears to be functional. Atipamezole may be used to
heavy sedation or in higher dosage to induce general
reverse residual o2-agonist sedation.
anaesthesia. In either case, analgesia for the procedure
(castration, urethrostomy, dental) can be provided by
local analgesia.
LOCAL ANALGESIA
Intubation of the trachea in adult camels can be done
manually using the same techniques that are used in cattle.
Intubation may be more easily performed with the camel
Nerve blocks of the hind limbs in camels have been
in sternal rather than lateral position. The head and neck
 described, including the topographical anatomy and tech-
should be fully extended and the anaesthetist's hand with
nique to block the peroneal, tibial, and plantar nerves
the endotracheal tube introduced until the laryngeal
(Dudi et al., 1984). Desensitization of the digit can also
entrance can be palpated. The anaesthetist's fingers hold
be achieved using intravenous regional analgesia by inject-
 Open the larynx while the tube is advanced forward with
ing 60 mL of 2% lidocaine (without epinephrine) distal
the other hand. Male dromedary camels have a dulaa
to a tourniquet (Purohit et al., 1985).
(palatal flap or goola pouch) that extends from the soft
Xylazine sedation has been combined with a line block
palate and must be avoided during intubation. After intu-
with 2% lidocaine to provide satisfactory restraint and
bation and lateral recumbency, the camel's head should
analgesia for caesarian section to remove dead calves
be elevated with towels or padding to minimize nasal
(Elias, 199l). Epidural analgesia with lidocaine has been
mucosa congestion, and the nose positioned below the
combined with sedation for urethrostomy in camels with
pharynx to allow drainage of saliva and regurgitated fluid
wrethral obstruction. There are anecdotal reports of
(Fig. 13.14). Bloat may develop during anaesthesia despite
improved analgesia by inclusion of xylazine or detomi-
withholding of food and water previously. Supplementa-
dine with the lidocaine for epidural block.
tion with 15 L/min O2 is recommended for injectable
anaesthesia, into the endotracheal tube during anaesthesia
and into the nose for recovery. A pulse oximeter probe can
Elephants
be placed on the tongue to monitor oxygenation and a
cuff on the tail for oscillometric measurement of blood
pressure Mean arterial pressure should be approximately
INTRODUCTION
100 mmHg with injectable anaesthetic agents and above
65 mmHg during inhalation anaesthesia. The heart rate
Drug administration to free-ranging elephants is by dart
gun. Trained elephants are usually relatively quiet and
intravenous injection can be made into an ear vein. Accu-
rate estimates of body weight are useful when calculating
dnug dosages in an attempt to produce consistent anaes-
thetic effects. Body measurements from 75 Asian elephants
(Elephas maximus) from 1 to 57 years of age were used to
calculate correlations with body weight (Hile et al., 1997).
The authors concluded that in Asian elephants the heart
girth is the best predictor of weight. Heart girth (cm) was
measured just behind the front legs using cotton twine.
Weight was predicted using the equation:
Weight [kg) = 18.0 (heart girth) - 3336.
Measurement of pad circumference was not a useful
Figure 13.14 The camel's head is elevated (with a towel in
predictor of weight.
pue elis jo xueud aui woy abeuep molle ot (anid sn
regurgitated fluid (which occurred towards the end of the
surgical procedure) and to prevent contamination of the
right eye. The diameter of the rubber tubing delivering
ANAESTHETIC AGENTS
oxygen was too large to be inserted into the endotracheal
tube, therefore, one end of venous extension tubing was
attached to the rubber tube and the other end (after the
Medetomidine 0.003 or 0.005 mg/kg. IM has been
adapter was cut off) inserted into the endotracheal tube.
used to induce sedation in working Indian elephants
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
(2000-3000 kg) for producing restraint and performing
hypoxaemic as determined by pulse oximetry or blood gas
minor procedures [Sarma et al., 2002). At the higher dose
analysis. The average PaOz of the immobilized elephants
rate, sedation of the elephants was profound with head
in one study, 10.0 ± 1.7 kPa (75 ± 13 mmHg) (Still et al.,
and ear drooping and severe ataxia, and the animals were
1996), was lower than previously reported for recumbent
unresponsive to verbal commands. Bradycardia and
elephants, 11.2 ± 0.4 kPa (84 ± 3 mmHg). 0r standing
decreased respiratory rates were recorded, however, Oxy-
unpremedicated elephants, 12.8 ±0.3 kPa (96 ±2 mmHg)
genation was not measured.
(Honeyman et al., 1992). The overall mean SpO2 in 16
Etorphine has frequently been used to immobilize ele-
immobilized adult elephants was 87.3 ± 2.8% (70-96%)
phants. Free-ranging African elephants (Loxodonta afri-
(Osofsky, 1997). In another group of five adult female
cana) were immobilized by IM injection by darts with 9.5
elephants (3000-3500 kg) immobilized with 10-12 mg
± 0.5 mg etorphine (Osofsky, 1997) or 3, 6, or 9 mg of
of etorphine (Horne et al., 200l), initial PaOz values and
etorphine and 30, 60, or 100 mg of azaperone according
SpO2 were 8.4 kPa (63 mmHg). range 5.3-10.2 kPa
to size in juvenile elephants (mean weight 672 kg) (Still
[40-77 mmHg) and 95 % (75-99 %), respectively. The
et al., 1996). The mean time to recumbency was 9 minutes.
elephants were intubated with a 35 mm endotracheal tube
Additional etorphine had to be administered IV to main-
and controlled ventilation with oxygen achieved using two
tain immobilization for transportation. All elephants 
demand valves in parallel. The demand valves were con-
recovered without complication after reversal by IV
nected to a single oxygen tank by means of 'Y assembly
diprenorphine at approximately three times the dose of
and the oxygen cylinder reducing valve was set to an outlet
etorphine administered. The twenty African elephants that
pressure of 60-80 psi (Horne et al., 200l). The outlets of
were administered etorphine, 9.5 ± 0.5 mg and 2000 IU
the demand valves were connected to one side of a large
hyaluronidase by IM dart (Osofsky. 1997) were immobi-
animal circle Y-piece while the other side of the Y-piece
lized within 5-14 minutes for an average of 30 minutes.
was plugged with a rubber stopper. The demand valves
Injection of diprenorphine, 24 mg IV with or without an
were activated to achieve inhalation and the stopper
 additional half dose administered IM achieved satisfactory
removed to allow exhalation. End-tidal CO2 concentra-
reversal. In another report, l0 wild Asian elephants
(Elephas maximus) were immobilized by IM injection of
 PaCOz values during spontaneous or controlled breathing
3.3 (2.5-4.5) mL of etorphine and acepromazine (LA
(Horme et al., 2001).
Immobilon@; etorphine, 2.45 mg/mL, and acepromazine.
Mean arterial blood pressures measured from a 20
10 mg/mL) (Dangolla et al., 2004). The body weight was
gauge catheter in an auricular artery in two groups
estimated using the formula: 227 kg/30 cm of visually
of
adult African elephants, weighing approximately
estimated shoulder height; a distance that tended to be
3000 or 5000 kg. immobilized with etorphine were
overestimated based on actual measurement made later in
102 mmHg (80-115 mmHg) (Horme et al., 2001)and 186
the immobilized animals. The authors also commented
± 15 mmHg. A value of 145 ± 3 mmHg for MAP has been
that the dose rate was greater than previously used in
reported for standing elephants (Honeyman et al., 1992)
domestic elephants. Time to recumbency was 18 (15-45)
minutes and nine elephants assumed lateral recumbency
while the tenth required an additional 0.5 ml for complete
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
relaxation. Duration of recumbency was 42 (28-6l)
minutes. The etorphine was reversed by injection of an
equal volume of Revivon@ (diprenorphine 3.26 mg/mL)
General anaesthesia can be maintained in elephants with
and the time to standing was 6 (2-12) minutes. Another
inhalation agents when the equipment is available. A
published report of castration of elephants described IM
standard large animal machine, or two machines in
or IV injection of etorphine, 0.002 mg/kg, to provide sat-
tandem, with a weather balloon replacing the usual
isfactory immobilization for the procedure with supple-
rebreathing bag can used for an adult elephant (Heard
ments of l mg etorphine injected as needed (Foerner
et al., 1988; Dunlop et al., 1994; Fowler et al., 2000).
et al., 1994)
Induction of immobilization is commonly with etor-
 Elephants are positioned in lateral recumbency during
phine, with or without other agents. Induction of anaes-
anaesthesia because breathing is severely compromised in
thesia in juvenile (3-5-year-old) African elephants
the sternal position. Adequacy of ventilation is a feature
weighing 308 ± 93 kg was achieved with xylazine,
in larger animals because the anatomical features of ele-
0.1 mg/kg. and ketamine, 0.6 mg/kg. IM followed by IM
phants oppose collapse of lung. Elephants lack a pleural
etorphine, 0.0019 ± 0.00056 mg (Heard et al., 1988). A
space and there is a well-developed supportive system of
198 kg, 3-month-old calf was sedated with xylazine,
elastic fibres in the lungs and pulmonary vessels. Reported
 0. 1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 1.6 mg/kg. IM and subsequently
 average respiratory rates are 7-9 breaths/min, with a mild
anaesthetized by IV injection of ketamine and diazepam
to moderate increase in PaCO2. However, a proportion of
(Abou-Madi et al., 2004). Extraordinary management is
elephants immobilized with etorphine are reported to be
required in some cases to ensure safety of the animal and
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
personnel during induction and recovery, in this case, con-
Depth of anaesthesia may be monitored using eye
struction of a sling and lift for an elephant with degenera-
 signs and respiratory rates. Increases in trunk muscle tone
tive joint disease (Fowler et al., 2000).
and ear flapping are indicators that the depth of anaesthe-
Endotracheal tubes of 18, 22, and 26 mm can be used
sia is getting light. An electrocardiogram can be used to
and
monitor heart rate A non-invasive oscillometric blood
280-636 kg, respectively
[Heard et al..
1988)
PUE
 pressure cuff can be placed around the tail or a catheter
30-40 mm in adult elephants (Dunlop et al., 1994;
inserted in an ear artery facilitates measurement of blood
Fowler et al., 2000). Wads of food may be present in the
pressure directly. Balanced electrolyte solution can be
oropharynx despite food having been withheld for 24
administered IV
and dobutamine infused to treat
hours. The trachea can be intubated blindly or by manual
hypotension.
 palpation of the larynx and guiding the endotracheal tube
 The inhalation agent is usually discontinued for up to
into the trachea or with the aid of a stomach tube inserted
30 minutes before a reversal agent, diprenorphine or nal-
 in the trachea. Low vaporizer settings may be adequate to
trexone is injected. Oxygen administration is continued
maintain anaesthesia.
as long as possible.
REFERENCES
Aarnes, T., Fry, P., Hubbell, I., et al.
anaesthesia on blood gas and acid
intramuscular administration. ↓ Am
2012. The pharmacokinetics and
base parameters in rams. Br Vet J
Vet Med Assoc 219, 1263-1267.
 pharmacodynamics of midazolam in
151,579-585.
Carroll, G.L., Hooper, R.N.,.
alpacas. In: Proceedings of the 18th
Amsel, S.l., Kainer, R.A, Johnson, L.W..
Boothe, D.M., et al., 1999.
IVEECS Symposium. San Antonio,
1987. Choosing the best site to
Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl after
TX, USA. p. 726.
 perform venipuncture in a llama.
intravenous and transdermal
Abou-Madi, N., Kollias, G.V.,
Vet Med 82, 535-536.
administration in goats. Am J Vet Res
Hackett, R.P., et al., 2004. Umbilical
Andaluz, A., Felez-Ocania, N., Santos, L.,
60,986-991.
herniorhaphy in a juvenile Asian
et al., 2012. The effects on cardio-
Carroll, G.L., Hooper, R.N., Slater, M.R.,
eephant (Elephas maximus). J Zoo
respiratory and acid-base variables of
et al., 1998. Detomidine-
Wildlife Med 35, 221-225.
the anaesthetic alfaxalone in a
butorphanol-propofol for carotid
Abu-Serriah, M., Nolan, A.M., Dolan, S.,
 2-hydroxypropyl-b-cyclodextrin
artery translocation and castration or
 2007. Pain assessment following
(HPCD) formulation in sheep. Vet ↓
owariectomy in goats. Vet Surg 27.
experimental maxillofacial surgical
191,389-392
75-82.
procedure in sheep. Lab Anim 41.
Anderson, D.E., 2009. Uterine torsion
Caulkett, N., 1997. Anesthesia for North
345-352.
and cesarean section in llamas and
American cervids. Can Vet J 38.
Adami, C., Bergadano, A.,
alpacas. Vet Clin N Am Food Anim
389-390.
Bruckmaier, R.M., et al., 2011.
Pract 25, 523-538.
Caulkett, N.A., Cribb, P.H., Duke, T.,
Sciatic-femoral nerve block with
Auer, U., Wenger, S., Beigelbock, C.,
1994. Cardiopulmonary effects of
bupivacaine in goats undergoing
et al., 2010. Total intravenous
medetomidine-ketamine
elective stifle arthrotomy. Vet J 188,
anesthesia with midazolam,
immobilization with atipamezole
53-57.
ketamine, and xylazine or
reversal and carfentanil-xylazine
Ahern, B.J., Soma, L.R., Boston, R.C.,
detomidine following induction with
immobilization with naltrexone
et al., 2009. Comparison of the
filetamine, zolazepam, and xylazine
reversal: a comparative study in
analgesic properties of transdermally
in red deer (Cervus elaphus
domestic sheep (Ovis ovis). J Zoo
administered fentanyl and
 hippelaphus) undergoing surgery.
Wildlife Med 25, 376-389.
intramuscularly administered
I Wildlife Dis 46, 1196-1203.
Caulkett, N.A., Cribb, P.H., Haigh, J.C..
buprenorphine during and following
Barrington, G.M., Meyer, T.F.,
2000. Comparative cardiopulmonary
experimental orthopedic surgery in
Parish, S.M., 1993. Standing
effects of carfentanil-xylazine and
sheep. Am I Vet Res 70, 418-422.
castration of the llama using
medetomidine-ketamine used for
Alahuhta, S., Kangas-Saarela, T.
butorphanol tartrate and local
immobilization of mule deer and
Hollmen, A.l., et al., 1990. Visceral
anesthesia. Equine Pract 15.
mule deer/white-tailed deer hybrids.
pain during caesarian section under
35-39.
Can I Vet Res 64, 64-68.
spinal and epidural anaesthesia with
Bedforth, N.M., Hardman, J.G., 2010.
Celly, C.S., Atwal, O.S., McDonell, W.N.,
bupivacaine. Acta Anaesth Scand 34,
The hidden cost of neuraxial
et al., 1999. Histopathalogic
95-98.
anaesthesia {Editorial]. Anaesthesia
alterations induced in the lungs of
Alibhai, H.l.K., 2001. Aspects of
65.437-439
sheep by use of alpha2-adrenergic
inhalation anaesthesia in the goat.
Carroll, G.L., Boothe, D.M..
receptor agonists. Am J Vet Res 60,
PhD dissertation. University of
Hartsffeld, S.M., et al., 2001.
154-161.
London, London.
 Pharmacokinetics and
Celly, C.S., McDonell, w.N., Young, S.S..
Aminkoy, B.Y., Hubenoy, H.D., 1995.
 pharmacodynamics of butorphano]
et al., 1997. The comparative
 The effect of xylazine epidural
in llamas after intravenous and
hypoxaemic effect of four alpha 2
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 adrenoceptor agonists [xylazine,
Doherty, T.Jl., will, W.A.,
camels (Camelus dromedarius).
romifdine, detomidine and
Rohrbach, B.W., et al., 2004. Efect of
Vet Surg 20, 323-325.
medetomidine) in sheep. J Vet
morphine and flunixin meglumine
Fajt, V.R., 2011. Drug laws and
Pharmacol Ther 20, 464-471.
on isoflurane minimum alveolar
regulations for sheep and goats.
Chapman, N.G., Claydon, K.,
concentration in goats. Vet Anaesth
Vet Clin N Am Food Anim Pract 27.
Caydon, M., et al., 1987.
Analg 31, 97-101.
1-21.
Techniques for the safe and humane
Drager, C., Benziger, D., Gao, F, et al.,
Fernandez-Moran, J., Palomeque, I.,
capture of free-living muntjac deer
1998. Prolonged intercostal nerve
Peinada, Vl., 2000. Medetomidine/
[Muntiacus reevesi). Br Vet J 143.
blockade in sheep using controlled.
tiletamine/zolazepam and xylazine/
35-43.
 release of bupivacaine and
 tiletamine/zolazepam combinations
Clutton, R.E., Glasby, M.A., 2008.
dexamethasone from polymer
for immobilization of fallow deer
Cardiovascular and autonomic
microspheres. Anesthesiology 89,
(Cervus dama). I Zoo Wildlife Med
nervous effects of edrophonium and
969-979.
31, 62-64.
atropine combinations during
DuBois, W.R., Prado, T.M., Ko, J.C.H..
Fletcher, I., 1995. Handling famed deer.
 neuromuscular blockade antagonism
et al., 2004. A comparison of two
In Practice 17, 30-37.
in sheep. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
intramuscular doses of xylazine-
Foerner, I.J., Houck, R.l., Copeland, J.F.,
191-200.
ketamine combination and
et al., 1994. Surgical castration of the
Colditz, I.G., Lloyd, J.B., Paull, D.R.,
tolazoline reversal in llamas. Vet
elephant (Elephas maximus and 
et al., 2009. Effect of the non-
Anaesth Analg 31, 90-96.
Loxodonta africana). J Zoo wildlife
 steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
Dudi, PR., Chouchan, D.S.,
Med 25. 355-359.
carprofen, on weaned sheep
Choudhary. R., et al., 1984. The
Follett, K.A., 2003. Intrathecal analgesia
following non-surgical mulesing by
study of topographic anatomy and
intradermal injection of cetrimide.
and catheter-tip inflammatory
nerve blocks of hindlimb in camels
 masses (Editorial). Anesthesiology
Aust Vet J 87, 19-26.
(Camelus dromedarius). Indian Vet J
99.5-6.
Coombs, D.w., Colburn, R.W.,
61,848-853
DeLeo, J.A., et al., 1994.
Fowler, M.E., Zinkl, J.G., 1989.
Duke, T., Egger, C.M., Ferguson, J.G.
Comparative spinal neuropathy of
Reference ranges for hematologic
 et al., 1997. Cardiopulmonary effects
hydromorphone and morphine after
and serum biochemical values in
of propofol infusion in llamas. Am I
9- and 30-day epidural
llamas. Am J Vet Res 50, 2049-2053.
Vet Res 58, 153-156.
administration in sheep. Anesth
Fowler, M.E., Steffey, E.P., Galuppo, L..
Analg 78, 674-681.
Dunlop, C.l., Hodgson, D.s.
et al., 2000. Facilitation of Asian
Cambre, R.C., et al., 1994.
Copeland, S.E., Ladd, L.A., Gu, X.-Q..
elephant (Elephas maximus)
Cardiopulmonary effects of three
et al., 2008. The effects of general
standing immobilization and
 prolonged periods of isoflurane
anesthesia on the central nervous
anesthesia with a sling. I Zoo
anesthesia in an adult elephant.
and cardiovascular system toxicity of
Wildlife Med 31, 118-123.
local anesthetics. Anesth Analg 106.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 205, 1439-1444.
Garcia-Pereira, F.L., Greene, S.A.
1429-1439.
Dzikiti, B.T., Stegmann, F.G..
Keegan, R.D., et al., 2007. Effects of
Correia, D., Nolan, A.M., Reid, I., 1996.
Dzikiti, L.N., et al., 2010. Total
intravenous butorphanol on
Pharmacokinetics of propofol
intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA} with
ardiopulmonary function in
infusions, either alone or with
propofol-fentanyl and propofol-
isoflurane-anesthetized alpacas. Vet
 ketamine, in sheep premedicated
midazolam combinations in
Anaesth Analg 34, 269-274.
spontaneously-breathing goats.
with acepromazine and
Georoff, TA., James, S.B., Kalk, P., et al.
papaveretum. Res Vet Sci 60.
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 519-525.
2010. Evaluation of medetomidine-
213-217.
Dzikiti, B.T., Stegmann, F.G.
ketamine-butorphanol anesthesia
Dangolla, A., Silva, I., Kuruwita, V.Y.
Cromarty, D., et al., 201la. Effects of
with atipamezole-naltrexone
2004. Neuroleptanalgesia in wild
propofol on isoflurane minimum
 antagonism in captive male
Asian elephants (Elephas maximus
alveolar concentration and
guanacos [Lama guanicoe]. J Zoo
maximus). Vet Anaesth Analg 31,
ardiovascular function in
Wildlife Med 41, 255-262.
mechanically ventilated goats. Vet
276-279.
Gradert, T.L., Baze, W.B..
del Alamo, A., Mandsager, R.E..
Anaesth Analg 38, 44-53.
Satterfeld, W.C., et al., 2003. Safety
Riebold, T., et al., 2012. Anesthetic
Dzikiti, T.B., Stegmann, F.G.,
of chronic intrathecal morphine
valuation of administration of
Dzikiti, L.N., et al., 201lb. Effects of
infusion in a sheep model.
intravenous alfaxalone in
fentanyl on isoflurane minimum
Anesthesiology 99, 188-198.
comparison with propofol and
alveolar concentration and
Grant, C., Upton, R.N., Kuchel, T.R..
ketamine/diazepam in alpacas. In:
cardiovascular function in
1996. Efficacy of intra-muscular
Proceedings of the 18th iVEECS
mechanically ventilated goats. Vet
analgesics for acute pain in sheep.
Symposium. San Antonio, TX, USA.
Rec 168, 429
Aust Vet J73, 129-132.
p.725.
Eisenach, J.C., Shafer, S.L., Bucklin, BA.,
Gregory, G.A., Wade, J.G., Beihl, D.R.,
Doherty, T.J., Redua, M.A..
et al., 1994. Pharmacokinetics and
et al., 1983. Fetal anesthetic
Queiroz-Castro, P., et al., 2007. Effect
pharmacodynamics of intraspinal
requirement (MAC) for halothane.
of intravenous lidocaine and
dexmedetomidine in sheep.
Anesth Analg 62, 9-14.
ketamine on the minimum alveolar
Anesthesiology 80, 1349-1359.
Grint, N., Dugdale, A., 2009. Brightness
 concentration of isoflurane in goats.
Elias, E., 1991. Left ventrolateral
of venous blood in South American
Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 125-131.
 cesarian section in three dromedary
Gmelids: implications for jugular
085
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
catheterization. Vet Anaesth Analg
Honeyman, V.L., Pettifer, G.R..
post-operaative intra-articular
36.63-66.
Dyson, D.H., 1992. Arterial blood
bupivacaine in goats undergoing
Grubb, T.L., Riebold, T.W., Huber, M.J..
pressure and blood gas values in
stifle arthrotomy. Vet Anaesth Analg
1993. Evaluation of lidocaine.
normal standing and laterally
38, 363-373.
xylazine, and a combination of
recumbent African ( Loxodonta
Kutter, A.P., Kastner, S.B.,
lidocaine and xylazine for epidural
africana) and Asian (Elaphus
Bettschart-Wolfensberger, R., et al.
 analgesia in llamas. I Am Vet Med
maximus) elephants. J Zoo wildlife
 2006. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Assoc 203, 1441-1444.
Med 23, 205-210.
dexmedetomidine in goats and
Grubb, T.L., Schlipf J.W., Riebold, T.W.,
Horne, W.A., Tchamba, M.N.
sheep anaesthetised with sevoflurane.
et al., 2003. Minimum alveolar
Loomis, M.R., 2001. A simple
Vet Rec 159, 624-629
concentration of sevoflurane in
method of providing intermittent
Kyles, A.E., Waterman, A.E..
spontaneously breathing llamas and
positive-pressure ventilation to
Livingston, A., 1995. Antinociceptive
alpacas. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223.
etorphine-immobilized elephants
activity of midazolam in sheep. J Vet
1167-1169
(Loxodonta africana) in the feld.
Pharmacol Ther 18, 54-60.
Grubb, T.L., Schlipf, J.W., Riebold, T.W..
IZoo wildlife Med 32, 519-522.
Lagutchik, M.S., Januszkiewicz, A.J..
et al., 2006. Minimum alveolar
Howard, B.w., Lagutchik, M.S..
Dodd, K.T., et al., 1991.
concentration of desflurane in llamas
Januszkiewicz, A.l., et al., 1990. The
Cardiopulmonary effects of a
and alpacas. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
ardiovascular response of sheep to
tiletamine-zolazepam combination
351-355
tiletamine-zolazepam and
in sheep. Am I Vet Res 52.
butorphanol tartrate anesthesia. Vet
Hajduk, P., 1992. Haematological
Surg 19, 461-467.
1441-1447.
reference values for alpacas. Aust Vet
Laitinen, O.M., 1990. Clinical
Ingvast-Larsson, C., Svartberg. K.
169.89-90
Hydbring-Sandberg. E., et al., 2007.
observations on medetomidine/
Haymerle, A., Fahlman.,, A., Walzer, C.,
Clinical pharmacology of
ketamine anaesthesia in sheep and it
2010. Human exposures to
 buprenorphine in healthy, lactating
reversal by atipamezole. J Assoc Vet
immobilising agents: results of an
Anaesth 17, 17-19.
goats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 30,
online survey. Vet Rec 167, 327-332.
249-256.
Lee, I., Yamagushi, N, Oboshi, K., et al..
Heard, D.J., Kollias, G.V., Webb, A.l.,
Jessup. D.A., Lance, W.R., 1982. What
2003. Antagonistic effects of
et al., 1988. Use of halothane to
veterinarians should know about
intravenous or epidural atipamezole
 maintain anesthesia induced with
South American camelids.
on xylazine-induced dorsolumbar
etorphine in juvenile African
Californian Vet 11, 12-18.
epidural analgesia in cattle. Vet J
eephants. I Am Vet Med Assoc 193.
166, 194-197.
254-256.
Jessup, D.A., Jones, K., Mohr, R., et al..
1985. Yohimbine antagonism to
Leone, S., Di Cianni, S., Casati, A.,
Heard, D.., Nichols, w.w., Buss, D.,
 xylazine in free-ranging mule deer
et al., 2008. Pharmacology.
et al., 1996. Comparative
and desert bighorn sheep. I Am Vet
toxicology, and clinical use of new
cardiopulmonary effects of
Med Assoc 187, 1251-1253.
long acting local anesthetics,
intramuscularly administered
Johansen, M.Jl., Satterfeld, W.C.
ropivacaine and levobupivacaine.
etorphine and carfentanil in goats.
Baze, W.B., et al., 2004. Continuous
Acta Biomed 79, 92-105.
Am J Vet Res 57, 87-96.
Ley, S., Waterman, A.E., Livingston, A..
intrathecal infusion of
Hendrickson, D.A., Kruse-Elliot, K.T.,
hydromorphone: safety in the sheep
1990. Variation in the analgesic
Broadstone, R.V, 1996. A
 model and clinical implications.
effects of xylazine in different breeds 
comparison of epidural saline,
Pain Med 5, 14-25.
of sheep. Vet Rec 126, 508.
morphine, and bupivacaine for pain
Johnson, C.B., Sylvester, S.P.,
Lin, H.-C., Purohit, R.C., Rowe, T.A..
 relief after abdominal surgery in
Stafford, K.., et al., 2009. Effects of
1997. Anesthesia in sheep with
goats. Vet Surg 25, 83-87.
 age on the electroencephalographic
propofol or with xylazine-ketamine
Hikasa, Y., Okuyama, K., Kakuta, T..
response to castration in lambs
followed by halothane. Vet Surg 26.
et al., 1998. Anesthetic potency and
 anaesthetized with halothane in
247-252.
cardiopulmonary effects of
 Oxygen from birth to 6 weeks old.
Lin, H.-C., Tyler, J.W., Welles, E.G..
 sevoflurane in goats: comparison
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 273-279.
et al., 1993. Effects of anesthesia
with isoflurane and halothane. Can J
Kastner, S.B., 2006. 02-agonists in
induced and maintained by
Vet Res 62, 299-306.
sheep: a review. Vet Anaesth Analg
continuous intravenous
Hikasa, Y., Saito, K., Takase, K., et al..
33. 79-96.
administration of guaifenesin.
 2000. Clinical, cardiopulmonary.
Kastner, S.B., Ohlerth, S., Pospischil, A..
 ketamine, and xylazine in
hematological and serum
et al., 2007. Dexmedetomidine-
spontaneously breathing sheep. Am J
biochemical effects of sevoflurane 
induced pulmonary alterations in
Vet Res 54, 1913-1916.
 and isoflurane anesthesia in oxygen
 sheep. Res Vet Sci 83, 217-226.
Lin, H.-C., Wallace, S.S., Tyler, J.W.
under spontaneous breathing in 
Kastner, S.B.R., Wapf, P., Feige, K., et al.,.
et al., 1994. Comparison of 
sheep. Small Rumin Res 36.
2003. Pharmacokinetics and sedative
tiletamine-zolazepam-ketamine and
241-249
effects of intramuscular
tiletamine-zolazepam-ketamine-
Hile, M.E., Hintz, H.F., Erb, H.N., 1997.
medetomidine in domestic sheep.
 xylazine anaesthesia in sheep. Aust
Predicting body weight from body
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 26, 271-276.
Vet I 71, 239-242.
measurements in Asian elephants
Krohm, P, Levionnois, O.L.
Lukasik, V.M., Nogami, W.M.,
(Elephas maximus). J Zoo Wildlife
Zilberstein, L., et al., 2011.
Morgan, S.E., 1998. Minimum
Med 28, 424-427.
Antinociceptive activity of pre- versus
alveolar concentration and
L8E
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
ardiovascular effects of desflurane
Nazef, S., Maleki, K., 1998. Biochemical
Intravenous regional anaesthesia in
in sheep (abstract). Vet Surg 27, 167.
analysis of serum and cerebrospinal
cmel. Indian I Anim Sci 55.
Mama, K.R., Wagner, A.E., Parker, D.A..
fluid in clinically normal adult 
435-436.
et al., 1999. Determination of the
cmels (Camelus dromedarius). Res
Quinn, D.A., Robinson, D., Hales, C.A..
 minimum alveolar concentration of
Vet Sci 65, 83-84.
1990. Intravenous injection of
isoflurane in llamas. Vet Anaesth
Ogunbodede, E.O., Arotiba, J.T., 1997.
propylene glycol causes pulmonary
Analg 28, 121-125.
Camel bite injuries of the orofacial
hypertension in sheep. I Appl
Mama, K.R., Wagner, A.E., Steffey, E.P.,
region: report of a case. J Oral
Physiol 68, 1415-1420.
 2001. Circulatory, respiratory and
Maxillofacial Surg 55, 1174-1176.
Raekallio, M.R., Tulamo, R.-M.
behavioral responses in isoflurane
Okutomi, T., Whittington, R.A..
Valtamo, T., 1998. Medetomidine-
anesthetized llamas. Vet Anaesth
Stein, D.J., et al., 2009. Comparison
midazolam sedation in sheep. Acta
Analg 28, 12-17.
of the effects of sevoflurane and
Vet Scand 39, 127-134.
Mansel, J.C., Shaw, D.J., Strachan, FA.
isoflurane anesthesia on the
Raske, T.G., Pelkey, S., Wagner, A.E..
et al., 2008. Comparison of
maternal-fetal unit in sheep.
et al., 2010. Effect of intravenous
 peripheral and core temperatures in
I Anesth 23, 392-398.
ketamine and lidocaine on 
 anaesthetized hypovolaemic sheep.
Osofsky, S.A., 1997. A practical
 isoflurane requirement in sheep
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 45-51.
anesthesia monitoring protocol for
undergoing orthopedic surgery. Lab
Marzok, M., El-Khodery, S., 2009.
 free-ranging adult African elephants
Anim 39, 76-79.
 Sedative and analgesic effects of
(Loxodonta africana). J wildlife Dis
Ratajczak-Enselme, M., Estebe, I.-P.,
romifdine in camels (Camelus
33. 72-77.
Rose, F-X., et al., 2007. Effect of
dromedarius). Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
Pablo, L.S., 1993. Epidural morphine in
epinephrine on epidural, intrathecal,
352-360.
goats after hindlimb orthopedic
and plasma pharmacokinetics of
Mich, PM., Wolfe, L.L.,
surgery. Vet Surg 22, 307-310.
ropivacaine and bupivacaine in
Sirochman, T.M., et al., 2008.
Pablo, L.S., Bailey, I.E., Ko, J.C.H., 1997.
sheep. Br I Anaesth 99, 881-890.
Evaluation of intramuscular
Median effective dose of propofol
Read, M.R., Duke, T., Toews, A.R., 2000.
butorphanol, azaperone, and
required for induction of anesthesia
Suspected tolazoline toxicosis in a
medetomidine and nasal oxygen
in goats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 211,
llama. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216,
insufflation for the chemical
86-88.
227-229.
immobilization of white-tailed deer,
Padula, A.M., 2005. Clinical evaluation
Riebold, T.W., Engel, H.N., Grubb, T.L.
Odocoileus virginianus. J Zoo
of caudal epidural anaesthesia for
et al., 1994. Orotracheal and
Wildlife Med 39, 480-487.
Miller, B.F, Muller, L.l., Doherty, T.
the neutering of alpacas. Vet Rec
nasotracheal intubation in llamas.
156,616-617
I Am Vet Med Assoc 204, 779-783.
et al., 2004. Effectiveness of
antagonists for tiletamine/
Paull, D.R., Lee, C., Colditz, I.G., et al..
Riebold, T.w., Kaneps, A.J..
zolazepam/xylazine immobilization
2007. The effect of a topical
Schmotzer, W.B., 1989. Anesthesia in
in female white-tailed deer. J wildlife
anaesthetic formulation, systemic
the llama. Vet Surg 18, 400-404.
Dis 40, 533-537.
flunixin and carprofen, singly or in
Sarma, B., Pathak, S.C., Sarma, K.K..
combination, on cortisol and
2002. Medetomidine - a novel
Miller, B.F., Muller, L.l., Storms, T.N..
behavioural responses of Merino
et al., 2003. A comparison of
immobilizing agent for the elephant 
crfentanil/xylazine and Telazol@/
lambs to mulesing. Aust Vet J 85.
[Elephas maximus). Res Vet Sci 73.
98-106.
xylazine for immobilization of
315-317.
white-tailed deer. J wildlife Dis 39.
Pearl, R.G., Rice, S.A., 1989. Propylene-
Schauvliege, S., Narine, K., Bouchez, S.
851-858.
glycol-induced pulmonary
et al., 2006. Refned anaesthesia for 
Miller, B.F., Osborn, D.A., Lance, W.R.,
hypertension in sheep.
implantation of engineered
 et al., 2009. Butorphanol-azaperone-
Pharmacology 39, 383-389.
experimental aortic valves in the
medetomidine for immobilization of
Pollard, V., 2008. Potential toxicity and
pulmonary artery using a right heart
captive white-tailed deer. J wildlife
efficacy of local anaesthetic when
bypass in sheep. Lab Anim 40.
Dis 45. 457-467.
used for disbudding in the goat kid.
341-352.
Mohamadnia, A.R., Hughes, G..
B Vet Med dissertation. University of
Scott, P., 1996. Caudal analgesia in
Clarke, K.W., 2008. Maintenance of
London, London.
sheep. In Practice 18, 383-384.
anaesthesia in sheep with isoflurane.
Prado, T.M., Doherty, T.J., Boggan, E.B..
Seddighi, R., Doherty, T., Elliot, S..
desflurane or sevoflurane. Vet Rec
et al., 2008a. Effects of acepromazine
et al., 2012. Physiological and
163, 210-215.
and butorphanol on tiletamine-
antinociceptive effects of xylazine on
Molony, V., Kent, J.E., Robertson, I.S.,
zolazepam anesthesia in llamas. Am
tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia in
1993. Behavioural responses of
J Vet Res 69, 182-188.
llamas. In: Proceedings of the 18th
lambs of three ages in the first three
Prado, T.M., DuBois, W.R., Ko, J.C.H.,
IVEECS Symposium. San Antonio,
hours after three methods of
et al., 2008b. A comparison of two
TX, USA. p. 733.
 castration and tail docking. Res Vet
combinations of xylazine-ketamine
Shafford, H.L., Hellyer, P.W.,
Sci 55, 236-245.
administered intramuscularly to
Turner, A.S., 2004. Intra-articular
Moraga, F., Monge, C., Riquelme, R..
alpacas and of reversal with
lidocaine plus bupivacaine in sheep
et al., 1996. Fetal and maternal
tolazoline. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
undergoing stifle arthrotomy. Vet
 blood oxygen affnity: A comparative
201-207.
Anaesth Analg 31, 20-26.
 study in llamas and sheep. Comp
Purohit, N.R., Chouhan, D.S.,
Singh, R., Peshin, P.K., Patil, D.B., et al..
Biochem Physiol 115A, 111-115.
Chaudhary, R.l., et al., 1985.
1994. Evaluation of halothane as an
382
Anaesthesia of sheep. goats, and other herbivores
Chapter
13
 anaesthetic in camels (Camelus
Taylor, PM., 1998. Endocrine and
Wagner, A.E., Mama, K.R.,
dromedarius). Zentralbl 
 metabolic responses to halothane
Ruehlman, D.L., et al., 2011.
Veterinarmed 41, 359-368.
 and pentobarbitone anaesthesia in
Evaluation of effects of sciatic and
Snow, D.H., Billah, A., Ridha, A., 1988.
sheep. I Vet Anaesth 25, 24-30.
femoral nerve blocks in sheep
 Effects of maximal exercise on the
Tennent-Brown, B.S., Koenig. A.
undergoing stifle surgery. Lab Anim
blood composition of the racing
Wiliamson, L.H., et al., 2011.
40, 114-118
cmel. Vet Rec 123, 311-312.
Comparison of three point-of-care
Walsh, V.P., Gieseg, M., Mitcheson, S.L.,
Sontakke, S.D., Reddy, A.P,
blood glucose meters for use in
et al., 2012. A comparison of two
Umapathy, G., et al., 2007.
adult and juvenile alpacas. J Am Vet
different ketamine and diazepam
Anesthesia induced by
Med Assoc 239, 380-386.
combinations with an alphaxalone
 administration of xylazine
Torres, M.-D., Andaluz, A., Garcia, F.
and medetomidine combination for
hydrochlonide alone or in 
et al., 2012. Effects of an intravenous
 induction of anaesthesia in sheep.
combination with ketamine
bolus of alfaxalone versus propofol
N Z Vet I 60, 136-141.
hydrochlonide and reversal by
on intraocular pressure in sheep. Vet 
Waterman, A.E., Livingston, A..
administration of yohimbine
Rec 170, 226.
Amin, A., 199l. Further studies on
hydrochlonide in captive Axis deer
Trim, C.M., 1989. Epidural analgesia
the antinociceptive activity and
[Axis axis). Am J Vet Res 68, 20-24.
with 0.75% bupivacaine for
respiratory effects of buprenorphine
Stafferi, F., Driessen, B., Lacitignola, L.,
laparotomy in goats. J Am Vet Med
in sheep. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 14.
et al., 2009. A comparison of
Assoc 194, 1292-1296.
230-234.
subarachnoid buprenorphine or
Trim, C.M., 2007. The changing face of
Webb, S.T., Ghosh, S., 2009. Intra-
 xylazine as an adjunct for analgesia
epidural analgesia (Clinica]
articular bupivacaine - potentially
in goats. Vet Anaesth Analg 36,
commentary). Equine Vet Educ 19.
chondrotoxic? Br J Anaesth 102.
502-511.
595-596.
439-441
Stegmann, G.F., 2000. Hypoxaemia and
Trim, C.M., Hofmeister, E.H..
Webster, V.L., Cara, D.M., Walker, R.M..
suspected pulmonary oedema in a
Peroni, J.F., et al., 2013.
et al., 2005. Description of a
Dorper ewe after diazepam-ketamine
 Evaluation of an oscillometric blood
technique for anaesthetizing
induction of anaesthesia. J S Afr Vet
 pressure monitor for use in
 pregnant ewes for fetal surgery. Lab
Assoc 71, 64-65.
anesthetized sheep. Vet Anaesth
Anim 39, 94-99.
Stewart, M.C., English, A.W., 1990. The
Analg DOl:10:111i/vaa.12018.
White, R.J., Bali, S., Bark, H., 1987.
reversal of xylazine/ketamine
Tulamo, R.-M., Raekallio, M.R.
Xylazine and ketamine anaesthesia
immobilization of fallow deer with
Ekblad, A., 1995. Cardiovascular
in the dromedary camel under feld
yohimbine. Aust Vet J 67, 315-317.
effects of medetomidine-ketamine
conditions. Vet Rec 120, 110-113.
Still, J., Raath, J.P., Matzner, L., 1996.
 anaesthesia in sheep, with and
White, R.J., Bark, H., Bali, S., 1986.
Respiratory and circulatory
without 100% oxygen. JI Vet Anaesth
Halothane anaesthesia in the
parameters of African elephants
22, 9-14.
dromedary camel. Vet Rec 119.
(Loxodonta africana) anaesthetized
Uhrig, S.R., Papich, M.G., KuKanich, B.,
615-617.
with etorphine and azaperone. J S
et al., 2007. Pharmacokinetics and
Yaksh, T.L., Hassenbusch, S.
Afr Vet Assoc 67, 123-127.
pharmacodynamics of morphine in
Burchiel, K., et al., 2002.
Swenson, I.D., Wisniewski, M.,
llamas. Am J Vet Res 68, 25-34.
Inflammatory masses associated with
McJames, S., et al., 1996. The effect
Vincent, C.I., Hawley, A.T.,
intrathecal drug infusion: A review
of prior dural puncture on cisternal
Rozanski, E.A., et al., 2009.
of preclinical evidence and human
cerebrospinal fluid morphine
Cardiopulmonary effects of
data. Pain Med 3, 300-312.
concentrations in sheep after
dobutamine and norepinephrine
Yaksh, T.L., Horais, K.A., Tozier, N.A..
administration of lumbar epidural
infusion in healthy anesthetized
et al., 2003. Chronically infused
morphine. Anesth Analg 83.
 alpacas. Am J Vet Res 70,
intrathecal morphine in dogs.
523-525.
1236-1242.
Anesthesiology 99, 174-187.
E85
tel
Anaesthesia of the pig
Introduction
385
Monitoring
398
Porcine malignant hyperthermia
387
Postanaesthetic care
399
Clinical signs
387
Neuromuscular blocking agents
399
Treatment of MH
387
Local analgesia
400
Sedation
388
 Epidural nerve block
400
Agents employed for sedation in pigs
389
Analgesia for castration
401
Acepromazine
389
Caesarian section
402
αz-Agonists
389
Azaperone
390
Dissociative agents
390
INTRODUCTION
Droperidol
390
Opioids
390
 Buisn uey au uo pauoyuad aq Aeu Aiaains yanouiy
General anaesthesia
390
either local analgesia or general anaesthesia, whenever
 Preparation
390
Pinoqs Aiasins iouju ueq anou Buunbai said alqissod
Premedication
391
be transported to a veterinary clinic having the equipment
and personnel needed should complications arise. If the
Analgesia
391
surgery is to be performed using local analgesia, sedation
Intravenous technique
392
can be added to facilitate restraint General anaesthesia
Endotracheal intubation
employed under farm conditions will be dictated by finan-
cial concerns, availability of anaesthetic agents, and con-
Injectable anaesthetic agents
 siderations forthe animal such as adequacy of oxygenation.
and combinations
395
Pigs used in research studies must be anaesthetized using
Alfaxalone
395
protocols that are appropriate for the particular study.
Ketamine
395
Consequently, these anaesthetic protocols may be simple
Guaifenesin-ketamine-xylazine Triple Drip'
396
or complex but always should be selected after careful
Pentobarbital sodium
396
consideration of analgesia and animal welfare.
Pigs range in size from small newborn piglets to adults
 Propofol
396
weighing 350 kg or more. As a result, the methods of
Tiletamine-zolazepam
397
restraint and administration of anaesthetics vary accord-
Thiopental sodium
397
pue smos aaiel 'pauiensan Alsea aie said leuus allum Aigu!
Inhalation anaesthesia
397
boars may prove both diffcult and dangerous. Small pigs
397
an be simply held in arms or restrained on their sides by
Isoflurane, sevoflurane 
grasping the undermost legs and leaning on the pig's body.
Desflurane
398
A pig in a pen can be restrained for injection by placing a
Nitrous oxide (NO)
398
wooden board between the pig and the person effectively
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
385
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 14.1 Restraint of the pig by a snare applied around
the upper jaw.
Figure 14.2 Maintaining a clear airway by pushing forward
on the vertical ramus of the mandible.
to squeeze the pig against the pen wall or in a corner.
Boards used specifically for this purpose should be larger
than the pig and may have handles attached on one side
with the fat in the pharyngeal region (especially in Viet-
to facilitate manipulation of the board. Restraint of large
 namese potbellied pigs) coupled with a small larynx and
sows and boars is also easy if a weighing crate is available,
trachea, increases the likelihood of respiratory obstruction
especially one with a head catcher Large pigs can be
in sedated and anaesthetized animals. Results of physio-
restrained by a rope or wire snare placed around the upper
logical studies of breathing patterns in non-anaesthetized
jaw, caudal to the canine teeth (Fig. 14.1). Commercial
obese potbellied pigs have identified upper airway syn-
snares have a metre-long metal handle to facilitate snaring
the jaw and controlling the pig once it is caught. In most 
limitation of inspiratory airflow. In those studies, mild
cases, the pig will try to escape by pulling back against the
luail epue uoneudxa guunp paunno uoonppe ieasuaie
snare and thus immobilizes itself.
 plane of sleep. During deep sleep, the laryngeal adduction
In research studies, a pig may be immobilized by placing
was absent and the pigs became hypoxic and aroused. The
it in a webbed sling in sternal position with all four limbs
 authors postulated that the laryngeal adduction identified
passed through holes in the sling. Although Vietnamese
in the potbellied pigs is a form of autopositive end-
Auanbay paipuey uaaq aaey siad se iday said paaqiod
expiratory pressure (auto-PEEP) that provides expiratory
 aul uiensai isisan uao Aaun 'ueoidde on Asea ae pue
braking to preserve end-expiratory lung volumes (Tuck
caudal edge of the tusks are razor-sharp and care should
et al., 1999, 2001). This effect would be lost during
be taken to avoid lacerations when handling the jaws of
heavy sedation and anaesthesia, thereby resulting in
 pigs with untrimmed tusks.
hypoventilation.
 Most anaesthetists consider pigs to be good subjects for
Without endotracheal intubation, patency of the airway
general anaesthesia, provided due care is exercised.
in pigs is best maintained by keeping the head and neck
Although they resent restraint, as evidenced by the strug-
extended, pushing the lower jaw forward by applying pres-
gling and loud squeals they produce, they often respond
sure behind the vertical ramus of the mandible (Fig. 14.2),
predictably to anaesthetic agents. Recovery from anaesthe-
and by pulling the tongue out between the incisor teeth.
sia is usually calm, unless the pigs are in pain or disori-
Salivation, even if not excessive, can contribute to airway
ented. As they have little body hair, pigs are liable to
 obstruction and promote laryngospasm. Consequently.
develop hypothermia when sedated or anaesthetized, or
hyperthermia in a hot environment. Pigs tend to be fatter
thesia unless there are specific contraindications.
than most other farm animals and this can make accurate
aq iou Ae iandeup sul ul paisil siuase snaqisaeue au
IM injections difficult. The shape of the pig's head, together
 available in all countries and many are not licensed for
98E
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
use in pigs. Choice of agents used will also depend on the
American interpretations of the results and some false
pig as a food animal or not, its health, the procedure to
positives and false negatives are possible ( Rosenberg et al.,
be performed, and where the procedure will be performed
2007).
(e.g. owner's farm, veterinary clinic, or research facility).
 In some countries, pigs given unapproved drugs cannot be
Clinical signs
used for food.
Triggering of the MH syndrome initiates release of calcium
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle result-
 ing in muscle contracture and increased cellular metabo-
PORCINE MALIGNANT
lism with production of heat and lactate (Rosenberg et al..
HYPERTHERMIA
2007). Increased production of carbon dioxide results in
hypercarbia, rapid deep respirations, and increased end-
tidal CO2 concentrations. The carbon dioxide absorber in
Some breeds (particularly Poland China, Pietrain, and
a rebreathing anaesthetic circuit becomes very hot to touch
Landrace) and strains of pigs suffer from a biochemical
and the granules rapidly develop intense indicator colour.
myopathy which manifests itself during general anaesthe-
Release of catecholamines causes an initial increase in
sia. Malignant hyperthermia [MH) was frst reported in
 blood pressure with tachycardia and multifocal ventricular
Landrace cross pigs following the use of succinylcholine
dysrhythmias. Hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis
during halothane anaesthesia (Hall et al., 1966). The syn-
develop and, in some cases, the pH can decrease to less
drome bears a close resemblance to a condition described
than 6.80. The skin of white pigs becomes blotchy red
in the early 20th century in pigs with pale, soft, exudative
and white. Signs of advanced MH in most pigs include
muscle (PSE) and to the Porcine Stress Syndrome. We now
generalized muscle rigidity with spreading of the digits
know that sudden death may occur in MH-susceptible
and a severe and sustained rise in body temperature
humans in response to high environmental temperatures,
up to 42.2°C (108 °F) (Fig. 14.3). Ultimately, the animal
exercise, or stress. Since retrospective studies of several
becomes hypoxic and without treatment usually dies. In
generations of human family trees prior to 1970 identified
pigs, the signs observed during early development of MH
multiple sudden deaths within families, it is thought that
syndrome are likely to be caused by MH, however, in dogs.
the syndrome had been present but unrecognized; 1970
there are several differential diagnoses that must be con-
was the turning point in the history of MH and much
sidered (see Chapter 2, Table 2.9). Accurate identification
research has been published since that time. The MH syn-
of MH relies on the presence of clinical signs and the
drome is inherited in pigs in an autosomal recessive
 more signs present the more likely that the patient has MH
pattern, while in humans it is autosomal dominant. Only
(Box 14.1)
twO causative genes have been identified thus far, with
mutations of the type l ryanodine receptor of skeletal
muscle being most commonly involved. Al inhalation
Treatment of MH
anaesthetic agents, except nitrous oxide and the neu-
Treatment involves eliminating anaesthetic agent from the
romuscular blocking agent, succinylcholine, are triggering
anaesthetic circuit hyperventilation with oxygen to aid
agents. Injectable anaesthetic agents do not trigger the
elimination of CO2, aggressive cooling by covering the
syndrome but MH may develop in pigs anaesthetized with
injectable agents when the stress of handling and induc-
tion of anaesthesia has already initiated muscle metabo-
lism changes. If identified early in pigs anaesthetized with
Box 14.1 clinical signs of malignant
injectable agents, ventilation with oxygen and cooling the
pig may abort the syndrome. It is possible that some
hyperthermia syndrome
injectable agents, for example thiopental and alfaxalone,
Rapid deep breathing. high end-tidal and arterial CO2
may delay the onset of MH during inhalation anaesthesia
concentrations
(Hall et al., 1972). The MH syndrome does not always
Sodalime canister hot and 'blue'
Aue ie doaaap Aeu inq 'eisasaeue jo jasuo a ie inooo
time during anaesthesia and in the frst few hours after
Sinus tachycardia, hypertension, ventricular
dysrhythmias
anaesthesia.
Individuals suspected of susceptibility to MH can be
 Muscle rigidity
tested using a muscle biopsy and a laboratory test that
Moderate to severe metabolic acidosis
measures the degree of contracture induced in muscle
 Rapidly increasing body temperature
fibres exposed to halothane or caffeine (the in vitro con-
Hyperkalaemia
tracture test or IVCT). Although the test is sensitive, its
 Reversal of MH signs with dantrolene
specificity varies according to European and North
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 14.3 Rigidity of the limbs and spreading apart of the digits in a pig developing porcine malignant hyperthermia
syndrome.
anaesthesia may prevent development of the syndrome.
Box 14.2 Treatment of malignant hyperthermia
Azumolene, a more water-soluble analogue of dantrolene,
syndrome
has been investigated for treatment of MH but is not
recommended due to unacceptable hepatic toxicity
Discontinue inhalation anaesthetic administration,
reported in humans. Dysrhythmias may be treated as
increase oxygen flow
needed but calcium channel blockers should be avoided
·Start artificial ventilation and hyperventilate
when dantrolene has been administered. Hyperkalaemia
Cool patient with ice water
should be treated in the usual recommended way with
Cold IV fluids
alcium, sodium bicarbonate glucose and insulin, and
Sodium bicarbonate slowly IV, starting with
hyperventilation.
1.5 mEq/kg
 Dantrolene IV 2 mg/kg increments up to 10 mg/kg.
repeat 1 mg/kg each 6 h for 24 h
Change COz absorber granules as necessary
SEDATION
The pig's reaction to restraint (struggling and vocalization)
patient with ice countering metabolic acidosis with injec-
facilitate handling and minor procedures, as well as for
tion of sodium bicarbonate and balanced electrolyte
restraint prior to local or general anaesthesia. Intramuscu-
solution, and blocking the trigger by administration of
lar injections can be administered in the neck immediately
dantrolene (Box 14.2). Dantrolene is a hydantoin deriva-
behind the base of the ear at the level of the second cervi-
tive that was synthesized in 1967 (Krause et al., 2004). It
cal vertebra, or in the triceps, quadriceps, gluteal, or longis-
binds to a specific ryanodine protein site and blocks the
 simus dorsi muscles. The neck is the preferred site in pigs
release of calcium, thereby interrupting the trigger and
intended for food to avoid damage in the other muscles.
allowing signs of MH to reverse Dantrolene is generally
The skin should be clean before injection to avoid produc
administered IV for rapid effect. The oral preparation
tion of an abscess. The impact of the site of injection on
of dantrolene is less costly. The bioavailability of dantro-
drug action was evaluated in a study involving IM injec-
lene in animals after oral administration is less than
tion of azaperone, 1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 5 mg/kg
decribed for humans. However, when MH susceptibility is
(Clutton et al., 1998). Mature gilts were injected using 19
suspected, administration of dantrolene orally before
guge 5 cm needles at four sites: in the neck muscle 5 cm
888
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
caudal to the base of the ear; in the triceps muscle midway
Acepromazine
between the point of the shoulder and elbow; in the
 Phenothiazine derivatives are not as effective in pigs as
middle gluteal muscle at the centre of a triangle between
midline, tuber coxae and tail-head; and in the quadriceps
they are in other species. However, administration of ace-
promazine 0.03-0.1 mg/kg IM, renders pigs that are more
muscle in the cranial third of an imaginary line connecting
 oi  ssal  'oa l oy a a
patella and tuber ischii The degree of sedation at 16
lodge the IV needle by head-shaking. and vocalize less.
minutes after injection was not significantly different
between the injection sites, although the range of times to
Acepromazine should be allowed 30 minutes to produce
its full effects. Acepromazine has been commonly used
recumbency was narrower after injection in the quadriceps
with ketamine for anaesthesia in young pigs.
muscle In a separate experiment, the sedative agents were
either refrigerated, at room temperature, or warmed, and
 no differences in response to injection from the pigs were
α2-Agonists
observed.
Xylazine is not as an effective sedative as in other species.
Recommended dose rates for xylazine are 1-2 mg/kg by
Agents employed for
 IM or IV routes and these will induce a calming effect for
sedation in pigs
about 30 minutes, however, the pigs arouse easily when
disturbed and little sedative effect will be apparent Xyla-
Some of the agents listed in this section may be adminis-
zine induces a transient increase in mean arterial pressure
tered in low or high doses according to whether the
(MAP) and decreased heart rate (HR) for about 15 minutes.
desired effect is sedation or anaesthesia (Table 14.1).
Although ineffective when administered alone, xylazine
Commonly, these agents are used in combinations with
has an additive effect when added to other agents, such as
other agents, and more details may be found in the section
ketamine butorphanol or midazolam, and increases the
on general anaesthesia.
degree of sedation.
Table 14.1 Dosages of agents used in sedative and anaesthetic protocols in pigs
Agent
Drug class
Dose (mg/kg)*
Route
Indications
Atropine
Anticholinergic
t0'0-20'0
IM, IV 
Decrease salivation, treat bradycardia
Glycopyrrolate
Anticholinergic
10'0-500'0
IM, IV
Decrease salivation, treat bradycardia
Acepromazine
 Phenothiazine
0.03-0.1
IM, IV
Tranquillizer
Azaperone
 Butyrophenone
1-8
IM
Sedative
Diazepam
Benzodiazepine
0.2-0.5
IV
Mild sedative 
Droperidol
 Butyrophenone
E'0
IM
Sedative
 Med etomidine
15!U06e-70
80'0-500'0
IM, IV
Sedative
 Midazolam
 Benzodiazepine
0.2-0.5
IM, IV
Mild sedative
Xylazine
αz-agonist
1-2.2
IM, IV 
Sedative
Buprenorphine
Opicid
0.01
IM, IV
Analgesia
Butorphanol
Opicid
0.1-0.2
IM, IV
Analgesia
 Alfaxalone
 Steroid anaesthetic
0.7-3
IV
 Anaesthesia
Ketamine
 Dissociative anaesthetic
2-20
IM, IV
Sedation or anaesthesia
Metomidate
Hypnotic anaesthetic
3.3
IM, IV
Anaesthesia
 Propofol
 Hypnotic anaesthetic
1-6
IV
Anaesthesia
Thicpental
 Barbiturate
5-12
IV
Anaesthesia
 Tiletamine-zolazepam
 Dissociative anaesthetic-benzodiazepine
2-5
IM, IV
 Sedation or anaesthesia
*Dose depends on the CNs depressant effects of concurrently administered agents, the physical status of the pig. and the desired effect.
389
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Medetomidine produces a dose-dependent sedative
IM, combined with acepromazine, or azaperone, or
effect in pigs that is substantially greater than from xyla-
medetomidine or midazolam may be used to induce
zine The effect varies from mild to moderate sedation
relaxation and sedation.
with medetomidine, 0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM, to heavy seda-
Tiletamine-zolazepam is available as a commercial
tion produced by medetomidine, 0.08 mg/kg IM. The
preparation containing equal parts of each drug and is
depth and predictability of sedation can be improved by
usually prepared to achieve 500 mg of total drug per ml.
the addition of butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg IM, and mida-
Zolazepam is similar to diazepam and is included to
zolam, 0.2 mg/kg IM. Medetomidine induces bradycardia
 provide muscle relaxation. Following IM injection in pigs.
and clinical and experimental studies have included atro-
the highest plasma concentrations of tiletamine and
pine 0.02-0.04 mg/kg IM, or glycopyrrolate 0.005-
 zolazepam occur within 60 minutes, however, zolazepam 
0.01 mg/kg IM, to increase heart rates. The addition of
is more slowly eliminated than tiletamine (Kumar et al.
atropine to combinations that include (dex)medetomi-
2006). Tiletamine-zolazepam, 2-5 mg/kg IM, can be used
 dine is not recommended in dogs because these sedatives
alone to induce sedation or be combined with xylazine or
induce peripheral vasoconstriction and increased blood
 butorphanol. Recovery can be slow and lethargy and inco-
oisuanady aiaaas anounnd Aeu auidone pue anssand
ordination may persist for several hours.
by increasing HR. In pigs. medetomidine has a greater
vasoconstrictive effect on the pulmonary circulation and,
jou ae anssad ieae aeuound u saseaoui ynoe
Droperidol
severe when compared with the cardiovascular effects of
The butyrophenone compound, droperidol, has been
ketamine or tiletamine, the consequences of these effects
used in pigs and doses of 0.1-0.4 mg/kg give similar seda-
should be taken into consideration when anaesthetizing
tion to that produced by azaperone. Droperidol, 0.3 mg/
pigs for cardiovascular research or pigs with cardiac disease
kg IM, produced sedation by 15-45 minutes after admin-
(Sakaguchi et al., 1996).
istration with a duration of 2 hours in young pigs and
minimal effect on heart rates and systolic blood pressures
thetic agents may be less predictable In one study, a com-
(Bustamente and Valverde  l997).  Butyrophenone/
bination of medetomidine, 0.08 mg/kg. butorphanol,
analgesic drug mixtures have been used and droperidol,
0.2 mg/kg. and atropine, 0.025 mg/kg. administered to
20 mg/ml, and fentanyl, 0.4 mg/ml, dosed at 1 ml/50 kg
young pigs did not provide sufficient sedation to allow
 IM, produces better sedation than droperidol alone Seda-
blood sampling in all animals (Ugarte & O'Flaherty.
2005). The addition of ketamine or tiletamine-zolazepam
may induce anaesthesia. Dexmedetomidine is twice as
Opioids
potent as medetomidine and, therefore, dose rates for
dexmedetomidine are half that used for medetomidine.
Opioids administered alone are unlikely to induce seda-
Administration of medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
 produce similar cardiovascular effects, including bradycar-
zine 1-2 mg/kg. Or medetomidine, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg.
dia, decreased cardiac output, increased systemic vascular
usually with addition of atropine 0.02-0.04 mg/kg. is a
resistance and increased MAP.
popular combination for IM administration. The addition
of midazolam, 0.2-0.5 mg/kg. to these combinations
Azaperone
increases the quality of sedation. Increasing the dose rate
for medetomidine results in heavy sedation or anaesthe-
Azaperone is a licensed and commonly used pig sedative
 in Europe and is available for use in wildlife in the USA.
sia. Pet potbellied pigs may be sedated at lower dose rates
for medetomidine than is usually used in domestic pigs.
Azaperone must be given by deep IM injection and the pig
 Other opioids are used in pigs for analgesia during and
should be left undisturbed for 20 minutes for best effect.
after general anaesthesia.
The dose range is 1-8 mg/kg depending on the effects
sought, but it is recommended that a dose of 1 mg/kg is
not exceeded for adult boars as higher doses can cause
prolapse of the penis.
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
 Azaperone causes vasodilation resulting in a small fall
in arterial blood pressure and some slight respiratory
 stimulation. Hypothermia may develop in sedated pigs in
Preparation
a cold environment.
Pigs should undergo a physical examination for evidence
of ill-health. Clinical patients with abnormalities or sus-
Dissociative agents
 pected systemic disease should be evaluated further using
Ketamineand tiletamine [in combination with zolazepam)
haematological and clinical chemistry laboratory tests.
can be used to provide sedation. Ketamine, 2-10 mg/kg
Normal physiological values have been published and
06E
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
reveal that reference values for minipigs may differ from
or isoflurane, provide very little Analgesia may be pro-
domestic pigs (Hannon et al., 1990; Clark & Coffer, 2008).
vided by several methods, including administration of
Potbellied pigs have lower rectal temperatures than
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs, such as
domestic pigs (Lord et al., 1999). Other appropriate diag-
flunixin meglumine carprofen, meloxicam, or ketopro-
nostics that require patient cooperation, such as radiology
fen), opioids, and local anaesthetic agents. Keita et al.
and ultrasound, may have to be facilitated by sedation or
[2010) reported that meloxicam administered in 5-day-old
anaesthesia. Specifc patients, such as those with a history
piglets as a single IM dose, 0.4 mg/kg, 10-30 minutes
of vomiting or recent trauma, may require other precau-
before castration decreased plasma cortisol concentrations
tions for anaesthesia. Rabies is not a common disease in
and decreased pain related behaviours 2 and 4 hours after
 pigs but may occur where rabies is endemic and has been
surgery. Butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg IM or IV, is a frequently
reported in Vietnamese potbellied pigs. Clinical signs of
 administered opioid to pigs in general practice. Advan-
depression and difficulty walking are non-specific for
tges of butorphanol include increasing the sedation
rabies.
and analgesia provided by other agent combinations
Food is generally withheld for 8-12 hours and water for
with minimal adverse cardiovascular effects. Disadvan-
2 hours before anaesthesia. Although vomiting at induc-
tages of butorphanol are that it has a short-lived duration
tion of anaesthesia or during recovery is uncommon in
loleu ioy anenbapeul s! papiaoid eisagleue aul ieut pue
pigs, it can occur and introduces risk for aspiration, and
 surgery, particularly orthopaedic surgery. Buprenorphine,
ventilation is decreased when a full stomach exerts pres-
 0.01 mg/kg IM or IV, has been used as part of anaesthetic
sure on the diaphragm. Fluid deficits present before anaes-
thesia should be corrected by fluid therapy. Details of
4 hours. A higher dose rate of buprenorphine 0.1 mg/kg
existing drug therapy such as antibiotic food additives, Or
 IM, has been advocated by others [Harvey-Clark et al.,
anthelmintics, should be noted as drug interactions with
 2000: Malavasi et al., 2008). Buprenorphine administra-
 anaesthetic agents may occur.
tion during anaesthesia decreases the concentration of
isoflurane required for anaesthesia (Malavasi et al., 2008).
Premedication
Further studies are needed to define optimum dose
rate and the extent of analgesia provided by buprenor-
Salivation may be increased in anxious pigs and by admin-
phine in pigs.
istration of dissociative agents. Laryngospasm is easily
Morphine and meperidine (pethidine) prolong analge-
induced in pigs and saliva on the arytenoids can be an
sia when administered IM with azaperone and ketamine
inciting cause. Atropine, 0.02-0.04 mg/kg. or glycopyrro-
in pigs (Hoyt et al., 1986). Fentanyl IV infusions, 5-35 μg/
late, 0.005-0.0l mg/kg. IM or IV may be included in the
kg/h, IV have been included in anaesthetic protocols for
 premedication to minimize salivation.
research surgery.
Anaesthesia can be induced and maintained with iso-
Transdermal fentanyl patches, 2 μg/kg/h, have been
flurane or sevoflurane, however, in dogs, use of an inhalant
 investigated for use in young growing pigs. Serum fentanyl 
as the sole anaesthetic agent is associated with increased
concentrations were achieved by 12 hours after patch
risk of death (Brodbelt et al., 2008). In certain circum-
application, but large interindividual differences were
stances, use of an inhalant agent alone may be expedient,
measured and no true steady state concentrations were
observed (Malavasi et al., 2005). Consequently. the
ommended to reduce the subsequent dosages of anaes-
authors recommended that additional agents should be
thetic agents and thereby increase the safety of anaesthetic
administered to ensure adequate analgesia. Partial patch
administration. The degree of sedation required depends,
detachment will change absorption and use of an occlu-
in part, on the anaesthetic technique which is to follow.
sive dressing over the patch is recommended to improve
Agents may be administered IM to induce moderate to
adhesion. No depression of normal behaviour was noted
severe sedation and anaesthesia induced by titration IV of
anaesthetic agents, such as ketamine, ketamine-diazepam
 ing abdominal surgery that received both a morphine epi-
(or midazolam), or propofol, or by administration of iso-
dural block and a transdermal fentanyl patch applied at
flurane or sevoflurane by facemask. Alternatively, agents
the end of surgery had lower cortisol concentrations at the
may be administered in larger doses IM to induce general
end of surgery, showed immediate interest in food after
anaesthesia sufficient to accomplish endotracheal intuba-
anaesthesia recovery, and gained weight in the 2 days fol-
tion. Anaesthesia is then maintained with an inhalation
lowing surgery in contrast with pigs receiving no opioids
agent or injectable agents.
(Malavasi et al., 2006b).
Opioid dependence can develop in pigs. Experimental
Analgesia
pigs administered morphine free base daily for 23 days
were challenged by an injection of naloxone, 0.02 mg/kg.
Some anaesthetic agents, like medetomidine, provide
IM (Risdahl et al., 1992). All the pigs demonstrated behav-
some analgesia, while others, such as propofol, thiopental.
iour associated with opioid dependence i.e ‘wet-dog
391
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
shakes, crawling and dragging bellies, constant posture
the pressure on the vein should be released and a catheter
changes, increased vocalization, salivation and increased
cap attached. The catheter or Butterfly needle should be
defaecation frequency. A clinical patient, a young 5.9 kg
 secured to the skin using adhesive tape, or sutures [through
potbellied pig, developed similar signs after discontinua-
skin only and not cartilage), or glue. Sometimes attach-
tion of transdermal fentanyl after 9 days (Trim & Braun.
ment is easier when a roll of gauze or plastic syringe case
2010).
is placed on the inside of the ear flap (Fig. 14.6). The
 Local analgesic techniques, such as incisional infiltra-
needle or catheter should be flushed with heparinized
tion with bupivacaine up to 2 mg/kg. will contribute
saline.
long-term analgesia to an anaesthetic protocol. Other
Other veins that can be used for IV injection are the
nerve blocks applicable to specific surgeries can be incor-
cephalic vein on the dorsal surface of the forearm, and the
 porated, such as intercostal nerve blocks and interpleural
femoral vein on the medial surface of the hind limb. Use
nerve block for thoracotomy.
of long flexible catheters inserted with over-the-needle
technique can be used for catheterization of the femoral
Intravenous technique
or subcutaneous abdominal veins (Snook, 200l). Alterma-
tive methods employed to locate a vein in diffcult cathe-
Injections are made most frequently into auricular veins
terizations are ultrasound of peripheral veins and surgical
on the external surface of the ear flap. Pigs are restrained,
qt-down on the jugular vein.
as previously described, and an assistant applies pressure
With experience, it is possible to catheterize the cranial
over the vein as near to the base of the ear as possible.
vena cava by a blind technique Small pigs are restrained
 Pressure on the veins can also be achieved using an elastic
on their backs in a V-shaped trough with the neck fully
band applied around the base of the ear. Veins are inter-
extended, head hanging down, and the forelegs drawn
leaved with arteries and the sequence from one side of
back; large pigs are restrained standing with a nose snare
the ear flap to the other is vein-artery-vein-artery-vein
 and the head and neck fully extended and, in all cases.
(Fig. 14.4). Once the skin has been cleansed and alcohol
with the head, neck and body in a straight line. The skin
applied, the veins are usually easily visible (Fig. 14.5).
is clipped and cleaned as for a surgical procedure. A
Venepuncture is performed using a needle or catheter.
7.5- 10 cm long 10- 16 gauge needle, with syringe attached,
23-18 gauge depending on the size of the vein. The veins
 is pushed through the skin in the depression which can
are shallow and the passage of the needle or catheter
 be palpated just lateral to the anterior angle of the stermum
should be visible. Backflow of blood from the end of the
and formed by the angle between the first rib and trachea
needle or catheter should be observed but aspiration of
(Fig. 14.7). The needle is directed dorsocaudally towards
blood into a syringe may not be possible. A subcutaneous
bleb will be seen after a test injection if the tip of the
needle or catheter is perivascular. After correct placement,
Figure 14.4 Location of veins and arteries on lateral surface
of the ear. The solid lines drawn in black pen are veins and
Figure 14.5 Distension of the ear veins by the application of
the dashed lines represent location of arteries.
a rubber band around the base of the ear.
392
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
114
blood through it, the needle is completely withdrawn and
the catheter secured with skin sutures through adhesive
tape applied across the tubing where it exits from the skin
 puncture. Complications of this procedure include punc-
ture of an artery that is indicated by rapid flow of bright
red blood, penetration of the thoracic duct indicated by
aspiration of pinkish-white fluid, penetration of the
trachea indicated by aspiration of air or blood-tinged froth
into the syringe, and damage to the phrenic nerve which
is followed by dyspnoea. Haematoma formation after arte-
rial puncture should be limited by immediate removal of
the needle and frm pressure with a fist in the sampling
 site for 5 minutes. Damage to the phrenic nerve is less
likely if the needle is inserted from right to left.
Endotracheal intubation
 Endotracheal intubation in the pig is not as easy as in most
other domestic animals. The shape and size of the head
and mouth make use of the laryngoscope and viewing the
larynx difficult, especially in brachycephalic breeds. View
of the laryngeal opening can be obscured by the large soft
 palate Insertion ofthe endotracheal tube can be obstructed
when the tip is caught in the groove between the overlap-
 ping cricoid cartilage and the epiglottis or in the adjacent
blind sac, the oesophageal diverticulum, located dorsola-
terally (Fig. 14.8). The larynx is set at an angle to the
Figure 14.6 Catheter is secured by adhesive tape around
trachea, causing diffculty in passing the tube beyond the
the ear and a plastic syringe case that has been inserted into
the ear.
cricoid ring (Fig. 14.9). Laryngeal spasm is easily provoked
so intubation is facilitated by application of lidocaine.
1-2 mg/kg. into the larynx.
 The sizes of endotracheal tubes suitable for pigs are
small when compared with those used in dogs of a similar
body weight A 6 or 7 mm internal diameter (ID) tube
Direction
 may be the largest which can be passed in a pig weighing
of needle
about 25 kg a 9 mm ID tube is suitable for a 50 kg
 L. jugular vein
animal; large boars and sows may accommodate tubes of
14-16 mm ID diameter. Endotracheal tube sizes are
Site of skin -
Sternal
smaller in potbellied pigs, such that a 90 kg animal can
puncture
manubrium
only accommodate a 9-10 mm ID diameter tube. Intro-
Ist rib-
 L. brachial vein
duction of the tube may be made easier by the use of a
stilette placed inside the endotracheal tube and with the
- L. internal
end located at the endotracheal tube adapter bent over to
thoracic vein
Cranial
ensure that the tip does not protrude beyond the end of
the tube. Forceful intubation can result in pharyngeal or
vena cava
 tracheal laceration and the endotracheal tube emerging in
Figure 14.7 Site for the introduction of a needle to
the subcutaneous tissues. Trauma to the laryngeal mucosa
penetrate the cranial vena cava. The needle tip is advanced
should be avoided as oedema may cause airway obstruc-
towards an imaginary point midway between the scapulae.
tion during recovery from anaesthesia after extubation.
Laryngoscope blades used in dogs are suitable in small
pigs but longer blades (as described in the ruminant
an imaginary point midway between the scapulae and
chapter) are necessary in large pigs to expose the larynx
advanced until blood can be freely aspirated through it
to view.
when a syringe is attached. Sterilized plastic tubing is then
 Tracheal intubation can be accomplished with the pig
threaded through the needle into the cranial vena cava
 placed in any position, provided that the neck and head
and, after its position has been verified by aspiration of
are fully extended. With the pig in sternal position, an
565
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
（A
B
Figure 14.8 (A) Larynx of a 70 kg Large White pig (post-mortem). A 12 mm ID endotracheal tube was the largest tube that
(B) Larynx of a 90 kg potbellied sow (post-mortem). The largest endotracheal tube that could be inserted was 9 mm ID. The
probe is inserted into the oesophageal diverticulum.
Figure 14.9 Sagittal section of a 43 kg Landrace pig's head to show principal structures in relation to the passage of an
endotracheal tube (10 mm ID): a: tongue, b: epiglottis, c: thyroid cartilage, d: trachea, e: oesophagus.
assistant elevates the upper jaw and with the other hand,
 may have to be lifted away from the epiglottis, either with
pulls down on the lower jaw and pulls on the tongue
 the laryngoscope blade or the tip of the endotracheal tube.
(Fig. 14.10). Gauze strips or lengths of IV administration
 The tube is inserted into the larynx under direct vision and
tubing can be used to open the jaws and a dry gauze assists 
 is passed between the vocal cords at a level slightly dorsal
stabilizing the tongue. The anaesthetist introduces the
to the middle of the larynx. If its progress is arrested at the
laryngoscope blade until the tip is between the tongue and 
entrance to the trachea, the stilette can be partially with-
the epiglottis, and the tongue is depressed. The soft palate 
drawn and the head flexed slightly on the neck, or the
394
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
measurements of end-tidal CO2 35-45 mmHg. No air
leakage around the cuff was heard and no gastric disten-
sion was observed. Leakage may occur when higher infla-
tion pressures are needed for adequate ventilation.
Injectable anaesthetic agents
and combinations
Anaesthesia can be induced by IV injection of diazepam-
ketamine, thiopental, or propofol, for short surgical pro-
cedures. The degree of relaxation, the dose rates, and the
safety of the patient are improved by prior administration
of sedative agents. In some cases, agents administered IM
for sedation can induce anaesthesia suffcient for endotra-
cheal intubation or short surgical or medical procedures.
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) may be maintained
by additional IV supplements of anaesthetic agents and.
when appropriate, the inclusion of local analgesia. Hypox-
aemia and hypotension may develop during TIVA. These
Figure 14.10 Intubation of a pig in sternal position. Note
patients should be monitored and oxygen supplementa-
the extension of the head and neck
tion should be available for treatment of hypoxaemia.
Commonly used premedications for IM administra-
tion include butorphanol-atropine-midazolam (BAM),
butorphanol-atropine-midazolam-xylazine
(BAMX),
butorphanol-atropine-midazolam-(dex)medetomidine
endotracheal tube rotated 90-180° about its longitudinal
 (BAMM),. and tiletamine-zolazepam or azaperone with
axis. The tube may then be advanced gently into the
Or without butorphanol. Small pigs may be adequately
trachea. An altermative is to introduce a stilette about three
sedated with acepromazine-butorphanol or midazolam-
times the length of the endotracheal tube through the
butorphanol. Dose rates in domestic pigs that have not
larynx under direct vision and then to insert the tube over
been previously handled may be much higher than those
it into the trachea. Placement of the tube in the oesopha-
'sid paaqiod iad u eisauseue ioy panhal
gus may be recognized by failure of substantial airflow
through the tube or absence of misting inside the tube
with breathing. breathing sounds or gurgling from the
Alfaxalone
pharynx, evidence of airway obstruction including onset 
Alfaxalone, in its new formulation in cyclodextrin, is
of cyanosis, and failure of carbon dioxide measurement
licensed for use in dogs and cats in many countries. Induc-
by capnography. In large adult pigs. a speculum made
tion of anaesthesia with alfaxalone in 60 mixed breed pigs
from a length of plastic plumbing pipe covered with duct
that were premedicated with azaperone IM produced good
tape can be inserted between the upper and lower incisors
conditions for endotracheal intubation in 63% of the pigs
to protect the endotracheal tube.
and some diffculty with jaw tone in 37% of the pigs
Placement of a laryngeal mask airway (LMA) is an alter-
[Keates, 2003). The gilts, weighing a mean of 1l6 kg, were
native method for securing the airway (Patil et al., 1997:
 premedicated with azaperone, 2.1 mg/kg IM, and anaes-
Fulkerson & Gustafson, 2007: Birkholz et al., 2008). Size 4
thesia was induced with alfaxalone, 0.9 ± 0.2 mg/kg. The
has been recommended for 45 kg domestic pigs and size
mature sows, weighing a mean of 242 kg, were premedi-
 5 for larger adult miniature pigs. With the cuff deflated and
cated with azaperone, 1.2 mg/kg, and received alfaxalone,
sterile lubricating gel smeared on the outside, while the
0.7 ± 0.1 mg/kg. IV. Anaesthesia was maintained with
tongue is immobilized with one hand, the LMA is inserted
halothane in oxygen. Ventilation was good based on end-
into the pig's mouth with the other hand and advanced
tidal CO2 values. Twitching, most commonly involving
into the pharynx until resistance is felt The cuff is inflated
the facial or jaw muscles, was observed in one-third of the
with up to 30 mL air. In one study comparing the LMA and
pigs during recovery from anaesthesia.
endotracheal tube in isoflurane-anaesthetized pigs, con-
trolled ventilation was achieved with both airways using
Ketamine
tidal volumes of 10-13 mL/kg, respiratory rates 19-25 per
minute and peak inspiratory pressures of 15-23 cm H2O
Ketamine is a useful agent for induction of anaesthesia in
(Fulkerson & Gustafson, 2007). Adequacy of ventilation
 pigs. When used alone, anaesthesia is accompanied by
was evaluated by observation of chest excursion and
 poor muscle relaxation, difficulty in achieving a desired
565
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
depth of anaesthesia for surgery, and agitation and exces-
Pentobarbital sodium
sive motor movement in recovery. The addition of seda-
This dnug still has a place for surgery in experimental labo-
tives and opioids to ketamine anaesthesia results in a
longer duration of action and a quiet recovery. Ketamine
ratories. The most satisfactory method of administration
of pentobarbital is slow IV injection until the desired
may be administered at the time of premedication, for
degree of CNS depression is obtained. Depths of anaes-
induction of anaesthesia, or both. Many different combi-
thesia may be difficult to assess in pigs. Presence or absence
nations, and dose rates, have been recommended and the
of withdrawal to toe pinch may be evidence of anaesthe-
choice may depend of the anaesthetist's preference or
sia. For healthy, unsedated male and female pigs up to
availability of agents. The dose rate for IV administration
 50 kg body weight, the average IV dose of pentobarbital
of ketamine for induction of anaesthesia in healthy pigs
depends on the degree of preanaesthetic sedation and
necessary to induce medium depth anaesthesia is about
30 mg/kg. Injection must be made slowly over several
1-5 mg/kg following heavy sedation.
minutes and titrated to the onset of muscle relaxation. The
 dose rate must be reduced for very large pigs and marked
A combination of ketamine, 10 or 20 mg/kg. xylazine
variations in susceptibility will be encountered. Adminis-
2 mg/kg, and midazolam, 0.25 mg/kg, all injected IM pro-
tration of other anaesthetic agents allows a decrease in the
dose rate of pentobarbital and various combinations have
mately 2 minutes, duration of 55 minutes [low dose) and
been decribed for anaesthesia in research animals {Liu
92 minutes (high dose), followed by recovery times of
et al., 2009),
8-19 minutes [Ajadi et al., 2008). Analgesia was tested by
 Intratesticular injection of pentobarbital has been used
the low dose of ketamine but was present for an average
to produce anaesthesia for castration in large pigs. A con-
of 4l minutes after administration of the higher dose of
centrated solution of pentobarbital sodium (300 mg/mL).
such as one commercially available for euthanasia of
ketamine. The conclusion was that the high dose of keta-
mine or other anaesthetic agents must be administered to
small animals may be administered at a dose rate of
about 45 mg/kg: a very large boar being given 20 mL
provide analgesia for surgical procedures when using this
 of solution into each testicle and adequate anaesthesia for
dnug combination.
castration develops within 10 minutes of injection. The pig
In another study, domestic pigs weighing 20 kg were
given a combination of atropine, 0.025 mg/kg, medetomi-
must be castrated as soon as it becomes anaesthetized to
 prevent overdosage by removing the depot of pentobarbi-
dine 0.08 mg/kg. and butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg, IM for
tal. Safe disposal of the testicles is essential to prevent
premedication followed by ketamine, 10 mg/kg. IM 15
minutes later. These agents provided anaesthesia for minor
inadvertent ingestion by dogs that would lead to their
death.
surgical procedures for at least 30 minutes and loss of
pedal reflex for a mean of 75 minutes (Sakaguchi et al.
1996). In a separate experiment administration of ati-
pamezole, 0.24 mg/kg, IM or IV to pigs anaesthetized with 
Propofol
atropine-medetomidine-butorphanol-ketamine resulted
 Propofol has been used to induce anaesthesia in pigs
in arousal within 20 minutes accompanied by ataxia and
after a variety of preanaesthetic agents. As with other
hind limb weakness. There was no significant difference
anaesthetics, the dose rate of propofol decreases with
 in mean arousal times and mean walk times between pigs
increasing sedation. Dose rates 4-5 mg/kg IV have
given atipamezole IM or IV.
been used in pigs with mild to moderate preanaesthetic
sedation (Zaballos et al., 2009) and 1-3 mg/kg IV in
pigs with greater sedation. Anaesthesia is generally
Guaifenesin-ketamine-xylazine Triple Drip'
maintained in clinical patients with inhalation agents.
The combination of ketamine and xylazine in 5% guaife
Total intravenous anaesthesia with propofol infusion.
nesin ('Triple Drip') given by IV infusion, although rather
8-13 mg/kg/h, has been reported for experimental studies,
expensive, can be used in pigs as in other species of animal
in conjunction with continous infusions of fentanyl.
to produce and maintain anaesthesia. The solution is
35 μg/kg/h. or remifentanil, 0.5 μg/kg/h (Schoffmann
usually prepared immediately before use to contain 2 mg
of ketamine, l mg of xylazine, and 50 mg guaifenesin per
of TIVA with propofol, 18.5 mg/kg/h, a continuous infu-
mL. Induction of anaesthesia usually needs 0.6-1 mL/kg
 sion of dexmedetomidine, 0.2 μg/kg/h, significantly deep-
and anaesthesia is maintained by infusion of approxi-
ened anaesthesia as measured by BIS monitor (Sano et al.
mately 2.2 mL/kg/h, but the rate of infusion must be
2010). Cardiac output was decreased primarily due to
adjusted to effect as judged by monitoring the usual signs
decreased HR, MAP decreased and peripheral vascular
of anaesthesia. Recovery is usually 30-45 minutes follow-
resistances were unchanged. Higher dose rates for
ing cessation of administration but can be hastened by
dexmedetomidine resulted in significant cardiovascular
administration of tolazoline or atipamezole.
depression.
96E
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
Tiletamine-zolazepam
circuits designed for equine anaesthesia are more appro-
priate for very large boars and sows because the circle
In healthy pigs. IM injection of tiletamine-zolazepam
Y-piece lumen and internal diameters of endotracheal
induces sedation that is not sufficient to allow endotra-
tube adapters of small animal circuits are smaller than
cheal intubation or a painful procedure The combina-
their tracheas and impose resistance to air flow. Inhalation
tion of tiletamine-zolazepam, 4.4 mg/kg, and xylazine,
agents may be administered via a facemask but endotra-
cient for endotracheal intubation, approximately 20-30
cheal intubation is preferable as controlled ventilation
may be necessary. Large facemasks available for dogs are
minutes of analgesia, and an acceptable recovery from
adequate for small pigs. Masks for large pigs can be con-
anaesthesia (Ko et al., 1993, 1995). The addition of keta-
structed from heavy plastic rolled into a cone, and from
mine, 2.2 mg/kg. to the combination was found only to
 prolong analgesia and recumbency times by a few minutes.
plastic funnels or plastic containers. Care must be taken
so that the mask does not distort or obstruct the nostrils.
Tiletamine-zolazepam is available as a powder in multi-
dose vials for reconstitution with 5 mL sterile water that
Adhesive or duct tape can be wrapped around the edge of
the mask and the pigs' face to produce an air-tight seal.
results in a solution containing 250 mg of tiletamine
 Isoflurane and sevoflurane are commonly used to main-
and 250 mg of zolazepam or 100 mg/mL of tiletamine-
 tain anaesthesia in pigs. Desflurane is used less in clinical
zolazepam. The powder can be reconstituted with adjunct
 practice because of significantly increased expense of the
agents to decrease the final volume for injection ( Ko et al.
agent and the vaporizer. Nitrous oxide was used exten-
 sively in pigs to provide analgesia and decrease the con-
be made by adding 2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL xylazine and
centration of halothane required for anaesthesia. The
2.5 mL of sterile water to 500 mg of powder to produce a
improved cardiovascular effects of isoflurane and sevoflu-
solution containing 100 mg/mL of tiletamine-zolazepam
rane and the increase in available injectable agents for
and 50 mg/mL of xylazine. To produce a mixture of
sedation and analgesia have minimized the need for
tiletamine-zolazepam-ketamine-xylazine (TKX). a vial
nitrous oxide.
containing 500 mg tiletamine-zolazepam powder should
be reconstituted with 2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL ketamine and
Drug dosages, mg/kg, for anaesthetic agents are
2.5 mL of 100 mg/mL xylazine. In each case, the dose rate
decreased by heay sedation,old age,obesity, sepsis,
is 4.4 mg/kg based on the combined concentration of
severe haemorrhage,and systemic disease.
100 mg/mL tiletamine-zolazepam. Lower dose rates can
be used for preanaesthetic sedation followed by induction
Isoflurane, sevoflurane
of anaesthesia by ketamine 1-2 mg/kg IV, or inhalation
The published values for the minimum alveolar concen-
agent administered via facemask.
tration (MAC) for isoflurane in pigs is 1.6-1.9% and for
Tiletamine-zolazepam, 4-5 mg/kg. may be combined
sevoflurane is 2.4-2.66% [Manohar & Parks, 1984; Allaou-
with medetomidine, 0.05 mg/kg, IM to induce anaesthesia
chiche et al., 200l; Malavasi et al., 2008). The concentra-
in domestic pigs. Lower dose rates of medetomidine,
tion required for anaesthesia will be decreased by prior
0.01 mg/kg, are often sufficient in potbellied pigs.
administration of other anaesthetic agents, for example,
induction of anaesthesia with tiletamine-zolazepam-
Thiopental sodium
medetomidine decreased isoflurane MAC by 68%
Anaesthesia can be induced in pigs by thiopental,
[Malavasi et al., 2008). The addition of opioids or the
5-12 mg/kg. IV depending on premedication, with the
presence of disease will further decrease anaesthetic
larger pigs requiring the smaller dose rate Thiopental is
requirement For example, in young domestic pigs anaes-
preferably used as a 2 or 2.5% solution since a 5% solution
thetized with sevoflurane, experimental induction of
will cause tissue necrosis if injected outside the vein. Further, 
sepsis decreased sevoflurane requirement by 44% (Allaou-
use of a more dilute solution of thiopental usually results 
chiche et al., 200l).
in administration of a lower total dose of thiopental. Induc-
 Both isoflurane and sevoflurane induce dose-dependent
tion of anaesthesia with thiopental sodium is facilitated by
decreases in cardiac output (CO), stroke volume and MAP
preanaesthetic sedation, and lower doses of thiopental are
 in healthy pigs (Manohar & Parks, 1984). Compared with
adequate. Apnoea may occur after injection. Duration of
equipotent
concentrations of isoflurane, sevoflurane
 anaesthesia is short and may have to be supplemented with
caused a larger decrease in CO but less depression of MAP
inhalation anaesthesia. Supplemental doses of thiopental
especially at deeper planes of anaesthesia. Cerebrovascular
 are cumulative and can result in delay in recovery.
resistance altered minimally when the pigs were normo-
carbic and renal blood flow was unchanged from the
Inhalation anaesthesia
characteristics of sevoflurane give it the advantage over
Breathing systems that are used for dogs may be used
isoflurane for anaesthesia of sick patients and for outpa-
to administer inhalant anaesthetics to most pigs. Circle
 tient anaesthesia.
L65
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Desflurane
Different values for desflurane MAC in pigs have been
reported; 8.28-10.0% (Manohar & Parks, 1984; Eger et al.,
1988), and even as high as 13.8% (Holmstrom et al.
2004). Cardiovascular effects of desflurane in pigs are
similar to those in other species, in that increasing desflu.
rane administration to above MAC value results in
hypotension but no significant change in heart rates
(Martin-Cancho et al., 2006).
Nitrous oxide (N20)
Nitrous oxide is not suffciently potent to induce anaes-
thesia in pigs but can be used as an adjunct agent to
provide analgesia during anaesthesia. One study measured
a 2l% decrease in isoflurane requirement when 50%
Figure 14.11 Attachment of a Doppler probe on the caudal
inspired NzO was added, and that the decrease in isoflu-
surface of the forelimb. A cuff is wrapped proximally and
rane administration was accompanied by a significantly
connected to a pressure manometer for non-invasive
higher MAP compared with measurements recorded
measurement of blood pressure
 during anaesthesia with isoflurane alone (Tranquilli et al.
1985).
When NzO is part of the anaesthetic protocol, it must
be remembered that the pig must breathe oxygen for 5
single cuff (Fig. 14. 1l). Accuracy of NIBP measurement in
minutes after NzO is discontinued to avoid 'diffusion
pigs may be influenced by the uneven circumference of a
hypoxia'
an yo uaeid Aroeses ym suaau q s
uff. Systolic arterial pressure measured using Doppler
Monitoring
ultrasound may be less than invasive systolic pressure in
anaesthetized domestic pigs, whereas diastolic pressure
Monitoring vital signs is essential for early detection of
measurements may be similar (Trim, unpublished obser-
abnormalities. Common abnormalities during anaesthe-
vations). Data from another investigation indicate that
sia that require treatment are hypoventilation, airway
there are no significant differences between systolic pres-
obstruction, hypotension, bradycardia, and hypothermia.
 sures measured directly and indirectly in domestic pigs
Recently, a review of anaesthesia in potbellied pigs identi -
(Hodgkin et al., 1982). Invasive blood pressure measure-
fied a high incidence of these abnormalities in a series of
ment is usually made from a catheter inserted in an auricu-
clinical patients (Trim & Braun, 20ll).
u qu pu io qaioy aul uo Aae Aue inq Aae ie
ayl suisn Aq passasse st eisauisaeue jeojgins jo ydaa
also be cannulated. Comparison of arterial pressures from
position of the eye, rolled rostroventral in the orbit, and
auricular and femoral arteries in anaesthetized pigs found
the presence or absence of a palpebral reflex, which should
no signifcant differences (Bass et al., 2009). Normal
be weakly present or just absent. Failure of withdrawal
values in awake domestic pigs for heart rate and MAP vary
yanoi e s! youd jenipiaul io aol e oi asuodsai ui xayai
from 103 ± 13 to 114 ± 6 beats/min and 102 ±9 to 116 ±
guide for adequacy of anaesthesia. Heart rates and arterial
16 mmHg. respectively (Tranquilli et al., 1982; Trim &
pressures are largely determined by the anaesthetic agents
Gilroy. 1985; Hannon et al., 1990; Sakaguchi et al., 1996)
administered, but abrupt increases shortly after an increase
Balanced electrolyte solution is infused at 5-10 mL/kg/h.
in noxious stimulus probably represent signs of inade-
Hypotension, MAP less than 65 mmHg. has many causes
quate anaesthesia.
 during anaesthesia and surgery. Treatment is aimed at the
Circulation is assessed in similar ways to small animal
cause and involves decreased anaesthetic agent adminis-
patients but evaluation of membrane colour and capillary
tration, fluid therapy, and vasoactive drugs (see Chapter
refll time may be complicated by black pigmentation. An
21, Complications). Circulating blood volume in pigs
Desophageal stethoscope can be used in small pigs but will
has been reported as 67 mL/kg (Hannon et al., 1990).
 need to be inserted visually using a laryngoscope. A pulse
Anaesthesia impairs the physiological response to haem-
oximeter can be attached to the tongue lips, or nose to
 orrhage and loss of 15% of blood volume in anaesthetized
monitor oxygenation. Arterial blood pressure can be
animals (10 mL/kg in pigs) is associated with significant
measured non-invasively (NIBP) using the Doppler ultra-
decreases in circulatory function.
sound probe placed caudally on a lower extremity with a
cuff proximal, or by the oscillometric technique using a
protocol but slow rates less than l0 per minute
868
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
 may indicate hypoventilation. Breathing should be both
concurrently with an opioid, have been used to maintain
thoracic and abdominal but visual estimation of depth of
long-term immobility after experimental surgery (Nunes
breathing is diffcult Rapid shallow breathing during
et al., 2007).
inhalation anaesthesia is frequently accompanied by sig-
nificant hypercarbia. Adequacy of ventilation is easily
monitored non-invasively using end-tidal COz measure-
Neuromuscular blocking agents
ment, with values 30-40 mmHg representing normoven-
Neuromuscular blocking agents may be used in pigs to
tilation. Hypoventilation is best treated with controlled
provide muscle relaxation for thoracic, abdominal,
ventilation, or lightening the plane of anaesthesia if arti-
and orthopaedic surgery, and experimental studies.
ficial ventilation is not an option. Artificial ventilation at
When using neuromuscular blockade the pigs must
10-15 breaths/minute and tidal volumes of 15 mL/kg
be unconscious and analgesic, and controlled ventila-
should achieve normocarbia. Tidal volume/kg should be
tion must be employed. Monitoring equipment should
 decreased in obese patients.
include a method for measuring arterial blood pressure
Pigs' body temperature frequently mimics ambient tem-
and a peripheral nerve stimulator to monitor neuromus-
qular blockade. Details on the pharmacology and clinical
Monitoring is important to identify hypo- or hyperther-
use of neuromuscular blocking agents are covered in
mia. Rectal temperature in normal domestic pigs is 38.5 ±
Chapter 8.
0.65"C (10l.3 ±1.2"F) (Hannon et al., 1990). Potbellied
Many neuromuscular blocking agents have been used
 pigs are reported to have lower rectal temperatures than
successfully in pig anaesthesia. The depolarizing muscle
relaxant suxamethonium (succinylcholine) was primarily
1.5°F), range 35.1-39.6°C (95.2-103.3*F) (Lord et al.,
used to facilitate endotracheal intubation. The increased
1999). Potbellied pigs also exhibit diurnal variation in
 availability of anaesthetic agents that induce satisfactory
Buu aun ui saaduan ym 'sanan apo
jaw relaxation for intubation has eliminated the need for
being signifcantly lower than temperatures in the evening.
 suxamethonium. The non-depolarizing agents, pancuro-
Prevention of hypothermia during anaesthesia involves
nium, atracurium, vecuronium, and rocuronium, provide
application of heat, such as hot water circulating pads or
longer durations of paralysis and can be administered as
warm air blankets, use of warmed intravenous fluids, and
boluses at intervals or as continuous infusions. Initial
 alteration of room temperature, where appropriate.
bolus dose rates are listed (Table. 14.2) (weiskopf et al.
1990; Herweling et al., 2004; Shi et al., 2008). Neuromus-
Postanaesthetic care
cular blocking agents can also be administered by continu-
ous rate infusions.
It is essential that pigs should be kept warm until they are
Reversal of neuromuscular blockade at the end of anaes-
completely mobile after sedation or general anaesthesia
thesia involves administration of an acetylcholinesterase
because they are prone to develop hypothermia and recov-
inhibitor, such as neostigmine or edrophonium. When
ery will be prolonged.
using the train-of-four (TOF) pattern of nerve stimulation
Close observation after extubation during recovery is
to monitor neuromuscular function, it is usual to wait
 necessary so that immediate measures may be taken to
relieve any respiratory obstruction. When tracheal intuba-
tion was traumatic, dexamethasone, l mg/kg. should be
injected slowly IV during anaesthesia to decrease laryngeal
swelling.
 Table 14.2 Neuromuscular blocking agents used
Disorientation and increased activity during recovery
in pigs
may be residual CNS effects of dissociative agents, anxiety.
 or pain. Administration of midazolam, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg. IV
Agent
Dose rate for
 Duration of action
should calm an anxious patient. Rectal temperature should
initial IV
to 80-95%
ap re an s s ae ui p an
bolus (mg/kg)
recovery of digital
hyperthermia.
twitch (min)
Postoperative pain relief is essential, particularly follow-
ing all surgical procedures. Provision of analgesia should
Suxamethonium/ 2.0
2-3
 succinylcholine
have been incorporated into the anaesthetic protocol and
supplemental doses of opioids may be necessary during
 Pancuronium
0.06-0.12
25-30
recovery. The pigs should be observed as the full effect of
Vecuronium
0.1
17
opioid develops in case the pigs become reanaesthetized
or assume a position that results in airway obstruction.
Atracurium
9'0-5'0
09-02
In research, continuous infusions of medetomidine,
Rocuronium
1.26
22
0.02 mg/kg/h, diluted to a convenient volume and infused
665
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
until at least two twitches are present. Attempt at earlier
Lumbosacral
reversal requires a larger dose of antagonist and increases
space
the risk of adverse effects. When four twitches are appar-
Crest of
Last lumbar
ent even in the presence of a small degree of fade a
the ilium
vertebra
considerably smaller dose rate of anticholinesterase agent
is adequate for reversal. It must be remembered that even
when the amplitude of extremity twitch has returned to
the pre-paralysis value, return of strength of the laryngeal
muscles (and therefore, protective reflexes of the airway)
will take a longer time. Bradycardia and gastrointestinal
stimulation are included in the adverse effects induced by
>Sacrum
anticholinesterases and generally it is advisable to admin-
ister atropine or glycopyrrolate before pharmacological
reversal.
LOCAL ANALGESIA
Epidural nerve block
In the pig. the spinal cord ends at the junction of the fifth
 and sixth lumbar vertebrae and the spinal meninges con-
Figure 14.12 Dorsal view of the pig's pelvis. A line
tinue, around the phylum terminale, as far as the middle
connecting the iliac crests crosses the last lumbar vertebra.
of the sacrum. At the lumbosacral space the sac is com-
The lumbosacral space in adult pigs is 2.5-3 cm caudal
 paratively small, and it is uncommon that a needle intro-
to this point. The patella can be used as a reliable
duced at this point will penetrate into the subarachnoid
landmark for location of the iliac crest in larger animals;
 space. The lumbosacral aperture is large. Its dimensions in
with the hind legs in a normal standing position, a vertical
the adult are approximately 1.5 cm craniocaudally and
line through the patella will cross midline on level with the
3 cm transversely. The depth of the canal is about l cm.
crest of the ilium.
The site for insertion of the needle is located as follows:
the cranial border of the ilium on each side is found with
the fingers. A line joiningthem crosses the spinous process
of the last lumbar vertebra (Fig. 14.12). The needle can be
needles are used; 8 om long for pigs between 30 and 50 kg.
s s q  au a u a
10 cm long for 100 kg pigs. and 15 cm for 200 kg pigs.
process and directed downwards and backwards at an
Spinal needles that have a shorter needle bevel and a sti-
angle of 20° with the vertical, or inserted up to 2.5-4 cm
lette are preferable when available.
caudal to the spinous process and perpendicular to the
After preparation of the skin with a surgical scnub. a
pig's back. The depth to which the needle must penetrate
 small volume of lidocaine should be injected with a hypo-
in pigs of from 30 to 70 kg will vary from 5 to 9 am. The
dermic needle as a subcutaneous bleb at the proposed site
landmarks described are readily detected in animals of
 of needle insertion. Positioning for epidural injection may
smaller size but they may be masked by the overlying
ul Aq paieiey uoeiadoo iuaed aq pauaiap aq
tissues in larger ones. In large pigs. a point 15 cm cranial
or heavy sedation or general anaesthesia. Small pigs may
to the base of the tail serves as a fairly accurate guide.
be restrained in sternal position with the hind limbs
Provided the needle is introduced in approximately the
 pulled rostrally, and large pigs may be in lateral position
correct position and direction, the size of the lumbosacral
or standing. Insertion of the long needle required to reach
space makes its detection comparatively easy. Alterna-
the epidural space in large pigs may be facilitated by place-
tively, in large pigs that are standing or in lateral recum-
ment of a 14 gauge 5 cm hypodermic needle through
bency with the hind limbs placed in a normal standing
which the 18 gauge 12-15 cm needle is inserted. Insertion
position, a line perpendicular to the floor passing through
of the needle through the interarcuate ligament should be
the patella will cross midline at the level ofthe last lumbar
carefully controlled. Rapid penetration may result in the
spinous process. Needle insertion is 2.5-4 cm caudal to
needle touching the spinal cord and sudden movement by
this point and perpendicular to the animal's back. Some
the pig that may dislodge needle placement. A syringe
animals have straighter hocks than others and adjustment
should be attached to the needle and aspirated to ensure
must be made for this difference in anatomy to prevent
absence of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or blood. A small
insertion of the needle too far caudally. Eighteen gauge
amount of air, saline, or local anesthetic solution should
400
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
then be injected to ascertain ‘loss of resistance: Local
Injection of local anaesthetic solution will result in vasodi-
 anaesthetic solution should be injected slowly over at least
lation of the hind limbs and a decrease in MAP. Hypoten-
30 seconds to avoid an increase in CSF pressure.
 sion should betreated with IV fluid therapy and ephedrine,
Epidural analgesia has been used for the castration of
0.1 mg/kg, IV or IM.
pigs of 40-50 kg, injecting 10 mL of 2% lidocaine solu-
tion (5 mg/kg). with or without epinephrine. Complete
Analgesia for castration
desensitization of the scrotum, testes and spermatic cord
o eied e sem aia pue 'sanu ii un juasaid sem
Local analgesia can be used to provide analgesia for castra-
 paralysis of the hind limbs. Recovery was complete at the
tion of pigs up to about 5 months of age, but general
end of the second hour.
anaesthesia is more satisfactory for older animals. For
Lower dose rates of lidocaine have been recommended
intratesticular injection, a needle of suitable size is inserted
at 1 mL of a 2% solution per 7.5 kg (2.7 mg/kg) for pigs
perpendicularly through the tensed scrotal skin and
weighing up to 50 kg and an additional 1.0 mL for every
advanced until its point lies in the middle of the testicle.
10 kg above this in weight. Another suggestion which has
Between 3 and 15 mL, depending on the size the animal,
proved to be satisfactory is based on occiput-tail base
of 2% lidocaine or 5% procaine are injected, with the
measurement allowing l.0 mL for the frst 40 cm and an
majority of drug injected into the testicle and part of the
additional 1.5 mL for each 10 cm longer length. Epidural
dose injected subcutaneously beneath the scrotal skin as
analgesia with 20 mL of 2% lidocaine is adequate for
the needle is withdrawn. Both sides are treated in the same
manner. The operation may commence about 5 minutes
The effects of xylazine and detomidine injected at
 after completion of the injections.
the lumbosacral space have been evaluated (Lumb &
Within Europe, lobby from welfare groups has resulted
Jones, 1996). Epidural xylazine, 2 mg/kg in 5 mL 0.9%
in some countries (and even supermarket chains) intro.
saline, induces sedation, hind limb immobilization, and
loj eisaieue pue eisauisaeue ioy suauainbai sun
analgesia extending to the umbilicus within 5 minutes
astration of even the youngest piglets. A number of
after injection. Duration is up to 2 hours. Detomidine
studies have investigated methods which might be practi-
(0.5 mg/kg in 5 mL 0.9% saline) induces sedation
cal for castration of large numbers of pigs on the farm.
but minimal analgesia. Administration of atipamezole,
Most have considered that isoflurane (which has a food
0.2 mg/kg. reversed the sedation but not the hind
limb immobilization or analgesia. In another research
combined with postoperative analgesia using, for example,
study, epidural xylazine, 0.2 mg/kg diluted in saline to
meloxicam.
0.5 mL/kg, in isoflurane anaesthetized healthy Landrace-
A novel technique for anaesthetizing piglets approxi-
Large White pigs produced analgesia for up to 90 minutes
mately l week old for castration utilizes liquid injection
(Tendillo et al., 1995).
of isoflurane or sevoflurane, oxygen, and a rebreathing
Administration of morphine into the epidural space will
inhaler (Hodgson, 2007). Calculation ofthe liquid volume
 provide additional analgesia for abdominal or pelvic limb
of isoflurane or sevoflurane to achieve a l.3x MAC dose
surgery. Preservative-free morphine 0.1 mg/kg, diluted
utilized the square root of time model and metabolic size
with saline if necessary to provide a volume of 0.1 mL/kg.
to achieve target alveolar concentrations of 1.82% isoflu-
will have an expected onset of maximal effect of 40
rane or 4.03% sevoflurane. A table of piglet weights and
minutes after injection. Epidural morphine has the advan-
liquid anaesthetic requirement was produced for practical
tage of providing analgesia without systemic adverse
use This technique is based on total anaesthesia time of
effects, and the decrease in inhalant agent requirement
less than 5 minutes since rebreathing of carbon dioxide
will result in less respiratory depression. In one study of
 occurs. In one study of ll4 piglets, induction time was on
domestic pigs weighing on average 20 kg and undergoing
average 45 seconds, castration approximately 75 seconds,
abdominal surgery. the concentration of
isoflurane
and recovery about 2 minutes. There were no clinically
required to maintain anaesthesia was decreased by 33%
sigmificant differences between isoflurane and sevoflurane.
except that the cost of isoflurane was minimal compared
with pigs without morphine [Malavasi et al., 2006a). The
with sevoflurane The inclusion of general anaesthesia for
duration of analgesia may last more than 12 hours.
castration of piglets was accepted by the herdsman of the
 Potential adverse consequences of epidural injection are
farrowing house as quiet and stress free.
meningitis or abscess formation as a result of failure of
The use of carbon dioxide to immobilize the pigs, which
aseptic technique, or neurological deficits as a result of
 has been advocated in some countries, has been described
epidural haematoma or trauma. Injection of local anaes-
as an inappropriate and inadvisable technique by the
thetic solution too rapidly will increase CSF pressure
Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists. Fortunately, the
and may result in collapse or seizures. Injection of too
introduction and use of immune-mediated chemical
large a volume of local anaesthetic solution may result in
astration will mean that surgery will be no longer
a  e s o n si
necessary.
401
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Caesarian section
down to the peritoneum. Administration of oxygen by
 mask appears to decrease mortality in exhausted or toxic
Sows may be restrained with ropes, lightly sedated, or put
SOWs.
umder general anaesthesia. Analgesia for a flank laparot-
Other injectable anaesthetic combinations that have
omy can be provided by infltration of lidocaine, up to
 been used for caesarian sections in pigs, including xyla-
 4 mg/kg as a 0.5-2% solution, as a line block at the site
zine, 1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 2 mg/kg, IV or light prean-
 of incision or a regional block as an inverted-L cranial and
aesthetic sedation with a neuroleptanalgesia combination
dorsal to the incision site. Lidocaine must be infltrated
 and induction and maintenance of anaesthesia with iso-
subcutaneously and deeper into the abdominal muscle
flurane or sevoflurane.
REFERENCES
Ajadi, R.A., Smith, O.F, Makinde, A.F.,
Eger, E.l., Jr, Johnson, B.H.,
Holmstrom, A., Rosen, I., Akeson, I.,
et al., 2008. Increasing ketamine
Weiskopf, B., et al., 1988. Minimum
2004. Desflurane results in higher
dose enhances the anaesthetic
alveolar concentration of I-653 and
cerebral blood flow than sevoflurane
properties of ketamine-xylazine-
isoflurane in pigs. Anesth Analg 67.
or isoflurane at hypocapnia in pigs.
midazolam combinations in growing
1174-1177.
Acta Anaesth Scand 48, 400-404.
pigs. I S Afr Vet Assoc 79, 205-207.
Fulkerson, Pl., Gustafson, S.B., 2007.
Hoyt, R.F., Hayre, M.D., Dodd, K.T.,
Allaouchiche, B., Duflo, F.,
 Ulse of laryngeal mask airway
et al., 1986. Long-acting
Tournadre, J.P., et al., 2001. Influence
compared to endotracheal tube with
intramuscular anesthetic regimen for
of sepsis on sevoflurane minimum
positive-pressure ventilation in
swine. Lab Anim Sci 36, 413-416.
alveolar concentration in a porcine
anesthetized swine. Vet Anaesth
Keates, H., 2003. Induction of
model. Br I Anaesth 86, 832-836.
Analg 34, 284-288.
anaesthesia in pigs using a new
Bass, L.M.E., Yu, D.-Y., Cullen, L.K.,
Hall, L.W., Trim, C.M., Woolf, C.J..
alphaxalone formulation. Vet Rec
2009. Comparison of femoral and
1972. Further studies of porcine
153, 627-628.
 auricular artenial blood pressure
malignant hyperthermia. Br Med ↓
Keita, A., Pagot, E., Prunier, A., et al..
monitoring in pigs. Vet Anaesth
2.145-148.
2010. Pre-emptive meloxicam for
Analg 36, 457-463.
Hall, L.w., Woolf, V., Bradley, I.w.P..
postoperative analgesia in piglets 
Birkholz, T., Irouschek, A., Kessler, P.,
et al., 1966. Unusual reaction to
undergoing surgical castration. Vet
et al., 2008. Feasibility of the
suxamethonium chloride. Br Med J
Anaesth Analg 37, 367-374.
 Jaryngeal tube airway for artificial
2,1305.
Ko, J.C.H., Williams, B.L., Rogers, E.R.
ventilation in pigs and comparison
Hannon, J.P., Bossone, C.A., Wade, C.E.,
et al., 1995. Increasing xylazine dose
with the laryngeal mask airway. Lab
1990. Normal physiological values
enhanced anesthetic properties of
Anim 37, 371-379.
for conscious pigs used in
Telazol-xylazine combination in 
Brodbelt, D.C., Pfeiffer, D.U..
biomedical research. Lab Anim Sci
swine. Lab Anim Sci 45, 290-294.
Young. L.E, et al., 2008. Results of
40, 293-298.
Ko, J.C.H., Williams, B.L., Smith, V.L..
the confdential enquiry into
Harvey-Clark, C.J., Gilespie, K.,
et al., 1993. Comparison of Telazol,
 perioperative small animal fatalities
Riggs, K.W., 2000. Transdermal
Telazol-ketamine, Telazol-xylazine,
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-
fentanyl compared with parenteral
and Telazol-ketamine-xylazine as
related death in dogs. I Am Vet Med
buprenorphine in post-surgical pain
chemical restraint and anesthetic
Assoc 233, 1096-1104.
in swine: a case study. Lab Anim 34,
induction combination in swine. Lab
Bustamente, R., Valverde, A., 1997.
386-398.
Anim Sci 43, 476-480.
Determination of a sedative dose
Herweling, A., Latorre, F., Herwig. A..
Krause, T., Gerbershagen, M.Ul.
and influence of droperidol and
et al., 2004. The hemodynamic
Fiege, M., et al., 2004. Dantrolene
midazolam on cardiovascular
effects of ephedrine on the onset
- A review of its pharmacology.
function in pigs. Can J Vet Res 61,
time of rocuronium in pigs. Anesth
therapeutic use and new
246-250.
Analg 99, 1703-1707.
developments. Anaesthesia 59.
Clark, S.G., Coffer, N., 2008. Normal
Hodgkin, B.C., Burkeltt, D.E.,
364-373.
hematology and hematologic
Smith, E.B., 1982. Noninvasive
Kumar, A., Mann, H.J., Remmel, R.P.,
disorders in potbellied pigs. Vet Clin
measurement of systolic and
2006. Pharmacokinetics of
N Am Exot Anim Pract 11, 569-582.
diastolic blood pressure in swine.
tiletamine and zolazepam (Telazol)
Clutton, R.E., Bracken, I., Ritchie, M.,
Am ↓ Physiol 242, H127-H130.
in anesthetized pigs. I Vet Pharmacol
1998. Effect of muscle injection site
Hodgson, D.R., 2007. Comparison of
Ther 29, 587-589.
and drug temperature on pre-
isoflurane and sevoflurane for
Liu, D., Shao, Y., Luan, X., et al., 2009.
anesthetic sedation in pigs. Vet Rec
short-term anaesthesia in piglets. Vet
Comparison of ketamine-
142, 718-721.
Anaesth Analg 34, 117-124.
 pentobarbital anesthesia and
402
Anaesthesia of the pig
Chapter
14
fentanyl-pentobarbital anesthesia for 
Nunes, S., Berg, L., Raittinen, L.-P.,
Tendillo, F.J., Pera, A.M., Mascias, A.,
open-heart surgery in minipigs. Lab
et al., 2007. Deep sedation with
et al., 1995. Cardiopulmonary and
Anim 38, 234-239.
dexmedetomidine in a porcine 
analgesic effects of epidural
Lord, L.K., Wittum, T.E., Anderson, D.E..
model does not compromise the
lidocaine, alfentanil, and xylazine in
et al., 1999. Resting rectal
viability of free microvascular flap as
 pigs anesthetized with isoflurane. Vet
temperature of Vietnamese
depicted by microdialysis and tissue
Surg 24, 73-77.
potbellied pigs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Oxygen tension. Anesth Analg 105.
Tranquilli, W.J., Parks, C.M., Thurmon,
215, 342-344.
666-672.
J.C., et al., 1982. Organ blood flow
Lumb, w.V., Jones, E.w., 1996.
Patil, V.U., Fairbrother, C.R.,
and distribution of cardiac output in
Veterinary Anesthesia, third ed.
Dunham, B.M., 1997. Use of the
nonanesthetized swine. Am J Vet Res
Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
laryngeal mask airway for emergency
43.895-897
p. 501.
or elective airway management
Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C.,
Malavasi, L.M., Augustsson, H.,
solutions in pigs. Contemp Top Lab
Benson, G.J., 1985. Anesthetic
Jensen-Waern, M., et al., 2005. The
Anim Sci 36, 47-49.
 potency of nitrous oxide in young.
 effect of transdermal delivery of
Risdahl, JM., Chao, C., Murtaugh, M.P.,
swine [Sus scrofa). Am J Vet Res 46,
fentanyl on activity in growing pigs.
et al., 1992. Acute and chronic
58-60.
Acta Vet Scand 46, 149-157.
 morphine administration in swine.
Trim, C.M., Braun, C., 2011. Anesthetic
Malavasi, L.M., Jensen-Waern, M.,
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 43.
agents and complications in
Augustsson, H., et al., 2008. Changes
799-806.
Vietnamese potbellied pigs: 32 cases.
in minimal alveolar concentration of
Rosenberg, H., Davis, M., James, D.,
1999-2006). JAm Vet Med Assoc
isoflurane following treatment with
et al., 2007. Malignant hyperthermia.
239, 114-121.
 medetomidine and tiletamine/
Orphanet ↓ Rare Dis 2, 21.
Trim, C.M., Gilroy, B.A., 1985.
zolazepam, epidural morphine or
Sakaguchi, M., Nishimura, R..
Cardiopulmonary effects of a
 systemic buprenorphine in pigs. Lab
Sasaki, N., et al., 1996. Anesthesia
xylazine and ketamine combination
Anim 42, 62-70.
induced in pigs by use of a
in pigs. Res Vet Sci 38, 30-34.
Malavasi, L.M., Jensen-Waern, M.,
combination of medetomidine.
Tuck, S.A., Dort, J.C., Olson, M.E., et al..
Jacobson, M., et al., 2006a. Effects of
butorphanol, and ketamine and its
1999. Monitoring respiratory
xtradural morphine on end-tidal
reversal by administration of
function and sleep in the obese
isoflurane concentration and
atipamezole. Am J Vet Res 57,
Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. I Appl 
 physiological variables in pigs
529-534.
Physiol 87, 444-451.
undergoing abdominal surgery: a
Sano, H., Doi, M., Mimuro, S., et al..
Tuck, S.A., Dort, J.C., Remmers, I.E.,
dinical study. Vet Anaesth Analg 33,
2010. Evaluation of the hypnotic and
2001. Braking of expiratory airflow
307-312.
hemodynamic effects of
 in obese pigs during wakefulness
Malavasi, L.M., Nyman, G..
dexmedetomidine on propofol-
and sleep. Respir Physiol 128.
Augustsson, H., et al., 2006b. Effects
sedated swine. Exp Anim 59.
241-245.
of epidural morphine and
199-205
Ugarte, C.E., O'Flaherty, K., 2005.
transdermal fentanyl analgesia on
Schoffmann, G., Winter, P., Palme, R.
The use of a medetomidine.
 physiology and behaviour after
et al., 2009. Haemodynamic changes
butorphanol, and atropine
abdominal surgery in pigs. Lab Anim
and stress responses of piglets to
combination to enable blood
40, 16-27.
 surgery during total intravenous
sampling in young pigs. N Z Vet J
Manohar, M., Parks, C.M., 1984.
anaesthesia with propofol and
53.249-252
 Porcine systemic and regional organ
fentanyl. Lab Anim 43, 243-248.
Weiskopf, R.B., Eger Il, E.l..
blood flow during 1.0 and 1.5
Shi, Y., Hou, V., Tucker, A., et al., 2008.
Holmes, M.A., et al., 1990.
minimum alveolar concentrations of
Changes of extremity and laryngeal
Cardiovascular actions of common
sevoflurane anesthesia without and
muscle electromyographic
anesthetic adjuvants during
with 50% nitrous oxide. J Pharm
 amplitudes after intravenous 
desflurane [l-653] and isoflurane
Exper Ther 321, 640-648.
administration of vecuronium.
anesthesia in swine. Anesth Analg
Martin-Cancho, M.F., Lima, J.R., Luis, L.
Laryngoscope 118, 2156-2160.
71, 144-148.
et al., 2006. Bispectral index, spectral 
 Snook, C.S., 2001. Use of the
Zaballos, M., Jimeno, C., Almendral, J.
edge frequency 95% and median
subcutaneous abdominal vein for
et al., 2009. Cardiac electrophysiologic
 frequency recorded at varying
blood sampling and intravenous
effects of remifentanil: study in a
desflurane concentrations in pigs.
catheterization in potbellied pigs.
closed-chest porcine model. Br ↓
Res Vet Sci 81, 373-381.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 219, 809-810.
Anaesth 103, 191-198.
FURTHER READING
Rosenberg, H., Sambuughin, N.,
Dirksen, R., 2010. Malignant
hyperthermia susceptibility.
www.ncbi.nim.nih.gov/bookshelf
Last update Jan 19.
20t
e
Anaesthesia of the dog
Introduction
406
Intravenous agents
431
 Sedation and analgesia
406
 Thiopental
431
General principles
406
Methohexital
434
 Phenothiazines
407
 Pentobarbital 
434
Benzodiazepines
407
Ketamine
434
αz-Agonist sedatives
409
Tiletamine-zolazepam 
435
Opioids
410
 Propofol
436
Tr amadol
410
 Etomidate
437
Maropitant
411
Alfaxalone
438
 Sedative-opioid combinations
411
 Sedative-opioid combinations
438
NSAIDS
411
Induction of anaesthesia
439
Dipyrone (metamizole)
411
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)
440
Antagonists
412
 Propofol-fentanyl
441
General anaesthesia
412
 Inhalation anaesthesia
441
Preparation for anaesthesia
413
 Inhalation agents
441
 Concurrent drug therapy
413
Systems of administration
443
Breed characteristics
416
Induction using a facemask
444
Age characteristics
417
Intraoperative supplements
445
Physical examination
418
 Opioids
445
Diagnostic tests
419
Lidocaine
447
Evaluation of the significance of disease
419
Ketamine
448
Food and water restrictions
420
αz-Agonist sedatives
448
Premedication
421
 Propofol
449
 Anticholinergics
421
Neuromuscular blocking agents
449
Sedative and analgesic premedication
422
Agents used
449
Intravenous technique
424
Administration
450
Endotracheal intubation
427
Termination of neuromuscular block
450
Intubation via pharyngotomy
431
Dose rates for NMBAs
452
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
405
Section
|2 —
Anaesthesia of the species
 Anaesthetic management
453
Epidural and intrathecal block
476
 Positioning
453
Infiltration; Soaker catheters
481
Monitoring
453
Intercostal nerve block
481
Fluid therapy
456
Interpleural block
481
Cardiovascular support
456
Intra-articular analgesia
482
 Artificial ventilation
459
Intravenous regional analgesia (IvRA)
482
Postoperative management
460
 Mandibular and maxillary nerve blocks
482
 Oxygen supplementation
462
Ocular nerve blocks
484
Analgesia
462
 Paravertebral nerve block (brachial plexus)
485
Specific patient and procedure problems
464
 Pelvic limb blocks
487
Cardiac disease
464
 Peroneal and tibial nerve blocks
488
Mitral regurgitation
464
RUMM blocks
489
C ardiomyopathy
465
Transdermal lidocaine patch
489
Ventricular dysrhythmias, myocardial ischaemia,
myocardial contusions
465
Pacemakers
466
INTRODUCTION
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
466
Endoscopy
466
Within the last 10 years, there has been an explosion of
Bronchoscopy, transtracheal wash (TTW),
new information about different anaesthetic agent combi-
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
466
nations that can be used for sedation and anaesthesia in
Gastroscopy and colonoscopy
 dogs. Anaesthetic protocols can still be straightforward for
467
 short anaesthesia for elective procedures but there are
Laparoscopy
467
more choices for anaesthetic management of increasingly
Laryngoscopy
467
complex and more protracted medical and surgical proce-
Rhinoscopy
468
 dures. Monitoring equipment has become more available
 Urinary bladder
468
for veterinary practice, enabling more precise control of
Exploratory laparotomy
the animal's physiological status and reducing intra- and
468
postanaesthetic complications. There has been a resur-
Gastric dilation-volvulus
469
gence in the use of nerve blocks in combination with
 Peritonitis 
469
general anaesthesia in concert with increased use of
Biliary system
470
opioids not only to provide analgesia during surgery but
with the intention of controlling pain after anaesthesia.
Hepatic disease
470
 This management goal is based on the desire to improve
Neurological disease
470
 animal welfare but may have added benefits in more rapid
 Dorsal hemilaminectomy and ventral cervical
recovery, shorter hospitalization time, and improved client
decompression
471
satisfa ction.
Myelography. computed tomography
471
Craniotomy
471
Ocular surgery
471
SEDATION AND ANALGESIA
Orthopaedic surgery
472
Renal disease
472
General principles
Trauma
473
Selection of a dnug or drugs for sedation depends on the
Hit-by-car (HBC, RTA), high-rise syndrome
(fell from a great height)
473
details of opioids and sedatives are given in Chapters 4
Big dog-little dog
473
and 5. Mild behaviour modifcation can be achieved with
Local analgesia
473
a phenothiazine such as acepromazine whereas moderate
474
'siuoge-o ue Busn pauieiqo iaaq si uoepas Aeaq o
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
such as medetomidine or dexmedetomidine with an
Brachial plexus block
475
Digital nerve blocks
476
mazine with morphine or methadone Intravenous
406
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
administration produces a more rapid onset and intense
negligible in aggressive or excited dogs. In general, concur-
effect of a shorter duration than IM administration and,
rent administration of an opioid with acepromazine
generally, drugs injected IV are at lower dose rates. Dose
results in significantly greater sedation.
rates chosen may depend on whether the dog is to be only
loy uoalu l aye paimbai Allensn si sainuu Aiu
sedated or whether sedation is to be followed by general
 appreciable effects to be seen, including calming and pro-
anaesthesia. When the drugs are used for premedication
trusion of the third eyelid over the cornea. One investi-
to anaesthesia, dose rates are often considerably lower so
gation found no difference in sedation scores in dogs
 as to minimize cardiovascular and respiratory depression.
administered acepromazine, 0.025 mg/kg. and morphine,
Some individuals are sensitive and some resistant to
0.3 mg/kg. IM at four different sites: the cervical epaxial
anaesthetic agents and unusual responses should always
muscles at the level of C3 and 2-3 cm off midline; the
be recorded in the medical record for valuable informa-
triceps brachii halfway between the elbow and scapula;
tion at the dog's next visit.
the middle gluteal muscle injected midway between the
Many minor procedures can be performed when dogs
 greater trochanter of the femur and wing of the ilium; and
are sedated and the addition of local anaesthesia allows
the quadriceps femoris halfway between the femorotibial
surgical procedures, depending on the type of nerve block
joint and the greater trochanter of the femur (Self et al.,
used. Some procedures can be satisfactorily accomplished
2009). The development of sedation at 30 minutes after
under only sedation while others are better done with the
injection was independent of injection site and the degree
dog under general anaesthesia, for example dental prophy-
of sedation was less at 20 than 30 minutes. Another
laxis where general anaesthesia including endotracheal
common site for IM injections in dogs are the epaxial
intubation is recommended (American Veterinary Dental
lumbar muscles. Drugs may have incomplete absorption
Association, 2004). Sedation only for this procedure limits
when injected SC but a comparison of IM and SC admin-
effective cleaning and the absence of an endotracheal tube
istration of acepromazine 0.03 mg/kg, and buprenor-
increases risk of aspiration of water and debris.
phine,
0.02 mg/kg. in cinical patients revealed no
difference in sedation assessed after 60 minutes, and no
difference in the dose of propofol required for endotra-
Phenothiazines
cheal intubation (Gurney et al., 2009). Although some
Acepromazine is a commonly used phenothiazine for
effect may be noticed by 5 minutes after IV injection of
sedation in dogs. Use of a 2 mg/mL solution facilitates
acepromazine, full effect may not develop for 30 minutes.
more accurate dose administration than when a stronger
 Oral administration is much less reliable and the tranquil -
solution is used. When not commercially available, a
lizing effect is greatly influenced by whether the drug is
2 mg/mL solution can be made by adding 60 mg of ace-
administered with food (poor effect) or on an empty
promazine to a 30 mL bottle of sterile saline, after first 
stomach [better effect).
removing an equivalent volume of saline. The bottle
 An advantage to including acepromazine for premedi-
should be wrapped to protect the solution from the light.
The response to acepromazine is not uniform and depends
catecholamine-induced ventricular irregular rhythms. Ace-
on the animal's temperament, physical condition, and
promazine should be omitted from premedication when
breed. Some giant breeds, for example, the St Bernard.
sunp paiedipue sl uoisuaiody io ssol pooiq aaaas
Newfoundland, and Swiss Mountain dog appear sensitive
surgery as the peripheral α blockade complicates treatment
to the drug and may become reaumbent and reluctant to
of hypotension. Acepromazine is not recommended for
move following doses of 0.03 mg/kg. Some dogs of the
use in brachycephalic breeds or dogs at risk for upper
Boxer breed will 'faint' when given acepromazine and it
airway obstruction. Acepromazine has been avoided in the
should be given in only small doses, ± an anticholinergic.
 past in dogs with a history of seizures but there is recent
 Or avoided completely in this breed.
evidence that administration of acepromazine to dogs with
 The cardiovascular actions of acepromazine are minimal
( 'ie ia seiq) sanzias pan nou s asdaa
in healthy dogs but are potentiated by hypovolaemia, azo-
Other phenothiazine derivatives that are used include
taemia, and old age. The dose rates for acepromazine
propionyl promazine, promazine, promethazine, meth-
decrease with increasing size of the animal; for IM admin-
otrimeprazine and chlorpromazine. The side effects
istration in small dogs, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg is usually suff-
produced by them and the provisions of use are
cient for dogs 10-20 kg, 0.05-0.07 mg/kg, for dogs
similar to those of acepromazine.
>20 kg, 0.02-0.05 mg/kg, with a maximum dose of 3 mg
for most large dogs (Table 15.1). Occasionally, dogs are
Benzodiazepines
-o1d annpul ot pioido ue yim auizeuoidane Bu 5 uaaig
found sedation. Note that these doses are lower than those
 The benzodiazepines, for example, diazepam, midazolam,
recommended on the product data sheets but increasing
and climazolam, are frequently used in combinations with
dosage rarely increases the sedative effect. The action
Opioids, Q2-agonist sedatives, and anaesthetic agents in
of acepromazine is mild mood alteration and may be
veterinary practice to augment sedation, decrease dose
407
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 15.1 Injectable drugs for sedation, analgesia, or premedication in dogs
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Comments
Anticholinergic
Atropine
0.02-0.04 IM, SC; 0.005-0.02 IV
Duration 30 (IV) - 90 (IM) min
Glycopyrrclate
0.005-0.01 IM; 0.005 IV
Onset 40 min IM; duration 2-3 h
Phenothiazine
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05 IM,IV; up to 0.1 IM
Lovvest doses for large dogs, max 3 mg for premedication; larger
 small-medium dogs
 doses used when not followed by anaesthesia; cnset IM >30 min
0.02-0.05 IM, IV large dogs
Benzodiazepine
 Diazepam
0.2-0.5 IV
Do not give alone to healthy dogs: poor absorption from IM
Mlidazolam
0.1-0.5 IM, IV
Do not give alone to healthy dogs
Climazolam 
0.5-2.0 IM, IV
In combination with an opioid or anaesthetic agent
α-agonist
Xylazine
0.5-2.0 IM; 0.5-1.0 IV
Medetomidine *5
 See product information 
Dosed on body surface area; dose decreases as size of dog increases;
0.01-0.05 IM small dogs
 profound sedation; severely decreases dose of anaesthetic agents
0.01-0.02 IM large dogs
Severely decreases subsequent dose rates of anaesthetic agents
0.005-0.020 IV
Dexmedetomidine*5
 See product information
Dosed on body surface area; dose decreases as size of dog increases;
0.028-0.040 IM small dogs
 profound sedation; severely decreases dose of anaesthetic agents
0.008-0.014 IM large dogs
0.003-0.010 IM;
Premedication severely decreases dose rates of anaesthetic agents
0.003-0.005 IV
 Romifidine 
t0'0-10'0
Severely decreases dose of anaesthetic agents
Opioid
 Morphine 
0.3-0.5 (range 0.2-1.0) IM, SC
Onset IV 40 min; if IV give over several minutes to avoid hypotension
 Meperidine
2-6 IM, SC
Onset IM 15-20 min; IV contraindicated to avoid hypotension
(Pethidine)
 Methadone (racemic form)
0.1-0.5 IM, SC; 0.1-0.2 IV
Onset IM 10 min
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.2 IM; 0.025-0.1 IV
Onset IM 15 min 
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.2 IM; 0.025-0.1 IV
Onset IM 15 min; max initial dose 5 mg 
 Fentanyl *
0.002-0.010 IM, IV
Onset IM 10 min
 Buprenorphine
0.005-0.02 IM, IV
Onset IM, IV >30 min
 Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 IM, IV
Onset IM 10 min
*0.010 mg/kg = 10 μg/kg: also refer to manufacturers package insert for sedation doses
rates of other agents, and to block excitatory effects of
produces a more intense effect than IM. Diazepam is
injectable anaesthetic agents. Benzodiazepines rarely are
reserved for IV use as the formulation interferes with IM
administered alone to healthy dogs because restlessness,
absorption whereas midazolam is water soluble and
agitation, or even excitement may follow. In contrast, seda-
administered either IV or IM. The benzodiazepines induce
tion may be induced in geriatric dogs, ill dogs, and dogs
minimal cardiovascular or respiratory effects and have a
with meningitis or seizures. Intravenous administration
wide margin of safety. Thus they are good alternative
408
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
agents to acepromazine in old or sick dogs. Benzodi-
decrease dose rates of other anaesthetic agents adminis-
azepines can be reversed by flumazenil or sarmazenil.
tered subsequently. Most dogs will retch or vomit after
administration of xylazine as sedation is developing.
There is evidence that xylazine sensitizes the myocar-
Q2-Agonist sedatives
dium to catecholamines, although the validity of the test
These sedatives are widely used in veterinary practice for
 has been questioned. If xylazine increases the prevalence
their profound sedation and analgesic properties. They
 of ventricular dysrhythmias that may explain the increased
induce signifcant cardiorespiratory changes (see Chapter
risk of death occurring during or after anaesthesia
 5). The effects include CNS depression, hypnosis and anal-
in which xylazine was part of the protocol (Dyson
gesia, decreased cardiac output, increased blood pressure
et al.,1998]
followed by a decrease, and bradycardia. Second degree
atrioventricular (AV) heart block develops in some dogs.
Medetomidine
Since administration of moderate doses of medetomidine
Medetomidine is a racemic mixture of two stereoisomers,
and dexmedetomidine decrease cardiac output to 2l -40%
of the preinjection value (Kuo & Keegan, 2004; Congdon
dextro-medetomidine and levo-medetomidine. It is mar-
et al., 20ll), cautious use and decreased dose rates are
keted for small animal practice as 1 mg/mL (1000 μg/mL).
recommended for sick dogs and those with cardiac disease.
Medetomidine provides better sedation and analgesia
Ventilation and PaCO2 may not significantly change
than xylazine and has a longer duration of action (Tyner
during medetomidine sedation but the respiratory centre
et al., 1997). The cardiopulmonary effects of medetomi-
sensitivity and response to CO2 is depressed and some
dine are similar to previously described, however, the
dogs may become hypoxaemic (Kuo & Keegan, 2004;
changes are quantitatively similar for doses ≥5 μg/kg
Lerche & Muir, 2004).
(Pypendop & Verstegen, 1998). Sedation is achieved
Peripheral vasoconstriction increases the difficulty of
at 2 μg/kg IV and increasing the dose rate increases the
inserting an IV catheter and interferes with monitoring of
intensity and duration of sedation, from 60 minutes after
patient oxygenation as the gums may be white and a pulse
5 μg/kg to 120 minutes after 20 μg/kg. Vomiting occurs
oximeter probe may not be able to detect a signal. Gas-
in about 20% of dogs receiving medetomidine which
is less than xylazine Medetomidine 0.01-0.02 mg/kg
trointestinal motility is decreased. Bloody diarrhoea occa-
sionally has occurred up to 24 hours after sedation with
(10-20 μg/kg). IV significantly decreases serum insulin
medetomidine and dexmedetomidine administered at the
concentration but plasma glucose concentration remains
higher dose rates, perhaps caused by ischaemia. Decreases
within the normal physiological range (Burton et al.,
in ileal and colonic microvascular blood flows have
1997).
been measured, presumably resulting from decreased
Medetomidine has a steep dose-response curve and
cardiac output and increased systemic vascular resistance
doses should, ideally, be calculated on a body surface area
(Pypendop & Verstegen, 2000). This group of drugs also
(BSA) rather than on body weight. In practice, this means
that large dogs require relatively lower doses than smaller
varying increases in blood glucose concentration, and
 dogs. The IM dose rates given to induce profound sedation
increased urine output.
 are up to 750-1000 μg/m?. The cut-off weight between
The intensity of sedation from injection of these drugs
higher and lower dose rates is 15 kg, so that dogs <15 kg
can be influenced by the mental status of the dogs such
need a higher dose and dogs >15 kg need less. The highest
that sedation is less when the dog is frightened or excited.
dose rate for a 15 kg dog is roughly equivalent to 0.03-
ylm uoepas punoyond Auaiedde wuony lesnoie uappns
0.04 mg/kg (30-40 μg/kg). The product information
medetomidine may occur and has resulted in serious facial
sheet contains detailed tables on volume of dnug to
injuries in personnel leaning close to the dog. a reaction
administer for different weights of dogs. A formula for
'sop paadual-poog Aisnoiaand ul uana inoso Aew ieul
calculating BSA using kg bodyweight is BSA m² = [Bwt kg2/3
Concurrent administration of an opioid decreases the like-
x 10.1)100 (Pypendop & Verstegen, 2000; Hill & Scott,
lihood of arousal. The addition of atropine or glycopyr-
2004). The sedative effect is increased in senior dogs and
rolate with medetomidine or dexmedetomidine to prevent
frequently half the dose rate will have the same effect as
bradycardia is not recommended because the increased
the full dose in a younger dog.
heart rate (HR) may result in extreme hypertension
and cardiac dysrhythmias [Ko et al., 200lb; Congdon
Dexmedetomidine
et al., 2011).
The effects and use of dexmedetomidine are similar to
those described for medetomidine. The recommended
Xyazine
dose rate for inducing mild sedation is 125 μg/m2
Xylazine was the first O2-agonist sedative to be widely used
for moderate sedation 375 μg/m?, and for profound
in veterinary medicine. Xylazine, 0.5-2.2 mg/kg, IM will
 sedation 375-500 μg/m?. The manufacturer has marketed
produce dose-dependent sedation and will markedly
a solution (0.5 mg/mL, 500 μg/mL) that is half the
409
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
concentration of small animal medetomidine to facilitate
ease of transition from medetomidine to dexmedetomi-
Box 15.1 Opioids are valuable components
dine so that the volume to be injected is an identical
of sedation or anaesthetic protocols but
volume for volume substitution. The product information
anticipate adverse effects
sheet has detailed tables with volume/dose for dogs of
varying body weights. In clinical practice, these dose rates
Vomiting
must be modified based on evaluation of the individual
Panting
 patient and the required effect.
Respiratory depression when in combination
Decreased dose requirement for anaesthetic agents
Acute drop in BP after rapid IV injection during
Romifidine
anaesthesia
Romifidine has been administered IM or IV and induces
Bradycardia, in particular with fentanyl
sedation and bradycardia for 2-3 hours. The dogs may
vomit before assuming recumbency. Cardiac output is
decreased and central venous pressure (CVP) is increased
(Pypendop & Verstegen, 2001). Romifdine ≥0.025 mg/kg
[25 μg/kg) IV initially increases mean arterial pressure
methadone, vocalization after hydromorphone or butor-
(MAP) followed by a prolonged decrease; MAP is imme-
diately decreased by lower doses. Second degree AV block
1 hour to 3 days after acepromazine-oxymorphone or
has been observed. Romifidine at 0.02 mg/kg (20 μg/kg)
fentanyl-droperidol (Dohoo et al., 1986; Ingvast-Larsson
and 0.04 mg/kg (40 μg/kg) IM has been used alone or in
et al., 20l0) (Trim, personal observations).
conjunction with a low dose of anticholinergic agent
(atropine, 0.01 mg/kg. or gycopyrrolate 0.001 mg/kg) for
sedation and for premedication to inhalation anaesthesia
Tramadol
in experimental and clinical dogs (England & Hammond.
 Tramadol is structurally related to codeine and exerts an
1997: Redondo et al., 1999; Lemke, 2001). The dose
analgesic effect through weak μ receptor agonist action
rate of the induction agent was significantly decreased,
 and blocking of serotonin and norepinephrine uptake in
thiopental to a mean of 6.5 mg/kg and propofol
to
the pain pathways of the spinal cord. Systemic availability
3-4 mg/kg. Administration of an anticholinergic at the
is equivalent from IV and IM administration. There are
doses studied appeared to induce acceptable changes in
no dosage recommendations for tramadol in dogs but
HR and MAP and may have reduced the incidence of
published dose rates are 2 or 3 mg/kg and a redosing
vomiting (Lemke, 2001).
interval of 8 hours. Tramadol provides improved post-
operative pain control when combined with a non-
steroidal
 anti-inflammatory dnug
(NSAID).In one
Opioids
study, dogs scheduled for ovariohysterectomy were pre-
When administered alone, few opioids cause significant
medicated with atropine, 0.04 mg/kg. acepromazine
sedation in healthy dogs. When combined with a sedative
0.05 mg/kg, and either tramadol, 3 mg/kg, or morphine
or acepromazine, the result can vary from mild to heavy
0.5 mg/kg, SC before induction of anaesthesia with thio-
sedation depending on the route of administration, the
 pental and maintenance with halothane (Kongara et al.
dnug and dose rate used, and the mental and physical
 2012). Dogs premedicated with acepromazine-tramadol
status of the animal. Opioids can be used to provide anal-
required significantly higher concentrations of halothane
gesia for animals in pain, as part of an anaesthetic protocol
for anaesthesia than dogs given acepromazine-morphine.
for which a painful medical or surgical procedure is to be
Half of the dogs in each group were given boluses of
 performed, and in combination with a sedative to deepen
enus [esins ol sasuodsa1 ieanl ol gy/sn 1 'jueiuay
the intensity of sedation (see Table 15.1).
tion. The dogs required additional doses of analgesic agent
Panting is a side effect of opioid administration that
by one hour after anaesthesia, approximately 4 hours after
may interfere with the procedure to be performed and may
premedication. This time corresponds to the usual time
Dccur in as high as 70% of patients given morphine, oxy-
interval (3-4 hours) for redosing of morphine. In another
investigation of postoperative analgesia after maxillec-
minutes to 3 hours [Dohoo et al., 1986; Cullen et al.,
tomy or mandibulectomy, tramadol or codeine or keto-
1999). Vomiting is frequently observed after administra-
profen, all at 2 mg/kg SC, or combinations of these drugs
tion of morphine, oxymorphone, and hydromorphone
were administered 30 minutes before the end of surgery
(Box 15.1). Vomition is unlikely to occur after butorpha-
(Martins et al., 2010). Tramadol and codeine were repeated
nol, buprenorphine fentanyl or methadone. Behaviour
at 8-hour intervals for the 24-hour monitoring period.
changes have been reported in a small number of
dogs, such as increased whining after administration of
group based on pain scores that included responses to
410
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
pressure at the surgical site Although not statistically sig-
Sedative-opioid combinations
-oay uania saop ui isamol aram saioss uied ueau huey
There are many publications reporting the effects of com-
profen with tramadol or codeine Rescue analgesia denotes
the administration of an analgesic agent during episodes 
binations of a sedative or acepromazine and an opioid,
using different dose rates, routes of administration, and
of pain that are not controlled by a patient's scheduled
timing of administrations. In most cases, the combination
analgesic regimen.
ueul uoepas jo uoeinp pue Aisuaul iaeaig ui sinsan
Injection of tramadol, 4 mg/kg, IV in experimental dogs
anaesthetized with sevoflurane caused no change in HR or
is achieved by the individual drugs. Combinations that
cardiac output (Itami et al., 20ll). Mean arterial pressure
include medetomidine or dexmedetomidine generally
increased for 15 minutes and then returned to pre-
 induce the greatest sedation and decreased cardiac output.
Because these Oz-sedatives exert such profound sedation
injection value. Measurement of systemic vascular resist-
and cardiovascular effects, the dose rates of the opioids
ance revealed a mild but prolonged vasoconstriction.
used in combination are often lower than those used in
combination with acepromazine or a benzodiazepine.
Maropitant
Other factors influencing the sedative and cardiovascular
effects of these combinations are the relative dose rates
Maropitant (Cerenia@) is licensed for use in the USA and
 and route of administration, and the mentation, age and
Europe for prevention of motion sickness and acute vom-
physical status of the patient. To summarize, advantages
9iz sop ioy Adeiaiomay se qons suoeis ui gu!
of these combinations include:
weeks of age (Sedlacek et al., 2008). It is recommended as
a once-daily administration at 1 mg/kg SC or 2 mg/kg
● Increased sedation over that achieved by either agent
orally. Absolute bioavailability is much higher after SC
alone
administration than oral, partly due to a hepatic frst-pass
1
 Improved analgesia
effect after oral dosing (Benchaoui et al., 2007). Feeding
 Decreased dose rates of subsequently administered
 status was found to have no significant effect on absorp-
lau suuapim shut suate uoelequt pue aqeiau!
tion of the drug. Renal clearance was negligible and no
safety margins.
dosage adjustment was considered necessary for patients
●With some combinations and in some patients,
with renal disease.
 particularly old patients, sedation may be profound.
 Maropitant is an antagonist for neurokinin (NK,) recep-
tors for which Substance P is the agonist. These receptors
NSAIDS
are present in the dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord
The addition of an NSAID is valuable for management
dorsal horn, ascending projections to the brain, and in
of perioperative inflammation and analgesia (doses in
some visceral tissues (Boscan et al., 20ll ). Studies evaluat-
ing the analgesic effects of maropitant have yielded con-
Chapter 5). High doses of NSAIDs, hypotension, hypovol-
aemia, and anaesthetic agents have the potential to alter
flicting results. Working on the premise that maropitant
may be an effective analgesic forvisceral surgery, an experi-
renal perfusion and may increase the risk of adverse renal
effects of NSAIDs (KuKanich et al., 20l2). Consequently.
 paziausaeue siop ul auonaueao paneinus aps ieiuau
with sevoflurane (Boscan et al., 20ll). Maropitant, 1 mg/
general anaesthesia of dogs receiving NSAIDs should
include fluid therapy and appropriate management of cir-
kg, IV injected over 10 minutes followed by an infusion to
culatory changes to avoid risk of NSAID-induced renal
maintain a constant blood concentration was documented
toxicity. Anaesthesia is not a contraindication to NSAID
significantly to decrease by 24% the concentration
administration, nonetheless, some clinicians prefer to
of sevoflurane required to prevent response to traction
administer the NSAID at the end of anaesthesia when it is
on an ovary. A study recently presented at a national
au 'aaisuaoday iou pue pieipy si gop aun ieun umou
meeting compared premedication with saline, morphine,
0.5 mg/kg, or maropitant, 1 mg/kg. SC prior to propofol-
effects of NSAIDs in dogs with renal disease have not been
-osai sl sluaed asaul ul asn snonnes inq pajodan
isoflurane anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy (Marquez
mended (KuKanich et al., 2012).
et al., 20ll). A significantly lower concentration of isoflu-
rane was used for removal of the ovaries and skin closure
Dipyrone (metamizole)
in dogs that received maropitant for premedication com-
pared with none; sevoflurane concentrations for dogs
Dipyrone, also known as metamizole, was first produced
given morphine were intermediate between these groups.
       
Some dogs panted at the time of intense surgical stimula-
agranulocytosis with some mortality in human patients
tion, 67%, 38%, and 35% in premedication groups saline,
led to failure of licensure of dipyrone in several countries,
morphine or maropitant, respectively. This limited evi-
including the USA, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and
dence suggests that maropitant provides some analgesia
Australia. The incidence of this adverse effect is low
but investigations are needed to define its role in compari -
 son with the available options.
use is disputed. Dipyrone/metamizole is available by
411
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
prescription in some countries and over the counter for
reverse the effects of diazepam or midazolam overdose.
self-medication in others. In some countries, dipyrone/
Butorphanol will almost completely reverse the sedative
metamizole has a veterinary licence for use in dogs and
effects of oxymorphone and hydromorphone (Dyson
horses as an analgesic, antipyretic antispasmodic, and
et al., 1990). Nalbuphine, 0.16 mg/kg, IV partially reversed
(weak) anti-inflammatory dnug. Inhibition of COX-3 in
uaum uoepas aseaioul ol paieadde inq auoudiouaxo
the brain and spinal cord is a proposed mechanism of
 administered after buprenorphine [Jacobson et al., 1994).
action (Chandrasekharan et al., 2002).
Product information for dipyrone 50% in Canada states
a dose rate in dogs of 50 mg/kg. to be administered IM or
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
slowly IV at 8-12-hour intervals up to a maximum of 2
days. Several dose rates of metamizole have been evaluated
for analgesic efcacy after ovariohysterectomy in dogs
None of the currently available anaesthetic agents have all
anaesthetized with acepromazine, propofol and isoflurane
the properties of an ideal agent In clinical practice, one
(Imagawa et al., 20ll). Dogs given metamizole 25 or
 Or more sedative, analgesic, or anaesthetic drugs are given
35 mg/kg IV 10 minutes before the end of surgery had
before or during induction of anaesthesia to achieve safer
significantly lower pain scores after surgery compared with
anaesthesia by reducing the dose rates of individual agents.
dogs given tramadol. Four of 20 dogs given metamizole
In fact, any of these agents may be suitable for most of our
required rescue analgesia. Metamizole was repeated every
patients and the final choice may be determined by avail-
8 hours for 2 days. Vomiting in the first 6 hours after
ability, familiarity of use or cost of the drug. However, in
anaesthesia was observed in 40% of dogs and this effect
some patients, selection of one dnug over another may
was equally distributed through the treatment groups.
increase safety of anaesthesia.
 Preventive analgesia is aimed at attenuating the impact
of all factors that stimulate pain pathways in the pre-,
Antagonists
intra- and postoperative periods in order to reduce or
Specific antagonist agents are available for benzodi-
 prevent postsurgical peripheral and central sensitization
azepines (flumazenil and sarmazenil), Q2-sedatives (ati-
and chronic pain-related behaviours. Preventive analgesia
pamezole, and yohimbine and doxapram for xylazine).
is demonstrated when postoperative pain and analgesic
and opioids (naloxone) (Table 15.2). Flumazenil will
use are reduced beyond the duration of action ofthe agent
Table 15.2 Antagonists
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Comments
Benzodiazepine antagonist
Flumazenil
0.01 IM, IV
Titrate to effect. Reversing a benzodiazepine-ketamine
Sarmazenil
0.05-0.10 IM, IV
combination will expose ketamine-induced CNS excitement
Q-agonist antagonist
Yohimbine
0.11 IV slowvly, 0.25-0.5 IM, SC
Anta gonist of xylazine
Atipamezole *
Equal volume IM as volume of (dex)medetomidine
Anta gonist of medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
administered, or less
0.005-0.020 IV slowly over several min
 IV off label use
Opioid antagonist
Naloxone
0.01-0.02 IM, IV, SC
Anta gonizes all opioids
Butorphanols
0.2-0.3 IM, IV
Partial reversal of analgesia and sedation from μ opicids
Buprenorphines
0.005-0.01 IM, IV
Decreases analgesia from μ opioids
Analeptic and respiratory stimulant
Doxapram
0.51.0 IIM, IV
 Stimulates rate and depth of breathing: release of
norepinephrine causes generalized arousal
*0.010 mg/kg = 10 μg/kg: Not specific antagonists and not used in emergencies; used to diminish sedation or signs of dysphoria induced
by a μ opioid
412
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
used for analgesia [Katz et al., 20ll ). Although the surgical
Preparation for anaesthesia
incision, wound retraction, and manipulation of organs
may trigger central sensitization, so also can preanaes-
It is important to be adequately prepared to provide
Aoneuueyu anneiadoisod pue ndu snoixou o
safe general anaesthesia in animals. Preparation includes
mediators. Use of opioids alone is not suffcient hence
preanaesthetic evaluation of the ability of the patient to
recommendations for including NSAIDs, nerve blocks,
withstand the changes induced by administration of
and other agents in the anaesthetic protocol. Patients with
anaesthetic agents and of the potential impact of the
presurgical pain may not receive the same pain relief by
procedure on the intra- and postoperative course. Choice
analgesic therapy because central sensitization is already
of anaesthetic agents and management is based on infor-
established. Even in healthy patients, preoperative factors
 mation derived from the dog's history, physical examina-
tion, abnormal values detected in laboratory tests, nature
'uauaeeueu yausaeueisod anuangu aeu aie
 of any current illness, and requirements of the proposed 
The intention of preanaesthetic evaluation is to avoid
 medical or surgical procedure. The significances of many
the development of complications. Unfortunately, compli -
of the conditions that may be discovered during preanaes-
cations frequently develop in patients not expected to have
thetic evaluation are discussed in Chapter l and later in
a problem with anaesthesia. All personnel involved in
this chapter. Some aspects of the preanaesthetic prepara-
providing anaesthesia and related medical or surgical pro-
tion of dogs that deal with routine management are con-
cedures should be familiar with the practice's accepted
sidered here.
plans for treatment of specific complications and resusci-
tation procedures. Plans should have been discussed
Concurrent drug therapy
before anaesthesia in a stress-free environment Key points
Previous drug therapy can alter the response of a dog to
to a safer anaesthesia are listed (Box 15.2).
anaesthesia and surgery so it is essential that details of
dnug use should be sought from the case history. A full
 discussion of all possible drug interactions is beyond the
 Box 15.2 Key points to improve safety
 scope of this book and reference should be made to text-
of anaesthesia
books and online sources concerming pharmacology and
drug interactions. Interactions that are encountered fairly
All dogs that can be handled should have a clinical
commonly in canine anaesthesia are described below.
examination before anaesthesia to identify factors that
impact response or choice of agents
Antibiotics
Food should be withheld for 10 hours before
Chloramphenicol increases the length of action of bar-
anaesthesia, except for paediatric patients
E siuasaid Aiaiei siun inq suae ueieuu pue anei
 Allow sufficient time for premedication agents to
clinical problem. More importantly, antibiotics given
achieve full effect before induction
rapidly IV during anaesthesia can, in some dogs, cause
Include analgesic agents for painful procedures
myocardial depression and induce hypotension (Table
 Develop check lists for specific procedures
15.3). Antibiotics administered IV should be given slowly
Maintain an anaesthetic record that lists time, dose (mg),
over several minutes with a close watch on arterial pres-
and route of all agents administered, record parameters
 sure. Many antibiotics, including the streptomycin group.
regularly through anaesthesia, add summary
the polymixins, and tetracyclines, exert an influence at the
ssauaaisuodsaun jo juiod aul ot stuabe uaai sboa
neuromuscular junction that enhances the effects of non-
should be considered to be anaesthetized and not
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. This may
merely heavily sedated
induce re-paralysis when these antibiotics are adminis-
 An indwelling venous catheter or secured indwelling
tered at the end of anaesthesia.
needle is advisable
Plan to intubate the trachea of all brachycephalic dogs
Antipsychotic drugs
A means to supply oxygen and the ability to ventilate
Three groups of drugs are used to treat aggression, fear or
should be readily available
compulsive behaviours in dogs: (1) monoamine oxidase
 The person assigned to monitoring should have
inhibitors (MAOIs), such as selegiline; (2) tricyclic antide-
received training
pressants (TCAs), such as amitriptyline and clomipramine;
 Attach available monitoring equipment to all 
and (3) non-tricyclic antidepressants such as fluoxetine
 anaesthetized dogs
and trazadone. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors block the
Continue monitoring into recovery: surveys have
deoxidative deamination of endogenous catecholamines
identified that currently over half of anaesthetic
into inactive metabolites, allowing an accumulation of
deaths occur in recovery
norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine and serotonin.
Selegiline HCl is licensed for use in dogs for control of
413
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 15.3 Impact of concurrent drug administration on anaesthetic management
Drug
Significance
 Antibiotics
IV administration during anaesthesia causes moderate, occasionally severe, decrease in blood
pressure in some dogs. Aminoglycoside antibiotics can cause muscle weakness and
sleep time from ketamine and inhalant agents 
 Antipsychotic drugs
Risk of cardiovascular instability
Risk of serotonin syndrome
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Induces metabolic acidosis
Cardiovascular drugs
 Calcium channel blockers and ACE inhibitors given before anaesthesia may be associated with
hypotension
Corticosteroids
Long-term preoperative use may predispose to circulatory collapse, patient may need
supplementation
 Diuretics
Furosemide (frusemide) decreases serum potassium and may cause muscle weakness and
cardiac arrhythmias
Insulin 
 Risk of hypoglycaemia during and after anaesthesia
 Non-stercidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Hypotension during anaesthesia increases risk for toxic effects
 Organophosphate anthelmintic/parasiticide
Reduces plasma cholinesterase and prolongs duration of some drugs (suxamethonium/
succinylcholine, mivacurium, procaine). Some product information sheets on acepromazine
state it should not be given within 1 month of devorming - effects potentiated. May
decrease anaesthetic requirement.
Phenobarbital
Chronic use for seizure control associated with decreased hepatic function. Hepatic enzyme
induction may increase production of metabolites from halothane to toxic level
clinical signs of cognitive dysfunction syndrome and
 but possible drug interactions should be considered. Sym-
umcomplicated pituitary dependent  hyperadrenocorti-
 pathomimetic dnugs such as ephedrine will cause an exag-
cism. It is believed to be a MAO-type B inhibitor. Thera-
 gerated pressor response.
peutic effects may be mediated through MAO inhibition
The non-tricyclic antidepressants, such as fluoxetine and
and increased dopamine concentrations in the CNS or
trazadone, are used to treat anxiety disorders in dogs and
mediated through its metabolites, amphetamine and
exert a calming effect. Fluoxetine a selective serotonin
methamphetamine Extreme blood pressure fuctuations
reuptake inhibitor (SsRI), and trazadone, a tetracyclic anti-
have been noted in human patients receiving MAOIs
depressant and serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake
during anaesthesia that included d2-agonists, and use of
inhibitor (SNRI), have side effects that can lead to com-
meperidine is contraindicated because it may increase
plications during anaesthesia. Complications observed in
neuronal 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). An exaggerated
human anaesthesia are increased bleeding. unstable car-
effect after ephedrine administration is described. Little
diovascular system with hypotension and dysrhythmias,
information is available about interactions with anaes-
and changed thermoregulation. Recommendations for
thetic agents in dogs but, in one investigation, there were
humans are that fluoxetine be continued up to the time
no differences recorded in behaviours or cardiopulmonary
of anaesthesia because of the mental instability that may
measurements following administration of medetomi-
occur if it is discontinued. In vitro studies indicate that
dine, 750 μg/m², oxymorphone, 0.1 mg/kg, or butorpha-
fluoxetine significantly enhanced the inhibitory effect of
nol, 0.4 mg/kg. IV in dogs that were or were not receiving
propofol on norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake but
selegiline (Dodam et al., 2004).
had no effect on thiopental or etomidate (Zhao & Sun,
Clomipramine is approved for use in dogs to treat
 2008). This would suggest that patients receiving fluoxet-
canine separation anxiety. Tricyclic antidepressants block
 ine might have an altered response to propofol. The dura-
uptake of norepinephrine into presynaptic adrenergic
tion of trazodone is such that if administered in the
nerve terminals, increasing the amount of circulating cat-
evening before anaesthesia, metabolites that can cause
echolamines. Neuroleptic drugs, sedatives, atropine, keta-
adverse effects will be present the following day. A recently
mine, and thiopental potentiate the effect of TCAs. These
reported study of dogs anaesthetized for orthopaedic
agents do not have to be discontinued before anaesthesia,
Jey u uoesipauaid auizeuoidane au pasedai Aasins
414
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
of the dogs with trazodone, 5 mg/kg for dogs >10 kg or
Symptomatic treatment should be instituted in event of
7 mg/kg for dogs ≤10 kg, orally and found no differences
suspected serotonin toxicity, such as cooling if hyperther-
in HR and blood pressure during anaesthesia between the
mic and administration of diazepam to counter seizures.
groups (Mathews et al., 20ll).
Cyproheptadine is an Hl histamine receptor antagonist
Serotonin syndrome is well recognized in humans and
with non-specific 5-HT receptor antagonist properties that
is now reported in animals. Ingestion of L-5-hydroxytryp-
has been used successfully to treat serotonin syndrome in
tophan, from Griffonia simplicifolia seeds used to ease
humans. The recommended dose by Animal Poison
chronic headaches, fibromyalgia, depression and insom-
Control Center in dogs and cats is l mg/kg orally or per
nia, was incriminated in 2l dogs exhibiting signs of sero-
rectum every 4-8 hours until clinical symptoms resolve.
tonin toxicity (Gwaltney-Brant et al., 2000). A summary
Chlorpromazine has been used with some success in
of 189 dogs with serotonin toxicity received in 2002-2004
people.
by the Animal Poison Control Center, Urbana, Ilinois.
USA, associated 45 with paroxetine 59 sertraline, 85 fluox-
Barbiturates
etine, 4 MAO, and 4 St John's Wort (Mohammad-Zadeh
Long-term barbiturate therapy for epilepsy will lead to
et al., 2008). Signs associated with SSRI administration
 enzyme induction and a decrease in duration of action of
included lethargy 31%. vomiting 12%. with fewer dogs
similar dnugs given for anaesthesia. Administration for
-   'i si 
 years leads to hepatic cirrhosis and decreased hepatic func-
sion, tachycardia, tremors and vocalization. There are no
tion. The effects of acutely administered phenobarbital (or
clinical data addressing multidrug therapy inducing sero-
diazepam) for the seizuring animal will be additive to
tonin toxicity in veterinary patients but the potential for
subsequently administered drugs for anaesthesia.
asaul uim patean aie saop aiou se aseaioui snu Aiixol
agents. Combinations of drugs such as the SSRIs or SNRIs
Cardiovasculardrugs
and others with serotonin reuptake inhibitory effect, such
Dogs with cardiac disease are treated with a variety of
as tramadol, are commonly involved. Meperidine fenta-
nyl and congeners, pentazocine, tramadol, and dex-
cardiovascular dnugs, some of which decrease vascular
resistance.
Hypotension may develop during general
tromethorphan are all weak SSRis and have been
anaesthesia in dogs receiving these drugs unless the chosen
implicated in human cases of serotonin syndrome. Trama-
dol may also be a serotonin releaser. Morphine and its
anaesthetic protocols induce minimal vasodilation
or
myocardial depression. Angiotensin-converting enzyme
analogues do not cause inhibition of serotonin uptake.
[ACE) inhibitors, such as captopril, enalapril, or benaz-
Since the incidence of complications arising from anaes-
thesia of dogs receiving antipsychotic dnugs is not yet
april, in particular, appear to be associated with hypoten-
sion that is not easily reversed.
determined, anaesthetic considerations should include the
behaviour initiating administration of the drug, including
Corticosteroids
herbal supplements, and the pharmacological effect of the
dnug in addition to usual preanaesthetic evaluation. Rec-
 Dogs that have been treated with corticosteroid dnugs at
 ommendations for management of these patients include
aeu Aeu eisauisaeue Supasand suuou zau ui au Aue
the possibility of treatment early in the day and on an
reduced ability to respond to stress. For animals that have
'out-patient' basis to minimize stress, and use of dog-
been on long-term corticosteroid treatment, additional
 appeasing pheromone in the hospital for venous catheteri-
steroid may be advisable in the form of dexamethasone,
zation (Robertson, 2009). Owners should be warmed
0.5-2.0 mg/kg IV, or methylprednisolone, 10-20 mg/kg.
about the possibility of drug interactions. Some
edog
Or another steroid more appropriate for the individual
dog's condition based on knowledge of the history and
owners may have to be present for premedication and
aggressive dogs should be managed efficiently in a quiet
 previous dosing regimen. Further steroid may be needed
area using experienced personnel to eliminate delays and
depending on the severity of the surgical procedure and
minimize patient stimulation. The dogs may be reassured
how the dog recovered from anaesthesia.
by the presence of an item from home in the cage or run.
Anaesthetic agents that should be satisfactory are glycopyr-
insulin
rolate but not atropine, morphine, hydromorphone, oxy-
Diabetic dogs receiving insulin are at risk of developing
morphone buprenorphine, and butorphanol. Injectable
hypoglycaemia, hypotension, and cerebral damage during
anaesthetic agents should be titrated to individual effect
 anaesthesia. An accepted management for the diabetic dog
and inhalation anaesthesia can be used for maintenance.
that must be anaesthetized is given in Table 15.4. The
Avoidance of Oz-sedatives has been suggested because they
blood glucose level should be maintained between 5.5
cause such major changes in HR and MAP that cardiovas-
juanbay ysnoiy (7p/su 0oz-0o1) 7p/louu 0'1l pue
cular changes important to the diagnosis of serotonin tox-
 measurement of blood glucose concentrations and appro-
icity may be obscured. Measurement of blood pressure
priate IV administration of 5% dextrose in water (D5W)
during anaesthesia is advisable.
during anaesthesia. Even when preanaesthetic blood
415
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 15.4 A protocol for anaesthetic management
Box 15.3 Management of brachycephalic
of a regulated diabetic dog
breeds
Sequence of
Management
Anticipate airway obstruction
events
Keep under observation after premedication
 Night before surgery
Feed as usual
Monitor oxygenation before and after anaesthesia
Wide selection of endotracheal tube sizes
 Morning of the day of
Give one-half of the usual dose of
 surgery
insulin; do not feed
 Controlled ventilation frequently necessary
Protect against corneal drying and abrasions
Before anaesthesia
Measure blood glucose; administer
●Recover from anaesthesia with head elevated
dextrose if value is low
Avoid early extubation
During anaesthesia
Administer 5% dextrose in water,
Oxygen in recovery
 3-5 mL/kg/h, in addition to balanced
electrolyte solution; measure blood
 glucose at the end of anaesthesia, or
every 1-2 hours, and adjust dextrose
infusion rate according to result
Tzu, Lhasa Apso, and Pekingese are at risk of airway
After anaesthesia
 Measure blood glucose 2 hours after
obstruction because of elongated soft palates, abnormal
anaesthesia; adjust treatment
narrowing of the larynx, everted laryngeal ventricles, nar-
according to result; feed and return to
rowing of the space between nasal turbinates, and stenotic
insulin therapy as soon as appropriate
nares. Prolonged inspiratory stridor contributes to forma-
tion of oedema of the soft palate and laryngeal mucosa
and tenacious stringy saliva in the oropharynx. These dogs
are also more likely to develop cyanosis during induction
glucose is high, blood glucose may decrease significantly
 of anaesthesia and to vomit in the recovery period. Partial
during the frst hour of anaesthesia. Dogs with well-
 Or complete obstruction can occur even during sedation
controlled diabetes can experience wide swings in blood
and these dogs should be kept under observation after
glucose for several hours after anaesthesia, and monitor-
 administration of premedication drugs. Sedated dogs may
ing should be continued until the following day.
be hypoxaemic and not exhibit classic signs of hypoxia
-edde aunoi pue suyiaiq yinou io sunued se ypns
Breed characteristics
tion of a pulse oximeter probe will identify those patients.
Tracheal intubation is more diffcult in these breeds and
The breed, age, and conformation have signifcant impact
may involve smaller endotracheal tubes than expected
on choice of dnugs and anticipated complications. Breed
based on the body size. The anatomy of the English
dispositions for different diseases and traits are extensive
Bulldog larynx may be distorted such that only an
and appear to be constantly changing. Variable responses
extremely small lumen tube can be inserted.
to anaesthetic dnugs within breeds have also been reported.
'Preoxygenation' is advisable to prevent hypoxaemia
Some families of the Boxer breed, for example, are very
during induction of anaesthesia and is accomplished by
sensitive to the effects of acepromazine. Several other
administration of O2 by facemask for several minutes
breeds have been suggested as having increased sensitivity
before and during induction. Acepromazine should be
to anaesthetic agents, for example, the Belgian Terveurens
used cautiously, if at all, and propofol, alfaxalone, keta-
and the Siberian Husky. It is very likely, and this hypoth-
mine, or etomidate are less likely to be associated with
 esis is supported by experience and anecdotal reports, that
prolonged diffculty with breathing during recovery from
there are strains of dogs within many breeds that have a
anaesthesia than thiopental. Opioids are useful agents to
very low tolerance for anaesthetic agents. Consequently.
 provide sedation and analgesia and to decrease the dose
safety is increased when balanced anaesthetic techniques
 of subsequent anaesthetics. One problem with this group
are employed and drugs are administered sequentially and
is that Bulldogs, Boston Terriers, and Pugs frequently pant
to effect: Information provided by the owner
rabout
during inhalation anaesthesia, necessitating use of con-
anaesthetic-related complications with siblings should be
trolled ventilation. Brachycephalic dogs often have protu-
incorporated into the anaesthetic plan.
berant eyes and frequent application of ophthalmic
lubricant is advisable to prevent corneal drying, and taping
Brachycephalic breeds
the eyelids closed may provide added protection.
Conformation will have an impact on anaesthetic man-
Congestion of the nasal mucosa occurring during anaes-
agement (Box 15.3). Brachycephalic breeds such as the
thesia interferes with airflow after extubation. The patient
English Bulldog. French Bulldog. Pug. Boston Terrier, Shi
should be placed in sternal recumbency as soon as
416
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Table 15.5 Anaesthesia of paediatric and senior/
geriatric dogs includes increased risk of these
problems
Paediatric
Senior/Geriatric
 Anaesthetic requirement
↓↑
个
 Ventilation
 Blood pressure
个
↑
Recovery time
个
个
Hypothermia
√
 Hypoglycaemia
√
*Decreased in neonate, progressive increase in paediatric
Figure 15.1 Brachycephalic breeds of dogs should be
recovered from anaesthesia in a sternal, head-up position to
trained in their racing career not to sit down, and this
promote decongestion of the nasal mucosa. Oxygenation is 
behaviour must be adjusted for when inserting an IV cath-
monitored with a pulse oximeter clipped to the tongue as
eter by accomplishing this in the standing animal or by
in this dog. or on the lip. ear, toe or toe web. This dog is
 positioning the animal in lateral recumbency. Many grey-
breathing air but a mainstream capnograph is connected to
hounds will try to stand early after anaesthesia despite
the endotracheal tube
significant ataxia.
possible at the end of the procedure and the dog's head
Age dharacteristics
elevated (Fig. 15.1). Administration of an opioid for recov-
Life stage divisions are arbitrary, are affected by both the
ery of anaesthesia will allow the dog to tolerate the
breed and size of dog, and may be defined differently in
endotracheal tube while exhaling isoflurane or sevoflu-
various contexts. Guidelines proposed by a panel of
rane. After extubation, it is important to listen for airflow
experts (Bartges et al., 20l2) are similar to those generally
and not merely rely on chest movement as an indicator of
anou e apiaoid inq Asoioisauisaeue Aeuuaian ul padde
adequate breathing. Opening the dog's mouth, extending
the head and neck, and pulling the tongue rostrally may
complete definition:
temporarily relieve an obstruction. Oxygenation should
 Neonate, puppy 1-2 weeks of age
be measured using a pulse oximeter and administration
 Paediatric, junior dog 2-12 weeks of age
Adolescent, 3-9 months of age
of Oz by mask may be necessary for 10 minutes or longer.
Administration of dexamethasone sodium phosphate,
+
Adult finished growing, socially mature
0.5 mg/kg. IV may be advisable after soft palatectomy to
 Mature, dog is around half life expectancy
minimize postoperative swelling
+
Senior, last 25% of life expectancy
● Geriatric, at life expectancy and beyond.
Sighthounds
While individual dogs have problems that influence
The lean athletic breeds collectively known as 'sight-
is e  o   'isis on aos
hounds' include Greyhounds, Afghans, Salukis, Borzois,
impact on anaesthetic management A survey of 15881
Whippets, Wolfhounds and Deerhounds. Their signif-
deaths of 165 breeds of purebred dogs in the UK has
o Aaoai pauoioid aul sl isnayisaeue a ol au
 provided information on breed differences in lifespan and
anaesthesia induced by thiopental because of the lack of
provides further evidence that smaller breeds tend to have
body fat (and muscle in some breeds), which precludes
a longer lifespan than larger dogs (Adams et al., 2010).
redistribution and lowering of blood thiopental concen-
tration. Reduced ability to metabolize thiopental and pro-
Paediatric anaesthesia
pofol has been documented in greyhounds. For these
Neonatal puppies require small doses of anaesthetic
dogs. propofol yields a vastly improved quality of recovery
 agents. Puppies less than 2 months of age are more likely
anaesthesia in these breeds than propofol, unless ade-
 mia than young adults (Table 15.5). Oxygen consumption
quate sedation is provided for recovery, because these dogs
is higher in puppies than in mature animals and respira-
may exhibit signs suggestive of dysphoria. Greyhounds are
tory rates are high. Heart rates of around 200 beats/min
417
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
occur in newborn puppies. Decreased heart rate and
the presence of abnormalities unconnected with the pre-
decreased preload (blood volume) result in large decreases
senting problem.
in cardiac output (Baum & Palmisano, 1997). A small
blood loss will cause a greater decrease in cardiac output
Auscultation of the thorax
than in an older animal. The MAP is considerably lower
Auscultation ofthe heart, cardiac rhythm, and lung sounds
in the frst month of life than in mature dogs and the
before anaesthesia is essential to identify abnormalities
problem for the anaesthetist is how low is too low for
in animals that exhibit no signs of disease to owners,
blood pressure during anaesthesia? MAP of 55-60 mmHg
for example, to detect a patent ductus arteriosus in a
may be satisfactory during anaesthesia in the first 2 weeks 
young dog scheduled for castration or ovariectomy/
 of life provided that peripheral perfusion appears to be
ovariohysterectomy. Auscultation of murmurs or abnor-
adequate as indicated by pink mucous membranes and
mal rhythms should be followed up as potential early
rapid capillary refill time (CRT). Successful treatment of
 indicators of cardiomyopathy (Brownlie, 1991). All dogs
low pressure can be diffcult as the immature heart may
that have been injured in a road traffic accident or have
 not respond satisfactorily to administration of anticholin-
suffered a fall from a high location should be auscultated
ergic and inotropic agents. The young animal is capable of
for decreased lung sounds indicating lung collapse, pneu-
a signifcant increase in cardiac output in response to a
mothorax, or diaphragmatic hermia. Abnormal ventricular
volume load, but this increase is depressed after the frst
rhythm in these dogs is an indication of traumatic myo-
few weeks of life.
carditis, although this clinical sign may not become appar-
Puppies have immature mechanisms for detoxification.
ent until 24-36 hours after the trauma. A thoracic
Renal function does not, for example reach adult function
radiograph provides valuable information on the integrity
until puppies are 3 months of age (Poffenbarger et al.,
of the lungs and diaphragm, and this evaluation is espe-
1990). Hypoglycaemia may develop during and after
-one ul paaIoaul ssop Jo os ol dn se juejodul Alep
anaesthesia. Food should not be withheld for more than
mobile trauma will have pulmonary contusions.
a few hours before anaesthesia and the puppy should be
fed a few hours after anaesthesia. As prevention against
Ovenweight and obese dogs
hypoglycaemia, 5% dextrose in water, 3 mL/kg/h, should
 The anaesthetist may either calculate drug dosages based
be infused IV during anaesthesia in addition to balanced
on actual weight, realizing that overweight dogs will
electrolyte solution. Hypothermia develops easily in these
receive a higher dose rate than ideal weight dogs, or to
small patients and will have a significant effect in decreas-
calculate the dose rates on ideal weight based on an assess-
ing blood pressure and metabolic rate, thus prolonging
ment of body condition. Preferably, anaesthetic drug
recovery from anaesthesia.
 dosages for an overweight dog should be calculated on its
ideal weight since the animal's circulating blood volume
Senior and geriatric dogs
is that of a smaller animal and fat contributes little to
Older dogs have a decreased requirement for anaesthetic
initial redistribution (Fig. 15.2). Various body condition
agents due to a reduction in the number of neurons and
score (BCS) systems are used to evaluate dogs and cats and
neurotransmitter. The duration of action of drugs may be
 it is recommended that all veterinarians within a practice
increased because hepatic and renal function are decreased,
use the same scoring system (Baldwin et al., 20l0). The
resulting in longer recovery from anaesthesia. The preva-
recommended goal for most dogs is 3 out of 5 or 4-5 out
lence of hypoventilation is higher in senior dogs because
of 9. Comparison of methods for estimating body fat in
chemoreceptor response to high PaCOz and low PaO2 is
decreased. Hypotension is more likely to develop due to
decreased autonomic function with increasing age. Ther-
Dog A = healthy
Dog B = overweight
develops as a consequence. Pharyngeal and laryngeal
FAT
FAT
reflexes are diminished and aspiration of reflux is more
MUSCLE
MUSCLE
likely to occur than in a younger animal.
BLOOD
BLOOD
Physical examination
au jo ed zueod ue st uexa eisasaeueand, au
whole process. It is almost impossible to design a safe
Administration of the same mg/kg dose
in overweight dog= overdosage
anaesthetic protocol without observing the temperament
of the dog. its physical conformation, auscultating the
Figure 15.2 Schematic representation of the risk for
heart and lungs for abnormalities, assessing any impact of
overdosage of overweight dogs with intravenous anaesthetic
current disease on adequacy of breathing, and ruling out
agents.
418
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
dogs revealed that a 9-point scale for assigning a body
(Hoskins, 1995). These changes predict increased inci-
condition score (BCS) correlated well with dual-energy
dence of organ malfunction and are a reason for
X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) which is a non-invasive
laboratory measurement of haematological and clinical
method for estimating body fat content (Mawbry et al.
chemistries of older dogs before anaesthesia even when
2004). This investigation determined that the ideal BCS of
they are thought to be healthy. The age at which a dog
 5 corresponded to l1% body fat, and body fat increased
 should be considered senior varies with the breed and is
by 8.7% for every unit increase in BCS. Ideal bodyweight
 reached at 75% of life expectancy, or broadly 9 years old
is calculated by dividing the actual weight by a number
for small and medium dogs and 6 years for giant breeds.
based on the BCs, for example, weight of dogs with BCS
 Many clinicians require that all dogs over 4 or 5 years of
of 6 = actual weight ÷ 1.087, BCS 7 = weight ÷ 1.174, BCS
 age have blood drawn for a complete blood count (CBC)
8 = weight ÷ 1.26l, BCS 9 = weight ÷ 1.348.
and clinical chemistries, including but not limited to
An overweight dog is likely to hypoventilate during
plasma protein, albumin, blood urea nitrogen and creati-
anaesthesia and assisted or controlled ventilation will
nine, liver enzyme tests, glucose, and electrolytes. Con-
probably be necessary. An obese animal breathing air
siderable controversy exists concerning blood testing of
when anaesthetized is likely to become hypoxaemic. Use
healthy dogs scheduled for elective surgery because when
 of a pulse oximeter during preanaesthetic sedation, anaes-
a clinical examination has revealed no abnormalities very
thesia, and recovery from anaesthesia will warn when O2
few dogs will be found to have a significant laboratory test
supplementation is needed.
abnormality (some may have values just outside the
accepted normal range) that requires a change in anaes-
Dogsweighing<5kg
 thetic management. Current recommendations proposed
Death can occur in patients of all ages and health status
by the American Animal Hospital Association is that a
but complications are more likely to occur in dogs weigh-
minimum database should be routinely run on all mature.
ing less than 5 kg (Brodbelt et al., 2008). Guessing rather
senior and geriatric dogs as part of comprehensive well.
than actually calculating dose rates in mL for these patients
ness care for early detection of disease [Bartges et al.,
 may lead to inadvertent overdosage. Use of 1 mL syringes 
2012). They also make the point that the laboratory
with a 25 gauge needle or insulin syringes increases accu-
should be aware of specifc breed variations of 'normal
racy of drug administration by controlling the volume in
values.
the syringe and minimizing the impact of residual drug in
Abnormalities in the results of laboratory tests should
the needle hub. A small mask and selection of endotra-
be noted for the possible modifcation of the anaesthetic
cheal tube sizes down to 2.0 mm internal diameter (ID)
 s r   o se  'ioo
should be available for these small dogs. Surveys have
amount of free and active anaesthetic agent and alters the
shown that complications are less likely to occur when
 ability ofthe dog to maintain a satisfactory blood pressure
someone's sole responsibility is to monitor the patient
during anaesthesia. Abnormalities of hepatic or renal
through anaesthesia and recovery, and this is particularly
function may dictate an adjustment in the selection of
true of small patients. Drape barriers should be placed to
 anaesthetic agents based on the dog's decreased ability to
lift the drapes and facilitate observation. The volume of
eliminate the drugs.
fluid administered during anaesthesia must be closely
Specific blood tests are justifed when a dog is in a high-
recorded (including volume for flushing catheters and
risk population, for example, a Doberman pinscher may
dobutamine or dopamine administration) to avoid over
suffer from von Willebrand's disease and should be tested
transfusion, as well as the volume of blood loss to avoid
for adequate coagulation. Dogs with 30% or less of the
hypovolaemia. Heat loss is rapid in small animals and one
normal level of von Willebrand's factor are at risk for
 or more means of supplying warmth should be employed
haemorrhage during surgery and should be treated with
from the start of anaesthesia.
8-D-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP) or an infusion of fresh
 plasma or cryoprecipitate before surgery.
Diagnostic tests
Evaluation of the significance of disease
Evaluation of the history and a comprehensive physical
examination of a patient prior to anaesthesia may reveal
Identification of neurological or cardiac disease, or hepatic
abnormalities that require further elucidation using labo-
 Or renal malfunction, may have a direct bearing on choice
ratory tests. Routine testing before a major surgical proce-
 of anaesthetic agents or anaesthetic management as dis-
 dure should be done to provide a baseline for comparison 
cussed later in this chapter Some diseases cause derange-
of postoperative tests, although it is likely that tests will
ments of fluid, electrolyte and metabolic balance and
have already been run during evaluation of the patients'
 these should be corrected if possible before induction of
diseases. With increasing age, hepatocyte numbers
 anaesthesia. Correction of dehydration may not be feasi-
decrease pancreatic enzyme secretion diminishes, neph-
ble, but restoration of an adequate circulatory blood
rons decrease and glomenular fltration rate decreases
volume should be ensured by infusion of appropriate
419
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
product, such as crystalloid fluid, hypertonic saline, heta-
 gastric reflux and aspiration. The problem is deciding how
starch, plasma, or blood.
long to withhold food since gastric fluid pH decreases with
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) clas-
fasting and the longer the fasting period the higher the
sifcation of physical status (see Chapter l) is an objective
incidence of gastric reflux. Furthermore, the acidity and
assessment of a patient's global physiological illness status
volume of gastric fuid not only fluctuate during the day
and should be used to assess prediction for requirement
but are also influenced by the type of food eaten before
for care, that is, the higher the score the increased require-
fasting. In one experimental study, dogs were fed different
ment for attention to preanaesthetic preparation, choice
foods and gastric fluid aspirated and tested after induction
 of anaesthetic protocol, and extent of monitoring during
of anaesthesia. Dogs that were fasted l0 hours before
and after anaesthesia. Although the ASA classification
anaesthesia had less volume of fluid in the stomach but
reflects the degree of physiological derangement of the
 greater acidity (mean pH <2.0) compared with dogs fasted
patient, specifc guidelines are not available for class
Buipaay (60oz 'Te a seaAes) (6'z<Hd ueau) sunoq e A[uo
assignment, consequently, anaesthesiologists may vary in
low-fat or low-protein food with a l0-hour fast resulted in
their classifications of some patients. Furthermore, ASA
the greatest acidity. The conclusions were that gastric
classification does not describe risk of anaesthesia because
acidity was best controlled by feeding canned food rather
adverse aspects of the procedure or surgery are not
than dry food, and for the fasting time to be shorter rather
included. For example, consider a relatively physiologi-
than longer.
cally healthy dog that is scheduled to undergo dorsal hem-
The traditional approach has been to recommend
ilaminectomy or forelimb amputation, procedures that
'nothing-by-mouth after midnight. Currently. a fasting
possess inherent risks for complications including exces-
time of 8, 10, or 12 hours has been most frequently pub-
sive haemorrhage and air embolism. The impact of the
lished but there is no strong evidence to support any
 procedure on the course of anaesthesia should be consid-
specific time recommendation. Fluid may be gone from
ered, for example surgical procedures in the cranial
isisiad Aeu poog Aip inq sainuu og um yens au
abdomen or performed with the animal in a prone, head-
for 24 hours. It is not uncommon to observe large quanti-
down position will impair ventilation. Orthopaedic pro-
ties of partially digested dry food when dogs vomit after
cedures require profound analgesia and may be responsible
premedication, even when they have been fasted for 10-12
for significant blood loss. Excision of tumours over the
hours. In these cases, it is likely that anxiety created by an
thorax may result in penetration of the pleural cavity.
unfamiliar environment delayed gastrointestinal transit
Animals with mast cell tumours are at risk for acute hypo-
time. Dogs less than about 16 weeks of age should be
tension as a result of histamine release and should be
fasted only a short time to minimize risk for hypoglycae-
pretreated with an antihistamine such as diphenhy.
mia, and not more than 4 hours is the most recent recom-
dramine, 2 mg/kg. In human medicine, there is a variety
mendation in the American Animal Hospital Association
of scoring systems for different diseases, for example,
guidelines for anaesthesia ( Bednarski et al., 20ll). Minimal
the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation
fasting also applies to those little dogs at risk for hypogly-
(APACHE) score, and these scores are adjusted every 5
cemia such as a l kg Yorkshire Terrier or Chihuahua. This
years to accommodate changes in current management
 author's personal preference for management of a diabetic
and agents available Specific illness severity scores are not
dog is to fast the patient, reduce the insulin dose by half
commonly used at present for clinical veterinary patients
but have a place in evaluation of groups of clinical patients
kg/h, during anaesthesia.
included in research investigations of new treatment
Water should be withheld for 2 hours before anaesthe-
modalities. Illness severity scores are not designed to be
sia, although some clinicians allow water up to the time
used in isolation to predict outcome for individuals and
of premedication.
clinicians should be careful about quoting score results to
clients (Hayes et al., 2010). Furthermore, even a disease
specific model may be difficult to select for a patient with
Gastro-oesophageal reffux
a primary disease and comorbidities, for example, a
The incidence of gastric fluid entering the oesophagus
patient scheduled for a forelimb amputation and an
(gastro-oesophageal reflux, GER, GOR) without reaching
the pharynx (silent regurgitation) has been reported in
clinical patients as low as 13-17% (Raptopoulos &
Food and water restrictions
Galatos, 1995: Favarato et al., 2012). 40-44% (wilson
et al., 2005, 2007), and as high as 50-67% (Raptopoulos
The times recommended for withholding food before
& Galatos, 1997: Wilson et al., 2006a,b; Panti et al., 2009;
anaesthesia range from 6 to at least 12 hours (most fre-
Shaver et al., 20ll). Gastric reflux may go unnoticed
quently 12 hours), the object being to minimize the
because the number of dogs in which gastric fluid reaches
volume and acidity of food in the stomach and decrease
the pharynx (regurgitation) is small. Investigations of
risk of oesophageal and pulmonary tissue damage from
GER/GOR usually involve insertion of a pH electrode
420
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
through the mouth or nose and into the oesophagus until
Hd ousee paueidu gusn painsau sem Hd ouse uaum
the tip is just cranial to the cardia. The presence of reflux
telemetry capsules in experimental dogs fed dry food
can be confirmed by oesophagoscopy performed at the
(Tolbert et al., 20ll) whereas, in another investigation,
end of anaesthesia. While the pH electrode can easily
both famotidine and omeprazole, but not ranitidine, sig-
identify sudden decreases in pH due to acid reflux from
nifcantly elevated gastric pH (Bersenas et al., 2005). Ome-
the stomach, not all cases of reflux of non-acid fluid or
 prazole has been documented to decrease the incidence of
alkaline fluid may be identified.
GER/GOR in dogs fasted for at least 12 hours and then
Oesophageal pH in conscious dogs is approximately 8.0.
anaesthetized for orthopaedic surgery ( Panti et al., 2009).
Achange in pH to <4.0 is considered to be indicative of acid
The dogs received omeprazole, 1 mg/kg, orally at least 4
gastric reflux and pH <2.5 is associated with risk of serious
hours before anaesthesia consisting of acepromazine,
 Desophageal mucosal damage and possible stricture forma-
 methadone, propofol, and isoflurane with or without epi-
tion later. Contact time with oesophageal mucosa may
dural nerve block, and the occurrence of acid reflux was
impact on the degree of damage. Measurement of oesopha-
 decreased from 52% in untreated control dogs to 18%.
geal pH has defined GER/GOR as occurring at any time
The intestinal prokinetic, metoclopramide, increases the
from induction to the end of anaesthesia and low oesopha-
lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and has been inves-
 geal pH may persist from a few minutes to hours. The posi-
tigated in management of gastric reflux. Similar to the PPI
tion of the dog has and has not been associated with
treatment, metoclopramide will decrease the incidence of
initiation of reflux but intra-abdominal surgery increased
GER/GOR but not completely prevent it. In a study of
the incidence of reflux in one group of patients (Galatos &
dogs fasted for an average of 17-19 hours before being
Raptopoulos, 1995). Oesophageal damage may occur at
 anaesthetized for orthopaedic surgery, metoclopramide,
any point along its length and stricture formation has been
1 mg/kg, administered IV before induction of anaesthesia
described at the thoracic inlet, heart base and cardia
and continued as an infusion of l mg/kg/24 hours
(Wilson & Walshaw, 2004). The primary clinical sign of
decreased acid reflux from 63% to 33% (wilson et al.,
oesophagitis and stricture was vomiting, often associated
2006b). Metoclopramide at the dosages just described,
-se ie s (ai-o) e ae uo i ea y
 is the agent that this author uses for dogs that are known
thesia. Fortunately, considering the high incidence of GER/
to have regurgitated during a previous anaesthetic.
GOR in some populations, oesophagitis and stricture for-
Metoclopramide is also added to the anaesthetic manage.
mation after anaesthesia are uncommon.
ment when a dog regurgitates shortly after induction of
The cause of GER/GOR is largely due to a decrease in
anaesthesia.
lower oesophageal sphincter pressure allowing release of
fluid from the stomach. Anaesthetic agents influence
sphincter tone to varying degrees. Morphine and acepro-
Premedication
mazine, meperidine and acepromazine, methadone and
Anticholinergics
acepromazine, and hydromorphone and midazolam were
used as premedications in several studies with moderate
Anticholinergic dnugs are selected after consideration of
to high incidences of GER/GOR (Wilson et al., 2005,
the needs of individual patients. Atropine or glycopyrro-
2007; Panti et al., 2009, Shaver et al., 2011). Modifying the
late may be administered to prevent bradycardia, reduce
premedication by eliminating one agent or decreasing
tracheobronchial secretions, or to prevent salivation that
dose rate altered the incidence of GER/GOR. Although
 might obstruct the airway or initiate laryngospasm. Glyco-
morphine induces vomiting, the occurrence of vomiting
pyrrolate results in a smaller increase in heart rate after IM
after premedication was found to be unrelated to GER/
administration than atropine and that may be an advan-
GOR A significantly higher incidence of GER/GOR has
asape aaey A snen jeau ya um ut saop iy a
been recorded when propofol has been used for induction
effects, eg. senior and geriatric dogs. Conversely, atropine
of anaesthesia compared with thiopental (Waterman &
 may be selected when a higher heart rate is required, as in
Hashim, 1992; Raptopoulos & Galatos, 1997). The lower
treatment of AV heart block and cardiac arrest. Anticholin-
oesophageal sphincter pressure was found to be decreased
ergic premedication may be contraindicated in dogs with
during isoflurane anaesthesia compared with halothane
hypertension or with moderate to severe cardiac disease
(Hashim et al., 1995), whereas another study recorded no
due to mitral regurgitation, cardiomyopathy, myocardial
statistically signifcant differences in episodes of acid
ischaemia, and traumatic myocarditis as the tachycardia
reflux between halothane [47%). isoflurane (63%). and
induced may decrease cardiac output, increase the preva-
sevoflurane (60%) (wilson et al., 2006a)
lence of ventricular dysrhythmias, and increase myocardial
Altering the gastric acidity before anaesthesia by admin-
ischaemia by increasing Oz demand. Dogs with rectal tem-
istration of a histamine H receptor antagonist or proton
peratures exceeding 39.7°C (103.5 °F) should not be given
pump inhibitor (PPl) is not routine practice. The effcacy
 atropine. Concurrent use of an anticholinergic drug with
of these agents differs under different study conditions.
 medium to large doses of medetomidine or dexmedeto-
Famotidine was found to be less effective than expected
midine is not recommended.
421
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Atropine may be given IM, IV, or SC. Dose rates com-
butorphanol will diminish the analgesic effect of a concur-
monly used for premedication are 0.04 mg/kg of a
rently administered μ opioid for 1-2 hours.
0.5 mg/mL solution IM or SC, or half that dose IV. Onset
Administration of butorphanol or buprenorphine after
of action occurs in about 20 minutes after IM injection
a μ opioid will result in partial reversal (Dyson et al.,
and lasts about l.5 hours. Onset of action is within 2
1990). For example, consider a dog that has received mor-
 minutes after IV injection in conscious dogs but may take
phine or hydromorphone and epidural morphine for an
longer in anaesthetized animals with slow circulation, for
orthopaedic procedure. Administration of buprenorphine
example with advanced AV heart block or hypotension.
shortly after the dog regains consciousness will change the
A transient slowing of the heart after administration is
dog's behaviour from quiet, relaxed, and comfortable to a
often observed before the heart rate increases. Higher
dog that is crying, shivering and painful. In certain situa-
doses may be used where needed and in the antagonism
tions, butorphanol or buprenorphine may be purposely
of neuromuscular block and in cardiopulmonary resus-
 selected for postanaesthetic administration after pre- Or
citation. Glycopyrrolate is administered as 0.0l mg/kg
intraoperative administration of a μl opioid. For example,
IM and 0.005 mg/kg IV. Onset of action after IM
 a dog that is young and bouncy and must be stretched out
injection is 40 minutes in conscious dogs and the
on the table for radiography has a μl opioid added to the
duration of effect on heart rate is 2-4 hours. Onset of
anaesthetic protocol to achieve a stable and adequate
 so u ua l ae s aq  u
plane of anaesthesia. The dog is expected to have minimal
inhalation anaesthesia, presumably due to increased
discomfort after anaesthesia and administration of butor-
muscle blood flow.
phanol facilitates a speedy recovery and an earlier hospital
discharge. In another situation, a dog during recovery from
Sedative and analgesic premedication
anaesthesia exhibits dysphoria ±vocalization that is attrib-
uted to the μl opioid administered for postoperative anal-
Any of the analgesic and sedative drugs already discussed
gesia. After ruling out the possibility that the behaviour of
may be used for premedication. The choice of agent will
the dog is a consequence of unsatisfactorily treated pain,
depend partly on the dog and the reason for anaesthesia
administration of buprenorphine may result in a calmer
and partly on availability and cost. An opioid may provide
analgesia during and after anaesthesia, and when admin-
tion may occur in pain-free dogs after administration of
istered with a sedative will increase the sedation achieved.
methadone or hydromorphone.
Opioids that are μ receptor agonists with a tendency to
Concurrent administration of a sedative and an opioid
induce vomition, such as morphine, hydromorphone, and
is a popular choice for premedication. Sedation is much
oxymorphone, should be avoided for premedication in
improved by the combination and may dramatically
dogs that may be adversely affected, such as the presence
decrease the dose rate of drugs used for induction of
of neck pain, gastric or intestinal foreign body or obstruc-
anaesthesia and endotracheal intubation. The degree of
tion, severe corneal ulcer or ruptured cornea, or at risk for
 sedation produced depends on the drugs used and dose
aspiration such as laryngeal paralysis or megaoesophagus.
rates, further influenced by individual variation. Adminis-
In these circumstances, administration may be withheld
tration of butorphanol, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg, buprenorphine
until after induction of anaesthesia or another opioid that
0.01-0.02 mg/kg, morphine 0.5 mg/kg, hydromorphone,
does not induce vomition, such as fentanyl, methadone
0.05-0.10 mg/kg, 0r meperidine (pethidine), 3-4 mg/kg.
Or buprenorphine, can be used.
 IM alone may induce very little sedation but when com-
An opioid should be chosen for premedication only
bined with acepromazine, 0.02-0.05 mg/kg, the combina-
after consideration ofthe desired opioid for intraoperative
tions result in moderate to heavy sedation. The choice of
analgesia and for the immediate recovery from anaesthe-
opioid may be influenced by the onset time, preferred
sia. Some opioid-opioid combinations interact resulting
route of administration, and effcacy. Butorphanol is not
in diminished analgesia. For example, a much higher dose
a good choice for orthopaedic pain.
of μ opioid will be necessary when administered after
Acepromazine IM or IV, 0.02 mg/kg in large dogs and
buprenorphine because l
buprenorphine
preferentially
0.02-0.05 mg/kg in smaller dogs, will calm some dogs
 OCcupies μ receptors but provides less analgesia. This was
 sufficiently for venepuncture but have minimal effect in
demonstrated in a group of dogs anaesthetized for ovario-
active dogs and here the addition of an opioid is advisable.
hysterectomy. All of the dogs were premedicated with ace-
 Acepromazine will not develop a full effect for at least 30
promazine and half received buprenorphine. A light plane
minutes after IM injection. Larger doses of acepromazine
of isoflurane anaesthesia was maintained such that addi-
do not increase sedation but can contribute to lowering
tional opioid was needed to provide analgesia for surgery.
blood pressure during inhalant anaesthesia. Acepromazine
Analysis of the data revealed that 2.5 times more sufen-
contributes to maintenance of a steady plane of anaesthe-
tanil was needed to treat responses to surgical stimulation
sia and to a smooth recovery from anaesthesia.
in the dogs that had received buprenorphine (Goyenechea
The benzodiazepines are not useful drugs to be used
Jaramillo et al., 2006). Similarly. premedication with
 alone in healthy dogs as agitation or restlessness may be
422
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
induced. Combination with an opioid may improve seda-
from dislodging the patch or chewing on it. Extreme seda-
tion and, for this, IV diazepam is more effective than
-lasal e Sunsasul jo palpadsns sop e u paloda1 sem uon
midazolam. These agents appear to produce more CNS
 [un (o a  a] yd a 
 depression in older and sick dogs than in healthy animals.
 an opiate and a controlled substance and a consent form
In sick dogs. IV administration of diazepam concurrently
is required in some states in the USA for the dog to be sent
[uuay io auoqdrouxo se yns piondo Suons e ym
home with a patch. Significant toxic and fatal events have
may induce such heavy sedation that a miniscule
developed in children that have ingested fentanyl patches
amount of anaesthetic agent is required for endotracheal
or stuck one on their skin mistaking it for a tattoo or Band-
intubation.
Aid. Owners should be informed of potential risks to
Moderate doses of medetomidine, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg
 people and be given detailed information about disposal.
[10-20 μg/kg). or dexmedetomidine, 0.003-0.010 mg/kg
A transdermal patch should be carefully removed using
[3- 10 μg/kg), administered with an opioid produce heavy
the tips of the fingers or when wearing gloves. The patch
sedation that seriously decreases the dose of anaesthetic
 should be folded so that the adhesive surfaces stick to each
 agent needed for induction of anaesthesia. Care must be 
other and wrapped up before disposal in the waste bin.
taken during induction of anaesthesia since these drugs
Hands should be washed thoroughly and gloves turmed
slow circulation time, and sufficient time must be allowed
 inside out before disposal. Flushing the patch down the
to elapse before administering more anaesthetic agent.
toilet (USA) is illegal in UK and Europe.
The highest dose listed on the manufacturer's package
Analgesic plasma concentrations are achieved by appli-
information given IM with butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg. pro-
ation of patch strength of 4 μg/kg/h (Egger et al., 1998;
duces such deep sedation that endotracheal intubation
Robinson et al., 1999; Hofmeister & Egger, 2004; Bellei
can be accomplished without further drug administration.
et al., 20ll). There is a dearth of published information
The cardiovascular effects of this group of dnugs are sig-
on dose rates and plasma concentrations in dogs >40 kg.
m sop u aisnone pasn aq inu aau pue juy
 One 100 μg/h and one 50 μg/patch may be applicable for
cardiovascular disease or hypovolaemia.
a 40-50 kg dog and two 100 μg/h patches for larger dogs.
Or a lower dose rate may be sufficient. The time to effective
Transdermal fentany!
plasma fentanyl concentrations is 12-24 hours but there
Transdermal fentanyl patches are manufactured for human
is a high degree of variability in individual dogs. When
use. There are two designs of transdermal fentanyl patches:
used for premedication, the fentanyl patch should be
the reservoir, or membrane-controlled system, and the
applied at least 24 hours before surgery. If the patient
 matrix systerm. A reservoir patch holds the fentanyl in a gel
 develops hypothermia during anaesthesia, plasma fenta-
nyl concentrations decrease [wilson et al., 2006c). When
brane between the reservoir and the skin (Margetts &
 applied at the end of surgery, and even when used as pre-
 Sawyer, 2007). The matrix patch incorporates the drug into
 medication, additional μ opioid will be needed as rescue
an adhesive polymer matrix from which fentanyl is con-
analgesia in the frst 12 hours until plasma fentanyl con-
tinuously released to the skin. The dose of fentanyl deliv-
centrations increase [Kyles et al., l998; Robinson et al.,
ered depends on the amount of fentanyl in the matrix and
1999; Bellei et al., 20ll). Later in recovery, analgesia pro-
the area of the patch applied to the skin, such that one-half
yiim Aiqenoaej saieduos [uejuay [euapsuen Aq papia
of the patch in contact with skin will deliver half of the
alternative systemic or epidural opioid administration.
original dose. Reservoir patches have tighter control on
Z ioy aeid u yal Aleau si yed ieapsuen au
dnug delivery but, if the membrane is damaged, there may
hours after application. Plasma fentanyl concentration
be a burst of fentanyl into the skin and risk of overdose.
 decreases by 5 hours after patch removal.
Patches are available in different sizes with the dose
Potential adverse effects include bradycardia, sedation,
expressed as μg/h.
and anorexia, and dogs should be monitored for these
Common sites for application are the dorsal cervical
signs. Mild skin irritation may be observed after the patch
area, dorsal or lateral aspects of the thorax, or the caudal
is removed and, in some dogs. there may be a delay in hair
abdomen. The hair is clipped without abrading the skin.
 growth and altered coat colour.
The area is washed with water and allowed to dry thor-
Fentanyl is now available as a liquid-based dnug (TD
oughly. The protective seal is peeled from the patch and
fentanyl solution, not a patch) that contains octyl-salicylate
the patch held to the skin for 60 seconds to promote adhe-
as a skin penetration enhancer and approved for use in
sion. Generally. an adhesive dressing is placed over the
dogs (Recuvyra?" TD fentanyl solution). It is applied with
patch for security. Fentanyl forms a depot within the skin,
an applicator to the skin of dogs between the shoulder
therefore, a large amount of fentanyl is put in the patch to
blades or to the ventral abdomen as a single dose of
maintain the concentration gradient between patch and
2.7 mg/kg (50 mg/mL, 0.05 mL/kg). Absorption is more
skin. Even at the end of 72 hours, matrix fentanyl patches
 rapid from the dorsum resulting in a faster onset of action
attached to dogs had a mean residual content of 83%
(Friese et al., 20l2b). Mean plasma concentrations of fen-
(Reed et al., 201l). A dog with a patch must be prevented
tanyl were maintained for at least 4 days above the
423
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
Figure 15.3 (A) Restraint for injection into the cephalic vein. (B) Alternative technique for occluding the cephalic vein for
insertion of a catheter.
concentration presumed to provide analgesia (Friese et al.,
may be painful for the patient and may obscure the vein
2012a). In a clinical investigation, 445 dogs anaesthetized
for several days, preventing subsequent use of the vein.
Ql iauia panianai Aiagins anss yos io pipaedouuo 1oy
Where a vein has been entered during an unsuccessful
fentanyl solution applied 2-4 hours before surgery or
buprenorphine before surgery and then every 6 hours for
vein distended should be released and firm pressure
90 hours (Linton et al., 20l2). Postoperative analgesia
 applied to the site to stop bleeding before another attempt
from the two opioid administrations was judged to be
is made.
similar.
If the vein on the right forelimb is to be punctured, an
Buprenorphine is also available as a transdermal matrix
assistant stands on the left side of the animal, passes his
patch. Pieper et al. (20ll) investigating application of a
or her left arm around the animal's neck and raises its head
52.5 μg/h patch in 13 kg Beagles identified onset of
(Fig. 15.3A). The dog can be in sitting, stermal, or lateral
thermal antinociception at 36 hours. However, buprenor-
position. The assistant's right hand grips the animal's right
phine could not be detected in 3/ 10 dogs. Further informa-
forelimb so that the middle, third, and fourth fingers are
tion is needed to assess use of buprenorphine patches
immediately behind the olecranon and the thumb is
in dogs.
around the front side of the limb. Some assistants prefer
 to place their thumb behind the olecranon and use fingers 
Intravenous technique
to occlude the vein ( Fig. 15.3B). Pushing on the olecranon
extends the limb and applying pressure with the thumb
Intravenous injections or placement of indwelling venous
raises the vein. The hand should be rotated so as to pull
catheters in dogs are commonly made into the cephalic
the cephalic vein slightly lateral, which straightens it and
vein, but other convenient sites include the lateral saphen-
makes it more visible Venepuncture must be carried out
ous vein, the medial saphenous or femoral vein, the
with the usual aseptic precautions, so hair over the vein is
jugular vein and, in anaesthetized animals, the sublingual
clipped and the skin is disinfected. For detailed guidelines
veins. Whichever site is used, conscious dogs should be
for catheter placement see also Chapter 10, Box 10.1.
handled quietly and forcible restraint reserved for those
Venepuncture with a needle and syringe for drug admin-
occasions when it is essential. Muzzles should be of the
istration is most easily accomplished using a syringe with
type with a quick release catch as delay in removal of a
an eccentrically placed nozzle. This feature allows the
muzzle tangled in facial hair in a dog that has vomited
 syringe to lie closer to the forearm and the needle more
 during induction of anaesthesia may lead to inhalation of
 or less parallel in the vein such that the needle is more
the vomited material.
likely to remain in the correct position. Suitable needle
Haematoma formation after venepuncture should be
 sizes depend on the size of the dog and the quantity and
prevented by application of pressure to the site for an
viscosity of the fluid to be injected. For most purposes a
adequate period - usually about a minute. A haematoma
needle 2.5 cm (1 inch) long and 22 or 23 gauge is
424
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
satisfactory; a 25 gauge needle can be used for small dogs
The first attempt at needle puncture should be done
and a 20 gauge for large dogs.
distally in the limb so that if a haematoma forms further
Two methods of stabilizing the vein prior to needle
attempts can be made more proximally. In Dachshunds
puncture are employed. In one, the skin over the vein is
and dogs with similar short, bent forelimbs such as Bull-
tautened without flattening the vein by the anaesthetist's
 dogs, venepuncture is best attempted where the cephalic
free hand grasping the limb distal to the site of venepunc-
vein curves medially on the limb or in the angle where the
ture and gently pulling the skin down. Usually the skin is
 accessory cephalic and cephalic veins join just proximal to
penetrated in one move and then the vein entered in a
the carpus (Fig. 15.5).
second move. Once blood is observed in the needle hub,
 All air should be expresed from the syringe before
the needle should always be threaded deeper into the vein
venepuncture is attempted and there must be sufficient
before making any injections. The position of the hand
 space left in the syringe to allow slight withdrawal of the
holding the skin taut is adjusted slightly to grip the hub
 plunger in order to test whether the needle is within the
 of the needle or the syringe between thumb and forefinger
lumen of the vessel. Blood should enter the syringe when
while the limb is still held secure in the palm and fingers.
this is done, and no injection must be made if blood does
In the second method, the thumb ofthe anaesthetist's free
 not appear in the syringe or needle hub. Failure to draw
hand is placed just alongside the vein and the skin is not
blood usually means that either the vein has not been
tensed (Fig. 15.4). The vein is stabilized between the
entered, the needle tip has passed through the opposite
 needle and the thumb as the needle is advanced through
wall of the vein, or that the needle has become occluded.
the skin and into the vein. With this method it may be
Failure to aspirate blood into the syringe is also encoun-
harder to thread the needle up the vein and there is a
 tered if the assistant has released occlusion pressure on the
greater tendency for contamination of the needle by
vein, ifthe vein is already thrombosed, or when peripheral
touching the thumb.
perfusion is poor as it may be after administration of an
Ot2-agonist sedative.
The lateral saphenous vein may be used for IV injection
or catheter placement at the point where it passes obliquely
on the lateral aspect of the hind limb just proximal to the
Figure 15.5 In short-legged dogs such as Dachshunds and
Figure 15.4 Stabilization of the cephalic vein against the
thumb.
junction of the accessory cephalic vein and the cephalic vein.
425
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 15.6 The lateral saphenous vein runs obliquely over
Figure 15.7 Jugular venepuncture in the conscious
the lateral surface of the limb from a point caudal on the
sitting dog.
gastrocnemius muscle to a point craniolaterally on the limb
just proximal to the hock.
vein. This breed (and Bloodhounds, Shar pei, etc) have
excessive skin so it is important to avoid short needles or
hock (Fig. 15.6). The dog may be in sternal position with
short catheters and to wrap the tape snuggly proximal to
the leg pulled to one side or restrained in lateral position.
the hock to prevent the catheter from sliding out of the
Two assistants may be required for an alert dog. one
vein as the skin moves.
restraining the head and forelimbs and one to raise the
Venepuncture of the jugular vein in the dog can be done
vein on the hind limb. There are several ways to accom-
with the dog standing or sitting with the head raised (Fig.
 plish this but one method involves the assistant standing
15.7). Identifying the jugular vein may be easier with the
on the opposite side of the animal and placing a hand
dog restrained on its side, particularly in smaller or ill
(right hand for right hind limb and vice versa) on the
 patients, and the vein raised by occlusion near the thoracic
cranial surface of the stifle, the thumb medially, and the
inlet. A small foam pad, towel, or sandbag placed under
fingers curled around the back of the leg, using pressure
the neck of the dog makes the position of the vein more
on the stifle to hold the leg in extension and fingers to
obvious.
Dcclude the vein. The person performing venepuncture or
(auoul 7) u 5 'anes 0z pue aane gi) saauies jous
catheter placement holds the lower part of the limb.
long. or 20 gauge or 22 gauge 2.5 cm (1 inch) long) are
slightly pulling on the skin to tense it over the vein. After
commonly inserted into the cephalic or lateral saphenous
insertion of a needle the hand is rotated to hold the
 veins, using the approach just described for venepuncture,
needle hub between thumb and forefinger until the injec-
prior to induction of anaesthesia for administration of
tion is made. The assistant may have to use two hands to
anaesthetic drugs, electrolyte solutions and supportive
immobilize the limb and raise the vein in very large or
dnugs (see Chapter l0 for examples and insertion tech-
active dogs (Fig. 15.6). Sometimes the lateral saphenous
nique). Some giant breed dogs may require a 14 gauge or
vein is easier to catheterize in Bulldogs than the cephalic
16 gauge catheter when extensive fluid therapy is required
426
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
or anticipated. Dogs <l kg bodyweight may receive a 22
gauge or 24 gauge catheter, or occasionally an intraosseous
catheter. The short venous catheters are typically secured
Jo qny aut punoie isiy pauoene ade snoiod anum yim
the catheter and then around the limb. The sequence of
taping and protective wrapping is an individual preference
sl adel jo aaid isiy aui ieul asua oi leassa si ll ig
frmly stuck on the catheter and adhered to the skin,
otherwise the catheter may easily pull out. A variety of
catheter caps, T-ports, double T-ports, and extensions are
available for attaching to the catheter. A needle on an
administration set from a fluid bag may be inserted
through the catheter cap/plug but faster flow will be
obtained if the cap is removed and the administration set 
is attached directly to the catheter or T-port. Additionally.
contamination is less likely with direct attachment. All
connections must be tight or taped together.
 ugular, lateral or medial saphenous veins are used for
Figure 15.8 Dog in dorsal recumbency with a 22 gauge
placement of 'central lines'; long catheters inserted until
catheter in the lingual artery for blood pressure
the tips lie in the cranial or caudal vena cava and that are
measurement. The dashed line is the site of one of the
single, double or triple lumen catheters for multiple thera-
lingual veins that can be catheterized for fluid or blood
pies and blood sampling (see Fig. 10.3). These catheters
administration when other veins are not available.
are inserted using strictly sterile technique, frequently
using a modifed Seldinger technique (see Chapter 10).
and must be securely wrapped for protection and to
prevent contamination.
the smallest dogs and is inserted aseptically through the
The sublingual veins are easily accessed in the anaesthe-
trochanteric fossa of the femur and parallel to the long
tized patient for collection of a small blood sample to
axis of the bone into the medullary cavity (see Fig. 10.4).
 The stilette is removed, the needle flushed with heparinized
measure blood glucose or packed cell volume and total
laguy sisausaeue ay iaao pand st anguot aul uaioid
 saline, a T-port is attached and flushed again. Bandaging
 must be secure to prevent the needle from being dislodged
so that its ventral surface is exposed and the veins are
easily visible It is important to use a small (25 gauge)
as the animal moves about Potential complications
needle because the vein will bleed freely after the needle
 include infection and exceptional care should be taken in
is withdrawn. Bleeding will be less if the needle is inserted
maintaining sterility of injections. The needle should be
for a few millimetres under the mucosa before penetrating
removed after 72 hours.
the vein. Pressure should be applied for a couple of
Vascular port
 minutes after the needle is removed to avoid a haematoma.
Gauze or cotton wool with alcohol should not be used
 The vascular port is a subcutaneously implanted system
because the alcohol will cause mucosal necrosis. In case
for IV delivery of drugs. It is used when dogs require
of emergency and absence of other adequate venous
multiple anaesthetic episodes over a short time, for
access, an 18 gauge catheter can be inserted in the lingual
example for radiation therapy, and the peripheral veins are
vein of a medium or large sized dog for administration of
badly thrombosed. The vascular port consists of two basic
a large volume of electrolyte solution or blood (Fig. 15.8).
parts: an indwelling catheter that is threaded into the
Tape must not be wrapped tightly around the tongue.
jugular vein after surgical dissection in the anaesthetized
dog and a rigid puncturable bulb that looks like a volcano
and is located subautaneously in the neck. The bulb has a
Intraosseous injection
 silicone rubber window that is easily palpated through the
Placement of a catheter in a vein is occasionally diffcult
skin and allows percutaneous intravenous injections using
in dehydrated animals, especially toy breeds and puppies.
 an appropriate sized needle.
The intraosseous route is an acceptable alternative for
administration of fluids, blood, and drugs. Absorption is
Endotracheal intubation
rapid and within one minute for some drugs, such as
atropine. Intraosseous injection implies injection into the
Cuffed endotracheal tubes for dogs vary from 2.5 mm to
intramedullary canal of the femur, tibia, or humerus using
16.0 mm internal diameter (ID). The diameter of the
a Cooke intraosseous needle, a Jamshidi needle or a spinal
largest tube that can be introduced into the trachea is
 needle. A 20 gauge, 2.5 am spinal needle is satisfactory for 
 related to both the size and the breed of the dog with the
427
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
requirement that the tube selected should be a good
approximation of the tracheal lumen diameter but not a
push' fit. For example, a 14 mm tube can usually be
inserted in the trachea of an adult German Shepherd and
an ll or 12 mm tube used for most 25 kg dogs. In con-
trast, the Bulldog often has an exceptionally small-
diameter laryngeal lumen and trachea for its body weight
and a selection of smaller tubes should be available at
anaesthetic induction of this breed.
The tubes should be checked for length alongside the
dog because the tip should not extend beyond the thoracic
inlet into the chest. Excess tube extending outside the inci -
sors contributes to dead space and CO2 breathing and.
therefore, some tubes may have to be shortened by cutting
off 2-6 cm length with scissors. Thin-walled endotracheal
tubes with small volume cuffs should be purchased for use
in puppies and very small dogs to allow the largest lumen
Figure 15.9 Holding the head for tracheal intubation should
size possible in their small tracheas. Alternatively, uncuffed
provide alignment between the pharynx and trachea. The
tongue should never be used for leverage to open the
Or Cole pattern tubes can be used to eliminate the space
Occupied by the cuff IPPV and aspiration of foreign mate-
mouth
rial are potential problems with use of uncuffed tubes and
should be prevented by packing the pharynx with mois-
while the tube itself is advanced in front of the arytenoid
tened gauze.
cartilages into the trachea (Fig. 15.10D). Frequently, rotat-
A good light source is needed in the form of bright
ing the tube 90° about its longitudinal axis as the tip
overhead lighting or a laryngoscope since intubation in
passes through the larynx allows the tube to be advanced
dogs is accomplished under direct viewing of the epiglottis
more easily into the trachea. The dog is then moved into
and the position of the tube in relation to it. A laryngo-
lateral recumbency, the anaesthetic circuit connected to
 scope is advisable for intubation of brachycephalic dogs.
the endotracheal tube and the O2 flowmeter turmed on.
It is usual to induce anaesthesia in the dog to a level that
The endotracheal tube is positioned within the trachea
is just adequate to allow the dog's mouth to be held open
 by gentle palpation at the base of the neck to determine the 
without initiating chewing movements, yawning. Or
level of the tip of the tube. This is facilitated by using the
tongue curling. When thiopental, propofol, alfaxalone, or
other hand to move the endotracheal tube a little within
etomidate has been used for induction of anaesthesia and
the trachea (Fig. 15.1l). Once the tip of the tube is deter-
the dog is swallowing when intubation is attempted, the
mined to be level with the base of the neck, the tube is
depth of anaesthesia is too light and more drug should be
further advanced a distance appropriate to the size of the
administered. Swallowing during intubation is normal
dog [0.5-2.5 cm) to the level of the thoracic inlet. Any
during ketamine anaesthesia.
 markings on the tube level with the incisors are noted for
 The dog may be positioned in either sternal or lateral
future reference of tube position during that anaesthetic.
recumbency. In either case, the assistant must hold the
While the assistant holds the tube in place, the anaesthetist
dog's head and neck in a straight line with one hand
ties a length of gauze or tubing tightly around the tube and
holding the top jaw, thumb and forefinger on either side
then behind the dog's head or around the upper or lower
 of the jaw behind the canine teeth and holding the upper
jaw, using a bow or quick release knot (Fig. 15.12). The
lips up and away from the teeth to facilitate the anaesthet-
knot around the tube must be tight to avoid slipping and
ist's view (Fig. 15.9). The assistant or the anaesthetist
accidental extubation. The endotracheal tube cuff should
depresses the lower jaw using a finger on the interdental
be inflated with just enough air to prevent a leak that can
space caudal to the canine tooth. The dog's tongue is
be detected when listening for air escaping aroundthe tube
pulled rostrally to spread open the larynx and is held
during inflation ofthe lungs by squeezing the reservoir bag
either by the assistant or the anaesthetist in such a way as
to a pressure of 20-25 cmHzO with the 'pop-off (APL)
to protect it from laceration by the teeth (Fig. 15. 10A). The
valve closed. The anaesthetist must remember to release the
blade ofthe laryngoscope is placed flat on the tongue with
valve after this procedure. The vaporizer is then turned on.
the tip of the blade depressing the tongue at the base of
The process of intubation should be performed gently
the epiglottis. In some dogs, the epiglottis may be trapped
to avoid trauma to the pharynx and larynx that can cause
behind the soft palate and must be released using the tip
tissue swelling and damage Furthermore, any time that
of the endotracheal tube to push the soft palate dorsally
the dog's position or location is changed, the endotracheal
(Fig. 15.10B, C). The lubricated tube should be used to
tube should be briefly disconnected from the breathing
depress the epiglottis onto the tongue and to keep it there
circuit to avoid twisting the tube within the trachea and
428
Anaesthesia of thedog
Chapter
|15
A
B
C
(D
Figure 15.10 Endotracheal intubation as seen by a right-handed anaesthetist. (A) The assistant is holding the upper lips and 
osiui sbop aui laao labu e buieid Ag aensiapun sii buianod 'ynow aut jo ino anbuot aut buimep s! isauisaeue aui
aul jo d aul A paill uaag sey aieed los aul () aieed los aul aa pansgo Aaialdo isoe s! silobida aul (a) yiaat
tube to allow the tip of the epiglottis to come forward. (D) The tip of the tube has been passed over the epiglottis, through
the vocal cords and on towards the sternum.
429
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 15.11 Palpating the position of the tip of the
endotracheal tube within the trachea at the base of the neck
with the thumh on one side of the trachea and fingers on
the other. The tube should then be advanced further to
Figure 15.12 The endotracheal tube is secured with tubing
place the tip level with the thoracic inlet.
(from an old IV administration set) tied around the tube and
behind the dog's head. Next to the endotracheal tube is a
temperature probe inserted into the oesophagus. Bilateral
protocol to provide analgesia for repair of trauma to the
maxilla.
Table 15.6 Complications occurring during endotracheal intubation
Complication
dinical signs
Management
Oesophageal
Panting, ± SpO<90%, muddy pink/bluish
To confirm tracheal intubation, look inside dog's mouth to see the ETT
intubation
 gums, minimal excursion of RB, waking
 passing under the arytenoids, epiglottis should be pressed horizontal
P
by the ETT. Panting may be opioid induced. Oesophageal intubation
may obstruct larynx and is seen as chest collapsing on inspiration.
 Squeezing thie RB will inflate abdomen and not the chest
Endobronchial
 Panting. may or may not cause hypoxia
Observe the cm marks on the side of the ETT as distance inserted may
intubation
(SpOz<90%, muddy pink/bluish gums),
 confirm depth, deflate cuff and withdrav ETT a short distance and 
minimal excursion of RB, waking up
observe for a decrease in RR and increase in SpOz
ETT obstruction
Small excursion of RB compared with
 Deflate ETT cuff and partially withdraw tube (overinflation of cuff may
larger chest movement, presence of
compress tube lumen, tip of tube may be against tracheal wall,.
hypoxaemia depends on duration of
kinked ETT). Tensicn pneumothorax will mimic partial ETT
obstruction, resistance felt when
cbstruction. During surgery, mucus or blood clot may obstruct ETT
 artificially inflating lungs
Unable to
Assuming the tube is not too big, this
Rotate the ETT before or during advancement, try a slightly smaller
advance ETT
 problem may occur in dogs with 
ETT, use a flexible guarded (metal spiral) ETT
tracheal collapse
Mimics ETT
Increased heart rate, decreased SpOz as a
Check CRT, femoral pulse, and blood pressure
problem
result of hyp otension
Unable to 
Insert ETT, suspect tube is too large {a
Move tube in a little further and attempt to aspirate more air from cuff.
extubate
'push fit), attempts to extubate fail
relax larynx by topical lidocaine and deeper anaesthesia, KY gel in a
 small syringe and attempt to insert some around the tube. Gentle
digital manipulation. Last resort is to cut the tube longitudinally.
 Don't forget to supply Oz and continue monitoring during this
 procedure. Observe for laryngeal mucosa swelling after extubation
ETT = endotracheal tube, RB = Rebreathing bag
430
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
tearing tracheal mucosa. The ability to bark may be lost for
possible, the tube bent back on itself, and the end grasped
1-2 days after anaesthesia when laryngeal swelling occurs
by the forceps and withdrawn through the pharyngeal wall
as a result of pressure from the tube or friction from being
followed by the cuff inflation pilot balloon. The adapter
 moved around, for example, during dental procedures.
is replaced and the endotracheal tube connected to the
Apnoea may occur following endotracheal intubation
anaesthesia machine. Alternatively, the forceps can be
 asuodsa xaan e se Aiuis sop pazauisaue kua e u
 introduced into the mouth and out through the skin inci-
to presence of the tube. Management depends on the indi-
sion (Fig. 15.13B). The tip of the guarded endotracheal
vidual circumstances. For example, if the dog is very light
 tube is grasped and pulled through into the oral cavity and
and likely to start chewing on the tube if it does not inhale
out of the mouth. The tube must then be turned 180° and
anaesthetic gas then either some artificial lung inflations
the tip of the tube grasped by the forceps and advanced
 Or a small dose of injectable anaesthetic agent would be 
into the larynx. Once the tube has entered the larynx, a
appropriate. In many cases, no artificial ventilation is nec-
finger can be introduced to push the tube fully into the
essary, as the animal will start breathing when the PCO2
trachea and to straighten the tube (Fig. 15.13C). In either
increases. An exception might be when cyanosis has
case, the guarded endotracheal tube is moved gently until
developed after induction of anaesthesia with propofol in
the tip of the tube is at the thoracic inlet. The exterior part
which case two to three lung inflations are needed quickly
 of the tube is bent caudally and secured firmly in place
to restore pink mucous membranes. Other complications
before the cuff is inflated in the usual manner [Fig.
may occur as a result of unsatisfactory tube placement,
15.13D). At the end of anaesthesia, the endotracheal tube
such as oesophageal intubation, endobronchial intuba-
is removed while the dog is still anaesthetized and replaced
tion, and endotracheal tube obstruction. The frst step is
with a clean orotracheal tube for recovery from anaesthe-
to look into the dog's mouth and see the tube entering
sia. The pharyngotomy site is not sutured.
the larynx ventral to the arytenoids. Having confirmed
endotracheal intubation, other causes of abnormal clinical
Intravenous agents
signs can be investigated (Table 15.6).
Intravenous agents may be administered alone but are
Intubation via pharyngotomy
usually given after injection of sedatives or opioids. Induc-
tion of anaesthesia will then be calmer, fewer adverse side
 Tracheal intubation through a pharyngotomy is used when
effects of the induction drugs will be observed, their
oral surgery requires closure of the jaws for correct align-
margin of safety will be increased, and recovery may be
 ment, such as repair of bilaterally fractured jaws, or when
faster. Some commonly used dnug combinations, with
the endotracheal tube obscures the surgical site, such as
dose rates, are given in Table 15.7.
during cleft palate repair. Commonly, a tube with a metal
spiral in the wall (guarded endotracheal tube) is used so
Thiopental
that the surgeon can operate rostrally to the patient and
the anaesthesia machine is moved to the side of the patient
ue smup aut pue Hd yaiy e aney ieuadoiut yo suonios
requiring the endotracheal tube to bend 180° without
only be given IV. It should be used as a 2.5% or weaker
kinking. The dog is frst anaesthetized, orotracheally intu-
 solution because more concentrated solutions are less easy
bated in the usual way and connected to the anaesthesia
to titrate to effect, resulting in administration of a higher
 machine. The hair is clipped from over the right pharyn-
 dose than necessary. A 5% thiopental solution may cause
 geal area just caudal to the angle of the mandible and a
thrombosis of the vein and produces necrosis of overlying
surgical scrub applied to the skin. A hand is inserted into
 tissues and skin if injected perivascularly. Management of
the dog's mouth until a finger can palpate the epiglottis.
even a 2.5% solution into tissues outside the vein should
arytenoid cartilages and hyoid apparatus. The finger is then
include immediate injection into the area of lidocaine,
 directed towards the lateral wall of the neck atthe junction
 2 mg/kg, without epinephrine to precipitate the thiopen-
of the intrapharyngeal osteum and laryngopharynx and
 tal into a harmless salt, and a volume of saline appropriate
caudal to the epihyoid bone with enough pressure to
to the size of the dog for dilution of the irritant. Warm
create an external bulge (Fig. 15.13A). Large curved forceps
 compresses should be applied to the leg at intervals over
are substituted for the finger and a small skin incision is
the subsequent 12-24 hours.
made over the bulge. The underlying tissues are blunt dis-
 The dose of thiopental depends on the condition of the
sected through pharyngeal muscle and mucosa until the 
dog, its state of hydration, and especially on previous
forceps can pass through the hole (Fig. 15.13B). The
medication. As a rough guide, the anaesthetist should
endotracheal tube can be inserted in one of two ways. The
 expect to use up to 12 mg/kg in a dog for induction of
existing endotracheal tube can be removed and replaced
 anaesthesia. In the healthy but lightly premedicated dog.
 by a guarded endotracheal tube. The jaws of the instrument 
 one half of this, i.e. about 6 mg/kg is given fairly rapidly
are introduced through the pharyngotomy hole into the
 as a bolus to produce a rapid induction of anaesthesia.
mouth. The endotracheal tube adapter is removed, if
If anaesthesia is insufficient to permit endotracheal
431
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
A
B
C
Figure 15.13 Endotracheal intubation through a pharyngotomy. This dog is clipped in preparation for the pharyngotomy and
eds (ea an jo dii aul () oueud au jo ino pue yno au ynou sao yo uonoul (a) (moe)
endotracheal tube has been pulled through the pharyngotomy and directed into the trachea. (D) The endotracheal tube,
inserted in a different dog. is bent caudally and secured in position with a tie around the neck.
intubation, additional small increments of the remainder
sedation before thiopental is advisable because, like
should be given at 15-20-second intervals. The whole
propofol and etomidate thiopental does not provide
dose may be needed in a proportion of dogs. A slow
analgesia.
administration rate of thiopental significantly decreases
Other dnugs may be administered IV immediately before
the total dose required for anaesthesia but may result in a
thiopental to decrease the dose needed and to enhance
Aejunqoaul Aq pajueduosse uosnpul jo Aienb iaood
the quality of induction. Diazepam or midazolam,
movements (Dugdale et al., 2005). Large dogs require
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, or another benzodiazepine may decrease
relatively less than small, while geriatric dogs have a
the dose of thiopental required by 15% or more, depend-
reduced anaesthetic requirement. A lower total dose of
 ing on the physical status of the dog. Potent opioids such
5-6 mg/kg of thiopental may be sufficient in dogs with a
as fentanyl, sufentanil, or alfentanil will also substantially
moderate degree of preanaesthetic sedation from a com-
decrease the dose of thiopental required for tracheal intu-
bination of sedative and opioid, such as acepromazine
bation. Prior or concurrent administration of atropine or
and morphine, methadone, or hydromorphone. The dose
glycopyrrolate may be needed to counter bradycardia
A aq lm uonpu ig paan leuaon jo
induced by the opioid. Lidocaine, 1-2 mg/kg, IV can also
decreased to 1-3 mg/kg in dogs that are heavily sedated,
be administered before thiopental to decrease the dose.
for example with medetomidine or dexmedetomidine and
 Return to consciousness after thiopental anaesthesia is
butorphanol, or tiletamine-zolazepam. Preanaesthetic
due to decreased blood concentration from redistribution
432
Table 15.7 Some examples of drug combinations for anaesthesia with injectable agents*
Premedication
Dose rate (mg/kg)
Induction#
Dose rate (mg/kg IV)
Acepromazine
0.02-0.03 (large dog) IM
Thicpental
12
0.03-0.1 (small dog) IM
Acepromazine +
0.020.05 IM
Thiopental
6-10
Butorphanol
0.3-0.4 IM
or Meperidine
 3-5 IM 
Acepromazine +
0.020.05 IM
Thiopental
4-6
 Morphine 
0.2-0.5 IM
 or Hydromorphone
0.05-0.10 IM
or Oxymorphone
WI OL'0-50'0
 or Methadone
0.10.5 IM
Medetomidine
0.02 IM
Thiopental
1-3
None
 Propofol
8-9
Acepromazine
0.02-0.05 IM
 Propofol
2-4
 or Midazolam +
0.2 IM
Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 IM
 or Hydromorphone
0.05-0.20 IM
or Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02 IM
 Medetomidine
0.01-0.02 IM
 Propofol
1-2
or Dexmedetomidine +
0.003-0.01 IM
 Butorphanol 
0.2 IM 
 or Hydromorphone
0.05 IM
 Fentanyl
0.005 IV
 Propofol
1
Diazepam
0.2 IV
None
Alfaxalone
2-4
Or
Acepromazine +
0.02 IV
Hydromorphone
0.05 IV
 or Methadone
0.2 IM 
Medetomidine +
0.004 IM
 Alfaxalone
0.5-1.5
 Butorphanol
0.1-0.2 IM 
None
Diazepam (5 mg/mL)
0.25
Ketamine (100 mg/mL)
5.0
(1 mL/10 kg using a 50 : 50 mixture)
 Sedative and/or opicid
Diazepam (5 mg/mL)
0.25
Ketamine (100 mg/mL)
5.0
(1 mL/10 kg using a 50 : 50 mixture) Inject half first,
titrate remainder to effect
 Xylazine
1.0 IM, IV
Ketamine
10 IM, IV
Medetomidine
0.010.04 IM
Ketamine
25 IM, IV
 or Dexmedetomidine
0.003-0.015 IM
± Opicid 
Tiletamine
 2-5 IM, IV
Zolazepam
Butorphanol
0.20.3 IM, IV
Diazepam
0.2-0.25
or Buprenorphine
0.01 IM, IV
Etomidate
1.5 (small dog)
 or Hydromorphone
0.050.10 IM, IV
 0.5-1.0 (medium to large dog) Up to total 3
None
Fentanylt
010'0-500'0
Diazepam 
0.25
or Midazolam
0.25
*These are only examples as dose rates should be modified appropriately for the breed, the individual, and concurrent disease. Other
premedication agents can be used. An anticholinergic drug may be included if appropriate.
#Diazepam or midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg, can be injected IV before thiopental or propofol and willfurther decrease their dose rates.
Generally reserved for old dogs or dogs with moderate to severe cardiac disease or compromise.
For induction of depressed and ill dogs. These drugs are administered in increments alternately starting with fentanyl.
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
of the drug into well-perfused organs and muscle. A
Methohexital
smoother recovery from thiopental is achieved by ensuring
Although recovery from a single bolus of methohexital is
some degree of sedation from other agents. Thiopental is
very slowly metabolized in dogs such that 24% of the
due mainly to redistribution to the muscles and body fat,
the drug is rapidly eliminated from the body by metabo-
injected dose is still present in the body after 24 hours.
uaaa woy Aoinb iaaonau sop ieu os uonaixa pue us
This characteristic has a number of consequences. Admin-
large doses. It is advisable to use sedative premedication
istration of multiple doses of thiopental to prolong anaes-
to smooth induction and recovery because both periods
thesia over 20-30 minutes will result in an unacceptably
prolonged recovery, except when very small doses of thio-
may otherwise be violent. Doses of 4-6 mg/kg IV in a 1%
or 2% solution are suitable for the induction of anaesthe-
pental are required because of heavy preanaesthetic seda-
tion. Recovery time can be shortened when antagonists
sia in dogs premedicated with acepromazine. Further
 small increments given as required may be used to prolong
can reverse premedicant drugs. Recovery is sufficiently pro-
anaesthesia or anaesthesia may be maintained with an
longed and accompanied by decreased muscle tone that
 inhalant agent The method of injection is similar to that
maintenance of a patent airway can initially be a problem
of thiopental, although a slightly slower rate of initial
for brachycephalic dogs. Use of a different IV anaesthetic
 injection is less likely to result in apnoea. Overdose pro-
agent produces better results in these breeds. Dogs that are
duces severe respiratory depression, and even anaesthetic
thin or lean or are one of the breeds that constitute 'sight-
hounds', such as Borzois, Afghans, Greyhounds,
doses produce more respiratory depression than equipo-
have
tent doses of thiopental. Depression of cardiac output
trouble redistributing thiopental because they have no fat
with low anaesthetic doses is also greater than after equi-
and may have little muscle. Blood concentrations remain
potent doses ofthiopental (Clarke & Hall, 1975). Cumula-
high for longer, the dogs are slower to regain conscious-
ness and are slow and ataxic to stand. Furthermore, Grey-
tion and, therefore, delayed recovery occurs in doses in
hounds may be deficient in the enzymes required for
excess of 10-12 mg/kg.
detoxification of thiopental.
 Because recovery is so rapid and complete, methohexital
has been most useful for outpatient anaesthesia and
npu ae sop go uoodoid e un sino eaoud
 of anaesthesia due to depression of the respiratory centres.
induction of anaesthesia in brachycephalic dogs, thin
Only when the PaCO2 accumulates to a higher concentra-
dogs, and for caesarian section. In current practice, metho-
hexital has been replaced by propofol which provides a
tion will spontaneous breathing be stimulated. After a
rapid recovery without the excitement that can occur with
few breaths the PaCO2 decreases below the new set point
and breathing ceases. Thus an uneven pattern of breathing
methohexital.
may be observed as the dog takes a few breaths and then
pauses, and the cycle repeats. Only when the blood thio-
Pentobarbital
pental concentration decreases, and respiratory depression
is less, will spontaneous breathing become regular. Irregu-
the early 1930s revolutionized anaesthetic techniques. It
lar heart rhythm from occasional premature ventricular
 is no longer used for anaesthesia in clinical practice but
complexes (PVCs) may be detected within the first 10
may be used in experimental projects.
minutes of administration. Treatment for these is rarely
The approximate dose rate in healthy unpremedicated
needed. However, thiopental sensitizes the myocardium
dogs is 30 mg/kg and this will be reduced by premedica-
to catecholamines for several hours so that abnormal
tion. About one-half to two-thirds of the calculated prob-
ventricular rhythm may develop during hypercarbia.
able dose is injected rapidly IV in order to ensure that the
hypoxaemia, light anaesthesia, or halothane anaesthesia.
dog passes quickly through the excitement phase of induc-
A different injectable anaesthetic agent may be a better
tion of anaesthesia. Because the onset of action of pento-
choice for dogs with myocardial ischaemia or contusions.
barbital is much slower than that of thiopental, the
Thiopental decreases myocardial contractility and veno-
remainder of the dose is administered in increments over
dilation decreases venous return to the heart resulting in
3-5 minutes until the desired effect is reached. Loss of the
a decrease in cardiac output The heart rate may increase
pedal reflex indicates a sufficient depth of anaesthesia for
in order to maintain arterial pressure within a normal
surgery.
range.
When used to control seizures in a patient with neuro-
A striking advantage to use of thiopental for induction
logical disease, pentobarbital must be given over several
of anaesthesia is that depth of inhalation anaesthesia
minutes in small increments to avoid overdosage, as the
tends to be more even and easy to regulate compared with
By/su f se mol se aq Ae sjuanied asaui u asop 
a ketamine or propofol induction, presumably due to a
slower decrease in plasma concentration of injectable
 agent Thiopental decreases intracranial pressure (ICP), as
Ketamine
does propofol and etomidate, and may be a suitable
The dose of ketamine that produces anaesthesia in dogs
choice for use in some neurological patients.
produces excessive muscle tone and spontaneous muscle
434
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
activity and is near to that which causes convulsions. Thus,
Or anaesthesia or induction to isoflurane anaesthesia.
ketamine cannot be recommended as a sole agent for
An experimental investigation found that morphine,
canine anaesthesia. It can be used in combination with
0.2 mg/kg. medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg (20 μg/kg). and
various sedative agents to induce anaesthesia for short-
ketamine, 5 mg/kg, mixed in the same syringe and admin-
term procedures or for induction followed by mainte-
istered IM produced good to excellent short-term sedation
nance of anaesthesia with an inhalation agent. Unless
and mild to moderate analgesia that was judged to be suit-
specifically contraindicated, an anticholinergic can be
 able for minor medical and surgical procedures (Ueyema
administered for premedication to reduce salivation
et al., 2008). Tracheal intubation was possible in only half
induced by ketamine.
 of the dogs but the dogs were unresponsive to toe or tail
A common combination used for induction of anaes-
clamps from 20 minutes after administration to approxi-
thesia is diazepam, 0.25 mg/kg. and ketamine, 5 mg/kg.
mately 50 minutes. Cardiovascular changes measured
given IV at the same time [equivalent to combining
included high MAP at 10 minutes after drug administration
 5 mg/mL of diazepam and 100 mg/mL of ketamine in the
followed by a decrease, sinus bradycardia and a 45%
same syringe as a 50:50 mixture and dosing at a rate of
decrease in CO for 60 minutes. Injection of atipamezole,
1 mL of the mixture per 10 kg of body weight) (see Table
0.1 mg/kg, IM at 60 minutes resulted in return to sternal
15.7). Midazolam, 0.25 mg/kg. can be substituted for the
recumbency within a few minutes.A higher dose of
diazepam but the degree of sedation induced is not as
medetomidine 1000 μg/m², IM followed 10-15 minutes
great Premedication may also include a sedative, opioid,
later by ketamine, 3-4 mg/kg. IV produced anaesthesia
Or any combination of these, such as acepromazine, 0.02-
for 54 ± 31 minutes (mean ± SD) (Hellebrekers & Sap.
0.05 mg/kg, with butorphanol, 0.3-0.4 mg/kg. IM/SC or
1997: Hellebrekers et al., 1998). Some recoveries from
acepromazine with hydromorphone, 0.1 mg/kg. IM/SC.
medetomidine-ketamine anaesthesia were associated with
In which case approximately one-half of the calculated
 restlessness and hyperactivity. Premedication with a lower
volume of ketamine-diazepam mixture is administered
dose of medetomidine, 0.01 mg/kg ( 10 μg/kg), IM prior to
rapidly initially and the remainder administered in incre-
induction of anaesthesia with ketamine, 4 mg/kg. IV
ments as needed. The onset of action is much slower than
allowed rapid intubation but was accompanied by apnoea
thiopental or propofol and the signs of anaesthesia differ.
in 50% ofthe dogs (Ko et al., 200la). Although bradycardia
The eyelids may be wide open and a brisk palpebral reflex
<60 beats/minute was present in most dogs, inclusion of
should be present. If the dog shakes its head, then more
atropine was associated with more and varying types of
ketamine is required. Strong jaw tone and a swallowing
 arrhythmias and, therefore, not recommended.
reflex are normal and are frequently present for endotra-
Dexmedetomidine 0.003-0.005 mg/kg (3-5 μg/kg),
cheal intubation.
IM/IV with a low to moderate dose of an opioid is a useful
Injection of ketamine, 10 mg/kg, IV to healthy dogs.
premedication for induction ofanaesthesia with ketamine-
with or without diazepam, results in increased HR, MAP.
diazepam before inhalation anaesthesia. A higher dose
CO, and systemic vascular resistance [Haskins et al., 1985,
rate of dexmedetomidine, 0.015 mg/kg (15 μg/kg). with
1986). These positive haemodynamic effects associated
ketamine, 3 mg/kg. and either butorphanol, buprenor-
with the use of ketamine are attributed to its sympatho-
 phine, or hydromorphone, combined in the same syringe
mimetic activity involving
inhibition of neuronal
and injected IM was evaluated for anaesthesia for castra-
uptake of catecholamines by sympathetic nerve endings
tion in 30 dogs (Barletta et al., 201l). The dogs assumed
(Tsuneyoshi et al., 2004). It must be remembered that
lateral recumbency in 4-6 minutes after administration
these effects may be altered by the presence of hypovolae-
and tracheal intubation was accomplished in all but one
mia or myocardial ischaemia.
dog. Measurements in the frst 15 minutes after drug
The cardiovascular effects of combinations of ketamine
administration revealed that the dogs were moderately to
with an O2-sedative tend to be dominated by the effects of
severely hypoventilating despite RR within an acceptable
the sedative. Xylazine and ketamine used to be popular for
range and 16/30 dogs were hypoxaemic and required O2
short-term anaesthesia. Xylazine, 1 mg/kg, and ketamine,
administration. The time from IM injection to skin inci-
10 mg/kg. with atropine, were administered IV or IM,
sion was 20 minutes. Anaesthesia was sufficient for surgery
however, the combination is associated with an undesir-
in most dogs but isoflurane at a low vaporizer seting of
able incidence of hypoxaemia, occasional respiratory
0.5-1% was supplied to eight dogs at some point during
 arrest, tachycardia, hypertension, increased left atrial pres-
surgery.
sure, decreased myocardial contractility. and a 36%
decrease in CO (Kolata & Rawlings. 1982). The drugs
Tiletamine-zolazepam
should be injected in increments because xylazine and
ketamine injected rapidly IV cause abrupt severe hypoten-
Tiletamine is available in a premixed combination with
sion of 30-90 seconds duration.
zolazepam, a benzodiazepine under the trade names
 Different dose rates of medetomidine have been paired
of Telazol and Zoletil. The drug preparation consists of
with ketamine, 3-5 mg/kg. to induce heavy sedation
jo su osz] wuedazeloz-aua paziudokl jo su oos
435
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
tiletamine and 250 mg of zolazepam) that is reconstituted
is less with slow injection. The time of onset of action of
with sterile water. The doses reported are the sum of tileta-
 propofol is about 15 seconds after injection. Cyanosis of
mine and zolazepam doses so that 4 mg/kg of Telazol is
the tongue, due to respiratory depression and an initial
equivalent to 2 mg/kg of tiletamine and 2 mg/kg of
 decrease in blood pressure, may be noticed. Tracheal intu-
zolazepam. Tiletamine-zolazepam, 4 mg/kg. IM with an
bation, administration of O2 and two to three artificial
anticholinergic provides effective sedation for aggressive
ventilations may be necessary to restore pink mucous
 or dangerous dogs. Sedation is profound but ranges from
 membranes. Administration of Oz by facemask before and
the dog being just capable of walking to the dog that is
during  propofol  administration  (preoxygenation)
to
almost unconscious and ready for tracheal intubation.
pue sueag un Aejned aqesiape si sisouei juaaand
Onset of sedation may be within minutes or up to 10
 sick dogs. Injection of propofol IV may be painful and
 minutes. The dog should be kept under observation after
 dogs may vocalize or pull back on their legs. A clinical
injection in case immediate care is needed to treat apnoea
impression is that this effect is seen more frequently when
gsn uoisod e panss sy 1eui op e ao on 1o
the catheter has been in place for several hours. No treat-
upper airway obstruction. An alternative technique is to
 ment is necessary when sufficient propofol has been given
provide premedication with other drugs and to use lower
to induce anaesthesia. When the response is observed at
doses of tiletamine-zolazepam IV to achieve tracheal intu-
the beginning of injection, options are to flush the cath-
bation prior to inhalation anaesthesia. Restlessness may
eter, inject lidocaine, 0.5 mg/kg. into the catheter and
be observed during recovery due to slow metabolism of
leave it for 30 seconds before injecting propofol, or to
tiletamine and the dog may be calmed by administration
inject the propofol into fast flowing IV fluids to achieve
of diazepam.
dilution. Muscle relaxation is obvious during the onset of
Administration of tiletamine-zolazepam results in a
 anaesthesia and the eyes begin to roll rostroventrally when
dose-dependent duration of anaesthesia, with 6.6 mg/kg
jaw relaxation is usually suffcient for endotracheal intuba-
 IV resulting in an average of 17.5 minutes to arousal and
tion. Twitching of the muzzle, ears, and legs may be
62.3 minutes to sternal recumbency (Hellyer et al., 1989).
observed in some dogs after administration of propofol
A bolus injection IV results in transient decreased myocar-
and lasts about l0 minutes. The twitches are not associated
dial contractility and hypotension at l minute followed
with an inadequate depth of anaesthesia and no attempt
by increases in HR, MAP, and CO.
should be made to deepen anaesthesia specifically to treat
the twitches as they will disappear in time It is important
Propofol
to palpate a peripheral pulse during or soon after induc-
tion of anaesthesia to assess both pressure and rhythm of
Propofol, in a white emulsion of glycerol, soybean oil, and
the pulse. Occasionally, abnormal cardiac rhythms devel-
egg lecithin, is commonly used in dogs. The carrier vehicle
oping within a minute of propofol administration are life
supports bacterial growth and once a bottle is opened the
threatening. Propofol can be used for induction of anaes-
contents may only be used for a maximum of 6 hours
thesia followed by maintenance with an inhalation agent
before unused drug is discarded. Strict precautions must
or used for total intravenous anaesthesia (see later).
 be taken to avoid contamination when drawing the drug
into a syringe and when using that syringe for top-up
 Or ketamine is that elimination is more rapid and recovery
dosing during anaesthesia. PropoFlo 28 is a preparation
is quick (Quandt et al., 1998). Changes in cardiovascular
containing benzyl alcohol that extends the shelf life of an
 parameters are minimal when propofol is administered to
opened bottle to 28 days. The dose for induction of anaes-
'uooalui jo paads pue asop anedandde ui ssop Auiieay
thesia in unpremedicated dogs is 6-8 mg/kg IV and pre-
It must be remembered that senior and geriatric dogs have
medication with acepromazine or an opioid decreases this
 a decreased requirement for propofol for induction of
to about 4 mg/kg (see Table 15.7). The dose rate of pro-
 anaesthesia, are more prone to apnoea, and recover more
 pofol will be further decreased by heavy preanaesthetic
slowly than young healthy dogs (Reid & Nolan, 1996).
sedation and particularly by inclusion of medetomidine
Hypovolaemia also decreases the requirement for propo-
or dexmedetomidine. Males may require slightly more
fol and failure to decrease the dose of propofol in these
dnug than females (Watkins et al., 1987). Suffcient pro-
patients will result in a serious immediate decrease in MAP
-xa Aea au ssed-aq oi Aleiu paalul aq is iogo
[llkiw et al., 1992).
tory stages of anaesthesia and that is usually about
 Propofol does not provide analgesia and so premedica-
one-third of the calculated dose with the remainder
tion with sedatives and opioids is recommended practice.
titrated slowly over 60 seconds until the desired effect is
 The agents used for premedication will modify the propo-
produced. Slow dnug administration is advisable for
fol dose requirement (see Table 15.7), the blood pressure.
several reasons: there is evidence that the cumulative
and the duration of recovery from anaesthesia. Systolic
administered dose is less when the drug is injected slowly:
blood pressure will be decreased by premedication with
acepromazine since acepromazine itself decreases systemic
 decrease in blood pressure; and the incidence of apnoea
vascular resistance (Smith et al., 1993). The 02-sedatives
436
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
dose-dependently markedly decrease the dose rate of pro-
1999). This mixture of propofol and thiopental does not
pofol, cause bradycardia and sustain blood
pressure.
 support organism growth and maintains bactericidal
Medetomidine, 0.02-0.04 mg/kg [20-40 μg/kg), decreases
 properties similar to those of thiopental alone (Crowther
the induction dose of propofol to 2-4 mg/kg (Vanio.
et al., 1996; Joubert et al., 2005). Mixtures of propofol
199l; Hall et al., 1997: Hellebrekers et al., 1998). Romif-
and thiopental at a ratio less than l:l do not maintain
dine premedication dose-dependently decreased the pro-
bactericidal properties.
pofol dose to 1.8-2.5 mg/kg (England et al., 1996),
Propofol may be a good choice for induction of anaes-
Propofol-ketamine('ketofol")
thesia in dogs with seizures, meningitis, brain tumours, or
The addition of ketamine to propofol, 'ketofol', has been
spinal cord disease as it decreases intracranial pressure.
proposed as a means to add some cardiovascular stimula-
A probable link has been established between the use
 tion and analgesia to propofol anaesthesia. A comparison
of propofol and isolated spontaneous cases of pancreatitis
of induction of anaesthesia with propofol, 4 mg/kg. or
in people after anaesthesia (Crawford et al., 2009). The
with propofol, 2 mg/kg, and ketamine, 2 mg/kg. in dogs
cause has not been confirmed because of the infrequent
premedicated with acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg, and mepe-
Occurrence and variety of concurrent medications and ill-
ridine (pethidine), 3 mg/kg, and subsequently maintained
nesses. An association between hypertriglyceridaemia and
with halothane and NzO revealed no significant differ-
naturally occurring pancreatitis exists in dogs, although it
ences between the two protocols (Lerche et al., 2000).
is not known if the hypertriglyceridaemia is a cause of the
 Apnoea after induction was more common in dogs receiv-
 pancreatitis or an incidental finding (Xenoulis & Steiner,
ing both propofol and ketamine, heart rates were higher,
2010). There are no reports at this time incriminating pro-
but systolic blood pressures were not different.
 pofol in the development of postoperative pancreatitis in
dogs but it is conceivable that administration of a high
Fospropofo!
 dose of propofol might contribute to conditions resulting
Fospropofol is a phosphate pro-dnug for propofol that is
in pancreatitis in a dog already at risk. Some clinicians
converted to propofol within a few minutes after IV injec-
avoid the use of propofol in dogs with pancreatitis as a
tion. Consequently, induction and recovery are slower
precautionary measure.
than from propofol. Fospropofol is being investigated for
There have been verbal reports of individual dogs devel 
possible uses.
oping allergic reactions following administration of pro-
pofol. It is currently unknown whether dogs with allergies
are at increased risk from propofol administration. There
Etomidate
are isolated reports of hypersensitivity reactions 
to
Etomidate is a clear solution that is water soluble at an
propofol in humans that include generalized erythema,
acid pH and lipid soluble at physiological pH. Return to
uticaria, pruritus, bronchospasm, hypoxaemia, and hypo-
 consciousness from etomidate is due to redistribution of
tension (Belso et al., 20ll; Berasategui, 20ll; Murphy
the drug from brain to tissue. Etomidate is rapidly trans-
et al., 20lla). These reactions have been attributed to pro-
formed and results in little hangover or cumulative effect.
 pofol itself, but may be responses to the metabisulfite, egg
It is hydrolysed by hepatic enzymes and the clearance rate
 Or soybean phosphatides, or egg lecithin content in the
is five times that of thiopental with a recovery time that is
propofol formulation (Berasategui, 20ll). The package
similar to propofol. Etomidate is used only as a single
information in some countries lists a history of allergy to
 anaesthetizing injection prior to maintenance of anaesthe-
egg and soy as a contraindication to the administration of
sia with an inhalant agent because a higher dose of the
 propofol. Currently expressed opinions are that there is no
 agent causes adrenal suppression. The major advantage to
contraindication to use of propofol in egg-allergic or soy-
use of etomidate is that it causes no cardiovascular depres-
allergic human patients without a history of anaphylaxis
 sion and that makes it a good induction drug for dogs with
(Dewachter et al., 201l; Murphy et al., 201la). A patient 
 severe cardiac disease, circulatory depression, or old age.
that develops an allergic reaction to propofol may also be
Etomidate also decreases intracranial pressure.
allergic to other anaesthetic agents.
Administration of etomidate is similar to that of thio-
 pental. Onset of action is approximately 15 seconds, there-
fore up to half of the estimated anaesthetizing dose is
Propofol-thiopenta!
 injected fairly quickly (5-10 seconds) and the remainder
An increase in postsurgical infections has been reported in 
is titrated in increments injected in 10-second intervals.
human and veterinary patients associated with the use of
 Overdose is obviously undesirable but administration of
propofol (Heldmann et al., 1999). Combining 1% propo-
 etomidate too slowly may result in difficulty achieving
fol and 2.5% thiopental at a ratio of 1: 1 for induction of
 adequate depth of anaesthesia for tracheal intubation. Pre-
anaesthesia (mean 2.7 mg/kg propofol and 6.8 mg/kg
 medication with at least an opioid is essential and injec-
in unpremedicated dogs) achieved a higher MAP than
tion of diazepam or similar agent before etomidate results
during propofol alone and a similar recovery (Ko et al.
in a smooth induction of anaesthesia.Etomidate is
437
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
available in a preparation that contains propylene glycol
Alfaxalone
and, although no evidence of haemolysis has been noted
when using these recommended dose rates, some clini-
The original formulation of alphaxalone and alphadolone
in Cremophor EL caused massive histamine release in
cians prefer to inject etomidate into a continuous flow of
dogs. Alphaxalone (alfaxalone) has now been reformu-
crystalloid fluid to achieve dilution of the dnug. Etomidate
is similar to propofol in that in a few dogs twitching of
-xopy-z u uos (a/m] %I 1ea e se pae
the ears, eyebrows, muzzle, or legs may be observed after
β-cyclodextrin (HPCD). The HPCD increases the solubility
of alfaxalone and the formulation no longer causes his-
induction of anaesthesia. No treatment is necessary as the
muscle contractions will abate after about l0 minutes.
tamine release. The solution is not irritating to tissues in
event of accidental perivascular injection. The recom-
Also similar to propofol, some dogs may exhibit signs of
 pain on injection of etomidate.
mended dose rate for use with minimal sedation is
2-3 mg/kg, although less will be required to induce anaes-
The dose rates required for etomidate vary according to
thesia in dogs with moderate to heavy sedation (see Table
the size of the dog, with higher doses, 1.5 mg/kg, needed
15.7). Alfaxalone is injected in increments over 60 seconds
for small dogs and smaller doses, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, for large
dogs. Premedication IM may be with any opioid, for
and dilution of the dnug allows more precise titration
and less total drug administered (Maddern et al., 2010:
example, butorphanol, buprenorphine, hydromorphone,
Psatha et al., 20ll). Induction of anaesthesia is generally
Or oxymorphone, with or without midazolam. Similarly
good to excellent. Apnoea will occur occasionally after
IV premedication with an opioid can be followed by injec-
injection of alfaxalone and twitching may be observed.
tion of diazepam or midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg. and etomi-
date. This author has the clinical impression that dogs
An investigation of alfaxalone administered alone to
experimental dogs as a bolus injection, 2 mg/kg, pro-
with patent ductus arteriosus or portosystemic shunts that
characteristically have low blood pressure during isoflu-
duced no change in CO or systemic vascular resistance
rane or sevoflurane anaesthesia have better pressure and
(Muir et al., 2008). The duration of anaesthesia was 10
circulatory characteristics when anaesthesia has been
minutes and the dogs assumed sternal position on
induced with etomidate compared with the other inject-
 average 20 minutes after injection. Cardiovascular status
able anaesthetic agents. Etomidate is the induction drug
was also well maintained at purposefully higher dose
of 6 mg/kg in these healthy dogs. Other studies investigat-
of choice for dogs requiring anaesthesia for pacemaker
ing induction of anaesthesia with alfaxalone in dogs
implantation.
The significance of adrenal suppression caused by a
without premedication reported either a similar dose,
single induction dose of etomidate in patients with sepsis
mean 2.6 mg/kg (Maney et al., 2013), or larger, mean
4.2 mg/kg. (Rodriguez et al., 2012). Time to extubation
is in dispute. A retrospective study of human patients in
severe sepsis and septic shock found that use of etomidate
was a mean of ll minutes with the lower dose and
did not contribute to mortality and supported the safety
25 minutes with the higher dose Alfaxalone administra-
tion increased HR and CO with no change in MAP
of use of etomidate in these patients (Ehrman et al., 2011).
Another search of literature bases identified seven studies
and some dogs developed hypoxaemia (Rodriguez
that evaluated clinical endpoints in septic adult humans
et al., 2012). Premedication will alter the cardiovascular
receiving etomidate for induction of anaesthesia, discov-
response to alfaxalone, for example, in experimental dogs
ered that the conclusions were conflicting and thus no
given acepromazine 0.02 mg/kg. and hydromorphone,
0.05 mg/kg, IV before alfaxalone, 2 mg/kg, the average
frm consensus could be made (Edwin & walker, 20l0).
However, a meta-analysis published in 20ll concluded
MAP was acceptable but too low in some individuals
[Ambros et al., 2
2008).
 Hypoventilation  may occur
that there is an increased mortality in critically ill patients
depending on the combination of dnugs used.
who receive etomidate (Albert et al., 20ll). It has been
reported that a single bolus of etomidate in humans
induces adrenal inhibition for 48 hours, thus empirical
Sedative-opioid combinations
use of steroid supplementation has been recommended
(Vinclair et al., 2008). Relative adrenal insuffciency has
Some combinations are suffciently potent to induce
been identified in some septic dogs and may be associated
anaesthesia that is adequate for endotracheal intubation.
with hypotension (Burkitt et al., 2007). The concern is
Combinations of medetomidine or dexmedetomidine
that use of etomidate in an anaesthetic protocol for a
with an opioid, with or without a benzodiazepine, will
septic dog will exacerbate the deficiency and adversely
immobilize a healthy dog and a combination of a μ opioid
impact mortality rate and, therefore, should not be
with a benzodiazepine may be suffcient in an old or
used in these patients. New etomidate products, such as
sick dog. The dogs may initially be responsive to noise
methoxycarbonyl-etomidate (MOC-etomidate) and car-
and sudden movements, and endotracheal intubation
boetomidate, cause significantly
yless adrenocortical
should be performed quietly and gently followed by
depression and are currently being investigated (Sneyd &
administration of suffcient inhalation agent to deepen
Rigby-Jones, 2010).
anaesthesia.
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
(Dex)medetomidine and an opioid
0.05 mg/kg. and diazepam 0.1 mg/kg are injected in
 sequence flushing between drugs. These dose rates are
Administration of high doses of medetomidine or dexme-
repeated after 30 seconds. Further administration of oxy-
detomidine IM with an opioid, such as butorphanol,
morphone will depend on the patient's response. As
0. 1-0.2 mg/kg, or morphine, 0.2-0.5 mg/kg, or hydromor-
phone, 0.05 mg/kg. or methadone, 0.3 mg/kg. to healthy
described in the previous section, dogs under sedative-
dogs may induce heavy sedation or even unresponsiveness 
 Opioid sedation are sensitive to noise or handling. After
that allows endotracheal intubation. When followed by
tracheal intubation, the dog must be allowed to breathe
administration of an inhalation anaesthetic agent, the
inhalant for several minutes before being disturbed and
vaporizer setting is very low initially, for example 0.5%
moved into a different position.
isoflurane. MAP is usually normal to high and associated
with bradycardia. Monitoring with an ECG is advisable as
Induction of anaesthesia
advanced AV heart block can develop, albeit a rare occur-
rence. SpO2 should be monitored in recovery after discon-
The aims for induction are for the patient to lose con-
nection from the anaesthesia machine as this combination
sciousness with minimal stress, to acquire suffcient jaw
 i ai    e 
relaxation for endotracheal intubation (if planned), and
tion, resulting in hypoxia when breathing room air.
to avoid an excessive depth of anaesthesia or cardiovascu-
lar depression. Avoidance of complications is key and
Fentany! and diazepam or midazolam
juase ypea 't'si xog ui uani aie suonepuauuosai auos
has its own characteristics and the previous sections are
This combination is used for sick dogs where the anaes-
 intended to provide suggestions to obtain the best induc-
thetic requirement is likely decreased and where there is a
tion of anaesthesia. Relative anaesthetic overdose, that is,
high risk for cardiovascular depression during anaesthesia.
The dose rates are fentanyl, 5-10 μg/kg, and diazepam or
excessive anaesthetic response to average dose rates, may
occur in some patients:
midazolam, 0.25 mg/kg. and the dnugs are drawn into
separate syringes. The environment should be quiet and
1. Failure to adjust and decrease dose rate of
all movements slow. Benzodiazepines may induce CNS
Aaeaq yim suaed ui suaae uonpui sauisaeue
stimulation if given alone, consequently, the first dnug to
preanaesthetic sedation, especially those that have 
be administered is fentanyl, 2 μg/kg, followed soon after
received medetomidine, dexmedetomidine, or
by diazepam, 0.1 mg/kg. After about 20 seconds, fentanyl
tiletamine-zolazepam
2 μg/kg and diazepam, 0.1 mg/kg, are injected, and after
2.
.Patients with underlying disease that decreases the
20-30 seconds the depth of sedation is assessed by
requirement for anaesthetic agents, or decreases the
gently attempting to open the jaws. Additional fentanyl,
1-2 μg/kg, up to 10 μg/kg is injected as needed (total
fentanyl dose of 6 μg/kg is often sufficient). Some dogs
can be intubated while others will require a very small
Box 15.4 Tips for a safe induction
dose of injectable anaesthetic agent or inhalation agent
of anaesthesia
administered through a mask before endotracheal intuba-
tion. The dog should not be disturbed until anaesthesia is
Dehydrated patients should first receive IV fluids to
deepened because it will be easily aroused. The duration
restore blood volume
of fentanyl is short, about 20 minutes, and therefore either
 Check membranes for hypoxaemia or with a pulse
more fentanyl must be administered or a different μ
oximeter before induction, especially brachycephalic,
opioid with a longer duration of action administered IM
old, obese, traumatized, respiratory disease
or IV. Fentanyl may be supplemented by bolus injections 
Administer Oz for 2-3 minutes before and during
of fentanyl, 2 μg/kg, at 20-minute intervals or by using a
induction to patients at risk for hypoxaemia or
continuous infusion of 6 μg/kg/h.
hypotension
Fentanyl, 4 μg/kg. and midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg. can be
Calculate IV anaesthetic agent doses based on ideal
administered IM for premedication to induce light seda-
weight if overweight, not actual weight
tion. Induction of anaesthesia can be as just described or
Assess degree of preanaesthetic sedation, mild,
with an injectable anaesthetic agent.
moderate, severe, and adjust anticipated induction
dose
Oxymorphone and diazepam or midazolam
Titrate anaesthetic agents to individual requirement
Oxymorphone with a benzodiazepine can induce heavy
Palpate femoral pulse during or immediately after
sedation in an old dog or one with a reduced requirement
injecting anaesthetic agent
for anaesthetic agents. Oxymorphone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg.
Hold dogs at risk for regurgitation sternal or upright on
and diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg. are drawn into separate
hind limbs until trachea is intubated and cuff inflated 
syringes. Through a preplaced IV catheter, oxymorphone
439
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
ability of the cardiovascular system to compensate
legs during administration of anaesthetic agents and until
for anaesthetic-induced depression. Injection of the
the endotracheal tube has been inserted, tied in and the
'usual' dose into patients with hypovolaemia results
cuff inflated. If fluid has been seen in a radiograph of a
in high blood concentration of anaesthetic.
dog with megaoesophagus, consideration should be given
Hypovolemia must be suspected in patients that
to careful passage of a tube to remove the fluid once the
have had no access to water for several hours, or are
dog has been connected to the anaesthesia machine and
likely to be dehydrated (e.g. gastric dilation-volvulus
 a frst set of monitored parameters recorded
(GDV), intestinal foreign body with vomiting or
decreased water intake), or have suffered blood loss
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TlvA)
(eg gastric ulcer, ruptured spleen, fractured
humerus, pelvis, or femur). Senior patients have
Anaesthesia may be maintained by intermittent or con-
decreased circulating blood volumes compared with
tinuous infusion of an injectable anaesthetic agent Deci-
young adults, and decreased baroreceptor
sion of which agent to use is largely determined by the
responsiveness
cumulative properties of the agent in that slow elimina-
 3. Healthy dogs with an intrinsic predisposition for a
tion will result in a prolonged recovery. Consequently.
low requirement for anaesthetic agents.
propofol is the injectable agent most commonly used for
TIVA. The dog should be premedicated with agents appro-
Hypoventilation before induction of anaesthesia may
priate to its condition and anaesthesia induced in the
result from heavy premedication, also from premedication
normal way with propofol. Propofol is administered con-
 in English Bulldogs and obese patients, in dogs with spinal
tinuously thereafter at 12-18 mg/kg/h (0.2-0.3 mg/kg/
cord trauma especially with 'big dog-little dog syndrome.
min). The simplest method is to use a syringe pump with
a syringe containing propofol sufficient for the estimated
mothorax, fractured ribs, or diaphragmatic rupture, and in
duration of anaesthesia. For short duration anaesthesia.
dogs with abdominal distension particularly GDV, preg-
small boluses of propofol can be injected by hand into
nancy, and ascites. These patients should be monitored
the IV catheter. Dilution of propofol in a 250 mL or
with a pulse oximeter and be supplied with oxygen during
500 mL bag of lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) can and
induction of anaesthesia.
has been done but tends to be a more expensive method
Airway obstruction is likely to occur at this time in
and control of administration is not precise unless the
brachycephalic breeds, and dogs with laryngeal paralysis,
administration set is run through an infusion pump. Pro-
oral/nasal tumours, or retro-orbital or pharyngeal abscess.
pofol without preservative is preferred for TIVA. Intuba-
Heavy sedation from premedication should be avoided.
tion of the trachea and administration of oxygen is
Retropharyngeal abscesses can make intubation extremely
advisable as some individuals will develop hypoxaemia
diffcult and anaesthesia should not be started without
when breathing air. Controlled ventilation will likely be
adequate personnel available to assist if needed. Endotra-
necessary for prolonged infusions. Joubert (2009),. in a
detailed review of published investigations of propofol
Diffculties sometimes occur and their recognition and
continuous infusions, concluded that most changes in
 management are described in the section on endotracheal
anaesthetic depth were likely to occur in the first hour of
intubation (see Table 15.6). Apnoea and cyanosis are
admministration. Analgesia must be supplied.
 common features of some anaesthetic agents at the time
An
experimental
investigation
has
characterized
of frst administration, particularly propofol, and the inci-
 alfaxalone TIVA. The dogs were premedicated with acepro-
dence may be decreased by slower administration of the
mazine, 0.02 mg/kg. and hydromorphone, 0.05 mg/kg. IV
and more than 30 minutes later, anaesthesia was induced
haemoglobin desaturation during induction and intuba-
with alfaxalone, 2 mg/kg. or propofol, 4 mg/kg. and
tion, and is especially advisable for brachycephalic, old,
maintained with alfaxalone, 4.2 mg/kg/h (0.07 mg/kg/
and sick dogs. Two points to remember are: (1) the tongue
min), or propofol, 15 mg/kg/h (0.25 mg/kg/min), respec-
and mucous membranes may remain pink in the first few
tively, for 2 hours [Ambros et al., 2008). The dogs were
minutes after cardiac arrest and (2) colour of mucous
intubated and received O2 via a circle circuit Induction
membranes in hypoxaemic dogs may not be blue but
was judged as smooth in all dogs. RR varied around 6-8
could be dull reddish to pinkish-bluish colour.
papiai sem uoeuaaoday juesyuis inq uu/sueang
Dogs at risk for regurgitation during induction of anaes-
in both groups of dogs. Cardiac output was adequately
thesia include animals that have not had food withheld
maintained and, although average MAP stayed above
before anaesthesia, emergency anaesthesias. pregnant
60 mmHg. some dogs were hypotensive. HR decreased
animals, nervous animals with gastrointestinal stasis, old
animals, patients with megaoesophagus, gastrointestinal
alfaxalone. The quality of recovery was similar between
foreign bodies, Or diaphragmatic hernia. These dogs
alfaxalone and propofol and, although not statistically
should be held sternal or upright standing on their hind
significant, recovery to sternal position was a little earlier
440
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
after alfaxalone, mean 43 (33-56) minutes compared with
discontinuation of anaesthesia to extubation was an
propofol, mean 52 (29-84) minutes.
average of 33 (range 18-80) minutes.
Propofol-fentanyl
INHALATION ANAESTHESIA
For some patients, such as those requiring cranial decom-
pression for cerebral swelling or intracranial haemorrhage
after head trauma or for craniotomy for tumour excision,
Many inhalation agents have been used for canine anaes-
the additional increase in intracranial pressure (ICP) pro-
thesia and currently isoflurane and sevoflurane are most
duced by inhalation agents may adversely affect the
commonly used. Nitrous oxide is used selectively in those
 success of the procedure TIVA can be employed in con-
hospitals that have the equipment for its administration.
junction with controlled ventilation to maintain normo-
Desflurane offers the fastest induction and recovery times
carbia in an attempt to avoid an increase in ICP
but is not widely used due to the high cost ofthe desflurane-
Maintenance of anaesthesia with continuous infusions of
specifc vaporizer. Halothane is no longer available in
fentanyl and propofol delivered by separate syringe drivers
some countries.
can be used in these patients. Glycopyrrolate for premedi-
Inhalation agents are the most commonly used anaes-
cation is optional but preferred by this author. HR may
thetic agents to maintain general anaesthesia in dogs, par-
 slow several hours into the procedure. Repeat dosing of
ticularly for anaesthesia lasting longer than 20-30 minutes.
an anticholinergic drug should be avoided if at all pos-
 Anaesthesia with inhalation agents in clinical patients is
sible during craniotomy because the increase in HR and
almost always preceded by administration of injectable
MAP usually causes unwanted bleeding at the operative
agents to induce heavy sedation or general anaesthesia.
site The dog should be premedicated with a μ opioid,
Inhalation agents are subsequently administered through
such as oxymorphone or hydromorphone anaesthesia
 an endotracheal tube to protect the patient against aspira-
induced with diazepam and propofol, and the trachea
tion of gastric or other fluids, prevent room pollution with
intubated and connected to an anaesthesia machine deliv-
 anaesthetic gases, and to facilitate use of low O2 flow thus
ering oxygen. Controlled ventilation is instituted at the
saving money. Induction of anaesthesia with an inhalant
beginning of anaesthesia to counter respiratory depression
via a mask has potential complications, as described later.
induced by propofol and the high dose of fentanyl. Pro-
 The anaesthesia machine must be checked before use as
pofol should be infused at 12-18 mg/kg/h (0.2-0.3 mg/
described in Chapter 10.
kg/min). initially at the higher dose and this can be
reduced after 1-2 hours in step-wise fashion. Fentanyl is
Inhalation agents
infused at 24-48 μg/kg/h, starting with the lowest dose
and increased if judged necessary. Intensive monitoring
 The average concentration of an inhalation agent required
using electronic equipment is recommended as warranted
for anaesthesia to prevent purposeful movement in
by the seriousness of the procedure and relative lack of
response to a noxious stimulus is expressed as the
access of the anaesthetist to the patient. Local anaesthetic
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), and for details
solution can be infiltrated at the proposed incision site.
 of MAC and inhalant properties see Chapter 7. The pub-
 Neuromuscular blockade is an option but not necessary
lished MAC values for inhalation agents in a given species
for most surgeries. At the end of the procedure, propofol
vary due to differences in the experimental design that
is discontinued but fentanyl is continued at a low dose,
include the method of determination and variations in
3 μg/kg/h, into recovery or another μ opioid administered
animal populations. Published MAC values for isoflurane
as needed. Both propofol and fentanyl are rapidly elimi-
in dogs range from 1.19% (Credie et al., 2010) to 1.7%
nated when used for short-term procedures, however,
(Kulka et al., 20l2) and for sevoflurane from l.75%
half-lives are increased when anaesthesia duration is 4
(Seddighi et al., 2012) to 2.39% (Yamashita et al., 2008).
hours or more and a longer recovery must be expected.
These measurements indicate that sevoflurane is less
Adequacy of ventilation and oxygenation must be moni-
potent than isoflurane and a higher concentration is
tored during recovery.
needed to maintain anaesthesia. MAC values reported for
Concurrent infusions of propofol and fentanyl can be
desflurane were 7.6 % (range 6.9-9.0%) (Pypendop &
Ikiw, 2006) and 10.3% (range 9.8-10.6%) (Hammond
report described a similar protocol for dogs scheduled for
et al., 1994). Unfortunately, the wide ranges in values
a variety of procedures from ovariohysterectomy to cranial
diminish the effectiveness of this measurement for moni-
cruciate repair (Andreoni & Hughes, 2009). The dogs
toring purposes in clinical patients. Furthermore, the
were premedicated with acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg. and
anaesthesia induced with propofol and maintained with
20% from the average MAC. Thus it is not surprising that
propofol, 12-24 mg/kg/h (0.2-0.4 mg/kg/min), and fen-
for the same anaesthetic protocol one dog may require a
tanyl, 30 μg/kg/h. Ventilation was controlled. Time from
higher concentration of inhalant than another. In humans,
441
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
a linear decrease in MAC has been documented from <l
1997). Heart rates increased during anaesthesia and with
to 82 years of age (Eger, 2001). All the inhalation agents
increasing depth of anaesthesia when compared with rates
have a common slope and a number of nomograms have
when the dogs were conscious (Picker et al., 200l). The
 been published to aid the anaesthetist in identifying the
 greatest increase in HR ocurred during desflurane anaes-
 appropriate MAC (anaesthetic concentration) for a patient
thesia and the least during halothane. The differences
of a given age [Nickalls & Mapleson, 2003). These nomo-
between the anaesthetic agents were determined to be due
grams also provide a calculation for the reduction in MAC
to differences in vagolytic action. Respiratory depression
provided by inclusion of 50% or 66% NzO. This informa-
tion cannot be extrapolated for use in dogs because MAC
Although respiratory arrest may occur before cardiac
values are different in the two species. Most MAC studies
 arrest, life-threatening hypotension may develop before a
in dogs are performed in young adults, however, clinical 
clinically significant decrease in respiratory rate is observed
experience supports a decrease in anaesthetic requirement
(Galloway et al., 2004; Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2006). Concur-
in old dogs. One study measuring MAC during isoflurane
rent administration of a μl agonist opioid potentiates res-
anaesthesia in 2-3-year-old and 1l-year-old Beagles iden-
piratory depression with inhalation agents.
tified a 20% reduction in MAC in the older dogs, from
1a1ea13 st a1a4L (000z '1e 1a uossnu3e) %7'I 0h %5'1
variation in human infants <l year but the general pattern
Sevoflurane and COz absorbent
1e yead e on Buiseanou! pue yuq ie mol Buieis Dvn S!
Sevoflurane reacts with some COz absorbents (see Chapter
3-6 months before progressively decreasing (Mapleson,
10) and generates several degradation products, of which
1996). One study in 1-month-old Beagles determined a
Compound A is reported to be nephrotoxic There has
mean MAC for sevoflurane as 2.1 ± 0.2%. a value that is
been concern that the concentration of Compound A may
in the middle ofthe range reported for adult dogs (Morgaz
increase in circle circuits using low Oz flows. In a clinical
et al., 2009). MAC determinations are done during admin-
trial of sevoflurane in dogs, no evidence of impaired renal
istration of the inhalation agent only and in clinical prac-
function was detected when the Oz inflow was maintained
tice it is a rare situation in which only one anaesthetic
at 500 mL/min (Branson et al., 200l). Concentrations of
agent is administered. Administration of sedative analge-
 Compound A measured in circle circuits administering
sic, Or anaesthetic drugs before or during anaesthesia
low-flow (<15 mL/kg/min) O2 and sevoflurane to dogs
decreases the amount of inhalant agent needed for anaes-
were substantially lower than concentrations reported to
thesia [Yamashita et al., 2008; Ko & Weil. 2009: Credie
cause renal toxicity in rats (Muir & Gadawski, 1998)
et al., 2010).
In rare situations, use of sevoflurane with dry CO2
Monitoring anaesthetic administration is part of safe
absorbent has resulted in spontaneous combustion and
practice It should be remembered that MAC values are
fire in the anaesthetic circuit. This might occur during use
measurements of end-tidal (alveolar) concentrations and
of absorbent that has been in the circuit canister and
that the inspired concentrations will be higher. The vapor-
unused for a while.
izer setting is the same as the inspired concentration for a
dog connected to a non-rebreathing circuit whereas an
 anaesthetic gas analyser is needed to measure inspired and
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
expired anaesthetic concentrations in a rebreathing circuit.
Dogs cannot be anaesthetized with NzO and O2 alone.
Comparison of these measurements with the MAC value
Nitrous oxide is used to provide analgesia either (1) as a
can be an aid to assessing depth of anaesthesia. Although
-dns e se (z) io juage uoneiequi iauioue ot juauaddns
the information may not be a reliable guide to how low
plement to injectable agents. A valuable use of NzO is to
the vaporizer can be decreased and still maintain anaes-
speed induction of anaesthesia with halothane by mask
thesia, it may prevent an absolute overdosage since it has
utilizing the 'second gas effect: Isoflurane and sevoflurane
 been documented that 1.7xMAC is associated with exces-
induce anaesthesia faster than with halothane such that
sive cardiovascular depression (Galloway et al., 2004;
the inclusion of NzO may not provide signifcant benefit
Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2006).
to speed of induction (Mutoh et al., 200l). During main-
tenance of anaesthesia, the addition of NzO may provide
Isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane, halothane
sufficient analgesia to block patient response to intermit-
tent intense surgical stimulation such as traction on
Increasing concentrations of isoflurane, sevoflurane, des-
ovaries, clamping of the spermatic cord, or the manipula-
flurane and halothane cause significant decreases in
tion of a long bone fracture. Several experimental studies
cardiac index, MAP, and mean pulmonary arterial pres-
have documented a decrease in halothane MAC by inclu-
sure, a significant increase in CVP, and a decrease or
sion of NzO. More recently, measurements in dogs anaes-
increase in HR (Hoffman et al., 199l; Hysing et al., 1992:
thetized for ovariohysterectomy with halothane, isoflurane
Picker et al., 2001). Changes in cardiovascular parameters
or sevoflurane revealed that adding 65% NzO decreased
are similar with isoflurane and sevoflurane (Mutoh et al.,
 the concentration of all the anaesthetic agents required for
442
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Surgical anaesthesia; the halothane concentration by
CO2 absorbent canisters impose resistance on small dogs
12.4%. isoflurane by 37.1%. and sevoflurane by 2l.4%
 and small diameter hoses do the same for large dogs: (2)
(Duke et al., 2006). In an experimental study in which
systems requiring high Oz flows are wasteful of inhalation
dogs received only sevoflurane, the addition of 70% NO
 e (e) pue uonod aseanui Aleuaiod pue juage
decreased the sevoflurane concentration required
to
uis sasn aeis peap seedde aaiel e ym
 u    q  
rebreathing of CO2 in small dogs. The different types of
prevent autonomic response to an electrical stimulus by
breathing systems are described in Chapter 10 and a wide
35%, but with a large variability in % reduction in indi-
variety of circuits with different sizes of hoses are available.
vidual dogs (Seddighi et al., 2012). In another study, the
 As previously stated, the resistance to breathing offered by
addition of 50% NO to desflurane decreased the require-
the COz absorbent and turbulence in large diameter hoses
ment for desflurane by 23% (Hammond et al., 1994). The
 intent behind the inclusion of NzO is that either analgesia
smallest size of animal that should be connected to a circle
is improved without increasing inhalant administration or
 circuit with large hoses (internal diameter 22 mm) is con-
that inhalant administration can be decreased while pro-
troversial. Paediatric hoses (internal diameter 15 mm)
viding the same depth of anaesthesia. An increase in MAP
may be substituted for dogs between 3 and 8 kg body-
may be observed in the latter case (Seddighi et al., 2012).
weight. An O2 flow of 1 L/min will facilitate flow of gases
The percentage of NzO in the inspired gases should be
around the circle. A much smaller circle is available for
 50-70% in order to provide the most analgesia. When the
dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, that weigh <2 kg (see Fig. 10.19
O2 and NzO flowmeters are set at flow ratios of 1: 1 or
Hallowell workstation). Scavenging of waste anaesthetic
1 : 2, a non-rebreathing system will deliver the desired gas
gases is essential. All equipment must undergo a safety
mixture. In contrast, use of a low fresh gas flow into a
check before use
rebreathing system causes the concentration of N2O
An important difference between non-rebreathing cir-
within the circuit to increase and the concentration of O2
cuits, such as the T-piece, and rebreathing circuits, such as
to decrease To ensure that the percent ratios of Oz and
the circle, is that the inspired concentration of anaesthetic
NzO remain the same as the flowmeter settings, the O2
agent can be very different between the systems. The
inflow should be set at ≥30 mL/kg/min and an equal flow
inspired concentration delivered by a non-rebreathing
of NzO added. Flows can be reduced if the inspired O2
circuit is the same as the vaporizer % and will change
percent is monitored. The increased fresh gas flow into a
       s 
trast, the inspired concentration may be the same or sub-
and, therefore, increases the cost of anaesthesia.
stantially lower than the vaporizer setting in a rebreathing
Essential facts to remember about use of NzO arex
circuit with the vaporizer outside the circle. The larger the
●NzO will enter any air pocket in the dog and expand
dog attached to the circle circuit and the lower the fresh
its size, thus use of NzO is contraindicated in animals
gs flow, the greater the impact of exhaled gases on the
with pneumothorax, pulmonary blebs or bullae,
concentration of anaesthetic in the rebreathing bag. Con-
 pneumoperitoneum, or intestinal obstruction with air
sider a 30 kg dog connected to a circle circuit with an O2
distension. Movement of NzO into the air pocket is
inflow of 1 L/min. For every breath that the dog takes,
rapid and elimination is slow
some anaesthetic agent is retained and the exhaled gas has
●A condition known as 'diffusion hypoxia' will
a lower concentration than inspired gas. A dog of this size
develop during recovery from anaesthesia when NzO
will exhale approximately 5.4 L/min of gas, a volume that
administration is discontinued and the dog is
will dilute the concentration entering from the vaporizer.
simultaneously disconnected from the anaesthesia
With low-flow anaesthesia, the vaporizer will have to be
machine NzO is poorly soluble in blood and rapidly
considerably higher than the desired inspired % in order
exits into alveoli in large volumes when
to maintain anaesthesia. Frequently, high O flow [1-2 L/
administration is discontinued. Room air has 2l% O2
 min) is supplied in the first 15 minutes to deliver sufficient
and this becomes diluted by NzO to a level that
inhalant to effect a smooth transition from injectable to
cannot sustain arterial oxygenation. To avoid hypoxia.
inhalant anaesthesia and to eliminate nitrogen from the
the dog should be given 100% O2 for at least 5
circuit, then the flow is decreased to the preferred low
minutes after NzO is stopped (remain connected to
O2flow.
the anaesthesia machine).
The minimum Oz flow into a circle circuit that is safe
for the dog is a flow equal to the dog's metabolic O2
Systems of administration
flow rate is used there is no excess Oz to be discharged
through the pressure relief valve, hence the technique is
Factors to take into consideration when choosing a system
called a closed system of administration. A closed systerm
and a circuit are: (1) avoid increased resistance to breath-
does not require that the pressure relief valve be closed
ing imposed by the circuit, for example, the usual sized
because the valve is designed to remain closed until the
443
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 pressure in the circle builds to 2 cmHzO. During low-flow
and speed of induction is faster. For example, in an experi-
administration, generally considered to be <15 mL/kg/
mental study of mask induction in Beagles, with an O2
min, the O2 inflow exceeds metabolic needs and a small
flow rate 4 L/min and the sevoflurane vaporizer increased
amount of waste gas will enter the scavenging system after
by 0.8% increments/15 seconds up to a maximum of
each exhalation. Circle circuits that incorporate the vapor-
4.8%, time to intubation was an average of 5.8 minutes
izer within the circle are designed for the low-flow system
[Mutoh et al., 2002). Premedication with acepromazine,
of administration. The dog's breathing draws O2 through
0.05 mg/kg, with butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg, IM or medeto-
the vaporizer and the lower the O2 rate the more quickly
midine, 0.02 mg/kg [20 μg/kg), with midazolam, 0.3 mg/
the anaesthetic concentration increases. Rebreathing
kg. IM decreased the time to intubation to 3.7 ± 0.5
systems that include CO2 absorption are economical
minutes or 2.9 ± 0.6 minutes, respectively.
because low O2 flows are used and less anaesthetic agent
When induction of anaesthesia with an inhalant and
is vaporized. Heat generated by the action of exhaled CO2
facemask is selected, the procedure should be accom-
 on the absorbent and exhaled water vapour are responsi-
plished calmly and quietly. The dog should be allowed to
ble for the dog breathing warm, moist gases that help to
become accustomed to the facemask while breathing
maintain body heat and prevent drying damage to the
oxygen. The vaporizer setting is increased in 0.5% incre-
respiratory tract mucosa. Fresh gas inflows for other types
ments for isoflurane (larger increments for sevoflurane
of circuits are given in Chapter l0. The vaporizer setting
and desflurane) with three to four breaths between incre-
must be adjusted to deliver the estimated anaesthetic
ments and the patient monitored closely for signs of
requirement and is based on the potency of the inhalation
increasing depth of anaesthesia (Box 15.5). Atempts to
 agent, the type of delivery circuit, the physical status of the
 patient, the characteristics and dose rates of concurrently
to a conscious dog will result in struggling, breath-holding.
admministered anaesthetic agents, and the nature of the
and excitement The release of catecholamines will be
procedure.
counterproductive, as they will increase anaesthetic
requirement It must be remembered that with a non-
Induction using a facemask
rebreathing circuit the inspired concentration is the same
as the vaporizer setting and the inspired anaesthetic
Induction of anaesthesia with an inhalation agent via a
facemask may be employed in a variety of situations but
is also contraindicated in some situations (Table 15.8).
 Induction and maintenance using an inhalation agent as
Box 15.5 Mask induction 'Dos'
the sole agent is not advisable. Higher concentrations of
inhalant must be used, compared with a balanced anaes-
 Use preanaesthetic sedation
thesia, decreasing the safety margin. Sole agent use [induc-
Quiet, calm, slow
tion and maintenance with an inhalation anaesthetic) has
Flush previous gases from circuit 
been associated with a 5.9-fold increase in the odds of
anaesthetic-related death compared with induction of
Mask with Oz only first
anaesthesia with injectable agents and maintenance with
Use a close-fitting mask, careful not to rub the eyes
isoflurane (Brodbelt et al., 2008). Endotracheal intuba-
Increase vaporizer in 0.5% increments
juase uoeieuul jo uoenuauon iauaiu e sanban uon
 Resist impulse to 'max out' vaporizer
than is needed for maintenance of anaesthesia. Less car-
Decrease vaporizer setting and dilute circuit
diovascular depression may be achieved by prior admin-
concentration before attaching to endotracheal tube
istration of a sedative, opioid, or injectable anaesthetic
Table 15.8 Induction of anaesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane via facemask
Advantages
Disadvantages
Contraindications
Rapid elimination/recovery;
 Generally slower than injectable agents; airway not
 Airway obstruction impairs uptake, slows
 advantageous for young and old
protected
induction: brachycephalic breeds,
patients
Dog may be frightened; catecholamine release
 pharyngeal mass, collapsing trachea,
Technique results in preoxygenation
increases anaesthetic requirement
 pneumonia, diaphragmatic rupture
before tracheal intubation
Anaesthetic plane for tracheal intubation must be
Risk of regurgitation and pulmonary
 deeper than for maintenance; lowers blood pressure
 aspiration: full stomach, megacesophagus,
Risk of anaesthetic gas pollution
laryngeal paralysis
444
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
concentration will change within seconds of a change in
continuous infusion (continuous rate infusion, constant
the vaporizer setting. The rise in anaesthetic concentration
rate infusion, CRI) of an opioid, Q2-sedative, benzodi-
in a rebreathing circuit is slower and thus induction of
azepine, lidocaine, ketamine, or propofol. The purpose of
 anaesthesia must be expected to be slower. Increasing the
a CRI is to provide a steady plasma concentration of dnug
O2 flowmeter seting for a rebreathing circuit [vaporizer
for consistent analgesia or sedation avoiding concentra-
outside the circuit) will increase the rate of concentration
tion peaks and troughs that accompany periodic dosing.
rise and speed induction of anaesthesia, as does compress-
Nerve blocks are also supplements but are considered in
ing the rebreathing bag periodically to express 
dilute
a later section of this chapter. More than one supplerment
anaesthetic gas into the scavenger. For a small dog, induc-
 may be included in the anaesthetic protocol, for example.
tion may be facilitated by using a non-rebreathing circuit
fentanyl or morphine plus lidocaine plus ketamine CRIs
during mask administration and then changing to 3
for total ear canal ablation, or opioid for premedication
rebreathing circuit for maintenance of anaesthesia; the
 plus fentanyl CRI plus lidocaine CRI for forelimb amputa-
objective being to use the non-rebreathing circuit to
-ida snid sdn dot snqd uoeipauand ioy pioido io 'uon
induce anaesthesia more rapidly and the rebreathing
dural morphine and bupivacaine for pelvic limb fracture
circuit for economy and humidifcation. The maximum
repair. A fentanyl patch should also be considered as a
vaporizer setting used during induction should depend on
supplement to general anaesthesia when it has been
the degree of preanaesthetic sedation, the type of delivery
applied at least 12 hours previously. A 75 μg/h patch
system, and the health of the dog. When a halothane
luaiam ueau saop ot eisausaeue anoyaq sinou tz patdde
vaporizer is set to above 2.5%o, the isoflurane to above 4%.
26 kg decreased the concentration required for anaesthe-
or the sevoflurane to above 5%, the anaesthetist must
sia by 36.6% (wilson et al., 2006c).
closely observe the progression of anaesthesia to avoid
Administration of supplements, opioids, analgesics,
Overdosage The highest concentration in the circuit
 CRIs, nerve blocks, may be seen as a nuisance occupying
should be expressed through the pressure relief valve
more time, more money, and more worry over risk of
before attaching the endotracheal tube and the vaporizer
 Overdosage and adverse effects, and all of these concerns
setting must be decreased to avoid overdose.
are valid. However, the impetus for custom designing
anaesthetic protocols is a desire to provide better pain
control during and after anaesthesia and to facilitate the
Intraoperative supplements
dogs' return more quickly to a pain-free state after surgery.
Additional injectable agents are frequently administered
Some of the drugs and dose rates of supplements used in
during general anaesthesia to provide or maintain analge-
dogs are described below and in Table 15.9.
sia or to increase the sedative base so that the administra-
tion of inhalation agent can be decreased. In the latter
Opioids
case, the usual objective is to find a balance between inject-
able and inhalation agents that results in the best cardio-
Supplementation with additional opioid may become
vascular function. The choice of agent(s) depends on
necessary during anaesthesia to avoid increasing the
the desired effect and may include bolus injections or
vaporizer setting as the effect of premedication wanes or
 Table 15.9 Agents for continuous IV infusion during anaesthesia
Agent
Administration
Comments
Fentanyl 
2-10 μg/kg/h (vwvith isoflurane or sevoflurane)
Provides analgesia, decreases vaporizer setting. may cause bradycardia
and hypoventilation, lovvest dose used in recovery
Fentanyl
2442 μg/kg/h (with propofol anaesthesia
TIVA for craniotomy, IPPV necessary
12-18 mg/kg/h)
Morphine
0.2-0.24 mg/kg/h
Provides analgesia, decreases vaporizer setting. decreases ventilation
Lidocaine
1.5-3.0 mg/kg/h
 Provides analgesia, decreases vaporizer setting
Ketamine
0.5 mg/kg/h 
Decreases vaporizer seting, analgesia unpredictable
Dexmedetomidine
0.5-1.0 μg/kg/h
Decreases vaporizer seting, supplements opicid analgesia, lower dose
often sufficient during anaesthesia and higher dose used in recovery
 Propofol
6 mg/kg/h (0. 1 mg/kg/min)
Decreases vaporizer setting
445
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
to provide analgesia as the surgical stimulus increases
 a long-acting opioid administered for recovery, or the infu-
Hydromorphone and methadone, for example, may need
sion can be continued for several hours or overnight, gen-
to be redosed about 2.5 hours after the initial administra-
erally at a reduced rate of 2-4 μg/kg/h. The fentanyl
tion, butorphanol after 1.5 hours, meperidine/pethidine
infusion rate is titrated down in recovery on an individual
after 1.5-2 hours (not IV), buprenorphine after 3 hours,
basis to find the right degree of sedation that allows the
depending on the initial dose and circumstances. Intrave-
 dog to lift its head and safe extubation without airway
nous injections shoul d be given in increments over at least 
obstruction.
one minute because bolus injections of opioids some-
The lower dose rates just described are to be used in
times cause an acute decrease in blood pressure.
conjunction with inhalation anaesthesia. The reduction in
An opioid may be administered as a CRl, most com-
inhalant will depend on the nature of other drugs admin-
monly fentanyl or morphine but also hydromorphone.
istered concurrently, for example, administration of lido-
sufentanil, or remifentanil. Fentanyl is available as
caine and ketamine with fentanyl (FLK) decreased the
50 μg/mL in ampoules of different volumes. Where a
 requirement for isoflurane in clinical patients at the time
modest analgesic contribution is required, fentanyl can be
of skin incision by 97% in dogs premedicated with ace-
administered as a bolus of 2 μg/kg every 20 minutes or as
 promazine and midazolam, induced with propofol and
a continuous infusion of 6 μg/kg/h with an increase up to
receiving a loading dose [Aguado et al., 20ll). High fen-
10 μg/kg/h when considered necessary. A CRI administra-
tanyl dose rates are used when fentanyl is administered
tion is most convenient using a syringe pump and a micro-
with propofol for TIVA (see earlier).
infusion extension set 1.7 metres (60 inches) long with a
 Remifentanil is a synthetic opioid structurally related to
small 0.3 mL internal volume attached to the syringe.
fentanyl and sufentanil. Onset of action is rapid and clear-
Bradycardia should be treated with an anticholinergic,
ance is rapid by enzymatic hydrolysis by esterases and
such as glycopyrrolate 0.005 mg/kg IV, and artificial ven-
unrelated to liver function. The effects of infusions of
tilation is usually necessary. A loading dose is not needed
remifentanil, 0.1 or 0.15 μg/kg/min, during isofurane
if a long-acting opioid, such as hydromorphone, mor-
phine, or methadone was administered for premedication
orthopaedic procedures [Allweiler et al., 2007). After pre-
and the fentanyl CRI is started soon after induction of
medication with acepromazine and meperidine/pethidine,
anaesthesia. If an immediate increase in analgesia medica-
 anaesthesia was induced with thiopental. During surgery.
tion is required during anaesthesia then a loading dose of
isoflurane administration was adjusted based on observa-
fentanyl, 2-5 μg/kg, is injected IV over 60 seconds fol-
tion of clinical signs, and was decreased an average of
lowed immediately by starting the CRI. A decrease in the
40-50% by the addition of remifentanil. Bradycardia in
vaporizer setting is essential as the dose rates of fentanyl
some dogs was treated with glycopyrrolate. Recovery to
are increased, otherwise anaesthetic overdose will
 spontaneous ventilation was rapid after discontinuing the
Occur. In one experimental investigation in isoflurane-
remifentanil infusion. Experimental investigations of
anaesthetized dogs, a loading dose of fentanyl, 5 μg/kg.
remifentanil infusions during inhalation anaesthesia have
followed by an infusion of fentanyl, 9 μg/kg/h, decreased
 documented dose-dependent decreases in requirement for
the requirement for isoflurane by 35% (Ueyama et al.,
inhalant (MAC reductions) in dogs (Michelsen et al.,
2009) and, in another, a loading dose of fentanyl,
1996; Monteiro et al., 20l0b). Infusion rates from 0.15 to
10 μg/kg, followed by an infusion of fentanyl, 18 μg/kg/h
0.90 μg/kg/min allowed step-wise decreases in isoflurane
decreased isoflurane requirement by 53% (Hellyer et al.
administration from 43 to 71% (Monteiro et al., 2010a).
2001). Concurrent administration of a sedative with fen-
The infusions resulted in the expected bradycardia without
tanyl will achieve a greater effect, for example, injection of
any change in MAP. Relevant details are that even the
diazepam, 0.5 mg/kg, in dogs anaesthetized with isoflu-
lowest infusion rates were associated with significant
rane and a fentanyl CRI resulted in a further 20% decrease
decreases in cardiac output and O2 delivery. Increased
in isoflurane requirement (Hellyer et al., 2001). In clinical
plasma vasopressin concentrations were measured in these
patients, diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg, IV is usually suffcient to
dogs and assumed to be responsible for the peripheral
augment a fentanyl CRI during surgery.
vasoconstriction that maintained MAP Remifentanil is
A pharmacokinetic investigation of a bolus of fentanyl,
eliminated rapidly after it is discontinued and, therefore,
10 μg/kg, IV in conscious dogs identified a rapid decrease
the onset time of the opioid chosen for recovery must be
in plasma fentanyl concentration for the first 20 minutes
 allowed for to achieve a smooth return to consciousness.
and then a more gradual decrease (Sano et al., 2006).
Morphine is administered at a rate of 0.2-0.24 mg/
When the bolus was followed by an infusion, 10 μg/kg/h.
kg/h. Administration is easy and precise if the total dose
the fentanyl plasma concentrations dipped in the first
for 2-3 hours (or anticipated surgery time) is drawn into
hour and then increased progressively for 3 hours before
a syringe and diluted to provide a dose rate of 5 mL/h (or
levelling out. Total body clearance was significantly lower
 a volume appropriate for the size of the animal) and deliv.
after a 3-hour infusion than a 1-hour infusion. The fenta-
ered by syringe pump. An alternative method of adminis-
nyl infusion can be stopped at the end of anaesthesia and
tration is to add 10 mg of morphine to a 500 mL bag of
446
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
provide analgesia in the earlier part of the anaesthetic
 Box 15.6 MLK for continuous infusion during
period while the plasma concentrations of MLK are
inhalation anaesthesia
increasing. Commonly, dogs given morphine CRI or MLK
require assisted or controlled ventilation. The vaporizer
Formula
setting must be substantially decreased to avoid anaes-
500 mL lactated Ringer's or similar
thetic overdose, and it is advisable after a long anaesthesia
1.6 ml of 15 mg/mL (24 mg) morphine
to decrease the infusion rate by half for the last 30 minutes
15 mL of 2% (300 mg) lidocaine
of anaesthesia to avoid a prolonged recovery. There are
0.6 ml of 100 mg/ml (60 mg) ketamine
reports of deaths in early recovery after disconnection
Delivery
from the anaesthesia machine involving dogs that have
received MLK. It is essential that dogs receiving MLK be
 5 mL/kg/h fluid
monitored for adequacy of ventilation, depth of breathing
Morphine 0.24 mg/kg/h
as well as rate, when disconnected from the anaesthesia
Lidocaine 3.0 mg/kg/h
machine and for hypoxia, preferably by using a pulse
Ketamine 0.6 mg/kg/h
oximeter.
Precautions
Decrease vaporizer %
Lidocaine
IPPV may be necessary
Use pulse oximeter in recovery
Infusion of lidocaine, 0.02-0.08 mg/kg/min, IV has been
used for more than 40 years to control abnormal ventricu-
Substitution
lar rhythms in conscious or anaesthetized dogs. More
Fentanyl for morphine = FLK
recently, lidocaine infusion has been used intraoperatively
Delivery 5 or 10 μg/kg/h
to decrease the requirement for inhalation anaesthetic.
Lidocaine provides sedation but it is not clear how much
analgesia is provided. In a study of a range of lidocaine
infusions 0.025-0.100 mg/kg/min, in conscious dogs, no
balanced electrolyte solution such as lactated Ringer's
antinociception to electrical stimulation that was different
solution and the drip delivery adjusted to deliver 10 mL/
from the saline controls was detected during 12-hour
kg/h. It must be remembered that the bag cannot be used
infusions (MacDougall et al., 2009). Lidocaine has anti-
to give a bolus of fluid for cardiovascular support Another
inflammatory properties and may exert an effect on the
practice for intraoperative supplementation with mor-
inflammatory component that is associated with surgery.
phine, lidocaine, and ketamine (MLK) is to add 24 mg of
There is limited evidence that intraoperative administra.
morphine (1.6 mL of 15 mg/mL) to a 500 mL bag of
tion of lidocaine may contribute to the reduction in pain
fluid, and also add 15 mL of 2% lidocaine and 0.6 mL
of ketamine, 100 mg/mL, and to infuse the mixture IV at
eisaaieue auos papiaond Aiagins iejnooenul ioy eisau
5 mL/kg/h ( Box 15.6). This will give the patient morphine.
postoperatively for 50% of the treated dogs even though
0.24 mg/kg/h, lidocaine 3 mg/kg/h, and ketamine 0.6 mg/
plasma lidocaine was undetectable 2 hours after infusion
kg/h (different concentrations can be devised to accom-
ceased (Smith et al., 2004).
modate a fluid rate preference). Combining the drugs into
A study evaluated the cardiovascular effects of lidocaine
one bag is convenient but removes the preference for
in healthy dogs and dogs with subaortic stenosis anaesthe-
adjusting the dose rates of individual dnugs according to
tized with isoflurane [Nunes de Morales et al., 1998). A
the patient's responses to anaesthesia and surgery, and an
lidocaine loading dose, 0.4 mg/kg, was injected IV over 10
additional bag of fluid will be needed for increased fluid
minutes, and an infusion of 0.12 mg/kg/min in healthy
administration. In experimental dogs, a morphine infu-
 dogs achieved plasma lidocaine concentrations within the
sion, 0.2 mg/kg/h, decreased the requirement for isoflu-
therapeutic range with no significant changes in cardio-
rane by 48%. and this was not decreased further by the
vascular indices. However, a higher infusion dose rate,
combination of MLK [Muir et al., 2003). A loading dose
0.2 mg/kg/min, produced plasma lidocaine concentra-
was not administered and steady state plasma concentra-
tions >7 μg/ml in 50% of the dogs and evidence of
tions of morphine were reached by 2 hours of infusion. A
impaired myocardial contractility, significantly decreased
similar decrease in isoflurane requirement of 45% was
stroke index and increased CVP and pulmonary artery
measured in dogs anaesthetized with isoflurane and
pressure The same loading dose and lidocaine infusion of
receiving MLK for ovariohysterectomy Or mastectomy
0.12 mg/kg/min was administered to dogs with subaortic
(Aguado et al., 20ll). These dogs were given a loading
stenosis for control of PVCs and, although these dogs
dose of MLK over 5 minutes that was equal to the hourly
 started with a lower cardiac index than the healthy dogs.
infusion rate. An alternative to a loading dose of MLK is
produced no significant impact on the cardiovascular
to administer a μ opioid for premedication that can
measurements (Nunes de Morales et al., 1998).
447
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
The reduction in inhalation agent requirement from
infusion of dexmedetomidine can be used to provide
lidocaine administration alone is less than is obtained
additional and continuous sedation for longer surgeries.
from an opioid infusion, and is dose dependent. Admin-
Dexmedetomidine CRI may be a useful adjunct to opioid
istration of a loading dose of lidocaine, 2 mg/kg, to anaes-
analgesia and decrease the requirement for inhalation
thetized experimental dogs and followed by an infusion,
 agent during surgery and, if continued after anaesthesia,
0.05 mg/kg/min, resulted in MAC reductions of 15-29%
 may promote a smooth recovery in hyperexcitable or
[Muir et al., 2003; Valverde et al., 2004; Wilson et al.,
frightened dogs. An infusion of dexmedetomidine,
2008; Matsubara et al., 2009), infusion of lidocaine,
0.5-1.0 μg/kg/h, has been useful during anaesthesia in
0.1 mg/kg/min, by 29% (wilson et al., 2008), and infu-
clinical patients. Options are to discontinue the CRI at the
sion of 0.2 mg/kg/min, by 37-43% (Valverde et al., 2004;
end of surgery, to discontinue the CRI and administer
Wilson et al., 2008; Matsubara et al., 2009). Vomiting in
atipamezole IM, or to continue the CRI after anaesthesia
recovery, a presumed sign of lidocaine toxicity, was noted
at an infusion rate of 1-2 μg/kg/h; all with appropriate
in 75% of dogs receiving the highest dose rate (Matsubara
opioid or nerve block analgesia. For medium to large dogs.
et al., 2009),
the dexmedetomidine can be diluted with saline to deliver
Currently, in clinical practice, lidocaine dose rates com-
a volume of 1.0 mL/h. Example: a 30 kg dog is scheduled
monly used are a loading dose, 1-2 mg/kg administered
to receive l μg/kg/h for 12 hours. Dexmedetomidine,
over several minutes followed by an infusion, 0.05 mg/kg/
0.7 mL of 0.5 mg (500 μg)/mL (30 kg × 12 h/500) is
min (3 mg/kg/h). Published evidence supports the use of
added to ll.3 mL saline, mixed well, and delivered at
eaig e apiaoid oi 'u/sy/su I'0 on dn aiei uoisnyui ue
1 mL/h via a syringe pump.
and more consistent contribution to the anaesthetic
 The sedative, analgesic, and cardiovascular effects of low
protocol. Combination with other agents may signif-
dose dexmedetomidine infusions have been investigated.
cantly decrease the concentration of inhalation agent
The results indicate that a loading dose of dexmedetomi-
required for anaesthesia. Addition of a lidocaine infusion,
dine, 0.5 or 1.0 μg/kg. followed by an infusion, 0.5 or
0.05 mg/kg/min, in clinical patients given buprenorphine
1.0 μg/kg/h, respectively induce sedation in isoflurane-
improved anaesthetic management (Ortega & Cruz, 201l;
anaesthetized and conscious dogs (Pascoe et al., 2006; van
Columbano et al., 2012) but provided no apparent intra-
Oostrom et al., 20ll). Sedation but not analgesia was
operative contribution in dogs receiving a fentanyl infu-
 detected using auditory and somatosensory evoked poten-
sion (Columbano et al., 2012).
tials in conscious dogs given dexmedetomidine, l μg/kg.
and CRI 1 μg/kg/h, but both sedation and analgesia were
detected at a higher dose rate, 3 μg/kg/h (van Oostrom
Ketamine
et al., 2011). An 18% decrease in isoflurane concentration
Infusion of ketamine 0.6 mg/kg/h, in experimental dogs
was measured following administration of dexmedetomi-
dine loading dose, 0.5 μg/kg, and CRI, 0.5 μg/kg/h, using
decreased the isoflurane requirement by 25% ( Muir et al.
 2003). It is unknown if the ketamine provides sedation
electrical stimulation testing to the fore- and hind limbs
(Pascoe et al., 2006). Isoflurane MAC was reduced by
and analgesia. Personal experience suggests that keta-
approximately6
60% during an infusion of 3 μg/kg/h
mine decreases the anaesthetic requirement by sedation
(Pascoe et al.,
2006: Uilenreef et al., 2008). Clinical
because, although the animal appears to be satisfacto-
patients were administered dexmedetomidine, 5 μg/kg.
rily anaesthetized, an increase in surgical intensity elicits
and buprenorphine 5 minutes before induction of anaes-
increased HR, MAP and even movement. There is some
evidence that low dose ketamine infusion during surgery
thesia with propofol and start of a dexmedetomidine CRI
and isoflurane for soft tissue or orthopaedic surgery
in humans may decrease central sensitization that leads to
(Uilenreef et al., 2008). The authors compared dexme-
secondary hyperalgesia (Stubhaug et al., 1997; De Kock &
detomidine 1, 2, and 3 μg/kg/h and concluded that
Lavand'homme, 2007). Central sensitization appears to be
although HR, MAP, and recoveries were satisfactory, infu-
reversed some time after surgery in most human patients
but may continue in some as chronic pain, and it is not
sion of dexmedetomidine at l μg/kg/h was their best
choice In this study, the sedative was antagonized at the
known if decreasing central sensitization reduces the inci-
 dence of chronic pain. A similar effect of ketamine in dogs
end of anaesthesia by atipamezole, 0.0l25 mg/kg. IM. In
another experimental investigation, administration of a
still has to be established.
dexmedetomidine loading dose, l μg/kg. followed by
infusion, 1 μg/kg/h, to dogs anaesthetized with propofol
Q2-Agonist sedatives
or isoflurane resulted in significant decreases in HR and
cardiac output (propofol 44%, isoflurane 33%) ( Lin et al.
Moderate to large doses of medetomidine or dexmedeto-
 2008). Oxygen delivery was decreased but remained above
midine provide analgesia for approximately 1 hour and
the published critical level to meet tissue O demand. The
may obviate the need for supplementation when used for
infusion of dexmedetomidine was continued for 22 hours
 premedication for short-term anaesthesia. A continuous
after anaesthesia and plasma concentrations decreased
448
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
abruptly in the first hour after the infusion was
effects, however, most of this drug is excreted in bile and
discontinued.
-oid st sisieied jo uoneanp snu pue pasueupun aum
longed by renal disease. Atracurium has a more rapid
onset of action and shorter duration of action. Atracurium
Propofol
has no significant cardiovascular effects, however, in rare
An infusion of propofol, 6 mg/kg/h (0.1 mg/kg/min), can
cases atracurium causes histamine release, peripheral
be used as a supplement to isoflurane or sevoflurane
vasodilation and a small decrease in arterial blood pres-
anaesthesia to smooth the level of anaesthesia and allow
 sure. A major advantage to use of atracurium is that it has
a small decrease in the vaporizer setting. Clinical experi-
 two methods of elimination: (1) ester hydrolysis catalysed
ence has been that the depth of anaesthesia remains more
 by non-specific esterases such that normal levels of plasma
stable and the decrease in inhalation concentration results
 cholinesterase are not required; and (2) a non-enzymatic
in an improvement in blood pressure.
 process known as the Hoffman reaction, that is independ-
ent of liver or kidney function.
Pancuronium is classed as a long-acting NmBA, atracu-
Neuromuscular blocking agents
rium, vecuronium, and rocuronium as intermediate
 Muscle relaxation can be achieved during anaesthesia by
acting. and mivacurium, another agent used in people, as
inducing deep general anaesthesia, by incorporation of
a short-acting NMBA. These agents act primarily at the
centrally acting agents, such as diazepam or medetomi-
acetylcholine binding sites on the postsynaptic receptors
dine, or by use of peripherally acting agents that induce
at the neuromuscular junction. At least 75% of receptors
neuromuscular blockade (see Chapter 8). Neuromuscular
must be occupied by an NMBA to begin to decrease neu-
romuscular function. The binding of the NMBA is com-
blockade provides complete relaxation (paralysis) so that
deep general anaesthesia can be avoided with the premise
petitive with acetylcholine which only lasts for milliseconds
that administration of less inhalant or injectable supple-
in the synaptic cleft before it is destroyed by cholineste-
ments results in better cardiovascular performance. This
rase. Ifa cholinesterase inhibitor (anticholinesterase) such
as edrophonium or neostigmine is administered, acetyl-
may be particularly advantageous for old or ill dogs. Spe-
 choline is able to accumulate and is able to compete at
cifc surgical procedures for which neuromuscular block-
 ing agents (NMBs, NMBAs, muscle relaxants) are included
the receptors, effectively antagonizing the NMBA. Neostig-
in the anaesthetic protocol are:
mine also acts at other receptors causing bradycardia and
increased gastrointestinal motility. Consequently, atropine
●Ocular surgery to immobilize the eye, ensure the eye
 Or glycopyrrolate is usually administered before or concur-
remains in a central position in the orbit, and to
rently with the anticholinesterase agent.
decrease intraocular pressure (IOP)
Sugammadex (sug/as in hug/ -amma-dex) is a relatively
●To aid reduction of overriding long bone fractures
 new selective steroidal relaxant binding agent (antagonist)
(may or may not be helpful)
available in some countries. Sugammadex is a modified
●To abolish thoracic movement during thoracotomy
Y-cyclodextrin constructed of a ring of linked glucose units 
●To facilitate exposure of deep structures during
with a water-soluble exterior and a hydrophobic interior
abdominal surgery or to facilitate closure of the
that has a central cavity. Upon contact, rocuronium and,
abdominal incision.
to a lesser extent, vecuronium are bound within the cyclo-
dextrin core preventing binding with an acetylcholine
receptor. Sugammadex has the advantages of more com-
Agents used
plete reversal of the NMDA, no autonomic instability, and
The non-depolarizing NmBAs most commonly used in
 no need for concurrent use of an anticholinergic because
clinical practice are pancuronium, atracurium, vecuro-
it does not work through cholinergic mechanisms.
nium, and rocuronium. Pancuronium is a steroid quater-
Succinylcholine is a depolarizing NMBA that causes
nary ammonium compound and has been in use the
initial muscle fasciculations after injection and before
longest of these agents. Disadvantages of pancuronium are 
 onset of paralysis. Succinylcholine, 0.3-0.4 mg/kg, IV will
that its administration may cause tachycardia and a tran-
produce about 20 minutes of paralysis in dogs. Salivation
sient increase in blood pressure in some animals and that
and bradycardia may be induced such that prior adminis-
elimination is through hepatic and renal mechanisms
tration of an anticholinergic is advisable. There is no
which, when function in a patient is decreased, results in
 reversal agent for succinylcholine but its action usually
an excessively prolonged duration of action. Dosage
terminates rapidly and completely. Multiple doses of suc-
should also be reduced in animals with hypoproteinaemia
cinylcholine may be associated with a change in the nature
  q     
of the neuromuscular block from depolarizing to non-
plasma. Vecuronium is a mono-quaternary analogue of
 depolarizing (known as Dual or Phase II block) resulting
pancuronium with only one small structural difference.
in prolonged paralysis. Identification of Phase II block
Vecuronium has no significant adverse cardiovascular
using a peripheral nerve stimulator permits the use of an
449
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
anticholinesterase for reversal. Succinylcholine is rarely
peripheral nerve stimulator is satisfactory for most clinical
used today in veterinary practice because the initial muscle
cases [see Fig. 8.2) and nerves that can be stimulated are
contractions may cause hyperkalaemia and cardiac dys-
the tibial, peroneal, ulnar, and dorsal buccal branch of the
rhythmias, particularly in animals with myopathies or
facial nerve. Monitoring neuromuscular transmission pro-
severe muscle trauma. Succinylcholine is a specific trigger
vides an assessment of the degree of paralysis that can be
agent in animals susceptible to Malignant Hyperthermia
 used to determine when top-up doses are necessary during
syndrome.
anaesthesia. At the end of anaesthesia it is used to assess
the need for or response to an anticholinesterase agent
Artificial ventilation,unconsciousness,and analgesia
must be provided when a neuromuscular blocking
and determine a safe time to allow the dog to breathe
agent has been administered
spontaneously. The peripheral nerve stimulator has two
electrodes that can be clipped onto 25 gauge or 22 gauge
needles. The needles are inserted through the skin until
Administration
the tips are close to the nerve. The needles are positioned
along the course of the nerve, positive proximal on the
An NMBA weakens or abolishes respiratory muscle func-
limb and negative distal, not touching but <5 cm apart,
tion and prevents many ofthe signs associated with moni-
and not in a muscle belly. The peroneal nerve is located
toring depth ofanaesthesia. Therefore, artificial ventilation,
along the craniolateral surface of the tibia and the needles
umconsciousness, and analgesia must be provided when
can be inserted either high or low [just proximal to the
an NMBA has been administered. Artificial ventilation
hock). The tibial nerve is located on the medial surface of
(IPPV) should be started before or at the time of injection
the limb, just above the hock and cranial to the gastrocne-
because onset of complete paralysis may be slow at up to
 mius tendon. The unit is turned on and power dialed up
2 minutes. Not all skeletal muscles are paralysed at the
same time due to differential distribution of receptors so
until the foot twitches in maximum response to an electri-
cal stimulus. A sequence of four stimuli delivered in quick
that muscles of the head and limbs are paralysed frst,
succession (train-of-four, TOF) provides the most infor-
followed by the abdominal muscles, intercostal muscles
and lastly the diaphragm. Thus, loss of the palpebral reflex
mation (see Fig. 8.3). When there is no paralysis, four toe
twitches of equal strength should be observed in response
and extraocular muscle relaxation allowing the globe to
to the TOF No twitches will be observed when complete
assume a central position occur at a low dose of NmBA.
neuromuscular transmission has been abolished.
Respiratory muscle function will be decreased and will not
be sufficient to ensure normocarbia and IppV is still
Several methods of quantitative monitoring of neuro-
muscular function have been used. Acceleromyography
needed (Lee et al., 1998). Monitoring depth of anaesthe-
sia can be difficult when breathing, palpebral reflex, and
[AMG) calculates muscle activity using a piezoelectric
transducer attached to the stimulated muscle In the dog.
eye position are abolished. Deep anaesthesia increases risk
a limb is stabilized in a vacuum pillow leaving just the
for hypotension and prolonged recovery from anaesthesia.
Non-invasive or invasive monitoring of arterial blood
 paw free and the transducer is attached to the paw. Accel-
eration of the paw generates a voltage proportional to the
 pressure is advisable when an NMBA is to be included in
force of contraction. Thus, the strength of each twitch can
the anaesthetic protocol. Insufficient anaesthesia results in
be measured and the ratio of the last twitch of a TOF to
awareness, increased sympathetic nervous system stimula-
the frst twitch strength can be calculated (TOF ratio).
tion, and increased IOP. One approach is to anaesthetize
AMG may provide more accurate measures of reversal in
the dog and achieve a stable plane of anaesthesia before
administration of the relaxant. Subsequently, vaporizer
recovery when compared with the conventional TOF tech-
nique described previously ( Brull & Murphy, 2010; Murphy
saeue au un ieu pasn aie saiei mo uasAxo pue sunias
et al., 201l1b)
thetist's experience result in adequate depth of anaesthe-
sia. An anaesthetic agent analyser is useful to avoid
extremes of anaesthetic depth. In dogs, sigms of autonomic
Termination of neuromuscular block
stimulation may be observed when anaesthesia or analge-
As described in Chapter 8, a variety of factors influence
sia is inadequate for the procedure:
the duration of neuromuscular block. Pancuronium and
●Pupillary dilation
vecuronium have a prolonged duration of action in dogs
Salivation
with hepatic or renal disease Other factors that prolong
Increased heart rate
duration are immature organ function in paediatric
Increased blood pressure
patients, hypothermia, hypokalaemia, acidosis, and gen-
Tongue twitch
tamicin. Several studies have confrmed that neuromuscu-
● Small respiratory movements.
  s  a  si  
 Monitoring neuromuscular transmission with a periph-
(Kastrup et al., 2005; Nagahama et al., 2006), although no
eral nerve stimulator provides positive feedback and con-
fidence in decisions for dosingwith NMBAs. An inexpensive
measured in a group of clinical patients (Auer, 2007).
450
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
As the effects of neuromuscular block wear off, assum-
varies considerably with the degree of block present and
ing the anaesthetic depth to be that of light surgical anaes.
should only be attempted when the block begins to wane.
thesia, the dog's eyes, which have been central, start to
When full paralysing doses are given, the time lapse from
rotate rostroventrally. 
Spontaneous respiratory move-
last administration of vecuronium should be 15 minutes
ments may not resume when the dog has been ventilated
or 40 minutes for pancuronium and atracurium. When
to a normal PaCO2. When neuromuscular block is being
TOF twitches are being monitored, at least two twitches
 monitored using a peripheral nerve stimulator, toe twitches
and preferably four should be present before attempting
will be observed in response to an electrical stimulus.
to reverse the block. In the absence of this monitoring.
Recovery from a non-depolarizing NMBA is accompanied
decreasing chest compliance attempts at spontaneous
by a fade phenomenon in response to multiple electrical
breathing, or rotation ofthe ye should be observed before
stimuli. When applying the TOF, initially only one of the
attempting to restore normal neuromuscular transmis-
twitches may be observed. As two, three, and four twitches
sion. Inhalation anaesthesia can be decreased but not
appear it will be noticed that the fourth twitch is less
 stopped during the reversal process so that the patient is
strong than the first [see Fig. 8.4). The fade is due to occu-
still lightly anaesthetized when paralysis is reversed. Fur-
pancy of the presynaptic receptors that normally facilitate
thermore, respiratory acidosis prolongs the action of most
release of acetylcholine and indicates a significant pres-
 non-depolarizing agents and will impair reversal. Artifcial
ence of NmBA at the neuromuscular junction. Only when
ventilation should, therefore, be continued through the
all four twitches are observed to be of equal strength is it
reversal process. Monitoring with the peripheral nerve
safe to stop IPPV and allow spontaneous ventilation. A
stimulator is continued until the TOF has returned to pre-
TOF ratio of greater than 0.7 measured using AMG is
paralysis strength.
recommended before extubation. Increased use of AMG
An anticholinergic dnug such as atropine, 0.02 mg/kg.
in veterinary practice would seem warranted since investi-
 Or glycopyrrolate, 0.005 mg/kg, should be injected IV 1-2
gations in human anaesthesia have confrmed that major-
minutes before administering the anticholinesterase to
ity of anaesthetists are unable to detect fade at a TOF
block the adverse effects of bradycardia, salivation, and
ratio of >0.4 using subjective visual or tactile assessment
increased intestinal motility. Heart rate should be moni-
of responses to peripheral nerve stimulation (Brull &
tored and a repeat dose of an anticholinergic given if
Murphy, 2010).
bradycardia occurs. The neostigmine is injected IV in small
Neostigmine and edrophonium are commonly used
increments until satisfactory reversal is achieved (Table
anticholinesterase antagonists of non-depolarizing neu-
15.10). Onset of action of neostigmine is slower than
romuscular block in dogs. The response to reversal agent
edrophonium and may take 5+ minutes. Edrophonium is
Table 15.10 Neuromuscular blocking agents and antagonists in dogs, dose rates and comments for use
Agent
Dose (mg/kg) IV
Comments
 Pancuronium
90°0
Abdominal and thoracic surgery
 Pancuronium
0.01-0.02
Central eye position for ocular surgery
 Atracurium
0.5
Abdominal and thoracic surgery
Atracurium
0.1-0.2
 Central eye position for ccular surgery
Vecuronium
0.1
Abdominal and thoracic surgery, ocular surgery
Rocuronium
0.5-0.6
Abdominal and thoracic surgery
Rocuronium
0.1
 Central eye position for ocular surgery
 Neostigmine
02'0-50'0
5e uw 2-z u!leada - bop ahel Joj hw 5'0 Jo bop llws joy 6w 5z'0 y jeis 1sjuo6eus
indica ted. Atropine or glycopyrrolate first
Edrophonium
0.25-0.50
Antagonist. Use low dose first. Pretreat withi anticholinergic or observe for bradycardia
Sugammadex*
0'8
 Antagonist to rocuronium and vecuronium
*Use in dogs not fully investigated
451
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
more appropriate for use with intermediate duration
u m s [ 1o i r / 7'o-10
NMBAs, rather than pancuronium, and is commonly used
to be redosed at 20-25-minute intervals to maintain neu-
to antagonize atracurium. Administration of an anti-
romuscular block. Single bolus doses of rocuronium, 0.3
cholinesterase may be unnecessary when low doses of
Or 0.6 mg/kg, produced neuromuscular blockade of 14
relaxant are employed for ocular surgery and only one or
 Or 22 minutes when administered to dogs given a variety
two doses given, when the duration of surgery exceeds an
yiim paieuieu eisausaeue pue suase uoeipaand go
hour after the last administration, or when the peripheral
either fentanyl-propofol or fentanyl-isoflurane [Auer,
nerve stimulator induces a TOF equivalent to pre-paralysis
2007). Return to complete recovery was in 23 or 32
strength.
 minutes, respectively.
Residual neuromuscular block may remain even after
A continuous infusion of an NmBA will produce a
restoration of apparently normal breathing and the
more consistent blockade After an initial dose of atra-
curium, 0.5 mg/kg. blockade can be maintained by an
remain weak and airway obstruction or aspiration may
infusion of atracurium, 0.5 mg/kg/h (Jones & Brearley.
occur after tracheal extubation (Kopman & Eikermann,
1987). Early publications concerning use of vecuronium
2009). Residual block is probably present when the dog's
in
dogs described an initial bolus of vecuronium,
eyes remain central with absent palpebral reflexes during
0. 1 mg/kg, followed by an infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/h (Jones
a light plane of anaesthesia and the dog must be closely
& Young. 1991) and an initial bolus of 0.05 mg/kg with
observed during recovery from anaesthesia for evidence of
uadxg (7661 'uon) 4/8y/3u 150'0 jo uoisnyu1 ue
an inability to raise its head and protect the airway. Strong
mental Beagles anaesthetized with fentanyl-propofol,
jaw tone may be a better indication of return of muscle
fentanyl-isoflurane or fentanyl-sevoflurane required
function. Peripheral nerve stimulation monitoring is rec-
vecuronium infusions of 0.2 mg/kg/h for TIVA and
ommended for safe practice.
0.1 mg/kg/h for inhalation anaesthesia to maintain AMG
Sugammadex, 8 mg/kg. injected 5 minutes after rocuro-
TOF count of l measured at the ulnar nerve [Nagahama
nium or vecuronium in anaesthetized dogs returmned the
et al., 2006). This study determined that full recovery
T4/Tl ratio to >0.9 in 15-2l0 seconds (Mosing et al.,
from paralysis was 50- 100% longer after inhalation anaes-
2012). No decrease in twitch response or clinical signs of
thesia than TIVA, depending on the end-point TOF ratio
recurarization after anaesthesia were observed in any dog.
of 0.7 or 1.0, suggesting that residual effects of vecuro-
The authors suggested further studies to define optimal
nium may be of concern in dogs.
 dose rate and safety of sugammadex in dogs.
Rocuronium has been used in clinical patients with a
loading dose of 0.5 mg/kg followed by an infusion of
0.2 mg/kg/h lasting 20-146 minutes (Alderson et al.,
2007). Atropine and neostigmine were administered for
Dose rates for NMBAs
reversal in 10 out of 22 dogs. An increased duration to
Whereas a small dose may achieve a centrally placed eye
returm of neuromuscular transmission and to adequate
for ocular surgery, a larger dose of agent will be needed
 spontaneous ventilation was associated with longer infu-
for relaxation of thoracic and abdominal muscles (see
sion durations. The authors suggested that rocuronium
Table 15.10). An approximate guideline is when the dura-
 infusion rate may need to be decreased with longer anaes-
tion of neuromuscular block must be extended beyond
thesia times and titrated to individual patient require-
one dose, subsequent injections for top up of a small
ments using peripheral nerve stimulator monitoring. A
dose used for ocular surgery should equal the frst dose
lower dose of rocuronium can be used to cause the eye
but when larger doses have been used for abdominal or
to assume a central position. Rocuronium, 0.l mg/kg.
thoracic surgery, the top-up doses are one-half the initial
injected IV in propofol-anaesthetized dogs caused the
dose. However, because of variation in duration of block
globe to rotate to a central position and remain there for
between dogs, it is better to titrate doses by using infor-
23 ± 1l minutes [Auer et al., 2007). The TOF ratio from
mation from the peripheral nerve stimulator, either main-
the peroneal nerve decreased to 45 ± 21%. The dogs were
moderatelyl
hypoventilating (ETCO2 53 ± 5 mmHg)
at the reappearance of one twitch. No increase in IOP
was measured in isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs after
not signifcantly increased by the administration of
administration of atracurium, 0.2 mg/kg (McMurphy
rocuronium. Close monitoring of the adequacy of ventila-
et al., 2004). Return to frst twitch was in 20 minutes
tion during a single injection of rocuronium is essential
although the eye remained in a central position for 45
and assisted ventilation is recommended.
minutes. In another study in dogs anaesthetized with
Oxygen must always be supplied when an NMBA is
sevoflurane, atracurium, 0.1-0.3 mg/kg, resulted in a
administered. Artificial ventilation should be employed
dose-dependent duration of block of 20-35 minutes
when ventilation is decreased and when multiple injec-
(Kastrup et al., 2005). These results support clinical expe-
tions or continuous infusion are administered for longer
rience that anaesthetized dogs administered atracurium,
procedures.
452
 Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Anaesthetic management
TIME
15
30
45
60
Positioning
O2 L/min
2
Care must be taken when positioning the animal to pad
Vaporizer
2.5
2
parts of the body that might be subject to pressure ischae-
Inspired Sevo
mia. Limbs should not be allowed to hang over the side
End tidal Sevo
2.5
2.4
of the table. Whenever possible, heads of brachycephalic
End tidal CO
36
29
27
27
38
38
39
dogs should be elevated to minimize nasal congestion.
SpO2
97
66
98
99
66
Some positions will compromise abdominal movement
and contribute to hypoventilation. A pad under the pelvis
140
of a dog in sternal position may sufficiently elevate the
abdomen off the table to allow adequate spontaneous
120
breathing. Consideration should be given to the dog with
V
bad hips when positioning involves extension of the hind
Systolic
limbs. Placing a drape stand in front of the animal may
100
facilitate access to the head for monitoring. A drape stand
can be easily created by bending a metal rod into a semi-
Heartrate
80
circle, with the diameter of the circle as wide as the operat-
ing table, and 15 cm at each end bent at right angles and
×
Mean
 parallel to the table edges for taping the stand to the oper-
60
ating table. When the instrument table is to be placed over
the patient, there should be suffcient space between the
Diastolic
40
table and the patient to allow access for the anaesthetist
to check tube connections, pulse oximeter probe gum
O
colour, catheters etc. The anaesthetist should ensure that
20
the IV injection port is within easy access before the dog
Resp rate
is draped. For patients for which access to the IV catheters
10
will be blocked by draping or the surgical team, an admin-
istration set for dobutamine or dopamine can be attached
close to the catheter and left turmed off until required. The
LRS
560
630
830
950
dog's eyes should be well lubricated with sterile eye lubri-
cant at the start of anaesthesia and periodically during a
Figure 15.14 This figure is part of the anaesthetic record of
long anaesthesia. It should be realized that when dogs
a 45 kg Rhodesian Ridgeback anaesthetized with sevoflurane
with short noses, eg. Pug, are in dorsal recumbency, the
and fentanyl infusion for a forelimb amputation. Changes in
more than one parameter on this record indicate that
eyes will be immediately ventral to the commissures of the
cardiovascular function was decreasing. Ss= start of surgery.
mouth. Regurgitation will result in acid reflux flowing into
The fluid flow through the IV catheter was recognized as
the cormeas causing serious damage.
inadequate and a new catheter was inserted by 20 min after
SS. By this time estimated blood loss was 350 ml. Note that
Monitoring
the decrease in ETCOz without a change in IPPV indicated
that cardiac output had decreased. Fluid administration was
Recognition of problems during anaesthesia is a combina-
increased by use of a pressure bag around the fluid bag but
tion of intuition, based on observation and evaluation of
10 min later MAP (invasive measurement) also decreased.
vital signs compared with normal expected behaviour, and
The vaporizer setting was decreased by 20%. By 20 min
data collected from monitoring equipment. Monitoring
after placement of a new catheter, ETCOz and MAP had 
equipment is essential because observation, palpation,
returned to pre-hemorrhage values. Total blood loss for the
and measurement of vital signs may not identify a problerm
procedure was at least 600 ml as determined by weighing
blood-soaked gauzes.
Or may be insufficient to diagmose the cause of the
problem. Recording values at regular intervals on an
anaesthetic record provides a clear picture of the progres-
sion of anaesthesia, especially when written in graphic
especially for a large dog and when haemorrhage is antici-
form. The anaesthetic record can highlight subtle changes
pated during surgery, be observant of changes in moni-
that could otherwise be missed as well as documenting
tored values especially when there is no obvious reason,
case care and facilitating analysis later (Fig. 15.14). While
develop an appreciation of the significance of such
in hindsight the management of the case in Figure 15.14
changes, and blood pressure monitoring can be valuable
 should have been different, lessons to be learned include:
 in the assessment of patient status during anaesthesia. The
 never accepta catheter that will not deliver a fast fluid flow.
significance of the degree of haemorrhage was recognized
453
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
in this case but volume replacement was delayed by lack
of venous access. Alternative management at this time
pressure.
should have been an earlier and greater reduction in
Palpation of a peripheral arterial pulse is not a reliable
 sevoflurane administration and a request to the surgeons
 guide to arterial pressure. An arterial pulse can often be
-saeu anssad aodua pue ans asean  aieoua
 Buuaeaiu ail s!lieu moi os si ainssaid uaum patedied
tasis. Administration of a colloid, such as hetastarch, to
Changes in strength of the pulse over time may provide
replace part of the blood loss would have allowed a reduc-
an indication of increasing or decreasing pressure. Arterial
tion in the total volume of crystalloid fluid infused and
pressure can be measured by a variety of non-invasive
resulted in a better fluid balance Details about monitoring
[NIBP) methods or by invasive measurement (Fig. 15.15).
techniques and interpretations have been described in
Systolic (SAP)/diastolic (DAP) and mean (MAP) pressures
Chapter 2.
for conscious healthy unsedated dogs are 133/75
Suggestions for preventing problems during induction
(94) mmHg and MAP is consistently 90-100 mmHg.
of anaesthesia have been given in an earlier section of this
-09> dvn jo juauainseau Aq pauyuos st uoisuaiodkh
chapter [see Box 15.4). Monitoring at this time is directed
65 mmHg or NIBP SAP <80 mmHg (excepting the
towards assessment of depth of anaesthesia by using
Doppler ultrasound technique in dogs <5 kg where the
 palpebral reflex, eyeball rotation, jaw muscle relaxation
NIBP SAP may approximate MAP). Seriously life-
[with the exception of ketamine), and absence of gross
threatening pressures are MAP <55 mmHg and DAP
 muscle movement, evaluation of the circulation primarily
<45 mmHg. Unfortunately, NIBP measurements are not
using heart rate and blood pressure and identification of
always precise and values obtained may differ from actual
 inadequate oxygenation by observation of gum colour and
values by up to 20 mmHg. even when factors that com-
use of a pulse oximeter. Not all clinicians agree on whether
monly produce errors in measurement are corrected (Box
management of regurgitation should include lavage. The
15.7). Therefore, invasive blood pressure measurements
adequacy of inflation of the endotracheal tube cuff should
are recommended for dogs at risk for circulatory failure
be checked by inflation of the lungs and listening for a
when facilities for measurement are available. Invasive
leak. A stomach tube may be temporarily inserted to deter-
method of pressure measurement involves insertion of a
mine the extent and nature of the gastric reflux and to
 22 gauge (20-24 gauge) catheter under aseptic conditions
drain as much fluid as possible The oesophagus may be
into a peripheral artery and connecting it by saline-filled
lavaged with water, but if done, extreme care must be taken
tubing to an electrical pressure transducer and a monitor.
to avoid leakage of fluid into the trachea by ensuring cuff
 Stiff tubing specifc for blood pressure monitoring pro-
inflation and positioning the dog's pharynx lower than its 
duces the best recording, however, less expensive venous
neck. Use of a double lumen tube, one lumen for instilling
extension tubing is a practical alternative for clinical cases
water and the other for suction, may minimize cranial
and mean pressures remain accurate The transducer must
spread of fluid (Pascoe Pl. personal communication)
Metoclopramide administration may be advisable
 During maintenance of anaesthesia in healthy animals.
life-threatening2
abnormalities
are most commonly
Box 15.7 Factors influencing precision of
hypoxia during injectable anaesthesia with the dogs
non-invasive blood pressure measurement
breathing air and hypotension during inhalation anaes-
thesia. Hypoventilation is common but is easily treated
Width of the cuff for most monitors should be equal to
with assisted or controlled ventilation. Heart rate can be
40% (40-60) of the circumference of the limb or tail
monitored with multiple items of equipment. Simultane-
Falsely high values when:
Ous comparison of HR (ECG or stethoscope) with pulse
★ Cuff is too small 
rate (palpation or blood pressure monitor) may identify
 Cuff too loose
a dysrhythmia. During maintenance of anaesthesia, HR
● Cuff slipped down over carpus or hock
should not decrease below 50 beats/min in dogs. except
●Cuff is not level with heart (on tail in dorsally or
for animals receiving medetomidine or dexmedetomidine.
'aget aui go buibuey bal 'bop juagwnan Aluiais
Higher values are expected in very small and paediatric
cuff on forelimb with table in head-down tilt)
patients. It is important to look at the gums, not the
Falsely loww values when:
tongue when assessing mucous membrane colour. In
Cuff is too large
 general, pink mucous membranes indicate good periph-
★Cuff above heart level *
eral perfusion and adequate oxygenation. A bright pink
●Cuff deflated too quickly (Doppler)
colour indicates more vasodilation than a pale pink
colour. When vasoconstriction is present, the mucous
●Audible sound too soft (Doppler)
membranes are pale, even grey or white. Capillary refill
*Sometimes reads falsely high when dog is partly dorsal, partly
time (CRT) provides some information about tissue per-
lateral and leg with cuff is stretched up high
fusion. A CRT of l second is normal and prolonged time
454
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
OFF
35
OFF
OFF
ETCO2
2
OFF
INCO2
132
155
160
R
109
88
HR
PPR
CHECK SENSOR
1137
72
OFF
OFF
11:04
06
mmH
B
PRESSTHEROTARYKNOBTOFREEZETHEWWAVEFORMAREA
PRINTERNOPAPER
NIBPMODE:
PRINTER
TRENDS
QUICKSET
FREEZE
ALARMS
SETUP
MANUAL
Figure 15.15 This dog was breathing 35 breaths/min but moderately hypoventilating with an end-tidal COz of 47 mmHg.
MAP measured by oscillometric technique (B) was the same as obtained by invasive blood pressure measurement (A). Systolic
pressures were different.
be placed level with the heart [manubrium, spine or
Bradycardia
sternum with patient in lateral recumbency: mid-axilla or
1
Tachycardia
thoracic inlet with patient in dorsal recumbency) for the
 Slow irregular peripheral pulse
pressure to be accurate. The dorsal pedal artery located
+
MAP <65 mmHg
below the hock on the dorsomedial surface of the meta-
 Systolic pressure ≤80 mmHg
tarsus is the most popular for catheterization because the
CRT ≥2 seconds
artery is a reasonable size, the catheter is easily secured,
+
Weak or non-palpable femoral pulse
and limited injury will be produced should the procedure 
1
Apnoea or panting
result in trauma and haematoma formation (see Fig.
+
SpO ≤90%. PaO ≤60 mmHg
2.16). Catheters can also be placed in the anterior tibial,
ETCO2≤28mmHg
coccygeal, metacarpal, auricular, lingual, or femoral arter-
 Gums bright pink, almost white, or grey
ies. Dilute heparin saline [4 units/mL) should be used for
+
 Dark blood or little oozing at incision site
multiple flushing of the artery as heparinization of the
 Intestinal colour pale pink or white.
patient can occur with stronger solutions, especially in tiny
dogs. The waveform will provide information on blood
suis asau apnoui ot sneis zued ui saueuo inq
flow (area under the curve) and cardiac contractility
(such as a severe drop in HR, MAP, SpO2 or ETCO2) may
[steepness of the rising portion of the curve). ECG leads
be an indication of severe cardiovascular decompensation
should be attached as standard LA, RA, LL either with clips
and the first step is severely to decrease or cease anaesthetic
or with electrodes clipped onto needles inserted through
administration (vaporizer setting) and to alert people in
the skin, or sticky electrode pads on the paws and moni-
the room. Slower onset or less severe signs may be treated
tored on Lead I1. The ECG provides information on heart
symptomatically but search for the cause is essential. The
rate and rhythm. Its main use in anaesthesia is for early
depth of anaesthesia should be evaluated and adjusted;
recognition of ectopic beats or dysrhythmias that could
centrally placed eye, lack of palpebral reflex, partial or
lead to cardiac arrest The ECG is not an indicator of blood
complete pupillary dilation are associated with deep
pressure or tissue perfusion and a normal ECG can be
anaesthesia. Bradycardia may be induced by some opioids
present in the absence of an effective cardiac output or
but also may be the result of various causes of hypoten-
blood pressure.
 sion. Sometimes the cause of cardiovascular collapse is
 Inadequate circulation may be present when any of the
suspected because of some event occurring a few minutes
following are identified:
earlier, such as a change in body position (see Fig. 2.11).
455
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
moving a dog with an abdominal mass into dorsal recum-
increased or decreased according to results obtained from
bency, following an IV injection of an antibiotic, opioid,
measurement of blood glucose and, at the same time bal-
sedative or anaesthetic agent, epidural nerve block, surgi-
anced electrolyte solution should also be infused at
cal exploration of the abdomen, or rapid blood loss.
3-7 mL/kg/h.
Sometimes an apparent sudden cardiovascular decompen-
sation is actually the culmination of a progressive decrease
Cardiovascular support
in cardiovascular function from gradually increasing depth
of anaesthesia, haemorrhage without fluid replacement, or
 Oxygen delivery to tissues is determined by blood flow, in
 progressive hypoventilation.
turn determined by the cardiac output, arterial blood pres-
When monitoring ventilation, it is essential to count RR
sure and diameter of the blood vessels (vasoconstriction
 and estimate depth of the breaths. Fast RR is hyperpnoea
 Or vasodilation), and the amount of oxygen carried in the
and should not be confused with hyperventilation. Arte-
blood. Thus, tissue hypoxia can occur in the presence of
rial PCOz may be normal, high or low with a rapid RR.
 decreased tissue blood flow despite an adequate haemo-
Assisted or controlled ventilation is used to correct
globin content and Oz saturation or in a dog with satisfac-
hypoventilation.
tory cardiovascular status that is anaemic Measurement of
 Other parameters that should be monitored are body
 SpO2 is not sufficient to ensure adequate tissue oxygena-
temperature and blood glucose concentration in dogs at
tion. Since blood pressure is the product of cardiac output
risk for hypoglycaemia. Hypothermia, 34-35°C (93.2-
and peripheral vascular resistance targeting heart rate,
95 °F), will significantly decrease the concentration of iso-
cardiac contractility, and pre- and afterload can effectively
flurane required for anaesthesia (wilson et al., 2006c).
treat inadequate circulation (Fig. 15.16). A common cause
of low blood pressure during anaesthesia is vasodilation
Fluid therapy
induced by the inhalation agent. Decreasing the vaporizer
setting may be all that is required to improve blood pres-
Crystalloid fluids are commonly administered IV during
sure and, if necessary, supplementing analgesia with
anaesthesia. Balanced electrolyte solution, such as lactated
injectable dnugs. Expansion of blood volume with an addi-
Ringer's solution, Hartmann's solution, or Normosol-R is
tional infusion of crystalloid, 10-20 mL/kg, may improve
 usually recommended for all anaesthesia episodes lasting
 cardiac output but have little impact on MAP in normo-
an hour or longer and in very young, old, or sick patients.
volaemic dogs. Hypotension due to vasodilation from
Fluid loss is increased by evaporation during laparotomy
epidural analgesia with a local anaesthetic agent may
or thoracotomy and for these animals balanced electrolyte
require in infusion of colloid, such as hetastarch,
solution at 10 mL/kg/h IV is recommended. An infusion
5-10 mL/kg, in addition to crystalloid and administration
rate of 10 mL/kg/h should be halved after 1-2 hours in
of ephedrine, 0.06 mg/kg, or dopamine, 7 μg/kg/min.
normovolaemic animals. An infusion rate of 5 mL/kg/h
 Bradycardia may be treated by injection of an anticholin-
from the beginning of anaesthesia is adequate when a
ergic or may be corrected when cardiac output and blood
procedure is performed without celiotomy or blood loss.
 pressure are improved by other means. Irregular heart
Recommendations for lower fluid infusion rates arise from
rhythms must be diagnosed using an ECG and treated
the concern for fluid retention postoperatively and some
appropriately (see Chapter 21). In the absence of an
discussion about this concern is given in Chapter 2l and
obvious cause of decreased venous return, myocardial
in Chapter 2 in the section on monitoring of urine volume.
function may be improved by administration of a catecho-
Accurate infusion of the volume of fluid in very small
lamine (Table 15.ll). Dopamine and dobutamine are
patients is essential and may be accomplished using a
 rapidly metabolized and must be administered as continu-
paediatric administration set delivering 60 drops/mL (see 
 Ous infusions after preparing a dilute solution in a bag of
Box 10.2), by using an infusion pump or syringe driver/
saline (Box 15.8). Each practice should have one method
pump (see Figs 10.5 & 10.6). or intermittent manual
 of preparing vasoactive drugs to avoid confusion, such as
 administration of small boluses of fluid from a syringe
using one size fluid bag and one size infusion set (paedi-
 containing a fxed volume. Restricted fluid administration
atric 60 drops/mL). In many cases, either dopamine or
to 5 mL/kg/h is recommended for some patients in which
 dobutamine may be the dnug of choice since both increase
overload may result in adverse effect, for example, animals
ardiac output Dobutamine may be preferred in dogs
with severe mitral insuffciency, cardiomyopathy, Or a
with gastrointestinal hypoperfusion. Dopamine is metab-
olized to norepinephrine and is the drug of choice for
should receive fluids that will increase oncotic pressure as
treatment of cardiac arrest and AV heart block. Dopamine,
part of their fluid therapy, such as hetastarch, 5-10 mL/kg
7 μg/kg/min, was found to be more effective than dob-
administered over 15-30 minutes, or plasma. Patients
utamine, 6 μg/kg/min, in causing changes in MAP in dogs
with low blood glucose or who are at risk for hypoglycae-
with moderate blood loss compared with responses in the
mia (<3 months of age diabetic, insulinoma) should be
normovolaemic state (Dyson & Sinclair, 2006). Increasing
given 5% dextrose in water at 3 mL/kg/h. The rate can be
the dobutamine infusion rate to l0 μg/kg/min increased
456
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Hypotension
Low vascular tone
Low cardiac output
Decrease vasodilation:
+ Decrease vaporizer %
+ Ephedrine
Expand blood volume:
Low heart rate
Low stroke volume
*LRS* 10 mL/kg challenge
+Hetastarch 5-10 mL/kg
Increase heart rate:
·Atropine
·Glycopyrrolate
·Dopamine
Ventricular
Decreased
dysfunction
venous return
Increase contractility:
Find and treat couse
Dobutamine
· Expand blood volume
Dopamine
+ Decrease anaesthesia
Fluidvolume
+Remove caval obstruction
*LRS =Balanced electrolyte solution
Decrease irritabiity:
 Manage blood loss
$pVCs = Premature ventricular complexes
Lidocaine for PVCss
Figure 15.16 Simplified chart for management of hypotension directed at some of the physiological abnormalities that may
 cause hypotension and listing options for treatment
arterial pressure, cardiac output and contractility in experi-
Animals in septic shock may have persistent vasodila-
mental dogs with severe blood loss during isoflurane
tion and MAP <60 mmHg that is not responsive to
anaesthesia (Curtis et al., 1989). Infusion of epinephrine.
fluid resuscitation and administration of dobutamine,
0.5 μg/kg/min, after haemorrhage increased cardiovascu-
dopamine, and ephedrine. Relative adrenal insufficiency
       
aq s uoisuo pue so odas aos u sio
 Dopamine may increase ventricular irritability in patients
associated with low plasma cortisol concentrations
with traumatic myocarditis, myocardial ischaemia, and
(Burkitt et al., 2007). Arterial blood pressure may be
cardiomyopathy. The beginning infusion rate of dob-
improved by supplemental administration of hydrocorti-
utamine is usually 5 μg/kg/min and for dopamine is 7 μg/
sone. Use of a vasopressor, such as phenylephrine or nore-
kg/min and the rate decreased following an appropriate
pinephrine that stimulate Qi-receptors or arginine
cardiovascular response to MAP 70 mmHg (Table 15.11).
vasopressin that stimulates vasopressin V1 receptors may
Both agents may induce increased heart rates, tachycardia,
be effective treatment. Concerns with use of these vaso-
or PVCs. Occasionally dobutamine slows the HR or initi-
ates second degree AV block. In this situation, the dob-
left ventricle; and (2) vasoconstriction may decrease organ
utamine infusion rate should be slowed and, if considered
blood flow and induce gastrointestinal ischaemia
1and
appropriate, atropine or glycopyrrolate administered.
renal failure. Thus, these agents are only used after resus-
When low blood pressure persists despite volume expan-
citation has been attempted with fluids and dobutamine.
sion and dopamine or dobutamine infusion, a bolus injec-
dopamine, and ephedrine administration. Arginine vaso-
tion of ephedrine, 0.06-0.1 mg/kg. may be an effective
 pressin is generally recommended for use when phenyle-
stimulant. Ephedrine, 50 mg/mL, is diluted to a concen-
 phrine or norepinephrine has failed to improve MAP and.
tration of 2.5 mg/mL by mixing 0.5 mL of ephedrine with
in this situation, it is administered at a much lower rate
9.5 mL of saline. Onset of action may be within a minute
than for treatment of cardiac arrest (see Table 15.1l). The
but may take up to 5 minutes and the duration of ephe-
mechanisms of vasodilatory septic shock and role of
drine is 20-40 minutes. Subsequent injections may
arginine vasopressin have been reviewed (Scroggin &
have less effect (tachyphylaxis). Ephedrine may cause
Quandt 2009).
tachycardia. Ephedrine augments venous return by causing
Decreased
preload
decreases  cardiac output and
splenic contraction.
pressure Venous return to the heart may be reduced
457
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 15.11 Drugs to be used for circulatory support
Drug
Drug class
Dose range
Frequency
Route
Indications
Dobutamine
Catecholamine
 3-10 μg/kg/min 
Continuous infusion 
IV
Hypotension
 Dopamine
 Catecholamine
 5-10 μg/kg/min 
 Continuous infusion 
IV
Hypotension, 3rd degree A-V
 block, cardiac arrest
Ephedrine
Catecholamine
02'0-90°0
Bolus, repeat in
AI
Hypotension
30-40 min
Epinephrine
Catecholamine
0.01-0.015 mg/kg
Repeat in 3 min if heart IV, Intratracheal, Cardiac arrest
bolus
 beat not restored
Intraosseous
Lidocaine
Antiarrhythmic
12 mg/kg
10-15 min
IV
Ventricular premature complexes
Lidocaine
 Antiarrhythmic
0.025-0.08 mg/kg/min  Continuous infusion
IV
Ventricular premature complexes
Naloxone
Opicid antagonist 0.02 mg/kg
Bolus, repeat in 20 min IV, IM
 When opicid present: hypotension
if necessary
unresponsive to other
treatment, cardiac arrest
Phenylephrine
Vasopressor
 1-4 μg/kg/min
 Continuous infusion 
AI
Septic shock hypotension
unresponsive to other treatment
 Norepinephrine 
Vasopressor
0.01-1 μg/kg/min
Continuous infusion
IV
Septic shock hypotension
unresponsive to other treatment
vasopressin
Vasopressor
0.05 unit/kg
Bolus, may repeat once IV
 Septic shock hypotension
0.01-0.04 unit /min
 Continuous infusion 
IV, do not
unresponsive to other treatment
exceed dose
 position of the dog can result in hypotension. Splanchnic
Box 15.8 Preparation of a 100 μg/mL
vasodilation initiated by mesenteric traction (mesenteric
dopamine or dobutamine solution*
traction syndrome) or release of catecholamine and
vasoactive mediators during manipulation of an intus-
Target concentration × Total volume
mL of drug to
 susception, septic tissue pancreatic or prostatic abscess,
Drug concentration
add to total volume
or
from a catecholamine-secreting tumour (carcinoid
syndrome) also decreases venous return. An absolute
Example Dopamine
decrease in venous return occurs during hypovolaemia
and blood loss.
0. 1mg/mL × 500 mL
1.25 ml to add to
Blood loss should be continuously estimated during
40 mg/mL
 500 mL bag of 0.9% saline
anaesthesia. The number of blood soaked gauzes can be
counted and multiplied by 6, 8, or 10 mL, depending on
Example Dobutamine
the dimensions of the gauze and your estimate of gauze
saturation. Blood on the drapes, lap sponges, floor and
0.1mg/ml ×500 ml
4 ml to add to
12.5 mg/mL
 500 mL bag of 0.9% saline
suction bottle must be added to the total. Comparison of
the estimated blood loss with the calculated values of
*Drugs are available in different concentrations; different size
10%, 15%, and 20% of the patient's blood volume, esti-
bags may be used.
mated at 86 mL/kg, provides a guide when assessing the
 severity of blood loss. Cardiovascular function becomes
significantly impaired in healthy animals during anaesthe-
sia at a loss of 15% of their circulating blood volume, with
mechanically or be due to a relative or an absolute decrease
cardiac output decreasing more than blood pressure. Many
in blood volume. Increased intra-abdominal pressure,
 dogs can tolerate blood loss up to 20% provided they have
an abdominal mass or gravid utenus, or increased intratho-
received fluid therapy. Sick or old dogs. and dogs with
racic pressure due to increased anaesthetic circuit pressure
cardiac disease may not be able support more than
may mechanically restrict venous return. A change in body
12-15% blood loss. Further, the speed of blood loss
458
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
influences the cardiovascular changes and a loss of 5% of
a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/min and tidal volume
blood volume in less than 5 minutes may result in a meas-
(breath) of 15 mL/kg. or with a respiratory rate of 20
urable decrease in blood pressure.
breaths/min and tidal volume of 1l mL/kg. A fixed RR can
Infusion of balanced electrolyte solution at 2-2.5 times
be used for all patients regardless of the spontaneous res-
the volume of blood lost will expand blood volume suf-
piratory rate of the dog. Calculation of tidal volume
ficiently to maintain cardiac output. Crystalloid fluid
should take into account the body conformation of the
leaves the intravascular space over 60-90 minutes with a
patient. Thus, the tidal volume should be calculated based
high proportion of the load remaining in the interstitial
on the ideal weight for an overweight patient and the tidal
space. To decrease the crystalloid fluid load and avoid
volume may have to be larger in lean dogs. The target tidal
Oedema, treatment of moderate blood loss should include
volume is produced in most patients with a peak inspira-
infusion of a colloid, such as hetastarch 5-20 mL/kg. on
tory pressure of 15-20 cm HzO as measured by the pres-
a l:1 basis to replace at least part of the blood loss. The
sure gauge on the delivery circuit. Using inspiratory
impact of blood loss can be tracked with serial measure-
 pressure as a guide to the volume delivered may be the
ments of Hct and total protein when IV fluid is adminis-
only means of measurement but as a guide it can be quite
tered to maintain normovolaemia. The Het should not be
inaccurate Small thin dogs may require less pressure to
 allowed to decrease below 20% at which point O2 delivery
inflate the lungs whereas a heavy dog may require a pres-
to tissues becomes compromised. Splenic contraction
sure of 25-30 cm HzO, especially if positioned on the
Occurs during recovery from anaesthesia and results in a
operating table in a prone, head-down tilt for perineal
3-4% increase in Hct.
 sp u assa su  s
healthy lungs should be 40 cmH2O, although it should be
rarely necessary to reach that value, and a lower maximum
Artificial ventilation
  Aod m o u o  o 
Hypoventilation commonly occurs in overweight, senior,
trauma. Ventilation strategy for dogs with pulmonary
and geriatric dogs, following administration of opioids,
disease should include a tidal volume ≤10 mL/kg with low
injectable anaesthetics or high concentrations of inhala-
airway pressure. During manual ventilation, adjusting the
-jueuay lesiop 'eauuad suunp ssop ul pue 'sjuase uon
amount of squeeze on the reservoir bag can be a combina-
nectomy, or upper abdominal surgeries. Hypoventilation
tion of observation of peak inspiratory pressure, degree of
may be the cause of inadequate uptake of inhalation agent
collapse of the bag, excursion of the thorax, and (if avail-
and a depth of anaesthesia that is too light for the medical
able) measurement of end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2). Ventilation
 Or surgical procedure to be performed. All ofthese patients
 parameters should be adjusted to achieve ETCO2 values of
will benefit from artificial or controlled ventilation (CV.
30-40 mmHg.
controlled mandatory ventilation,
. intermittent positive
 The increase in intrathoracic pressure that occurs during
pressure ventilation, IPPV). IPPV will be required for
controlled ventilation impedes return of venous blood to
intrathoracic surgery, during neuromuscular paralysis, in
the heart and may decrease cardiac output. The longer the
neurological procedures that either include muscle weak-
 inspiratory time the more adverse the cardiac effect. The
ness or dictate the need for normal intracranial pressure,
best technique to avoid excessive depression of cardiac
 and for respiratory or cardiac resuscitation.
 output and blood pressure is to maintain a short inspira-
Oxygen flow rates into the breathing circuit should not 
 tory time and a longer expiratory time. Time of squeezing
need to be increased at the onset of IPPV. When IPPV is
the bag should be about 1.2 seconds for most patients, so
needed to decrease hypercapnia but no change in the
count: Squeeze 100l, release during 1002, pause 1003.
depth of anaesthesia is desired, the vaporizer seting
pause 1004, squeeze 1001, release during 1002 etc. Pres-
should be decreased by 20-25% to adjust for the increase
sure in the circuit must drop to zero during expiration. If
in alveolar ventilation and anaesthetic uptake. When a
the pop-off valve is screwed down for artificial ventilation,
circle circuit with a vaporizer in the circle is being used,
it will need to be released when the bag is full. It is impor-
the vaporizer setting should be decreased substantially. In
tant to avoid distractions when the pop-off valve is closed
this case, the positive pressure generated in the circuit and
 because excessive pressure in the circuit can kill a patient.
the increase in gas flow through the vaporizer can result
In the event that excess pressure does develop. the anaes-
in a dramatic increase in inspired anaesthetic concentra-
thetist must realize that the decrease in coronary blood
tion, with potentially fatal consequences.
flow may progress to cardiac arrest several minutes after
Artificial ventilation is achieved by generating a positive
the pressure in the circuit is released. Use of a pop-off valve
 pressure at the entrance of the endotracheal tube high
with a 'quick-close' button to facilitate artificial ventilation
enough to force air into the lungs. Positive pressure is
is a safety precaution (see Fig. 10.16).
generated in a breathing circuit when the outflow through
A ventilator allows the anaesthetist's hands to be free for
the pop-off valve or exit to the scavenger is closed and the
other tasks and ensures accurate and even breaths. Details
reservoir bag is squeezed. Arterial COz concentrations
about ventilator construction and use are presented in
within normal range can be achieved in healthy dogs with
Chapter 9. Some ventilators have a pressure feedback
459
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 15.12 Troubleshooting ventilator problems
Complication
Potential causes
Bellovs not completely filing
Oz fails to enter bellows
Oz source to anaesthesia machine failure
Ventilator hose not connected to anaesthesia machine
Leaks present
 Pop-off (APL) valve open
 Endotracheal tube cuff needs more air
Hose connections need tightening
 Absorbent dust on canister washers
Irregular bellows movement, spontanecus
Inadequate depth of anaesthesia
 brea thing overriding ventilator setting
Vaporizer % high encugh?
Time interval from last opioid dose?
Increase in surgical stimulation?
 Hypoxaemia
 Note: not all hypoxic animals breathe against the ventilator
High PaCOz
Inadequate ventilator settings
Inadequate volume delivery (hose expansion, endotracheal tube cuff leak)
Rebreathing COz (high deadspace from adapters, one-way valve stuck open or
closed, exhausted CO, absorbent)
Ventilator pattern changes
Mechanical obstruction to air flov 
Surgeon or surgical compression of thorax
Kinked or obstructed endotracheal tube
 Decreased driving Oz pressure 
Oz supply to ventilator failing
adapter that must be inserted into the expiratory limb of
Unsatisfactory IPPV may originate with the ventilator
a circle circuit that triggers an alarm when pressure is too
(Table 15.12) and if the problem is serious or not easily
high or too low in the circuit The control box has settings
identifed, consider returning to manual ventilation for
for RR (frequency) and tidal volume (flow rate), and
safety of the patient while the ventilator problem is cor-
sometimes inspiratory : expiratory time ratio (set usually at
rected. Inadequate volume delivery frequently is the result
1 : 2 or 1:3) and maximum inspiratory pressure alarm (set 
of small leaks around the endotracheal tube or hose con-
at 25-30 cmHzO). These values are usually preset before
nections, or due to loss of delivery volume from expansion
connecting the dog to the ventilator. Manually delivering
in the hoses to the patient (expansion can be easily
several breaths in quick succession to decrease PaCO2
observed during inspiration). In the latter case, the volume
before connection to the ventilator may smooth the transi-
set on the ventilator must be increased in order for the
tion from spontaneous to controlled ventilation. When
calculated tidal volume to be delivered to the dog. Signifi-
the ventilator is turned on, the chest should be observed
ant rebreathing of CO2, and an increase in PaCO2, will
for movement and the bellows movement for volume
Occur if one of the one-way (unidirectional valves) is stuck
delivery, and the pressure gauge on the circuit or bellows
Open or closed. The valves become sticky from moisture
for peak pressure. The setings should then be adjusted to
and absorbent dust and must be cleaned. Partial obstruc-
fit the individual animal. If the dog was moderately to
tion of the endotracheal tube can occur if the end of the
severely hypoventilating before connection to the ventila.
tube lies on the wall of the trachea or enters a bronchus.
tor, it may take 5-10 minutes for the PaCO2/end-tidal CO2
or is compressed by retraction during neck surgery, for
to decrease to normal values. The depth of anaesthesia
example, ventral cervical decompression or mass removal.
must be monitored and the vaporizer setting adjusted
Personnel leaning on the thorax or insertion of retractors
accordingly. When the ventilator is not functioning
as
for upper abdominal surgery will also limit thoracic
e au yau isy rsu isausaue au 'paaxa
expansion.
●Is the thorax moving in concert with the bellows?
●Auscultate with a stethoscope for air sounds in both
Postoperative management
sides of the chest
Is the dog hypoxic - gum colour, SpO2?
The dog should breathe l00% oxygen for about 10
●Are the CRT and blood pressures acceptable?
minutes, or shorter or longer as seems appropriate, after
460
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Box 15.9 Predicted scenarios for decreased
 oxygenation during recovery from anaesthesia
 Heavy sedation with residual inhalation agent
 Long duration anaesthesia, especially with analgesia
CRI
Anaesthesia protocol included NMBA
 Overweight or heavily built dogs
Senior and geriatric patients
 Brachycephalic breeds
Head, neck, chest, or abdominal bandages
 Elizabethan collar
 Pharyngotomy tube
Figure 15.17 This dog was hypoxaemic during recovery
from anaesthesia. SpOz returned to normal after releasing
Local swelling from oral/pharyngeal surgery
the pressure on the abdomen and thorax by cutting the
Laryngeal paralysis after neck surgery
abdominal bandage. The distance between the cut ends has
Pulmonary disease or thoracic surgery
been marked by arrows.
NMBA = neuromuscular blocking agent
catheterization in males, to avoid soiling of bandages from
urination in the cage during recovery. Expressing the
discontinuing anaesthetic administration. Hypoxaemia
bladder is important when the patient has received an
may develop if the animal is disconnected and allowed to
epidural that might result in an inability to urinate for
breathe room air when still deeply anaesthetized. O2
several hours. The volume of urine collected should be
should be supplied for at least 5 minutes after NzO is dis-
measured or estimated to assess adequacy of urine flow
continued to avoid diffusion hypoxia. A pulse oximeter is
during anaesthesia. Approximately 1 mL/kg/h of urine
a valuable monitoring aid during recovery from anaesthe-
should have been produced. when the volume is less,
sia and a probe can be clipped to the tongue, lip, ear, toe
wrine output should be monitored after anaesthesia to
 Or interdigital web, or a rectal probe can be used (see Fig.
ensure that urine volume increases when the dog is con-
15.1). Patients at increased risk for hypoxaemia include
 scious and regains mobility. Blood should be collected for
dogs that have received heavy doses of an O2-sedative, μ
 measurement of Hct and TP concentration from dogs that
opioid, or an infusion of an opioid or opioid combination
have suffered blood loss. If the dog has not yet regained
(Box 15.9). Old, overweight, and ill patients are at greater
consciousness at the time of blood draw, the Hct will
risk for hypoventilation during and after anaesthesia.
increase later by several % due to splenic contraction. It
 Head and neck bandages easily cause external pressure on
should be remembered that contribution by hetastarch is
the pharynx and obstruction after tracheal extubation.
not recorded by the refractometer. Blood glucose should
One trick to avoid bandaging too tightly is for the assistant
be measured in diabetic dogs, and in those that are less
to holdthe dog's head in a normal partially flexed position
than 3 months of age or are thin.
as the bandage is applied. It takes experience to apply a
Rectal temperature should be measured and heat
thoracic or abdominal bandage to an anaesthetized dog
 applied when the temperature is low. The temperature of
that is not too tight and not too loose Measurement of
animals frequently decreases further after the end of
SpO2 when O2 is discontinued will identify bandages that
 surgery when the covering drapes are removed. Warming
are too tight. Partial splitting of the bandage will be fol-
is highly effective when using a device blowing hot air into
) uos uony ui as ue aq pmo
pads placed over the animal or overhead radiant heat
15.17). Airway obstruction after tracheal extubation may
(hospital infant warmer). Once the patient's temperature
occur in brachycephalic breeds due to nasal mucosal con-
has reached 36.4°C (97.5°F) a cage with a heated floor
gestion, any dog from pharyngeal swelling after soft palate
may be sufficient to maintain body temperature The dog
Or oral surgery, and from pharyngeal/laryngeal compres-
should never be turned side-to-side as a form of stimula-
sion by a pharyngotomy tube or an Elizabethan collar or a
tion as the change in body position results in an acute
head and neck bandage. It is important to hear or feel air
drop in blood pressure in some individuals (see Fig. 2. 11 ).
movement through the mouth or nose and not to rely on
and gastric reflux may also be initiated.
observation of chest wall movement.
When regurgitation has occurred, or when an oral or
 Before the dog regains consciousness, except following
nasal procedure has been performed, the mouth and pha-
laparotomy or some laparoscopies, the urinary bladder
ryngeal area around the epiglottis must be cleaned before
should be expressed by abdominal palpation, or
extubation and gentle suction of the nasal passages is
461
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
advisable. Extubation may be done with the dog in sternal
facemask supplied with O2 through a length of tubing
position and after the cuff has been only partially deflated
from an Oz cylinder with a regulator and flowmeter (Fig.
in an attempt to squeeze any fluid in the trachea forward
15. 19). An O2 chamber, if available, can be used to supply
into the pharynx.
 atargeted inspired concentration of 40-60% O2 and warm
Tracheal extubation is normally performed when the
the animal at the same time. A disadvantage is that access
 dog is sufficiently alert to swallow and withdraw its tongue
 to the patient is restricted and openingthe door or window
back into the mouth. The tube should be withdrawn
for examination decreases the cage O2 concentration.
between the incisor teeth while the jaws are held apart or
Nasal administration of O2 may achieve a 40% inspired
the head and neck are overextended to minimize closing
O2 concentration and can be a more economical method
power of the lower jaw. Removal of the endotracheal tube
of administration. One or two nasal tubes are inserted and
through the side of the mouth may result in inadvertent
secured to the dog between the eyes or on the side[s) of
severing of the tube with subsequent inhalation or swal-
the face (Table 15.13, Fig. 15.18). Thetubes can be inserted
lowing of part of the tube If the tube has been inhaled,
while the dog is still anaesthetized or later using subcuta-
the dog must be immediately lightly re-anaesthetized with
neous blebs of lidocaine at the sites of suture or staple
an injectable agent and Oz supplied by mask. In big dogs.
placement. O2 is humidifed by bubbling through sterile
a smaller endotracheal tube may be inserted inside the
water and insuflated into the patient at l00 mL/kg/min
broken tube, the cuff inflated, and the tube with the larger
(Fig. 15.20). The oxygen delivery tubing should be secured
piece attached slowly withdrawn. When an endoscope is
t a collar or tape around the neck.
available it can be used to view directly the piece of the
endotracheal tube and facilitate grasping of the tube with
Analgesia
fne forceps or biopsy punch. The endoscope can also be
Behaviours during recovery from surgery may be obvious
used to retrieve pieces of a tube that were swallowed;
Or subtle Thrashing and loudly vocalizing may be
failing thata gastrotomy must be performed. After retrieval,
all pieces of the tube should be fitted together to ensure
that no piece has been left behind.
Oxygen supplementation
O2 therapy should be given to dogs that have trouble
adequately oxygenating. Initially. O2 can be supplied
through a facemask attached to the anaesthesia circuit
(Fig. 15.18). The simplest method for supplying O2 for a
short time is 'flow-by' oxygen involving a loosely applied
 Figure 15.19 Equipment for Oz supplementation. O2
cylinder in a portable stand with a combined regulator and
Figure 15.18 Dog recovering from anaesthesia. Oxygen is
flowmeter attached. The Oz flow rate is dialed in L/min and
being supplied via facemask. A nasal tube has been inserted
delivered through tubing and a facemask (mask is resting on
for insufflation of Oz after the dog is placed in a cage.
the handle of the stand).
462
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
a a woy adeosa oi su snoy 9 Aq pue umed
Table 15.13 Placement of a nasal Oz tube
Surgery caused the dogs to spend more time sleeping in
lateral recumbency in the frst 12 hours, and decreased
Supplies
Placement
grooming but increased licking at the incision site After
 Polyvinyl or rubber
 Measure tube from medial canthus to 
surgery, the dogs exhibited less ofthe behaviours described
feeding tube 5 F or 8 F
for anaesthesia only. Lip lifing (a warning of aggression)
nostril
 Permanent pen marker
was only seen in the dogs after surgery without oxymor-
 Mark distance with pen
phone. Anaesthesia with oxymorphone caused no changes
 Lubricant gel
Lubricate tube
in waking/sleeping pattern but the dogs spent more time
in sternal position and exhibited less greeting behaviour.
 Suture, haemostat
 Push nose dorsally, introduce tube
Thus, a reluctance to rise or a decrease in responsiveness
 forceps, skin staples
dorsally for a few mm, then
 medially and ventrally
to an observer can be related to opioid administration and
Suture or staple at the nares, between
umrelated to the presence of pain. The combined effect of
the eyes, and on the forehead
a go junoue a paseaui auudoxo pue ains
in lateral recumbency in the first 12 hours and decreased
 responsiveness to the observer. By 6-12 hours, behaviours 
returned to normal at a faster rate than in dogs after
 a su an  
behavioural measurements detected a difference between
the surgery groups and found that use of oxymorphone
resulted in more rapid return of normal behaviour after
ovariohysterectomy. In contrast, the numerical pain scales
indicated increased pain in the dogs that had surgery and
did not differentiate between administration of pain med-
ication or placebo. This was surprising as the two surgery
Aaui uaum aul e ie saioss uied ieuis paniaai sdnon
HUMIDIFIER
respond appropriately to the observer. This similarity in
pain scores may have been appropriate or may have been
 due to variation between observers or due to weighting of
some of the scaling parameters. For example a rigid stance
(often associated with pain) was common in the dogs that
did not have surgery (Hardie et al., 1997). Evaluation is
further complicated by the fact that there are individual
 and breed differences in tolerance for pain.
Figure 15.20 Oxygen flowmeter and humidifier containing
Various types of pain scoring scales have been described
sterile water for humidification of Oz delivered by nasal
in an attempt to detect severity of pain and provide a guide
insufflation.
for analgesia therapy (see Chapter 5). To complete a visual
analogue scale (VAS), the patient is observed for a specific
attributable to pain or anxiety or Stage II anaesthesia.
behaviour and the observer places a mark on a line on
Clinical assessment may be diffcult, resulting in an incor-
which one end (o) represents no pain and the other end
rect assessment ofthe degree of pain and subsequent inter.
represents the most pain possible, using a scale of 0-10 or
pretation for treatment. It is important to differentiate the
0-l0o. Use of a numerical rating scale is similar except
effects of anaesthesia and analgesic dnugs from the conse-
that a number is assigned to the behaviour where 0 repre-
quences of surgery. One investigation observed behaviours
sents normal or preprocedural behaviour and 2 or 3 rep-
after anaesthesia and ovariohysterectomy by videotaping
resents abnormal behaviour (Conzemius et al., l997:
the dogs for 24 hours and using hourly observation and
Holton et al.,1998a; Firth & Haldane, 1999). Evaluations
interaction to assign sedation and pain scores (Hardie
 of pain scoring techniques have discovered that measure-
et al., 1997). Control dogs were anaesthetized without
 ments of some clinical signs, such as HR and RR, do not
surgery. Half of the surgery and control dogs were given
accurately reflect the severity of postoperative pain.
oxymorphone 2.5 mg/m², approximately 0.05 mg/kg. IM
Although combining scores from a variety of observations
before anaesthesia and at 6, 12, and 18 hours thereafter.
including activity, mental status, posture, vocalization, is
Dogs that were anaesthetized without oxymorphone or
believed to provide a reliable assessment of pain (Firth &
surgery spent one-half to three-quarters of their time
 Haldane, 1999), scores from different observers may vary
awake At all times they actively interacted with the
considerably (Holton et al., 1998b). Forms for assessment
observer, standing up and orienting, tail wagging, door
of acute pain designed to be easy to use are the Glasgow
463
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
potential decrease in blood pressure, and decreased effec-
Table 15.14 Examples of IM dose rates of opioids for
tiveness of the pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes, with
analgesia in dogs in the early recovery period*
increased risk for aspiration. Both abrupt and progressive
development of hypotension may develop after even slow
Opioid
Dose rate
Dosing interval
IV administration of an opioid at the end of anaesthesia.
(mg/kg)
(h)
Consequently, monitoring should be continued into the
Morphine
0.2-0.5
4
 recovery period. When an IV infusion of fentanyl or mor-
 phine is continued into the recovery period, the infusion
 Meperidine
2-3
2
may have to be discontinued for a short time if recovery
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.10
4
to consciousness and extubation is protracted. The infu-
 sion can be restarted when protective pharyngeal/laryngeal
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.10
4-6
reflexes have returned.
Methadone
0.2-0.5
4
Administration of a μ-receptor agonist, such as mor-
phine, hydromorphone or methadone, occasionally
Buprenorphine
0.006-0.02
4-6
results in an apparent dysphoria manifested as restless-
Butorphanol
0.2
2
ness, panting, whining and, occasionally, vocalization. It
may be difficult to differentiate between dysphoria and
*Dose depends on degree of residual anaesthetic effects
response to pain, however, further administration of an
opiate has no calming effect in these dogs. Options are to
administer a sedative and wait for the opiate to be metabo-
Pain Scale and the Colorado State Acute Pain Scale These
lized, try a partial reversal with a small dose of naloxone
forms can be downloaded as pdf documents by accessing
(this is hard to achieve without total reversal of analgesia),
www.google.com and entering Glasgow Pain Scale or
or administer a partial agonist such as buprenorphine or
Colorado Pain Scale.
butorphanol. With the latter choice, the degree of analge-
Plans for provision of analgesia should have been made
sia will be decreased.
before anaesthesia and a multimodal approach should be
employed that, whenever possible, includes local nerve
blocks. Parenterally administered opioids should be given
before consciousness returns. Although this may prolong
SPECIFIC PATIENT AND
the time to extubation, with experience appropriate
PROCEDURE PROBLEMS
timing of administration and dose will result in a dog
recovering quietly and smoothly from anaesthesia. Exam-
Cardiac disease
ples of opioids for immediate postoperative analgesia are
given in Table 15.14 but adjustments should be made for
General recommendations for anaesthesia of dogs with
the individual dog's status and anaesthetic protocol. Even
cardiac disease include premedication to present a calm,
when a transdermal fentanyl patch is applied 24 hours
unstressed animal for induction of anaesthesia and suff-
before surgery, the analgesia is usually insufficient for the
cient analgesia during and after surgery. Anaesthetic agents
first several hours after anaesthesia and must be supple-
should be chosen based on the pathophysiology of the
mented with another μ opioid. A small dose of sedative
disease and low dose rates used initially. Management of
may be needed to potentiate the effect of the opioid, for
cardiovascular function must include maintenance of an
example, acepromazine 0.005 -0.02 mg/kg IV, or diazepam
 adequate blood volume without overload, preoxygenation
0.2 mg/kg IV, or medetomidine 1-2 μg/kg IV, or dexme-
at induction of anaesthesia and provision of Oz during
detomidine 0.5-1 μg/kg IV. Acepromazine 
will
take
 anaesthesia to avoid hypoxaemia, cardiovascular support,
several minutes to take effect and before the dog will
and assisted or controlled ventilation to prevent moderate
quieten. Diazepam is a short-lived mild sedative more
to severe hypercarbia. Different forms of cardiac disease
suited to old patients. Dexmedetomidine is rapidly acting
require specifc management (Table 15.15).
and may induce profound sedation but the effect will
wane in 30-45 minutes. A dexmedetomidine infusion,
1 μg/kg/h, IV may contribute to calming an overactive
Mitral regurgitation
dog. The value of a ketamine infusion, 0.5 mg/kg/h, for
For dogs with mitral regurgitation, left ventricular preload
analgesia during the recovery period is questionable. Keta-
should be maintained by ensuring normal blood volume.
mine is not useful as a single agent however, concurrent
Fluid therapy is initially restricted in dogs with severe
infusions of fentanyl and ketamine appear to have a ben-
mitral insufficiency to 5 mL/kg/h of balanced electrolyte
eficial effect in some dogs compared with fentanyl alone.
solution but the individual's clinical response to fluid
Disadvantages of opioid administration include a vari-
may be used as an estimate of the best level of preload.
able degree of respiratory depression, even hypoxaemia,
These dogs with serious comorbid disease may require
464
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Table 15.15 Significance of cardiac disease to anaesthesia
Patient problem
Anaesthetic considerations
Mlitral valve insufficiency
Increased risk for hypotension
Consider increasing cardiac preload (Iv fluids to maintain blood volume), avoid decreasing
cardiac contractility, avoid bradycardia, and consider slightly decreasing cardiac afterload
(some vasodilation preferable to vasoconstriction).
Cardiomyopathy
Increased risk for hypotension and death
Careful choice of anaesthetic agents to avoid decreased cardiac contractility
Ventricular arrhythmias, e.g. automobile
 trauma, gastric dilata tion volvulus,
Consider use of agents that do not sensitize the myocardium to catecholamines, e.g.
splenic neoplasia
 benzodiazepines, opioids, ketamine, etomidate, alfaxalone, isoflurane, sevoflurane
Patent ductus arteriosus
Increased risk for hypotension before ligation and for pulmonary cedema after ligation.
Minimize dose of agents that cause vasodilation and limit intraoperative fluid rate to 6 ml/kg/h
more and other types of fluid to maintain venous return.
dysrhythmias or congestive heart failure may develop
Heart rate should be normal or slightly elevated as brady-
within 24 hours and up to 5 days after anaesthesia. Choice
cardia decreases cardiac output in the presence of mitral
of anaesthetic protocol should be directed towards
regurgitation. Anticholinergic drugs may be omitted from
avoiding tachycardia, or myocardial depression or hypo-
premedication but may be needed for treatment of brady-
tension. Fluid restriction, 5 mL/kg/h, is an initial goal,
cardia. Anaesthetic agents should be chosen that maintain
although progression of surgery may alter the patient's
myocardial contractility and an infusion of dobutamine
requirements.
may be needed to achieve that goal. A normal or low
systemic vascular resistance is preferred because peripheral
Ventricular dysrhythmias, myocardial
vasoconstriction increases mitral regurgitation.
ischaemia, myocardial contusions
Administration of ACE inhibitor medication on the day
of anaesthesia is controversial. This author is not alone in
Approximately one out of two dogs requiring fracture
believing that omitting one dose is safer for the patient
repair of long bones or pelvis incurred by automobile
because hypotension that is difficult to reverse develops in
trauma have radiographic evidence of pulmonary contu-
some dogs given an ACE inhibitor a few hours before
sions, and by extension, myocardial contusions. Ventricu-
anaesthesia. All other heart medications should be contin-
lar dysrhythmias that are evidence of myocardial contusion
ued. An opioid and benzodiazepine combination is satis-
 may not appear until approximately 24 hours after the
factory for premedication in these patients. Induction of
accident Myocardial ischaemia induced by high intra-
anaesthesia in dogs with severe mitral insuffciency is
abdominal pressure occurring with gastric dilation and
safely accomplished with diazepam or midazolam and
volvulus may also manifest as PVCs with or without runs
fentanyl and/or etomidate Xylazine, medetomidine, and
of ventricular tachycardia. Some other clinical conditions,
dexmedetomidine should be avoided because they induce
 such as neoplasia of the spleen and prostatic abscess, may
peripheral vasoconstriction, pulmonary hypertension, and
also be associated with ventricular dysrhythmias. Agents
bradycardia. Ketamine hypercarbia, and hypoxia should
 other than thiopental or halothane (because they increase
lenosea Aieuound u aseaul ue juaad ci papioae aq
irritability of the myocardium) should be used if possible.
resistance. Propofol is not an ideal agent for induction of
Propofol displays both pro- and antiarrhythmic effects
anaesthesia in these patients with severe disease because
(Liu et al., 2011). Occurrences of arrhythmias from propo-
it decreases myocardial contractility and preload but, if
fol in humans are relatively rare and include bradycardia
used, the dose must be minimized by first administering
and block of cardiac conduction. In experimental dogs.
an opioid and benzodiazepine. Anaesthesia can be main-
propofol reduced the arrhythmic dose of epinephrine
tained with an inhalation agent and use of analgesic infu-
(ADE) suggesting that it may enhance epinephrine-
sions and nerve blocks where appropriate.
induced arrhythmias. Personal observations of life-
threatening dysrhythmias developed at the time of
induction of anaesthesia with propofol in dogs have
Cardiomyopathy
included ventricular extrasystoles, ventricular tachycardia,
Anaesthesia of these patients should be undertaken with
atrial fbrillation, and sinoatrial heart block. It is impor-
caution and with the realization that life-threatening
tant to remember that anaesthetic agents may depress
465
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
cardiac contractility to a greater extent in dogs with myo-
should be started at a very low concentration. Useful mon-
cardial ischaemia. Ketamine typically is associated with
itoring includes SpO2, capnography, NIBP ECG, and
increased heart rates and high blood pressure that are
direct arterial pressure Without pacing, the ventricular rate
induced by a centrally mediated release of catecholamines.
is usually about 30 beats/min and MAP should be above
However, ketamine's negative inotropism is unmasked in
70 mmHg. Dopamine will have to be discontinued when
dogs with maximal sympathetic nervous system stimula-
the pacemaker is activated.
tion [anxiety. excitement pain) or with autonomic
blockade or a failing myocardium (ischaemic, contused,
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
acidosis, endotoxaemia). Induction of anaesthesia with
ketamine in these patients can result in significant hypo-
Specifc points about PDA physiology that influence
tension. Either propofol or ketamine should be adminis-
anaesthetic management are: (l) MAP is low because the
tered in small doses and incrementally in patients with the
diastolic pressure is low; (2) ligation of the PDA induces 
conditions just described.
 pressure changes that acutely increase diastolic pressure;
Lidocaine is the agent most commonly used for treat-
and (3) mature dogs with a PDA are likely to have left
ment of ventricular extrasystoles during anaesthesia
atrial and left ventricular enlargement, and pulmonary
because onset of action is rapid. Not all PVCs need to be
hypertension and oedema.
eliminated. Lidocaine can be administered when PVCs are
Hypotension should be expected during anaesthesia of
 associated with decreased blood pressure or absent periph-
dogs with a PDA. Consequently. a combination of agents
eral pulses, are multifocal, or occur in runs of three or
should be chosen to cause the least depression of contrac-
more. A loading dose of lidocaine, 1-2 mg/kg. is injected
tility and least impact on peripheral vascular tone The
IV followed by an infusion, 1.2-4.8 mg/kg/h (0.02-
 drugs should be administered incrementally and in small
0.08 mg/kg/min). A single bolus of lidocaine exerts an
 doses. Intraoperative fluid administration must be limited
effect for about l0 minutes. The starting infusion rate is
to 6 mL/kg/h and fluid boluses are not used to treat hypo-
usually 3 mg/kg/h that is then adjusted up or down
tension. Dobutamine or dopamine, 5-7 μg/kg/min, are
according to effect. Concurrent administration of lido-
used to maintain MAP above 60 mmHg before ligation.
caine decreases the inhalation agent requirement and the
Dogs ≤3 months of age should receive 5% dextrose during
vaporizer setting must be decreased. In patients with or at
anaesthesia at 3 mL/kg/h with balanced electrolyte solu-
risk for PVCs, the loading dose of lidocaine can be given
tion at 3 mL/kg/h. Other requirements for management
just before the anaesthetic agents administered for induc-
relating to a thoracotomy are discussed in Chapter 20.
tion of anaesthesia. The lidocaine in this case may control
myocardial irritability and decrease the dose rate of induc-
Endoscopy
tion drugs.
Endoscopy may induce several abnormalities in the patient
that must be recognized early by the anaesthetist. Abnor-
Pacemakers
malities include hypoxia, respiratory compromise, regur-
Anaesthesia for transvenous implantation of a pacemaker
 gitation, accidental tracheal extubation, and response to
must exert minimal effect on myocardial contractility and
intense noxious stimulation. Endoscopic procedures
heart rate. Several anaesthetic agent protocols may be sat-
require that the anaesthetist be focused on the patient at
 all times and not be distracted by other duties. Anaesthesia
an opioid, induction of anaesthesia with etomidate, and
for these patients is equally if not more about monitoring
maintenance with isoflurane or sevoflurane A combina-
 and management than choice of anaesthetic agents.
tion of butorphanol, midazolam, etomidate, and sevoflu.
rane has proven satisfactory for these patients in this
Bronchoscopy, transtracheal wash (TTW),
author's hands. The dog's neck must be clipped and
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
cleaned and an IV catheter inserted in a cephalic or saphe-
nous vein before drug administration. When extermal
 Premedication with atropine or glycopyrrolate is avoided
pacing is available, pads are attached for use in the event
prior to bronchoscopy. TTW, or BAL. An anticholinergic
that the spontaneous ventricular rate fails. Temporary
drug will dry respiratory secretions, interfering with
-uiu anpanoid aul anoyaq paneul gued snouansuen
sample collection and possibly contributing to small
mizes the risk of hypotension. All equipment and person-
bronchiole plugging. These dogs generally have pulmo-
nel should be assembled before any agent is administered
nary pathology and anaesthesia and the procedure may
to keep anaesthesia time as short as possible. Dopamine.
cause hypoxia, making supplementation with O2 before
7 μg/kg/min, is started frst and anaesthetic agents should
induction of anaesthesia and throughout the procedure
be administered IV in increments and in sequence. After
important. An opioid with a short time of onset and short
duration, such as butorphanol, is ideal for these proce-
nected to the anaesthesia circuit and O2, the vaporizer
dures. Anaesthetic management is easier when the
466
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
endoscope is small enough to be inserted through the
premedication of dogs with glycopyrrolate and morphine
lumen of the endotracheal tube A bronchoscopy adapter
has been documented to increase significantly the number
allows administration of O2 and inhalant during bron-
of attempts required to introduce the endoscope into the
choscopy and BAL. The adapter is a plastic elbow connec-
duodenum successfully (Donaldson et al., 1993). Infla-
tor with the end covered by a rubber plug with a hole in
tion of the stomach can significantly impair ventilation
the centre through which the endoscope is inserted
 and cardiovascular function. The anaesthetist must con-
forming an airtight seal. Ventilation may have to be
stantly observe the stomach for excessive inflation.
assisted if the endoscope is large compared with the
Decreases in heart rate, SpO2, or blood pressure are indica-
endotracheal tube and offers too much resistance to
tions that the stomach must be deflated. Endoscopy for
airflow. The endotracheal tube may have to be removed in
removal of an oesophageal foreign body or for dilation of
a very small dog, in which case the dog is anaesthetized
 an oesophageal stricture introduces the potential for pneu-
first and connected to an anaesthesia circuit breathing
mothorax. All of the procedures, including placement of
anaesthetic agent and Oz while monitoring equipment is
oesophageal or gastric feeding tubes, are associated with
attached. The dog is then extubated while the endoscopy
risk of accidental extubation. The endotracheal tube must
is performed. Gum colour and the SpO2 must be watched
be securely tied and kept under observation as scope,
carefully for the onset of hypoxaemia, at which point the
hands, and instruments are in and out of the mouth and
endoscope must be removed and the patient given O2 to
the endotracheal tube becomes wet and slippery. Move-
breathe. It may be necessary to maintain anaesthesia with
 ment of the endotracheal tube within the trachea may
small increments of propofol IV. Alternatively, injectable
cause tracheal mucosal damage and the tube must be
anaesthesia can be planned from the start and a propofol
temporarily disconnected from the circuit when the dog's
infusion used to maintain anaesthesia. Development of
position is changed.
hypoxaemia may be delayed by Oz insufflation down a
In contrast to upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, admin-
thin feeding tube inserted alongside the endoscope or
istration of a μ opioid appears to facilitate colonoscopy.
down a side port of the endoscope.
Distension of the colon can induce bradycardia, patient
When BAL or TTW are planned, a short sterile endotra-
cheal tube must be used and inserted through the
tilation. Occasionally. colonic fluid is forced into the
larynx without touching the tip of the tube to the oral
stomach and up into the pharynx. The mouth should
mucosa. For TTW, a satisfactory protocol is butorphanol.
always be examined for reflux using a laryngoscope before
0.2 mg/kg. IM for premedication followed by placement
anaesthesia is discontinued.
of an IV catheter. Propofol is used for anaesthesia and a
calculated dose of 4 mg/kg is drawn into a syringe Anaes-
thesia is not induced until all personnel and equipment
Laparoscopy
are present. The dog is given Oz through a mask for several
Choice of anaesthetic agents for laparoscopy will be
minutes before incremental injections of propofol
lare
dependent on the patient and the reason for the proce-
injected IV to achieve a light plane of anaesthesia so that
dure.Carbon dioxide insufflated into the abdomen is
the dog's jaws can be opened. Swallowing should be abol-
absorbed into the general circulation and increases PaCO2
ished to facilitate introduction of the sterile endotracheal
Ventilation will be further compromised if the patient is
tube, but coughing is permitted. The endotracheal tube
tilted into a head-down position. Controlled ventilation
cuff is inflated but the tube is not connected to the anaes-
is advisable throughout the procedure. Local infltration
thesia machine. The sampling tube is then inserted into
of bupivacaine into the subcutaneous and muscle
the endotracheal tube and beyond, followed by instilla-
tion of saline and aspiration with coupage. When the
postoperatively.
sampling tube is connected to a suction unit rather than
Discussion on thoroscopy is in Chapter 20.
to a syringe, the degree of suction and the patient must be
monitored carefully as it is possible for the suction to
Laryngoscopy
cause hypoxia or collapse the dog's lungs. Oxygen should
be supplied during recovery from anaesthesia.
Transnasal laryngoscopy in sedated dogs has been used
to identify laryngeal paralysis without the confounding
Gastroscopy and colonoscopy
influence of general anaesthesia (Radlinsky et al., 2004).
Butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg. and midazolam, 0.2 mg/kg. are
Dogs with chronic weight loss and low plasma albumin
 injected IV through a preplaced catheter. A small amount
will have a decreased anaesthetic requirement for injecta-
 of lidocaine is instilled into a nostril with the dog's nose
ble anaesthetic agents. When the dog is thin, recovery will 
 elevated. The endoscope is then gently inserted and passed
be slow from thiopental. During gastroduodenoscopy, the
to the pharynx for observation of laryngeal movement.
ease of introduction of the endoscope into the duodenum
The tip of the endoscope is moved lightly to touch the
is related to the experience of the operator. However,
larynx and the resultant response noted.
467
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Oral examination to confirm laryngeal paralysis involves
induction of light general anaesthesia. Active arytenoid
Table 15.16 Problems and consequences for
anaesthesia for exploratory laparotomy
movements are necessary to avoid misdiagnosis of laryn-
geal paralysis Thiopental has been evaluated as the anaes-
thetic agent that preserves arytenoid motion best (Jackson
Problems that may
Problems to be
et al., 2004). Propofol may induce apnoea and weak ary-
be present before
managed during
tenoid motion, and acepromazine premedication and
anaesthesia
anaesthesia
diazepam-ketamine significantly decrease the ability to
CNS depression
 Gastric reflux, aspiration
assess laryngeal function accurately. Ketamine should not
Myocardial ischaemia
 pneumonia
be used to assess laryngeal function for laryngeal paralysis.
Autonomic system overdrive
Decreased anaesthetic
Doxapram, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg. IV can be administered to dogs
Hypovolaemia
requirement
during oral examination of laryngeal function to increase
Abdominal distension
Increased risk of overdose
rate and depth of breathing. Injection of doxapram.
Full stoma ch
Sepsis, endotoxaemia
Hypotension, dysrhythmias
1.0-2.2 mg/kg has been documented to increase signifi-
Reflex bradycardia
cantly the area ofthe rima glotidis during propofol anaes-
Hypoventilation
thesia and has been recommended as an aid in the
Decreased urine cutput
diagnosis of laryngeal dysfunction (Miller et al., 2002;
Hypothermia
Tobias et al., 2004).
± blood transfusion
Rhinoscopy
traumatic abdominal crush or perforation, protein losing
Rhinoscopy and video otoscopy share a common consid-
enteropathy, pancreatitis, biliary calculi or mucocoele,
eration in that deep anaesthesia or profound analgesia is
exploratory for neoplasia, and urinary tract rupture These
necessary to prevent patient response to the procedure.
patients should be managed before anaesthesia to bring
Premedication with a μl opioid is preferable over use of
physiological parameters to as close to normal as possible.
butorphanol. Acepromazine is usually avoided for rhinos-
These patients are prime candidates for hypotension and
copy because the vasodilation it causes may potentiate
decreased peripheral perfusion during anaesthesia if they
blood loss initiated by biopsy. Lidocaine may be instilled
are hypovolaemic and hypoproteinaemic. Blood volume
 through the nares to minimize response to insertion of the
and colloid osmotic pressure should be normalized before
scope, however, introduction of the endoscope through
anaesthesia and some animals that are anaemic or have
the mouth and retroflexion behind the soft palate is often
been bleeding may need a blood transfusion. Dogs with
a stimulus for the dog to jerk and twist its head. Bilateral
GDV or a splenic mass are likely to have PVCs and runs
maxillary nerve blocks with lidocaine, approximately
of ventricular tachycardia.
1 mg/kg each side, significantly decrease patient response
It is imperative to practice defensive anaesthesia for
to this procedure [Cremer et al., 20l3).
these high-risk patients and evaluate the problems before
 During rhinoscopy, the dog's head should be positioned
 anaesthesia, anticipate the complications, and make con-
with the nose down during the procedure for drainage of
tingency plans (Table 15.16). Two IV catheters will be
blood and the pharynx should be packed with gauze The
needed when multiple drug or fluid administrations are
 pharynx must be cleaned before discontinuing anaesthesia
anticipated. Arterial blood pressure, HR, gum colour, and
and the packing gauze removed. The endotracheal tube
CRT should be measured preoperatively to assess the
should left in place for as long as possible and removed
patients' cardiovascular status. Measurement of central
with the cuff still partially inflated.
venous pressure when a jugular catheter is available (tip
must be within the thorax) will provide an additional
Urinary bladder
guide to fluid replacement Dosage of emergency drugs
should be calculated before anaesthesia. This will shorten
yioq sjuaed aul ioy inyuied aq ol sieadde Adossoisi
time to treatment of an abnormality and removes the risk
during and after anaesthesia and anaesthetic management
 of inadvertent inaccurate drug administration. A prepared
must provide adequate analgesia. A morphine epidural
bag of dopamine or dobutamine should be present in the
may provide long-term analgesia for a dog with substan-
surgery room.
tial tissue trauma after cystoscopy.
Dogs that are obviously depressed, or are septicaemic or
endotoxaemic, will have a reduced requirement for anaes-
thetic agents and may need very little drug for endotra-
Exploratory laparotomy
cheal intubation and maintenance of anaesthesia. Dogs
Dogs and cats with abdominal disease that present as high
with an intra-abdominal mass are at risk for hypotension
anaesthetic risks include gastric dilation-volvulus (GDV),
 a a  um ois e 
splenectomy, intestinal volvulus, intestinal perforation,
 dorsal position. Preparation of the surgical site should be
468
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
done with the dogs in an oblique position to delay onset 
coagulation (DIC), and peritonitis (Beck et al., 2006).
of hypotension that may occur in dorsal recumbency. Bal-
Re-expansion of plasma volume before anaesthesia is
 anced electrolyte solutions are used for basic fluid therapy
advisable to decrease the severity of cardiovascular depres-
during anaesthesia. Dogs that are hypoglycaemic or have
 sion at induction. Treatment with hypertonic 7.5% saline
liver disease should receive 5% dextrose at 3 mL/kg/h and
solution (HSS) or HSS-dextran at 4-5 mL/kg in addition
the rate adjusted based on measurements of blood glucose.
to LRS will restore arterial blood pressure and peripheral
Cardiovascular support with any or all of the following
perfusion more rapidly than treatment with LRS alone
may benecessary in thesepatients: dobutamine dopamine.
(Schertel et al., 1997). 7.5% HSS has been reported to
ephedrine, hetastarch, and hypertonic saline IV. Adequacy
have several other beneficial effects in other species,
of ventilation and oxygenation should be monitored
including modulation of systemic inflammation and
during anaesthesia and in recovery. Controlled ventilation
increasing urine output and intestinal motility postopera-
may be necessary. Manipulation of ischaemic tissue during
tively. HSS can be given rapidly over 10-15 min if consid-
surgery, some neoplasms, or mesenteric traction may
ered necessary. Hetastarch, 10-20 mL/kg given IV over
release catecholamines or other vasoactive products that
30 min can also be used to expand blood volume and
abruptly cause hypotension. Reperfusion injury may
improve cardiac output. Not all dogs with GDV are in
develop in some organs that have been ischaemic when
shock and preoperative treatment should be modifed
blood supply is restored during surgery. Deferoxamine,
accordingly.
-ipeu [xoipay yo uonpoid siqiyu ypum i sy/su oe
Increased IAP is partly alleviated by bulging of the dia-
cals, given before anaesthesia may increase survival rate of
phragm into the thorax. Ventilation is compromised and
dogs with GDV (Lantz et al., 1992).
hypoxaemia is more likely to develop during administra-
Regurgitation may occur in some of these animals and
tion of anaesthetic agents. Preoxygenation during induc-
the pharynx must be cleaned before recovery from
tion of anaesthesia is advisable. A variety of anaesthetic
anaesthesia.
combinations are satisfactory for anaesthesia of these
patients, and a frequently used combination for induction
of anaesthesia before inhalation anaesthesia is fentanyl-
Gastric dilation-volvulus
 diazepam or midazolam. μ Opioids that induce vomiting
Abdominal distension resulting from gastric distension
should not be administered before anaesthesia as this
decreases cardiac output up to 9o% from normal and the
may increase the risk for aspiration pneumonia and
decrease in coronary blood flow causes myocardial ischae-
potentially the associated increase in abdominal pressure
oq ul pauao uaaq au saur asaun 'e
may result in gastric rupture. A continuous infusion of
dlinical and experimental dogs. The increased senum
lidocaine ± fentanyl will contribute to a stable heart
concentrations of markers of myocardial cell injury in
rhythm and provide sedation and analgesia.
clinical patients with GDV have been correlated with the
severity of ECG abnormalities and outcome PVCs may
Peritonitis
first manifest within 36 hours after the onset of the disease
and are clinical evidence of myocardial damage. A retro-
Dogs with peritonitis requiring surgical intervention
spective study identified cardiac dysrhythmias in 51% of
 include cases of external trauma, gastric or intestinal per
166 dogs with GDV, and the majority of patients devel-
foration, intestinal strangulation and intussusception,
oped these during anaesthesia (Beck et al., 2006). The
 pancreatitis, pancreatic abscess, and pancreatic neoplasia,
presence of preoperative dysrhythmias has been associated
or prostatic abscess. These patients may be septicaemic or
with increased mortality. High intra-abdominal pressure
endotoxaemic in addition to having abnormalities of fluid
(IAP) measured in GDV also signifcantly decreases blood
flow to the intestinal tract leading to intestinal ischaemia
decreased. Several anaesthetic agent combinations are sat-
and translocation of bacteria, and decreased hepatic and
isfactory for anaesthesia of these patients provided that the
renal blood flows. Gastric decompression before anaesthe-
 agents are administered in small increments and titrated
sia is important to improve ventilation and cardiovascular
 to effect. Circulating blood volume must be restored with
function, although IAP will still be higher than normal
balanced electrolyte and HSs, hetastarch, or plasma as
after decompression. Lidocaine may improve MAP during
 needed. Circulatory support with dobutamine infusion is
anaesthesia by controlling the frequency of PVCs and ven-
frequently necessary. Excessive PVCs and ventricular tachy-
tricular tachycardia, however, use of lidocaine may not
cardia are treated with an infusion of lidocaine. During
decrease mortality (Buber et al., 2007).
surgery, manipulation of ischaemic tissue, or sometimes
Hypovolaemia and dehydration are frequently present
traction on the mesentery, can be followed by an acute
in dogs with GDV on admission to the hospital. Hypoten-
severe decrease in blood pressure. A patient recovered with
sion occurring at any time during hospitalization has been
saiinban Allensn Aiagins isiy aul ie uauopqe uado, ue
correlated with increased risk for death in dogs with GDV.
higher anaesthetic dose rates when re-anaesthetized
 as are the presence of sepsis, disseminated intravascular
2 days later.
469
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 15.17 Significance of hepatic disease to anaesthesia
Patient problem
Anaesthetic considerations
Decreased hepatic function
Increased risk for excessive bleeding, hypoglycaemia, prolonged recovery from anaesthesia
and giving 5% dextrose in water 3 mL/kg/h as part of fluid therapy, using anaesthetic agents that are
easily eliminated or anta gonized
 During anaesthesia, avoid further hepatic damage by preventing hypotension and hypercarbia
Portosystemic shunt
Increased risk for hypotension, hypoglycaemia, and hypothermia
 Benzodiazepines contraindicated with encephalopathy; use agents with minimal cardiovascular depressant
effects and that can be antagonized or do not depend on hepatic function for elimination
During anaesthesia, give 5% dextrose in water 3 mL/kg/h as part of fluid therapy and treat hypotension with
dopamine or dobutamine ±hetastarch 5 mL/kg.
Bile duct calculi
Increased risk for surgical procedure to cause hypoventilation and hypotension (mechanical obstruction of 
venous return)
 Contraction of bile ducts may be initiated by opiates, impact of partial agonists under debate
Biliary system
should be infused during anaesthesia with balanced elec-
trolyte solution, or directed by intraoperative measure-
Dogs with gall bladder mucocoeles are older, lethargic.
ments of blood glucose Surgical problems relating to
anorexic, and may have concurrent pancreatitis or bile
the liver, such as portosystemic shunt and bile duct
peritonitis. These dogs are sick and may have other prob-
calculi, have other specific anaesthetic considerations
lems such as cardiac disease. In a retrospective review of
(Table 15.17).
60 dogs undergoing extra hepatic biliary surgery, 43 (72%)
survived. The presence of septic bile peritonitis, elevated
serum creatinine concentration, prolonged partial throm-
Neurological disease
boplastin times, and lower MAP were significantly associ-
ated with mortality (Mehler et al., 2004). Dogs with
Dogs with neurological disease range from being relatively
distension of the gall bladder or bile duct obstruction
healthy to comatose. The procedure performed may pose
(calculi) should not be given μl-receptor opioids for pre-
no specific threat for example, electromyography and
nerve biopsy, or may introduce risks of impaired ventila-
medication because they will cause constriction of the bile
duct and possible rupture. Butorphanol and buprenor-
tion, haemorrhage, air embolism or severe noxious stimu-
phine are less likely to cause biliary constriction. Decreased
lus, such as dorsal or ventral spinal decompression, and
hepatic function can result in prolonged recovery from
frequently limits access of the anaesthetist to the patient.
anaesthesia. Propofol or etomidate may therefore be good
Cerebellar herniation is a rare complication of cerebrospi
nal fluid (CsF) collection with generally fatal outcome.
 Anaesthesia must be managed to prevent increased intrac-
Maintenance of anaesthesia with isoflurane or sevoflurane
ranial and spinal cord pressure for CSF collection, spinal
decompression, imaging procedures for dogs with intrac-
vasoactive substances will be necessary in these patients.
ranial masses, and craniotomy. Factors that increase intrac-
ranial pressure (ICP) are listed in Table 15.18. Anything
Hepatic disease
that increases intracranial volume notably vasodilation
from dnugs or increased PaCOz, or increased jugular
Administration of anaesthesia to dogs with decreased
venous pressure from obstruction or the head in a depend-
hepatic function must circumvent two possible conse-
ent position, increases ICP. Anaesthetic management
quences: (1) recovery from anaesthesia will be slow if the
shoul d avoid use of ketamine for induction of anaesthesia
anaesthetic agents used must be detoxified by the liver.
and monitor and support ventilation to avoid hypercarbia.
and (2) further damage can occur during anaesthesia from
Thiopental, propofol, etomidate the benzodiazepines,
hepatic hypoxia as a consequence of arterial hypoxaemia
and opioids decrease ICP Inhalation agents decrease cer-
or hypotension or splanchnic vasoconstriction induced by
ebral metabolic rate but increase ICP by cerebral vasodila-
hypercapnia. Dogs with moderate to severe hepatic disease
tion. Their effect may not be significant in most dogs
may have disorders of cloting and tests of coagulation
provided that normocarbia is maintained. Inhalation
should be performed before surgery. Hypoglycaemia is
en leqaian m so u papiae ansn aie sae
also a potential complication and 5% dextrose in water
and those undergoing craniotomy. Anaesthetic agent dose
470
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
values in response to surgery despite high concentrations
Table 15.18 Impact of anaesthetic management
 of the inhalant anaesthetic and supplemental opioid and
on neurological disease
 diazepam. Continuous infusion of morphine or fentanyl,
with or without ketamine, will modify the patient's
Factors that
Factors that decrease
response, with return of HR and MAP to normal and
increase IcP
or normalize ICP
allowing a decrease in vaporizer setting. Instillation of
Hypoxia
SpOz >90%
preservative-free morphine, 0.1 mg/kg, on an absorbable
Hypercarbia
Normocarbia
gelatin sponge placed on the spinal cord at the end of
 Hypertension
 Avoiding hypotension or hypertension
as e ul yaan ued aaosod aid u Ais
Inhalation anaesthetics:
Anaesthetic agents: thiopental.
of 12 dogs that underwent hemilaminectomy, the time to
halothane, isoflurane.
propofol, etomidate, benzodiazepines,
administration of rescue analgesia in dogs that had
 sevoflurane
(opicids minimal effect)
Ketamine
Head elevated above heart level
received topical morphine [14 hours in 4/6 dogs) was
Head-down position
Administration of mannitol
(mean of 5 hours but as early as 2 hours in 2 dogs)
ICP = intracranial pressure
(Wehrenberg et al., 2009).
Myelography, computed tomography
requirement is not usually different from normal for most
 The anaesthetic protocol should be directed at preventing
neurological procedures but dogs with meningitis may
an increase in ICP Controlled ventilation assists in lower-
require little more than diazepam for endotracheal
ing ICP and that may facilitate spinal needle placement
intubation.
and injection of contrast agent. Blood pressure should be
monitored frequently as injection of radiographic contrast
Dorsal hemilaminectomy and ventral
agents may induce hypotension or, more rarely, anaphy-
laxis. Seizures may occur during recovery from anaesthesia
cervical decompression
after myelography. Manifestations of an allergic reaction,
Increased ICP and spinal cord pressure should be avoided
swelling of lips and eyelids or reddening of the skin, may
in these patients. Artifcial ventilation has advantages of
be observed during recovery after IV injection of contrast
maintaining a low spinal pressure and may prevent air
agents.
embolism that can occur following laceration of a large
vein. Positioning a dog for hemilaminectomy should
Craniotomy
include pads under the head to keep it level with the spine.
A long endotracheal tube with a Murphy eye should be
 The anaesthetic protocol using fentanyl and propofol has
selected for dogs anaesthetized for ventral cervical decom-
been described in the section on TIVA. Ideally, two cath-
 pression and the tip of the tube inserted as far as the
eters should be placed, one for fluids and one for drug
thoracic inlet If the tube is only inserted to mid-neck,
administration. Monitoring equipment is valuable because
retractors used to expose the surgical site may compress
access to the patient will be obscured by surgical drapes
the trachea and occlude the end of the tube. When this
and the need to minimize disturbance of the procedure.
happens, the dog's breathing movements will become
 Administration of an anticholinergic IV during surgery is
more exaggerated due to increased PaCO2 whereas move-
 likely abruptly to increase HR and bleeding at the opera-
ment of the reservoir bag is less. If the dog is connected to
tive site and should be avoided if possible; glycopyrrolate
a ventilator, irregular movements of the bellows will be
IM is less likely to induce this effect.
seen. If capnography is in use, ETCO may decrease or
even disappear and the capnograph waveform will change.
Ocular surgery
Blood loss is occasionally severe with these surgical pro-
cedures but more frequently occurs as a smaller volume in
 The anaesthetic protocol for young healthy dogs sched-
a short period of time. A check of the suction bottle for
uled for eyelid surgery should be chosen based on evalu-
 blood volume before saline flushing solution is added will
ation of the patient and provide suffcient analgesia to
aid assessment of blood loss. Balanced electrolyte solution
 prevent discomfort and rubbing after anaesthesia. The eye
should be infused initially at a rate of 2: 1 blood loss but
is heavily innervated with sensory and pain fibres and any
substituted with colloid on a 1 : 1 basis when l0% of blood
surgery involving the globe will be painful and, in fact,
volume is lost.
pain may be part of the presenting problem with cormeal
 These surgical procedures may elicit signs during and
ulcers, lacerations, and glaucoma. Any procedure involv.
 after anaesthesia that indicate moderate to severe pain. A
ing pressure or traction on the eyeball may induce an
μ opioid should be included in the anaesthetic protocol
oculocardiac reflex resulting in bradycardia, and this is
for analgesia. Some dogs have increased HR and MAP
more common in dogs with deep set eyes, such as a
471
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
German Shepherd, than dogs with protuberant eyes.
tropicamide and following administration of morphine,
Administration of atropine or glycopyrrolate, unless spe-
0.15 mg/kg bolus and infusion of 0.1 mg/kg/h (Smith
cifcally contraindicated, is recommended for premedica-
et al.，
2004). Analgesia supplements for intraocular
tion before surgeries likely to induce an oculocardiac
 surgery are intracameral lidocaine or an IV infusion of
reflex. A retrobulbar nerve block is recommended before
lidocaine, 1 mg/kg bolus + infusion of 1.5-3.0 mg/kg/h
enucleation to provide analgesia and to block the oculo-
(Smith et al., 2004). Administration of an opioid during
cardiac reflex.
anaesthesia at the end of surgery for recovery is advis-
An increase in intraocular pressure (IOP) must be
able as neither lidocaine technique produces analgesia
al uo ioedui asae ue au lm i uaum Paioe
in all dogs. Hypotension developing during anaesthesia
outcome. Administration of glycopyrrolate, 0.0l mg/kg.
should be treated by infusion of dobutamine and not fluid
IM can be used for premedication, if preferred, as it does
boluses to avoid increasing IOP Catecholamines added
not change pupil diameter or increase IOP [Frischmeyer
to flush solution for phacoemulsification are rapidly
et al., 1993). Induction of anaesthesia with thiopental or
 absorbed and cause increases in heart rate and blood pres-
etomidate should not increase IOP. Ketamine, ketamine-
sure to varying extents.
diazepam, and propofol have been documented to cause
clinically significant increases in IOP in dogs, although the
  r     g 
Orthopaedic surgery
diazepam (Hofmeister et al., 2006a,b). In these studies.
Anaesthesia for dogs undergoing elective orthopaedic
endotracheal intubation produced further increases in IOP
Bumban sop ioy ueu piemiouaiens arou st Aiasins
(mean 5-8 mmHg) that were not statistically significant.
 surgery after a traumatic accident, and some of the prob-
The effect of intubation was minimally attenuated by
lems of the latter group of dogs are discussed in the later
topical application of lidocaine, 2 mg/kg. on the larynx
section on trauma. Prolonged anaesthesia, significant
but not prevented by IV injection of lidocaine. Increases
blood loss, provision of analgesia, and hypothermia are
in IOP after intubation could have serious consequences
common problems for anaesthetic management. Analge-
in dogs with a penetrated or near ruptured cornea. Modi-
sia for surgery on the forelimb can include in addition to
fication of the anaesthetic protocol to minimize adverse
effects of tracheal intubation should include adequate
parenteral administration of opioid and NSAID, continu-
preanaesthetic medication, sufficient depth of anaesthesia
ous infusion of opioid and lidocaine, paravertebral or
brachial plexus nerve block, and digital nerve blocks or
on the larynx may be advisable. Modest but statistically
intravenous regional anaesthesia (IVRA) for the foot. Anal-
gesia for surgery of the hind limbs and pelvis can include
significant increases in IOP above preanaesthesia mea sure-
parenteral opioid and NSAID, and epidural nerve block,
ments were recorded during sevoflurane or desflurane
 anaesthesia with neuromuscular blockade (Almeida et al.
sciatic and femoral nerve blocks, or intra-articular block,
and for the foot, peroneal and tibial or digital nerve
2004). Hypertension and hypercarbia will increase IOP
blocks or IVRA.
and should be avoided.
 Intraocular surgery, e.g. cataract extraction and corneal
 graft, generally requires the globe to be positioned cen-
Renal disease
trally in the orbit. Since rostroventral rotation of the eye
is a feature of inhalation anaesthesia, administration of
Anaesthesia and surgery decrease urine formation. Dogs
an NMBA is common practice with the added benefit
with chronic renal disease are at risk for acute renal failure
of decreasing the incidence of oculocardiac reflex. Access
after anaesthesia. For some dogs, fluid therapy should be
-ldnd Aq pasjuouduos aq Aeu Aiagins iejnooenui 1og
started at least an hour, and preferably several hours,
lary constriction. Miosis has been observed following
before anaesthesia to induce diuresis and should be con-
administration of μ opioids, specifically morphine and
 tinued after anaesthesia (Table 15.19). Anaesthetic agents
oxymorphone. Hydromorphone, 0.04-0.08 mg/kg. and
acepromazine, 0.04 mg/kg. caused significant miosis in
thesia, IV fluid should be administered during anaesthesia,
16 of 17 dogs at 10 and 25 minutes after IM adminis-
and physiological abnormalities, such as hypotension and
tration (Stephan et al., 2003). An 02-agonist, medetomi-
hypercarbia, prevented.
dine, 1500 μg/m? administered IV to induce deep sedation
Acute renal failure from urethral obstruction or urinary
decreased pupil size by about one half in all 14 dogs in
bladder or ureter rupture include problems of hypovolae-
the study ( Verbruggen et al., 2000). No significant changes 
mia, azotaemia, and metabolic acidosis, all of which result
in IOP were measured in either study. Full dilation of the
in decreased anaesthetic requirement and increased risk of
pupil with ocular medications before opioid administra-
hypotension and dysrhythmias. The patients' abnormali-
tion may block miosis. In a small number of experimental
ties should be corrected before anaesthesia whenever
dogs anaesthetized for intraocular surgery, there was no
possible Anaesthetic agents should be administered at
detectable difference in pupil size after treatment with
markedly decreased rates.
472
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
 Table 15.19 Significance of renal disease to anaesthesia
Patient problem
Anaesthetic considerations
Chronic renal disease
Increased risk for prolonged recovery from anaesthesia and further deterioration of renal function
 after anaesthesia. Use a combination of anaesthetic agents to facilitate low dose rates and rapid
elimination. Consider initiating diuresis with IV balanced electrolyte infusion before induction of
fluids into recovery period
Urethral cbstruction, ruptured ureter,
Increased risk for anaesthetic overdose, hypoventilation, hypotension, and prolonged recovery from
urinary bladder or urethra
anaesthesia. Provide medical treatment before anaesthesia to expand blood volume and decrease
serum potassium to <6.5 mmol/L (cystocentesis or abdominal drainage may be necessary).
 Administer anaesthetic agents in small increments to avoid cverdosage and monitor cardiac
rhythm and blood pressure during anaesthesia
Trauma
Radiographic evidence of pulmonary contusions, bleb or
bulla adds the risk of pneumothorax developing during
Hit-by-car (HBC, RTA), high-rise syndrome
anaesthesia. Care must be taken when inflating the
(fell from a great height)
lungs and peak inspiratory pressure should be limited to
Head trauma must be suspected in animals with obvious
<20 cmHO.
skin lacerations on the head, with jaw or cranial fractures,
Big dog-little dog
bruising or ecchymoses on the whites of the eyes, or bleed-
ing from the nose Bleeding within the cranium (subdural
A major concern when preparing to anaesthetize a dog
haematoma) may be present and anaesthetic management
ayl ieul s! leue 1aiel e Aq Payoee uaaq sey 1e4
must prevent an increase in ICP in these cases. Ausculta-
 severity of organ damage may not be immediately appar-
tion of the thorax is essential to evaluate heart rhythm and
ent Crushing injury to the head or cervical spine may
confirm air sounds on both sides of the chest Thoracic
result in increased ICP or spinal cord damage leading to
radiographs are needed to identify pneumothorax, rib
hypoventilation and hypoxaemia. Subsequent administra-
fractures, pulmonary blebs (see Fig. 2l.2) and bullae, pul-
Aroieisai aiaas un hnsai Ae siuae oasaeue jo uon
monary contusions, and diaphragmatic rupture. A signif-
depression. Observation of the character of chest wall
cant amount of blood may be sequestered around a
movement during breathing and evaluation of SpO2 with
fractured humerus, femur, or pelvis. The haematocrit
a pulse oximeter before anaesthesia may identify patients
measured at admission to the hospital may not accurately
in or at risk for ventilatory failure. Puncture wounds of
reflect the magnitude of blood loss until fluid therapy has
the skin may overlie torn muscles and penetration of
restored normovolaemia. Analgesia must be provided
the thoracic or abdominal cavities. Facilities and means
even when anaesthesia for repair is not scheduled until the
for artificial ventilation must always be present for these
following day. Opioids form a large part of this preopera-
cases. Crushing and shaking of the dog's body may
tive treatment and choices may include administration of
have created severe destruction of underlying organs.
buprenorphine or a μ opioid, application of a transdermal
Hypotension and circulatory collapse are likely sequels
fentanyl patch, or infusion of fentanyl and ketamine.
to8
 general anaesthesia. Anaesthetic agents that cause
Ideally, pain management should be chosen that would
minimal cardiovascular depression should be adminis-
 be compatible with the subsequent anaesthetic protocol.
tered in small increments and dose rates for crystalloid
 Trauma patients may have a full stomach and are at high
and colloid fluids, and vasoactive agents should be calcu-
risk for regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration of fluid or
lated before anaesthesia.
food if anaesthesia must be performed within a few hours
of admission to the clinic The owner may be able to
confirm the last feeding time or a radiograph can be taken
to determine presence/absence of food in the stomach.
LOCAL ANALGESIA
The anaesthetic protocol should be chosen after pre-
anaesthetic evaluation of the patients' problems.
The
Local analgesia is most frequently used as an adjunct to
detection of PVCs is evidence of myocardial trauma
heavy sedation or general anaesthesia in the treatment of
and management should include avoidance of condi-
perioperative pain. Techniques for performing these
-iaday se qpns Aaqe ieipiesoau aneaeiase ieul suon
blocks are described in this section. Electrical nerve stimu-
carbia, hypoxaemia, hypotension, and catecholamine
lators or ultrasound imaging can be used to identify accu-
release. Administration of lidocaine may be indicated.
rately the location of the nerves to be blocked (Fig. 15.21).
473
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
Figure 15.21 Nerve stimulator locator. (A) Stimulator supplying electrical current; (B) ground lead; (C) needle supplied in a
sterile pack delivers stimulation to nerve and is connected to syringe (D) containing local anaesthetic solution.
The duration of some nerve blocks can be extended by
insertion of catheters that allow intermittent or continu-
ous administration of additional local anaesthetic solu-
tion or opioid. New formulations of anaesthetic agents are
being developed that provide slow release of injected
 agents, such as liposome-encapsulated lidocaine, bupi-
vacaine, mepivacaine and hydromorphone. Liposomes
are microscopic lipid vesicles that carry the drug within a
 central aqueous compartment surrounded by lipid (Wiles
& Nathanson, 2010).
It is important to avoid injecting doses of local anaes-
thetic agent that exceed the recommended maximum total
doses. A maximum total dose of lidocaine recommended
for dogs is 10 mg/kg and 3 mg/kg for bupivacaine. The
toxic dose of lidocaine, as determined by the onset of
muscle tremors in conscious dogs, is a mean of 1l mg/kg
Figure 15.22 Auriculopalpebral (palpebral branch) nerve
(Lemo et al., 2007). The CNS signs of toxicity developed
block. The nerve is blocked where the zygomatic ridge dips
 before significant decreases in blood pressure. Administra-
medially.
tion of bupivacaine or ropivacaine to the point of seizures
was achieved with doses of 4.3 mg/kg bupivacaine and
proceeds as the temporal branch along the dorsal border
4.9 mg/kg of ropivacaine (Feldman et al., 1991). Bupi-
of the zygomatic arch towards the orbit. Before reaching
vacaine is highly cardiotoxic when injected IV. Initial treat-
the orbit, the nerve divides into two branches that pass
ment of local anaesthetic toxicity is directed towards
medially and laterally to supply the orbicularis muscle.
correction of hypotension or cardiopulmonary resuscita-
The needle is introduced through the skin and fascia
tion in the event of a cardiac arrest. When resuscitation is
 over the midpoint of the caudal third of the zygomatic
unsuccessful, IV administration of a lipid emulsion (ILE)
arch (just where the arch can be felt to dip sharply medi-
that is used for parenteral nutrition may decrease the
ally) and 2% lidocaine, up to 1 mg/kg, is injected (Fig.
adverse effects (see Chapter 21).
15.22). The blocking ofthis branch ofthe facial nerve does
not produce any analgesia. Paralysis of the orbicularis
muscle facilitates examination and procedures involving
Auriculopalpebral nerve block
the eyeball and helps to prevent squeezing of the eye.
The nerve runs caudal to the mandibular joint at the base
Adequate lubrication of the cornea is necessary because
of the ear and, after giving off the cranial auricular branch,
the blink reflex is lost.
474
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Brachial plexus block
up by the anaesthetist using a sterile syringe after donning
 sterile gloves or the bupivacaine can be drawn up sepa-
 Block of the brachial plexus will provide analgesia distal
rately from the procedure and labeled, but can only be
to the elbow. Injection can be made with the anaesthetized
handled by the anaesthetist after the spinal needle is in its
dog in lateral recumbency using a 22 gauge 3.75 cm,
correct position (Fig. 15.24). The aim is to divide the total
6.25 mm, or 8.75 cm long spinal needle, according to the
volume of bupivacaine into small blebs that will coalesce
size of the dog. Bupivacaine, 2.5 mg/kg, should provide at
along the line of needle insertion. Aspiration before injec-
least 6 hours of analgesia with an onset time of 10-40
minutes. Alternatively, lidocaine, 6 mg/kg, can be used for
tion of local anaesthetic is essential to ensure that the tip
of the needle is not in a blood vessel. After injection of a
a shorter duration of action - approximately 2 hours. The
small amount of anaesthetic solution, the needle is with-
brachial plexus originates from the ventral branches of the
 drawn a short distance, the syringe is aspirated and, if no
sixth, seventh, and eighth cervical and the frst and second
blood appears, another small volume of local anaesthetic
thoracic spinal nerves that form three cords that run for a
-saeue aul jo isel ayt iun paiadai si ssasoid aul 'papalu
short distance before segregating into the nerves of the
thetic is deposited just before the needle exits the skin.
thoracic limb. Local anaesthetic solution must be spread
 Brachial plexus block can also be performed using an
over a wide area to block all the nerves. Bupivacaine can
electrical needle locator technique and with ultrasound
be used as a 0.5% solution or diluted with saline by 25%
guidance The anatomy ofthe area is described later in this
to produce a larger volume for injection and increase the
 chapter, however, use of ultrasound is best learned with
spread of anaesthetic. Greater dilution than this impairs
the aid of video teaching modules or a continuing educa-
the quality of nerve block.
 A successful block is consistently obtained using the
tion programme.
following technique. An area rostral to the cranial border
Some complications may occur as a consequence of this
procedure Large blood vessels pass through the area for
of the scapula, between the point of the shoulder and over
the caudal cervical vertebrae should be clipped and the
injection and needle puncture may create a haematoma.
Further, the local anaesthetic solution may be injected
skin prepared as for surgery. An assistant should lift the
leg and the attached scapula horizontally to create a gap
intravascularly, the needle may enter the thorax and permit
 entry of air into the pleural cavity, the brachial plexus may
between the scapula and the thoracic wall. The anaesthet-
ist, wearing sterile gloves, should insert the point of the
be damaged, causing neuritis or permanent paralysis, or
infection may be introduced into the axilla. However,
needle halfway between the point of the shoulder and the
transverse proces of the sixth cervical vertebra, where
complications are rare if due care is exercised and the
the cranial border of the scapula is concave (scapular
 technique may be regarded as a relatively safe procedure,
notch) (Fig. 15.23). The needle is then advanced gently
and without resistance to insertion on a path medial to
the scapula and parallel to the dog's back as far as the first
or second rib. The bupivacaine, 2.5 mg/kg, can be drawn
C6
Point of shoulder!
greater tubercle
of humerus
Ist rib
Figure 15.24 Brachial plexus block. The dog is lying on its
left side and, for orientation, 1: dog's head; 2: spine; 3:
sternum. The assistant is elevating the right forelimh and
shi oi aipaau leuids aul patasui seu isiauisaeue aul endess
full depth, removed the stilette, and attached a syringe
Figure 15.23 Landmarks for brachial plexus nerve block.
containing bupivacaine.
475
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 and of particular value for intraoperative and postopera-
be performed at the proximal end of the third phalanx for
tive analgesia for surgical procedures distal to the elbow.
more distal surgery.
Other regional techniques that involve the brachial
plexus nerves are the paravertebral nerve blocks and the
RUmM blocks
Epidural and intrathecal block
 Epidural block with lidocaine, bupivacaine, or ropivacaine
Digital nerve blocks
can provide analgesia for major surgery of the hind limbs
Nerve blocks for surgery on the metacarpus and digits can
and pelvis in sedated or anaesthetized dogs [Heath et al.
be performed at one of three levels depending on the site
1989). Opioids, morphine, oxymorphone, fentanyl, and
buprenorphine have been used in the epidural space to
of the procedure: above the carpus; midmetacarpal level;
provide analgesia during and after surgery. Opioid analge-
or at the level of the proximal phalanges. Local anaesthetic
pue Aiagins ioy arinos aunua au aq ot luaipyyns iou si eis
solution can be infltrated subcutaneously just proximal
to the distal extremity of the radius at three sites: on the
will not block acute pain in most animals in the immedi-
 dorsomedial aspect to block branches of the radial nerve;
ate recovery period. Analgesia from lumbosacral epidural
on the palmar surface of the limb at the caudomedial
injection of opioids will provide some analgesia for tho-
racotomy but is not effective analgesia for forelimb surgery.
aspect to block branches of the radial and median nerves;
Combinations of local anaesthetic and opioid have been
and the caudolateral aspect to block branches of the ulnar
found to be synergistic and epidural administration of
nerve. A ring block is also an option provided that good
coverage is possible without exceeding the maximum total
medetomidine or ketamine may contribute to analgesia.
 Epidural block is contraindicated if the dog has a coagu-
dose rate of local anaesthetic Blockade of the hind paw
an be achieved by peroneal and tibial nerve blocks. The
lopathy or skin damage or infection over the lumbosacral
area. Hair is slow to grow in the clipped area and may not
digits of fore- and hind limbs may be blocked by infiltra-
return fully for a year.
tion of local anaesthetic solution on the dorsal and
palmar/plantar aspects of the foot at the level of the meta-
Epidural injection is contraindicated with skin
carpal or metatarsal bones (Fig. 15.25). A ring block can
infection, local tissue damage, or coagulopathy
Hair is slow to grow back
Technique
Details of epidural nerve block have been discussed in
Chapters 5 and 13. The spinal cord ends in the dog at the
junction of the sixth and seventh lumbar vertebrae, and
the meninges continue to the middle of the sacrum. Not
infrequently a needle inserted at the lumbosacral space
penetrates the dura and CSF is aspirated. The volume for
injection into the subarachnoid space (intrathecal) is
much less than the volume for epidural injection.
The epidural injection may be performed in the con-
scious or anaesthetized dog in lateral or sternal recum-
bency. In lateral recumbency, the hind limbs may be held
perpendicular to the body or pulled forwards. When
the dog has a dislocated hip or pelvis fracture, the hair
over the area must be clipped wider to facilitate sterile
palpation of the unaffected side in order accurately to
determine landmarks. Alternatively, location of the lum-
bosacral space in these patients may be easier with the
dog positioned with the abnormal side down. A satisfac-
 tory epidural block may be obtained independent of the
side of recumbency. However, cranial spread of fluid
 injected into the epidural space is greater on the depend-
Figure 15.25 This 10-year-old standard poodle required
anaesthesia for amputation of two digits. A light plane of
ent side (Gorgi et al., 2006), therefore, a more extensive
block may be obtained if injection is performed with the
general anaesthesia was augmented by infiltration of
bupivacaine subcutaneously between the metatarsal bones at
side scheduled for operation next to the table. For epidural
three sites on the dorsal surface (white dots) and three sites
injection in stermal recumbency, the dog's body is squarely
on the plantar surface proximal to the metatarsal pad
positioned with the hocks pulled forward so that the
476
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Figure 15.27 Site for epidural injection. This dog is
imaginary line between the caudal dorsal iliac spines crosses
Figure 15.26 Epidural nerve block with the dog in sternal
midline at the lumbosacral space. An imaginary line between
aul jeui aon Alleuen pand sqwll puy aul pue uoiiisod
the iliac crests crosses midline between the spinous processes
spinal needle is held immobile using a thumb and forefinger
of the last two lumbar vertebrae.
on the hub and the hand is resting on the dog's back
hind limbs are in extension and the spine is curved (Fig.
15.26). The hair should be clipped over a suffcient area
to observe the landmarks for injection and to maintain
sterility. The skin should be given a surgical scrub. The
site for needle insertion is located by identifying the
caudal dorsal iliac spines of the pelvis (Fig. 15.27). If
dorsal part of the pelvis. An imaginary line joining the
caudal dorsal iliac spines crosses midline at the lum-
bosacral junction that can be palpated as a depression
between them. The caudal dorsal iliac spines are diffcult
to palpate in heavily muscled or fat dogs and dogs with
Figure 15.28 Epidural analgesia. The site and direction for
rounded hindquarters. The cranial borders of the pelvis.
insertion of the needle.
the iliac crests, can usually be palpated and an imaginary
line at this point crosses midline between the last two
lumbar vertebrae. The spinous process of the last lumbar
vertebra is palpated and the lumbosacral space is identi-
epidural space imparts a distinct 'popping' sensation to
fed as a depression immediately caudal. When the lum-
the fingers as the needle encounters increased tissue resist-
bosacral depression cannot be palpated, the space
ance. The interspinous ligament just beneath the skin
between the last two (L6 and L7) lumbar vertebrae can
 can be difficult to penetrate and offer the frst pop. The
be identified as just described, then the space between
 needle should be advanced gently and penetration of the
the L5 and L6 vertebrae is identified by palpating crani-
ligamentum flavum over the epidural space may offer
ally, the distance between the L5-L6 and L6-L7 spaces
resistance to the tip of the needle and then a pop and
is measured, and the same distance caudally from the
loss of resistance is appreciated as the needle enters the
L6-L7 interspinal space identifies the site for needle
epidural space. Sometimes the hand holding the needle
insertion.
is observed to travel faster for a short distance Should
 In conscious dogs, an insensitive skin weal is made
bone rather than ligament be encountered, it indicates
with a fine needle and a bleb of local anaesthetic. A 22
that insertion site of the needle was incorrect and that
or 2l gauge spinal needle, 3.75 cm for small dogs and
the needle has struck an articular process or the roof of
6.25 om for large dogs, is inserted midline perpendicular
the first sacral vertebra. If this occurs, the needle is slightly
to the skin and curvature of the rump (Fig. 15.28). Pen-
withdrawn and a search made for the space by redirecting
etration of different layers between the skin and the
 it a little caudally, cranially, or laterally. Part of the success
477
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
in performing epidural analgesia is developing knowledge
must be performed with the dog in sternal position. The
of the approximate depth between the skin and the epi-
spinal needle is advanced until the tip is close but not in
dural space, as failure of block is frequently because the
the epidural space The stilette is removed and a drop of
needle has not been inserted to a sufficient depth and
local anaesthetic solution or saline placed on the hub of
not through the interarcuate ligament. The hub of the
the needle. The needle is advanced through the ligamen-
needle should be held securely with thumb and forefinger
tum flavum at which point the bleb of solution will be
as the stilette is removed, so that the tip of the needle
sucked into the needle as confrmation of accurate place-
remains in position. A 3 mL syringe containing 0.25-
ment. These techniques do not always accurately identify
0.50 mL of air or saline should be attached and when
the epidural space and occasionally produce a false posi-
no cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or blood can be aspirated
tive result. A 6.8% failure rate was estimated in one
into the syringe (a vacuum should be encountered), injec-
retrospective study of epidural analgesia in canine and
tion of air or fluid should offer no resistance (loss of
feline surgical patients (Troncy et al., 2002). Radiological
resistance', LOR). Confirmation of correct placement is
imaging is sometimes used for confirmation of epidural
made by ensuring that the needle is midline, that it is
needle or catheter placement in experimental studies, but
suffciently deep (needle should be supported securely
this is time consuming and expensive. Ultrasound is
[enpida aul ul sl di aui uaym sanss gupunouns Aq
another modality that has been used to confirm needle
s dod, u ua asis is e ie 1s
ansua i Aessanau si sun aedode inq uo
appreciated during traverse of the interarcuate ligament,
accuracy. Nerve stimulation of the spinal cord using an
and there is no resistance to injection of the air or saline.
electrically insulated spinal needle at 0.3 mA at 0.1 mil-
If CSF or blood is aspirated into the syringe the syringe
liseconds in conjunction with loss of resistance may
should be disconnected, the stilette reinserted, and the
increase the success rate for correct needle placement
tip of the spinal needle repositioned. Injection of the
(Garcia-Pereira et al., 20l0). Using saline instead of air for
anaesthetic solution should be made over at least 30
the LOR test with nerve stimulation may improve electrical
seconds to avoid an increase in intracranial pressure. Some
conductance. Connection of the spinal needle to a pres-
clinicians recommend that the injection should be given
sure transducer and detection of pressure waves caused by
Over 1-3 minutes. The injectate should be warmed before
arterial pulsations transmitted to the CSF may confirm
performing epidural analgesia in the conscious dog to
epidural placement (de Medicis et al., 2005; Lennox et al.,
avoid movement in response to the cold solution. After
2006: Iff et al., 2007). A combination of LOR test and
the injection has been made, the needle should be with-
observation of epidural pressure waves in one clinical
drawn while using the other hand to apply pressure to
study involving 98 dogs resulted in 77% successful epi-
the skin at the site of needle insertion. This will prevent
dural blocks (Iff & Moens, 20l0). Epidural pressure waves
air entering the subcutaneous tissues and perhaps limit
were only observed after injection of the anaesthetic drugs
leakage of fluid from the epidural site into the needle
in one-third of the dogs. The absence of pulsatile wave-
track.
form does not confrm misplacement and other testing
modalities are recommended (wilson, 2007). Correct
placement may be confirmed when transient jugular vein
Confirmation of needle placement in
compression results in a distinct rise in CSF and epidural
the epidural space
pressures (Chilvers et al., 2007).
The “loss of resistance' technique just described is a com-
monly used method in clinical veterinary practice for iden-
Epidural catheter
tifying the epidural space. As the spinal needle penetrates
the skin, muscle, and ligamentum flavum, pressure
A catheter can be introduced into the epidural space
increases within the needle. The pressure decreases on
through a correctly placed Tuohy needle (Fig. 15.29).
entering the epidural space. Subsequent injection with
 Details are discussed in Chapter 13. This technique is
saline or air is translated to a characteristic tactile sensa-
useful for continuing administration of analgesic agents
tion of loss of resistance. Injection of air results in small
postoperatively.
bubbles within the epidural space and may result in a
Use of an epidural does not preclude the need for
patchy block (Dalens et al., 1987) or limit cranial spread
of analgesic solution (Iseri et al., 2010). Consequently, the
smallest amount of air possible or sterile saline or a little
local anaesthetic solution should be used for testing.
Drugs used in the epidural space
Bubbles in the epidural space may compress the spinal
The generally recommended dose of 2% lidocaine or
cord (Iseri et al., 2010). Some clinicians no longer use air
0l dn eisaaieue anpoid on pannan auieseaidnq %5o
for the LOR test for this reason. A "hanging drop' tech-
L1 dermatome after injection into the epidural space at
nique has been advocated as a useful technique to deter-
the lumbosacral junction is 0.2-0.22 mL/kg (1 mL per
mine placement of the needle in the epidural space but
4.5 kg body weight). There has been discussion as to the
478
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Lidocaine 2% with or without 1:200 000 epinephrine
will produce analgesia in 15 minutes and last 1.5-2.0
hours. In conscious dogs with an indwelling epidural cath-
eter previously placed at the lumbosacral space to deliver
bupivacaine 0.5% 0.14 mL/kg and 0.22 mL/kg, average
onset time to desensitization of the perineum was 3-5
minutes and onset of hind limb desensitization was about
20 minutes (Duke et al., 2000). The average duration of
block of the perineum and hind limbs was 2.3 hours
whereas analgesia of the flank was of considerably shorter
duration. In the same study, injection of ropivacaine
resulted in loss of sensation at the perineum in 7-20
minutes and the average durations of analgesia at the
perineum and hind feet were between ll5 and 140
minutes. Thus, there were no significant differences
between the two agents using 0.5% solutions and
injected volumes of 0.14 and 0.22 mL/kg. Injection of
bupivacaine or ropivacaine using a 0.75% concentration
and 0.22 mL/kg produced longer durations of analgesia
and potentiated the duration of analgesia in the more
proximal dermatomes up to Tl3-Ll (flank and caudal
rib). Injections of 0.22 mL/kg produced a higher success
rate (>80%) of block than 0.14 mL/kg at all concentra-
tions. No clinically significant effects on the mean cardi-
Opulmonary measurements were detected but MAP
 decreased below baseline in some dogs. Hypotension fol-
lowing epidural injection of local anaesthetic agents can
be a significant adverse problem (see following section).
An opioid can be used alone in the epidural space or
injected in combination with a local anaesthetic to inten-
sify the analgesia for the operative period and to extend
 analgesia for longer postoperatively. Morphine, 0.1 mg/kg
in a total volume of 0. 10-0.25 mL/kg as a preservative-free
Figure 15.29 Epidural sets are available for the introduction
solution, is the opioid used most frequently for epidural
of a catheter into a dog's epidural space. This set contains a
injection in veterinary medicine This dose rate for mor-
10 mL syringe, 19 gauge Tuohy needle graduated 10-45 mm
phine is recommended by the authors and is commonly
× 5 mm, open-ended catheter marked at 20-100 mm x
reported by others (Valverde et al., 1989, 1991; Branson
10 mm from tip., loss-of-resistance device, flat filter and Luer
et al., 1993; Pascoe & Dyson, 1993: Hendrix et al., 1996:
Lock connector
Robinson et al., 1999; Smith & Yu, 200l: Fowler et al.
2003: Pacharinsak et al., 2003). The onset of analgesia
from epidural morphine is about 45 minutes and lasts
6-12 hours (Branson et al., 1993), an average of 19.6
acceptable dose for epidural injection in giant breeds of
hours (Troncy et al., 2002), or as long as 23 hours (Bonath
dogs and some clinicians have recommended a limit for a
& Saleh, 1985). Morphine preparations containing phenol
maximum injected volume of 6 mL, 8 mL, or 10 mL for
 or formaldehyde should not be used whereas the preserva-
fear of excessive cranial migration of local anaesthetic
tive chlorbutanol has not been shown to be neurotoxic
solution resulting in respiratory muscle paralysis. None-
(Du Pen et al., 1987). Analgesia from morphine may
theless, volumes of 0.24 mL/kg have been injected into the
extend as far forward as the forelimb (Valverde et al.
epidural space of dogs without complications (Valverde,
1989). The addition of bupivacaine to morphine for epi-
 2008). The calculated dose should be decreased in preg-
dural analgesia in dogs for orthopaedic surgery has been
nant and obese animals. The dose can be calculated on
reported to increase the effectiveness of analgesia in a
the animal's non-pregnant or ideal weight and further
prospective study (Kona-Boun et al., 2006).
 decreased due to a reduction in epidural space from dis-
Oxymorphone is another opioid that when injected
tended blood vessels or excess fat, respectively. Conversely.
into the epidural space lasts signifcantly longer than an
epidural block may not extend as far cranially as expected
 a ss s a   
in dogs that have experienced serious weight loss.
tion of inhalation agent required for anaesthesia, and
479
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
analgesia persists for hours into the recovery period. The
dose (Campagnol et al., 2007). Analgesia was restricted to
duration of analgesia after epidural injection of oxymor-
the hind limbs.
phone, 0.05 mg/kg. was 7.6 hours after hind limb ortho-
paedic surgery (Vesal et al., 1996) and 10 hours after
Potential complications
thoracotomy (Popilskis et al., 1991). Epidural administra-
Hypotension may develop acutely 5-20 minutes after epi-
tion of oxymorphone, 0.1 mg/kg with 0.75% bupivacaine
dural injection of a local anaesthetic in some dogs, pre-
added to a total volume of 0.2 mL/kg, provided postop-
sumably dueto theonset ofvasodilation in thedermatomes
erative analgesia for 24 hours after orthopaedic surgery
that are blocked. Results from one study indicated that
(Torske et al., 1998).
saop u inooo on Aianl anou sanl I'g sem uoisuaiodu
Buprenorphine, 0.005-0.0l mg/kg. alone or with bupi-
given bupivacaine, 1 mg/kg. and morphine compared
vacaine and diluted to 0.1-0.2 mL/kg can be administered
with morphine alone (Kona-Boun et al., 2006). Hypoten-
by epidural injection. In a clinical study of dogs anaesthe-
 sion was measured 5 minutes after epidural administra-
tized approximately 3 hours for cranial cruciate surgery.
tion of 0.76% ropivacaine, 1.65 mg/kg (0.23 mL/kg), in
epidural injection of buprenorphine, 0.004 mg/kg. was
isoflurane-anaesthetized Beagles, and lasted for 30 minutes
compared with morphine, 0.1 mg/kg, both diluted with
(Bosmans et al., 20ll). Infusion of6% hetastarch 200/0.5,
sterile saline to 0.2 mL/kg (Smith & Yu, 2001 ). There were
7 mL/kg. over 30 minutes before epidural injection did
no differences in postoperative pain scores between the
not prevent hypotension. One dog did not regain con-
paiinbai dnoig ypea ui ssop jo y0s yanouile sjuase om
sciousness after anaesthesia despite restoration of satisfac-
rescue analgesia.
tory blood pressure with dobutamine. Other factors may
Methadone, 0.5 mg/kg. injected into the epidural space
contribute to the severity of low pressure, such as pre-
of experimental dogs significantly decreased the require-
existing decreased circulating blood volume or low cardiac
ment for isoflurane by 30% when tested by electrical
output, and use of larger volumes of local anaesthetic
stimulation of the hind limb (Campagnol et al., 2012).
solution that result in more cranial spread in the epidural
 This effect was present at 2.5 hours after administration
space increasing the extent and magnitude of sympathetic
but was waning at 5 hours. Analgesia in the forelimb
nerve block. Effective treatment of hypotension induced
appeared to persist for longer than in the hind limb. A
 by epidural bupivacaine is not always straightforward and
lower dose of methadone, 0.3 mg/kg, was employed for
usually comprises a combination of decreased inhalant
epidural analgesia in clinical patients undergoing stifle
administration, balanced electrolyte 10 mL/kg bolus, dob-
surgery, however, no difference was detected in the dura-
utamine infusion with or without ephedrine and hetas-
tion of postoperative analgesia comparing epidural or IV
tarch 5-10 mL/kg. Cardiac arrest is rare in dogs given
methadone administration (Leibetseder et al., 2006).
epidural nerve block but has been reported after injection
Fentanyl, 0.002-0.010 mg/kg. has been added to epidural
of lidocaine and lidocaine, bupivacaine and morphine
injections of local anaesthetic. Almeida et al.
[2007)
(Savvas et al., 2006; Mosing et al., 2008). In each case,
investigated in dogs anaesthetized with propofol the
arrest occurred almost immediately after epidural injec-
quality of analgesia for ovariohysterectomy by epidural
tion. Spontaneous circulation was restored by cardiopul-
injections of bupivacaine.
l mg/kg, alone or with
monary resuscitation but soon asystole recurred and the
fentanyl, 0.002 mg/kg. or sufentanil, 0.001 mg/kg. The
dogs had to be resuscitated again. Cause of arrest may have
epidural drugs were diluted to a total volume of
been an acute decrease in venous returm resulting in asys-
0.36 mL/kg to facilitate cranial migration into the thoracic
tole since IV injection was nuled out. These cases are a
dermatomes in order to provide analgesia of the ovaries.
reminder that cardiovascular function should be moni-
There were no differences in the three treatments during
tored closely after an epidural injection.
surgery with regard to HR, SAP, MAP, or propofol dose.
Agents other than local anaesthetics may be absorbed
The duration of sensory block for bupivacaine and
from the epidural space and cause signifcant systemic
fentanyl-bupivacaine was a mean of 3.4 hours, and for
effects. The dose of epidural morphine is too low to
sufentanil-bupivacaine was 4 hours. None of the dogs
produce significant systemic effect (Valverde et al., 1991).
required rescue analgesia, however, pain scores 6 hours
However, oxymorphone is systemically absorbed and
after epidural injection were significantly lower in dogs
causes dose-dependent sedation and significant decreases
that had received sufentanil-bupivacaine compared with
in HR and CO (Vesal et al., 1996; Torske et al., 1999). The
bupivacaine alone.
addition of fentanyl, 0.0l mg/kg. to morphine for epi-
Xylazine, medetomidine and dexmedetomidine can
dural injection resulted in sigmificant decreases in MAP
also be administered by the epidural route Significant
and vascular resistance, and increased PaCOz compared
decreases in t
the isoflurane concentration needed to
with morphine alone [Naganobu et al., 2004). Adminis-
prevent response to a noxious stimulus were measured in
 tration of glycopyrrolate IM/IV may improve HR and MAP
experimental dogs 2 hours after administration of 0.003
 in dogs with opioid-induced bradycardia. Medetomidine
or 0.006 mg/kg dexmedetomidine, and the decrease was
and dexmedetomidine are absorbed from the epidural
still signifcant 4.5 hours after administration of the higher
 space resulting in decreased HR and moderately increased
480
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
MAP (Vesal et al., 1996; Campagnol et al., 2007). In
Soaker catheters
 humans, respiratory depression has been reported to occur
Specific peripheral surgical sites or areas of trauma can be
several hours after epidural morphine injection, but this
targeted for intermittent or continuous infusion of local
does not appear to be a problem in dogs.
anaesthetic solution. A soaker catheter is sealed at the end
The incidence of other complications after epidural
 nerve block is low, but includes urine retention, pruritus,
and has a series of pinpoint holes extending along the
catheter for a distance that fits the size of the wound, typi-
myoclonus, and persistent sensory or motor blockade
ally ranging from 2.5 to 25 cm (1-10 inches) (Fig. 5.3).
(Troncy et al., 2002). Direct trauma of the spinal cord is a
 The sterile catheter is placed within the wound at the time
possible complication. Some agents may be neurotoxic.
 of surgical closure with the free end exiting through the
including lidocaine, and the addition of ketamine to lido-
skin. Local anaesthetic solution, bupivacaine or lidocaine,
caine in an in vitro study increased cell toxicity in an addi-
can be injected as intermittent boluses or the catheter can
tive manner (Werdehausen et al., 20ll). However, no
clinical or histological alterations in spinal tissue were
be connected to a pressurized ball pump or continuous
infusion pump. The anaesthetic solution slowly emerges
found in dogs that had been given an intrathecal injection
from the holes in droplets to bathe the wound. The
of ketamine, 1 mg/kg in 1 mL (Rojas et al., 2012). Postop-
umo  e u pa sm ui un aa
ON-Q? infusion system has been used in dogs with bupi-
vacaine (Radlinsky et al., 2005) and with lidocaine (Wolfe
epidural analgesia with morphine and bupivacaine
et al., 2006). In another series of cases, either purchased
(Herperger, 1998).
or homemade sterile soaker catheters were used to deliver
A complication that may be regarded adversely by
either 0.5% bupivacaine as boluses or 2% lidocaine as a
clients is inability of hair to grow back
overthe
continuous infusion of 2 mg/kg/h (Abelson et al., 2009).
epidural site at the same rate as expected for other
The concentration of the solutions was adjusted on an
 parts of the body and new hair may be darker than the
individual basis depending on the volume of solution
original hair.
needed to bathe the size of the wound. Extreme care must
be taken to avoid bacterial contamination when adminis-
Infiltration; Soaker catheters
tering anaesthetic solution or changing connections.
Infiltration of surgical sites with local anaesthetic solution
is a common practice. Infltration provides analgesia for
Intercostal nerve block
the procedure in order to decrease the need for anaesthetic
This block is commonly used to provide analgesia after
agents, for example, suturing of lacerations or midline
lateral thoracotomy and can be performed before the start
infiltration of lidocaine before caesarian section. For inci-
 of surgery or by the surgeon during closure of the thoracic
sional infiltration to be most effective for abdominal inci-
wall. The intercostal nerve should be blocked where it lies
sions, local anaesthetic must be injected subcutaneously
 on the caudal surface of the rib. Injection of bupivacaine
and into the muscle down to the peritoneum. The efect
should be made as close to the head of the rib as possible
s aaains iae ued suad aun ua uoeun ieoi o
before the nerve begins to send off branches. The nerve
been the focus of several investigations. Infiltration of
 runs alongside a vein and artery, consequently, the syringe
0.25% bupivacaine, 2 mg/kg, before the laparotomy inci-
must be aspirated before injection to prevent intravascular
sion or after closure of subcutaneous tissues was associ-
injection. An acute and dramatic drop in blood pressure
ated with decreased pain scores after anaesthesia [Savvas
can follow accidental IV injection of bupivacaine. Gener-
et al., 2008). Infiltration before skin incision was more
ally, two nerves cranial to the thoracotomy and two caudal
effective than infiltration after surgery. Carpenter et al.
are blocked. The total maximum dose of 2.5 mg/kg of
[2004) found that bupivacaine, but not lidocaine, admin-
0.5% bupivacaine is calculated and the volume divided
istered into the abdominal cavity or as a splash block on
between the sites and not to exceed administration of the
the closed linea alba after surgery decreased pain scores
total volume. Any bupivacaine remaining after perineural
after surgery, although most dogs required rescue analge-
infltration can be injected down the chest tube to mini-
sia. Lidocaine, 8.8 mg/kg 2% with epinephrine 1 : 200 000.
mize pain associated with pleural friction from the chest
was diluted with an equal volume of isotonic saline and
tube. A 75% success rate for analgesia for 12 hours after
inserted into the peritoneal cavity just before close of the
thoracotomy was reported in one investigation of this
abdominal wall and a further injection of 2 mg/kg was
block (Pascoe & Dyson, 1993). Blockade of too many
administered as a splash block before closure of the inci-
nerves will impair ventilation.
sion (wilson et al., 2004). Lidocaine was rapidly absorbed
into the systemic circulation but plasma concentrations
Interpleural block
were only about halfthe reported concentrations achieved
by IV infusions of lidocaine and were sustained for less
 Injection of bupivacaine, 1.5-2.5 mg/kg, into the interp-
than an hour. No signs of toxicity were observed in the
leural space will provide analgesia after thoracotomy. The
dogs after anaesthesia.
bupivacaine can be instilled into the pleural cavity at the
481
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
end of surgery before starting wound closure or instilled
in vitro comparison using equine articular chondrocytes
down a chest tube, flushed in by a small amount of sterile
revealed that although both agents caused cell death, bupi-
saline. Analgesia develops most effectively when the dog
vacaine was more toxic than lidocaine (Park et al., 20l1).
is in dorsal recumbency so that the bupivacaine collects 
Administration of morphine into the joint provides
near the vertebral column, and blocks the nerves at that
some analgesia though not as effective as bupivacaine.
 point. Injection with the dog in sternal position may only
Non-inflamed canine joint tissue has been shown to
result in ventral analgesia.
contain minimal specific opioid binding sites but by 12
 Injection of 1.5 mg/kg after lateral thoracotomy was
hours after initiation of inflammation there is approxi-
found to produce a significant improvement in PaOz and
syiads jo isuap ueau aul ui aseaiou! pioy-os e Ajaneu
some measures of pulmonary function for several hours
morphine binding sites in articular and periarticular
after anaesthesia when compared to systemic admini-
tissues [Keates et al., 1999).
stration of morphine, 1 mg/kg (Stobie et al., 1995) or
buprenorphine (Conzemius et al., 1994). Furthermore,
Intravenous regional analgesia (IVRA)
analgesia was at least as good from interpleural bupi-
vacaine as morphine (pain scores were lower after bupi-
 This method provides a safe and simple way of providing
vacaine for 10 hours) and better than buprenorphine. A
 analgesia in a tractable or sedated or lightly anaesthetized
larger dose may be needed for analgesia after median ster-
dog of the distal part of the limb for suturing lacerations,
notomy, however, it should be noted that a dose rate of
excision of tissue masses, and surgery of the toes.
3 mg/kg 0.5% bupivacaine caused hypotension in some
The dog should be restrained on its side and the appro-
anaesthetized dogs (Kushner et al., 1995). This occurred
 priate limb held above heart level for 2-3 minutes par-
15 minutes after interpleural injection and was coincident
tially to exanguinate it prior to application of a tourniquet.
with peak blood bupivacaine con
 Thin rubber tourniquets can be painful and a blood pres
total dose at one time of 2.5 mg/kg is recommended.
sure cuff inflated to a pressure above systolic arterial pres-
 Supplemental injections of 1.5 mg/kg bupivacaine can
sure is least likely to cause the dog distress. On the
be made down the chest tube as analgesia fades several
forelimb, the tourniquet is placed either high on the
hours later. Transient 30 second discomfort after injection
forearm or above the elbow and on the hind limb above
may be observed in the conscious dog.
the hock. Lidocaine, 4 mg/kg, is injected with a 25 gauge
needle into any vein distal to the occluding cuff, with the
direction of injection being made towards the toes. The
Intra-articular analgesia
lidocaine should not include epinephrine which will
Postoperative analgesia after arthrotomy may be pro-
cause vasoconstriction, impair diffusion of lidocaine and
vided by injection of 0.5% bupivacaine, 0.5 mg/kg. Or
possibly result in tissue ischaemia. Onset of analgesia will
preservative-free morphine, 0.1l mg/kg. A prospective 
 be in about 15 minutes and this will persist as long as the
blinded study comparing analgesic effects of these drugs
tourniquet is in place. Failure of analgesia will occur if the
 after stifle surgery in dogs confirmed that less supplemen-
tourniquet does not effectively occlude arterial or venous
 tal analgesia was needed in dogs receiving intra-articular
blood flow. Sensation will return to the limb within a few
bupivacaine or morphine compared with dogs receiving
 minutes of removal of the tourniquet.
a placebo (Sammarco et al., 1996). Injections were made
Intravenous injection may be diffcult in thick-skinned
after the joint capsule and subcutaneous tissues were
dogs and this problem can be circumvented by preplace-
closed. Intra-articular bupivacaine provided the greatest
ment of a small indwelling catheter or Butterfly needle
analgesia for up to 24 hours and HR, MAP, RR, and pain
prior to application of the tourniquet.
Aiaieiadoisod saniea isamol aul aiam saiois 
The dog can be sedated with any drug combination
In humans, postoperative analgesia for shoulder, knee,
 appropriate for the dog. If the sedatives are to be reversed
and hip surgeries frequently includes infltration of bupi-
at the end of the procedure, it must be remembered that
vacaine into the joint and periarticular tissues. This is
IVRA confers no lasting analgesia after the tourniquet is
followed by continued postoperative analgesia for 2-3
removed. Other agents have been investigated as additives
days using a catheter implanted at the time of surgery and
to lidocaine for IVRA with limited success.
continuous infusion of local anaesthetic solution from a
ball pump. Recently, the toxicity effects of bupivacaine and
Mandibular and maxillary nerve blocks
lidocaine on articular cartilage were discussed in light of
reports of chondrolysis after arthroscopy in humans. Anal-
Blockade of these nerves will achieve analgesia for a variety
 yses of reports indicate that the cases were associated with
of procedures in the anaesthetized dog. including teeth
continuous infusion of the local anaesthetic into the joint
extractions, tumour excisions and reconstructive surgery of
postoperatively and the effect of a single injection has yet 
the face rostral to the last molar, maxillary and mandibular
to be determined. Chondrolysis in humans has been asso-
fracture repairs, rhinotomy, and rhinoscopy. The nerves are
ciated with both bupivacaine and lidocaine, however, an
commonly blocked where they enter or exit the skull
482
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
A
B
Figure 15.30 Nerve blocks of the rostral half of the head and the mandible. (A) Angle of the arrow indicates the direction of
tooth; D: mandibular foramen. The angle of the arrow indicates direction of insertion of the needle, perpendicular to the
mandible just rostral to the angular process of the mandible and adjacent to the bone on the medial surface of the mandible. (B)
A: Arrow is pointing to the sphenopalatine and posterior palatine foramina. The angle of the arrow indicates a lateral approach
to the head with the direction of the needle inserted perpendicular to the skull beneath the anterior border of the zygomatic
arch, and angled slightly dorsally and rostrally: B: arrow indicates direction of needle insertion to enter the infraorbital foramen.
(Fig. 15.30). Local anaesthetic solution deposited on the
canine and incisor teeth. The infraorbital foramen can be
maxillary nerve as it enters the sphenopalatine and poste-
 approached through the mouth by lifting the upper lip or
rior palatine foramina will desensitize the hard and soft
approached directly through the skin. The direction of the
palate, upper teeth, gingivae and skin over the maxilla.
25 gauge needle (or even smaller in tiny dogs) should be
 parallel to the infraorbital canal and the tip introduced
taneous, and the choice may be dictated by the conforma-
 gently for a short distance, remembering that the canal is
tion of the dog. For the intraoral approach, with the dog
short in brachycephalic dog breeds. The dog's nose is ele-
on its side and the ventral surface of the neck next to the
anaesthetist, the anaesthetist places a hand on the dog's
 sure, the syringe aspirated to ensure the needle is not in a
forehead and straightens the head and neck to open
blood vessel, and local anaesthetic agent injected slowly
the dog's mouth. The thumb is used to push up on the
 to encourage caudal flow.
dog's lip to expose the last upper cheek tooth. The needle
The mandibular alveolar nerve that is sensory to the
with syringe attached is introduced through the gum adja-
lower teeth enters the mandible on the medial surface just
cent to the last molar tooth and is inserted along the
rostral to the angular process (see Fig. 15.30A). To block
caudal border of the maxilla as shown (Fig. 15.30A). A 25
this nerve before it enters the mandibular foramen, the
gauge needle can be used for medium or small dogs and
 needle is introduced through the skin perpendicular to
a 22 gauge needle for bigger dogs. For the percutaneous
the edge of the mandible at the caudal end of the concave
paedied st pie seuiz ajo pua iensorai upeodde
edge of the body of the mandible. The needle must be
where it joins the maxilla and the needle is inserted
 inserted next to the bone and beneath the muscle to a
through the skin perpendicular to the skull and ventral to 
 distance that depends on the size of the dog. The needle
the end of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 15.30B). The needle is 
 can be inserted a little deeper than anticipated and, after
then directed slightly dorsally and rostrally. Contact may
 aspiration of the syringe, local anaesthetic agent injected
be made with the palatine bone and the needle withdrawn 
 in a stream while partly withdrawing the needle. The man-
slightly. As always, the syringe must be aspirated before
dibular foramen can also be approached through the
injecting local anaesthetic solution to ensure that the tip
 mouth but locating the site and inserting the syringe may
of the needle is not in an artery or vein.
be a problem due to lack of space. The rostral, middle.
The infraorbital nerve is a continuation of the maxillary
and caudal mental nerves exit the mandible at the rostral
nerve that emerges from the vertically oval infraorbital
end of the mandible. The middle mental foramen is largest
foramen positioned dorsal to the septum between the 
 and is located adjacent to the second premolar tooth. The
third and fourth cheek teeth. Just before the infraorbital
lip is depressed, the foramen palpated and injection just
nerve emerges from the infraorbital canal it gives off the
inside the foramen will desensitize the canine and
rostral maxillary alveolar nerve that supplies the upper
incisors.
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
The total volume to be injected for all sites should not
retrobulbar and peribulbar blocks are argued in human
exceed 4 mg/kg lidocaine or 2.5 mg/kg bupivacaine and,
ophthalmology. A 2008 Cochrane Database review found
if combined, not more than 50% of the maximum dose
no differences in reported pain control and paralysis of the
of each. The plunger should always be withdrawn before
 Ocular muscles between the two techniques and a very
injection to ensure that the needle is not in a blood vessel
 small complication rate. Peribulbar and retrobulbar injec-
as IV injection of bupivacaine will cause serious cardiovas-
tions are commonly used for eye enucleations in veterinary
cular depression. The volume injected at each site is
medicine, but rarely for other procedures mainly owing to
usually about 0.5 mg/kg lidocaine or 0.25 mg/kg bupi-
aay Ae i inooo dol ui aseaul ue pinous ieu uauo
vacaine. Lidocaine has a rapid onset and duration of
an adverse impact on the surgical outcome.
approximately 1.0-1.5 hours; bupivacaine has a slow
The surgical procedure of enucleation of the eye may
onset and duration of 6-12 hours. Choice of agent there-
Aanenbape Auaiedde saop uony uaaa asuodsan e i
fore depends on the procedure to be performed. Lidocaine
 anaesthetized. Analgesia may be provided by premedica-
and bupivacaine can be combined in the same syringe.
tion with an opioid augmented by administration of IV
Chloroprocaine, 1 mL of 2% per site depending on the
lidocaine, 1-2 mg/kg, or a retrobulbar or peribulbar block
size of the dog, has been described for producing analgesia
of lidocaine and/or bupivacaine. Observation of dogs
of the infraorbital and inferior alveolar nerves in anaesthe-
given a retrobulbar injection of preservative-free 0.5%
tized dogs (Gross et al., 1997). Onset of analgesia occurred
bupivacaine approximately 20 minutes before the start of
within i0 minutes and duration lasted less than 90
 surgery identifed a significant decrease in use of postop-
minutes in the majority of dogs but persisted in isolated
erative analgesics (Myrna et al., 20l0). The dosage ofbupi-
teeth for up to 96 hours.
vacaine in the trial never exceeded 2 mg/kg and the
There is always concern that blockade of the maxillary
maximum volume injected did not exceed 3 mL in any
and mandibular nerves may put the dog at risk for chewing
patient. Doses were calculated using 0.5% bupivacaine:
its tongue during recovery from anaesthesia and for aspira-
dogs weighing <5 kg were given bupivacaine, 0.05 mL/kg
tion of fluid collecting in the pharynx. To date, these prob-
(0.25 mg/kg) diluted with an equal volume of saline, dogs
lems have not been reported. It has been suggested that a
5-15 kg were given 2 mL of bupivacaine (0.7-2.0 mg/kg).
precautionary measure is to place the dogs in stermal
and dogs >15 kg were injected with 3 mL bupivacaine
recumbency with their tongues positioned within their
(1 mg/kg for a 15 kg dog, decreased for heavier dogs). An
mouths after extubation.
experimental investigation of retrobulbar injection of latex
 and contrast agent followed by MRI in euthanized dogs
Ocular nerve blocks
and injection of 2 mL of 2% lidocaine in anaesthetized
10 kg dogs that were recovered from anaesthesia was not
Topical application of 0.5% proparacaine (proxymeta-
associated with complications [Accola et al., 2006). The
caine) hydrochloride will desensitize the cormea. The
duration of nerve block with this dose of lidocaine in this
palpebral reflex can be abolished by an auriculopalpebral
size dog was approximately 2 hours.
nerve block. Administration of an NMBA will cause paraly-
 A technique for retrobulbar injection is as follows. The
sis of extraocular muscles, a centrally placed eye in the
skin around the eye is cleaned as for a surgical procedure.
orbit, decreased IOP, and abolish the palpebral reflex but
The anaesthetist, wearing sterile gloves, takes a 22 gauge
 provide no analgesia.
3.8 m (1.5 inch) spinal needle and bends it slightly in
the middle to form a gentle crescent. The stilette is then
Peribuibar and retrobuibar
removed. The tip of the needle is inserted at the edge of
A retrobulbar injection involves insertion of a needle into
au on l isl Pa mo an uo  li a
the orbit and advancing the tip behind the eyeball within 
 middle of the eyelid. The needle is advanced until a slight
the muscle cone and near the nerves. In contrast, peribulbar
 popping sensation is felt as the needle penetrates the
injection implies deposition of local anaesthetic solution
orbital fascia and then the needle is advanced parallel to
less deep within the orbit and outside the muscle cone.
the curvature of the orbit to skirt the globe before being
Arguments against using either block for ocular surgery are
 directed slightly dorsally and nasally. The syringe contain-
that pressure on the eyeball in the presence of a cormeal
ing bupivacaine or lidocaine is attached to the needle
ulcer may induce eye rupture, that laceration of a blood
and aspirated frst to check that the tip of the needle is
 not in a blood vessel before injecting. Resistance to injec-
and initiates an oculocardiac reflex or interferes with ocular
tion is a sign that the needle must be repositioned. The
 blood flow, needle penetration of the globe may transfer
onset of nerve block is signified by the eye assuming a
bacteria, and insertion of the needle may introduce bacteria
central position, complete pupillary dilation, and mild
into the orbit. A life-threatening complication occurs when
exophthalmia. Retrobulbar injection is contraindicated
the needle penetrates the dural cuff near the optic nerve
when infection is present in the eye or conjunctiva.
and local anaesthetic solution diffuses centrally to cause
Technique for needle insertion for peribulbar injection
apnoea or cardiac arrest The merits and disadvantages of
is the same except that no attempt is made to redirect the
484
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
needle within the muscle cone Local anaesthetic solution
root lies caudal to the head of the first rib. There are several
is deposited between the ocular muscles and the orbit. A
 recommendations for the angle of insertion of the needle
 successful block is achieved by insertion of the needle
to the appropriate sites and the procedure can be per-
dorsally as well as ventrally and dividing the total volume
formed blindly or guided by use of a peripheral nerve
 of anaesthetic solution to be injected between the two sites.
stimulator or ultrasound (Lemke & Dawson, 2000; Hof-
meister et al., 2007: Lemke & Creighton, 2008; Bagshaw
Intracameral lidocaine
et al., 2009; Rioja et al., 2012).
The effects of intracameral injection of preservative-free
The dog is anaesthetized and the area to be injected must
2% lidocaine, 0.3 mL, have been investigated in dogs
 be clipped and the skin prepped as for a sterile procedure.
anaesthetized for intraocular surgery including phaco-
An assistant can elevate the scapula away from the dog to
emulsification (Park et al., 20l0). No increase in isoflurane
facilitate palpation of the transverse process of C6 and the
was needed to maintain stable cardiovascular parameters
head of the first rib. These sites may be difficult to palpate
-o auinopil ym paalu saop au ul Aabns sunp
in overweight or heavily muscled dogs. In one technique
pared with balanced salt solution controls. The need for
(Hofmeister et al., 2007), three separate needle insertions
rescue analgesia after anaesthesia was significantly delayed
at the same angle are used to block the sixth to eighth
by 3 hours. In this study, a 30 gauge needle on a l mL
     7   
syringe was inserted into the anterior chamber slightly
spinal needle is inserted 2-3 cm from dorsal midline (for
medial to the 12 o'clock position and 0.3 mL of fluid
ueipau aui ot lalleied aueld iees e u! '(sy 0e-o1 ssop
 aspirated before injecting 0.3 mL of lidocaine 15 minutes 
and passing from craniodorsal to caudoventral at a 45°
 beforethe start of surgery. A previous study (Gerding et al.,
angle to the dorsal (horizontal) plane at the level of the
10 %1 jo qu I'o jo uooalui ieut payuos pey (t0o7
nerve. Palpation of the head of the first rib is the landmark
2% preservative-free lidocaine produced no significant dif-
to guide the needle towards the eighth cervical nerve, at
ferences in IOP, central cormeal thickness, endothelial cell
an angle as described for the first two nerves, to deposit
density, cell area, or cell morphology in any eyes. An
local anaesthetic cranial to the head of the rib. If the head
increase in the amount of aqueous flare was expected and
of the rib cannot be palpated, the site of needle insertion
was observed for 48 hours in injected eyes regardless of
for the eighth cervical nerve is the distance between the
the use of lidocaine or salt solution.
puncture. The T1-2 intervertebral space is identified by
palpation of the head of the first rib or by palpating the
Paravertebral nerve block (brachial plexus)
first rib and extrapolating dorsally to the probable intersec-
Paravertebral nerve blocks providing analgesia of the
tion of the rib and the spinal column. The needle to block
entire forelimb including the humenus involve injections
the first thoracic nerve should be inserted at the same
 of local anaesthetic solution on the nerves supplying the
 distance from dorsal midline but vertically and perpen-
brachial plexus (sixth, seventh and eighth cervical nerves,
dicular to the dorsal (horizontal) plane. Keeping a fnger
first thoracic) as they leave the vertebral canal through
on the head of the first rib identifies the maximum depth
intervertebral foramina between adjacent vertebrae (Fig.
of the needle and may avoid penetration of the pleural
15.31). Contributions from fifth cervical and second tho-
 space. The syringe should be always be aspirated before
racic nerves to the brachial plexus are more often absent
injection to minimize the risk of intravascular injection of
than present (Budras et al., 2007). The cranial nerves leave
local anaesthetic agent The volume of 2% lidocaine Or
the vertebral canal cranial to the vertebra of the same
0.5% bupivacaine to be injected at each site is not fully
name, except for the first and eighth cervical nerves. The
defined but the total volume for all nerves should not
phrenic nerve arises from the fifth to seventh cervical
exceed 8 mg/kg of lidocaine or 2.5 mg/kg of bupivacaine.
nerves and runs medial to the brachial plexus, and the
Onset of action of bupivacaine may be long. similar to its
axillary artery and vein lie ventromedial to the caudal
use for other nerve blocks, although a decrease in twitch
portion of the brachial plexus. The transverse processes of
 strength induced by a peripheral nerve stimulator may be
the cervical vertebrae in this area are well developed and
observed even during injection. Significant spread of anaes-
bifurcated and the transverse process of C6 has a large
thetic solution will occur at an injection volume of 0. 1 mL/
ventral expanded plate that can be used as a landmark.
kg, increasing the likelihood of phrenic nerve and epidural
The cervical nerves to be blocked have been described
block (Bagshaw et al., 2009). Although volumes as low as
ultrasonographically as lying beneath the scalenus muscles
 0.3 mL per site have been injected using ultrasonography
(Bagshaw et al., 2009). The sixth cervical nerve root passes
with 10o% accuracy in canine cadavers, the lowest volume
obliquely across the cranial edge of the expanded plate of
that will produce analgesia is yet to be determined.
the transverse process of C6, the seventh cervical nerve lies
An alternative technique for this nerve block has been
between the transverse processes of C6 and C7, and the
described (Lemke & Creighton, 2008; Rioja et al., 2012).
eighth cervical nerve lies immediately caudal to the trans-
After identifying the transverse process of C6 by palpation,
verse process of C7 (Fig. 15.31). The frst thoracic nerve
a 22 gauge 3.8 am (1.5 inch) or 20 gauge 7.6 cm (3 inch)
485
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Headoffirstrib
T1
A
Phrenicn
Lateralprocess
ofC6
OUGA'04
Transverse
C
Figure 15.31 Anatomic landmarks for performing the paravertebral nerve block in the dog. Note the angle of insertion for
the needle at the first three sites (45°) is different from the angle of insertion for the needle at the caudal site (90°) 2000-
John Wiley & Sons Ltd (Hofmeister et al., 2007). Inserts: the median plane divides the body into equal right and left halves
A sagittal plane is parallel and lateral to the median plane and divides the body longitudinally but into unequal parts. The 
transverse plane is perpendicular to the median plane and cuts the body into cranial and caudal parts. The dorsal (horizontal)
 plane is perpendicular to both median and transverse planes and cuts the body into dorsal and ventral parts or the extremities
into proximal and distal. Drawn from descriptions in Budras et al. (2007).
hypodermic needle is inserted 2-5 cm from dorsal
cranial margin of the first rib. The axillary artery and the
midline, depending on the dog's bodyweight, dorsal to the
first rib are palpated. The needle is inserted slightly dorsal
cranial and caudal margins of the transverse process of C6
to the spine of the scapula and is directed ventromedially
and directed ventrally and medially in the transverse plane
at a 30° angle to the sagittal plane along the cranial edge
but at a 30-45 ° angle to the sagittal plane, until the needle
of the rib. Local anaesthetic solution is injected when the
contacts the transverse process. The needle is then reori-
tip of the needle is 1-2 cm dorsal to the chostrochondral
ented to become parallel to the sagittal plane and advanced
junction and after aspiration to confrm that the tip is not
cranially beyond the transverse process, where an injection
in a blood vessel.
is made to block the sixth cervical nerve. The tip of the
Blockade of some but not all nerves might decrease
needle is then reoriented caudally to the edge of the trans-
postsurgical analgesia requirerment but is likely to result in
verse process and a second injection is made to block the
an uneven plane of anaesthesia during the surgical proce-
seventh cervical nerve The eighth cervical and frst thoracic
dure. The nerves may be more accurately located with the
nerves are blocked where they converge at a place dorsal
aid of electrical nerve stimulation or ultrasound. An experi-
to the axillary artery and costochondral junction along the
mental study involving injection of contrast agent and
486
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
methylene blue under ultrasound guidance has identified
 in n un o  a  
ultrasonographic landmarks for cervical paravertebral
 necessitate manual compression of the bladder to express
injections and confirmed staining of all four nerves
urine. The femoral and sciatic nerves can be blocked by
in every cadaver (Bagshaw et al., 2009). Injections of meth-
 injecting local anaesthetic solution as the nerves emerge
ylene blue made only by palpation of landmarks achieved
from the spinal column (paralumbar plexus block and
staining of all four nerves in 33% (Hofmeister et al., 2007)
 parasacral plexus block) resulting in complete sensory and
or 17% of legs (Rioja et al., 20l2). However, a comparison
motor blockade of the entire limb. Potential complica-
between techniques involving palpation only or with aid
tions of paravertebral injections are the risk of spread into
of peripheral nerve stimulation or ultrasound, determined
the epidural space, resulting in bilateral hind limb paraly.
that the palpation only technique was 2.37 and 2.25 times
sis, and the risk of needle penetration of the abdominal
more likely to stain a greater number of nerves than the
jabiet on s uoau ieiqaaied ot aneuane uy ian
nerve stimulation or ultrasound techniques, respectively
the nerves more distally in the limb. Potential disadvan-
(Rioja et al., 20l2). One explanation may be that a con-
tages of this technique are that some proximal branches
siderable degree of experience with ultrasound at this ana-
may be unblocked such that analgesia may not be com-
tomical area is required for accuracy. Increased practice
 plete, and that the femoral artery and vein are adjacent to
with ultrasound-guided needle insertion and a change to
the femoral nerve at the site of injection introducing risk
an axillary approach with the dog in dorsal recumbency
of intravascular injection or haematoma formation. The
appears to have increased performance accuracy of this
 landmarks to perform these blocks have been described
block (Campoy L, presented at the llth World Congress
following detailed dissections. Techniques involving
of Veterinary Anaesthesia, Cape Town, South Africa 2012).
ultrasound-guided placement of an electrical needle
The injected anaesthetic solution will spread to the
locator are evolving to facilitate accurate, safe, and effective
spinal cord or phrenic nerve in a proportion of blocks and
nerve blocks. Direct nerve trauma during performance of
the degree of spread is decreased by use of smaller volumes
nerve block is a possibility. If resistance to injection is felt,
of local anaesthetic [Lemke & Dawson, 2000; Lemke &
pressure on the syringe should cease immediately and the
Creighton, 2008; Bagshaw et al., 2009; Rioja et al., 2012).
needle tip repositioned. However, no neurological deficits
 Paralysis of the cervical spinal cord or phrenic nerve may
were recorded in 265 dogs that had received femoral and
result in adverse cardiovascular or respiratory effects.
sciatic nerve blocks for stifle surgery [Vettorato et al.,
Adverse effects of this block in clinical patients have not
 2012). Sciatic nerve damage has been reported in dogs and
 a a a   
cats as a consequence of pelvic, femoral, and stifle surgery.
unilateral phrenic nerve blockade with interpleural bupi-
or intramuscular injections, that were not caused by
vacaine in dogs resulted in partial or complete loss of
regional nerve blocks (Forterre et al., 2007).
diaphragmatic function on the side ofthe block ( Kowalski
General principles applying to femoral and sciatic nerve
et al., 1992). Phrenic nerve transection resulting in hemid-
blocks include clipping the hair over the injection sites.
iaphragmatic paralysis was documented to cause a direct
aseptic preparation of the skin, and aspiration before injec-
detrimental effect on the expansion of both lungs (De
tion of local anaesthetic solution. The dog should be ade-
Troyer et al., 2009). Pneumothorax is a potential compli-
quately sedated or anaesthetized and lying in lateral
cation when the needle penetrates the thorax. Staining of
 recumbency with the leg to be blocked uppermost. Nerve
the visceral pleura indicating thoracic puncture was
stimulating needles 2l or 22 gauge and 50 mm and 100 mm
observed in 1/24 dogs injected using the palpation
 are used according to the size of the dog and the positive
method, 1/2l dogs using electrical nerve stimulation loca-
electrode can be clipped to the skin ofthe ventral abdomen.
tion, and 3/23 dogs using the ultrasound-guided tech-
Paralumbar pfexus block
nique (Rioja et al., 20l2).
Safety of the cervical paravertebral block requires a
The femoral nerve is formed from branches of the fourth,
detailed knowledge of the anatomy of the area and close
ffth and sixth lumbar nerves. Lumbar nerves emerge
monitoring of respiratory function during blockade.
caudal to their corresponding vertebrae. One published
Further investigation is needed to determine the lowest
 technique is to block all three nerves with separate injec-
dose/site that will provide analgesia.
tions (Portela et al., 20l0). The nerve stimulator needle was
inserted between L4 and L5, 1-2 cm lateral to midline and
with the duration of electrical stimulus set at 0.1l millisec-
Pelvic limb blocks
onds [ms), the frequency at 2 Hz, and the current at 2 mA,
 Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks provide analgesia during
advanced within the sagittal plane. The electrical current
surgery allowing the concentration of inhalation agent to
was progressively decreased until contraction of the quad-
be decreased, reduce spinal cord sensitization, and provide
riceps or sartorius muscles was elicited with 0.5 mA. This
analgesia for some hours following anaesthesia. Epidural
 procedure was repeated for the fifth lumbar nerve by inser-
 analgesia will provide the same benefits but causes greater
tion of the needle between L5 and L6 and observing con-
vasodilation that significantly decreases arterial pressure,
 traction of the quadriceps muscle and extension of the
487
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
kmee joint The needle was introduced between L6 and L7
maintaining a 20-30° angle to the skin (Campoy et al.,
to block the sixth lumbar nerve and injection was made
20l2a; Vettorato et al., 20l2). Current is reduced towards
after observation of contraction of the gluteal or biceps
0.2 mA and contraction of the quadriceps muscle indi-
femoris muscles with extension of the hip. In this experi-
cates proximity for injection of 0.5% bupivacaine, 0.1 mL/
mental study comparing three anaesthetic dose rates, the
kg (Campoy et al., 20l2a).
longest and most complete block was obtained following
injection of 0.5% bupivacaine, 0.05 mL/kg/site (total
Sciatic nenve block
0.75 mg/kg). The duration of complete femoral nerve
This nerve block can be performed with the anaesthetized
blockade was 6 ± 2 hours (Portela et al., 2010),
dog lying in lateral recumbency with the leg to be blocked
An alternative technique has been described where the
in a normal position. The site of needle insertion is
dorsal spinous process of L5 was identifed and the nerve
 described as one-third of the distance along a line from
stimulator needle inserted 1-2 om lateral to midline and
the greater trochanter of the femur to the ischiatic tuberos-
advanced parallel to the sagittal plane. When bone was
ity (Campoy et al., 2008: Vettorato et al., 2012). The
contacted, needle was redirected into a slightly more
needle is inserted perpendicularly to the skin and advanced
caudal direction so as to pass over the transverse process
until a current >0.2-0.4 mA elicits contraction of the
 until a contraction of the quadriceps muscle was observed
 cranial tibial or gastrocnemius muscles (dorsiflexion Or
at a current of 0.6 mA (Campoy et al., 2008). This was an
plantar extension of the foot). At this point bupivacaine.
 eXperimental study that included injection of bupivacaine
0. 1 mL/kg is injected.
and methylene blue followed by euthanasia and dissec-
A slightly different site for sciatic nerve block has been
tion. No nerve staining was found in six dogs receiving
 described using both nerve stimulator and ultrasound in
either 0.1 or 0.2 mL/kg of injectate, epidural spread was
10 dogs sedated with infusions of propofol and dexme-
found in two dogs and traces of dye were found in the
detomidine for orthopaedic surgery (Campoy et al.
abdominal cavity of two dogs. The results indicate that this
2012b). The needle was introduced through the skin
approach did not produce consistent nerve blockade
immediately distal to the ischial tuberosity in the caudal
unless a higher dose of 0.4 mL/kg was used. These authors
aspect of the thigh. The sciatic nerve was located using a
used a more distal blockade of the femoral nerve in a later
stimmulating current of 0.4 mA. Bupivacaine 0.5% or 0.75%
clinical study. An investigation of 265 client-owned dogs
ropivacaine, mixed with an equal volume of dexmedeto-
administered pelvic limb blocks for surgery identified
midine 0.5 μg/mL, was injected as a total volume of
complete records for 115 dogs, 95 of which received para-
0.1 mL/kg/nerve. Carprofen was administered at the end
lumbar plexus and sciatic nerve blocks and 20 received
 of surgery. Rescue analgesia with hydromorphone was not
femoral nerve and sciatic nerve blocks that were performed
required until 9 hours after the nerves were blocked.
according to the techniques described by Campoy et al. in
2008 (Vettorato et al., 20l2). The dose rates of 0.5% bupi-
Parasacral plexus block
vacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine administered were for the
 The parasacral plexus block has been performed in experi-
paralumbar plexus, 1 ± 0.4 mg/kg, femoral nerve, 0.4 ±
mental dogs (Portela et al., 2010). An imaginary line
0.2 mg/kg. and sciatic nerve 0.6 ± 0.3 mg/kg. The overall
drawn between the cranial dorsal iliac crest and the ischi-
success rate for the nerve blocks was 77% with a slightly
 atic tuberosity was divided into three equal parts. The site
higher success rate in dogs receiving femoral nerve blocks
of the electrical stimulating needle insertion was at the
compared with paralumbar plexus blocks. Postoperative
junction of the cranial and middle thirds. The needle was
analgesia was assessed every 2 hours by a blinded' observer.
le4l yanoua daap pue uys au ot iejnoipuadiad pauasui
Interestingly, there was no difference in rescue doses of
electrical stimulation induced contraction of the gastroc-
 methadone given to dogs with successful or unsuccessful
nemius muscle or digital or tarsal flexion or extension
blocks. The authors proposed that although unsuccessful
This site for injection is in the area where the seventh
blocks may not provide suffcient analgesia to prevent
lumbar nerve joins the frst and second sacral nerves. In
the clinical study, results of injection of 0.05 mL/kg of
have contributed to patient comfort in recovery.
 0.5% bupivacaine were inconsistent and the authors sug-
 gested that a higher dose rate might be more successful.
Femoral nenve block
With the dog lying on its side, the limb to be blocked is
Peroneal and tibial nerve blocks
abducted and elevated to an angle of 90° to the table and
extended caudally. The femoral triangle is identifed by
The peroneal and tibial nerves are easily blocked by infl-
palpating the pectineus muscle caudally, the sartorius
 tration of2% lidocaine or 0.5% bupivacaine The peroneal
muscle cranially, and the iliopsoas muscle proximally. A
nerve is located along the craniolateral surface of the tibia
50 mm stimulating needle with current set at l mA
just lateral to the tibial crest or more distally at the level
is advanced through the skin towards the iliopsoas
of the hock. At the proximal site, local anaesthetic should
muscle, medially to the femoral artery pulsation, while
be injected subcutaneously to block the superficial
488
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
peroneal nerve and more deeply between the long and
skin numbness in humans, and systemic analgesic effects
lateral digital extensor muscles to block the deep peroneal
are likely to be minimal because plasma lidocaine concen-
 nerve. The tibial nerve is located on the medial aspect of
-uo padde Aadaid si yied au uaum moi aie suoen
the limb, just above the hock and cranial to the gastroc-
 sequently, transdermal lidocaine patches are used as part
nemius tendon. A smaller bleb of local anaesthetic solu-
of a multimodal analgesia protocol. Measurements in
tion should be injected at a similar location on the lateral
experimental dogs have documented low and highly vari-
 aspect of the limb to block a cutaneous branch. Aspiration
able plasma lidocaine concentrations, peak concentra-
of the syringe before injection to check for blood is essen-
aeis Apeais pue 'uoeidde uied iage sinoy t ie suon
tial to avoid injection into adjacent blood vessels.
concentrations maintained for 48 hours (Ko et al., 2007)
sem guase Aoteldap v (9ooz 'ie ia pueliam) sinoy 0g 1o
applied to the skin before application of the patch in one
RUMm blocks
experiment and was associated with a significant increase
The radial, ulnar, musculocutaneous, and median nerves
 in plasma lidocaine concentration within 5 hours [Weiland
(RUMM) can be blocked at mid-humerus level and a
et al., 2006). Plasma lidocaine concentrations decreased
detailed description with diagrams has been published
over 3-6 hours after patch removal. One 700 mg lidocaine
(Trumpatori et al., 2010). There is a case report of RUMM
Om pu  7i am uea jo sop ui pasn sm qe
 blocks in a conscious dog using an electrical nerve locator
Sm iiey au  o7 sueia sop u pasn aram saued
to identify nerves to be blocked (Bortolami & Love, 2012)
clipped from the skin at the site of application (over the
thorax or either side of midline) and the skin prepared
with chlorhexidine as for a surgical procedure An adhesive
Transdermal lidocaine patch
protective dressing was placed over the patch(es) to
Transdermal lidocaine patches available for use on human
promote retention. Lidocaine patches are recommended
skin comprise of a matrix that binds the dnug and controls
for unbroken skin and the absorption may be different if
its release. The amount of dnug absorbed is proportional
placed over a surgical wound. The patches are clean but
to the area of skin contact Analgesia is primarily local as
not sterile Investigations of analgesic effects in clinical
the amount of lidocaine absorbed is insufficient to cause
canine patients are needed to determine optimal use.
REFERENCES
Abelson, A.L., McCobb, E.C., Shaw, S..
Alderson, B., Senior, M.J., Jones, R.S..
cardiopulmonary effects of
et al., 2009. Use of wound soaker
et al., 2007. Use of rocuronium
continuous rate infusions of
atheters for the administration of
administered by continuous infusion
alfaxalone-2-hydroxypropyl-beta-
local anesthetic for post-operative
 in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
 cyclodextrin and propofol in dogs.
analgesia: 56 cases. Vet Anaesth
251-256.
Am J Vet Res 69, 1391-1398.
Analg 36, 597-602.
Allweiler, S., Brodbelt, D.C., Borer, K.,
American Veterinary Dental Association,
Accola, P.J., Bentley, E., Smith, L.J.,
 et al., 2007. The isoflurane-sparing
2004. Companion animal dental
et al., 2006. Development of a
and clinical effects of a constant rate
scaling without anesthesia.
retrobulbar injection technique for
 infusion of remifentanil in dogs. Vet
www.AVDC.org
ocular surgery and analgesia in dogs.
Anaesth Analg 34, 388-393.
Andreoni, V., Hughes, J.M., 2009.
IAm Vet Med Assoc 229, 220-225.
Almeida, D.E., Rezende, M.L., Nunes,
 Propofol and fentanyl infusions in
Adams, V.l., Evans, K.M., Sampson, I..
N., et al., 2004. Evaluation of
dogs of various breeds undergoing
et al., 2010. Methods and mortality
 intraocular pressure in association
surgery. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
results of a health survey of purebred
with cardiovascular parameters in
523-531.
dogs in the UK. J Small Anim Pract
normocapnic dogs anesthetised with
Auer, U., 2007. Clinical observations on
51,512-524.
sevoflurane and desflurane. Vet
the use of the muscle relaxant
Aguado, D., Benito, J., Gomez de
Ophthalm 7, 265-269.
 rocuronium bromide in the dog. Vet
Segura, I.A., 2011. Reduction of the
Almeida, T.F., Fantoni, D.T.
1173, 422-427.
minimum alveolar concentration of
Mastrocinque, S., et al., 2007.
Auer, U., Mosing, M., Moens, Y.PS.,
isoflurane in dogs using a constant
Epidural anesthesia with
2007. The effect of low dose
rate of infusion of lidocaine-
bupivacaine, bupivacaine and
rocuronium on globe position,
ketamine in combination with either
 fentanyl, or bupivacaine and
muscle relaxation and ventilation in
morphine or fentanyl. Vet I 189,
sufentanil during intravenous
dogs: a clinical study. Vet Ophthalm
63-66.
administration of propofol for
10, 295-298.
Albert, S.G., Ariyan, S., Rather, A., 2011
owariohysterectomy in dogs. I Am Vet 
Bagshaw, H., Larenza, P., Seiler, G..
The effect of etomidate on adrenal
Med Assoc 230, 45-51.
2009. A technique for ultrasound-
function in critical illness: a
Ambros, B., Duke-Novakovski, T.,
guided paravertebral brachial plexus
systematic review. Intensive Care
Pasloske, K.S., 2008. Comparison of
injections in dogs. Vet Radiol
Med 37, 901-910.
the anesthetic effcacy and
Ultrasound 50, 649-654.
489
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Baldwin, K., Bartges, I., Buffington, T.,
Bortolami, E., Love, E.J., 2012. Use of
Burton, S.A., Lemke, K.A., Ihle, S.L.
et al., 2010. AAHA nutritional
mid-humeral block of the radial,
et al., 1997. Effects of medetomidine
assessment guidelines for dogs and
ulnar, musculocutaneous and 
on serum insulin and plasma
cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46.
median (RUMM block] nerves for
gucose concentrations in clinically
285-296
extensor carpi radialis muscle biopsy
normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 58.
Barletta, M., Austin, B.R., Ko, J.C..
in a conscious dog with generalized
1440-1442.
et al., 2011. Evaluation of
neuro-muscular disease. Vet Anaesth
Campagnol, D., Teixeira Neto, F.J.
dexmedetomidine and ketamine in
Analg 39, 446-447.
Giordano, T., et al., 2007. Effects of
combination with opioids as
Boscan, P, Monnet, E, Mama, K., et al.
epidural administration of
injectable anesthesia for castration in
2011. Effect of maropitant, a
dexmedetomidine on the minimum
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 238,
neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist, on
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
1159-1167
anesthetic requirements during
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 68.
Bartges, I., Boynton, B., Vogt, A.H..
noxious visceral stimulation of the
1308-1318.
et al., 2012. AAHA Canine life stage
owary in dogs. Am I Vet Res 72.
Campagnol, D., Teixeira-Neto, F...
 guidelines. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1576-1579.
Peccinini, R., et al., 2012.
48.1-11
Bosmans, T., Schauvliege, S., Gasthuys,
Comparison of the effects of
Baum, V.C., Palmisano, B.w., 1997. The
F, et al., 20ll. Influence of a preload
epidural or intravenous methadone
immature heart and anesthesia.
of hydroxyethylstarch 6% on the
on the minimum alveolar
Anesthesiology 87, 1529-1548.
cardiovascular effects of epidural
concentration of isoflurane in dogs.
Beck, I.J., Staatz, A.J., Pelsue, D.H.,
administration of ropivacaine 0.75%
Vet I 192, 311-315.
et al., 2006. Risk factors associated
in anaesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth
Campoy, L., Martin-Flores, M., Looney.
with short-term outcome and
Analg 38, 494-504.
A.L., et al., 2008. Distribution of a
 development of perioperative
Branson, K.R., Ko, I., Tranquilli, W..
lidocaine-methylene blue solution
complications in dogs undergoing
et al., 1993. Duration of analgesia
staining in brachial plexus, lumbar
surgery because of gastric dilatation-
induced by epidurally administered
plexus and sciatic nerve blocks in the
volvulus: 166 cases (1992-2003).
morphine and medetomidine in
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 348-354.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 229,
dogs. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 16.
Campoy, L., Martin-Flores, M., Ludders,
1934-1939.
369-372.
J.W., et al., 2012a. Comparison of
Bednarski, R.M., Grimm, K.A., Harvey.
Branson, K.R., Quandt, J.E., Martinez,
bupivacaine femoral and sciatic
R., et al., 2011. AAHA Anesthesia
E.A., et al., 2001. A multisite case
nerve block wrsus bupivacaine and
guidelines for dogs and cats. I Am
report on the clinical use of
morphine epidural for stifle surgery
Anim Hosp Assoc 47, 377-385.
sevoflurane in dogs. J Am Anim
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 39.
Bellei, E., Roncada, P., Pisoni, L., et al..
Hosp Assoc 37, 420-432.
91-98.
2011. The use of fentanyl-patch in
Brodbelt, D.C., Pfeiffer, D.U., Young.
Campoy, L., Martin-Flores, M., Ludders,
dogs undergoing spinal surgery:
L.E., et al., 2008. Results of the
J.W., et al., 2012b. Procedural
plasma concentration and analgesic
confdential enquiry into
sedation combined with
efficacy. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 34.
perioperative small animal fatalities
locoregional anesthesia for
437-441.
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-
orthopedic surgery of the pelvic limb
Belso, N., Kui, R., Szegesdi, I., et al.
related death in dogs. J Am Vet Med
 in 10 dogs: case series. Vet Anaesth
2011. Propofol and fentanyl induced
Assoc 233, 1096-1104.
Analg 39, 436-440.
perioperative anaphylaxis. Br ↓
Brownlie, S.E., 1991. An
Carpenter, R.E., wilson, D.V., Evans,
Anaesth 106, 283-284.
electrocardiographic survey of
A.T., 2004. Evaluation of
Benchaoui, H.A., Cox, S.R.,
ardiac rhythm in Irish wolfhounds.
intraperitoneal and incisional
Schneider, R.P., et al., 2007. The
Vet Rec 129, 470-471.
lidocaine or bupivacaine for
 pharmacokinetics of maropitant, a
Brull, S.J., Murphy, G.S., 2010. Residual
analgesia following
novel neurokinin type-1 receptor
neuromuscular block: Lessons
owariohysterectomy in the dog. Vet
 antagonist, in dogs. / Vet Pharmacol
unlearned. Part Il: Methods to
Anaesth Analg 31, 46-52.
Ther 30, 336-344.
reduce the risk of residual weakness.
Chandrasekharan, N.V., Dai, H., Roos,
Berasategui, M.TA., 2011. Potential
Anesth Analg 111, 129-140.
L.T, et al., 2002. COX-3, a
hypersensitivity due to food or food
Buber, T., Saragusty, I., Ranen, E., et al.,
cyclooxygenase-1 variant inhibited
additive content of medicinal
2007. Evaluation of lidocaine
by acetominophen and other
 products in Spain. J Investig Allergo]
treatment and risk factors for death
analgesic/antipyretic drugs: Cloning.
Clin Immunol 21, 496-506.
associated with gastric dilatation and
structure, and expression. Proc Natl
Bersenas, A.M.E., Mathews, K.A., Allen,
volvulus in dogs: 112 cases [1997-
Acad Sci USA 99, 13926-13931
D.G., et al., 2005. Effects of
2005). I Am Vet Med Assoc 230,
Chilvers, I., Geoghegan, I., Moore, P.,
 ranitidine, famotidine, pantoprazole.
1334-1339
et al., 2007. Internal jugular vein 
and omeprazole on intragastric pH
Budras, K.-D., McCarthy, P.H., Horowitz,
compression to assess the correct
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 66, 425-431.
A., et al., 2007. Anatomy of the Dog.
placement of an epidural catheter in
Bonath, K., Saleh, A., 1985. Long term
 Schlutersche, Hannover.
postpartum women. Anaesthesia 62.
treatment in the dog by peridural
Burkitt, J.M., Haskins, S.C., Nelson.
332-334
morphine. 2nd International
R.W., et al., 2007. Relative adrenal
Clarke, K., Hall, L.w., 1975. World
Congress of Veterinary Anesthesia,
insufficiency in dogs with sepsis. ↓
Veterinary Congress, Thessaloniki,
 Sacramento, California. p 161.
Vet Intern Med 21, 226-231.
Greece. p. 1688.
490
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Clutton, R.E., 1992. Combined bolus
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs before
epidural space of the conscious dog.
 and infusion of vecuronium in dogs.
and after hemorrhage. Am J Vet Res 
Vet Anaesth Analg 27, 13-21.
JVet Anaesth 19, 74-77.
50. 1866-1871.
Duke, T., Caulkett, N.A., Tataryn, J.M.,
Columbano, N., Secci, F., Careddu,
Dalens, B., Bazin, J.-E., Haberer, J.-P.
2006. The effect of nitrous oxide on
G.M., et al., 2012. Effects of
1987. Epidural bubbles as a cause of
halothane, isoflurane and
lidocaine constant rate infusion on
incomplete analgesia during epidural
sevofurane requirements in
 sevoflurane requirement, autonomic
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 66,
ventilated dogs undergoing
responses, and postoperative
679-683.
ovariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
 analgesia in dogs undergoing
De Kock, M.F, Lavand'homme, P.M.
Analg 33, 343-350.
owariectomy under opioid-based
2007. The clinical role of NMDA
Dyson, D.H., Doherty, T., Anderson,
balanced anesthesia. Vet J 193.
 receptor antagonists for the
G.l., et al., 1990. Reversal of
448-455.
 treatment of postoperative pain. Best
 oxymorphone sedation by naloxone.
Congdon, I.M., Marquez, M., Niyom, S.
Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 21,
nalmefene, and butorphanol. Vet 
et al., 20l1. Evaluation of the
85-98.
Surg 19, 398-403.
sedative and cardiovascular effects of
de Medicis, E., Tetrault, J.-P., Martin, R.,
Dyson, D.H., Sinclair, M.D., 2006.
intramuscular administration of
et al., 2005. A prospective
Impact of dopamine or dobutamine
dexmedetomidine with and without
comparative study of two indirect
infusions on cardiovascular variables
concurrent atropine administration
methods for confirming the
after rapid blood loss and volume
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 239.
localization of an epidural catheter
replacement during isoflurane-
81-89.
for postoperative analgesia. Anesth
induced anesthesia in dogs. Am J Vet
Conzemius, M.G., Brockman, D.J., King.
Analg 101, 1830-1833.
Res 67, 1121-1130.
LG., et al., 1994. Analgesia in dogs
De Troyer, A., Leduc, D., Cappello, M..
Dyson, H.D., Maxie, M.G., Schnurr, D..
after intercostal thoracotomy: A
2009. Bilateral impact on the lung of
1998. Morbidity and mortality
 dinical trial comparing intravenous
buprenorphine and interpleural
hemidiaphragmatic paralysis in the
associated with anesthetic
dog. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 166.
management in small animal
bupivacaine. Vet Surg 23, 291-298.
68-72.
veterinary practice in Ontario. J Am
Conzemius, M.G., Hill, C.M.,
Dewachter, P., Mouton-Faivre, C.
Anim Hosp Assoc 34, 325-335.
Sammarco, J.L., et al., 1997.
Correlation between subjective and
Castells, M.C., et al., 2011.
Edwin, S.B., Walker, P.L., 2010.
Anesthesia in the patient with
objective measures used to
Controversies surrounding the use of
 determine severity of postoperative
multiple drug allergies: are all
etomidate for rapid sequence
pain in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
allergies the same? Curr Opin
intubation in patients with suspected
210, 1619-1622.
Anaesthesiol 24, 320-325.
sepsis. Ann Pharmacother 44,
Dodam, J.R., Cohn, L.A., Durham, H.E..
1307-1313.
Crawford, M.w., Pehora, C., Lopez, A.V.
2009. Drug-induced acute
et al., 2004. Cardiopulmonary effects
Eger, E.l. Il, 2001. Age, minimum
 pancreatitis in children receiving
 of medetomidine, oxymorphone, or
alveolar anesthetic concentration,
chemotherapy for acute leukemia:
butorphanol in selegiline-treated
and minimum alveolar anesthetic
 Does propofol increase the risk?
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 31.
concentration-awake. Anesth Analg
Anesth Analg 109, 379-381
129-137.
93.947-953
Credie, R.G., Teixeira Neto, FJ., Ferreira,
Dohoo, S.E., O'Connor, M.K.,
Egger, C.M., Duke, T., Archer, I., et al.
T.H., et al., 2010. Effects of
McDonell, w.N., et al., 1986.
1998. Comparison of plasma
 A clinical comparison of 
methadone on the minimum
fentanyl concentrations by using
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
 oxymorphone/acepromazine and
three transdermal fentanyl patch
 in dogs. Vet Anaesthes Analges 37.
fentanyl/droperidol sedation in dogs.
 sizes in dogs. Vet Surg 27, i59-166.
240-249.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 313-317.
Ehrman, R., Wira, C., Lomax, A., et al..
Cremer, J., Sum, S.O., Braun, C., et al.
Donaldson, L.L., Leib, M.S., Boyd, C..
2011. Etomidate use in severe sepsis
2013. Assessment of maxillary and
et al., 1993. Effect of preanesthetic
and septic shock patients does not
infraorbital nerve blockade for
medication on ease of endoscopic
contribute to mortality. Intern Emerg
rhinoscopy in sevoflurane
intubation of the duodenum in
Med 6, 253-257.
anesthetized dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 54.
England, G.C.W., Hammond, R., 1997.
In press.
1489-1495
Dose-sparing effects of romifidine
Crowther, I., Hrazdil, I., Jolly, D.T., et al.
Dugdale, A.H., Pinchbeck, G.L., Jones.
 premedication for thiopentone and
1996. Growth of microorganisms in
R.S., et al., 2005. Comparison of two
halothane anaesthesia in the dog. I
 propofol, thiopental, and a 1:1
thiopental infusion rates for the
Small Anim Pract 38, 141-146.
mixture of propofol and thiopental.
 induction of anaesthesia in dogs. Vet
England, G.C.W., Andrews, F.
Anesth Analg 82, 475-478.
Anaesth Analg 32, 360-366.
Hammond, RA., 1996. Romifdine
Cullen, L.K., Raffe, M.R., Randall, D.A..
Du Pen, S.L., Ramsey, D., Chin, S.,
as a premedicant to propofol
et al., 1999. Assessment of the
 1987. Chronic epidural morphine
induction and infusion anaesthesia
respiratory actions of intramuscular
and preservative-induced injury.
in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 37.
morphine in conscious dogs. Res Vet
Anesthesiology 67, 987-988.
79-83.
Sci 67, 141-148.
Duke, T., Caulkett, N.A., Ball, S.D.,
Favarato, E.S., de Souza, M.V., dos
Curtis, M.B., Bednarski, R.M., Majors, L..
et al., 2000. Comparative analgesic
Santos Costa, P.R., et al., 2012.
1989. Cardiovascular effects of
and cardiopulmonary effects of
Evaluation of metoclopramide and
vasopressors in
bupivacaine and ropivacaine in the
ranitidine on the prevention of
491
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
gastroesophageal reflux episodes in
lidocaine on the anterior segment of
Haskins, S.C., Farver, T.B., Patz, J.D.
anesthetized dogs. Res Vet Sci 93.
the eyes in dogs. Am I Vet Res 65.
1986. Cardiovascular changes in
466-467.
1325-1330.
dogs given diazepam and diazepam-
Feldman, H.S., Arthur, G.R., Pitkanen,
Gorgi, A.A., Hofmeister, E.H.,
ketamine. Am I Vet Res 47, 795-798.
M., et al., 199l. Treatment of acute
Higginbotham, M.J., et al., 2006.
Hayes, G., Mathews, K., Kruth, S., et al..
systemic toxicity after the rapid
Effect of body position on cranial
2010. Illness severity scores in
intravenous injection of ropivacaine
migration of epidurally injected
veterinary medicine: What can
and bupivacaine in the conscious
methylene blue in recumbent dogs.
we learn? J Vet Intern Med 24,
dog. Anesth Analg 73, 373-384.
Am J Vet Res 67, 219-221.
457-466.
Firth, A., Haldane, S.L., 1999.
Goyenechea Jaramillo, G., Murrell, J.C..
Heath, R.B., Broadstone, R.V., Wright,
Development of a score to evaluate
Hellebrekers, L.J., 2006. Investigation
M., et al., 1989. Using bupivacaine
postoperative pain in dogs. I Am Vet
of the interaction between
hydrochloride for lumbosacral
Med Assoc 214, 651 -660.
buprenorphine and sufentanil
epidural analgesia. Comp Cont Educ
Forterre, F., Tomek, A., Rytz, U., et al..
during anaesthesia for ovariectomy
11,50-55
 2007. latrogenic sciatic nerve injury
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
Heldmann, E., Brown, D.C., Shofer, F.
in eighteen dogs and nine cats. Vet
399-407
1999. The association of propofol
Surg 36, 464-471.
Gross, M.E., Pope, E.R., O'Brien, D.,
usage with postoperative wound
Fowler, D., Isakow, K., Caulkett, N..
et al., 1997. Regional anesthesia of
infection rate in clean wounds: a
et al., 2003. An evaluation of the
the infraorbital and inferior alveolar
retrospective study. Vet Surg 28,
 analgesic effects of meloxicam in
nerves during noninvasive tooth
256-259.
 addition to epidural morphine/
pulp stimulation in halothane-
Hellebrekers, L., Sap, R., 1997.
 mepivacaine in dogs undergoing
anesthetized dogs. J Am Vet Med
 Medetomidine as a premedicant for
canial cruciate ligament repair. Can
Assoc 211, 1403-1405.
ketamine, propofol or fentanyl
Vet I 44, 643-648.
Gurney, M., Cripps, P., Mosing. M.
anaesthesia in dogs. Vet Rec 140.
Friese, K.J., Linton, D.D., Newbound,
2009. Subcutaneous pre-anaesthetic
545-548.
G.C., et al., 2012a. Population
medication with acepromazine-
Hellebrekers, L., vanHerpen, H., Hird.
pharmacokinetics of transdermal
buprenorphine is effective as and
J.F.R., et al., 1998. Clinical effcacy
fentanyl solution following a single
less painful than the intramuscular
and safety of propofol or ketamine
dose administered prior to soft tissue
route. J Small Anim Pract 50,
anaesthesia in dogs premedicated
and orthopedic surgery. J Vet 
474-477
with medetomidine. Vet Rec 142.
Pharmacol Ther 35 (Suppl. 2).
Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., Albretsen, J.C.,
631-634.
65-72.
Khan, S.A., 2000.
Hellyer, P., Muir Ill, W.w., Hubbell,
Friese, K.J., Newbound, G.C., Tudan, C.
5-Hydroxytryptophan toxicosis
JA.E., et al., 1989. Cardiorespiratory
et al., 2012b. Pharmacokinetics and
in dogs: 21 cases (1989-1999].
effects of the intravenous
the effect of application site on a
JAm Vet Med Assoc 216.
administration of tiletamine-
 novel, long-acting transdermal
1937-1940.
zolazepam to dogs. Vet Surg 18.
 fentanyl solution in healthy
Hall, L.W., Nolan, A.M., Sear, J.W.,
160-165.
laboratory Beagles. J Vet Pharmaco]
1997. Disposition of propofol after
Hellyer, PW., Mama, K.R., Shafford.
Ther 35 (Suppi. 2), 27-33.
medetomidine premedication in
H.L., et al., 2001. Effects of diazepam
Frischmeyer, K.J., Miller, P.E., Bellay, Y..
beagle dogs. I Vet Anaesth 24.
and flumazenil on minimum
et al., 1993. Parenteral
23-30.
alveolar concentrations for dogs
 anticholinergics in dogs with normal
Hammond, R.A., Alibhai, H.l.K.
anesthetized with isoflurane or a
and elevated intraocular pressure. Vet
Walsh, K.P., et al., 1994. Desflurane
combination of isofurane and
Surg 22, 230-234.
in the dog: Minimum alveolar
fentanyl. Am J Vet Res 62, 555-560.
Galatos, A.D., Raptopoulos, D., 1995.
concentration [MAC) alone and in
Hendrix, P.K., Raffe, M.R., Robinson,
Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
combination with nitrous oxide. J
E.P., et al., 1996. Epidural
 anaesthesia in the dog: the effect of
Vet Anaesth 21, 21-23.
administration of bupivacaine.
age. positioning and type of surgical
Hardie, E.M., Hansen, B.D., Carroll,
morphine, or their combination for
procedure. Vet Rec 137,513-516.
G.S., 1997. Behavior after
postoperative analgesia in dogs. ↓
Galloway, D.S., Ko, I.C.H., Reaugh, H.F.
owariohysterectomy in the dog:
Am Vet Med Assoc 209, 598-607.
et al., 2004. Anesthetic indices of
what's normal? Appl Anim Behav Sci H
Herperger, L., 1998. Postoperative
sevoflurane and isofurane in
51, 111-128.
urinary retention in a dog following
unpremedicated dogs. J Am Vet Med
Hashim, M.A., Waterman, A.E., Pearson,
morphine with bupivacaine epidural
Assoc 225, 700-704.
H., 1995. A comparison of the
analgesia. Can Vet J 39, 650-652.
Garcia-Pereira, F.L., Hauptman, J., Shih.
effects of halothane and isoflurane
Hill, R.C., Scott, K.C., 2004. Energy
A., et al., 2010. Evaluation of electric
in combination with nitrous oxide
requirements and body surface area
neurostimulation to confirm correct
on lower oesophageal sphincter
of cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med
placement of lumbosacral epidural
 pressure and barrier pressure in
Assoc 225, 689-694.
injections in dogs. Am I Vet Res 71.
anaesthetised dogs. Vet Rec 137.
Hoffman, W.D., Banks, S.M., Alling.
157-160.
658-661.
D.W., et al., 1991. Factors that
Gerding, PA., Turner, T.L., Hamor, R.E.,
Haskins, S.C., Farver, T.B., Patz, I.D.,
determine the hemodynamic
et al., 2004. Effects of intracameral
1985. Ketamine in dogs. Am J Vet
response to inhalation anesthetics.
injection of preservative-free
Res 46, 1855-1985.
J Appl Physiol 70, 2155-2163.
492
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
Hofmeister, E.H., Egger, C.M., 2004.
Ingvast-Larsson, C., Holgersson, A..
Ko, J.C., Golder, FJ., Mandsager, R.E.,
Transdermal fentanyl patches in
Bondesson, Ul., et al., 2010. Clinical
et al., 1999. Anesthetic and 
 small animals. J Am Anim Hosp
pharmacology of methadone. Vet
cardiorespiratory effects of a 1:1
Assoc 40, 468-478.
Anaesth Analg 37, 48-56.
mixture of propofol and thiopental
Hofmeister, E.H., Kent, M., Read, M.R.,
Iseri, T., Nishimura, R., Nagahama, S..
sodium in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
2007. Paravertebral block for
et al., 2010. Epidural spread of
215, 1292-1296.
forelimb anesthesia in the dog-an
iohexol following the use of air or
Ko, J.C.H., Fox, S.M., Mandsager, R.E.,
anatomic study. Vet Anaesth Analg
saline in the 'loss of resistance' test.
2001a. Anesthetic effects of ketamine
34, 139-142.
Vet Anaesth Analg 37, 526-530.
or isoflurane induction prior to
Hofmeister, E.H., Mosunic, C.B., Torres,
Itami, T., Tamaru, N., Kawase, K., et al.
isoflurane anesthesia in
B.T., et al., 2006a. Effects of
2011. Cardiovascular effects of
medetomidine-premedicated dogs.
ketamine, diazepam, and their
 tramadol in dogs anesthetized with
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37.
combination on intraocular
sevoflurane. J Vet Med Sci 73,
411-419
pressures in clinically normal dogs.
1603-1609
Ko, J.C.H., Fox, S.M., Mandsager, R.E.,
Am J Vet Res 67, 1136-1139.
Jackson, A.M., Tobias, K., Long, C.,
2001b. Effects of preemptive atropine
Hofmeister, E.H., Williams, C.O., Braun,
et al., 2004. Effects of various agents
administration on incidence of
C., et al., 2006b. Influence of
on laryngeal motion during
medetomidine-induced bradycardia
lidocaine and diazepam on
laryngoscopy in normal dogs. Vet
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 218,
Surg 33, 102-106.
52-58.
peri-induction intraocular pressures
in dogs anesthetized with propofol-
Jacobson, J.D., McGrath, C.J., Smith,
Kolata, R.J., Rawlings, C.A., 1982.
atracurium. Can J Vet Res 70.
E.P., 1994. Cardiorespiratory effects 
Cardiopulmonary effects of
251-256.
of four opioid-tranquilizer
intravenous xylazine, ketamine, and
Holton, L.L., Scott, E.M., Nolan, A.M..
combinations in dogs. Vet Surg 23.
atropine in the dog. Am I Vet Res 43.
et al., 1998a. Relationship between
299-306
2196-2198
 physiological factors and clinical
Jones, R.S., Brearley, J.C., 1987.
Kona-Boun, J.-J., Cuvielliez, S., Troncy.
 pain in dogs scored using a
Atracurium infusion in the dog.
E., 2006. Evaluation of epidural
numerical rating scale. J Small Anim
J Small Anim Pract 28, 197-201.
administration of morphine or
Pract 39, 469-474.
Jones, R.s., Young, L.E., 1991.
 morphine and bupivacaine for
Holton, L.L., Scott, E.M., Nolan, A.M.,
Vecuronium infusion in the dog.
 postoperative analgesia after
et al., 1998b. Comparison of three
 premedication with an opioid
J Small Anim Pract 32, 509-512.
methods used for assessment of pain
analgesic and orthopedic surgery in
Joubert, K.E., 2009. Computer
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 212,
simulations of propofol infusions
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 229.
61-66.
1103-1112.
for total intravenous anaesthesia in
Hoskins, J.D., 1995. The geriatric dog.
dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 80, 2-9.
Kongara, K., Chamber, J.P., Johnson,
Perspectives May/lune, 39-46.
C.B., 2012. Effects of tramadol,
Joubert, K.E., Picard, I., Sethusa, M.,
morphine or their combination in
Hysing, E.S., Celly, J.E., Doursout, M.-F.
2005. Inhibition of bacterial growth 
dogs undergoing ovariohysterectomy
et al., 1992. Comparative effects of
by different mixtures of propofol
halothane, enflurane, and isofurane
on peri-operative
and thiopentone. J S Afr Vet Assoc
electroencephalographic responses
at equihypotensive doses on cardiac
76.85-89
and post-operative pain. N Z Vet I
performance and coronary and renal
Kastrup, M.R., Marsico, F.F., Ascoli, FO.
60.129-135
blood flows in chronically
et al., 2005. Neuromuscular blocking 
 instrumented dogs. Anesthesiology
Kopman, A.F, Eikermann, M., 2009.
 properties of atracunium during
Antagonism of non-depolarising
76.979-984.
sevoflurane or propofol anaesthesia
neuromuscular block: current
Iff, I., Moens, Y.PS., 2010. Evaluation of
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 32.
practice. Anaesthesia 64 (Suppl 1),
xtradural pressure waves and the
222-227
22-30.
lack of resistance' test to confirm
Katz, I., Clarke, H., Seltzer, Z., 2011.
Kowalski, S.E., Bradley, B.D., Greengrass,
 extradural needle placement in dogs.
Preventive analgesia: quo vadimus?
R.A., et al., 1992. Effects of
Vet J185,328-331
Anesth Analg 113, 1242-1253.
interpleural bupivacaine [0.5%) on 
Iff, I., Moens, Y., Schatzmann, U.,
Keates, H.L., Cramond, T, Smith, M.T.,
cnine diaphragmatic function.
 2007. Use of pressure waves to
1999. Intraarticular and periarticular
Anesth Analg 75, 400-404.
confrm the correct placement of
opioid binding in inflamed tissue in
KuKanich, B., Bidgood, T., Knesl, O.,
epidural needles in dogs. Vet Rec
experimental canine arthritis. Anesth
 2012. Clinical pharmacology of
161, 22-25.
Analg 89, 409-415.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
Ilkiw, J.E., Pascoe, PJ., Haskins, S.C.
Ko, J.C.H., Weil, A.B., 2009. Effects of
drugs in dogs. Vet Anesth Analg 39.
et al., 1992. Cardiovascular and
arprofen and morphine on the
69-90.
respiratory effects of propofol
minimum alveolar concentration of
Kulka, A.M., Otto, K.A., Bergfeld, C..
administration in hypovolemic dogs.
isoflurane in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp
et al., 2012. Effect of isoflurane
Am J Vet Res 53, 2323-2327.
Assoc 45, 19-23.
anesthesia with and without
Imagawa, V.H., Fantoni, D.T., Tatarunas,
Ko, I., Weil, A., Maxwell, L., et al., 2007.
dexmedetomidine or remifentanil on
A.C., et al., 201l. The use of different
 Plasma concentrations of lidocaine
quantitative electroencephalographic
doses of metamizole for post-
 in dogs following lidocaine patch
variables before and after nociceptive
operative analgesia in dogs. Vet
application. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
stimulation in dogs. Am I Vet Res 73.
Anaesth Analg 38, 385-393.
43. 280-283.
602-609.
493
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Kuo, W.-C., Keegan, R.D., 2004.
Lerche, P., Muir Ill, W.w., 2004. Effect
Marquez, M., Boscan, P., Weir, H., et al..
Comparative cardiovascular.
of medetomidine on breathing and
2011. The anesthetic sparing effect of
 analgesic, and sedative effects of
inspiratory neuromuscular drive in
maropitant as a pre-anesthetic agent
medetomidine, medetomidine-
conscious dogs. Am I Vet Res 65,
during canine ovariohysterectomy.
hydromorphone, and medetomidine-
720-724.
In: Proc Am Coll Vet Anesth Ann
butorphanol in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Lerche, P., Nolan, A.M., Reid, I., 2000.
Mtg, Knoxville, TN, USA.
65. 931-937.
Comparative study of propofol or
Martins, T.L., Kahvegian, M.A.P.,
Kushner, L.I., Trim, C.M.
propofol and ketamine for the
Noel-Morgan, I., et al., 2010.
Madhusudhan, S., et al., 1995.
induction of anaesthesia in dogs. Vet
Comparison of the effects of
Evaluation of the hemodynamic
Rec 146, 571-574.
 tramadol, codeine, and ketoprofen
effects of interpleural bupivacaine in
Lin, G.-Y., Robben, J.H., Murrell, J.C..
alone or in combination on
dogs. Vet Surg 24, 180-187.
et al., 2008. Dexmedetomidine
postoperative pain and on
Kyles, A.E., Hardie, E.M., Hansen, B.D.,
constant rate infusion for 24 hours
concentrations of blood glucose,
et al., 1998. Comparison of
during and after propofol or
serum cortisol, and serum
transdermal fentanyl and
isoflurane anaesthesia in dogs. Vet
interleukin-6 in dogs undergoing
intramuscular oxymorphone on
Anaesth Analg 35, 141-153.
maxillectomy or mandibulectomy.
 post-operative behaviour after
Linton, D.D., wilson, M.G., Newbound,
Am J Vet Res 71, 1019-1026.
owariohysterectomy in dogs. Res Vet
G.C., et al., 2012. The effectiveness
Mathews, L., Reichl, L., Graham, L..
Sci 65, 245-251.
of a long-acting transdermal fentanyl
et al., 2011. Comparison of the
Lantz, G.C., Badylak, S.F., Hiles, M.C..
solution compared to buprenorphine
cardiovascular effects of
 et al., 1992. Treatment of reperfusion
for the control of postoperative pain
acepromazine versus trazodone as
injury in dogs with experimentally
in dogs in a randomized.
 pre-medication in dogs anesthetized
induced gastric dilatation-volvulus.
multicentered clinical study. J Vet
for TPLO or TTA surgical procedures.
Am J Vet Res 53, 1594-1598.
Pharmacol Ther 35 (Suppl. 2),
In: Proc Am Coll Vet Anesth Ann
Lee, D.D., Mayer, R.E., Sullivan, T.C.
53-64.
Mtg, Nashville, TN, USA.
et al., 1998. Respiratory depressant
Liu, Q., Kong, A., Chen, R., et al., 2011.
Matsubara, L.M., Oliva, V.N.L.S., Gabas.
and skeletal muscle relaxant effects
Propofol and arrhythmias: two sides
D.T., et al., 2009. Effect of lidocaine
of low-dose pancuronium bromide
of the coin. Acta Pharmacol Sin 32.
on the minimum alveolar
 in spontaneously breathing.
817-823
concentration of sevoflurane in dogs.
isoflurane-anesthetized dogs. Vet
MacDougall, L.M., Hethey, J.A..
Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 407 -413.
Surg 27, 473-479.
Livingston, A., et al., 2009.
Mawbry, D.l., Bartges, J.W., d'Avignon,
Leibetseder, E.N., Mosing. M., Jones,
Antinociceptive, cardiopulmonary.
A., et al., 2004. Comparison of
R.S., 2006. A comparison of
and sedative effects of hive
various methods for estimating body
xtradural and intravenous
intravenous infusion rates of
fat in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 methadone on intraoperative
lidocaine in conscious dogs. Vet
40,109-114
isoflurane and postoperative 
analgesia requirements in dogs. Vet
Anaesth Analg 36, 512-522.
McMurphy, R.M., Davidson, H.J..
Maddern, K., Adams, V.J., Hill, N.A.T.,
Hodgson, D.s., 2004. Effects of
Anaesth Analg 33, 128-136.
et al., 2010. Alfaxalone induction 
atracurium on intraocular pressure.
Lemke, K.A., 2001. Electrocardiographic
dose following administration of
 eye position, and blood pressure in
 and cardiopulmonary effects of
medetomidine and butorphanol
eucapnic and hypocapnic isoflurane-
intramuscular administration of
in the dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 37.
anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 65.
 glycopyrrolate and romifdine in
7-13.
179-182.
conscious beagle dogs. Vet Anaesth
Analg 28, 75-86.
Magnusson, K.R., Scanga, C., Wagner.
Mehler, S.J., Mayhew, P.D., Drobatz,
A.E., et al., 2000. Changes in
K.J., et al., 2004. Variables associated
Lemke, K.A., Creighton, C.M., 2008.
anesthetic sensitivity and glutamate
with outcome in dogs undergoing
Paravertebral blockade of the
receptors in the aging canine brain.
extrahepatic biliary surgery: G0 cases
brachial plexus in dogs. Vet Clin N
I Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 55A,
[1988-2002). Vet Surg 33, 644-649.
Am Small Anim Pract 38.
1231-1241.
B448-B454.
Michelsen, L.G., Salmenpera, M., Hug.
Maney, J.K., Shepard, M.K., Braun, C.,
C.H., et al., 1996. Anesthetic potency
Lemke, K.A., Dawson, S.D., 2000.
 of remifentanil in dogs.
Local and regional anesthesia. Vet
et al., 2013. A comparison of
Clin N Am Small Anim Pract 30,
ardiopulmonary and anesthetic
Anesthesiology 84, 865-872.
839-857.
effects of an induction dose of
Miller, C.J., McKiernan, B.C., Pace, IJ.-
Lemo, N., Vnuk, D., Radisic, B., et al..
alfaxalone or propofol in dogs.
et al., 2002. The effects of doxapram
2007. Determination of the toxic
Vet Anaesth Analg, doi:10.1111/
hydrochloride (dopram-V) on
 dose of lidocaine in dogs and its
vaa. 12006.
laryngeal function in healthy dogs.
corresponding serum concentration.
Mapleson, W.W., 1996. Effect of age on
J Vet Intern Med 16, 524-528.
Vet Rec 160, 374-375.
MAC in humans: a meta-analysis. Br
Mohammad-Zadeh, L.F., Moses, L.
Lennox, P.H., Umedaly, H.S., Grant,
JAnaesth 76, 179-185.
Gwaltney-Brant, S.M., 2008.
R.P, et al., 2006. A pulsatile pressure
Margetts, L., Sawyer, R., 2007.
Serotonin: a review. J Vet Pharmacol
waveform is a sensitive marker for
Transdermal drug delivery: principles
Ther 31, 187-199.
confirming the location of the
and opioid therapy. Cont Educ
Monteiro, E.R., Teixeira Neto, F.J..
thoracic epidural space. J Cardiothor
Anaesth, Crit Care & Pain 7,
Campagnol, D., et al., 2010a.
Vasc Anesth 20, 659-663.
171-176.
Hemodynamic effects in dogs
494
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
anesthetized with isoflurane and
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Sasaki, N.,
mepivacaine in equine articular
remifentanil-isoflurane. Am J Vet Res
2001. Efects of nitrous oxide on
chondrocytes. Vet Anaesth Analg 38,
71, 1133-1141.
mask induction of anesthesia with
127-133.
Monteiro, E.R., Teixeira-Neto, F.J.,
sevoflurane or isoflurane in dogs.
Park, S.A., Park, Y.W., Son, W.G., et al..
Campagnol, D., et al., 2010b. Effects
Am J Vet Res 62, 1727-1733.
2010. Evaluation of the analgesic
of remifentanil on the minimum
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Sasaki, N.,
effect of intracameral lidocaine
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
2002. Effects of medetomidine-
hydrochloride injection on
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 71, 150-156.
midazolam, midazolam-
intraoperative and postoperative
Morgaz, I., Granados, M.M.,
butorphanol, or acepromazine-
 pain in healthy dogs undergoing
Dominguez, I.M., et al., 2009.
butorphanol as premedicants for
phacoemulsification. Am J Vet Res
Relationship of bispectral index to
mask induction of anesthesia with
71, 216-222.
hemodynamic variables and alveolar
sevoflurane in dogs. Am I Vet Res 63.
Pascoe, P.J., Dyson, D.H., 1993.
 concentration multiples of
1022-1028
Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy
sevoflurane in puppies. Res Vet Sci
Myrna, K.E., Bentley, E., Smith, L.J..
in dogs. Epidural morphine vs.
86, 508-513.
 2010. Effectiveness of injection of
 intercostal bupivacaine. Vet Surg 22.
Mosing, M., Auer, U., West, E., et al.
local anesthetic into the retrobulbar
141-147.
2012. Reversal of profound
space for postoperative analgesia
Pascoe, PJ., Raekallio, M., Kuusela, E.,
rocuronium or vecuronium-induced
following eye enucleation in dogs.
et al., 2006. Changes in the
neuromuscular block with
JAm Vet Med Assoc 237, 174-177.
minimum alveolar concentration
sugammadex in isoflurane-
Nagahama, S., Nishimura, R.
of isoflurane and some
 anaesthetized dogs. Vet I 192.
Mochizuki, M., et al., 2006. The
Gardiopulmonary measurements
467-471.
effects of propofol, isoflurane and
during three continuous infusion
sevoflurane on vecuronium infusion
rates of dexmedetomidine in dogs.
Mosing, M., Iff, I.K., Nemetz, W., 2008.
Cardiopulmonary arrest and
rates for surgical muscle relaxation
Vet Anaesth Analg 33, 97-103.
resuscitation following an extradural
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
Picker, O., Scheeren, T.w., Arndt, J.O.,
injection in a normovolemic dog. J
169-174.
2001. Inhalation anaesthetics
increase heart rate by decreasing
Vet Emerg Crit Care 18, 532-536.
Naganobu, K., Maeda, N., Miyamoto, T.,
et al., 2004. Cardiorespiratory effects
cardiac vagal activity in dogs. Br J
Muir, W.w. Ill, Wiese, A.J., March, PA..
 of epidural administration of
Anaesth 87, 748-754.
2003. Efects of morphine, lidocaine,
morphine and fentanyl in dogs
Peper, K., Schuster, T., Levionnois, O.
 ketamine, and morphine-lidocaine-
anesthetized with sevoflurane. J Am
et al., 2011. Antinociceptive effcacy
ketamine drug combination on
Vet Med Assoc 224, 67-70.
and plasma concentrations of
minimum alveolar concentration in
 transdermal buprenorphine in dogs.
 dogs anesthetized with isoflurane.
Nickalls, R.W.D., Mapleson, W.W., 2003.
Am J Vet Res 64, 1155-1160.
Age-related iso-MAC charts for
Vet I 187, 335-341.
isoflurane, sevoflurane and
Poffenbarger, E.M., Ralston, S.L.
Muir, W., Lerche, P., Wiese, A, et al..
desflurane in man. Br J Anaesth 91,
Chandler, M.J., et al., 1990. Canine
2008. Cardiorespiratory and
170-174.
neonatology. Part I. Physiologic
 anesthetic effects of clinical and
differences between puppies and
supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in
Nunes de Morales, A., Dyson, D.H..
adults. Comp Cont Educ 12.
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 451-462.
O'Grady, M.R., et al., 1998. Plasma
concentrations and cardiovascular
1601-1609.
Muir, W.w., Gadawski, Il, 1998
influence of lidocaine infusions
Popilskis, S., Kohn, D., Sanchez, IJ..
Cardiorespiratory effects of low-flow
et al., 1991. Epidural vs
and closed circuit inhalation
during isoflurane anesthesia in
healthy dogs and dogs with
intramuscular oxymorphone
anesthesia, using sevoflurane
subaortic stenosis. Vet Surg 27.
analgesia after thoracotomy in dogs.
delivered with an in-circuit vaporizer
Vet Surg 20, 462-467.
and concentrations of compound A.
486-497.
Portela, D.A., Otero, P.E., Tarragona, L.-
Am I Vet Res 59, 603-608.
Ortega, M., Cruz, I., 2011. Evaluation of
et al., 2010. Combined paravertebral
Murphy, A., Campbell, D.E., Baines, D..
a constant rate infusion of lidocaine
for balanced anesthesia in dogs
plexus block and parasacral sciatic
et al., 201la. Allergic reactions to
block in healthy dogs. Vet Anaesth
 propofol in egg-allergic children.
undergoing surgery. Can Vet I 52,
Analg 37, 531-541.
Anesth Analg 113, 140-144.
856-860.
Psatha, E., Alibhai, H.l., Jiminez-
Murphy, G.s., Szokol, J.W., Avram, M.J..
Pacharinsak, C., Greene, S.A., Keegan,
Lozano, A., et al., 2011. Clinical
et al., 2011b. Intraoperative
R.D., et al., 2003. Postoperative
efficacy and cardiorespiratory effects
acceleromyography monitoring
analgesia in dogs receiving epidural
of alfaxalone, or diazepam/fentanyl
reduces symptoms of muscle
morphine plus medetomidine. I Vet
for induction of anaesthesia in dogs
weakness and improves quality of
Pharmacol Ther 26, 71-77.
that are a poor anaesthetic risk. Vet
 recovery in the early postoperative
Panti, A., Bennett, R.C., Corletto, F.
Anaesth Analg 38, 24-36.
period. Anesthesiology 115.
Et al., 2009. The effect of omeprazole Pypendop. B.H., ilkiw, 1.E., 2006.
946-954.
 on oesophageal pH in dogs during
Comparison of variability in
Mutoh, T., Nishimura, R., Kim, H.-Y..
anaesthesia. J Small Anim Pract 50.
cardiorespiratory measurements
et al., 1997. Cardopulmonary effects
540-544.
following desflurane anesthesia at a
 of sevoflurane, compared with
Park, J., Sutradhar, B.C., Hong, G., et al..
multiple of the minimum alveolar
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane.
 2011. Comparison of the cytotoxic
concentration for each dog versus a
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 58, 885-890.
effects of bupivacaine, lidocaine, and
multiple of a single predetermined
495
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
minimum alveolar concentration for
plexus blockade in dogs. Vet Anaesth
transmucosal or oral absorption of
all dogs in a group. Am I Vet Res 67.
Analg 39, 190-200.
fentanyl from a transdermal patch in
1956-1961.
Robertson, S.M., 2009. Anesthesia for
a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 70-73.
Pypendop, B.H., Verstegen, J.P., 1998.
patients treated with behavioral
Scroggin, R.D., Quandt, I., 2009. The
Hemodynamic effects of
medication. North Am Vet Conf.
use of vasopressin for treating
medetomidine in the dog: a dose
Orlando, FL, USA.
vasodilatory shock and
titration study. Vet Surg 27, 612-622.
Robinson, T.M., Kruse-Elliott, K.T.,
cardiopulmonary arrest. J Vet Emerg
Pypendop, B.H., Verstegen, J.P., 2000.
Markel, M.D., et al., 1999. A
Crit Care 19, 145-157.
Effects of a medetomidine-
comparison of transdermal fentanyl
Seddighi, R., Egger, C.M., Rohrbach.
midazolam-butorphano]
versus epidural morphine for
B.W., et al., 2012. Effect of nitrous
combination on renal cortical,
 analgesia in dogs undergoing major
oxide on the minimum alveolar
 intestinal and muscle microvascular
 orthopedic surgery. I Am Anim Hosp
concentration for sevoflurane and
blood flow in isoflurane
Assoc 35, 95-100.
the minimum alveolar concentration
 anaesthetized dogs: a laser Doppler
Rodriguez, I.M., Mufioz-Rascon, P.,
derivatives that prevent motor
study. Vet Anaesth Analg 27, 36-44.
Navarrete-Calvo, R., et al., 2012.
movement and autonomic responses
Pypendop. B.H., Verstegen, J.P., 2001.
Comparison of the cardiopulmonary
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 73, 341-345.
Cardiovascular effects of romifdine
parameters after induction of
Sedlacek, H.S., Ramsey, D.S., Boucher,
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 62, 490-495.
anaesthesia with alphaxalone or
J.F., et al., 2008. Comparative efficacy
Quandt, J.E., Robinson, E.P., Rivers,
etomidate in dogs. Vet Anaesth
of maropitant and selected drugs in 
W.J., et al., 1998. Cardiorespiratory
Analg 39, 357-365.
preventing emesis induced by
 and anesthetic effects of propofol
Rojas, A.C., Alves, J.G., Moreira e Lima,
centrally or peripherally acting
and thiopental in dogs. Am J Vet Res
R., et al., 2012. The effects of
emetogens in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol 
59.1137-1143
subarachnoid administration of
Ther 31, 533-537.
Radlinsky, M.G., Mason, D.E., Hodgson,
preservative-free S(+)-ketamine on
Self, I.A., Hughes, J.M., Kenny, D.A..
D., 2004. Transnasal laryngoscopy
spinal cord and meninges in dogs.
et al., 2009. Effect of muscle
for the diagnosis of laryngeal
Anesth Analg 114, 450-455.
injection site on preanaesthetic
Sammarco, I.L., Conzemius, M.G.
sedation in dogs. Vet Rec 164.
paralysis in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 40, 211-215.
Perkowski, S.Z., et al., 1996.
323-326.
Postoperative analgesia for stifle
Shaver, S.L., Jimenez, D.A., Brainard,
Radlinsky, M.G., Mason, D.E., Roush,
surgery: a comparison of intra-
B.M., et al., 201l. Evaluation of
J.K., et al., 2005. Use of a
articular bupivacaine, morphine, or
 perioperative gastroesophageal reflux
continuous, local infusion of
 bupivacaine for postoperative
saline. Vet Surg 25, 59-69.
in dogs with brachycephalic
Sano, T., Nishimura, R., Kanazawa, H..
syndrome. ACVS Conf, Chicago, IL,
analgesia in dogs undergoing total
ear canal ablation. J Am Vet Med
et al., 2006. Phammacokinetics of
USA.
Assoc 227, 414-419.
fentanyl after single intravenous
Smith, JA., Gaynor, J.S., Bednarski,
injection and constant rate infusion
R.M., et al., 1993. Adverse effects of
Raptopoulos, D., Galatos, A.D., 1995.
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
administration of propofol with
Post anaesthetic reflux esophagitis
266-273.
various preanesthetic regimens in
in dogs and cats. I Vet Anaesth 22.
Savvas, I., Anagnostou, T., Papazoglou,
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 202.
6-8.
L.G., et al., 2006. Successful
1111-1115.
Raptopoulos, D., Galatos, A.D., 1997.
resuscitation from cardiac arrest
Smith, L.J., Bentley, E., Shih, A., et al.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
associated with extradural lidocaine
2004. Systemic lidocaine infusion as
anaesthesia induced with either
in a dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
an analgesic for intraocular surgery
thiopentone or propofol in the dog.
175-178
in dogs: a pilot study. Vet Anaesth
JVet Anaesth 24, 20-22.
Savwas, I., Papazoglou, L.G., Kazakos.
Analg 31, 53-63.
Redondo, I.l., Gomez-Villamandos, R...
G.M., et al., 2008. Incisional block
Smith, L.J., Yu, J.K.-A., 2001. A
Santisteban, J.M., et al., 1999.
with bupivacaine for analgesia after
comparison of epidural
Romifdine, medetomidine or
celiotomy in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
buprenorphine with epidural
xylazine before propofol-halothane-
Assoc 44, 60-66.
morphine for postoperative analgesia
NgO anesthesia in dogs. Can J Vet
Savwas, I., Rallis, T., Raptopoulos, D..
following stifle surgery in dogs. Vet
Res 63, 31-36.
2009. The effect of pre-anaesthetic
Anaesth Analg 28, 87-96.
Reed, F., Burrow, R., Poels, K.L.C., et al.,
fasting time and type of food on
Sneyd, J.R., Rigby-Jones, A.E., 2010. New
2011. Evaluation of transdermal
gastric content volume and acidity in
drugs and technologies, intravenous
fentanyl patch attachment in dogs
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 36.
anaesthesia is on the move [again].
 and analysis of residual fentanyl
539-546.
Br JAnaesth 105, 246-254.
 content following removal. Vet
Schertel, E.R., Allen, D.A., Muir, W.W.,.
Stephan, D.D., Vestre, W.A., Stiles, I..
Anaesth Analg 38, 407-412.
et al., 1997. Evaluation of a
et al., 2003. Changes in intraocular
Reid, J., Nolan, A.M, 1996.
hypertonic saline-dextran solution
pressure and pupil size following
Pharmacokinetics of propofol as an
for treatment of dogs with shock
intramuscular administration of
induction agent in geriatric dogs. Res
induced by gastric dilatation-
hydromorphone hydrochloride and
Vet Sci 61, 169-171.
volvulus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210,
acepromazine in clinically normal
Rioja, E., Sinclair, M., Chalmers, H.,
226-230.
dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 6, 73-76.
et al., 2012. Comparison of three
Schmiedt, C.W., Bjorling, D.E., 2007.
Stobie, D., Caywood, D.D., Rozanski,
techniques for paravertebral brachial
Accidental prehension and suspected
E.A., et al., 1995. Evaluation of
496
Anaesthesia of the dog
Chapter
15
pulmonary function and analgesia in
A.S., Maze, M. (Eds). Anesthetic
effect of intravenous medetomidine
dogs after intercostal thoracotomy
Pharmacology: Physiologic Principles
on pupil size and intraocular
and use of morphine administered
and Clinical Practice. Churchill
pressure in normotensive dogs. Vet
intramuscularly or intrapleurally and
Livingstone, Philadelphia,
Quarterly 22, 179-180.
bupivacaine administered
pp.297-321
Vesal, N., Cribb, P.H., Frketic, M.M.,.
intrapleurally. Am J Vet Res 56.
Tyner, C.L., Woody, B.l., Reid, J.S., et al.,
1996. Postoperative analgesic and
1098-1109.
1997. Multicenter clinical
cardiopulmonary effects in dogs of
Stubhaug, A., Breivik, H., Eide, PK..
comparison of sedative and analgesic
oxymorphone administered
et al., 1997. Mapping of punctate
effects of medetomidine and
epidurally and intramuscularly, and
hyperalgesia around a surgical
xylazine in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp
medetomidine administered
incision demonstrates that ketamine
Assoc 211, 1413-1417.
epidurally: A comparative clinical
is a powerful suppressor of central
Ueyama, Y., Lerche, P., Eppler, C.M..
study. Vet Surg 25, 361-369.
sensitization to pain following
et al., 2009. Effects of intravenous
Vettorato, E., Bradbrook, C., Gurney, M..
surgery. Acta Anaesth Scand 41,
administration of perzinfotel,
et al., 2012. Peripheral nerve blocks
1124-1132.
fentanyl, and a combination of
 of the pelvic limb in dogs: A.
Tobias, K.M., Jackson, A.M., Harvey.
both drugs on the minimum
retrospective clinical study. Vet
R.C., 2004. Effects of doxapram HCl
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
Comp Orthop Traumatol 25.
on laryngeal function of normal
in dogs. Am I Vet Res 70.
314-320.
dogs and dogs with naturally
1459-1464
Vinclair, M., Broux, C., Faure, P, et al.,.
occurring laryngeal paralysis. Vet
Ueyema, Y., Waselau, A.-C., Wiese, A.J..
 2008. Duration of adrenal inhibition
Anaesth Analg 31, 258-263.
et al., 2008. Anesthetic and
following a single dose of etomidate
Tobias, K.M., Marioni-Henry, K.,
 crdiopulmonary effects of
in critically ill patients. Intensive
Wagner, R., 2006. A retrospective
intramuscular morphine.
Care Med 34, 714-719.
study on the use of acepromazine
medetomidine, ketamine injection in 
Waterman, A.E., Hashim, M.A., 1992.
maleate in dogs with seizures. I Am
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35,
480-487.
Effects of thiopentone and propofol
Anim Hosp Assoc 42, 283-289.
 on lower esophageal sphincter and
Tolbert, K., Bissett, S., King. A., et al..
Uilenreef, J.l., Murrell, J.C., McKusick,
barrier pressure in the dog. I Small 
2011. Effcacy of oral famotidine and
B.C., et al., 2008. Dexmedetomidine
Anim Pract 33, 530-533.
2 omeprazole formulations for the
 continuous rate infusion during
 control of intragastric pH in dogs. J
isoflurane anaesthesia in canine
Watkins, S., Hall, L., Clarke, K., 1987.
Vet Intern Med 25, 47-54.
surgical patients. Vet Anaesth Analg
 Propofol as an intravenous
35, 1-12.
anaesthetic agent for dogs. Vet Rec
Torske, K.E., Dyson, D.H., Conlon, P.D.
Valverde, A., 2008. Epidural analgesia in
120,326-329.
1999. Cardiovascular effects of
epidurally administered
dogs and cats. Vet Clin Small Anim
Wehrenberg, A.P., Freeman, L.M., Ko,
oxymorphone and an oxymorphone-
38.1205-1230.
J.C., et al., 2009. Evaluation of
bupivacaine combination in
Valverde, A., Doherty, T.J., Hernandez,
topical epidural morphine for
halothane-anesthetized dogs. Am ↓
J, et al., 2004. Effect of lidocaine on
postoperative analgesia following
 hemilaminectomy in dogs. Vet Ther
Vet Res 60, 194-200.
 the minimum alveolar concentration
Torske, K.E., Dyson, D.H., Pettifer, G..
 of isoflurane in dogs. Vet Anaesth
10,E1-E12.
1998. End tidal halothane
Analg 31, 264-271.
Weiland, L., Croubels, S., Baert, K.,
concentration and postoperative
Valverde, A., Dyson, D., Cockshutt, J.R..
et al., 2006. Pharmacokinetics of a
et al., 1991. Comparison of the
lidocaine patch 5% in dogs. J Vet
analgesia requirements in dogs: a
comparison between intravenous
hemodynamic effects of halothane
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 53.
oxymorphone and epidural
alone and halothane combined with
34-39
bupivacaine alone and in
epidurally administered morphine 
Werdehausen, R., Braun, S., Hermans.
combination with oxymorphone.
for anesthesia in ventilated dogs. Am
H., et al., 20ll. The influence of
Can Vet J 39, 361-368.
JVet Res 52, 505-509
adjuvants used in regional anesthesia
Troncy, E., Junot, S., Keroack, S., et al..
Valverde, A., Dyson, D.H., McDonell.
 on lidocaine-induced neurotoxicity
2002. Results of preemptive epidural
W.N., 1989. Epidural morphine
in vitro. Regional Anesth Pain Med
administration of morphine with or
reduces halothane MAC in the dog.
36. 436-443.
without bupivacaine in dogs and
Can I Anaesth 36, 629-632.
Wiles, M.D., Nathanson, M.H., 2010.
cats undergoing surgery: 265 cases
van Oostrom, H., Doornenbal, A..
Local anaesthetics and adjuvants 
(1997-1999). j Am Vet Med Assoc
Schot, A., et al., 2011.
- future developments. Anaesthesia
221,666-672
 Neurophysiological assessment of
65 (Suppl. 1), 22-37.
Trumpatori, B.J., Carter, J.E., Hash, I..
the sedative and analgesic effects
Wilson, D.V., Walshaw, R., 2004.
et al., 2010. Evaluation of a
of a constant rate infusion of
Postanesthetic esophageal
midhumeral block of the radial,
dexmedetomidine in the dog. Vet I
dysfunction in 13 dogs. I Am Anim
ulnar, musculocutaneous and
190.338-344
Hosp Assoc 40, 455-460.
median (RuMM block) nerves for
Vanio, O., 1991. Propofol infusion
Wilson, D.V., Barnes, K.S., Hauptman,
analgesia of the distal aspect of the
anaesthesia in dogs premedicated
J.G., 2004. Pharmacokinetics of
 thoracic limb in dogs. Vet Surg 39,
with medetomidine. J Vet Anaesth
combined intraperitoneal and
1-12.
18, 35-37
incisional lidocaine in the dog
Tsuneyoshi, I., Akata, T., Boyle, W.A..
Verbruggen, A.M., Akkerdaas, L.C.
following ovaniohysterectomy. I Vet
2004. Vascular reactivity. In: Evers,
Hellebrekers, L.., et al., 2000. The
Pharmacol Ther 27, 105-109.
497
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Wilson, D.V., Boruta, D.T., Evans, A.T.,
subsequent anesthetic in dogs. Vet
postoperative analgesic management
2006a. Influence of halothane.
Anaesth Analg 34, 15-22.
of canine total ear canal ablation - a
isoflurane, and sevoflurane on
Wilson, D.V., Evans, A.T., Miller, R..
randomized, controlled, double-
gastroesophageal reflux during
2005. Effects of preanesthetic
blinded study. Vet Anaesth Analg 33.
 anesthesia in dogs. Am I Vet Res 67.
administration of morphine on
328-339.
1821-1825.
gastroesophageal reflux and
Xenoulis, PG., Steiner, J.M., 2010.
Wilson, D.V., Evans, A.T., Mauer, W.A..
regurgitation during anesthesia in
Lipid metabolism and
2006b. Influence of metoclopramide
dogs. Am I Vet Res 66, 386-390.
hyperlipidemia in dogs. Vet J 183,
 on gastroesophageal reflux in
Wilson, I., Doherty, T., Egger, C.M..
12-21.
 anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 67.
et al., 2008. Effects of intravenous
Yamashita, K., Yoshihiko, O.,
26-31.
lidocaine, ketamine, and the
Yamashita, M., et al., 2008. Effects of
Wilson, D.V., Pettifer, G.R., Hosgood,
combination on the minimum
carprofen and meloxicam with or
G., 2006c. Effect of transdermally
alveolar concentration of sevoflurane
without butorphanol on the
administered fentanyl on minimum
in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35.
minimum alveolar concentration of
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
289-296.
sevoflurane in dogs. J Vet Med Sci
in normothermic and hypothermic
Wilson, M.J.A., 2007. Epidural
70, 29-35.
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 228,
 endeavour and the pressure
Zhao, Y., Sun, L., 2008. Antidepressants
1042-1046.
principle. Anaesthesia 62.
modulate the in vitro inhibitory
Wilson, D.V., Evans, A.T., Mauer, W.A.
319-322.
 effects of propofol and ketamine on
2007. Pre-anesthetic meperidine:
Wolfe, T.M., Bateman, S.W., Cole, L.K.,
norepinephrine and serotonin
associated vomiting and
et al., 2006. Evaluation of a local
transporter function. J Clin Neurosci
 gastroesophageal reflux during the
 anesthetic delivery system for the
15.1264-1269.
498
Anaesthesia of the cat
Introduction
499
 Pentobarbital
517
 Patient evaluation
500
 Propofol
517
History
Alfaxalone
518
500
Etomidate
518
Physical examination
500
Ketamine
519
Diagnostic tests
502
Tiletamine
519
Impact of disease
502
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)
520
Vaccination
502
Inhalation anaesthesia
520
Handling
502
 Administration of inhalation agents
521
503
 Adjunct agents
Sedation and analgesia
522
 Neuromuscular blockade
504
522
Agents
Monitoring and management
522
Acepromazine
504
Ventilation
523
2-Agonist sedatives
504
Cardiovascular system
524
Benzodiazepines
505
Temperature
526
Opioids
505
Recovery from anaesthesia
526
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
507
Local analgesia
527
Controversial issues
508
 Brachial plexus nerve block
527
Evaluation of pain
508
 Dental nerve blocks
527
 Digital nerve blocks
527
Ovariohysterectomy, castration
509
 Epidural analgesia
528
Feral cats
511
 Peroneal and tibial nerve block
529
Regional nerve blocks
512
Sciatic nerve block
529
Euthanasia
512
Topical or transdermal 
530
General anaesthesia
512
 Preanaesthetic preparation
512
Premedication
513
INTRODUCTION
Intravenous injection
513
Endotracheal intubation
514
General principles and recommendations for good anaes-
 Injectable anaesthetic agents
516
thetic practice that are discussed in the previous chapter
 Thiopental 
516
are applicable to anaesthesia of cats. This chapter will
Methohexital
517
focus on aspects of anaesthetic management that are
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
499
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
influenced by feline behaviour, anatomy. physiology.
 of the fluid volume delivered may be diffcult when using
pharmacology and disease. Other reading sources include
gravity flow from a 500 mL bag of balanced electrolyte
the guidelines published by veterinary organizations
solution, even with a paediatric (60 drops/mL) admin-
with specifc interest in the feline species, including
istration set The anaesthetist must maintain close control
the Association for Veterinary Anaesthesia (AVA). the
of fluid administration and this can be facilitated by
American College of Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia
use of an infusion pump or syringe driver. A running
[ACVAA), the International Society of Feline Medicine
tally of all fluid administered should be recorded,
(ISFM) and the American Association of Feline Practition-
including any volumes administered with adjunct thera-
ers (AAFP).
 pies such as dopamine or dobutamine and 5% dextrose
The risk of death from anaesthesia or sedation has
in water (D5w).
 decreased. Recent data have led to approximate estimates
of mortality of 0.1% in healthy cats and 1.4% in sick
poig) sop ue ysu iaiea ie Auaedde se ym 'sie
belt et al., 2008a,b). Administration of anaesthesia in
PATIENT EVALUATION
cats is not identical to that in dogs as the behavioural
responses to and metabolism of some anaesthetic agents
differ between cats and dogs. In a 2-year prospective survey
Evaluation of the cat before sedation or anaesthesia should
include assessment in each of the following areas.
of anaesthesia of 79 178 cats in the UK, physical status.
age and weight increased the risk of death. Cats that were
sicker, over 12 years of age, and weighing ≤2 kg or ≥6 kg
History
were more likely to die during or after anaesthesia.
Furthermore, cats weighing ≤2 kg were nearly 16 times
The effects and elimination of anaesthetic agents may be
more likely to die than cats weighing between 2 and
altered by specific diseases and anaesthesia may result in
6 kg (Brodbelt et al., 2007). As with other species, illness
a long-term adverse effect on organ function that was
 already compromised. Drugs administered to control fear
cal responses to anaesthetic agents as well as decrease
or anxiety, such as amitriptyline, paroxetine, sertraline,
the dose rates required. Overweight cats are at increased
fluoxetine, or selegiline may have interaction with anaes-
risk for hypoventilation and hypoxaemia and the dose
thetic agents. Although related complications are not
rates of anaesthetic agents must be decreased for these
documented in cats, there are potential problems with
patients. Small cats are at risk for unintended drug over-
these agents and they have been discussed in the previous
dose, especially if correct weights are not used. Accuracy
chapter. Concurrent administration of drugs to control
of administration of small volumes is improved by use
of l mL syringes with 24 gauge needles or insulin syringes.
thesia. Frequent measurerment of blood glucose periop-
Larger needles may contain as much as 0.1-0.2 mL of
eratively is important for cats with diabetes and some
dnug that can increase the dose administered when
ats will require infusion of glucose-containing fluid.
injected into a small patient Drugs should be diluted
 Knowledge of previous adverse responses to anaesthesia.
when the volume to be injected is too small to be
such as excitement, hypotension, or difficult recovery. is
accurately administered with available syringes/needles.
useful so that the current protocol can be modifed
Published factors associated  with  anaesthetic-
and
accordingly.
sedation-related deaths included the urgency and severity
of the procedure, and use of endotracheal intubation and
fluid therapy. Possible explanations are that preanaesthetic
Physical examination
evaluation and preparation are curtailed with emergency
 and out-of-hours surgery. Less or inadequate time is spent
The physical characteristics of the patient may immedi-
restoring fluid and electrolyte balance, and fewer person-
 ately suggest a potential problem, such as brachycephalic
 nel may be available for optimum management. Endotra-
 syndrome in Persian and Exotic shorthair cats. With severe
cheal intubation is not quite as easy in cats due to the
brachycephalia, the upper canine teeth rotate from the
smaller size of the larynx and increased tendency for
laryngospasm to interfere with insertion of the tube. Use
dorsorotation or nearly horizontal position. The greater
 of force or repeated attempts may cause trauma leading
the degree of brachycephalia and dorsorotation, the nar-
to laryngeal and tracheal mucosal swelling that obstructs
rower the nasal cavity, nasal airways and nares (Schlueter
airflow after extubation. Increased risk of death associated
et al.,
 2009). In the previous study, hypoplasia of the
with fluid therapy may be a consequence of fluid overload.
 trachea was not present in the brachycephalic cats studied.
Not only is the blood volume of a cat smaller than that
 Brachycephalic cats must not be left alone after premedica-
s Aiaa1 e ie ns sis5q  ia e uo o e jo
tion for fear of airway obstruction. Obese cats have
volume of fluid is required, but also accurate assessment
impaired ventilation and are predisposed to hypoxaemia
500
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
during sedation and anaesthesia. Dose rates of anaesthetic
 Table 16.1 Reference physiological values for awake
agents should be calculated on the ideal weights of these
unsed ated cats
patients to avoid overdosage Very thin cats are at increased
risk for hypothermia and warming methods must be used
throughout the anaesthetic episode, particularly during
Parameter
Range of published
the time between induction of anaesthesia and start of
means ± SD
surgery, and continued into recovery.
 RR breaths/min
39 ± 13 to 52 ± 15
As in other species, age affects aspects of anaesthesia in
feline patients. Although the demarcations between life
ETCOz mmHg
29 ± 4 
stages are arbitrary, the AAFP and AAHA (American Animal 
 PaOz mmHg
81 ± 7 to 103
Hospital Association) have determined feline life-stages as
follows (Hoyumpa Vogt et al., 2010):
 PaCOz mmHg
26 ± 3 to 32 ± 3
●Kitten Birth-6 months of age
eHd
7.30 ± 0.1 to 7.39 ± 0.04
●Junior 7 months-2years
HCOs mmol/L
16 ± 3.1 to 18.6 ± 1.7
Prime 3-6 years
●Mature 7-10 years
BE mmol/L
-5 ± 1.8
 Senior 1l-14 years
Temperature °C (F)
37.0 ± 0.9 (98.6 ± 1.6) to
●Geriatric >15 years.
38.6 ± 0.6 (101.5 ± 1.1)
 Senior and geriatric cats will have decreased require-
 Heart rate beats/min
118 ± 14 to 240 ± 21
ments for anaesthetic agents and are more likely than
 Systolic arterial pressure mmHg
174 ± 45 (aorta)
younger animals to develop hypoventilation, hypoxaemia,
Invasive
163 ± 12 (femoral artery)
and hypotension during anaesthesia.
Auscultation of a heart murmur on routine physical
 Diastolic arterial pressure mmHg
124 ± 27 (aorta)
Invasive 
111 ± 6 (femoral artery)
examination should be further investigated. Cardiac
%es ui Aydeigoipiesouna suisn payuap! sem Asoloued
 Mean arterial pressure mmHg
146 ± 29 (aorta)
of apparently healthy cats with a murmur (Nakamura
Invasive 
137 ± 8 (femoral artery)
et al., 2oll). A heart murmur may be auscultated in
Systolic arterial pressure mmHg
Age (years)
Mean value
animals without underlying structural heart disease, and
Oscillometric
<5
116
in cats that are hypovolaemic, anaemic or febrile, or may
DINAMAP 1846SX, tail, 94 cats
5-10
128
be absent despite the presence of significant heart disease
>10
147
such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Neverthe-
 Diastolic arterial pressure mmHg
Age (years)
 Mean value
less, the presence of cardiac disease such as cardiomyopa-
Oscillometric
<5
62
thy, mitral insufficiency, or a patent ductus arteriosus
DINAMAP 1846SX, tail, 94 cats
5-10
77
(PDA) requires modification of the anaesthetic protocol
>10
87
to avoid an adverse outcome The lungs should be auscul-
 Mean arterial pressure mmHg
Age (years)
Mean value
tated for abnormal or absent air sounds that suggest the
Oscillometric
<5
81
presence of pulmonary disease or diaphragmatic rupture.
DINAMAP 1846SX, tail, 94 cats
5-10
97
Some breeds are associated with increased incidence of
>10
110
certain diseases, such as the Maine Coon and cardiac
disease.
Allen et al., 1986; Hikasa et al., 1996; Sansom et al., 2004;
 The range of normal values for physiological parameters
Souza et al., 2005: Wiese & Muir, 2007; Cleale et al., 2009; Muir
et al., 2009: Taylor et al., 2012
is wide and the measurements obtained may be influ-
enced by the surroundings and method of monitoring
(Table 16.1). Respiratory rates (RR), heart rates (HR), and
Doppler systolic arterial pressures (SAP) have been found
to be slightly higher when obtained in the hospital com-
a moderate risk for organ damage, and SAP ≥180 mmHg
pared with the home environment although, even at home.
with DAP ≥120 mmHg as carrying a severe risk for organ
some cats struggle during measurements (Quimby et al.
damage (Brown et al., 2007). Cardiac abnormalities
20ll). Cats ≥ll years of age were found to have signif-
are frequent in cats with hypertension. Hypertension is
cantly higher SAP, diastolic arterial pressures (DAP) and
present in 19-65% of cats with chronic kidney disease,
mean arterial pressures (MAP) than younger cats (Bodey
although cats with extreme renal compromise may have
& Sansom, 1998) and, in a later study, the increases in
lower pressures and cats with chronic kidney disease and
 ae suseanui ym anissaisoid aiam sainssad poona
hypertension may not have azotaemia (Bodey & Sansom,
(Sansom et al., 2004). Increased systolic arterial pres-
1998; Brown et al., 2007). Cats with hyperthyroidism may
 sures of 160-179 mmHg and DAP 100-119 mmHg carry
 Or may not be hypertensive but hypertension has been
501
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
agents that rely on renal excretion for elimination, specif-
teronism. Hypertension is considered pathological in cats
cally ketamine and tiletamine-zolazepam. Azotaemia
when ocular pathology is also present. Hypokalaemia and
decreases anaesthetic requirement, therefore, lower doses
 muscle weakness are also features of primary hyperaldos-
should be used and the drugs titrated to effect Cats with
teronism. Measurement of blood pressure is advisable in
chronic kidney disease should be administered balanced
older cats as part of the preanaesthetic evaluation. The cat
 electrolyte solution IV during anaesthesia and even preop-
must be completely relaxed, preferably in its cage and
eratively and through the recovery period to encourage
the final values recorded should be the average of several
diuresis. The cats should be monitored after anaesthesia
measurements.
until confirmation of urine voiding.
Medications for cardiac disease should be continued on
the morning of the day of surgery. Some medications used
Diagnostic tests
to treat hypertension increase the risk for hypotension
 during inhalation anaesthesia and preparations for treat-
Further information may be desired based on the patient's
ment should be available Increased HR may adversely
history and physical examination. Requirement for preop-
impact cardiac function in cats with HCM. Atropine or
erative laboratory data is based on the patient's age, pre-
glycopyrrolate should not be used for premedication in
existing disease, and the type and complexity of the
these patients but reserved for therapeutic use if necessary.
sasaul uoungeu ueio anuss anpanond pauued
Vasoconstriction will decrease cardiac output in the pres-
with increasing age, haematological and biochemical
ence of mitral insuffciency. Medetomidine and dexme-
measurements should be determined in mature and older
detomidine or acepromazine should be used cautiously to
animals and the results may provide warning of a problerm
avoid exacerbation of hypertension or hypotension,
that requires specifc anaesthetic management. Laboratory
respectively. Fluid overloading should be avoided in cats
tests should be performed on all cats with comorbidities.
with severe cardiac disease.
Preoperative test results from healthy or sick cats sched-
Consideration of the results from the physical examina-
uled for complicated surgical procedures will provide
tion and diagnostic tests should culminate in an overall
baseline values for postoperative evaluation. Measurement
 assessment of the health status of the patient Commonly.
of haematocrit, total protein, and blood urea nitrogen
the patient is then assigned a category of 1-5, with 1 rep-
lou seY ieu ie 1o gop Aue ul papuaooa1 st (Nna)
resenting a healthy animal and 5 moribund, and with the
had laboratory tests within 2-4 weeks of anaesthesia.
 suffix E in situations of emergency anaesthesia (Chapter
The clinician has an obligation to determine clinical
1; ASA categories). This is a useful exercise because catego-
relevance of an abnormal result and need for further
ries 3-5 have been associated with increased incidence of
investigation (Epstein et al., 2005; Klein & Arrowsmith,
complications. Potential complications of the proposed
2010). Administration of sedation or anaesthesia before
medical or surgical procedure are not included with ASA
collection of blood will alter the results {Frankel &
status, therefore, the assigned category does not represent
Hawkey. 1980; Dhumeaux et al., 20l2: Reynolds et al.,
the total risk of anaesthesia and surgery.
2012). Even a small IV dose of ketamine 2 mg/kg. with
diazepam, 0.1 mg/kg. decreased red and white blood
cell and platelet counts, albumin and triglycerides (Rey-
Vaccination
nolds et al., 20l2). Some laboratory reference values may
The effect of anaesthesia on serological responses to vac-
be different for various breeds. An investigation of 525
cination at the time of neutering has been of concern. One
Birman, Chartreux, Maine Coon, and Persian cats in
investigation of serological responses to vaccinations
France identified clinically relevant differences for creati-
before, during or after neutering kittens at 7, 8, or 9 weeks
nine, glucose and total protein (Reynolds et al., 20l0).
of age measured antibody titres that were comparable to
The Birman cats were found to have higher creatinine
kittens that were not anaesthetized, suggesting that anaes-
concentrations than cats of the other breeds, and plasma
thesia and surgery did not have a significant impact (Reese
glucose concentrations were higher in Chartreux and
et al., 2008)
Maine Coon cats.
Handling
Impact of disease
The ISFM and AAFP guidelines for handling cats encour-
The presence of abnormalities may indicate the need to
ages the veterinary team to 'think like a cat' (Rodan et al..
adjust choice of agents and dose rates or anaesthetic man-
2011). Since cats often respond to confrontation by avoid-
agement to improve safety. Cats with kidney disease Or
ance or hiding. allowing a cat to fel hidden using
urethral obstruction have reduced urine flow and pro-
towels or carriers may facilitate handling. Cats should be
longed recovery from anaesthesia will result from use of
handled gently (unless unavoidable) using slow steady
502
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
movements, a quiet voice and avoiding direct eye contact.
scruffing, others use scruffing only if necessary to protect
Spraying synthetic feline facial pheromone in advance
a cat or person from injury, while others believe that it
into the cage and on towels used for handling may reduce
is acceptable for short procedures or to prevent escape. A
anxiety and fear aggression. Use of pheromones was found
 gentle hold is suffcient for most pets. Chemical restraint
to add an additional calming effect in cats given acepro-
 may be needed when an aggressive response is anticipated.
mazine and to a lesser extent when cats were not given
Preanaesthetic medication reduces patient struggling
acepromazine, but had no appreciable effect on the ease
during insertion of an IV catheter before general
of IV catheter insertion (Kronen et al., 2006). When
anaesthesia.
approaching a cat in a cage, the opening should not be 
 Nets of the clam-shell design with small holes are avail-
completely blocked (which the cat perceives as a threat)
able commercially to capture cats reluctant to be handled
and the cat should be allowed to approach the handler.
(Fig. 16.1). Any part of the cat is then available for IM
If the cat is reluctant to approach, the top of some car-
injection. Also available are clear plastic boxes with one
riers can be removed to gain access to the cat. The ISFM/
side that can be moved to immobilize the cat for IM
AAFP guidelines recommend that the carrier should not
injection.
be tipped up and the cat shaken out but to reach in and
support the caudal end of the cat and back legs to encour-
age it to move forward. Sliding a towel around or over
the cat before laying on hands may suffciently relax the
SEDATION AND ANALGESIA
cat to facilitate easy removal from the cage. Most cats
prefer touch on their heads and neck than other parts of
The goal for sedation is a quiet tractable animal to facili
the body. Signs of anxiety or fear include ears that
 tate procedures such as examination or IV injection. Seda-
are lowered and swiveled out, head drawn into the
tion will modify sympathetic nervous system stimulation
body, back slightly hunched, tail moved in to cover the
and minimize increases in cardiac output and blood pres-
feet, and sweaty paws. Immobility ('frezing) may also
sure that would increase the dose rate of subsequent
indicate anxiety.
-ipies ialeaig ui insai salei asop yaih 'sluase sauisaeue
'Scruffing is a term for a variety of holds on the skin
Kaes jo uieu amaeu e pue uoissaidap Aieuomndo
of the cat's neck. Opinions vary about use of scruffng
 Minimizing conflict between cat and handler also mini-
(Rodan et al., 2oll). Some clinicians will never use
 mizes stress on the veterinary personnel and contributes
Figure 16.1 Net bag restraint for fractious cats. The handles are at the front of the picture, kept closed by Velcro. The hinge
aul u! saloy aul yonoui ape ag uen uoipalu! l len aul dn doons oi sme! all uado oi apis iey aul smolle appiwu aul us
netting.
503
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
to efficiency by allowing them to stay focused and com-
ketamine and to provide aquieter recoveryfrom
plete the job in hand more quickly.
an aesthesia.
Agents
Q2-Agonist sedatives
Acepromazine
Experimental and clinical studies confrm that medetomi-
dine and dexmedetomidine reliably produce sedation
Acepromazine may be given to cats at dose rates of 0.02-
and analgesia in cats in 15-20 minutes after IM adminis-
0.1 mg/kg IM, IV or SC (Table 16.2). Acepromazine given
tration, although pre-injection excitement or aggression
alone provides mild sedation that can be intensified by the
may result in sedation of less intensity. Dose rates
addition of an opioid. It is used to provide a base for
based on body surface area are available in the product
anaesthesia, to increase sedation from an opioid,
to
package, indicating that the μg/kg dose rate decreases as
decrease signs of CNS stimulation seen with an opioid or
the animal's body weight increases. The duration of seda-
tion is dose dependent. Equivalent sedative doses for
dexmedetomidine are approximately one-half those for
medetomidine Analgesia produced by dexmedetomidine,
0.04 mg/kg (40 μg/kg), was reported to be equivalent to
Table 16.2 Injectable drugs for sedation, analgesia,
that provided by medetomidine, 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg).
or premedication in cats
IM (Slingsby & Taylor, 2008).
Dexmedetomidine given at doses varying from 0.015 t0
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
0.04 mg/kg (15-40 μg/kg). IM induced lateral recum-
bency in cats in approximately 20-30 minutes (Monteiro
Anticholinergic
et al., 2009; Slingsby et al., 2010). Maximum sedation
Atropine
0.04 IM, SC; 0.02 IV
without responsiveness lasted about 30 minutes from the
highest dose and the sedative effects began to wane at
Glycopyrrolate
0.01 IM; 0.005 IV
60 minutes after administration (Slingsby et al., 20l0).
Phenothiazine
Although times vary somewhat between reports, in general,
the duration of maximum sedation was similar for all the
Acepromazine
0.02-0.1 IMI; 0.02-0.05 IV
doses but the total duration of sedation tended to be
Benzodiazepine
longer the higher the dose rate. Experimental tests of anal-
 Diazepam
 gesia indicated that dexmedetomidine does not produce
0.2-0.5 IV
usan st eisaaieue jeu inq sanei asop mol ie eisasieue
 Midazolam
0.1-0.5 IM, 0.1-0.3 IV
when the dose of dexmedetomidine is increased to
0.04 mg/kg, IM. Further, the intensity and duration of
Q2-Agonist sedative
analgesia from dexmedetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg, was less
Xylazine
12 IM, 0.2-0.5 IV
than  that provided by buprenorphine, [
0.02 mg/kg
(Slingsby et al., 2010). Dexmedetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg.
Medetomidine *
0.005-0.08 IM
administered by the buccal transmucosal (TM) route
Dexmedetomidine*
0.002-0.04 IM
achieved the same effect as from IM administration
Opioid
(Slingsby & Taylor, 2009). Onset of sedation was on
average 30-35 minutes and duration an average of 98
Butorphanol
0.10.4 IM, IV, SC
minutes from both IM and TM routes. Medetomidine,
 Buprenorphine
0.005-0.02 IM; 0.005-0.01 IV
at a lower dose of 0.02 mg/kg (20 μg/kg). produced seda-
tion lasting 30-60 minutes in experimental cats (Lamont
Morphine
0.2-0.3 IM
et al., 2001).
 Meperidine
2-5 IM, SC
 The cardiovascular effects of medetomidine and dexme-
detomidine are similar for all dose rates. After administra-
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.1 IM, IV
tion of medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg. HR were decreased by
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.1 IM, IV
40% from the preadministration values and, although sys-
temic vascular resistance (SVR) increased significantly at
Methadone
0.2-0.5 IM; 0.10.3 IV
15 minutes (vasoconstriction), MAP was unchanged.
Other
Cardiac output (CO) was decreased by 63% at 15 minutes.
an effect due to a combination of decreased HR and
Tramadol
2 SC
decreased stroke index, the latter presumed due to the
*0.005 mg/kg = 5 μg/kg, 0.08 mg/kg = 80 μg/kg
increase in afterload. No significant changes in blood
gs values were noted. Similarly, HR decreased after
504
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
administration of dexmedetomidine and SAP as measured
volume of medetomidine previously administered, or up
by Doppler non-invasive blood pressure measurement
to 5x the dose of dexmedetomidine for deeply sedated
(NIBP) was unchanged for 60 minutes (Monteiro et al.,
cats. Allowance should be made for the time elapsed since
2009). Prior administration of atropine, 0.05 mg/kg, IM 
administration of the Oz-sedative, as less atipamezole will
significantly increased HR and SAP for 45 minutes,
be necessary over time. Overantagonism can lead to the
 although not to the high levels recorded in dogs. Concur-
cat becoming excessively alert Antagonism of the sedative
rent administration of atropine with these sedatives is not
will remove analgesia and reveal excitatory effects of keta-
usually recommended.
mine, when present. In an emergency, administration of
The sedative effects following administration of xyla-
atipamezole, 5-20 μg/kg has been recommended slowly
zine, 1 mg/kg, or romifidine, 0.2 mg/kg. IM are similar
IV (off label) over several minutes. Atipamezole is not FDA
although muscle relaxation and analgesia were less with
licensed for use in cats in the USA.
romifidine and were not increased significantly by increas-
Vomiting has been recorded in cats after administration
ing dose rate (Selmi et al., 2004). Medetomidine and
 of xylazine, medetomidine, dexmedetomidine, and romi-
dexmedetomidine are generally chosen over romifidine
fdine in most {Lamont et al., 200l; Selmi et al., 2004;
for use in cats.
Slingsby & Taylor, 2009; Slingsby et al., 2010; Biermann
Q2-Agonist sedatives are commonly administered in
a (0z 'e 1a 1) soa1 e iou 1q (i7 'e 1a
combination with an opioid. The addition of butorpha-
cats are usually still standing at this point which decreases
nol, 0.2 mg/kg, IM to a low dose of dexmedetomidine,
the risk of aspiration.
0.0l mg/kg, signifcantly increased sedation and muscle
Concerns with use of o2-agonists centre on their seda-
relaxation over administration of dexmedetomidine alone
tive and cardiovascular effects. When any of these agents
(Selmi et al., 2003). The combination of buprenorphine,
is used for premedication, the dose of subsequently
0.01 mg/kg, with dexmedetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg, IM pro-
 administered anaesthetic agent may be decreased by half 
duced a similar duration and degree of maximum sedation
or even more, especially when an opioid or a low dose of
as dexmedetomidine, 0.04 mg/kg. and a greater duration
ketamine has been included. Q2-Sedatives profoundly
of analgesia (Slingsby et al., 20l0). A combination of
decrease CO and this must be taken into consideration
midazolam, 0.4 mg/kg. butorphanol, 0.4 mg/kg. and
when selecting an anaesthetic protocol for old or sick cats
dexmedetomidine, 0.005 mg/kg (5 μg/kg). IM produced
and cats with cardiac disease. Use of medetomidine or
deep and long-lasting sedation (Biermann et al., 20l2).
dexmedetomidine is not recommended in very young
With this combination, HR decreased, CO decreased by
kittens.
approximately 50%, and blood pressure was unchanged.
The addition of ketamine to the combination of medeto-
Benzodiazepines
 midine or dexmedetomidine and butorphanol (popularly
known as kitty magic') can produce sedation at low
Diazepam and midazolam are rarely used alone as they
doses and anaesthesia at higher doses. The combination
 produce minimal sedative effects and may cause agitation
of 0.1 mL each of medetomidine (1 mg/mL) or dexme-
Or restlessness in healthy patients. Benzodiazepines are
detomidine (0.5 mg/mL), butorphanol (10 mg/mL). and
 commonly administered as adjunct agents to opioids or
ketamine (100 mg/mL) mixed in one syringe and admin-
anaesthetic agents to increase sedation or to block excita-
istered IM will induce heavy sedation within 5 minutes
tory effects of ketamine. Midazolam, 0.1-0.5 mg/kg. may
(Ko et al., 2009). These volumes are calculated for cats
be administered IM or IV and diazepam, 0.1-0.5 mg/kg.
weighing 4.5 kg and are equivalent to dexmedetomidine,
may be administered IV. Oral forms of diazepam are not
0.01l mg/kg, butorphanol, 0.22 mg/kg. and ketamine,
 recommended because of the risk of hepatotoxicity.
2.2 mg/kg. More or less ofthe total volume may be admin.
istered depending on the desired effect. The volume of
each dnug may be increased to 0.2 mL/4.5 kg
Opioids
or
0.13 mL/3 kg to induce general anaesthesia for castration
Factors to be considered when choosing an opioid are the
and to 0.3 mL/4.5 kg or 0.2 mL/3 kg to produce 40
preferred route of administration, speed of onset of effect,
minutes of anaesthesia suitable for ovariohysterectomy.
duration of effect, efficacy of analgesia in relation to the
Administration of this drug combination IV is generally at 
species and procedure to be performed, and adverse
half the IM dose. Substitution with buprenorphine for
effects.
butorphanol is not as satisfactory for injectable anaesthesia
The speed of onset is of significance depending on
because the onset time for buprenorphine is long, but is
the time available between administration and the
suitable for premedication to inhalation anaesthesia.
start of anaesthesia or painful process, with IV and IM
The sedative effects of medetomidine and dexmedeto-
administration as the most reliable routes. Onset after
midine may be antagonized by administration of atipam-
IV administration is rapid for butorphanol, hydromor-
ezole IM. The optimal recommended dose for atipamezole
 phone, oxymorphone, fentanyl, and methadone. Onset of
is 2.5x the dose of medetomidine, which equals half the
analgesia following administration of buprenorphine,
505
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
0.02 mg/kg, was 15 minutes after IV administration in one
both tramadol and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
ue Al yioq 1oy sau 5e (eg7 '1e 1a lees) 41s
dnug (NSAID) did not need rescue analgesia and did not
IM routes in another (Slingsby & Taylor, 2008), and 4
develop hyperalgesia. A longer elimination half-life for
hours after IM administration in another (Robertson et al.,
 tramadol was measured in cats than in dogs (Pypendop &
2003). Onset of effect after IM administration is relatively
1lkiw,2007)
rapid with butorphanol and hydromorphone at 15-20
 Routes of administration other than IV and IM are not
minutes (Lascelles & Robertson, 2004; Wells et al., 2008)
reliable for all opioids. Subcutaneous injection of hydro-
and peak effect of hydromorphone, 0.1 mg/kg, was meas-
morphone has a slower onset of peak effect, a shorter
ured at 30 minutes (Robertson et al., 2009). Onset after
duration of antinociception and is associated with more
IM injection of meperidine (pethidine) 5 mg/kg. was
undesirable side effects (Robertson et al., 2009). Buprenor-
phine administered SC or by buccal transmucosal (TM)
minutes [Millette et al., 2008).
routes produced significantly less analgesia than from IV
Methadone, 0.3 mg/kg. IV quickly causes sedation that
 Or IM injection (Slingsby & Taylor, 2008; Giordano et al.
lasts 30 minutes. Antinociception was detected 5 minutes
2010), although one investigation using thermal nocicep-
after IV administration, was most intense for 60 minutes
tion found the efficacy and duration of analgesia from
and a significant effect persisted for 4 hours [ Ferreira et al..
buprenorphine similar after TM and IV administration
 2011 ). In a clinical investigation of cats undergoing ovario-
(Robertson et al., 2005). TM administration is accom-
hysterectomy, premedication with methadone, 0.6 mg/kg.
 plished by squirting the drug from a 1 mL syringe inserted
l  le s   i ud p 
between the teeth and the cheek. Interestingly, administra-
Bley et al., 2004). The duration of analgesia from hydro-
tion was found to be signifcantly easier (without the cat
morphone, 0.1 mg/kg. against experimental nociception
-louaidnq an-aneaiasaid suisn (Aeme peaq sll sunu
was twice as long after IM than IV administration, 5.7
phine than buprenorphine from a multidose bottle
hours compared with 2.7 hours, respectively, and this dose
(Bortolami et al., 20l2b). The authors proposed that the
smell or taste of the chlorocresol preservative in the
dose rate (Lascelles & Robertson, 2004; Wegner & Robert-
product intended for multiple injections could be respon-
son, 2007). Thermal antinociception was recorded at 4-6
sible for the aversive behaviour and that the cat's response
hours after IM injection of morphine, 0.2 mg/kg (Robert-
to the preservative might result in less precise administra-
son et al., 2003). Morphine may not be as analgesic in cats
tion or increased swallowing of buprenorphine. Plasma
as in other species because the glucuronidation pathway
oncentrations of butorphanol after TM administration
is less efficient in cats, preventing formation of a morphine
remained below the concentrations anticipated for effec-
active metabolite (Taylor et al., 200l). Evaluations of
tive antinociception (Wells et al., 2008). Butorphanol is
the duration of antinociception from butorphanol,
 not as lipophilic as buprenorphine and the authors pro-
0. 1-0.8 mg/kg. IM vary from 5 to 480 minutes [Robertson
posed that the cats' oral pH was not high enough to
et al., 2003; Wells et al., 2008). A clinical perception is
promote maximal absorption. TM administration of
that the duration of analgesia from butorphanol is up to
 methadone resulted in a lower peak plasma concentration
loy ees aq  eisaie am i pue so 7
than after IV even though the TM dose was double the IV
 soft tissue surgery, butorphanol does not provide suffcient
(Ferreira et al., 2011).
 analgesia for orthopaedic procedures. No sedation should
Naloxone is an opioid antagonist and will reverse
be expected after administration of buprenorphine alone.
opioid-induced sedation, analgesia and hyperthermia.
Duration of analgesia from buprenorphine, 0.02 mg/kg.
Naloxone, 0.0l-0.02 mg/kg. is administered IM or
was recorded as 7-8 hours (Slingsby & Taylor, 2008).
slowly IV.
Care must be taken when mixing opioids in the same
Transdermal (TD) fentany!
patient as μ agonists, buprenorphine and butorphanol
possess different receptor affnities that may result in
Most investigations have described the effects ofa reservoir
diminished analgesia. Administration of hydromorphone
system fentanyl patch using one 25 μg/h patch per cat [see
 and buprenorphine together resulted in minimal analge-
previous chapter for precautions for use and dangers for
sia for the first 2 hours followed by onset of analgesia
human toxicity). Despite considerable variability between
(Lascelles & Robertson, 2004) and, in another investiga-
ats, the increase in plasma concentration of fentanyl is
tion, simultaneous administration of butorphanol and
quicker in cats than in dogs reaching a presumed analgesic
buprenorphine resulted in some cats without analgesia
threshold by 12-18 hours [Lee et al., 2000; Egger et al.,
(Johnson et al., 2007).
2003). Maximum plasma concentration was measured at
Tramadol, l mg/kg. SC was an inefficient analgesic
44 hours after application in one group of cats and mean
agent in an experimental investigation (Steagall et al.
values remained constant for 4 days (Lee et al., 2000). In
2008b) whereas 2 mg/kg, administered SC 1 hour before
contrast to dogs. plasma concentrations of fentanyl
ovariohysterectomy provided adequate analgesia postop-
decreased more slowly in cats after the patches were
eratively in 50% of cats (Brondani et al., 2009). Cats given
removed, presumably due to a slow depletion of a
506
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
cutaneous depot of fentanyl. Differences in skin structure
opioids, lasting from 30 minutes with butorphanol to
 s u ara s u  a
24 hours with buprenorphine (Gellasch et al.. 2002:
plasma fentanyl concentrations achieved following appli-
Robertson et al., 2003; Steagall et al., 2008a; Bortolami
cation or removal of a patch. Arbitrarily decreasing the
et al., 2
20l2a). Euphoria has also been observed after
surface area of the patch by removing part of the adhesive 
administration of tramadol (Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2007:
layer was not recommended for the reservoir type patch as
Steagall et al., 2008b). Dysphoria (staring into space, wary
that action would not correspond to a predictably linear
of people, pacing. jumping at the cage walls) has been
decrease in fentanyl transfer (Lee et al., 2000). Nonethe-
less, comparison of full or partial exposure in cats weigh-
phone, fentanyl, or tramadol. Mydriasis is induced in cats
ing 1.3-4.3 kg anaesthetized for ovariohysterectomy
by μ opioids, butorphanol, and buprenorphine and
revealed significantly higher plasma concentrations in cats
 dilated pupils may persist for 6-8 hours or even 2-3 days.
with full exposure (Davidson et al., 2004). The authors
Cats may vomit or excessively salivate after administration
proposed a 38% decrease in calculated delivery rate of
of morphine, hydromorphone, methadone and tramadol.
fentanyl resulting from a 50% decrease in surface area.
 The addition of acepromazine may decrease the incidence
Dysphoria was observed in several cats that were fully
 of vomiting. Cats given butorphanol, buprenorphine, Or
exposed to the patch membrane. Application of a 25 μg/h
fentanyl are not likely to vomit.
patch to cats weighing 2.2-5 kg scheduled for anaesthesia
Increased body temperature frequently occurs when cats
and onychectomy resulted in a similar range of plasma
have been given an opioid. Cats with hyperthermia may
fentanyl concentrations without adverse effects (Gellasch
 pant or behave no differently from the expected effects of
et al., 2002). In a study comparing serum cortisol concen-
the drug(s) administered. Body temperature was moni-
trations in conscious cats and during anaesthesia with or
tored for 24 hours in experimental cats with a wireless
without surgery, application of a TD fentanyl patch 12
thermistor implanted within the abdomen that were given
hours before anaesthesia was associated with significantly
different opioids and combinations (Posner et al., 2010).
 decreased cortisol during and after surgery, supporting the
authors' conclusion that the TD patch diminished pain or
Hydromorphone, morphine, buprenorphine and butor-
stress (Glerum et al., 2001). After application of a fentanyl
 phanol produced mild to moderate increases in body tem-
patch, cats' behaviours should be observed for signs of
perature. Various doses of hydromorphone increased cats*
Overdosage such as dysphoria, lethargy, inappetence. Cats 
temperatures to similar extents with a peak around 1.5-2
should also be monitored for signs of pain. Adequate
hours after administration and a return to baseline by
 analgesia should not be assumed as plasma fentanyl con-
about 5 hours. The maximum temperature recorded for
centrations may be low or undetectable in some cats after
 any cat in this study was 40.7°C (105.3°F) but tempera-
application of a patch (Lee et al., 2000).
tures up to 42.5°C (108.5°F) have been reported
TD fentanyl results in a small (18%) but significant
[Niedfeldt & Robertson, 2006). Greater increases in tem-
decrease in isoflurane requirement in experimental cats
perature have been noted after opioid administration in
(Yackey et al., 2004). A decrease in serum fentanyl concen-
trations after induction of anaesthesia has been measured
opioid administration without general anaesthesia. It has
in cats that developed hypothermia (35°C, 95°F). pre-
 also been noted that cats that were coldest during anaes-
sumably due to decreased cutaneous blood flow from
thesia developed the highest peak temperatures during
vasoconstriction (Pettifer & Hosgood, 2003). The mean
recovery (Posner et al., 20l0). Increased body tempera-
fentanyl concentrations of all the cats were within values
 tures were also recorded for several hours after anaesthesia
believed to be associated with analgesia so that the
in cats with fentanyl patches applied for premedication
decrease may be of clinical relevance only in some cats. A
(Lee et al., 2000; Glerum et al., 200l). Mild to moderate
further concern is that plasma fentanyl concentrations
increases in temperature should resolve without treat-
 may increase when a cat is positioned with the fentanyl
ment. Cooling measures should be instituted to treat
patch (and skin) in direct contact with a heating pad or
severe hyperthermia and injection of naloxone may further
heated cage floor.
decrease body temperature.
Side effects of opioid administration
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Side effects of opioids in cats are excessive salivation, vom-
iting, euphoria or dysphoria, and increased body tempera-
An NSAID will contribute to the comfort of a cat after a
ture, with some variations between agents. Signs of
 surgical procedure. Recommended dose rates for use in
euphoria (behaviour including more than usual meowing.
ats are given in Table 16.3, however, not all NSAIDs are
purring, rubbing. rolling. and kneading with forepaws)
licensed in all countries and the clinician should refer to
was present for 2-6 hours after IV methadone and 6-12
local information and regulations (Sparkes et al., 2010).
hours after TM administration (Ferreira et al., 20ll).
Single doses administered for treatment of acute pain may
Euphoria has been observed after administration of other
have a duration of 18-20 hours. Although the risk of acute
507
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 16.3 NsAID dose rates in cats
NSAID
Formulation
Dose
Route Frequency
Carprofen
Injectable
 4 mg/kg 
SC IV
Once only 
50 mg/mL
 Ketoprofen
Injectable
2 mg/kg
SC
Q24h up to 3 days
10 mg/mL
Tablets 5 mg
1 mg/kg 
PO
Q24 h up to 5 days
 Meloxicam
Injectable
0.3 mg/kg
SC
 Once only
5 mg/mL
Injectable
0.2 mg/kg
SC
Once ± 0.05 mg/kg PO Q24h for 4 days
2 mg/mL
Oral suspension
0.1 mg/kg
PO
Q24h indefinite
0.5 mg/mL
(= 0.2 mL/kg day 1, then
0.05 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg)
Robenacoxib
Injectable 
2 mg/kg
SC
Once only
 20 mg/mL
 Tablets 6 mg
1 mg/kg
PO
Q24h up to 6 days (longer in some countries)
Tolfenamic acid 
Injectable 
4 mg/kg
SC
Q24h for 2 days 
40 mg/mL
Tablets 6 mg
4 mg/kg 
PO
Q24h for 3 days
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) Toxic to cats, except for very low dosage, 10-20 mg/kg, PO Q3-4 days (Grace 2011)
Sparkes et al., z010. Note that not all drugs are licensed for cats in all countries.
renal failure is low in healthy cats, the ISFM and AAFP
informative Cats that hunch their backs, lower their ears,
panel recommendations list increased risk of adverse renal
hiss, or are aggressive may be showing signs of anxiety.
fearfulness, or pain. There are many pain scoring systems
cats that are dehydrated or hypovolaemic, older cats, cats
that may be employed (Chapter 5):
with concurrent cardiovascular, renal or hepatic disease,
The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) is a line with a scale
and concurrent administration of ACE inhibitors, diuret-
from 0 to 100 mm on which an observer marks a
ics, and beta-blocking drugs. NSAIDs should be used with
score based on observation of the cat. A VAS score
extreme caution if at all in cats with severe liver dysfunc-
can be assigned for evaluating pain or sedation or
tion or hypoalbuminaemia.
response to palpation of the incision. Generally 0
indicates no pain or no sedation and 100 mm
represents the maximum possible score
CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES
 The Dynamic and Interactive Visual Analogue Scale
(DIVAS) is a VAS that is a combined assessment of
observation from a distance the cat's behaviour when
This section addresses some areas where there are differ-
 approached, and response to palpation of the surgical
ences of opinion. One opinion may not be better or safer
site
than another but they illustrate varying practices in differ-
 The Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) includes
ent circumstances and the need for further evaluation.
observation of the cat from outside the cage and
evaluation of the animal's behaviour after opening
Evaluation of pain
the cage door, stroking the cat, and finally palpation
over or near the surgical incision. These behaviours
The presence and severity of pain in cats may be diffcult
are each graded by assigning a number from 0 to 3 or
to assess. Observation alone appears to be an inadequate
0-4 based on the cat's responses. An exact description
assessment of pain and changes in HR or RR may be unre-
of the possible responses for 0, 1, 2, and 3 are
lated. Cats in pain tend to become quiet and less interac
 predetermined. The total score represents the
tive and evaluation of their responses to stroking their fur
a a as a rai an p u jo is
or handling of the damaged or surgical site may be more
the pain.
508
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
In many studies, these evaluations are performed before
many dnugs are associated with wide variations in
anaesthesia to provide a baseline value for comparison
responses within a cat population.
with postoperative values. The difficulty in designing a
 Pain induced by elective surgery of short duration gener-
scale that is suffciently sensitive to detect pain or a differ-
 ally lasts only a few days. Persistence of post-surgical pain
ence between two or more analgesic treatments lies in the
occurs in a proportion of patients but, even in human
interpretation of the cat's behaviour or response and in
medicine, this condition is under-diagnosed and under-
the relative ranking of the individual components of the
scoring system. Healthy cats normally spend 40% of their
in 40%, 18% with moderate to severe pain, of over 2000
day sleeping and 20% resting (Robertson & Lascelles.
sieak E ol suuou e Aiabins pey ieu sjuaed ueuny
2010). Thus, stermal recumbency may be normal or a result
previously (Johansen et al., 20l2). The survey identified a
of agent-induced sedation, and lateral recumbency may be
strong asociation between persistent pain and the pres-
normal or the cat may be lying in this position because
ence and intensity of the immediate post-surgical pain,
 sternal position is uncomfortable or painful after a midline
incision. A cat that is at the back ofthe cage, hunched over,
surgery. Hyperaesthesia, indicating sensitization, occurred
tail wrapped around forepaws, eyes closed and ears down
in most patients but hypoaesthesia, indicating nerve
may be sedated or exhibiting the effects of residual anaes-
damage, was also often present. Cats clearly experience
thetic agents or may be in pain. Cats will tear at bandages
pain after surgery when not treated with analgesic agents.
 and exhibit abnormal behaviour whether they are in pain
 The incidence of persistent pain is unknown, however,
or not Palpation of the surgical site followed by the cat
experiences with human patients highlight the need to
moving away from the pressure may be the cat's normal
deal effectively with surgical pain. Preventive analgesia
aversion to being touched or may be a consequence of
to minimize central sensitization of the spinal nocicep-
induced discomfort Palpation of the wound during clini-
tive neurons aims to block noxious stimuli pre-, intra-,
cal evaluation and for experimental studies, use of a cali-
and postoperatively and requires use of more than one
brated force testing instrument or device on or adjacent to
('multimodal') approach (Katz et al., 20ll; Gurmey, 2012).
the incision may be a more accurate measure of tenderness
Acepromazine, thiopental, propofol, alfaxalone and the
of the surgical area and existence of hyperalgesia {Benito-
volatile inhalation anaesthetics do not provide analgesia
de-la-Vibora et al., 2008; Brondani et al., 2009; Bortolami
for painful procedures. Thus, the multimodal approach
et al., 2012a).
employs combinations of systemic opioid(s), NSAIDs,
A further dilemma is the designated threshold of the
 infiltration or regional nerve blocks with local anaesthetic
scoring system at which rescue (interventional) analgesia
or other drugs, and an NMDA-receptor antagonist. Effec-
is administered, that is, the point where there is recogni-
tive analgesia is demonstrated by the reduction in pain
tion that the current analgesia protocol is providing insuf-
and analgesic drug use beyond the duration of the drugs
fcient analgesia for the individual cat. A frequently used
administered, defined as 5.5 half-lives (Katz et al., 2011).
threshold is a score that is 55-62% of the total points
Long-term pain persisting for more than 2-3 weeks in
Aueu ul 'suis yaty oon aq Ae 1eui anlen e 'lqissod
Kiqou pasaiap jo sueis yim paneiosse aq Aeu se
publications, the need for rescue analgesia does not fit an
decreased interaction with humans and other animals,
intuitive expectation of induced pain and authors have
-u w ued nsuo 'uissae pue aadde rood
concluded that the assessment system was not sensitive
surgical causes, such as degenerative joint disease, cystitis,
enough to pick up the more subtle signs of pain. A thresh-
neoplasia, and dental disease requires consideration of
old of 33% of the total possible score was utilized in one
 agents that may 'reset'the CNS and agents that are consid-
study for identifying need for rescue analgesia in cats
ered to be safe for continued administration in cats, such
undergoing ovariohysterectomy and this value appeared
as tramadol, NSAIDs, and 'off label use of other drugs
to demarcate clearly differences between cats that did or
(Robertson & Lascelles, 20l0).
did not receive analgesic dnugs (Brondani et al., 2009).
 Experimental studies of the analgesic effects of drugs
Ovariohysterectomy, castration
employ the application of a noxious stimulus, thermal,
mechanical, or electrical, to a leg or the skin over the
Pain scoring has identifed that cats exhibit signs attribut-
thorax in stepwise increments before and after administra-
able to pain after ovariohysterectomy and castration, and
tion of the drug to determine the threshold at which the
pain has been present in some cats for at least 24 hours
cat responds. The stimulus ceases when the cat responds
(Balmer et al., 1998; Slingsby & Waterman-Pearson, 1998.
by turning towards the device or attempts to move away.
2002; Glenum et al., 200l; Al-Gizawiy & Rude, 2004;
 and has an automatic cut-off to prevent tissue damage in
Rohrer-Bley et al., 2004; Gassel et al., 2005; Grint et al.,
the event the drug has prevented the cat from feeling the
2006: Tobias et al., 2006; Benito-de-la-Vibora et al., 2008:
 stimulus. The nature of these stimuli may not accurately
Brondani et al., 2009; Steagall et al., 2009b; Giordano
mimic a naturally occurring painful process but allows
et al., 20l0; Murison & Martinez Taboada, 20l0). A com-
comparison of drugs. The results have demonstrated that
parison of the flank and midline surgical approaches
509
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
confirmed that wound tenderness was greater following a
 presented for ovariohysterectomy or castration should be
flank incision (Grint et al., 2006), as might be expected
evaluated cautiously because the anaesthetic protocols
from muscle involvement in the flank incision. An inex-
may have been limited combinations to facilitate study of
perienced surgeon may cause more tissue trauma than an
a single analgesic drug. It is important when selecting
experienced surgeon, however, a study evaluating postop-
analgesic dnugs to consider their onset times to avoid start
erative behaviours after ovariohysterectomy in dogs found
of surgery before onset of analgesia. For example, admin-
no sigmificant association with experience of the surgeon
istration of buprenorphine or an NSAID at induction of
or duration of surgery (Wagner et al., 2008)
anaesthesia does not provide suffcient time for onset of
Frequently, in clinical practice a sedative such as ace-
analgesia before the surgical procedure and, in some cases.
promazine, medetomidine or dexmedetomidine,
UE
recovery from anaesthesia. The durations of analgesia of
opioid and an NSAID are administered in conjunction
the agents chosen must also be known for scheduling of
with anaesthetic agent[s) in order to achieve both intra-
the redosing interval. Butorphanol and pethidine (mepe-
and postoperative analgesia (Bortolami 
et al., 20l2a;
ridine) have short durations of action of about 2 hours
Mathis et al., 20l2). Anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy
and a single administration of these dnugs for premedica-
 may be maintained with an inhalant agent preceded by
tion will be insuffcient for postoperative analgesia ( Balmer
 premedication and induction of anaesthesia with keta-
et al., 1998; Slingsby & Waterman-Pearson, 1998). Metha-
mine, ketamine with diazepam or midazolam, tiletamine-
done hydromorphone oxymorphone, and buprenor-
zolazepam, thiopental, propofol, oralfaxalone Anaesthetic
phine may provide analgesia for 4-6 hours. Published
protocols using only injectable agents are commonly used
research indicates that administration of only an NSAID
s  uun s aq o  si a s a
for analgesia does not provide suffcient analgesia after
(Table 16.4). Published investigations involving cats
ovariohysterectomy (Brondani et al., 2009; Murison &
Table 16.4 Examples of anaesthetic agent combinations for general anaesthesia in domestic cats
Premedication *
Induction of anaesthesiat
Maintenance of
anaesthesia
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg
Ketamine 5 mg/kg mixed with diazepam
10 min anaesthesia
Butorphanol 0.3 mg/kg IM or Buprenorphine
 0.25 mg/kg or ketamine 5-10 mg/kg IV
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM
Atropine 0.04 mg/kg IM
Medetomidine 0.08 mg/kg
 50 min anaesthesia
Ketamine 5-7.5 mg/kg IV
Dexmedetomidine 0.03 mg/kg
40 min anaesthesia
Butorphanol 0.4 mg/kg
Ketamine 7 mg/kg IM
 Tiletamine-zolazepam 4 mg/kg IM
Ketamine 2-4 mg/kg IV if needed for intubation
Isoflurane or sevoflurane starting
Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM
with no/low vaporizer setting
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM
Propofol 4 mg/kg or alfaxalone 2-5 mg/kg or
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
Buprenorphine 0.02 mg/kg IM or other opiocid#
ketamine 5 mg/kg mixed with diazepam 
0.25 mg/kg IV
 Medetomidine 0.01-0.02 mg/kg or
 Propofol 2 mg/kg or alfaxalone 2 mg/kg or
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
dexmedetomidine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM
ketamine 2 mg/kg IV
Opicid IM
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg IM
 Propofol 4 mg/kg or alfaxalone 2-5 mg/kg IV
 Propofol 6-18 mg/kg/h or alfaxalone
Opioid IM
11 mg/kg/h, respectively
Ill or cardiac patients:
 Diazepam 0.25 mg/kg or midazolam IV before
Isoflurane or sevoflurane
Butorphanol 0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM cr
Etomidate 1.5 mg/kg IV
 Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg IM 
*Onset time depends on drugs chosen; + Approximate dose rates, drugs should be given 'to effect';  Or substitute with IM injection of
by/hw 20 auydow jo by/hw e0 auopuaw jo by/bw 1'0 auoudowpy yo by/hw 1'0 auoudwxo jo l by/bw 20 louudong
Verstegen et al., 1990; Ko et al., 2009; O'Hagan et al., 2012.
510
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
Martinez Taboada, 20l0) although, in some studies, cats
anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy or castration. In
 receiving an NSAID had better total pain scores than those
one series of 10l feral cats (Harrison et al., 20ll), the
receiving an opioid only (Slingsby & Waterman-Pearson,
weight of each cat was determined by subtracting the
1998; Gassel et al., 2005). Inclusion of an NSAID was
known weight of the trap from the combined total
found to decrease incisional hyperalgesia (Al-Gizawiy &
weight. Medetomidine, 0.1 mg/kg (100 μg/kg), ketamine,
Rude, 2004; Benito-de-la-Vibora et al., 2008) and decrease
10 mg/kg, and buprenorphine, 0.01 mg/kg, were adminis-
pain scores when administered in combination with an
tered into the paralumbar muscles. If the cat was
opioid (Brondani et al., 2009; Steagall et al., 2009b).
still responsive after the first injection, additional medeto-
Rescue [interventional) analgesia is usually in the form
midine 0.02 mg/kg. was administered IM. Ketamine,
of an opioid at the same or reduced dose that is used for
2.5 mg/kg, was injected IM if anaesthesia was still insuf-
premedication, and is commonly administered IM for
ficient Atipamezole 0.125 mg/kg, SC was administered at
rapid onset of analgesia. An NSAID (SC administration)
the completion of surgery and the cats were released the
 may be included if one has not already been administered.
 next day. Eleven cats required additional medetomidine ±
Examples of drugs used for rescue analgesia in cats after
ketamine and ll cats required supplemental isoflurane,
ovariohysterectomy are:
half of which were after 45 minutes of satisfactory anaes-
●Morphine 0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM 
thesia. The initial injection induced recumbency in 5 ± 5
●Pethidine [meperidine) 4 mg/kg IM
minutes and the median time from injection to start of
●Buprenorphine 0.01-0.02 mg/kg IM
surgery was 23 minutes. Monitoring the cats immediately
●Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
after induction and during anaesthesia is important and
●Hydromorphone or oxymorphone 0.05 mg/kg IM
support treatment must be available In the previous inves-
●Methadone 0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM
tigation, significant decreases in SpOz were observed in
●Tramadol 2 mg/kg SC.
cats in the frst few minutes of anaesthesia, one cat was
apnoeic after induction of anaesthesia, one cat was cyan-
Management of anaesthesia in high volume practices
otic and responded sluggishly to O2 supplementation, one
and animal shelter programmes may of necessity be more
cat had bradycardia (<60 beats/min), and three cats were
regimented than tailored to the individual patient, and
hypotensive (Doppler SAP <90 mmHg).
 preanaesthetic evaluation of feral cats may not be possible.
Guidelines for spay-neuter programmes published by the
An older review of 750l feral cats anaesthetized for
ovariohysterectomy (59%) or castration [41%) utilized a
Association of Shelter Veterinarians are detailed and
combination of tiletamine-zolazepam, ketamine and
contain many suggestions for good patient care (Looney
xylazine (TKX) (Williams et al., 2002). A vial of 500 mg
et al., 2008). The guidelines stress that a standard volume
of lyophilized tiletamine-zolazepam was reconstituted
dose rate of anaesthetic agents for all cats should be
with 4 mL of ketamine (100 mg/mL) and 1 mL of 10%
avoided and suggest that doses either be calculated on a
 per kg basis or calculated for cats in several weight ranges.
xylazine (100 mg/mL) so that each mL of solution con-
tained 50 mg tiletamine 50 mg zolazepam, 80 mg keta-
for example <1 kg. 1-2 kg, and 2-4 kg. and the volume
mine, and 20 mg xylazine. The average dose per cat was
of each dnug be written out in a chart for easy reference.
 0.25 mL ofthe combination injected IM. Using the average
 Anaesthetic protocols should provide analgesia. Reversible
weight of 3 kg from 194 cats, the dose rates can be calcu-
dnugs are useful, especially in feral cats, but recognizing
lated as tiletamine-zolazepam, 8.3 mg/kg, ketamine
that reversal of medetomidine or dexmedetomidine
7 mg/kg. and xylazine 1.7 mg/kg. The standard dose of
removes some of the analgesia. In the context of shelter
0.25 mL was adjusted according to the estimated size of
medicine an animal with a mild infection or non-
the cat and additional small doses were administered
infectious medical condition  may  be anaesthetized
when the first dose was insufficient. A single dose provided
because of the likelihood that the animal will not be avail-
adequate anaesthesia for 79.5% of cats. Yohimbine,
able for neutering at a later date (Looney et al., 2008). The
 presence of disease may be responsible for deaths during
0.5 mg for adults and 0.3 mg for kittens, was injected at
the end of surgery to reverse the xylazine. Twenty-six cats
or following anaesthesia (Gerdin et al., 20ll).
(0.35%) died before hospital discharge of which 17 were
considered to be anaesthetic deaths. In another report, the
same anaesthetic dnug combination (0.25 mL IM) was
Feral cats
administered to 22 male and 67 female feral cats, and a
 Feral cats are defined as free-roaming cats without owners.
single injection provided sufficient anaesthesia in 92% of
A feral cat is caught in a special trap that can be adjusted
all cats (Cistola et al., 2004). The mean time to start of
to immobilize the cat for IM injection. The anaesthetic
ovariohysterectomy was 28 minutes and surgery time was
agent combination must reliably induce anaesthesia in
 1l minutes. All cats survived to discharge but hypoxaemia,
unsocialized cats without causing overdosage A small
 detected by pulse oximetry, was prevalent and some cats
number of cats may need supplementation with addi-
became hypotensive. These abnormalities are potential
tional anaesthetic agent to provide a suffcient depth of
causes of anaesthetic death but all the cats in this study
511
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
survived without treatment. The authors stressed the dif-
limited application in cats. Intracardiac injection in awake
ficulty of routinely supplying supplemental Oz in a high
cats is not considered acceptable Intracardiac injection is
volume Trap-Neuter-Return programme
when,
0
acceptable only when the cat is unconscious or anaesthe-
example, 12 cats are anaesthetized simultaneously. The
tized. Use of a supersaturated solution of potassium chlo-
authors also noted that MAP increased at the start of
ride in unanaesthetized animals is also unacceptable.
surgery and questioned the adequacy of the combination
Euthanasia should be performed in accordance with appli-
for providing postoperative analgesia.
cable federal, state and local laws governing handling of
When dealing with a small number of feral cats in a
dnugs and methods used for euthanasia.
practice environment, addition of pulse oximetry and
 Euthanasia of pregnant animals must take into consid-
Doppler or oscillometric arterial pressure monitoring.
eration euthanasia of the fetuses. Studies in other species
and supplementation with Oz when needed, is feasible
have documented that after euthanasia with pentobarbital
and advisable.
solution, cardiac function continues in the fetuses for 25
minutes [Peisker et al., 2010). The 2013 AVMA Guidelines
recommend that after euthanasia of a pregnant cat by
Regional nerve blocks
barbiturate injection, the fetuses should be left undis-
turbed in the utenus for 20 minutes after the queen has
Nerve blocks can be a valuable part of an anaesthetic
protocol by blocking central sensitization and extending
been confirmed dead. During ovariohysterectomy of a
analgesia postoperatively. The brachial plexus block pro-
pregnant queen, the uterine blood vessels should be
vides analgesia below the elbow for radius/ulna and
ligated and the uterus should not be opened for an hour
 metacarpal orthopaedic surgery. Epidural analgesia can be
after removal from the abdomen. IP injection of pentobar-
included for pelvis and hind limb surgery and an epidural
bital is recommended for late-term pregnancy fetuses that
opioid provides some analgesia for thoracotomy. Epidural
have been removed from the uterus.
analgesia has been used for many years in cats with ure-
A quiet and painless death should be the aim for eutha-
thral obstruction but, more recently, a sacrococcygeal
nasia. This may be easier said than done given the tendency
 nerve block has been recommended for pain relief in cats
 of some cats to resist even minimal restraint during routine
with this disease [O'Hearn & Wright, 20ll). Peroneal and
physical examination and collection of blood for labora-
tibial nerve blocks are easily performed and bupivacaine
tory tests. The presence of a grieving owner may impact
may provide at least 6 hours of analgesia for metatarsal
on the cat's behaviour and impose unrealistic expectations
for an uncomplicated procedure Induction of sedation or
 surgery. Digital nerve blocks can provide effective analge-
sia after onychectomy, 'declawing', where performed, and
 general anaesthesia before injection of a euthanasia drug
anecdotally have been associated with a decrease in
may be less stressful for the patient and client and avoid
Owners' concerns after the cat's return home. Dental nerve
terminal gasping, however, administration of an Q2-
 blocks are commonly employed for tooth extractions and
sedative may induce vomiting that is upsetting for the
client to observe Ketamine is absorbed through mucous
major oral surgery. Soaker catheters can provide substan-
membranes and sedation can be achieved by squirting
tial pain relief in cats with major superficial wounds.
ketamine into the mouth of a hissing cat and leaving it
undisturbed for 30 minutes before attempting IV injection.
Euthanasia
A large dose of acepromazine IM or SC may induce suf-
ficient sedation in 10-15 minutes for IV injection.
This section is not a discussion of the ethical concerms of
euthanasia, a topic that has been addressed elsewhere
(Yeates, 2010). The new 2013 American Veterinary Medical
Association (AVMA) Guidelines for the Euthanasia of
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
Animals is an extensive document that includes discus-
sions of ethical concerns and techniques of euthanasia in
Preanaesthetic preparation
all species and scenarios (www.avma.org). Injectable
euthanasia agents provide the most rapid and reliable
Fasting before anaesthesia is recommended to minimize
method of performing euthanasia. Intraperitoneal injec-
the likelihood of solid food in the stomach at the time of
tion of a non-irritating euthanasia agent that does not
 anaesthesia. This may reduce the risk of pulmonary aspira-
contain a neuromuscular blocking agent (not T6l) may be
tion should the cat vomit during induction or recovery
acceptable when IV administration is considered impracta-
from anaesthesia or if regurgitation occurs during anaes-
ble or impossible. Absorption of the drug by this route
thesia. Overnight fasting is recommended for animals >16
may be slow and signs of Stage 2 anaesthesia may be
weeks of age and scheduled for anaesthesia in the morning
manifested before the cat progresses to anaesthesia and
(Bednarski et al., 20ll). Fasting is limited to <4 hours for
overdose Intrahepatic injection by trained personnel of a
young kittens. Water must be removed at the time of
combination of pentobarbital and lidocaine may have
premedication.
512
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
Premedication
Intravenous injection
Administration of sedatives and opioids before induction
Whenever possible, restraint for IV injection should be
 of anaesthesia increases the safety of the patient by reduc-
minimal. Cats may respond strongly to forced restraint
ing anxiety, providing analgesia, decreasing the dose rates
resulting in sympathetic stimulation that increases the
of anaesthetic agents, and preventing adverse effects of
 dose rate for anaesthetic agents to achieve anaesthesia.
other dnugs. The sedative and cardiopulmonary effects and
Intravenous injections are commonly made into the
duration of action will depend on the combination of
 cephalic vein on the dorsal surface of the forelimb between
dnugs chosen. There are several anaesthetic protocols that
elbow and carpus or the saphenous vein on the medial
can be used safely in young healthy cats scheduled for
 surface of the hind limb. For injection into the cephalic
elective procedures and choice of protocol is influenced
 vein, the cat is placed in a sitting position on a table of
by personal preference (see Table 16.4). Anaesthetic agents 
 convenient height and for injection into the right cephalic
must be selected more carefully for old or sick cats with
vein the assistant stands to the cat's left side, raising and
regard for potential impact of the disease on agent effects,
 supporting its head between the thumb and fingers of the
and vice versa.
left hand (Fig. 16.2). The assistant's right hand is placed
so the middle third and fourth fingers are behind the
Sedatives and analgesics
olecranon, and the thumb is around the front of the cat's
right forelimb. The limb is extended by pushing on the
Acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg. is commonly used in combi-
 olecranon and the vein is raised by applying gentle pres-
nation with any of the opioids for premedication to
sure with the thumb. If the limb is held in a vice-like grip.
general anaesthesia. Sedation is not usually profound but 
 the cat is likely to respond adversely. Clipping the hair over
is generally sufficient to allow IV injection of anaesthetic
the vein should be accomplished quickly using quiet elec-
agent or placement of an IV catheter prior to induction of
tric clippers. When more restraint is needed, the assistant
anaesthesia. The degree of sedation from an acepromazine-
opioid combination varies according to the opioid chosen,
for example, minimal with buprenorphine to appreciable
with methadone Similarly, the reduction in dose rate for
anaesthetic agents depends on the opioid used, for
example, less reduction with butorphanol and greater with
hydromorphone The duration of preanaesthetic drug
effects is generally longer after IM injection than IV, and
effects of some drugs are unpredictable after SC adminis-
tration. A benzodiazepine may contribute significantly to
sedation when paired with an opioid or administered
immediately before or with injection of an anaesthetic
agent. An Q2-agonist sedative may be used alone or with
an opioid for premedication and the sedative effect is dose
and dnug dependent. Ketamine can be added to any IM
combination to induce profound sedation or anaesthesia.
Anticholinergicagents
Use of an anticholinergic agent atropine or glycopyrrolate.
is not routine. This author generally administers an anti-
cholinergic in cats (atropine 0.04 mg/kg IM or, more fre-
quently, glycopyrrolate 0.0l mg/kg IM) to minimize oral
secretions especially with drugs that increase salivation
such as ketamine and tiletamine, and to counter bradycar-
dia with pure μ opioids such as oxymorphone, hydromor-
phone, or fentanyl. An anticholinergic is not commonly
used in cats given medetomidine or dexmedetomidine
because the increased heart rate may cause hypertension
in an animal with an already high pressure. Anticholiner-
gics are not used routinely in cats with myocardial disease,
tachyarrhythmias, traumatic myocarditis, pathological
tachycardia, hyperthyroidism, pneumonia, or disease-
Figure 16.2 Holding a cat for venepuncture of the cephalic
induced hyperthermia.
vein.
513
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
should hold the cat between his or her body and right arm
while preventing moverment from the hind limbs by press-
ing the cat gently on to the table surface An effective
Suraeal jamol e ul ie aul deim ot si anbiuupan suinsan
exposed a leg for injection; the head may be covered or
uncovered. Nylon feline restraint bags are available com-
mercially that have a zipper over the back of the cat and
front leg openings through which one limb can be exposed
for catheterization. Ultimately, it may be necessary for the
assistant to control the cat's head by a frm grip with the
left hand on the scruff at the back of the head. Sometimes
injection into the saphenous vein is less stressful than
using the cephalic vein. There is always the option of
administering additional agents IM for sedation and
aiojaq uadap on uoepas ioy au anedoidde ue gunim
again attempting IV injection.
A 25 gauge or 22 gauge needle is commonly used for
percutaneous venepuncture Greater venous access security
is achieved by use of a Butterfly needle or a 22 gauge or
20 gauge indwelling catheter. A surgical scrub should be
applied to the skin before catheter placement. If desired,
the skin can be desensitized by application of local anal-
gesic cream (e.g. EMLA), wrapped with an occlusive dress-
Figure 16.3 Catheter in the cephalic vein capped with a
ing and left for 30-45 minutes. The dressing is removed
Tport. The fluid administration set is attached to the tube
and the skin cleansed before venepuncture. The cephalic
extension so that the cap on the catheter is available for
vein is located on the dorsal surface of the forearm. The
drug administration. Mydriasis is obvious after opioid
needle or catheter should be inserted gently, without
premedication.
jabbing. Once blood is observed in the hub of the needle.
both the needle and catheter must be advanced a small
distance [3 mm) to be sure that the catheter is also within
the vein, and then, without moving the needle, the cath-
eter should be advanced as far as possible. The needle is
removed and the catheter cap or T-port attached. White
tape is wrapped around the catheter and then around the
leg. A second piece of tape is inserted first under the
catheter hub, sticky side next to the skin, and then
wrapped around the leg and back around the catheter. If
the cap or T-port is not a luer lock, then additional tape
should be wrapped around the junction to prevent acci-
dental disconnection. Every attempt should be made to
accomplish IV catheterization as smoothly and quietly as
 possible leaving the cat calm for induction of anaesthesia
(Fig. 16.3).
The medial saphenous vein is located medial to the tibia
(Fig 16.4). The hair should be clipped down to the hock
Figure 16.4 Fractious cat heavily sedated with acepromazine
and ketamine in preparation for insertion of a 20 gauge
and up to the stifle to prevent contamination of the cath-
catheter into the medial saphenous vein on the medial
eter during placement. After preparation of the skin, a
aspect of the right hind limb. The cat is lying on a hot water
catheter is inserted and secured in the same manner as just
circulating acrylic pad.
 described. This vein is frequently used for cats with point
colours as clipping over the cephalic vein, or other parts
of the body, may be followed by regrowth of hair in the
Endotracheal intubation
point colour (Fig. 16.5). The lateral saphenous vein,
located on the caudolateral surface of the hind limb above
Intubation may be unnecessary for short periods of general
the hock, is a much smaller vein and difficult to catheter-
 anaesthesia. A mask can be applied to provide oxygen or
ize. Longer catheters may be inserted in the jugular vein,
for short-term administration of an inhalation anaesthetic
generally during general anaesthesia.
agent (see Fig. 10.26). Induction and maintenance of
514
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
Figure 16.6 The cat's head must be extended to align the
pharynx with the trachea for intubation. The laryngoscope
blade has been introduced over the tongue until the tip is
ventral to the epiglottis.
@ 2000-2012 University of Georgia Research Founoation, Inc. Art by
Wiiam “Kio Carter (University of Georgia)
Figure 16.5 Hair on Siamese cats may grow back as point
colour after clipping. This cat had a square of hair dipped 
over its chest for application of a fentanyl patch.
the epiglottis. The cat has a sensitive larynx and touch is
caine, either as a spray or by dripping from a syringe, will
anaesthesia with inhalation agent by facemask is not rec-
promote easy intubation and avoid the need for undue
ommended as a routine procedure as room pollution with
pressure of the tube on the arytenoids, minimizing trauma.
 Jo asneaq sinono atesem 'aiqedasseun st sasee arse
 The dose of lidocaine used for topical analgesia must not
dilution with room air, and inadequate ventilation cannot
exceed 2 mg/kg because lidocaine is rapidly absorbed
be assisted for long due to stomach inflation. Further.
from the tracheal mucosa and may produce a blood con-
proficiency in endotracheal intubation in cats should be
centration that causes cardiovascular depression or arrest.
Aouaiaua ue ui ieul os stuaed Auieay suisn panaue
Lidocaine for injection, without epinephrine, 0.l mL
or during diffcult situations there is no delay to intuba-
drawn into a l mL syringe and dripped into the larynx
tion. Should a cat develop cyanosis during induction of
delivers 2 mg that is an effective and safe dose for most
anaesthesia or during the process of intubation, oxygen
cats and one squirt of Intubeaze" spray (20 mg/mL) will
should be supplied using a well-ftting cat mask. Artificial 
deliver 0.1-0.2 mL or 2-4 mg. Xylocaine spray marketed
ventilation, two or three breaths, can be given by squeez-
for intubation in humans should not be used as it has a
ing the reservoir bag before attempting intubation. When
[euoen pue ieauiel asnen ieu sane jo Aian
gastric regurgitation has occurred, the pharynx should
mucosal swelling in cats resulting in potentially lethal
rapidly be scooped clean frst to provide a clear airway.
airway obstruction (Taylor, 1992; Fisher, 2010). Laryngos-
Tracheal intubation can be performed with the cat in
 pasm may temporarily occur after application of lidocaine
any position but it is commonly done with the cat in
and it is advisable to wait for 20-30 seconds before intu-
 sternal position. The assistant places his/her palm on the
bating. The tip of the endotracheal tube should be placed
top of the cat's head and grasps it with the thumb on one
ventrally at the entrance to the larynx [with the cat in
side and fingers on the other. The thumb and fingers can
sternal position) (Fig. 16.7) with the bevel of the tube
either use the zygomatic arch on each side for leverage or
vertically. The tube should be rotated 90° anticlockwise
the thumb and forefinger can be placed further forward
(to spread the arytenoids) while being advanced into the
on the maxilla just caudal to the upper canine teeth. The
'paaunosua si xuael au suaiua ui Aajnoyp Jl xuiel
cat's head and neck must be lifed and stretched into
 an option is to wait for the cat to inhale before advancing
a straight line for optimal position for intubation
the tube. When a stilette is used, for example for a guarded
(Fig. 16.6). The assistant's other hand is used to depress
(metal spiral) endotracheal tube, care must be taken to
the mandible. The assistant or anaesthetist will pull the
ensure that the stilette tip does not extend past the tip of
tongue gently rostrally to expose the laryngeal entrance.
the endotracheal tube as it may cause tracheal laceration.
Vision is further assisted by placement of a laryngoscope
 Care should be taken to limit the force used to push the
blade on the tongue with the tip of the blade ventral to
 endotracheal tube into the larynx as the tube may rupture
515
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 16.5 Range of dose rates for injectable
anaesthetic agents*
Anaesthetic agent Dose rates mg/kg and route
Alfaxalone
0.5-5 IV
Etomidate
1-3 IV 
Ketamine
2-10 IV, 233 IM
 Propofol
 2-10 IV
 Thiopental
 2-20 IV
Tiletamine-zolazepam
12 IV, 2-15 IM
*Dose rate depends on premedicant and concurrent drugs. In 
general, the heavier the preanaesthetic sedation the lower the
dose rate.
 be inflated by injection of small increments of air until no
 air leak can be heard when the cat's lungs are artificially
inflated to 15-20 cm HzO. A variety of types of small
Figure 16.7 View of the epiglottis and arytenoids before
endotracheal tubes are available for use in small cats.
intubation in a cat in sternal recumbency.
including uncuffed and Cole tubes (see Fig. 10.30). The
pharynx is usually packed with moistened gauze when an
uncuffed tube is used to avoid tracheal aspiration of fluid
and anaesthetic pollution of the room, and to facilitate
the larynx or be diverted into subcutaneous tissues
artificial ventilation. An excess of tube between the mouth
(Hofmeister et al., 2007). There is often a temptation to
and anaesthetic breathing system adds significantly to the
use a tube that is too small because it is easier to introduce,
apparatus dead space and CO2 rebreathing In most cases.
but this should be resisted because a small tube constitutes
the endotracheal tubes can be cut short to different lengths
a partial airway obstruction. Endotracheal tubes with thin
without interfering with the inflation tube supplying the
walls and thin-walled soft cuffs are optimal and for most 
cuff.
junior and adult cats tubes of 4.0-4.5 mm internal diam-
Endotracheal intubation through the pharyngostomy
eter (ID) are suitable. The tip of the tube should be inserted
site to facilitate exposure for oral surgery has been
to the approximate level of the thoracic inlet, 12-14 cm
described in the previous chapter.
for most cats. Large cats and large breeds, such as the
Maine Coon, will accommodate larger (5.0 and 5.5 mm
Injectable anaesthetic agents
ID) and longer tubes. The position of the tip of the tube
can be verified by palpation of the tip of the tube in the
There are several injectable anaesthetic agents that are used
trachea at the base of the cat's neck, whereupon the tube
to provide anaesthesia in cats (Table 16.5). Some agents.
is advanced a further 1 om distance. Altermatively, the
such as thiopental, propofol, and etomidate must be
length of the endotracheal tube can be approximated
administered IV whereas the dissociative agents ketamine
before intubation but measuring the tube alongside the
and tiletamine can be administered IV or IM. Alfaxalone
cat, from incisors to thoracic inlet. Once placed, the posi-
is currently licensed for IV use in many countries. Investi-
tion of the tube at the incisors should be memorized by
gations of IM doses of the new formulation of alfaxalone
observation of the centimetre distance on the tube, or
were not published at the time of writing.
adjacent lettering, so that any movement of the tube can
be recognized early before accidental extubation occurs.
The tube should be secured in place using gauze, tape, or
Thiopental
plastic tubing tied tightly around the tube and then behind
Thiopental may only be administered IV and in cats it
the cat's head or around the bottom jaw and before the
should be used as a 1, 2 or 2.5% solution. Induction doses
cuff is inflated. The position of the tube at the incisors
are up to 12 mg/kg depending on the degree of preanaes-
should be rechecked to ensure that the tube has not been
thetic sedation and very small doses [2 mg/kg) will be
inserted more deeply during the process. The cuff should
 needed after heavy premedication. The agent is titrated to
516
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
jaw relaxation and rostroventral rotation of the eye with a
from anaesthesia is largely due to metabolism of pento-
weak palpebral reflex. Laryngeal reflexes are retained to
barbital and consequently recovery from anaesthesia is
some extent with thiopental and use of lidocaine for
prolonged for hours, and will be even longer if the cat
intubation is advisable. Swallowing during attempted
becomes cold.
intubation is an indication for additional thiopental
administration. Withdrawal of a limb after a toe pinch is
an indication of a light plane of anaesthesia. Use of thio-
Propofol
 pental without preanaesthetic sedation may require incre-
Propofol is injected IV at 2-6 mg/kg. depending on the
mental doses up to a maximum of 20 mg/kg. This protocol 
degree of preanaesthetic sedation, and up to 10 mg/kg in
is not advisable because higher doses of thiopental induce
 the absence of premedication. Approximately one-third of
excessive respiratory and cardiovascular depression, and
the anticipated dose is administered over 10 seconds
prolonged recovery from anaesthesia. Furthermore, thio-
 and then propofol is titrated in small increments. Injec-
pental is not analgesic and other agents shoul d be included
 tion ofthe total dose of propofol should be over l minute,
to supply analgesia. Thiopental is a satisfactory agent for 
slower than thiopental, to decrease the incidence and
induction of anaesthesia in healthy premedicated cats
 severity of apnoea. The signs and stages observed during
prior to maintenance of anaesthesia with an inhalation
induction of anaesthesia with propofol are very similar to
agent but adequacy of ventilation and blood pressure
those of thiopental except that jaw relaxation occurs
should be closely monitored. Cats are likely to be lethargic
earlier and laryngeal spasm is less. Oral mucous mem-
the day following thiopental administration.
branes may develop a deep red-blue colour that is due to
a combination of low oxygenation and low blood pres-
 sure. A few artificial breaths with O2 may be necessary to
Methohexital
restore quickly a normal pink mucous membrane colour.
Methohexital has been used in the past as a 0.5 or 1.0%
 Femoral artery pulse strength or blood pressure should be
solution at 6 mg/kg IV for induction of anaesthesia in
immediately assessed. Apnoea may occur immediately
premedicated cats. The agent is administered in a similar
after induction of anaesthesia. Cyanosis or apnoea may
fashion to thiopental, that is, injection of one-third the
occur more frequently when larger doses of propofol are
administered or when propofol is administered rapidly
 Over 60 seconds to achieve the desired depth of anaesthe-
(Hall et al., 1999; Matthews et al., 2004). The duration of
sia. Recovery from anaesthesia from methohexital without
anaesthesia from an initial anaesthetic dose of propofol is
sufficient sedation is accompanied by hyperreflexia, exag-
6-8 minutes. Anaesthesia may be prolonged by additional
gerated muscle response to a stimulus such as nose contact
administration of propofol, 0.1-0.3 mg/kg/min, or an
to the side of the cage, or body jerks. The duration of effect 
of methohexital is extremely short-lived necessitating effi-
from an infusion of propofol for 150 minutes compared
cient transfer to an inhalation agent Agents other than
with administration for induction or for 30 minutes has
 methohexital are currently used for anaesthesia in cats.
been attributed to the inefficiency of the hepatic metabolic
pathway for propofol in cats (Pascoe et al., 2006a). Recov-
 ery from propofol is more complete than from thiopental
Pentobarbital
and without the hyperreflexia of ketamine The cat may
Pentobarbital is not used for anaesthesia in clinical
exhibit disorientation for a short time and can be loosely
patients but may be used in experimental protocols.
 wrapped in a towel under supervision until full awareness
0n dn uoau l aq uai aq is iqo
returns.
25 mg/kg in unpremedicated animals. Onset of anaesthe-
 The drugs used for premedication will influence the
sia is slow, therefore, administration involves injection of
 cardiovascular effects of propofol administration. Propo-
half the anticipated dose to speed transition through the
fol alone decreases arterial blood pressure and some cats
early stages of anaesthesia and then injection of small
will develop hypotension (Pascoe et al., 2006a; Cleale
increments to achieve the desired depth of anaesthesia.
et al. 2009). SpO2 ≤90% develops in some cats, indicating
The interval between increments must be much longer
the need for O2 supplementation [Matthews et al., 2004;
than with thiopental otherwise overdosage will occur.
Selmi et al., 2005; Cleale et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2012).
Total administration time is about 5 minutes. Signs used
 Mild to moderate hypoventilation develops during a light
to titrate the anaesthetic dose include presence or absence
plane of anaesthesia.
of limb withdrawal in response to a toe pinch and twitch-
Mild to moderate increases in Heinz bodies have been
ing of the whiskers in response to pinching the ear pinna.
detected after propofol anaesthesia on consecutive Or
Administration should cease when these reflexes are weak
alternate days reflecting the susceptibility of feline
 Or gone because anaesthesia will continue to deepen for
red blood cells to oxidative injury [Andress et al., 1995;
several minutes after the last administration. Duration of
Matthews et al., 2004; Bley et al., 2007: Taylor et al.,
surgical anaesthesia may be as long as 2 hours. Recovery
20l2). The numbers of Heinz bodies varied between cats
517
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
and were considered not to be clinically signifcant in the
control over the volume injected or by slowing administra-
majority of studies. However, after anaesthesia on 4 suc-
tion. In another clinical study of cats premedicated with
cessive days in one study [Andress et al., 1995), five out
acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg, IM, alfaxalone administered at
of six cats exhibited general malaise, anorexia, and diar-
 a rate of 5 mg/kg/min required a mean dose of 4.7 mg/kg
rhoea. Routine haematological monitoring is recom-
to achieve intubation (Martinez Taboada & Murison,
mended as a precaution in cats receiving multiple propofol
20l0). The duration from a single administration of
anaesthesias for radiotherapy (Bley et al., 2007). A concern
alfaxalone, 5 mg/kg. has been reported as 7 ±3 and 15 ±
has been expressed that propofol may be associated with
4 minutes (Whittem et al., 2008; Muir et al., 2009). The
 postanaesthetic deterioration in cats with hepatic lipido-
quality of induction is described as fair to excellent. Recov-
sis. A retrospective survey of 44 cats with hepatic lipidosis
ery may be good or accompanied by paddling. and may
requiring anaesthesia for feeding tube placement, of which
 be improved by the addition of premedication and a quiet
27 received propofol, found no significant association
environment.
between use of propofol and morbidity or mortality
Administration of alfaxalone, 5 mg/kg. IV to eight
(Posner et al., 2008).
unpremedicated instrumented experimental cats caused
Currently, propofol is marketed as a 1 % and 2% emul-
no significant change in HR, CO, and SVR and a slow
sion containing soybean oil and egg phospholipid. This
 progressive decrease in MAP that reached statistical signifi-
product supports bacterial growth and once a vial or bottle
cance at 102 ± 26 mmHg (aortic pressure) by 15 minutes
has been opened (it should be marked with the date and
(Muir et al., 2009). Apnoea occurred in one cat and PaO2
time of frst use), the remaining propofol should be dis-
was <60 mmHg in five cats. RR decreased but PaCO2 was
carded after 8 hours. Propofol emulsion containing benzyl
unchanged, leading the authors to attribute the immediate
alcohol as a preservative is also available (PropoFlo"" 28
decrease in PaOz to altered pulmonary perfusion. Admin-
and PropoFlo"" Plus). The benzyl alcohol is of concern as
istration of an excessive dose (15 mg/kg) caused vasodila-
cats are deficient in glucuronidating metabolic pathways
tion and negative inotropic effects. The addition of
involved in benzyl alcohol metabolism. Evaluation of this
isoflurane is likely to induce hypotension (Zaki et al.,
product in cats with multiple anaesthetic episodes at
2009).
48-hour intervals confirmed no significant differences in
haematological and biochemical laboratory test results
Etomidate
between propofol without preservative and propofol with
benzyl alcohol (Taylor et al., 2012). More details on for-
Etomidate is most commonly used for induction of anaes-
mulation are given in Chapter 6.
thesia in cats with cardiac disease because etomidate does
not cause alterations in the cardiovascular haemodynam-
Alfaxalone
ics as do the other agents. Premedication is essential to
provide analgesia and for a smooth induction with etomi-
Alfaxalone was frst used in cats in combination with
date, and may consist of butorphanol, buprenorphine, or
alphadolone solubilized in Cremophor-EL (Saffan@), but
 another opioid, with or without midazolam IM. Diazepam,
is no longer available. Despite well-documented problems
0.2 mg/kg, may be injected IV immediately before etomi-
due to Cremophor-EL-induced histamine release, it still
date. Etomidate is administered IV at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg.
proved to be a useful anaesthetic agent in cats and had a
although occasionally up to 50% less may be needed in
wide therapeutic index. A large survey of anaesthetic
cats with poor cardiovascular function, or additional eto-
deaths in general practice showed that cats anaesthetized
midate up to a total of 3 mg/kg, may be needed in some
with Saffan@ were three times less likely to die than
healthy cats. Etomidate has a short duration of action,
those anaesthetized by any other method available at
consequently, administration should be a bit faster than
that time (Clarke & Hall, 1990).
       
Alfaxalone (alphaxalone), 10 mg/mL, is now available
 anticipated dose is injected over 5-10 seconds and addi-
in a cyclodextrin formulation that should avoid the
tional increments injected after 15 seconds. Jaw relaxation,
problem of histamine release The recommended dose for
rostroventral rotation of the eye and a weak palpebral
cats is up to 5 mg/kg IV to be administered over I minute.
reflex are goals for tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia must
In one study of young cats premedicated with acepro-
be maintained with an inhalation agent because increas-
mazine, 0.03 mg/kg, and butorphanol, 0.3 mg/kg, SC.
ing dose administration of etomidate increases its depres-
induction of anaesthesia with alfaxalone injected over
sant effect on adrenal function. The carrier for etomidate
60-90 seconds was achieved with a mean dose of
includes ethylene glycol, which is toxic to red cells. No
2.7 mg/kg compared with 4.3 mg/kg in unpremedicated
adverse effect of the small dose described has been
ats (Zaki et al., 2009). The dose rate for induction of
observed but some clinicians prefer to administer etomi-
anaesthesia was significantly decreased by dilution of the
date into a catheter through which balanced electrolyte
alfaxalone to 5 mg/mL with sterile water before injection.
solution is flowing in order to produce rapid dilution.
This modification may have been effective by facilitating
Lack of adequate preinduction sedation or delay in
518
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
intubation and delivery of the inhalant anaesthetic will
administration of an Q2-antagonist (see earlier for dose
contribute to need of a higher dose of etomidate.
rates).
Low to medium dose rates of ketamine can be used in
combination with other drugs for premedication and
Ketamine
induction of anaesthesia prior to inhalation anaesthesia.
Ketamine is available as the water-soluble racemic mixture
For example, acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg, with or without
of two isomers and the standard for veterinary use is a
an opioid, plus ketamine, 4-5 mg/kg. IM for premedica-
solution containing 100 mg/mL ketamine hydrochloride
tion. This is followed in 15-30 minutes by induction of
with a preservative Ketamine is subject to abuse and must 
anaesthesia with ketamine, 5 mg/kg. IV with or without
be kept under locked storage and, in some countries, keta-
 diazepam, titrated to accomplish intubation and transfer
mine is a controlled substance requiring records of indi-
to an inhalation agent.
vidual patient administration. Ketamine is a commonly
Ketamine is often mixed with diazepam in the same
 used anaesthetic agent in cats and can be administered IM.
 syringe for IV administration. A commonly used calcu-
IV, or SC and is absorbed through oral membranes. Acci-
lated dose rate is ketamine, 5 mg/kg. and diazepam,
 dental introduction into the eyes during oral administra-
0.25 mg/kg. a 1: 1 ratio when using ketamine 100 mg/mL
tion does not cause corneal damage despite the low pH of
and diazepam 5 mg/mL. One-half to two-thirds of the
ketamine [Macy & Siwe, 1977). Intramuscular injection
calculated dose, depending on the premedication, is
appears to be painful and the cat must be restrained to
administered rapidly IV to healthy animals and the
 avoid sudden movement that might result in needle break-
age or only partial injection of the calculated dose. Onset
desired effect. Onset of action is slow at 40-50 seconds
of sedation or anaesthesia after IM injection of ketamine
and is slower than the other anaesthetic agents. The
is rapid. When the cat is left in its cage during onset of
anaesthetist must be patient and allow time for full effect
 anaesthesia, the water bowl and litter box must be removed
before intubation, at which point jaw tone will be moder-
to prevent accidental airway obstruction or inhalation of
ate, the eye in a central position in the orbit, and the
water or litter particles.
palpebral reflex will be brisk. Swallowing is a common
Ketamine induces catalepsy so that cats receiving keta-
occurrence during intubation and is 'normal' for this
mine alone have high muscle tone, rigid limbs, and spon-
 anaesthetic agent. Despite the appearance of swallowing.
taneous movement. Consequently, ketamine is usually
pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes will be depressed and
administered in combination with sedatives and opioids.
ats are still at risk for pulmonary aspiration of fluid
Ketamine has a wide variety of uses, such as providing
during ketamine anaesthesia in the absence of endotra-
mild sedation, immobilization, anaesthesia with injecta-
cheal intubation.
ble agents only, induction of anaesthesia for tracheal intu-
A combination of xylazine, 1 mg/kg. with ketamine,
bation before using inhalation anaesthesia, or as a
10 mg/kg, administered together IM has been in use for
continuous low dose infusion as an adjunct to inhalation
loy eisauisaeue jo sannuu De apiaoid on siean Aue
 anaesthesia or postoperatively. Many combinations have
ovariohysterectomy. Occasionally. apnoea and cyanosis
been described using low (2-4 mg/kg IM or IV), medium
 ensue requiring administration of Oz and artificial ventila-
(5-10 mg/kg IM or IV) or high dosage (25-33 mg/kg IM)
tion. A study monitoring cardiopulmonary function after
based on the degree of CNS depression desired, the route
administration of this combination measured significant
of administration, and the pharmacological effects of the
decreases in cardiac output, HR and MAP at 5 minutes
combination drugs (see Table 16.4). The ketamine dose
 after xylazine and ketamine administration that continued
rate is generally low to medium when ketamine is com-
throughout the 150-minute monitoring period, but no
bined with medetomidine or dexmedetomidine, or when
changes in arterial pH and blood gases [Allen et al., 1986)]
used IV for induction of anaesthesia to be maintained with
Fatal pulmonary oedema has been associated with keta-
an inhalation agent. High dosage in combination with
mine anaesthesia (Trim CM, recipient of personal com-
acepromazine and butorphanol or buprenorphine has
munications, Van der Linde-Sipman et al., 1992). The
been used for anaesthesia for ovariohysterectomy in
presence of fluid or froth in the endotracheal tube during
healthy cats. Recovery may be prolonged after high dose
anaesthesia or laboured breathing with crackles during
aun asnaq pnui ou st aea pi uaum sai
 thoracic auscultation developing hours after anaesthesia
formation is necessary for elimination of ketamine in cats
 are common signs. Aggressive treatment with Oz and furo-
(Heavner & Bloedow, 1979). Since no antagonist is avail-
semide are usually necessary to avoid a fatal outcome.
able for ketamine, some have recommended inclusion of
medetomidine or dexmedetomidine in the combination
Tiletamine
in order to decrease the ketamine dose rate, for example,
medetomidine, 0.08 mg/kg (80 μg/kg) with ketamine 5 or
The
combination of
tiletamine with
zolazepam
7.5 mg/kg. IM for ovariectomy (Verstegen et al., 1990).
(Telazol@ or Zoletil@) is frequently used to produce
 Shorter recovery time can be facilitated, if necessary, by
heavy sedation or anaesthesia in cats. Administration of
519
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
tiletamine-zolazepam, 4.0-4.4 mg/kg. IM with an opioid
 as dogs, and recovery will be progressively prolonged with
will induce a light plane of anaesthesia sufficient for intu-
increased hours of anaesthesia.
bation in most cats. Onset of anaesthesia is rapid. Because
Concurrent continuous infusions of fentanyl and pro-
the duration of anaesthetic effect is extended, in contrast
pofol, with or without midazolam, have been used to
to induction of anaesthesia with thiopental or propofol,
maintain anaesthesia for cats with neurological disease
initially the vaporizer is not turned on or set at a very low
and those undergoing craniotomy for tumour excision.
% to avoid overdose. As the effect of tiletamine wanes and
The technique is similar to that already described in
signs of a lightening plane of anaesthesia are observed,
 Chapter 15 for dogs. Others have reported using infusions
administration of the inhalation agent can be started or
of sufentanil, alfentanil, or low loses of ketamine with
increased. Hypotension is an indication to decrease the
propofol for TIVA.
vaporizer setting.
 Investigations of alfaxalone administered for mainte-
Hyperthermia develops in cats after opioid administra-
nance of anaesthesia are only just appearing in the lit-
tion but also may occur after tiletamine-zolazepam-
erature Short surgical procedures can be performed in
inhalation anaesthesia, with rectal temperatures up to
cats
 premedicated with acepromazine and an opioid
41 °C (106 * F). The cats exhibit typical dissociative recovery
and anaesthesia induced with alfaxalone, 5 mg/kg. IV.
activity with restless jerky movements about the cage and
Intermittent administration or a continuous infusion
head bobbing. Treatment to decrease their body tempera-
of alfaxalone at a rate of 0.18 mg/kg/min (1l mg/kg/h)
tures may include administration of a sedative such as
have been used to prolong anaesthesia for ovariectomy
acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg. IM where appropriate and
± hysterectomy. Cats were premedicated with acepro-
application of a draft of cold air from a fan, ice packs, or
mazine, 0.03 mg/kg. morphine 0.3 mg/kg. and atropine,
a pad for the cat to lie on that circulates iced water.
0.04 mg/kg, SC, followed by induction of anaesthesia with
Higher dose rates for tiletamine-zolazepam are licensed
alfaxalone, mean dose 4.7 mg/kg (O'Hagan et al., 2012)
in the cat, up to 10 mg/kg IM for minor procedures and
Or premedicated with medetomidine, 0.02 mg/kg. and
15 mg/kg IM for surgical
I procedures.
Tiletamine-
morphine, 0.3-0.5 mg/kg. IM and anaesthesia induced
zolazepam may be incorporated into an injectable anaes-
with alfaxalone mean dose l.8 mg/kg. IV (Beths et al.
thetic protocol with ketamine and xylazine (TKX) that has
2009). The cats were administered oxygen in both studies.
been described earlier in the section on feral cats.
Tiletamine-zolazepam is contraindicated for use in
Inhalation anaesthesia
animals with pancreatitis. Recovery from anaesthesia will
be excessively prolonged when tiletamine-zolazepam is
The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) value or
administered to cats with renal disease or urethral obstruc-
tion. Postanaesthetic pulmonary oedema has been
1.6% (Steffey & Howland, 1977: Drummond et al., 1983)
reported.
but, since that time, mean MAC values have been meas-
ured from 1.3% to 2.2% (1lkiw et al., 1997: Yackey et al.
2004; Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2005b). Published mean MAC
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TlVA)
values for sevoflurane in cats are 2.4% (Ko et al., 2008a),
Ketamine and tiletamine-zolazepam anaesthetic combi-
2.6% (Doi et al., 1988). and 3.2-3.4% (Lamont et al.,
nations with a sedative and/or opioid administered as a
2004; Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2004:; Ferreira et al., 2011). The
single injection may provide anaesthesia that is of satisfac-
MAC value for desflurane in cats was reported to be a
tory duration for short procedures. Additional small doses
mean of9.8% (range 8.6-10.6%) (McMurphy & Hodgson,
of ketamine may be administered to prolong anaesthesia,
1995) and 10.3 ± 1.1% (Barter et al., 2004). The cats in
but will also prolong recovery time.
these publications were anaesthetized with the inhalation
Currently, preservative-free propofol is the agent most
agent only. Differences in mean MAC value may be due to
commonly used for TIVA. Premedication with a sedative
and an opioid is advisable, induction of anaesthesia with
ent genetic origins and degree of socialization, the time of
propofol, and either top-up doses at appropriate intervals
the day, and slight differences in methods of application
depending on the opioid or a continuous infusion of
of the noxious stimulus. Halothane is more potent than
opioid should be administered during anaesthesia to
isoflurane, sevoflurane or desflurane, with a MAC value in
 maintain analgesia. Propofol is continuously infused at a
cats of 1.1-1.2% (Steffey et al., 1974; Drummond et al.,
rate of 0.1-0.3 mg/kg/min (6-18 mg/kg/h)using asyringe
1983). Nitrous oxide (NzO) is not suffciently potent to
driver. Endotracheal intubation and administration (
of
 provide unconsciousness in cats when administered alone.
 Oxygen are necessary as hypoventilation may be moderate
and the MAC value has been calculated as 255% at normal
zaee Al aq oi reae  sie a aaas oi
barometric pressure, higher than the MAC in dogs. Addi-
and absence of movement or autonomic stimulation in
tion of 50-70% NzO to inspired gases provides some
response to surgery should be used to assess depth
of
analgesia and decreases the requirement for the primary
anaesthesia. Cats do not metabolize propofol as rapidly
inhalation agent The requirements for isoflurane and
520
 Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
|16 |
sevoflurane in cats were decreased by a mean of 26% or
cardiovascular effects except during deep anaesthesia
23%, respectively. by the addition of 66% NzO [Hikasa
when controlled ventilation significantly decreased CO
et al., 1996). Although NzO causes myocardial depres-
during isoflurane [Hodgson et al., 1998) and MAP during
sion, it also causes some sympathetic stimulation so that
desflurane anaesthesia (McMurphy & Hodgson, 1996).
the addition of 50% or 70% NzO to isoflurane does not
Heart rates were significantly decreased with increasing
further decrease cardiac output, and arterial pressure
concentrations of isoflurane from 1x MAC to 2x MAC
increases due to peripheral vasoconstriction (Pypendop
but not by sevoflurane or desflurane in the majority of
et al., 2003).
studies (Steffey & Howland, 1977: Poterack et al., 1991;
The speed of induction of anaesthesia with an inhalant
McMurphy&H
Hodgson, 1996: Hikasa et al., 1997:
 agent depends on the technique used, with administration
Hodgson et al., 1998; Lamont et al., 2004; Pypendop &
through a facemask potentially faster than induction of
Ilkiw, 2004; Souza et al., 2005). Increasing concentrations
 anaesthesia with the cat in a chamber before transferring
of isoflurane induced vasodilation [decreased systemic
to a facemask, and faster with a non-rebreathing circuit
vascular resistance, SVR) (Hodgson et al., 1998) but no
than a circle rebreathing circuit The vaporizer setting and
changes in SVR were measured during sevoflurane or des-
O2 flow rate also influence the speed of induction using
flurane anaesthesia (McMurphy & Hodgson, 1996; Pypen-
rebreathing circuits by controlling the rate of increase in
dop & Ilkiw, 2004). A study comparing isoflurane and
inspired anaesthetic concentration. Induction times in cats
sevoflurane determined that MAP was significantly higher
sedated with acepromazine, 0.05 mg/kg, IM using a face-
 during deep sevoflurane anaesthesia than isoflurane when
mask and non-rebreathing circuit were 5 ± 1 minutes
the cats were breathing spontaneously (Hikasa et al.
with isofurane and 4 ± l minutes with sevoflurane
1997). One effect of halothane that is significantly differ-
(Lerche et al., 2002). Use of a chamber slows the time
ent from the other agents is the increased incidence of
to intubation. Using an Oz flow of 6 L/min and a des-
cardiac dysrhythmias, primarily premature ventricular
flurane vaporizer setting of 1.5x MAC or higher, cats in
complexes (PVCs), caused by sensitization of the myocar-
a chamber lost their righting reflexes on average in 2.3
dium in situations such as myocardial ischaemia, increased
minutes. The cats were removed from the chamber and
   ae s sou a
 desflurane administered using a facermask, O2 flow appro-
thesia, hypercarbia, increased endogenous or exogenous
 priate for the circuit used, and the vaporizer set at 1.5x
atecholamine concentrations, or increased HR or blood
MAC until intubation was accomplished, a total time of
pressure [Hubbell et al., 1984).
6.3 ± 1 minutes (McMurphy & Hodgson, 1995; Barter
Increasing depth of anaesthesia with all agents results
et al., 2004). A signifcant disadvantage to induction of
paseanul pue uoeuanau aaaas on aneapou ul
PaCO2, generally with no decrease in RR (Hodgson et al..
IV injectable agent is the relatively long time that the
1998; Souza et al., 2005). Consequently, although moni-
pharyngeal reflexes are depressed before tracheal intuba-
 toring RR during anaesthesia is necessary to detect apnoea,
 un us  go i a  '
RR will not be a warning of hypoventilation.
event that the cat vomits. Vomition during induction of
anaesthesia with an inhalant is not common but can
Administration of inhalation agents
occur (Barter et al., 2004). Atmospheric pollution with
the anaesthetic agent can be a problem with chamber
Two factors that may increase PaCOz are resistance to
inductions.
breathing and large apparatus dead space that cause
 Anaesthetic gas analysers measure the end-tidal (end-
decreased tidal volume and increased rebreathing of CO2.
expiration, alveolar) agent concentration and this value
A circle rebreathing circuit is frequently used for cats
most closely approximates brain concentration. The
weighing more than 2.5 kg as the O2 inflow is low and
inspiratory concentration will generally be 0.2-0.3%
the circuit is convenient to use with a mechanical ventila-
higher. Without concurrent administration of sedatives,
tor. When using a low O2 inflow, the cats' respiratory
analgesics, or other anaesthetic agents, an end-tidal value
movements are responsible for flow of the gases around
of 1.3-1.5x MAC is considered to be a light to moderate
the circle and through the CO2 absorbent. The absorbent
plane of anaesthesia whereas deep anaesthesia is a con-
 granules offer resistance to air flow as does turbulence
centration equivalent to 2x MAC. Concentrations in excess
created in wide bore tubing and the presence of valves.
of MAC, in the absence of other drugs, are necessary
The impact of these factors on small cats can be mini-
because inhalation agents block the motor response to a
mized by increasing O2 flow rate to 1 L/min and using
noxious stimulus at a lower concentration than will block
 paediatric hoses that have a small (12 mm) internal diam-
autonomic and CNS responses. All the inhalation agents 
eter. The total volume of the circle is high in relation to
induce a dose-dependent decrease in MAP and, in most
the fresh gas inflow so that the anaesthetic concentration
investigations, this was accompanied by a decrease in
is slow to change. Overswing in anaesthetic concentration
CO during deep anaesthesia. The mode of ventilation,
may occur during a dynamic change that may result in
spontaneous versus controlled, did not influence the
overdosage.
521
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Non-rebreathing circuits have no CO2 absorbent and
Neuromuscular blockade
may not have valves to offer resistance to airflow. The
 Paralysis with a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking
inspired anaesthetic concentration is the same as the
agent (NMBA) during anaesthesia is commonly used for
vaporizer setting thus, changing the vaporizer % results in
ocular surgical procedures such as cataract extraction,
an immediate change in inspired concentration and facili
tates rapid changes in depth of anaesthesia. Since the total
cormeal transplant, or conjunctival flap attachment for a
flow of gas is fixed by the design of the circuit, NzO can
cormeal ulcer or laceration. This author currently uses atra-
curium but pancuronium, vecuronium, and rocuronium
be added without changing total gas inflow.
Apparatus dead space begins at the endotracheal tube
are also used. The pharmacological effects of NMBAs are
given in Chapter 8 and the clinical use of these agents in
level with the incisors and extends into the anaesthetic
delivery circuit to the point at which COz-free gases are
cats is similar to that described for dogs in Chapter 15.
 available to the cat The apparatus dead space gas contains
When the cat is paralysed, even with low doses of NmBA
CO2 that will be inhaled at the beginning of the next
for ocular surgery, breathing is abolished or inadequate
jou st siskleied jl 'painban st uoeiuan leiye pue
inspiration. A large volume of apparatus dead space in
required until the start of surgery then the cat can be taken
relation to the cat's tidal volume significantly increases the
inspired CO2 concentration and thus the PaCO2. Some
to an adequate depth for surgery before administration of
the NMBA. Once paralysed, eye position, palpebral reflex,
Y-pieces on circle circuits have median dividers that cut
and breathing are lost monitoring aids. It is important to
down on dead space and non-rebreathing circuits may be
designed to deliver fresh gases at the level of the endotra-
achieve in the patient an adequate depth of anaesthesia
 and analgesia without excessive anaesthetic administra-
cheal tube Any addition between the endotracheal tube
tion. Administration of an NMBA without the monitoring
and circuit, such as a T-piece for a gas analyser or a humid.
capability for measuring blood pressure is not recom-
ity and moisture exchanger, increases dead space. Adapters
mended. Intraoperative fluid therapy is advisable to
are available for 2 or 3 mm ID endotracheal tubes that
 contribute to maintaining adequate circulation and redis-
have lumens the same ID as the endotracheal tube and a
tribution of the NMBA
side port for the gas analyser (see Fig. 10.30A), and both
Evaluation of neuromuscular transmission using a
features decrease dead space.
 peripheral nerve stimulator is used to guide administra-
tion of additional NMBA to maintain paralysis without
Adjunct agents
ayes si l ruod zeum ie auiuanap ot pue asesop anissaoxa
Balanced anaesthesia employs administration of several
to allow the animal to begin spontaneous breathing. The
need for a reversal agent depends on the NmBA used, dose
drugs to achieve unconsciousness, analgesia, and muscle
relaxation and by doing so allows use of smaller dose rates
rates used, the duration of drug administration, time
of each drug. In dogs, opioids are frequently administered
elapsed since the last administration, and information
provided by peripheral nerve stimulation. The cat should
not only for analgesia but also to decrease the concentra-
tion of inhalation agent, thereby diminishing the impact
not be allowed to breathe spontaneously until four
 a  p ae yus ea y sau
on MAP Opioid administration in cats does not decrease
the concentration of inhalant required to the same extent
four (TOF). Atracurium does not require hepatic or renal
function for elimination and is short lived when used in
as in dogs. Continuous infusions of fentanyl, 5 μg/kg/h,
small doses for ocular surgery. Use of a reversal agent is
Or morphine, 0.1 mg/kg/h, have been used to maintain
not always necessary but, if needed, edrophonium is the
analgesia during inhalation anaesthesia. Ketamine con-
cholinesterase inhibitor of choice.
tinuous infusion, 0.1-0.5 mg/kg/h, is also used to provide
some sedation and in the hope that it attenuates central
sensitization induced by surgery.
 Continuous infusion of lidocaine is often used in dogs
MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT
to decrease inhalant concentration and provide analgesia.
Increasing plasma lidocaine concentrations in cats pro-
duces a dose-dependent decrease in MAC of isoflurane
Continuous observation of cat behaviour and vital signs
(Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2005b). However, significant decreases
after premedication and during induction, maintenance
in cardiac index and increased SVR have been measured
 and recovery from anaesthesia is important to enable rec-
during lidocaine administration such that cardiovascular
ognition of normal and abnormal responses to anaes-
function was no better by inclusion of lidocaine and
thetic agents. Attached monitors and alarms serve as alerts
 decreasing the isoflurane concentration than maintaining
for potential or actual problems. Anaesthetic agents may
anaesthesia at an equipotent concentration of isoflurane
   s o 
alone [Pypendop & Ilkiw, 2005a). Many clinicians avoid
whether the duration of anaesthesia is 10 minutes or 2
the use of lidocaine infusion in cats because of the adverse
hours, consequently, application of monitoring equip-
cardiovascular effects.
ment is advisable from the start of anaesthesia whatever
522
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
the intended duration or the patient's health status. Even
just changing the body position of an anaesthetized cat
can result in life-threatening hypotension. A record of drug
administrations and monitored parameters should be
maintained and is a legal requirement in some states or
countries. An anaesthetic record identifies gradual trends
that require action, provides information for retrospective
evaluation of patient care and for future anaesthetics in
the same patient. The record is a framework for legal
defence in the event of a serious complication.
Signs to be observed during induction of anaesthesia for
assessment of depth of anaesthesia include assumption of
recumbency and loss of righting reflex, diminished pedal
withdrawal reflex, eye position, palpebral reflex, and relax-
ation of jaw muscles just sufficient to open the mouth.
Observation of RR and character of breathing. mucous
membrane colour, and palpation of the femoral artery for
Figure 16.8 The endotracheal tube is connected to an
pulse rate rhythm, and strength should be included to
adapter for a side-stream gas analyser (arrow) that in turn is
evaluate the cat's physiological status. Apnoea, cyanosis
connected to paediatric circle hoses. A Doppler probe has
(remembering that a cat's tongue may remain pinkish
(L) bal aul ol padei pue ped jedie) aul ol leisip paoeid uaag
during hypoxia). bradycardia, or a weak or absent pulse
The probe wire was passed between the toes and taped to
are indicators that anaesthetic drug administration should
the leg for added security. A cuff(2) is placed proximal to
be stopped and O2 administered. If need be, cats can be
the probe and connected to a manometer (3) for systolic
effectively artificially ventilated using a tight-fitting mask.
inserted in the cephalic vein on the opposite leg and taped
The eye signs vary according to the anaesthetic agents
in place (4). A T-port has been connected and the IV
administered. Ketamine and tiletamine are associated with
administration set tubing connected to the side arm. A pulse
uis s seaaum xaar ieiqadied ysq e jo anuasaid a
oximeter probe (5) is attached to a pinna.
reflects a light plane of anaesthesia during inhalation
anaesthesia. The eye is centrally placed in the orbit during
ketamine anaesthesia but rolls rostroventrally during
end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) value exceeds 6 kPa
 other injectable and inhalation anaesthesia, returning to
[45 mmHg). Further increase should be prevented by
 a central position as anaesthesia deepens. The presence of
 either decreasing anaesthetic administration or providing
limb withdrawal after a toe pinch can be a useful sign of
assisted or controlled ventilation. A low ETCOz value
inadequacy of anaesthesia, however, the absence of with-
[<30 mmHg: 4 kPa) may represent adequate/increased
 drawal does not necessarily reflect adequacy of analgesia
ventilation or may be an error when using a side-stream
for intensely nociceptive procedures. Monitoring RR, HR,
 capnograph. Dilution of exhaled gas with fresh gas results 
[ins oi asuodsan u sasueup ioy ainssad pooia pue
in a low ETCO measurement that is not representative of
stimulus may be a more reliable guide.
PaCO2. This will occur in cats with a small tidal volume,
slow RR, and when the cat is connected to a non-
Ventilation
rebreathing circuit The pulse oximeter probe can be
dlipped on the tongue ear, lip, or toe web (Fig. 16.8). The
Magnitude of ventilation can be diffcult to assess by
 pulse oximeter provides a pulse rate and indicates haemo-
observation of chest excursion. Ketamine induces a char-
globin Oz saturation but is not a measure of adequacy of
'usuieaig osnaude, suean jo uaned ssae
ventilation. Use of a pulse oximeter has been associated
whereby the cat inhales and holds inspiration for several
with decreased risk of death during anaesthesia (Brodbelt
 seconds before exhaling. The duration of inspiration can
et al., 2008b).
be so long that the cat appears apnoeic, except that eventu-
Hypoventilation may be caused by anaesthetic depres-
ally it exhales [a pattern that is opposite to apnoea). RR
 sion of cerebral respiratory neurons or due to mechanical
within the normal range is characteristic of inhalation
impairment of ventilation from obesity, a large uterus or
anaesthetic agents during light or deep anaesthesia. The
abdominal mass, or from certain body positioning such
volume of each breath progressively decreases as anaesthe-
aS a head-down prone position for perineal surgery.
sia deepens so that the cat may be breathing 30 breaths/
Hypoventilation may result in inadequate uptake of inha-
min but severely hypoventilating. Adequacy of ventilation
lation anaesthetic and an uneven depth of anaesthesia, in
can be measured indirectly using capnography (Figs 16.8
which case, assisted or controlled ventilation may stabilize
& 16.9, see Fig. 2.28) and invasively using blood gas analy-
the depth. Hypercarbia causes sympathetic stimulation in
sis. Significant hypoventilation is present in a cat when the
some animals and increased SVR that elevates MAP
523
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Figure 16.9 It is the end of surgery for this 0.5 kg 5-week old kitten lying within a hot air blanket to preserve body
main stream capnography (arrow), and a rectal probe for temperature. A 24 gauge catheter was inserted in a cephalic vein for
fluid and drug administration. A red rubber feeding tube had been inserted (through an uncuffed endotracheal tube) into the
stomach for decompression.
However, l
hypercarbia also causes vasodilation and
decrease in intensity of Doppler sound occurs with a
increased intracranial and spinal pressure Controlled ven-
decrease in blood pressure (the opposite effect is not nec-
tilation is essential for cats with head trauma, or for crani-
essarily true - that a loud sound heard when the Doppler
Otomy. dorsal laminectomy, or fractured vertebra
 probe is initially attached represents adequate blood pres-
stabilization, cats undergoing diaphragmatic rupture
sure). Hypotension is frequently associated with use of
repair, thoracotomy or thoracoscopy, and cats that are
propofol, tiletamine-zolazepam, and inhalation anaes-
paralysed with an NMBA.
thesia. The values obtained from oscillometric and
A respiratory rate of 12-15 breaths/min and tidal
Doppler ultrasound methods may or may not be accurate
-u n  / si Aaxde ai
for individual cats and the recording from the Doppler
tain normocarbia. Infation time should be just over 1
method may be closer to MAP than SAP (see Chapter 2).
second and 15 cm HO (1l.4 mmHg) inspiratory pressure
Differences in recorded measurements are influenced by
is sufficient to achieve a suitable tidal volume in many
the site of cuff application, cuff diameter, and the relation-
cats. For most patients, the airway pressure must decrease
ship between cuff position and heart level as well as the
to zero between breaths to allow adequate venous return
technique and model employed (Cannon & Brett, 2012).
to the heart When controlled ventilation is used to treat
Nonetheless, NIBP monitors are easy to use and provide
hypoventilation, the vaporizer setting should be decreased
warning of a severely decreased blood pressure or a change
to avoid increased depth of anaesthesia caused by delivery
in pressure (see Fig. 16.8). Actions initiated by a low blood
of anaesthetic to more pulmonary capillaries. A mechani-
pressure measurement may prevent progression to cardiac
cal ventilator with a small bellows (capacity 100 mL or
arrest (Fig. 16.10). Invasive blood pressure monitoring
300 mL) is ideal for adjusting to the small tidal volume
provides valuable information in cats with significant
of a cat. Manual ventilation may be the best option when
cardiac disease, very ill cats, and during complicated surgi-
the ventilator cannot be adjusted to deliver a small enough
cal procedures. A 22 or 24 gauge catheter is inserted in the
tidal volume. The Hallowell Workstation (see Fig. 10.17)
dorsal pedal or coccygeal artery after the skin at the site
is an example of an anaesthesia machine/ventilator
has had a presurgical preparation. The coccygeal artery
 designed specifically for very small animals.
midline on the ventral surface of the tail may be easier to
catheterize but skin preparation and protection of cleanli-
Cardiovascular system
ness of the catheter must be high quality because of the
potential contamination of the site A 22 gauge catheter is
Minimal cardiovascular monitoring includes HR, CRT.
less likely to require frequent flushing. Attaching a con-
mucous membrane colour, and palpation of a femoral
tinuous flush device (see Fig. 2.20) to the catheter is useful
pulse. Heart rate and rhythm can be obtained from an
for maintaining patency for long-term pressure monitor-
ECG, oesophageal stethoscope, pulse oximeter, or a
ing. The pressure transducer should be placed level with
Doppler probe over a peripheral artery. In general, a
the thoracic inlet. Central venous pressure can be
524
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
experimental cats made hypotensive with isoflurane
(Pascoe et al., 2006b). An infusion of dopamine, 5 μg/kg/
 min, IV resulted in a significant increase in HR and cardiac
index (Cl) and an infusion of 10 μg/kg/min increased
MAP >70 mmHg in all cats. SVR was unchanged at these
infusion rates. HR and CI were increased significantly by
dobutamine infusion ≥5 μg/kg/min but MAP increased
only in 3/6 cats, and overall increases in MAP were not
significant at infusion rates of 5 or 10 μg/kg/min. SVR was
decreased from baseline at all infusion rates. Infusion of
epinephrine, 0.5 μg/kg/min, significantly increased HR, CI
and MAP without significant changes in SVR. Infusions of
phenylephrine 1 and 2 μg/kg/min, increased MAP and
SVR with no significant change in HR. CI was significantly
increased by infusion of the higher dose rate In this inves-
tigation, dopamine was the most useful drug to increase
MAP and perfusion, and phenylephrine could be used to
increase MAP by vasoconstriction. MAP decreased rapidly
after stopping infusions of dopamine and epinephrine, so
 these infusions should be decreased in step-wise fashion.
Aconcentration of 100 μg/mL dopamine or dobutamine
Figure 16.10 This pregnant cat is anaesthetized for
is commonly used as it can be reasonably regulated and
ovariohysterectommy. Systolic arterial pressure decreased to
avoids excessive infusion of saline [see Box 15.9). The rate
40 mmHg (aortocaval compression) when the cat was placed
 of infusion must be closely controlled using a paediatric
in dorsal recumbency but rebounded after the cat was
60 drop/mL administration set or, even better, a syringe
turned onto its side. Blood pressure was minimally improved
driver where the rate of infusion is not influenced by other
by administration of dopamine. The left lateral tilt of the
solutions entering the same catheter It is important in cats
le pauiod moe aut Ag anpid aul u! paieisnlll uawopge
[and small dogs) to insert the needle as close to the IV
midline was the closest position to dorsal recumbency that
allowed adequate blood pressure. Removal of the uterus was
catheter as possible so that any change in infusion rate can
 Occur quickly, which is not the case if the vasoactive line
pressure.
is inserted into a fluid extension distant from the catheter.
Dopamine is started at a rate of 7 μg/kg/min. The rate of
infusion may be decreased once the blood pressure has
measured in cats with a long jugular catheter in place. An
increased. In refractory situations, dopamine dose rate
ECG is essential for the diagnosis of irregular rhythms.
may be increased to 10 μg/kg/min, or dobutamine added,
Maintenance fluid therapy during anaesthesia is usually
 Or a change made to phenylephrine.
balanced electrolyte solution, 5-10 mL/kg/h for the frst
 The volume of blood lost during a surgical or medical
1-2 hours followed by 5 mL/kg/h for subsequent hours.
procedure must be assessed closely. Hidden losses must
The circulating blood volume of cats is approximately
also be included, such as blood on the drapes, between
56 mL/kg body weight. Accidental delivery of 100-300 mL
the drapes and the table, or on the floor. The pharynx
of fluid may constitute overload, depending on the size of
 should be packed with gauze during nasal or oral surgery
the cat, and a bolus of 60 mL/kg of fluid is likely to cause
to prevent blood passing down the oesophagus into the
pulmonary oedema. Administration of furosemide is indi-
stomach where it cannot be quantitated. One fully soaked
cated when an excessive volume of fluid has been
'pooq 7u 5I-8 PIoy ue azne (a1enbs u 0l) sx
administered.
depending on the type of gauze A loss of 30-40 mL blood
Hypotension, MAP <60-65 mmHg or SAP ≤80 mmHg.
in a 3.5 kg cat [15-20% of circulating blood volume) will
should be treated according to the cause Hypotension
have a significant adverse effect on cardiac output Initial
induced by inhalation anaesthetic agents should be 
replacement of blood loss in a previously healthy cat can
managed initially by decreasing the vaporizer setting.
be with crystalloid solution at 2 times the volume lost,
Expansion of blood volume can be accomplished by one
however, administration of a colloid is indicated if the
fluid bolus of 5-10 mL/kg and infusion of hydroxethyl
blood pressure remains low, if the TP decreases below
starch (hetastarch) 5 mL/kg over 10 minutes with one
 4 g/dL, or by 15% blood loss. A blood transfusion may be
repeat dose. Hypotension may also be reversed by infusion
necessary at 20% loss of circulating blood volume, or
of a vasoactive agent, such as dopamine, 7 μg/kg/min. The
 earlier in patients starting with lower than normal Hct, or
cardiovascular effects of dopamine, dobutamine, epine-
when Hct decreases to 20%. When major haemorrhage
phrine, and phenylephrine have been evaluated in healthy
 is anticipated based on the type of surgical procedure,
525
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
eg. rhinotomy, it is advisable to blood type the cat and
partly due to the effects of opioid administration (see
have a donor with the same blood type available. Feline
earlier).
packed red blood cells and plasma are also commercially
available. Cats scheduled for potentially haemorrhagic
Recovery from anaesthesia
pelvic limb fracture repair, that have a preoperative Hct
The cat's urinary bladder should be expressed by gentle
<24% should receive a blood transfusion before or from
compression of the abdomen at the end of anaesthesia
the beginning of anaesthesia.
before the anaesthetic depth lightens to provide evidence
that urine was formed during anaesthesia and to prevent
Temperature
soiling during recovery, exceptions are following a laparot-
omy or urinary tract surgery. At the end of inhalation
An anaesthetized cat can quickly lose body heat when
anaesthesia, Oz should be continued for a period of time
 placed on a metal table, in a cold environment, skin pre-
(10 min) after the vaporizer has been turned offto allow
pared with cold solutions and alcohol, and connected to
waste gases to be scavenged, and to allow ventilation and
 a non-rebreathing circuit. In one report, anaesthetic agents
blood pressure to increase before inspired O2 is replaced
did not contribute to heat loss (Haskins, 1981).
by air. The cat should not be flipped from side to side for
The definition of hypothermia is not universally recog-
stimulation as this action will result in a significant
nized, however, low body temperature developing during
decrease in blood pressure in some individuals.
anaesthesia is accompanied by decreased metabolism,
 During recovery from routine anaesthesia, the endotra-
decreased end-tidal CO2, cardiovascular instability, and
cheal tube cuff is deflated and the tie around the back of
slows recovery time, increases postanaesthetic catabolism,
the head loosened or undone A hand should always
and decreases resistance to infection. Hypothermia
remain on the cat for control in case the cat abruptly
<35.5°C (<96°F) is of concern and temperatures <33.3°C
moves. Signs of recovery may include an increase in RR,
[<92°F) should be considered as serious as they are associ-
pupillary dilation, tongue curling, and shivering. Extuba-
ated with a significant decrease in anaesthetic requirement
tion should be performed when the anaesthetic plane is
and decreased cardiovascular function. Temperature can
light, jaw muscle tone is moderate, and swallowing is
be measured rectally or with a long probe inserted through
observed when the tube is moved. Extubation should be
the mouth into the oesophagus with the tip just caudal
performed with the head and neck extended to minimize
to the thoracic inlet. It is important to prevent the initial
 closing strength of the lower jaw and the tube should be
heat loss that occurs between induction of anaesthesia and
removed rostrally between the incisors to reduce the likeli-
start of surgery. A foam pad and a hot water circulating
hood of the endotracheal tube being accidentally bitten in
pad (rigid plastic to prevent puncture from cat claws)
half. The cat should be monitored for adequate ventilation
between the cat and the table will help (see Fig. 16.4).
after extubation, particularly in the presence of a head and
Overhead radiant heaters are particularly effective for use
neck bandage, thoracic or abdominal bandage, or an Eliza-
during the initial preparation and recovery times. Warm
bethan collar. Chest movement does not guarantee ade-
IV fluids and towels covering the cat should be utilized
quateairflow.
 Observation should be supported by
wherever possible but are not very effective. Warm air
listening for the sound of air movement, observation of
blankets or tubes (eg. Bair Hugger) placed over or around
movement of a few cat hairs held near the nostrils, auscul-
the cat can be used to slow heat loss or to warm up a cat
tation of the trachea or thorax with a stethoscope, Or
(see Fig. 16.9). Wrapping the legs in plastic or bubble wrap
sustained SpO2 >93% from a pulse oximeter probe.
may help to retain heat. Using low flow systems of admin-
Hypoxaemia accompanied by some air movement is char-
istration for inhalation agents, such as a paediatric circle
acteristic of a thoracic or abdominal bandage that is too
circuit may assist to retain heat by maintaining moisture
tight. Releasing some of the pressure by splitting the
laden inspired gases. Circle circuit hoses with embedded
bandage is followed by a satisfactory increase in SpO2.
heating elements are now available [www. darvallvet com).
Cats that are overweight or brachycephalic should be
It is a clinical impression that a heat and moisture
monitored with a pulse oximeter after extubation. Oxy-
 Exchanger (HME) inserted between the endotracheal tube
genation may be improved by placing the cat in prone
and anaesthetic circuit helps to maintain body heat but
 position with the head supported in a normal position by
at least one investigation found no improvement in body
a small towel.
temperature with the use of an HmE in dogs (Hofmeister
Aiaaosau io uosnpui guunp inoso Aeu usedsoguaiel
et al., 2011)
from anaesthesia. Laryngospasm is characterized by a
Hyperthermia is rare during anaesthesia in cats although
harsh ‘crowing' noise on inspiration (partial airway
a few cases of malignant hyperthermia syndrome have
obstruction) and retraction of the chin to the cat's chest.
been reported. Hyperthermia not infrequently develops in
Initial treatment involves overextending the cat's head
cats during recovery from anaesthesia, partly due to the
and neck (prevent neck flexure) and grasping the tongue
increased activity associated with dissociative agents and
to pull it forward out of the mouth in order to move
526
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
the epiglottis rostrally. In most cases, the repositioning
atheters and collection bags, will be accompanied by
is suffcient to allow satisfactory airflow and the laryn-
recording of volumes in and volumes out, and daily
gospasm dissipates. If the cat's mouth can be opened,
weighing.
dripping lidocaine, approximately 0.5 mg/kg. into the
larynx may abort the laryngospasm. The cat must be
intubated in those rare cases in which the laryngospasm
persists as complete airway obstruction and cyanosis
LOCAL ANALGESIA
develops.
Partially anaesthetized cats should not be carried or
Local nerve blocks can be included with general anaesthe-
cradled because of increased stimulation and possibility
 sia to allow a decreased administration of general anaes-
of airway obstruction; rather they should be stretched out
thetic agents and continued analgesia into recovery. The
on a flat surface. All water bowls and litter trays must be
 major precaution for use of local anaesthetic solutions in
removed from cages in which cats are recovering from
anaesthesia to avoid accidental pulmonary aspiration of
avoid toxicity. When two local anaesthetics are used
water or dust or airway obstruction due to a kinked neck.
u suaunsanui paysnl e aie ioo paieay e um sase
together, the dose rates of each should be proportionately
facilities where hypothermia is a common occurrence.
reduced. Secondly, the syringe must always be aspirated
before injection because inadvertent intravascular injec-
Postoperative management of feral cats is curtailed because
tion of local anaesthetic solution will be followed by an
of limited access, however, for domesticated cats, rectal
acute decrease in blood pressure, even cardiac arrest.
temperature should be measured at 30-60-minute inter-
vals to detect either a decrease or an increase in the recov-
ery period. Hyperthermia is a common occurrence after
Brachial plexus nerve block
administration of opioids or with increased muscle activ-
ity following anaesthesia with ketamine or tiletamine.
Brachial plexus nerve block is a useful block for orthopae-
dic surgery performed distal to the elbow. The landmarks
Excessively high temperatures should be treated as previ-
ously described.
and procedure are the same as for the dog and have been
 The need for analgesic agents will depend largely on
described in detail in Chapter 15. Bupivacaine is the drug
 agents used in the anaesthetic protocol and on the antici-
of choice and is administered at 2 mg/kg [slightly less
than for the dog).
paaiaai aey ieul sie ains au Aq panpun uied paied
morphine, meperidine, hydromorphone, oxymorphone or
methadone during anaesthesia may be given supplemen-
Dental nerve blocks
tal doses at appropriate time intervals for the drugs. Butor.
ae sno z aq uouans annban Aeu jouu
 Landmarks for location of the dental nerves for nerve
initial administration whereas analgesia from buprenor-
blocks with local anaesthetic solution are essentially the
phine may persist for 6 hours. Immediately switching
same as for the dog with a few exceptions. The infraorbital
from a μ opioid for anaesthesia to buprenorphine in
anal is short and the tip of the 24 or 26 gauge needle
recovery is unwise in painful cats as this will result in a
should only be inserted a few millimetres into the infraor-
gap in analgesia. A smoother transition will be obtained
bital foramen. The ventral border of the mandible is
if μ opioid analgesia is continued for a few hours after
straight but the mandibular foramen is located approxi-
anaesthesia. A fentanyl patch applied the day before anaes-
mately 20% of the distance from the angular process t0
thesia may not supply sufficient analgesia for the immedi -
the ramus of the mandible (Boyd & Paterson, 200l). The
ate recovery period and should be supplemented by
mental foramen is on the lateral aspect of the mandible
administration of another μ opioid. An NSAID provides
just rostral to the premolar teeth.
 synergistic analgesic effect with an opioid by modulating
the inflammatory response to surgery. An option for con-
tinuous analgesia in the ICU for postoperative major
Digital nerve blocks
surgery is a continuous infusion of fentanyl, with or
Local anaesthetic solution must be infiltrated SC on the
without ketamine. Analgesia for the client to administer
may include, but not limited to, buccal TM buprenorphine 
to the radiocarpal joint (Fig. l16.ll). Total lidocaine,
or tramadol tablets.
2 mg/kg. or bupivacaine, 2 mg/kg. is divided between all
Specifc postanaesthetic intensive care for individual
 sites. Bupivacaine is preferred because of the much longer
patients might involve administration of Oz with the cat
duration of anaesthesia but it has a longer onset time. If
in an O2 cage, turning the cat hourly, lubrication of the
lidocaine and bupivacaine are combined, half of each
eyes, and measurement of blood pressure, RR, SpO2, and
 maximum dose is used to avoid toxicity. The syringe must
temperature at specified intervals. Continued IV fluid
be aspirated before each injection to avoid inadvertent
administration, care of feeding tubes, chest tubes, urinary
vascular injection.
527
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Left forelimb
Left forelimb
dorsal aspect
palmar aspect
Cephalic vein
 Radial nerve
lateral branch
Ulnar nerve
dorsal branch ~
Median nerve
Radial nerve
medial branch
Papilla for
Ulnar nerve
tactile hairs
palmar branch
A
Accessory
B
carpal bone
Car pal pad-
Medial
Lateral
Medial
Figure 16.11 Sites for nerve blocks for onychectomy in the forelimb are illustrated by the stippled areas. (A) On the dorsal 
aspect, local anaesthetic solution is infiltrated on either side of the accessory cephalic vein at the level of the distal radius. The
combination of the distal radius and ulna are easily palpated as the widest osseous structure just proximal to the carpus.
(B) On the palmar aspect, local anaesthetic solution is injected just proximal to the carpal pad and accessory carpal bone on
carpal bone, the needle should be inserted into the subcutaneous space as the dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve is very
superficial. In the stippled zone beginning dorsal to the accessory carpal bone and extending medially, the needle should be
inserted through the skin and antebrachial fascia because the palmar branch of the ulnar nerve and the median nerve pass
through the carpal canal adjacent and deep to the superficial digital flexor tendon and flexor retinaculum. Based on
 anatomical dissection by Dr CJ Roberts.
for a surgical procedure A 22, 23, or 25 gauge 2.5 or
Epidural analgesia
3.75 cm (1 or 1.5 inch), spinal needle is inserted midline
Epidural injection is easily accomplished at the lumbosac-
through the skin perpendicular to the cat's back to a depth
ral space in cats. The cat may be restrained squarely in a
of about l om. The resistance to penetration of the liga-
crouching position or on its side with the hind limbs
mentum flavum is characteristic of needle placement in
pulled cranially. The area for injection is located by palpa-
dogs but may not be obvious in cats. A 'hanging drop'
tion of the cranial dorsal iliac spines and the spinous
technique can be used to assess insertion of the needle tip
 processes of the last lumbar and first sacral vertebrae The
into the epidural space in cats in sternal position. The
lumbosacral space and site of needle insertion in the cat
 spinal cord ends in most cats between L7 and S3 vertebrae,
is immediately cranial to the sacrum in contrast to its
and the dural sac continues through the sacrum. The hub
position in the dog of halfway between L7 and S1 ( Konig
of the needle must be inspected for cerebrospinal fluid
& Liebich, 2009). In addition, in the cat, the vertebral
(CSF) or blood after removing the stilette In either case.
body length of L7 is shorter than that of L6 and L5 which
the needle should be removed and replaced with a new
must be taken into account if using inter-vertebral dis-
one. Injection of local anaesthetic solution into the epi-
tances to locate the lumbosacral space Aseptic technique
dural space after penetration of the dura is likely to
is essential and the skin must be clipped and prepared as
increase the intensity and duration of block due to
528
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
increased uptake into CSF An epidural needle should be
medetomidine, 0.0l mg/kg, produced signifcant analge-
inserted with care, without excessive force, and the needle
sia in the forelimb for 2 hours and in the hind limbs for
 hub held firmly to prevent the tip from moving around in
 4 hours in experimental cats tested by electrical stimula-
the epidural space Complications are rare, however, they
tion (Duke et al., 1994). Medetomidine provided hind
may occur. Neurological dysfunction of micturition and
limb analgesia for 4-6 hours in another study that used
defaecation persisting for more than a year in a cat has
thermal and mechanical testing (Steagall et al., 2009a).
been attributed to probable traumatic injury during epi-
There is considerable variability between cats and it is
dural needle placement (Song et al., 2011).
unclear whether analgesia is due to epidural or systemic
 After the stilette is removed, a 3 mL syringe containing
effects. The addition of S(+)-ketamine, 2.5 mg/kg, to lido-
0.25 mL of saline or air, or a syringe specifcally manufac-
caine, 4 mg/kg, diluted to a total volume of 0.33 mL/kg
tured for 'loss of resistance' test, should be firmly attached
 and injected into the epidural space doubled the duration
to the needle (by holding the needle hub firmly with one
of analgesia from lidocaine alone to a mean of 140
hand and screwing, not pushing, the syringe on with the
minutes as determined by skin pinches over the hind
other). Aspiration of the plunger first is essential to iden-
limbs, abdominal wall, and perineum (DeRossi et al.,
tify a negative aspiration of blood or CSF Compression of
2009). S(+)-ketamine is available as a preservative-free
the plunger should be easy - hence the term loss of resist-
product. Racemic ketamine such as is used to induce
ance: Only a small volume of air must be injected because
anaesthesia by IM or IV route should not be used for epi-
the bubbles that form interfere with uniform neural block-
dural injection because cell toxicity has been observed. No
ade The bevel of the needle should be directed cranially
response to clamping of the skin over the tail was obtained
and the local anaesthetic solution injected over 30-60
for 6 hours after epidural administration of tramadol.
seconds.
I mg/kg (Castro et al., 2009).
The volume for injection into the epidural space is com-
monly 0.2 mL/kg and frequently drugs are diluted with
Peroneal and tibial nerve block
sterile saline to achieve this volume. Lidocaine, 4 mg/kg.
has a rapid onset of analgesia up to l0 minutes with a
These nerve blocks are easy to perform using a 25 gauge
reported mean duration of 40-90 minutes Klide & Soma,
 hypodermic needle for infiltration of lidocaine or bupi-
1968; DeRossi et al., 2009; Lawal & Adetunji, 2009). Bupi-
vacaine. The common peroneal (fbular) nerve crosses the
vacaine, l mg/kg. has a reported similar rapid onset of
lateral surface of the gastrocnemius muscle obliquely from
action with variable duration measured at 79 ± 6 minutes
caudal to cranial at the level of the stifle and divides into
(Lawal & Adetunji. 2009) or 2-6 hours (Lamont, 2002).
 superficial and deep branches just distal to the stifle joint.
Morphine and buprenorphine are probably the most
 The bellies of the relevant muscles can be separated by
 s reia ar un asue spio u
thumb pressure to identify the location for needle inser-
clinical feline practice. Our clinical impression is that com-
tion. The superficial branch can be blocked by infiltration
binations of bupivacaine, 0.5 mg/kg. with morphine,
of local anaesthetic solution between the long digital
0.1 mg/kg, or buprenorphine, 0.005-0.01 mg/kg. provide
 flexor muscle caudally and the long peroneal muscle crani-
postoperative analgesia in cats after orthopaedic pelvic
ally. The needle should then be advanced a few millime-
limb surgery. The effects of administering opioids or seda-
tres in depth in a slightly cranial direction to infltrate
tives have been investigated in experimental cats using
around the deep peroneal nerve where it runs between the
tests of analgesia such as needle pricks or skin pinches
 long digital extensor muscle caudally and the long pero-
with a haemostat forceps, thermal or mechanical antino-
neal muscle cranially The nerves can also be located with
ciception measuring devices. Experimental tests of analge-
the aid of a peripheral nerve stimulator that is used for
sia from epidural morphine, 0.1 mg/kg, revealed significant 
monitoring blockade with an NmBA or a specifc needle
analgesia for at least 12 hours (Castro et al., 2009). Tests
locator. The tibial nerve can be blocked just above the
of analgesia from epidural morphine in cats anaesthetized
 hock by SC infiltration on the medial aspect immediately
with isoflurane were equivocal, providing a reduction in
caudal to the tibia and cranial to the gastrocnemius
nq (g66l 'iapioo) Apnis auo ul juauaiinbai aueinyos!
tendon. A small branch of the tibial nerve, caudal cutane-
none in another (Pypendop et al., 2006). Epidural injec-
Ous sural nerve, is blocked at the same level on the lateral
tion of buprenorphine, 0.02 mg/kg, induced thermal anti -
aspect of the limb. Bupivacaine 0.5%. total maximum
nociception for up to 24 hours, but only 8 hours from half
dose for all nerves of 2 mg/kg, will provide several hours
that dose combined with medetomidine (Steagall et al.,
 of analgesia for metatarsal surgery.
2009a). Sufficient buprenorphine was absorbed systemi-
cally to induce euphoria in the cats starting 2 hours after
Sciatic nerve block
injection and lasting 24 hours in some cats. Medetomi-
dine is quickly absorbed from the epidural space into
Location of nerves with use of electrical stimulation or
the systemic circulation and induces sedation, vomiting.
ultrasound is becoming popular for more accurate place-
and decreased RR, HR, and MAP Epidural injection of
ment of local anaesthetic around nerves in dogs. A recent
529
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
publication described anatomical dissections and use of
 prepared for venepuncture and a 2-3 mm layer of cream
ultrasound to locate the sciatic nerve in cats [Haro et al.,
 spread on the skin and covered with an occlusive dressing
2012). The cats were positioned in lateral recumbency
for approximately 45 minutes (Flecknell, 1994). Jugular
paddo iey pue isouaddn payooiq aq ot quil aui yim
aeuaiad iaua e u paasu yssns aiam siaauie
from the lateral and caudal aspects of the limb. After surgi-
of awake sick cats that were pretreated with 1 mL of EMLA
cal preparation of the skin, a stab incision was made
cream over a 2 x 5 om area of skin than were not, although
xe ie ase lee a u us a yno
the difference was not statistically significant (Wagner
mid-femur level to facilitate insertion of an atraumatic
et al.，
 2006). Methaemoglobin blood concentrations
 peripheral nerve block needle (Stimuplex@ by B. Braun is
pue asuen leou um aiam sien any ul pansea
an insulated echogenic peripheral nerve block needle with
plasma lidocaine/prilocaine concentrations were undetec-
a short 30° bevel to decrease the risk of nerve injury).
table. No adverse effects attributable to toxic effects of the
Ultrasound was used to identify the sciatic nerve and
local anaesthetic agents were observed.
 allowed precise positioning of the needle next to the nerve
 In humans, lidocaine patches are used for controlling
and observation of the spread of anaesthetic solution
postsurgical incisional pain. Lidocaine patches are of a
during injection. Paralysis of the limb was achieved by
matrix system construction whereby lidocaine is within
injecting lidocaine, 2 mg/kg diluted in saline to a 1 mL
the adhesive layer and diffuses across the skin from high
volume, in multiple small volume injections around the
to low concentration. A study investigating the effects of a
nerve to achieve the ultrasound 'doughnut' sign that is
700 mg lidocaine patch applied to skin over the thorax of
indicative of perineural infiltration. Onset time and dura-
experimental cats determined that plasma lidocaine con-
tion of analgesia were not given.
centrations increased for about 12 hours after patch appli-
cation and remained constant for 72 hours [Ko et al.,
2008b). The plasma concentrations remained 25-fold less
Topical or transdermal
than concentrations achieved by a bolus IV injection of
A mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine (EMLA) is available
lidocaine, 2 mg/kg. Concentration of lidocaine in the skin
as a cream or patch that is used to provide dermal anaes-
umder the patch was much higher than plasma concentra-
thesia and prevent or minimize pain associated with intra-
tion. Further investigation is necessary to determine a role
venous insertion of a needle or catheter. The site is
for this form of analgesia in clinical feline practice.
REFERENCES
Al-Gizawiy, M.M., Rude, E.P., 2004.
Bednarski, R.M., Grimm, K.A..
Bley, C.R., Roos, M., Price, I., et al.
Comparison of preoperative
Harvey, R., et al., 2011. AAHA
2007. Clinical assessment of
carprofen and postoperative
Anesthesia guidelines for dogs and
repeated propofol-associated
butorphanol as postsurgical
cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 47.
anesthesia in cats. J Am Vet Med
analgesics in cats undergoing
377-385.
Ass0c 231, 1347-1353.
owariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
Benito-de-la-Vibora, I., Lascelles, B.D.X.,
Bodey, A.R., Sansom, I., 1998.
Analg 31, 164-174.
Garcia-Fermandez, P., et al., 2008.
Epidemiological study of blood
Allen, D.G., Dyson, D.H., Pascoe, P.J..
Efficacy of tolfenamic acid and
pressure in domestic cats. J Small
et al., 1986. Evaluation of a
meloxicam in the control of
Anim Pract 39, 567-573.
xylazine-ketamine hydrochloride
 postoperative pain following
Bortolami, E., Murrell, J.C.,
combination in the cat. Can J Vet
owariohysterectomy in the cat.
Slingsby, L.S., 2012a. Methadone in
Res 50, 23-26
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 501 -510.
combination with acepromazine
Andress, J.L., Day, T.K., Day, D., 1995.
Beths, T., Touzot-Jourde, G., Musk, G..
as premedication prior to neutering
The effects of consecutive day
et al., 2009. Total intravenous 
in the cat. Vet Anaesth Analg 40.
 propofol anesthesia on feline red
anesthesia (TIVA) in cats: Evaluation
181-193.
blood cells. Vet Surg 24, 277-282.
of Alfaxan? to induce and maintain
Bortolami, E., Slingsby, L., Love, E.J..
Balmer, T.V., Irvine, D., Jones, R.S..
anesthesia in feral and domestic cats
2012b. Comparison of two
et al., 1998. Comparison of
undergoing neutering procedures.
formulations of buprenorphine in
 arprofen and pethidine as
10th World Veterinary Anaesthesia
cats administered by the oral
postoperative analgesics in the cat. ↓
Congress, Glasgow, Scotland.
transmucosal route. J Feline Med
Small Anim Pract 39, 158-164.
Biermann, K., Hungerbihler, S.,
Surg 14, 534-539.
Barter, L.S., Illkiw, J.E., Pypendop, B.H..
Mischke, R., et al., 2012. Sedative,
Boyd, J.S., Paterson, C., 2001. Clinical
et al., 2004. Evaluation of the
ardiovascular, haematologic and
Anatomy of the Dog and Cat. Mosby
induction and recovery
biochemical effects of four different
International Limited, London.
characteristics of anesthesia with
drug combinations administered
Brodbelt, D.C., Pfeifer, D.U., Young. L.
desflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 65.
intramuscularly in cats. Vet Anaesth
et al., 2007. Risk factors for
748-751.
Analg 39, 137-150.
anaesthetic-related death in cats:
530
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
results from the confdential enquiry
 transdermal fentanyl patches in cats.
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. ↓
 into perioperative small animal
JAm Vet Med Assoc 224, 700-705.
Am Vet Med Assoc 227, 1937-1944.
fatalities [CEPSAF). Br J Anaesth 99,
DeRossi, R., Benites, A.P., Ferreira, J.Z.,
Gellasch, K.L., Kruse-Elliot, K.T..
617-623.
et al., 2o09. Effects of lumbosacral
Osmond, C.s., et al., 2002.
Brodbelt, D.C., Blissett, K.J., Hammond,
epidural and lidocaine in xylazine-
Comparison of transdermal
R.A., et al., 2008a. The risk of death:
sedated cats. I S Afr Vet Assoc 80.
administration of fentanyl versus
the confidential enquiry into
79-83.
intramuscular administration of
perioperative small animal fatalities.
Dhumeaux, M.P., Snead, E.C.R.,
butorphanol for analgesia after
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 365-373.
Epp, T.Y., et al., 2012. Effects of a
onychectomy in cats. J Am Vet Med
Brodbelt, D.C., Pfeiffer, D.U.,
standardized anesthetic protocol on
Assoc 220, 1020-1024.
Young, L.E., et al., 2008b. Results
hematologic variables in healthy
Gerdin, J.A., Slater, M.R., Makolinski, K.,
of the confidential enquiry into
cats. J Feline Med Surg 14, 701-705.
et al., 2011. Post-mortem fndings in
 perioperative small animal fatalities
Doi, M., Yunoki, H., Ikeda, K., 1988.
54 cases of anesthetic associated
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-
The minimum alveolar concentration
death in cats from two spay-neuter
related death in dogs. I Am Vet Med
of sevoflurane in cats. J Anesth 2.
programs in New York State. J Feline
Assoc 233, 1096-1104.
113-114.
Med Surg 13, 959-966.
Brondani, J.T., Luna, S.PL., Beier, S.L.,
Drummond, J.C., Todd, M.M.
Giordano, T., Steagall, P.V.M.
et al., 2009. Analgesic effcacy of
Shapiro, H.M., 1983. Minimal
Ferreira, T.H., et al., 2010.
perioperative use of vedaprofen.
 Postoperative analgesic effects of
alveolar concentrations for
tramadol or their combination in
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane
intravenous, intramuscular,
cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182.
subcutaneous or oral transmucosal
J Feline Med Surg 11, 420-429.
1099-1101
buprenorphine administered to cats
Brown, S.A., Atkins, C., Bagley, R., et al..
undergoing ovariohysterectomy. Vet
Duke, T., Komulainen Cox, A.-M.,
2007. Guidelines for the
Anaesth Analg 37, 357-366.
Remedios, A.M., et al., 1994. The
identification, evaluation and
Glerum, L.E., Egger, C.M., Allen, S.W.
 analgesic effects of administering
 management of systemic
fentanyl or medetomidine in the
et al., 2001. Analgesic effect of the
hypertension in dogs and cats. J Vet
transdermal fentanyl patch during
lumbosacral epidural space of cats.
Intern Med 21, 542-558
Vet Surg 23, 143-148.
and after feline ovariohysterectomy.
Cannon, M.J., Brett, I., 2012.
Vet Surg 30, 351-358.
Egger, C.M., Glerum, L.E., Allen, S.W.,
Comparison of how well conscious
Golder, F.J., Pascoe, PJ., Bailey, C.S.,
cats tolerate blood pressure
et al., 2003. Plasma fentanyl
et al., 1998. The effect of epidural
measurement from the radial and
concentrations in awake cats and
mophine on the minimum alveolar
coccygeal arteries. I Feline Med Surg
cats undergoing anesthesia and
concentration of isoflurane in cats. ↓
owariohysterectomy using
14.906-909
Vet Anaesth 25, 52-56.
transdermal administration. Vet
Castro, D.S., Silva, M.FA., Shih, A.C.,
Anaesth Analg 30, 229-236.
Grace, S.F., 201l. Aspirin toxicosis. In:
et al., 2009. Comparison between
Norsworthy, G.D. (Ed.), The Feline
 the analgesic effects of morphine
Epstein, M., Kuehn, N.F., Landsberg, G.
Patient, 4 ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames,
and tramadol delivered epidurally in
et al., 2005. AAHA senior care
 guidelines for dogs and cats. I Am
p 32.
 cats receiving a standardized noxious
Anim Hosp Assoc 41, 81-91.
Grint, N.J., Murison, PJ., Coe, R.J.,
stimulation. J Feline Med Surg 11,
et al., 2006. Assessment of the
948-953.
Ferreira, T.H., Rezende, M.L.,
influence of surgical technique on
Cistola, A.M., Golder, F.J., Centonze.
Mama, K.R., et al., 2011. Plasma
postoperative pain and wound
 concentrations and behavioral.
LA., et al., 2004. Anesthetic and
tenderness in cats following
physiologic effects of tiletamine.
antinociceptive, and physiologic
wariohysterectomy. I Feline Med
zolazepam, ketamine, and xylazine
effects of methadone after
Surg 8, 15-21.
combination [TKX) in feral cats
intravenous and oral transmucosal
administration in cats. Am J Vet Res
Gurney, M.A., 2012. Pharmacological
undergoing surgical sterilization.
options for intra-operative and early
I Feline Med Surg 6, 297-303.
72. 764-771.
postoperative analgesia: an update.
Clarke, K.W., Hall, L.W., 1990. A survey
Fisher 1., 2010. Use of Xylocaine spray
J Small Anim Pract 53, 377-386.
 of anaesthetic practice in small
in cats. Vet Rec 167, 500.
Hall, T.L., Duke, T., Townsend, H.G.C.,
animals. I Assoc Vet Anaesth 17.
Flecknell, PA., 1994. Injectable
et al., 1999. The effect of opioid and
4-10.
anaesthetics. In: Hall, L.W..
 acepromazine premedication on the
Cleale, R.M., Muir, W.W., Waselau,
Taylor, P.M. (Eds), Anaesthesia of the
anesthetic induction dose of
A.-C., et al., 2009. Pharmacokinetic
Cat. Bailliere Tindall, London,
propofol in cats. Can Vet J 40,
and pharmacodynamic evaluation of
pp. 129-156.
867-870.
propofol administered to cats in a
Frankel, T., Hawkey, C.M., 1980.
Haro, P, Laredo, F.G., Belda, E., et al.
novel, aqueous, nano-droplet
Haematological changes during
2012. Ultrasound-guided block of
formulation or as an oil-in-water
sedation in cats. Vet Rec 107.
the feline sciatic nerve. J Feline Med
macroemulsion. J Vet Pharmacol
512-513.
Surg 14, 545-552.
Ther 32, 436-445.
Gassel, A.D., Tobias, K.M., Egger, C.M.,.
Harrison, K.A., Robertson, S.A..
Davidson, C.D., Pettifer, G.R., Henry.
et al., 2005. Comparison of oral and
Levy, J.K., et al., 2011. Evaluation of
J.D. Jr, 2004. Plasma fentany]
subcutaneous administration of
medetomidine, ketamine and
concentrations and analgesic effects
buprenorphine and meloxicam for
buprenorphine for neutering feral
 during full or partial exposure to
 preemptive analgesia in cats
cats. J Feline Med Surg 13, 896-902.
531
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Haskins, S.C., 1981. Hypothermia and
Katz, I., Clarke, H., Seltzer, Z., 2011.
pharmacokinetics of fentanyl after
its prevention during general
Preventive analgesia: quo vadimus?
intravenous and transdermal
anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 42.
Anesth Analg 113, 1242-1253.
administration in cats. Am J Vet Res
856-861.
Klein, A.A, Arrowsmith, J.E., 2010.
61, 672-677
Heavner, J.E., Bloedow, D.C., 1979.
 Should routine pre-operative testing
Lerche, P., Muir, W.w., Grubb, T.L.
Ketamine pharmacokinetics in
be abandoned? Anaesthesia 65.
2002. Mask induction of anaesthesia
domestic cats. Vet Anesth 6, 16-19.
974-976.
with isoflurane or sevoflurane in
Hikasa, Y, Kawanabe, H., Takase, K.,
Klide, A.M., Soma, L.R., 1968. Epidural
premedicated cats. J Small Anim
et al., 1996. Comparisons of
analgesia in the dog and cat. J Am
Pract 43, 12-15.
 sevoflurane, isoflurane, and
Vet Med Assoc 153, 165-172.
Looney, A.L., Bohling, M.W..
halothane anesthesia in
Ko, J.C., Knesl, O., Weil, A.B., et al.
Bushby, PA., et al., 2008. The
spontaneously breathing cats.
2009. Analgesia, sedation, and
Association of Shelter Veterinarians
Vet Surg 25, 234-243.
anesthesia - Making the switch from
veterinary medical care guidelines
Hikasa, Y., Ohe, N., Takase, S., et al.
medetomidine to dexmedetomidine.
for spay-neuter programs. I Am Vet
1997. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Compend Contin Educ Vets 31
Med Assoc 233, 74-86.
 sevoflurane in cats: comparison with
(suppl 1A), 1-24.
Macy, D.w., Siwe, S.T., 1977. The use of
isoflurane, halothane, and enflurane.
Ko, J.C. H., Abbo, L.A., Weil, A.B., et al.,
ketamine as an oral anesthetic in
Res Vet Sci 63, 205-210.
2008a. Effect of orally administered
cats. Feline Pract 7, 44-66.
Hodgson, D.s., Dunlop, C.l.,
 tramadol alone or with an
Martinez Taboada, F., Murison, PJ.,
Chapman, P., et al., 1998.
intravenously administered opioid
2010. Induction of anaesthesia with
Cardiopulmonary effects of
on minimum alveolar concentration
alfaxalone or propofol before
 anesthesia induced and maintained
 of sevoflurane in cats. J Am Vet Med
isoflurane maintenance in cats.
with isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res
Assoc 232. 1834-1840
Vet Rec 167, 85-89.
59, 182-185.
Ko, J.C. H., Maxwell, L.K., Abbo, L.A.,
Mathis, A., Pinelas, R., Brodbelt, D.C.,
Hofmeister, E.H., Brainard, B.M.,
et al., 2008b. Phamacokinetics of
et al., 2012. Comparison of quality
Braun, C., et al., 201l. Effect of a
lidocaine following the application
of recovery from anaesthesia in cats
heat-moisture exchanger on heat loss
of 5% lidocaine patches to cats. J Vet
induced with propofol or alfaxalone.
in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs
Pharmacol Ther 31, 359-367.
Vet Anaesth Analg 39, 282-290.
undergoing single-limb orthopedic
Konig, H.E., Liebich, H.-G., 2009.
Matthews, N.S., Brown, R.M.,
procedures. I Am Vet Med Assoc 239.
Veterinary Anatomy of Domestic
Barling, K.S., et al., 2004. Repetitive
1561-1565
Mammals. Schattauer, Stuttgart.
 propofol administration in dogs and
Hofmeister, E.H., Trim, C.M., Kley. S..
Kronen, Pw., Ludders, I.W., Erb, H.N..
cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40,
et al., 2007. Traumatic intubation in
et al., 2006. A synthetic fraction of
255-260
a cat. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
feline facial pheromones calms but
McMurphy, R.M., Hodgson, D.S., 1995.
213-216.
does not reduce struggling in cats
The minimum alveolar concentration
Hoyumpa Vogt, A., Rodan, I..
before venous catheterization. Vet
of desflurane in cats. Vet Surg 24,
Brown, M., et al., 2010. AAFP-AAHA
Anaesth Analg 33, 258-265.
453-455.
Feline life stage guidelines.
Lamont, L.A., 2002. Feline perioperative
McMurphy, R.M., Hodgson, D.S., 1996.
J Feline Med Surg 12, 43-54.
 pain management. Vet Clin N Am
Cardiopulmonary effects of
Hubbell, J.A.E., Muir Ill, W.W..
Small Anim Pract 32, 747-763.
desflurane in cats. Am I Vet Res 57.
Bednarski, R.M., et al., 1984. Change
Lamont, L.A., Bulmer, B.J., Grimm, K.A..
367-370.
of inhalation anesthetic agents for
et al., 2001. Cardiopulmonary
Millette, V.M., Steagall, P.V.M.,
 management of ventricular
evaluation of the use of
Duke-Novakovski, T, et al., 2008.
 premature depolarizations in
medetomidine hydrochloride in cats.
Effects of meperidine or saline on
anesthetized cats and dogs. I Am Vet
Am J Vet Res 62, 1745-1762.
thermal, mechanical and electrical
Med Assoc 185, 643-646
Lamont, L.A., Greene, S.A..
nociceptive thresholds in cats. Vet
Ilkiw, J.E., Pascoe, P.J., Fisher, L.D.,
Grimm, K.A., et al., 2004.
Anaesth Analg 35, 543-547.
1997. Effect of alfentanil on the
Relationship of bispectral index t0
Monteiro, E.R., Campagnol, D.,
minimum alveolar concentration of
minimum alveolar concentration
Parrilha, L.R., et al., 2009. Evaluation
isoflurane in cats. Am I Vet Res 58.
multiples of sevoflurane in cats. Am
of cardiorespiratory effects of
1274-1279.
I Vet Res 65, 93-98.
combinations of dexmedetomidine
Johansen, A., Romundstad, L..
Lascelles, B.D., Robertson, S.A., 2004.
and atropine in cats. J Feline Med
Nielsen, C.S., et al., 2012. Persistent
Antinociceptive effects of
Surg 11, 783-792.
postsurgical pain in a general
hydromorphone, butorphanol, or
Muir, W., Lerche, P., Wiese, A., et al.,
 population: prevalence and
the combination in cats. J Vet Intern
2009. The cardiorespiratory and
predictors in the Tromso study. Pain
Med 18, 190-195.
anesthetic effects of clinical and
153, 1390-1396.
Lawal, FM., Adetunji, A., 2009. A
supraclinical doses of alfaxalone in
Johnson, J.A., Robertson, S.A..
comparison of epidural anaesthesia
cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 36, 42-54.
Pypendop, B.H., 2007
with lignocaine, bupivacaine and
Murison, PJ., Martinez Taboada, F.,
Antinociceptive effects of
lignocaine-bupivacaine mixture in
2010. Effect of propofol and
 butorphanol, buprenorphine, or
cats. J S Afr Vet Assoc 80, 243-246.
alfaxalone on pain after
both administered intramuscularly
Lee, D.D., Papich, M.G., Hardie, E.M.,
owariohysterectomy in cats. Vet Rec
in cats. Am I Vet Res 68, 699-703.
2000. Comparison of
166.334-335
532
Anaesthesia of the cat
Chapter
16
Nakamura, R.K., Rishniw, M..
chronically instrumented cats.
Robertson, S.A, Taylor, PM.
King, M.K., et al., 2011. Prevalence of
Anesth Analg 73, 64-75.
Lascelles, B.D.X., et al., 2003.
echocardiographic evidence of
Pypendop, B.H., Ilkiw, J.E., 2004.
Changes in thermal threshold
ardiac disease in apparently healthy
Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane
response in eight cats after
cats with murmurs. J Feline Med
in cats. Am J Vet Res 65, 20-25.
administration of buprenorphine.
Surg 13, 266-271.
 butorphanol and morphine. Vet Rec
Pypendop, B.H., llkiw, J.E., 2005a.
Niedfeldt, R.L., Robertson, S.A., 2006.
Assessment of the hemodynamic
153.462-465.
Postanesthetic hyperthermia in
effects of lidocaine administered IV
Robertson, S.A., Wegner, K.,
cats: a retrospective comparison
in isoflurane-anesthetized cats. Am J
Lascelles, B.D.X., 2009.
between hydromorphone and
Vet Res 66, 661-668.
 Antinociceptive and side-effects of
buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg
Pypendop, B.H., Ilkiw, J.E., 2005b. The
hydromorphone after subcutaneous
33, 381-389.
effects of intravenous lidocaine
administration in cats. J Feline Med
O'Hagan, B.J., Pasloske, K., McKinnon,
administration on the minimum
Surg 11, 76-81.
C., et al., 2012. Clinical evaluation of
alveolar concentration of isoflurane
Rodan, I., Sundahl, E., Carney, H., et al.
 alfaxalone as an anaesthetic
 in cats. Anesth Analg 100, 97-101.
 2011. AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly
induction agent in cats less than
Pypendop. B.H., Ilkiw, I.E., 2007.
handling guidelines. I Feline Med
12 weeks of age. Aust Vet J 90.
 Pharmacokinetics of tramadol, and its
Surg 13.364-375.
395-401.
metabolite O-desmethyl-tramadol, in
Rohrer-Bley, C., Neiger-Aeschbacher, G..
O'Hearn, A.K., Wright, B.D., 2011
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31, 52-59.
Busato, A., et al., 2004. Comparison
Coccygeal epidural with local
Pypendop, B.H., Ilkiw, J.E., Bolich, J.A..
of perioperative racemic methadone,
anesthetic for catheterization and
2003. Hemodynamic effects of
levo-methadone and
pain management in the treatment
nitrous oxide in isoflurane-
 dextromoramide in cats using
of feline urethral obstruction. J Vet
anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 64,
indicators of post-operative pain.
Emerg Crit Care 21, 50-52.
273-278.
Vet Anaesth Analg 31, 175-182.
Pascoe, PJ., Illkiw, J.E., Frischmeyer, K.J.
Pypendop. B.H., Pascoe, PJ., Ilkiw, J.E..
Sansom, I., Rogers, K., Wood, I.L.N..
2006a. The effect of the duration of
2006. Effects of epidural
2004. Blood pressure assessment in
propofol administration on recovery
administration of morphine and
healthy cats and cats with
from anaesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth
buprenorphine on the minimum
hypertensive retinopathy. Am J Vet
Analg 33, 2-7.
 alveolar concentration of isoflurane
Res 65, 245-252.
Pascoe, Pl.,Ilkiw, J.E., Pypendop, B.H..
in cats. Am J Vet Res 67, 1471-1475.
Schlueter, C., Budras, K.D., Ludewig. E..
2006b. Effects of increasing infusion
Quimby, J.M., Smith, M.L., Lunn, K.F.,
et al., 2009. Brachycephalic feline
 rates of dopamine, dobutamine.
 2011. Evaluation of the effects of
 noses CT and anatomical study of
epinephrine, and phenylephrine in
hospital visit stress on physiologic
 the relationship between head
healthy anesthetized cats. Am J Vet
parameters in the cat. J Feline Med
conformation and the nasolacrimal
Res 67, 1491-1499.
Surg 13, 733-737.
 drainage system. I Feline Med Surg 
Peisker, N., Preissel, A.K., Reichenbach,
Reese, M.J., Patterson, E.V., Tucker, S.J..
11,891-900
H.D., et al., 2010. Foetal stress
et al., 2008. Effects of anesthesia and
 Schug, S.A., 2012. Persistent post-
 response to euthanasia of pregnant
surgery on serologic responses to
surgical pain: A view from the other
sheep. Berl Munch Tierarztl
vaccination in kittens. J Am Vet Med
side of the fence. Pain 153.
Wochenschr 123, 2-10.
Assoc 233, 116-121.
1344-1345.
Pettifer, G.R., Hosgood, G., 2003. The
Reynolds, B.S., Concordet, D.,
Selmi, A.L., Barbudo-Selmi, G.R..
effect of rectal temperature on
Germain, C.A., et al., 2010. Breed
Mendes, G.M., et al., 2004. Sedative.
perianesthetic serum concentrations
dependency of reference intervals for
analgesic and cardiorespiratory
of transdermally administered
plasma biochemical values in cats. J
effects of romifidine in cats. Vet
fentanyl in cats anesthetized with
Vet Intern Med 24, 809-818.
Anaesth Analg 31, 195-206.
isoflurane. Am J Vet Res 64.
Reynolds, B.S., Geffre, A., Bourges-
Selmi, A.L., Mendes, G.M., Lins, B.T.,
1557-1561.
Abella, N.H., et al., 2012. Effects of
et al., 2003. Evaluation of the
Posner, L.P., Asakawa, M., Erb, H.N.,
intravenous, low-dose ketamine-
sedative and cardiorespiratory effects
2008. Use of propofol for anesthesia
diazepam sedation on the results of
of dexmedetomidine.
in cats with primary hepatic
hematologic, plasma biochemical.
dexmedetomidine-butorphanol, and
lipidosis: 44 cases [1995-2004]. ↓
and coagulation analyses in cats. 1
dexmedetomidine-ketamine in cats.
Am Vet Med Assoc 232, 1841-1843.
Am Vet Med Assoc 240, 287-293.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 222, 37-41.
Posner, L.P., Pavuk, A.A., Rokshar, J.L.
Robertson, S.A., Lascelles, B.D.X., 2010.
Selmi, A.L., Mendes, G.M., Lins, B.T.
et al., 2010. Effects of opioids and
Long term pain in cats How much
et al., 2005. Comparison of xylazine
anesthetic drugs on body
do we know about this important 
and medetomidine as premedicants
temperature in cats. Vet Anaesth
welfare issue? J Feline Med Surg 12.
for cats being anaesthetised with
Analg 37, 35-43
188-199.
propofol-sevoflurane. Vet Rec 157.
Poterack, K.A., Kampine, J.P.
Robertson, S.A., Lascelles, B.D.
139-143.
Schmeling, W.T., 1991. Effects of
Taylor, PM., et al., 2005. PK-PD
Slingsby, L.S., Taylor, P.M., 2008.
isoflurane, midazolam, and
modeling of buprenorphine in cats:
Thermal antinociception after
etomidate on cardiovascular
intravenous and oral transmucosal
dexmedetomidine administration in
responses to stimulation of central
administration. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
cats: a dose-finding study. J Vet
nervous system pressor sites in
5, 453-460.
Pharmacol Ther 31, 135-142.
EES
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Slingsby, L.S., Taylor, PM., 2009.
Steagall, PV.M., Millette, V.,
routine neutering in dogs. I Am Vet
Thermal antinociception after
Mantovani, FB., et al., 2009a.
Med Assoc 232, 109-115.
dexmedetomidine administration in
Antinociceptive effects of epidural
Wagner, K.A., Gibbon, K.J., Strom, T.L.,
 cats: a comparison between
buprenorphine or medetomidine, or
et al., 2006. Adverse effects of EMLA
intramuscular and oral transmucosal
the combination, in conscious cats. J
(lidocaine/prilocaine) cream and
administration. J Feline Med Surg 11,
Vet Pharmacol Ther 32, 477-484.
efficacy for the placement of jugular
829-834.
Steagall, P.V.M., Taylor, P.M.,
catheters in hospitalized cats. J Feline
 Slingsby, L.S., Waterman- Pearson, A.E.
Rodrigues, L.C.C., et al., 2009b.
Med Surg 8, 141-144.
1998. Comparison of pethidine.
Analgesia for cats after
Wegner, K., Robertson, S.A., 2007.
buprenorphine and ketoprofen for
owariohysterectomy with either
Dose-related thermal antinociceptive
postoperative analgesia after
buprenorphine or carprofen alone or
effects of intravenous
owariohysterectomy in the cat.
in combination. Vet Rec 164.
hydromorphone in cats. Vet Anaesth
Vet Rec 143, 185-189.
359-363
Analg 34, 132-138.
 Slingsby, L.S., Waterman-Pearson, A.E..
Steffey, E.P., Howland, D. Jr, 1977.
Wells, S.M., Glerum, L.E., Papich, M.G.,
2002. Comparison between
Isoflurane potency in the dog and
2008. Pharmacokinetics of
meloxicam and carprofen for
cat. Am J Vet Res 38, 1833-1836.
butorphanol in cats after
 postoperative analgesia after feline
Steffey, E.P., Gillespie, J.R., Berry, J.D..
intramuscular and buccal
owariohysterectomy. ↓ Small Anim 
et al., 1974. Anesthetic potency
transmucosal administration. Am J
Pract 43, 286-289.
[MAC) of nitrous oxide in the dog.
Vet Res 69, 1548-1554.
Slingsby, L.S., Murrell, J.C., Taylor, P.M.
cat, and stump-tail monkey. I Appl 
Whittem, T., Pasloske, K.S., Heit, M.C..
2010. Combination of
Physiol 36, 530-532.
et al., 2008. The phamacokinetics
dexmedetomidine with
Taylor, PM., 1992. Use of Xylocaine
and pharmacodynamics of
buprenorphine enhances the
pump spray for intubation in cats.
alfaxalone in cats after single and
antinociceptive effect to a thermal
Vet Rec 130, 583.
multiple intravenous administration
stimulus in the cat compared with
Taylor, PM., Chengelis, C.P.,
of Alfaxan? at clinical and
either agent alone. Vet Anaesth Analg
Miller, W.R., et al., 2012. Evaluation
supraclinical doses. J Vet Pharmacol 
37. 162-170.
of propofol containing 2% benzyl
Ther 31, 571-579.
Song, R.B., Cross, I.R., Golder, F.J.
alcohol preservative in cats. I Feline
Wiese, A.J., Muir, w.w., 2007.
et al., 2011. Suspected epidural
Med Surg 14, 516-526.
Anaesthetic and cardiopulmonary
morphine analgesia induced chronic
Taylor, PM., Robertson, S.A.,
effects of intramuscular morphine.
urinary and bowel dysfunction in
Dixon, M.J., et al., 2001. Morphine.
medetomidine and ketamine
a cat. J Feline Med Surg 13,
pethidine and buprenorphine
administered to telemetered cats. J
602-605.
disposition in the cat. J Vet
Feline Med Surg 9, 150-156.
Souza, A.P., Guerrero, PN.H..
Pharmacol Ther 24, 391 -398.
Williams, L.S., Levy, J.K., Robertson,
Nishimori, C.T., et al., 2005.
Tobias, K.M., Harvey, R.C., Byarley, J.M.,
S.A., et al., 2002. Use of the
Cardiopulmonary and acid-base
2006. A comparison of four methods
anesthetic combination of
effects of desflurane and sevoflurane
of analgesia in cats following
tiletamine, zolazepam, ketamine,
in spontaneously breathing cats.
owariohysterectomy. Vet Anaesth
and xylazine for neutering feral cats.
J Feline Med Surg 7, 95-100.
Analg 33, 390-398.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 220.
Sparkes, A.H., Heiene, R., Lascelles.
Van der Linde-Sipman, J.S.
1491-1495
B.D.X., et al., 2010. ISFM and AAFP
Hellebrekers, L.J., Lagerwey, E., 1992.
Yackey, M., llkiw, J.E., Pascoe, PJ., et al.,
 consensus guidelines Long-term use
Myocardial damage in cats that died
2004. Effect of transdermally
of NSAIDs in cats. J Feline Med Surg
after anaesthesia. Vet Quarterly 15.
administered fentanyl on the
12, 521-538
91-94.
minimum alveolar concentration of
Steagall, P.V.M., Mantovani, F.B.,
Verstegen, I., Fargetton, X., Donnay. I.,
isoflurane in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
Taylor, PM., et al., 2008a. Dose-
et al., 1990. Comparison of the
31,183-189
related antinociceptive effects of
dinical utility of medetomidine/
Yeates, I., 2010. Ethical aspects of
intravenous buprenorphine in cats.
ketamine and xylazine/ketamine
euthanasia of owned animals. In
Vet ↓ 182, 203-209.
combinations for the ovariectomy of
Practice 32, 70-73.
Steagall, P.V.M., Taylor, P.M.
cats. Vet Rec 127, 424-426.
Zaki, S., Ticehurst, K.E., Miyaki, Y.,
Brondani, J.T., et al., 2008b.
Wagner, A.E., Worland, G.A..
2009. Clinical evaluation of
 Antinociceptive effects of tramadol
Glawe, J.C., et al., 2008. Multicenter.
Alfaxan-CD@ as an intravenous
and acepromazine in cats. J Feline
randomized controlled trial of
 anaesthetic in young cats. Aust Vet J
Med Surg 10, 24-31.
pain-related behaviors following
87, 82-87.
534
laptel
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets.
zoo, aquatic, and wild animals
Stephen J. Divers
Introduction
535
Injectable anaesthetic agents
554
Small mammals
536
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
554
Preanaesthetic sedation and analgesia
539
Ventilation
556
Regional anaesthesia and local blocks
540
Monitoring
556
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
540
Recovery and postoperative care
557
Injectable anaesthetic agents
541
Birds
558
Ketamine
541
 Preanaesthetic stabilization, sedation,
 Neuroleptanalgesia
541
and analgesia
559
 Other agents 
542
Regional anaesthesia and local block
560
Ventilation
542
Injectable anaesthetic agents
561
Monitoring
542
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
561
Recovery and postoperative care
543
Ventilation
563
Lagomorphs - rabbits (Oryctolagus
Monitoring
564
cuniculus) and hares (Lepus europaeus)
544
Recovery and postoperative care
564
Rodents - rats (Rattus norvegicus),
Fish
564
mice (Mus muscufus), guinea pigs
Preanaesthetic stabilization, sedation,
(Cavia porcellus), hamsters and gerbils
(Mesocricetus auratus and Gerbillidae)
and analgesia
565
546
Anaesthesia, monitoring and recovery
Mustelids - ferrets (Mustela putorius furo).
566
mink (Mustela futreaola), European otter
(Lutra futra), stoat or short-tailed
weasel (Mustela ermine), polecat
(Mustela putorius), badger (Meles meles)
548
INTRODUCTION
Insectivores - European hedgehogs (Erinaceus 
europaeus), African pygmy hedgehogs
(Atelerix aibiventris)
549
The problems involved in anaesthetizing such diverse taxa
Reptiles
549
as birds, reptiles, fish, and exotic mammals present unique
and varied challenges. Dangerous animals (e.g. venomous
Preanaesthetic stabilization, sedation and
snakes, large carmivores, etc) are often impossible to
analgesia
551
evaluate and examine thoroughly prior to induction for
Regional anaesthesia and local block
552
reasons of human safety. Laboratory animals (e.g. rabbits
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
535
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
and rodents) are often healthy and, when anaesthetized
addition, many small mammal clinical problems neces-
for experimental purposes, it is particularly important that
sitate surgery. Readers are directed to detailed reviews that
methodologies have little or no influence on the result of
are available on the subject, as personal preferences will
the study. Conversely, pet rabbits and rodents are often
largely be presented here (Heard, 2004, 2007a,b; Carpen-
unhealthy and considerably older. The techniques to be
ter,2
2005). Practitioners are also fnding that sedation,
described in this chapter are those which the author has
especially when combined with local anaesthesia, is often
found to be satisfactory in general practice for most clini-
a viable option to general anaesthesia for such procedures
cal purposes in the various species of animal presented. In
as sample collection and catheterization.
some cases, specialized drugs and equipment not com-
Although rodents and other small mammals are anaes
monly found in general practice are required, which only
yiim sanpasoid Aioieioqel ioy siaqunu aiel u pazat
adds to the importance of advanced planning. Readers are
apparently few serious problems, when similar species are
directed to specialized texts for more in-depth descriptions
anaesthetized for clinical purposes, the mortality is higher.
as only brief overviews can be provided here (Brown,
The cause of the higher clinical mortality probably results
1993: Heard, 2004; Edling. 2006: Schumacher & Yelen,
from unfamiliarity with the species and the generally poor
2006; West et al., 2007).
health of many companion animals. Therefore, success
can be improved by:
1. Preparing the veterinary team by reviewing
the species-specific anatomy/physiology of
SMall MaMMals
the patient, the procedure[s) to be performed,
 Buiaey pue 'sualqoid ieuaiod sunediue
With over 10 million pet rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus).
 back-up plans
ferrets (Mustela putorius furo). and rodents [order Roden-
2. Calculate enmergency drugs, or consider a dedicated
tia) in the USA, these small mammals represent the third
emergency drug chart (Table 17.1). For critical cases.
largest group of companion mammals, after dogs and cats
 prepare individual emergency drug doses before
(AVMA, 2007). Although similar demographic data have
induction
not been located for Europe, this group nevertheless rep-
 Preparing all equipment and supplies ahead of time
resents an expanding component of small animal practice,
(anaesthetic drugs, catheters, fluids, fluid additives,
with many clients expecting the same level of medicine for
non-rebreathing anaesthetic circuits with
them as for more traditional pet species. Many diagnostic
appropriately sized bags and masks, surgical
and surgical procedures warrant anaesthesia, therefore,
equipment, etc.)
acquiring skills for competent anaesthesia is an indispen-
4.
 Ensuring the patient has been stabilized as much as
sable skill for the exotic animal practitioner. Short anaes-
possible prior to sedation or anaesthesia (eg. patient
thetic procedures are commonplace for completing tasks
is normothermic, rehydrated, previous good plane of
such as thorough examination, phlebotomy, radiography.
nutrition, fasted if needed, no metabolic
Or other short diagnostic/therapeutic procedures.
In
derangements).
 Table 17.1 Emergency drug calculator chart for a rabbit
Patient Name:
Roger
 Patient Number:
319902
Patient weight (kg):
1.230
Drug
Concentration
Dose
Route
Bolus
Units
 Glycopyrrolate
 0.2 mg/mL
0.02 mg/kg
IV/IO/IT
0.12
mL
Epinepherine (1 : 1000)
 1 mg/mL
 0.2 mg/kg
 IV/IO/IT
0.25
mL
Diazepam
 5 mg/mL
2 mg/kg
IV/IO
0.49
mL
 Furosemide
 50 mg/mL
 2 mg/kg 
IV/IO
50'0
mL
Shock fluids
 90 mL/kg/h 
IV/IO
111
mL/h
Maintenance fluids
 70 mL/kg/day
IV/IO
4
mL/h
Naloxone
0.4 mg/mL
0.01 mg/kg
IV/IO
E0'0
mL
536
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
 Table 17.2 Common problems, complications, and possible solutions associated with small mammal anaesthesia
Problem
Potential complication
Possible solution
 Small size 
Mechanical obstruction of airway due to
Be careful to keep head/neck extended; do not place heavy
 positioning;: compression of thoracic cavity
 drapes, equipment or rest hands/arms on the animal during
during handling/surgery
 anaesthesia and surgery
High metabolic rate
Hypoglycaemia, especially if prolonged fasting 
 Plan to be able to deliver higher fluid requirements and administer
prior to procedure; rapid drug metabolism;
fluids pre-, intra- and postoperatively; consider dextrose in IV
higher fluid requirements; unexpected drug
fluids if hypoglycaemic; minimize fasting time; utilize drug 
effects of interactions (e.g. atropine and
dosages based on species-specific pharmacokinetic studies;
tiletamine in rabbits)
know the species idiosyncrasies, avoid drug contraindications,
be prepared to reverse drugs if undesirable effects are 
appreciated, be prepared to provide respiratory support
 High surface
Hypothermia (small animals lose heat more
 Provide warmth from the point of induction; monitor body
area:volume ratio
readily) especially during abdominal/
temperature carefully and frequently; plan for different types
thoracic surgery; hypothermia can lead to
of supplemental heat during anaesthetic episode and use them 
decreased anaesthetic requirements.
simultaneously (radiant source, heating pad, warm fluids.
prclonged recovery, bradycardia, and
warm air); administer heat prior to animal becoming
terminal ventricular fibrillation
hypothermic and continue until the animal can thermoregulate
 Catecholamine-driven
Stressed prey species release endogenous
 Minimize handling of untamed animals preoperatively: plan for
 prey animals
catecholamines that sensitize the 
hospital environment to be stress-free (shelter boxes, quiet
myocardium (among other effects); this
wards away from predators); premedicate patient with
effect is much more pronounced in certain 
anxiclytics prior to induction; utilize strategies such as rapid
species (especially rabbits)
(sewaoey to peatsui saqwuo uoonpu! pue stuabe uoonpus
 to minimize handling
 Present with underlying
Small thorax, limited tidal volume, little
 Perform a preanaesthetic evaluaticn; minimize anaesthetic time
cardiovascular
respiratory or cardiovascular reserve
through efficiency (not rushing); carefully monitor patient
disease
(ETCOz. SpOz, blood pressure, blood gases); be able to ventilate
 animal; have crystalloids, colloids, dopamine/dobutamine, and
 emergency drugs available
 Difficult to intubate 
No control over ventilation; potential for
 Study anatomy of the animal prior to scheduling procedure and 
hypoxaemia and hypercapnia
mammals can be safely intubated with practice and proper
equipment; if unable to intubate, realize limitations of lack of
 control of airway. keep prccedure short; utilize well-fitting mask
and appropriate lab animal anaesthetic circuit (not a traditional
non-rebreather or T-piece circuit)
 Difficult to gain
Unable to administer maintenance fluids
Study anatomy of the animal prior to scheduling procedure and
vascular access
during anaesthetic procedure to maintain
research catheterization methods; many small mammals can be
 proper blood pressure and blood flow to
catheterized, either IV or IO with practice and proper
vital organs; unable to administer
equipment; if unable, administer maintenance fluid 
emergency agents if needed 
requirements SC before the procedure (or at induction), and
 repeat just prior to recovery
 There are some basic principles that apply when using
intubation and intravenous access. However, there are
 general anaesthesia in small mammalian patients in addi-
solutions that can help address these problems (Table
tion to the sound, basic principles of domestic animal
17.2). It should be kept in mind that patients under seda-
 anaesthesiology. These additional comments are based
tion alone must still be carefully monitored.
on the fact that exotic mammals are often small in size,
Many small mammals become distressed by handling.
    's   
increasing the risk of physical damage and of adrenaline
area:volume ratios and are prone to hypothermia,
. are
release leading to problems under subsequent anaesthesia.
     
Respiratory rate should be recorded before the animal is
easily, are typically presented in advanced stages of disease
disturbed and removed from the cage The risk of physical
(often respiratory) with little respiratory or cardiovascular
damage is considerably reduced by proper handling. Many
reserve, and have anatomy that challenges endotracheal
rabbits and rodents can be secured using the dorsal scruff.
537
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
A
B
Figure 17.1 Warming devices. (A) Radiant heating element (1) positioned above an anaesthetized rabbit; (B) ferret positioned
on top of a warm forced air blanket (1), with additional clear drapes (2) to maintain temperature following aseptic preparation
of the abdomen. Note blood pressure measurement on the rabbit is Doppler ultrasound technique.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia
while a towel over the eyes can further reduce stress and
with alcohol-based preparations) should be kept to a
struggling Small mammals can be placed into a small bag
minimum; the use of overhead radiant heat sources,
 or box and accurately weighed. Adequate preanaesthetic
warmed-water and warmed-air blankets should be
examination is often diffcult but many have respiratory
employed at induction, as well as during maintenance and
disease so oxygen should be available even if only inject-
Bu] sameiadual aion ueuie on spouad Aianoan
able agents are to be used. The high metabolic rate of these
17.1). Heat loss can be considerably reduced by wrapping
small mammals means that they require an almost con-
the animal in foil or bubble wrap during non-surgical
stant supply of food, so preanaesthetic fasting should not
procedures, while the application of clear plastic surgical
exceed 2 hours. In general, the cardiac sphincter of most
drapes helps maintain temperature during surgery. When
rabbits and rodents prevents regurgitation, while the
inhalation agents are used, carrier gases also contribute to
majority of the gastrointestinal ingesta are located in the
cooling effects, thus gas flows should be adequate but not
hind-gut such that prolonged fasting would be required to
excessive. In-line gas warmers can be used as long as
reduce volume, and likely lead to hepatic lipidosis. The
increased circuit resistance is overcome. Intravenous Or
main purpose of short-term fasting is, therefore, to reduce
intraosseous catheterization should also be considered
food material within the oral cavity. There is no need to
routinely and, in cases where this is likely to prove
curtail the water supply up to the time of induction of
difficult, subcutaneous fluid therapy should be instituted
anaesthesia; however, fasting typically requires not only
prior to induction and repeated during anaesthesia
the removal of all food but also all bedding materials that
(Fig. 17.2). Maintenance of hydration status and circula-
may be chewed. During anaesthesia, small mammals are
tion, ventilation and temperature appear to be key. Ade-
particularly prone to hypothermia (<37.8°C, <100 *F) and
quate monitoring of the animal's condition, including
precautions to avoid this should be taken from the time
cardiac and respiratory function is essential until recovery
of induction. Removal of hair and wetting (particularly
is complete.
538
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A
B
Figure 17.2 Fluid therapy. (A) IV fluid therapy via a cephalic catheter (arrow) in a ferret: (B) IO fluid therapy via a spinal needle
placed into the tibia (arrow) in a guinea pig.
Countesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
The commonest cause of death is respiratory failure.
Preanaesthetic sedation
Ideally, O2 and the ability to administer artificial ventila-
and analgesia
tion of the lungs should always be available. However.
intubation of rabbits and rodents requires practice as the
Midazolam is commonly used in human and traditional
narrow mouth makes viewing the larynx difficult. Suitable
 pet medicine for purposes of preanaesthesia and sedation.
antagonists should be at hand and there may be a place
It has a wide margin of safety in many species. When
for analeptic agents, such as doxapram, in ciraumstances
 combined with an opioid, effects are synergistic, allowing
where intubation is diffcult. The other common cause
a reduction of the amount of either dnug (see Table 17.3).
aq isnu aie ieul os ssol pooa iesigins st Aeow jo
 Effects in exotic species are promising, and this author has
taken to minimize this and, whenever possible, to replace
Youm u saiads Aue u siaa aiaape aiaaas paiasqo iou
that which does occur, with crystalloid boluses (such as
it has been utilized (avian, exotic mammals including
Normosol-R), volume expanders (colloids). or blood
rabbits, ferrets, rodents, primates, carnivores, and others).
transfusion products
Effects are variable, from slight decrease in activity to lateral
The use of anticholinergic premedication is controver-
au ui pasunouoid aiou aq ot ieadde spaua uaqunal
sial as in other species, but as small airways can be easily
rabbit and ferret and in compromised patients, and less
blocked by saliva or mucus, their use may be desirable.
pronounced in rats and mice unless higher dose rates are
ssassod Aaul se siaqei ioy panajaid st aneiodoki
used. These effects are likely related to species variability in
increased atropinase activity  that reduces  the effcacy
response and the varying dose rates suggested for different
and duration of atropine. The author prefers an opioid
 species/groups. However, with the availability of inexpen-
and benzodiazepine combination for premedication, and
 sive flumazenil, the sedative effects can, if deemed neces-
s     a   
sary, be reversed postoperatively. In all cases, patients still
animals, by subcutaneous injection (Table 17.3). General
 react somewhat to handling and noxious stimuli. when
anaesthesia is preferred for most purposes and may be
midazolam is combined with an opioid, greater seda-
induced and maintained with volatile agents, induced
tion and analgesia result Depending on overall patient
with injectable drugs and maintained with volatile agents,
 condition and goal of the sedation procedure, additional
 Or maintained with injectable drugs alone. There are many
sedation can be provided with subanaesthetic dosages of
different protocols available and only those routinely
ketamine (see Table 17.3). If additional immobilization
used and preferred by the author are presented here
is essential, low concentrations of inhalant gas can be
(Table 17.3). A more complete listing can be found in the
 considered. This combination of drugs for sedation allows
references (Brown, 1993; Carpenter, 2005; AVMA, 2007:
 Overall reduction of required inhalant gases, decreasing
Chinnadurai et al., 2010).
risk associated with the use of general anaesthesia.
539
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 17.3 Sedative, premedication, induction and maintenance drugs preferred for small mammals
Species
 Premedication/sedation
Induction typically
Maintenance
Additional analgesics
(mg/kg)
5-15 mins after
(mg/kg)
premedication (mg/kg)
Ferret
Butorphanol (0.1-0.3) SC/IM
Isoflurane or Sevoflurane by
Isoflurane 1-2.5%
 Meloxicam (0.2) SC/IM/PO q
Or
mask
Sevoflurane 2-4%
12-24 h
Buprenorphine (0.01-0.03) SC/IM/1VKetamine (5-10) IV or (10-15)
Buprenorphine (0.01-0.03)
r
 IM
SC/IM/V q 6-12 h
Oxymorphone (0.05-0.2) SC/IM 
Propofol (3-6) IV
Oxymorphone (0.05-0.2) SC/IM q
plus (if necessary)
8-12 h
Midazolam (0.1-0.3) SC/IM
Rabbit
Butorphanol (0.2-0.4) SC/IM
Ketamine (5-10) plus additional Isoflurane 1.5-2.5% 
4 z1 b od/I/s (s'o) wejxo
r
Midazolam (0.25-0.50) IV
Sevoflurane 24%
Buprenorphine (0.01-0.05) SC/
 Buprenorphine (0.01-0.05) SC/IM/IV(
or, if IV inaccessible 
IM/IV q 6-12 h
r
Ketamine (25-30) IM
Oxymorphone (0.05-0.2) SC/IM q
Oxymorphone (0.05-0.2) SC/IM
or
8-12 h
plus
induction using Sevoflurane
 Midazolam (0.5) SC/IM
Rat
Butorphanol (24) SC/IM/IP
Ketamine (25-50) IM/IP if
Isoflurane 1.5-3%
Meloxicam (1-2) SC/PO q 12 h
Mouse
r
intubating.
Sevoflurane 2-5%
Buprenorphine (0.05-0.1) SC q
Gerbil
 Buprenorphine (0.05-0.1) SC/IM/IP
 Sevoflurane (8%) with
6-12 h
 Hamster 
induction chamber if to be
Oxymorphone (0.2-0.5) SC q
Guinea pig 
Oxymorphone (0.2-0.5) SC/IMV/IP
 maintained by mask
8-12 h
Chinchilla 
plus
Midazolam (12) SC/IM/IP
O2-Agonists (medetomidine, dexmedetomidine, xyla-
and should therefore be buffered with bicarbonate unless
zine) can also be used alone or in combination with
the animal is unconscious.
opiates for sedation. However, given the profound cardio-
respiratory effects of the modern potent drugs, the author
0l asn iiaul iousai pue suase asaul asn ol iou siayand
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
young healthy animals.
-ost aie salads asaul ul asn ioy suase iejndod isowu au
flurane and sevoflurane. Halothane is still available in
Regional anaesthesia
some countries and can certainly be used, albeit with a
and local blocks
reduced margin of safety. Mask induction can lead to han-
ueu iauno suaee suisn uaum Aeined 'ssans su
It should be kept in mind that use of sedation and manual
sevoflurane, and theuse of an induction chamber, although
restraint alone is inappropriate in clinical practice for any
preferable, in some individuals does lead to greater vola-
procedure expected to produce discomfort. An exception
tile drug use, and often greater environmental contamina-
may be in a calm patient with judicious and efficient use
tion unless active scavenging is available. Several such
 of local anaesthesia in the form of a local or regional
-n aie Aau inq aqie Aeia aie siaq
block. In addition, when used in combination with
Kaul Aum uosean ou si aiaun pue astaoil oi Asea Alaa
 general anaesthesia, the use of local blocks can help reduce
should not be available in most general veterinary prac-
general anaesthetic requirements. For example, epidural
tices. Induction of anaesthesia with inhalants provides
blocks for pelvic orthopaedic surgery, and dental blocks
very little time for intubation, unless the operator is highly
for tooth extractions appear to be particularly worthwhile.
 skilled, and therefore, once induced, anaesthesia is gener-
Local anaesthetic drugs should be carefully calculated and
ally maintained by administering the volatile agent in
diluted if necessary to avoid overdose The most com-
Oxygen through a T-piece or similar low-resistance breath-
monly utilized agents for local block are l mg/kg lido-
ing system and a facemask. Rodents and other mammals
caine and 1 mg/kg bupivacaine The onset of action of
<l kg beneft from a dedicated rodent circuit (Fig. 17.3).
lidocaine is rapid but short lived, while bupivacaine is
Unlike the T-piece or similar circuits used for cats and dogs
slower to act but, in some species, may provide analgesia
that rely on active inspiration for taking in gas, a dedicated
for up to 6-8 hours. Lidocaine is painful when injected
sl pue iaen iein au oui see saioy ii uapon
540
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A
B
Figure 17.3 Dedicated rodent masks and circuits. (A) The rubber skirt (1) ensures that the mask (2) is secure around the
rodent's head, a small diammeter tube (3) delivers gas as a jet into the oral cavity while the large diameter outer tube
(4) provides a low resistance path for expired gases. (B) Close-up view of rodent masks demonstrating the small diameter gas
delivery (arrow) to the breathing chamber (1). and the outer tube (2) that carries away expired gases
Courtesy of Or Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
positive pressure improves ventilation. These circuits
efficacy vary greatly between the various species. Lower
including suitable facemasks are commercially available,
 doses may be used for sedation and immobilization for
or can be made from plastic syringe barrels and rubber
non-surgical procedures. As in other species of animal,
gloves. Facemasks should incorporate a close-fitting nubber
ketamine is used in combination with drugs such as the
skirt to reduce leaks that cause atmospheric pollution.
benzodiazepines (diazepam or midazolam) and/or Q2-
Some form of passive or active scavenging of gases should
adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine or medetomidine) in
be used.
order to reduce the dose of ketamine, improve muscle
relaxation and to increase the effectiveness of the dissocia-
tive agent as an anaesthetic. Many of the animals seen in
Injectable anaesthetic agents
dlinical practice are ill and/or aged, and therefore potent
Theoretically, any injectable anaesthetic can be used in
Oz-adrenoceptor agonists like medetomidine and dexme-
small mammals and usually the necessary doses for
detomidine are usually avoided. The author prefers to
healthy animals are well known from the original devel-
induce anaesthesia using intravenous ketamine, often in
  o  s  u m o
combination with additional benzodiazepine, as this
company that marketed the drug. However, practical limi-
induction provides more time for endotracheal intuba-
tations are set by the possible methods of administration.
tion, compared to inhalant induction.
In some animals with easily accessible veins (e.g. in
rabbits), drugs such as propofol or rapidly-acting barbitu-
Neuroleptanalgesia
rates can be used as in cats and dogs [although the dura-
tion of effect is generally much shorter). Where IV injection
Although most commercially available neuroleptanalge-
is more difficult, dnugs can be given by IM, IP, or SC routes.
 sic combinations can be used, the mixture of fentanyl
The most popular combinations of drugs are the neurolep-
 and fluanisone (Hypnorm@) has proved to be the most
tanalgesics or mixtures incorporating ketamine. There are
popular in the UK, and it can be administered by any
 marked differences between species responses and, even 
route. The dose of fentanyl in Hypnorm@ is high, result-
within one species of animal, many dnug actions may be
ing in a prolonged length of action and, occasionally, in
unreliable, such that a given drug producing deep anaes-
respiratory arrest. Combinations of Hypnorm@ with
thesia in one animal may only provide some sedation in
diazepam or midazolam give better muscle relaxation and
another of the same species.
allow a reduction of some 50% in the dose of Hypnorm@.
If anaesthesia becomes too deep, the fentanyl compo-
nent may be antagonized with naloxone (o.0l mg/kg)
Ketamine
Buprenorphine can be used to antagonize the fentanyl in
Ketamine has the advantage that it is effective no matter
the drug combination. The technique is termed sequential
what the route of administration. Doses required and
 analgesia and relates to the selective displacement of a
541
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
VETRONICS
05.2
人
4
B
Figure 17.4 Pressure-cycled ventilator. (A) Main control unit featuring maximum inspired pressure control (1),. expiration length
(2), and passive/ventilator switch (3): (B) patient delivery system with gas inlet (1), endotracheal tube connector (2), waste gas
removal (3) and solenoid switch (4)
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
pure agonist with a partial agonist/antagonist in the hope
being able to select the mode of ventilation by flicking
of reducing respiratory depression and sedation while
a switch and without changing circuits. Ventilation is
maintaining analgesia.
used whenever end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) rises above
45 mmHg or SpO2 falls below 95%. Ventilation is used
Other agents
tion with CO2. This inexpensive pressure-cycled ventilator
A mixture that is often used, although unlicensed, is
Dioxa ui piosai yoen uanoid e seu pue asn ol alduis s!
kmown as the 'Hellabrunn Mixture. It was developed pri-
 mammal practice. Depth and frequency of ventilation are
 marily for administration to zoo animals and is prepared
initially set to mimic preanaesthetic respiration,but are
by adding 4 mL of ketamine (100 mg/mL) to a vial of dry
modified to maintain ETCO2 readings of between 35 and
xylazine (500 mg). This yields a stable injectable solution
45 mmHg.
containing xylazine 125 mg/mL together with ketamine
100 mg/mL. Its stability means that it is immediately avail-
able and it is relatively safe for the administrator. Ketamine
Monitoring
and medetomidine/dexmedetomidine combinations are
also very effective, but their use is best restricted to young
The primary goal of anaesthetic monitoring should be to
healthy animals.
minimize morbidity by preventing, identifying. and cor-
 Propofol has been recommended for intravenous use in
rabbits, rats, mice and hamsters, however, its short dura-
mia, hypercapnia, and metabolic disturbances. Although
tion of action combined with apnoea necessitates rapid
the size and anatomy of some small mammal patients
intubation. Alfaxalone has proven useful in some species
often preclude some anaesthetic monitoring techniques.
when given IV. Pentobarbital and thiopental may be used
this should not discourage the practitioner from including
but given their prolonged sedation and respiratory depres-
the following steps:
sion, they cannot be recommended for clinical use The
1. Perform a basic preanaesthetic examination to record
shorter acting methohexital appears safer and has been
heart and respiratory rates and character, and if
used in various small mammals (Smith, 1993).
possible collect baseline clinicopathological data.
Complete blood counts and full biochemistry
Ventilation
profles are not always possible (and, indeed,
anaesthesia is often used to facilitate blood
This author prefers to connect all intubated small
collection), however, haematocrit, total protein,
mammals <8 kg to a pressure-cycled ventilator (e.g. Small
urea, and glucose can be run as a minimum using
Animal Ventilator VT-500o, BASi Vetronics, USA, or SAV03
 small samples. Alternatively, blood samples may be
Vetronics, UK). The ventilator is routinely set to the
collected and run immediately following induction
non-rebreathing passive circuit, with active ventilation
using point-of-care analysers (eg. Abaxis
selected if required (Fig. 17.4). This has the advantage of
biochemistry machine, I-Stat analyser)
542
 Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
Table 17.4 Normal physiological values for selected small mammals
Species
Body weight (g)
Life span
Temperature
Heart rate
Respiratory rate
Male/female
(years)
"C (°F)
Chinchilla
450-600/550-800
8-10
36.1-37.8
40-100
40-80
(97.0-100.0)
Gerbil
58-55/00 1-59
3-4
37.0-38.5
09E
90
(98.6-101.3)
Guinea pig
 006-002/0021-006
4-5
37.2-39.5
230-380
40-100
(99.0-103.1)
Hamster
85-130/95-150
1.5-2
37.0-38.0
250-500
35-135
(98.6-100.4)
Mouse
20-40/25-40
1.5-3
35.4-39.1
325-780
60-220
(95.7-102.3)
Rat
450-520/250-300
2.5-3.5
35.9-37.5
250-450
115
(96.6-99.5)
 Prairie dog
1000-2200/500-1500
6-10
35.4-39.1
83-318
40-60
(95.7-102.3)
Rabbit
0009-0002/0005-0002
5-15
38.5-40.0
130-325
30-60
(101.3-104.0)
Ferret
1000-2000/500-1000
5-8 (US)
37.840.0
007-002
95-25
6-12 (UK)
(100.0-104.0)
 Modified from Carpenter 2005.
2. Record the precise time of premedication/induction.
(Ypsilantis et al., 2005). A 22 or 24 gauge catheter
This step is often overlooked but it is important to
inserted in an ear artery is used for invasive blood
know how long an animal has been anaesthetized,
pressure monitoring in rabbits.
and to maximize efforts in expediting procedures.
Do not rely totally on the monitoring equipment -
3.
 Gauge the depth of anaesthesia by observation of
always rely on human evaluation of the patient
mentation and reflexes.
which means that there must be an anaesthetist
4.
 Utilize simple monitoring techniques rather than
dedicated to the case at all times. No anaesthetic
elaborate systems that are prone to failure First, take
monitoring equipment can ever replace an attentive,
a heart rate and note cardiac rhythm with a simple
experienced veterinary anaesthetist.
stethoscope and note the depth and frequency of
7.
 Maintain a contemporaneous record throughout the
ventilation, and judging the information based upon
anaesthetic period. Record quantitative readings and
preanaesthetic values (Table 17.4).
qualitative evaluations every 5 minutes on a
5.
 Utilize equipment that will give you the most 
dedicated anaesthesia sheet that should form part
information with least problems, for example,
of the medical record.
ultrasound Doppler probe for heart rate and rhythm.
end-tidal capnography, and ECG are easy to use.
 Pulse oximetry can be temperamental but still useful
when a reliable pulse wave is obtained (irregular or
Recovery and postoperative care
poor pulse wave leads to untrustworthy readings that
Recovery and the immediate postoperative period can be
must not be relied upon). Pulse oximetry readings
just as critical as the maintenance period in ensuring that
(SpO2) <90% is taken to correlate with hypoxaemia
 PaO2 ≤60 mmHg. Indirect blood pressure readings
the point of initial recovery and extubation can often be
taken from the radial artery of the forelimb using a
the most critical stage of the anaesthetic procedure,
 sphygmomanometer and ultrasound Doppler have
because critical support mechanisms have been with-
been shown to be accurate and reliable compared
drawn. In general, the following steps should be taken for
to direct arterial blood pressures in rabbits
 patient support:
543
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
1. When discontinuing inhalation anaesthesia, consider
anaesthesia so that owners may be warned of the anaes-
administration of applicable reversal drugs (e.g.
thetic risks associated with the presence of lung disease.
flumazenil for benzodiazepines).
Intramuscular injections are made into the quadriceps
 2. Maintain oxygen administration after extubation
Or triceps, epaxial or lumbar muscles. Intravenous injec-
until fully conscious.
tions can be most easily given into the marginal ear,
3. Recovery areas should be quiet, warm and in a place
cephalic, and lateral saphenous veins. Intravenous injec
where the animal can be placed in sternal
tion is greatly facilitated by the use of a restraining box
recumbency, and readily monitored. Hypothermic
that leaves the ears accessible, or good quality restraint
animals should be placed into an incubator until
following sedation. Rabbits produce atropinase, which
normothermic Do not add water/food bowls or cage
rapidly inactivates atropine, so to be effective doses of this
furniture/substrate until the animal is ambulatory.
 agent must be high (1-2 mg/kg) and repeated every 15-20
4. Monitor the animal frequently and administer
minutes. Alternatively, glycopyrrolate (0.01-0.02 mg/kg)
additional fluids or antagonists as and when needed.
is preferred as an anticholinergic.
Postoperative analgesia is important and must not be
Although IV anaesthetic agents can be used to induce
neglected. It should be a continuation/modification of the
anaesthesia in rabbits they are not good for maintaining
pre-emptive analgesic protocol employed for premedica-
anaesthesia for even very small incremental doses may
tion. Some opioid dnugs are suitable and other methods
cause death through respiratory arrest Induction of anaes-
utilizing local analgesics should be considered. It is regret-
thesia is satisfactory with methohexital (5-10 mg/kg).
table that the rat, which has probably contributed more
alfaxalone [2-8 mg/kg). propofol (3-6 mg/kg). or keta-
than most animals to advances in medical and veterinary
mine (10-15 mg/kg) and midazolam (0.5-1.0 mg/kg)
sciences, still is ignored in many laboratories in circum-
given IV to effect These agents can be given IV through a
 stances where postoperative analgesia would be regarded
2l gauge or 23 gauge catheter placed into an ear, cephalic,
as essential for other animals. Meloxicam is a preferential
or lateral saphenous vein. The ketamine/midazolam com-
COX-2 inhibitor that has been tried and tested in labora-
bination is preferred by the author as it provides a longer
tory rodents and, although multidose pharmacokinetics
duration of action for placing an endotracheal tube.
have yet to be determined, the author uses this analgesic
Diazepam injected into an ear vein may cause tissue
routinely with good effects.
necrosis.
Monitor temperature regularly and remove from incu-
 Induction of anaesthesia is usually quiet with sevoflu
bators once normothermic. Some mustelids, especially
rane administered in O2 1-2 L/min through a facemask
 Otters, appear prone to anaesthesia-induced hyperthermia
from a non-rebreathing system. Induction with isoflurane
that can be fatal if uncontrolled.
is facilitated when the animal is frst heavily sedated and
the concentration of isoflurane increased in small step
increments up to 3 or 4%. Alternatively, the rabbit can be
placed in an induction chamber or plastic box with a
LAGOMORPHS - RABBITS
charcoal canister on the outlet for scavenging and isoflu-
(ORYCTOLAGUS CUNICULUS) AND
rane in O2 introduced into the box until the animal is
Aipidei paneuua aie suase uoeiequl snoiosuosum
HARES (LEPUS EUROPAEUS)
after the mask is removed and leave little time for the
 process of endotracheal intubation.
Rabbits and hares need to be handled carefully as they
 Endotracheal intubation is relatively difficult because of
tend to panic if placed on slippery surfaces. These animals
-l yaal iosiu suol pue xuieydoia maeu suol au
are best held for injection wrapped in a towel in the arms
ing access through the mouth. The tongue is thick, fleshy.
of an assistant or placed in a restraining box. A rabbit or
friable, and easily torn. The soft palate is long and the
hare struggling against forcible restraint may fracture a
epiglottis is large. In all cases, it is essential to have an
vertebra, so any restraint technique used should only
 adequately anaesthetized patient that is completely relaxed
entail the minimum of force The animal should be caught
- attempts to intubate a semiconscious small mammal are
by grasping the scruff ofthe neck firmly and pressing down
likely to cause damage and fail. Endotracheal intubation
on a flat surface until it relaxes, then it may be lifted by
is accomplished by either (1) direct view of the larynx
supplementing the neck grip with support for the hind-
using a straight, premature human infant blade (Wiscon-
  a s   a s s
sin 00) or endoscope, or (2) blindly. A semi-rigid stylet
calmed by scratching behind the ears and stroking the
can be used as a guide to aid in the passage of the endotra-
back. Respiratory problems, usually due to various bacte-
cheal tube. Tubes of 2.0-4.0 mm internal diameter are
ria including but not limited to Pasteurella, are common
 suitable for use in most rabbits. Direct view of the larynx
Jo uoeninosny Auieay aq ot ieadde Aeu jeut siaqei u!
is considered the gold standard in human and veterinary
the lungs for diagnosis is not easy and many authorities
 medicine, and typically enables a larger endotracheal tube
advise conscious thoracic radiography prior to general
to be placed compared to blind techniques (Fig. 17.5).
544
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
B
+
C
A
D
E
soft palate (black arrows) buttoned below the epiglottis (2) at the base of the fleshy tongue (3). The cranial margin of the
epiglottis can be seen through the caudal soft palate (white arrows): (C) gentle dorsal deflection of the soft palate (1) enables
the epiglottis to fall ventrad (2): (D) with the soft palate (1) now disengaged from the epiglottis (2), the glottis (3) can be seen;
(E) endotracheal tube (1) containing a stylet is being passed over the epiglottis (2) and through the glottis (3) into the trachea.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
Placement of the largest possible tube becomes especially
00, long blade) or endoscope to view the epiglottis
critical in smaller animals where significant decreases in
and ensure that it is not engaged above the soft palate
airway resistance and gas flow can be obtained (see Table
(rabbits and many rodents are obligate nasal
17.4). The chances of successful intubation in small
breathers) (see Fig. 17.5A,B). Applying mild dorsal
rabbits and rodents can be maximized by:
pressure on the soft palate will cause the epiglottis to
1. Ensuring adequate anaesthesia (see Table 17.3).
fall ventrally and expose the glottis [see Fig. 17.5C,D).
Ketamine and midazolam anaesthesia will provide
Apply (<2 mg/kg) lidocaine to the glottis, and wait
for 30-60 seconds while administering nasal oxygen.
5+ minutes of good restraint and relaxation for
intubation (compared to 20-40 seconds following
The endotracheal tube can be advanced alongside the
inhalant induction)
laryngoscope, or slid off the endoscope, and advanced
2. Maintaining the animal on oxygen by holding a
through the glottis and into the trachea (see
small facemask over the nose during induction. A
Fig. 17.5E). Many experienced lab animal vets are able
to perform a blind intubation technique in rabbits:
pulse oximeter probe attached to a foot will provide
warning of low oxygenation during intubation.
however, given the smaller size of most pet rabbits
compared to the 3-5 kg laboratory New Zealand
There are two main techniques for endotracheal intuba-
white, varied breed/conformation and disease status,
tion of rabbits and rodents:
direct viewing is preferred for clinical practice.
1. Laryngoscope or endoscope-guided intubation. With
2.
 Blind intubation. The rabbit is positioned in sternal
the rabbit in sternal (or dorsal) recumbency, use
or dorsal recumbency with the head and neck
guze to open the mouth fully and hyperextend the
overextended. Introduce the endotracheal tube into
head and neck. Insert the laryngoscope (Wisconsin
the oral cavity and over the tongue while listening
545
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 17.5 Cross-sectional area, changes in gas
unless active scavenging is placed near the animal's mouth
and nose. Therefore, the author primarily uses this tech-
flow and resistance associated with different
endotracheal tube diameters
lapun sieuue ol uasAxo jeuamalddns apiaoid oi anbiu
injectable anaesthesia.
If two attempts at intubation are unsuccessful, the
Endotracheal
Cross-
Relative
animal should be placed on a tight-fitting facemask. Pha-
tube size,
sectional
resistance for
ryngeal oedema and dyspnoea associated with repeated
internal
area, πr2
tubes of the same
intubation attempts arenotuncommon. Anti-inflammatory
diameter
(mm)
length at the
 dnugs may be necessary and can be administered by the IV
(mm)
same flow rate*
or intratracheal routes [eg. NSAIDs or, less favourably
60
unless severe, steroids). Anaesthesia is usually maintained
1.0
410
with vaporizer settings of 1.5-3% isoflurane, or 2-4%
1.5
1.77
81
when administered by facemask. Oxygen administration
2.0
3.14
26
is essential since anaesthetized rabbits rapidly develop
hypoxaemia. In many circumstances, controlled ventila-
2.5
4.91
10
tion is important to maintain adequate ventilation.
3.0
7.07
5
Recently, the use of laryngeal cuffs (supraglottic devices)
Aisea anou aq ue Aaul Kuendod aos paui aay
3.5
9.62
3
placed than endotracheal tubes and in many cases can be
4.0
12.57
2
used to provide ventilation.
The MAC values for isoflurane and sevoflurane in New
4.5
15.90
1
Zealand white rabbits are 2.05% and 3.7%. respectively
*Hagen-Poiseuille equation for airway resistance is R = 8ln/mr*. In
(Drummond, 1985; Scheller et al., 1988). The depth of
this case as 8ln represents a constant, and so the values have
anaesthesia is assessed by tickling the inside of the ear
been made relative to a 4.5 mm tube with R = 1.
pinnae. Eye rotation occurs at 0.8 MAC while toe-pinch
withdrawal and pain reflexes are abolished >l MAC.
Palpebral and cormeal reflexes are lost at ≥2 MAC, and
for the sound of air movement as the tube advances.
indicate dangerously deep anaesthesia. Postoperative anal-
The tube is positioned over the glottis when the
gesia may be provided by opioids such as buprenorphine
sound of air movement is the loudest Alternatively.
and NSAIDs, for example, meloxicam. Postoperatively.
watch for the presence of condensation in the tube.
hypothermic rabbits should be kept warm (e.g. in an incu-
The tube is gently rotated while moving forward and
bator) until normothermic, remembering that a normoth-
back until the tube slides into the trachea. At no
ermic rabbit kept in an ambient temperature above 30°C
time must any pressure be used to insert the tube.
(86*F) can quickly result in heat stress.
Blind techniques are more acceptable for larger
animals because the size of the endotracheal tube
that can be easily inserted is generally smaller
RODENTS - RATS (RATTUS
compared to a direct view technique. Such
reductions in tube size become increasingly critical
NORVEGICUS), MICE (MUS
as tube diameter decreases (Table 17.5).
MUSCULUS), GUINEA PIGS (CAVIA
In addition to endotracheal intubation, nasal intuba-
PORCELLUS), HAMSTERS AND
tion has also been used effectively in various small
GERBILS (MESOCRICETUS AURATUS
mammals, particularly rabbits and rodents undergoing
AND GERBILLIDAE)
dental evaluations where the presence of an endotracheal
tube can be a hindrance Following induction, lidocaine
(<2 mg/kg total) is instilled into one or both nostrils
Rats that are not tame can be very diffcult to handle
before the insertion of fne-diameter tubes. Nasal tubes
because they cannot be restrained by the tail for any long
should be inserted carefully to avoid trauma and haemor-
time for they will turn and climb up their own tails to bite
rhage to nasal turbinates and, if placed deeply, will often
the restraining hand. They can be restrained in a towel that
simply enter the trachea of obligate nasal breathers like
is folded over the rat and rolled, making sure that the legs
the rabbit. The airway resistance of nasal tubes is typically
are secure. Experienced handlers often grasp the rat with
high and therefore they must be connected directly to the
the palm of the hand over the animal's back and restrain
anaesthesia machine and (low flow) oxygen supply. and
the forelegs by folding them across each other under the
not via a T-piece or other low-resistance circuit. It is gener-
chin so that the chin cannot be depressed enough to bite.
ally impossible to ventilate an animal using an intranasal
Mice should be lifted by holding the base of the tail
tube and waste gases will contaminate the environment
between the thumb and forefinger and immediately
546
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
transferred to a horizontal cloth surface (e.g. the coat of
In inexperienced hands, inhalation anaesthesia is safer
the handler). As it attempts to escape, it is grasped by the
for most rodents, and anaesthesia is best induced in a
loose scruff of the neck and the tail is gripped. Guinea pigs 
chamber or by facemask. Isoflurane or sevoflurane in
lack a true scruff and are best restrained by grasping
 O2 1-2 L/min is administered, starting with a minimal
around their pectoral and pelvic structures. It should be
 concentration and gradually increasing it until the animal
remembered that hamsters are nocturnal and often greatly
loses consciousness. Scavenging of anaesthetic gases from
resent being disturbed during daytime making them
the chamber or facemask is important and should not be
liableto bite The hamster's scruff is quite loose so restraint
 overlooked. Unconsciousness is equated with loss of the
by grasping the scruff needs to be quite vigorous. Chinchil-
 righting reflex when the box is tilted. Anaesthesia is usually
las are prone to 'hair slip' where they expel large tufts of
produced in about 2-3 minutes and can be maintained
hair in response to being grasped.
with concentrations of isoflurane [2-3%) or sevoflurane
Pre-existing chronic respiratory disease due to variety of
(2-4%) through a facemask from a dedicated rodent
circuit (see Fig. 17.3). A useful alternative that has proven
rodents. There are very many ways of anaesthetizing rodents
effective for maintaining anaesthesia during intra-oral
but simple gaseous anaesthesia is satisfactory for most clini-
dentistry is the use of a nose cone or nasal catheter. Fol-
 cal purposes. Intravenous injections into the dorsal metatar-
lowing induction and the instillation of 1-2 drops of
sal or tail vein of conscious rats are possible, but diffcult to
lidocaine [diluted if necessary to keep the total dose
 impossible in most other small rodents. Subcutaneous (and 
<2 mg/kg) into the nares, a fine diameter catheter is placed
intraperitoneal) injections are more frequently used, and
into one or both nares (Fig. 17.6). The tube is then con-
appear to be as effective as the IM route for induction.
nected directly to the anaesthesia machine without the use
 Induction of anaesthesia with injectable agents is useful
 of any form of circuit. Oxygen 0.5 L/min is then forced
in larger rodents prior to tracheal intubation. Accurate
into the nares and nasopharynx to maintain anaesthesia
bodyweights to the nearest gram (or 0. 1 grams for rodents 
if carrying an anaesthetic agent or to provide Oz if using
<30 g) are critical for the precise calculation of drug doses.
o a yoe aesa sas sxg 'sut aeoa
Ketamine is generally unsatisfactory as a sole agent, and
 Or around the nasal catheter(s) and must be actively scav-
must be combined with either a benzodiazepine or O2-
enged using a negative pressure hose to avoid room
agonist (see Table 17.3). There are species. age and sex
contamination.
differences in responses of rodents to ketamine Duration
Maintenance of a clear airway is not always easy in the
of effect decreases as young rats mature from 1 to 3 weeks
absence of endotracheal intubation since nasal and
of age whereas after 3 weeks of age females sleep longer
oropharyngeal secretions tend to become viscid during
than males.
anaesthesia and are liable to give rise to obstruction. The
A
B
Figure 17.6 Nasal intubation in a rabbit using 5 Fr red rubber tubes (A) and guinea pig using a 3 Fr urinary catheter (B) to
provide oxygen during oral surgery performed under injectable anaesthesia. This system can be used to provide inhalant
agents but scavenging near the oral cavity is required
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
547
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
risk may be countered by frequent aspiration of the
readily vomit when anaesthetized so they should be fasted
mouth and oropharynx using a fne rubber catheter
for 6-8 hours before induction of anaesthesia. Ferrets can
attached to a 60 mL syringe Endotracheal intubation is
be anaesthetized with isoflurane or sevoflurane passed
possible and the author prefers the use of a l mm diam-
into an induction box or by facemask until they are uncon-
eter endoscope with appropriately small endotracheal
scious (see Table 17.3). Alternatively, propofol IV can be
tubes (1-2 mm). Intubation using a small otoscope to
used with tractable individuals, while IM ketamine com-
insert a stylet as a guide for a l4 gauge IV catheter cut
binations can be used in those that are unable to be
short and with the end blunted in a flame has also been
handled (Table 17.6).
advocated for rats (Trim, personal communication). As
Mink, stoats, weasels, and otters are not domestic
with all small mammals, conservation of body heat is
animals - they are nervous, fast and can be vicious. They
critically important and a warm environment must always
are best handled by persuading them to enter a clear-sided
be provided from the point of induction to recovery.
induction box or squeeze cage. Most mustelids dislike a
 Intraoperative fluids may be administered by IV catheters
human blowing into their face and will retreat from such
(larger rodents only) or the IO (femur or humerus) route.
an onslaught. Moreover, they are very inquisitive and will
Where only maintenance fluids are required (eg. elective
investigate the source of gentle scratching noises such as
castration), a fluid bolus can be given SC following induc-
an be made on the side of a box. Once in the box, they
tion, and will be absorbed during anaesthesia. Rodents
an be anaesthetized with a volatile anaesthetic such as
regain consciousness quickly within a few minutes of
isoflurane or sevoflurane If necessary, the box may be
discontinuing inhalants, and full recovery takes less than
covered with transparent plastic sheeting to make it more
10-30 minutes.
gas-tight and, until the animal is unconscious, it should
not be removed from the box. Experienced handlers can
net individual animals and inject by hand an anaesthetic
combination of ketamine, Q2-sedative or benzodiazepine
MUSTELIDS - FERRETS (MUSTELA
(see Table 17.6).
PUTORIUS FURO), MINK (MUSTELA
Badgers resist handling by biting and scratching. The
safest procedure for handling them is to immobilize them
LUTREAOLA), EUROPEAN OTTER
with a squeeze cage and an IM ketamine combination,
(LUTRA LUTRA), STOAT OR SHORT-
followed by intubation and maintenance of anaesthesia
TAILED WEASEL (MUSTELA ERMINE),
with conventional inhalation techniques (see Table 17.6).
 Like other carnivores, endotracheal intubation is gener-
POLECAT (MUSTELA PUTORIUS),
ally straightforward, and maintenance using a T-piece or
BADGER (MELES MELES)
other non-rebreathing system is recommended for animals
<6-8 kg. Temperature monitoring is critical as hypother-
 Domesticated, neutered ferrets are generally tame, and can
mia and life-threatening hyperthermia (especially in
be handled in a similar way to cats and small dogs. They
otters) are not uncommon.
Table 17.6 Injectable anaesthetic regimens recommended for European mustelids
Species, adult weight
Agents and doses (mg/kg)
Reversal
Comments
range (kg)
agent (mg/kg)
European mink (Muste/a
Ketamine (10)
Atipamezole (1)
Beware of hypothermia
/utreao/a), 0.4-1 kg
Medetomidine (0.20)
European otter (Lutra /utra),
Ketamine (15-18) + diazepam (0.4-0.5)
Atipamezole (0.25)
Respiratory depression
3-14 kg 
Ketamine (5) + medetomidine (0.05)
Bradycardia, apncea, hypothermia
Stoat or short-tailed weasel
Ketamine (5) + medetomidine (0.1)
Atipamezole (0.5)
(Muste/a ermine), 0.05-0.36 kg
European polecat (Mustela
Ketamine (10) + medetomidine (0.20)
Atipamezole (1)
Beware hypothermia
putorius), 0.7-1.7 kg
European badger (Meles me/es).
Ketamine (10-15) + midazolam (0.41)
5.5-12.5 kg
Ketamine (5-10) + medetomidine (0.05-0.10)
Atipamezole
 Preferred combination
(0.25-0.50)
548
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
Class Reptilia
INSECTIVORES - EUROPEAN
Order Crocodyla (crocodiles, alligators, gharials)
HEDGEHOGS (ERINACEUS
Order Testudines, suborders 
EUROPAEUS), AFRICAN
a) Pleurodira (side-necked turtles, snake-neck
PYGMY HEDGEHOGS (ATELERIX
turtles)
 b) Cryptodira (tortoises, terrapins, soft-shelled
ALBIVENTRIS)
turtles)
Order Squamata, suborders
Hedgehogs are insectivores with rapid metabolism and, as
a)Sauria (lizards)
such, should not be fasted for more than 1 hour. Efforts
b）Serpentes (snakes)
must be made to maintain temperature, especially in the
c)Amphisbaenia (worm lizards)
smaller pygmy species. Inhalational anaesthesia using
Order Rhynchocephalia (tuataras)
chamber induction is preferred as even a tightly rolled-up
hedgehog will succumb. Intubation can be challenging
Reptiles are vertebrates with similar organ systems to
and is most readily accomplished using endoscopic guid-
mammals. However, they are ectothermic and rely on
ance of small diameter endotracheal tubes (Fig. 17.7).
environmental temperature and behaviour to control their
Altermatively. facemask maintenance is often acceptable
core body temperature. They possess both renal and
for short procedures. Parenteral drugs may be indicated for
hepatic portal circulations, and predominantly excrete
feldwork but details are scant.
ammonia, urea, or uric acid depending upon their evolu-
tionary adaptations. They possess nucleated red blood
cells and their metabolic rates are typically only around
15% those of mammals.
The diversity of evolutionary adaptations within
the Reptilia necessitates generalities. Reptiles possess a
common cloaca that receives the lower gastrointestinal,
reproductive and urinary tracts. In addition, lungs are
simpler and composed of vascular pockets, more like a
cavitated sponge than alveoli. Lizards are quadrupeds and
have a similar organ distribution. Of particular note is the
lack of a diaphragm such that all organs are contained
within a single coelomic cavity. Some lizards (e.g. tegus
and monitors) possess post-pulmonary and/or post-
hepatic membranes that are thin but divide the coelom
into compartments. Snakes have their organs distributed
 in a longitudinal arrangement. While the general location
of organs is similar between species, variations do occur.
Figure 17.7 African pygmy hedgehog intubated and
However, the heart is typically located 22-35% from
maintained on isoflurane/Oz while a needle is placed into the
snout-to-vent, while the respiratory surface areas of the
humerus for IO access.
lungs are situated between 25 and 50% snout-to-vent [the
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
caudal air sac may extend far further caudad). Boas and
n ar ur ue saus a are sud
evolved from quadripedal reptiles still possess both left
and right lungs: however, more evolved members of the
Serpentes lack a developed left lung. Snakes and lizards
REPTILES
have incomplete tracheal rings. The chelonians (Testu-
dines) are characterized by their shell, which comprises of
 The Class Reptilia consists of over 8000 species, but only
a dorsal carapace and ventral plastron. The shell may be
a few dozen species are likely to be encountered with any
leathery or rigid. The internal organs are not dissimilar in
regularity in general practice All the crocodylia, front-
distribution between different chelonian species. The
fanged poisonous snakes (but not all backed-fanged poi-
cranioventral heart is located within a pericardial mem-
sonous species) and both species of poisonous lizard
brane, while the lungs are dorsad and separated from the
(Heloderma spp.) are considered to be dangerous animals
remaining viscera by a post-pulmonary membrane (or
and are usually covered by national and/or state legisla-
septum horizontale). Chelonians have complete tracheal
tion. The following description will concentrate on
 rings, and males possess a single copulatory phallus. Croc-
companion reptiles that are frequently presented to
odilians have a four-chambered heart, and a functional
practitioners.
diaphragm that utilizes the ventral body wall skeletal
549
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
C
D
Figure 17.8 Reptile venipuncture sites: (A) left jugular vein in a Greek tortoise; (B) dorsal coccygeal vein in an Aldabra
tortoise; (C) caudal (ventral tail) vein in a monkey-tailed skink; (D) cardiocentesis in a sedated boa constrictor.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
musculature and liver to create a 'diaphragmatic pump’
approximately 4-8% of body weight and of this, up
The gular flap must first be displaced ventrad to expose the
to 10% may be withdrawn safely in healthy animals. A
 glottis for tracheal intubation. The trachea is composed of
range of IV routes are available for blood collection
complete tracheal rings. All reptiles have both pulmonary
and the administration of anaesthetics and other agents
and systemic circulations (similar to mammals). In non-
(Fig. 17.8):
crocodilian reptiles, functional separation of venous and
arterial blood is largely maintained by a muscular ridge
 Tortoises, turtles and terrapins - Jugular vein, subcarapacial
within the ventricle. The total blood volume of reptiles is
 sinus, post-occipital sinus, dorsal coccygeal vein 
550
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
Table 17.7 Important husbandry requirements for some popular reptiles
Species
Habitat/vivarium type
POTz *C Humidity %* Lighting Hibernation Diet
Corn/rat snake
Terrestrial, scrubland
25-30
NS
Yes
Boa constrictor
Terrestrial, rainforest 
28-31
70-95
NS
No
C
(semi-arboreal/aquatic)
 Ball pythion 
Terrestrial, scrubland 
25-30
50-80
NS
No
C
Leopard gecko
Terrestrial, arid scrub
25-30
 20-30
NS
No
1, C
 Green iguana
Arboreal, rainforest 
29-33
58-09
BS
No
H
Bearded dragon
Terrestrial, desert 
20-32
DE-02
BS
No
I, c, h
Water dragon
Arboreal, rainforest
24-30
06-08
B5
No
I, c. h
 Savannah monitor
Terrestrial, arid scrub
25-32
20-40
B5
No
C. i
Greek tortoise
Terrestrial, temperate to subtropical
92-02
30-50
B5
Yes
H. C
Box tortoise
Terrestrial, temperate to subtropical
22-28
08-05
B5
Yes
H, l, C
Leopard tortoise
Terrestrial, tropical
25-30
05-0E
BS
No
'H
Red-footed tortoise Terrestrial, tropical
25-30
06-05
58
No
3'H
Red-eared terrapin
Temperate to subtropical, semi-aquatic, water 24-28
enbe
BS
Yes
H, I, c
depth 30 cm min, land area % of tank
*Humidity requirements will be significantly greater during ecdysis. Temperature requirements shown are air temperature gradients. In 
general, basking temperatures should be 5°C greater, while at night these temperatures should fall by 5°C. Bs: broad spectrum lighting 
(UVB 290-320 nm) essential; NS: no special lighting requirements known or able to utilize dietary Vit D3; li: insectivorous, Hh: herbivorous,
Cc: carnivorous. Upper case indicates major food items, lower case minor food items.
Lizards - Caudal (ventral tail) vein, caudal to cloaca
should be assessed, especially if debilitated or presented
Snakes - Caudal (ventral tail) vein, caudal to cloaca;
 post-hibernation. Reduced skin elasticity is an unreliable
cardiocentesis
sign of dehydration, but together with enophthalmos and
Crocodilians - Caudal (ventral tail) vein (small
reduced body weight compared to previous records, evi-
animals), supravertebral sinus (just caudal to the skull in
dence of dry mucous membranes and lethargy may be
the dorsal midline).
 suggestive. However, determination of packed cell volume
and total solids by blood sampling provides a more quan-
iour to maintain their body temperature within their pre-
titative measure of dehydration. Normal haematocrit
ferred optimum temperature zone (POTZ) (Table 17.7).
values vary between species, but tend to be approximately
Maintenance of species-specific POTZ before, during and
20-35%. Lithium-heparin tubes should be used for bio-
after anaesthesia is important to ensure proper dnug
chemical profles, while EDTA is preferred for haematol-
metabolism and complete recovery. For some minor pro-
ogy [unless it is known to cause haemolysis in which case
cedures, for example blood sampling, simple restraint may
heparin is used, e.g. for some species of chelonians).
be all that is required. This can be enhanced by temporary
For elective procedures [e.g. neutering). underweight,
immobilization techniques, for example dorsal recum-
dehydrated or debilitated animals should be nursed for
bency, reduced light intensity, or by gentle ocular pressure
days, weeks or months until their condition improves. For
[vaso-vagal response). However, for more invasive and
 non-elective cases, attempts to correct dehydration should
painful procedures sedation or anaesthesia is required.
be started prior to anaesthesia. Even the most moribund
reptile will usually beneft from stabilization for 24-48
hours before embarking on general anaesthesia. In the
Preanaesthetic stabilization,
author's experience, reptiles that fail to stabilize prior to
sedation and analgesia
surgery tend to succumb intra- or postoperatively. While
oral fluids are non-invasive to administer and provide the
A full clinical examination should be performed, and the
most physiologically normal method of rehydration, they
animal accurately weighed. The fluid status of all reptiles
are suffcient only for mildly dehydrated tractable animals
551
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
B
Figure 17.9 Intracoelomic fluid therapy administration (A) in a tortoise via the ventrocranial aspect of the prefemoral
fossa, cranial to the left hind limb: (B) in a green iguana cranial to the right hind limb. Care is required to avoid the often
voluminous bladder of chelonians and some lizards.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia
and are contraindicated immediately prior to surgery due
All reptiles should be hospitalized and maintained
to the risks associated with regurgitation. Intracoelomic
at their POTZ at all times to minimize physiological
fluids are more suitable but uptake can take many hours 
disturbance facilitate recovery, and ensure immunocom-
and their use is obviously problematic if coeliotomy or
petence (see Table 17.7). It should be noted that although
coelioscopy is scheduled (Fig. 17.9). Thus, for dehydrated
hypothermia will reduce movement, it does not provide
surgical candidates, IV or IO fluid therapy should be
analgesia, and is therefore unacceptable as a means of
considered.
anaesthesia. It can also dramatically affect the pharma-
 The osmolarity of reptile plasma is generally lower than
cokinetics of any drugs administered and greatly prolong
that of mammals, although desert species are certainly
recovery. Fasting should be carried out before all elective
capable of profound physiological haemoconcentration
procedures in order to avoid the compression of lung(s)
that would be fatal to mammals. In addition, reptiles
 associated with large meals and potential regurgitation.
possess a larger intracellular fluid compartment than
Fasting time depends on the feeding regimen of the reptile
mammals. Consequently, for both IV and IO fluid therapy.
but, in general, one feeding cycle should be omitted prior
isotonic (hypotonic compared to mammals) electrolyte
to surgery.
fluids (260-290 mOsm/L) are favoured to encourage the
Phenothiazines and parasympatholytics are rarely
intracellular diffusion of water. Fluids are administered at
employed, however, benzodiazepines have been used. The
20-35 mL/kg/day (rates of up to 5 mL/kg/h may be ini-
presurgical administration of analgesics should be routine,
tially used for the first 3 hours, although maintenance
although taxa-specific effects have been documented
rates of 3 mL/kg/h are typically used during anaesthesia).
(Table 17.8). Morphine (but not butorphanol) has been
 Use of an infusion pump or syringe driver achieves accu-
shown to be analgesic in bearded dragons and red-eared
rate dosing but multiple bolus injections are a practical
terrapins, whereas high doses of butorphanol (but not
alternative The catheter site should be prepared asepti-
morphine) is effective in snakes (Sladky et al., 2007, 2008).
cally. For lizards and snakes, ventral tail vein catheters, size
dependent upon animal size, can be placed and main-
tained during anaesthesia (Fig. 17.10A,B). In addition, IO
Regional anaesthesia
tibial or femoral catheters are well tolerated in lizards
and local block
(Fig. 17.10C). Jugular catheterization can be used in che
lonians and snakes, while cephalic catheters can also be
Inadequate knowledge of precise nerve positions is prob-
practical in larger lizards. Most IV catheterizations require
ably responsible for the current lack of regional nerve
a surgical cut-down procedure. (Fig. 17.10D),
blocks in reptiles, however, nerve locators may help
552
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A
?
C
D
Figure 17.10 (A) Intravenous catheterization of the caudal (ventral tail) vein in an anaconda; (B) caudal (ventral tail) vein 
catheter taped in position in an anaesthetized beaded lizard in dorsal recumbency: (C) intraosseous fluid therapy via a tibial
needle in a conscious bearded dragon; (D) intravenous fluid therapy via a left jugular catheter in a Greek tortoise
Courntesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
alleviate this problem (wellehan et al., 2006). Certainly.
authors used 2% lidocaine, 1 mL/25 kg or 0.8 mg/kg.
local anaesthetics have been used at coeliotomy sites, and
injected intrathecally by insertion of a needle from the
although inadequate for major surgery. they may be
dorsal aspect of the tail into the intercoccygeal vertebral
useful for decreasing general anaesthetic requirements
 space located by digital palpation. Complete analgesia and
[Hernandez-Divers et al., 2009). Recently, a local anaes-
relaxation of the cloaca and phallus developed in 4 ± 3
thetic technique was used for surgical phallectomy of
minutes. Mild hind limb paresis was noted in some
hybrid Galapagos tortoises (Rivera et al., 20ll). The
animals but resolved within 2-3 hours.
553
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 17.8 Analgesics, sedatives, and anaesthetics used in reptiles
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Comments
 Morphine 
1.5 IM,SC
Chelonia
10 IM, SC
Lizards
 Not analgesic for snakes. May cause respiratory depression
 Hydromorphone
0.5 IM, SC
 Chelonia (causes less respiratory depression than morphine)
 Butorphanol
 20 IM
Corn snakes
Not analgesic for bearded dragons or red-eared sliders. May cause
 respiratory depression
Meloxicam
0.2 IV, IM, SC
 Pharmacokinetic data in iguanas
Ketamine
10-40 IM
 Sedation, prolonged hangover effects
40-60 IIM
 Deeper sedation but not sufficient for painful procedures and care in
 debilitated individuals
Ketamine (10), combined with
 Deep sedation/anaesthesia in many chelonia. More pronounced effects
medetomidine (0.1) or
in aquatic species. Can be reversed using atipamezole (0.5 mg/kg IM)
dexmedetomidine (0.05), and
 and naloxone (0.2 mg/kg IM)
morphine (1.5) IM (or 50% dose IV)
Midazolam
2 IM or IV
 Given with ketamine to increase sedative effects or promote similar
effects at lower ketamine doses. Little effect by itself
 Tiletamine/zolazepam 
 3-12 IM
Tortoises, lizards, snakes
Propofol
3-10 IV, IO
Lov dose rate for larger reptiles
 Subanaesthetic doses produce variable short-term sedation
Alfaxalone
 5-10 IV
Low dose rate for larger reptiles
10-20 IM
Has the advantage of being effective IV/ or IMI
Isoflurane 
1-5%
Routine gaseous agent, subanaesthetic levels provide short-term sedation.
 Mask down or conscious (sedated) intubation possible in some species
Sevoflurane
2-7%
Very similar effects to isoflurane but recoveries appear to be faster
 Preferred agent for critical or giant reptiles
Injectable anaesthetic agents
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
Propofol, 3-10 mg/kg. IV or IO or alphaxolone 5-10
Isoflurane, desflurane or sevoflurane are the agents of
mg/kg, IV provide a rapid, controlled mode of induction
choice for maintenance of anaesthesia. These volatile agents
(Fig. 17.ll; see Table 17.8). These agents are relatively
have faster modes of action, are more controllable, and
non-toxic and there is minimal risk of thrombophlebitis
facilitate faster recoveries than most altermatives. Further-
if injected perivascularly, a particular concern since IV
more their lack of reliance on hepatic metabolism or renal
e u aeasa i aiaei aq a sse
animals undergoing elective procedures. Alfaxalone also
reptiles or those with questionable renal or hepatic func-
has the added advantage of being effective when admin-
tion. Some reptiles can be induced by inhalation agents in
istered IM at 10-20 mg/kg.
an induction chamber or by mask. A small lizard or snake
If IV access is impractical or dangerous to attempt, IM
can be placed into a Ziplock bag which is then flushed with
agents can be used to induce sufficient chemical restraint
5% isofurane or 8% sevoflurane [Fig. 17.12). Induction
for intubation. For IM injections in lizards and chelonia,
typically takes 10-20 minutes. Prolonged breath-holding is
the forelimb musculature is preferable, while for snakes, the
common with chelonians and crocodilians, and anaesthetic
epaxial muscles are used. Recently, an IM combination
induction with inhalation agents is seldom, ifever, possible.
of ketamine, 10-20 mg/kg, medetomidine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg.
Intubation of conscious patients has been suggested follow-
or dexmedetomidine, 0.05-0.1 mg/kg, and morphine,
ing local lidocaine spray, but cannot be recommended given
1.0-1.5 mg/kg. has proven effective for a variety of chelo-
the stress and risks of trauma to reptile and staff.
nians, and anaesthesia can be readily reversed using ati-
pamezole, 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, and naloxone 0.2-0.4 mg/kg.
lizards as the glottis is positioned craniad, but more
554
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A
B
Figure 17.11 Propofol induction (A) via the supravertebral sinus in an American alligator: (B) via the caudal (ventral tail) vein
inacolubridsnake.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
A
B
Figure 17.12 Inhalant induction: (A) a small snake in a Ziplock bag flushed with 8% sevoflurane: (B) a rattlesnake having
been coerced and restrained within the plastic tube receiving 5% isoflurane from a non-rebreathing mask circuit.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
555
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
[lizards and snakes) or limb movements (chelonia). The
action of these muscles is abolished at surgical anaesthetic
planes, and intermittent positive pressure ventilation is
essential for all reptiles that are anaesthetized for pro-
longed periods. Ventilation rates should initially mirror
preanaesthesia evaluations, and then be adjusted to main-
tain end-tidal capnography readings of above 10 mmHg
and, ideally, 15-25 mmHg. The use of electrical ventila-
tors enables precise and consistent ventilation rates and
 pressures thus preventing some of the variables associated
with manual ventilation and unstable anaesthetic depths.
Large reptiles are prone to ventilation-perfusion mis-
match if placed into lateral or dorsal position, and there-
fore it is wise to achieve a surgical plane of anaesthesia
before positioning for surgery.
Monitoring
Monitoring anaesthesia in reptiles can be different com-
pared to that of mammals. Palpebral and corneal reflexes
are reliable in those species in which they can be elicited
Figure 17.13 Intubation of a large snake. Even though this
(snakes and some lizards have spectacles, fused transpar-
is a non-venomous constrictor, care is still required to avoid
ent palpebrae). Cormeal reflexes are abolished at excessive
the needle-sharp teeth. The reptile glottis remains closed and
 depth, while pupillary diameter may bear little relation
only opens during active inspiration
to the depth of anaesthesia (unless fixed and dilated which
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia
indicates excessive anaesthetic depth or brain anoxia and
 death). Jaw tone (not recommended in venomous species)
and withdrawal reflexes [tongue, limb or tail) are useful,
becoming abolished only at a surgical plane. This also
diffcult in chelonia and crocodylia (Figs 17.13, 17.14).
correlates with full loss of righting reflex, loss of spon-
Many chelonians, lizards and crocodilians have a power-
tneous movement and complete muscle relaxation.
ful bite and a strong mouth gag is required for pro-
Cloacal tone is lost at excessively deep levels. Temperature
tection during intubation and throughout anaesthesia
should be monitored as metabolism of drugs is directly
(Fig. 17.15). In addition, crocodilians possess a gular
related to core temperature with decreased temperature
flap that must be deflected ventrad to expose the glottis.
commonly associated with protracted recoveries. Pulse
When dealing with venomous snakes, it is important to
oximetry, using either an oesophageal or cloacal reflect-
keep well clear of the fangs and use a head guard on the
 ance probe is useful for monitoring pulse rate. In addition,
anaesthetized snake to prevent accidental envenomation.
although the SpO2 readings are often low and have not
For most pet reptiles, small diameter endotracheal tubes
been conclusively validated for reptiles, monitoring the
or catheters are inserted through the glotis immediately
trend in SpO2 is often helpful. Doppler ultrasound is
caudal to the tongue, and this may be aided by forcing the
often more reliable for detection of a heart beat than
tongue up and forward by pressing a finger into the inter-
pulse oximetry when the probe is placed and taped over
mandibular space from under the jaw. The reptilian glottis
the heart of lizards and snakes or positioned over the
is actively dilated, and therefore its movement will often
carotid artery or placed at the caudolateral aspect of the
be abolished once anaesthetized. A guiding stylet can be
neck of chelonia and directed towards the heart. End-tidal
useful in facilitating endotracheal tube placement The
apnography has proven useful to assess adequacy of
 bifurcation of the trachea may be sited far craniad in some
ventilation (Fig. 17.l6). Excessive ventilation and low
chelonia, and gaseous exchange has also been reported
ETCO2 readings tend to correlate with a delayed return
within the tracheal lung of some snakes. Care should
to spontaneous respiration and slower recoveries.
therefore be taken to use a short endotracheal tube that is
Arterial catheters are difficult to place in reptiles and
securely taped into position.
require a surgical cut-down procedure to the carotid or
femoral arteries. Average MAP in conscious green iguanas
Ventilation
was 79 mmHg and decreased to 47 mmHg when anaes-
thetized with 1.5% isoflurane (Chinnadurai et al., 2010),
Apart from crocodilians, reptiles lack a functional dia-
 A poor correlation between oscillometric and direct blood
phragm, instead relying on skeletal intercostal muscles 
556
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
117
B
C
aod oi be ieiau aut o asn aui a lodod yr pnui slt roo-i u uonu leauee ) ti'l ane
the anaesthesiologist and endotracheal tube from being bitten. (B) View of the glottis (arrow) as it opens during inspiration
and (C) following intubation (arrow indicates endotracheal tube).
Courtesy of Dr Steohen Divers, University of Georgia.
of green iguanas (Chinnadurai et al., 20lo). The same
Recovery and postoperative care
researchers also discovered that only norepinephrine,
0.3-0.5 μg/kg/min, resulted in a significant increase in
 Towards the end of surgery, the anaesthetic gas should be
blood pressure when used in hypotensive iguanas (unpub-
discontinued while maintaining ventilation for a further
lished data). Blood gas measurements are often affected
 'uonaioxa juase uoeieuui aneney on sanuu oi-5
by intracardiac or pulmonary shunts, especially in aquatic
this point, oxygen should be discontinued in favour of
species.
decreased ventilation (once every l-3 minutes) using
557
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
room air delivered by an ambulance bag as this will help
a  a sn u  hssa s
reduce PaO2 and increase CO2 levels which stimulate
animal is ambulatory. It is not unusual for a recovering
spontaneous respiration (Fig. 17.17A). Once breathing
reptile to revert back to unconsciousness and apnoea
 spontaneously, the reptile can be extubated, and returned
(Fig. 17.17B). Additional analgesia and fluid support
to an incubator to recover fully. Continued monitoring
should be provided as indicated.
BIRDS
There are over 10oo0 species of birds that vary tremen-
dously in their anatomical, physiological, and ecological
adaptations. It would be impossible to cover all species
and therefore this review has been purposefully restricted
to those likely to be encountered in companion animal
practice, namely the psittacines (parrots), passerines (song
birds), raptors (birds of prey). waterfowl (ducks and
geese), and backyard chicken. Readers are directed to the
dedicated literature on avian medicine and anaesthesia for
further details, as only a brief overview can be provided
here [Forbes & Harcourt-Brown, 1996; Harcourt-Brown &
Chitty, 2005; Harrison & Lightfoot 2006).
Birds possess a unique and highly effcient cardiores-
Yiy aun um aos on paaioa sey ieul uaiss Aioiei
metabolic demands of flight Several of these anatomical
and physiological adaptations have a significant impact
on anaesthesia. The glottis is positioned at the base of
Figure 17.15 Monitor lizards have powerful bites and the
the tongue while the trachea is long and wide and
use of a mouth gag helps protect the endotracheal tube.
extends from the oral cavity to the syrinx. While the
avian trachea shows dramatic taxonomic variation
78
per minute. The pulse oximeter probe (not shown) is reading 1o0% saturation and a pulse of 78 per minute
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia
558
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A)
B
Figure 17.17 (A) Use of an ambulance bag to deliver air to a corn snake recovering from general anaesthesia: (B) recovering
reptiles, like this sea turtle, should be closely monitored, even after extubation, and until ambulatory.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
(e.g. complete septum and division in penguins, mallards
uninterrupted flow of airthrough the lungs. Tidal exchange
and petrels; inflatable sac-like diverticulum in emus and
is generated through the air sacs.
ducks; complex tracheal loops within the keel of cranes),
 The respiratory volume per unit body mass of the avian
the most common concern is the considerable increase
respiratory system is two to four times that of the dog:
in dead space compared to mammals. The two primary
however, the volume of gas in the lungs is only l0% of
bronchi are divided into extrapulmonary (from syrinx to
 total volume (compared to 96% in mammals). Therefore,
)Aeuoujndenu! pue (euaupuaied Sun
[throughout
birds have a much smaller functional reserve capacity and
length of lung to abdominal air sacs). Further bronchial
even short periods of apnoea are serious and will produce
division gives rise to the secondary bronchi, one group
 marked hypoxia. The cross-current relationship between
of which, the ventrobronchi, communicates with the
cranial air sacs [cervical, interclaviaular, and cranial tho-
effciency regarding gas exchange, including anaesthetic
racic). The dorsal and lateral secondary bronchi terminate
 gas exchange. Consequently, anaesthetic depth can change
in the caudal air sacs (abdominal and caudal thoracic
 quickly, necessitating a focused and attentive anaesthetist
air sacs). The dorsal and ventral bronchi are joined by
at all times.
narrow tubes, the parabronchi, which form the analogue
to mammalian lungs and are where gaseous exchange
 Preanaesthetic stabilization,
takes place between the air and the blood. In birds,
sedation and analgesia
inspiration and expiration are active processes requiring
muscular activity, and the air sacs act as bellows, deliver-
 Many birds will hide clinical signs of diseaseuntil advanced
ing air in a unidirectional manner through the non-
and so seemingly healthy individuals may actually be seri-
expansible lungs.
ously compromised. Anorectic, depressed or 'fluffed' birds
Air passing through the parabronchi moves in one direc-
arry a high anaesthetic risk (Fig. 17.18). Prior to anaes-
tion only during both inspiration and expiration: blood
thesia, every bird should be physically restrained as
flows across the direction of gas flow in a cross-current
 described below (especially for assessment of body condi-
design. Thus, the gas composition must change from the 
tion, and cardiorespiratory function), and accurately
inspiratory to expiratory ends of the parabronchi so that
weighed. High-risk patients are often subjected to a cursory
capillary blood must equilibrate with parabronchial gas at
physical examination and weight determination, before
widely different PO2 and PaCO2. The arrangement is such
being stabilized for l-2 hours prior to a more detailed
that gas exchange takes place during both inspiration
 examination. Maintenance in a heated incubator at
and expiration and its efficiency is dependent on an
28-30°C (82-88"F). SC fluid therapy. and oxygen
559
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
B
surroundings and confronted by a veterinarian. (B) A sick bird, like this African grey parrot is fluffed-up. depressed, and
lethargic, and should be considered a high anaesthetic risk.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
(Fig. 17.20A). For larger birds, it helps to use a towel to
keep the wings under control (Fig. 17.20B). Raptors can
be examined after being caste onto a table in either dorsal
or ventral recumbency, and wrapped in a towel, while
some hawks and falcons can be hooded. As birds do not
have a functional diaphragm, any disease process, or
space-occupying lesion anywhere within the coelom can
have adverse effects on cardiorespiratory function.
 Birds tend to have fast gastrointestinal transit times and
preanaesthetic fasting times are generally reduced with the
objective of emptying the crop (if present) and stomach
(proventriculus and ventriculus) prior to induction. Small
birds (e.g. budgerigars and cockatiels) are often fasted for
1-2 hours, medium-sized parrots (e.g African greys.
Figure 17.19 Subcutaneous fluid administration into the
Amazons) for 2-3 hours, and large parrots (e.g. cockatoos
medial inguinal skin fold of a conscious parrot.
and macaws) for 4-6 hours. These times can be extended
Courtesy of Dr Steohen Divers, University of Georgia.
or reduced following palpable evaluation ofthe crop. Large
raptors that feed once daily can be fasted for 8-12 hours.
provision are commonly used during triage (Fig. 17.19).
Avian analgesia has received little attention, but butor-
Nutritional support is also critical for many birds, espe-
phanol appears to be more effcacious as an analgesic than
buprenorphine in some parrots (Paul-Murphy et al., 1999;
cially for smaller passerines that require a near-constant
Sladky et al., 2006).
Kiddns pooy
Physical restraint should be kept to a minimum because
small birds, such as budgerigars and canaries, are prone to
Regional anaesthesia
become very distressed and large birds may struggle vio-
and local block
lently. Poultry should be grasped so thathe wings are held
saassed leus 'uay uaainh oi Apoq au guoie xeq
While local anaesthesia can be useful to reduce the
and psittacines should be cradled in the palm of the hand
need for volatile agents, they are seldom sufficient by
with the neck between the index and middle fingers,
themselves as general restraint is required. Overdosage is
taking care not to apply pressure to the neck or the coelom
ael ut 'snq sieaapnq se yns saiads les u kia
560
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
A
B
Figure 17.20 (A) Small birds like this budgerigar can be held using one hand to control the head, but care is required not to
compress the coelom and compromise breathing. (B) Large birds like this African crowned crane require two-handed restraint
and the use of a towel can help control the wings.
Countesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
birds, local analgesia can be used quite safely as long
chickens, guinea fowl, hawks, and ostriches (Gandini
as the total dose is calculated and maintained under
et al., 1986; Teare, 1987; Degernes et al., 1988; Langan
4 mg/kg lidocaine.
et al., 2000; Lumeij & Deenik, 2003; Mohammad et al.,
Aleipadsa] samup asaul yo auos on asuodsai aul (2007
O2-agonists) is inconsistent but may be of value in specific
Injectable anaesthetic agents
situations (Table 17.9). The bird should be confned in a
Intramuscular injection is made into the pectoral muscles
warm, darkened box as soon as the injection has been
on either side of the cariniform sternum or into the thigh
 made and the depth of anaesthesia produced is assessed
muscles. Intravenous injections are made into the ulnar or
by noting response to withdrawal reflexes and, although
basilic vein (e.g. parrots, raptors), right jugular vein (more 
the eyelids often close, the cormeal reflex should persist
difficult in pigeons), or medial metatarsal vein (eg. water-
throughout Increments can be given to produce the
fowl, chickens, large parrots). Although many injectable
desired degree of unconsciousness. Propofol has also been
agents have been used in birds of all kinds, the proven
used in pigeons, as wellas larger species including ostriches
effectiveness and improved safety of modern inhalation
and waterfowl (Fitzgerald & Cooper, 1990; Langan et al.,
agents has largely relegated injectable agents to situations 
2000);: however, concerns exist regarding narrow safety
where gas is not practical, possible, or is cost prohibitive.
margins.
Currently, most injectable anaesthetic agents are restricted
to instructional or free-ranging field applications. It would
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
be diffcult for a practitioner to defend the use of an inject-
able agent for induction or maintenance in companion
Whenever possible, it is desirable following premedica-
avian practice.
tion, to induce and maintain anaesthesia with an inhala-
Ketamine has been used alone and in combination with
tion agent, namely isoflurane or sevoflurane. Most birds
 medetomidine, midazolam, and butorphanol in pigeons,
 may be restrained so that anaesthesia can be induced using
561
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Table 17.9 Injectable analgesic, sedative, and anaesthetic agents used in birds
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Indications
Comments
and route
 Diazepam
0.2-2.0 IV
Most species, premedicant,
 May cause ataxia, remove perches. IM may cause muscle
 sedative, anticonvulsant 
irrita tion
 Reversed with flumazenil
Mlidazolam
0.2-2.0 IM, IV,
Most species, premedicant, sedative 
May cause regurgitation, and ataxia at higher doses
 intranasal
Ketamine 
 20-50 IM 
Most species, often inadequate for
Aates paonpay abuns joy paunbau Alleauah sasop yh
Medetomidine
0.10.35 IM
major surgery
 margin compared to inhalants
Ketamine 
 20-50 IM
Most species, often inadequate for
Aates paonpay abuns jof panbau Aleyaua sasop yhi
Xylazine
1-10 IM 
major surgery
 margin compared to inhalants
Meloxicam
0.25-1.0 IM, PO
NSAID
Care if used repeatedly
Butorphanol
 2-4 IM q 2-6 h
Analgesia
 Proven efficacy in parrots 
 Buprenorphine
0.01-0.05 IM q 8-12 h 
 Analgesia
 Ineffective in parrots
Figure 17.21 Mask induction using isoflurane in oxygen in
an African grey parrot.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
a facemask or they can be confined in a box made of
transparent plastic material while anaesthetic gases are
m suyom uaum ( iz'zi bid) xoq aui ou pananu
trained raptors, the use of a hood can reduce stress and
struggling during induction. Endotracheal intubation is
not difficult in most birds but uncuffed tubes are preferred
Figure 17.22 Intubation is relatively straightforward in most
as the avian trachea is composed of complete rings
birds. The glottis of an owl after intubation.
(Fig. 17.22). Endotracheal tubes should be lubricated and
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
562
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
placed gently to avoid trauma. Airway secretions may
behind the last rib, and just ventral to the flexor cruris
block the flow of gas in both intubated and non-intubated
medialis muscle.
 birds so it is always wise to have suction available for their 
Unlike injectable agents, modern inhalants provide reli-
removal by aspiration. Adequate suction can be provided
able induction, consistent dose-dependent cardiorespira-
from a 60 mL syringe fitted with a short length of fine
tory effects across a wide taxonomic range of birds, wide
catheter.
safety margin, and rapid recovery with minimal hangover
Most birds can be induced with 4-5% isoflurane or
C ide see  u saal isaea au siaa
6-8% sevoflurane, and maintained on 1.0-2.0% isoflu-
be maintaining ventilation and core body temperature.
rane or 2.0-4.0% sevoflurane in O2 delivered by mask or
These can be largely overcome by the careful use of patient
endotracheal tube. While non-rebreathing circuits (eg.
warming blankets (warm water blankets and forced air
T-piece system) are oten adequate for larger birds, the air
heaters), and mechanical ventilation (see Fig. 17.23),
sacs should be flushed at about 1-5-minute intervals by
Occlusion of the open arm of the T-piece system, their over
Ventilation
distension being prevented by escape of gas around the
endotracheal tube or by partial lifting of the facemask
Large birds placed on their backs may not ventilate
away from the face. The author prefers to use a ventilator
adequately due to the weight of their keel and pectoral
(Small Animal Ventilator, Vetronics) that can be used as a
muscles. Even smaller birds may suffer from a gradual
passive non-rebreather circuit or as an active ventilator.
 deterioration in ventilation. Consequently, all birds gener-
simply by pushing a button (Fig. 17.23). Total gas flow
ally benefit from continuous or intermittent ventilation;
rates should be about two to three times the estimated
however, accurate monitoring of both ETCO2 and SpO2
minute volume of respiration of the bird (respiratory rate/
 ('i  as) (moiq  as ai s
min xtidal volume 15-30 ml/kg). Inhalation anaesthetics
author prefers a pressure-cycled ventilator that can over-
may also be administered through a cannula inserted into
come a small leak associated with an uncuffed endotra-
the caudal thoracic air sac, but not the clavicular air sac
cheal tube. In general, ETCO2 concentration should be
(Jaensch et al., 200l ). This is particularly useful when per-
maintained between 35 and 45 mmHg. and SpOz above
forming surgery in the oral cavity or the trachea, and when
95%. Overventilation results in decreased ETCOz. res-
dealing with an upper respiratory obstruction. The air
piratory alkalosis and delayed return to spontaneous
sac cannula can be placed through the lateral body
respiration necessitating a gradual weaning off the ven-
wall (either in front of or behind the left pelvic limb).
tilator. When controlled ventilation is employed, in-line
br/m
SFM
IALRT TRND SCALE CAL
Balr Hug
3
Figure 17.23 An anaesthetized macaw receiving isoflurane/Oz from a dedicated ventilator (1) positioned on a warm air
blanket (2) supplied by a forced air heater (3). Fluids are being delivered IV from a syringe driver (4) into the ulnar vein and a
Doppler probe is being used to monitor the ulnar pulse (5). Inset shows measurements and waveforms for respiratory rate,
ETCOz. heart rate and SpOz
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
563
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
humidifiers and warmers can be used to reduce the cooling
effects of inhaled O2.
Monitoring
Respiratory rate can be monitored visually or by using a
respiratory monitor or capnography, or can be set by the
ventilator. Pulse rates can most easily be monitored using
a Doppler probe over the ulnar artery as it courses medi-
ally, close to the elbow. Thermometers with a remote
probe are most useful with the probe inserted into the
cloaca or oesophagus. Maintenance of core temperatures
around 39.4-40.6°C (103-105°F) are ideal but can be
difficult to maintain in small birds. ETCOz can be reliably
e uim iun Aydeigoudes ueansueu e Suisn painsea
paediatric adaptor - side stream units often have too high
a sampling volume to be accurate for small birds. Pulse
oximetry can be unreliable but intermittent readings may
be obtained from the tongue, oral commissure, cloaca, Or
Desophagus. SaO2 and SpO2 are not well correlated but
observed trends may be useful (Schmitt et al., 1998).
Intraosseous (ulnar, tibiotarsus) or IV (jugular, ulnar/
basilic. medial metatarsal) catheterization is recom-
mended for the provision of crystalloid fluids at l0 mL/
kg/h, or ermergency medications (Fig. 17.24). Arterial cath-
 eterization for direct blood pressure and arterial blood gas
 measurements is certainly possible in birds over 400 g but
can take practice to perfect (Touzot-Jourde et al., 2004)
[Fig.17.25]
Recovery and postoperative care
Figure 17.24 Medial metatarsal vein catheterization in a
parrot.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
measures are withdrawn. If adequately ventilated, hydrated
and normothermic, healthy birds recover quickly from
inhalant anaesthesia and can be perching within minutes.
More compromised patients should be wrapped in a towel
to maintain warmth, held upright, and directly observed.
Following extubation, critical birds should be maintained
 On Oz using a mask (without the rubber skirt), and once
struggling. placed back into an oxygenated incubator
(Fig. 17.26). Continued fluid therapy and analgesia are
important for a quick return to normal behaviour and
feeding. Assisted feeding (crop tubing) should be insti-
tuted within a few hours if the bird is anorectic.
FISH
Figure 17.25 Arterial catheterization of the cranial tibial
artery (arrow) for invasive blood pressure monitoring in a
Fish are usually anaesthetized by allowing them to swim
au oi pauene si ydeboude weasuiew  uoabid
in a solution of the anaesthetic agent that has been made
endotracheal tube, a Doppler probe held over the radial
up in some of the water in which they are normally main-
pue sosadap anbuoi omi woy pauoysey dwep e ag Aae
an oesophageal probe is inserted to measure temperature.
and the temperature and pH matched to their tank water.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
564
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
Figure 17.26 Heated incubators capable of temperature control and oxygen support are useful for citical birds, and those
recovering from anaesthesia.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
Furthermore, additional clean, aerated tank water is
at identifying potential problems before they become
required for recovery. Various dnugs have been used for fish
advanced. While subanaesthetic doses of MS222 and
anaesthesia including carbon dioxide, ketamine, medeto-
eugenol may be used to sedate fish, most situations require
midine, metomidate alphaxalone/alphadolone diethyl-
a   i  a  i 'ie 
ether, propoxate hydrochloride tiletamine-zolazepam,
feeding cycle in order to reduce ammonia contamination
benzocaine, (iso)eugenol (clove oil) and tricaine meth-
in the anaesthetic solution.
anesulphonate (MS222) (Neiffer, 2007). Of these, eugenol
Fish analgesia is still an area of contention because
and tricaine methanesulphonate are probably the most
 some argue that fish lack the cerebral centres required for
common agents in use, although carcinogenic concerns
cOgnitive assessment of pain and suffering. Nevertheless,
have been raised.
there is increasing evidence to support the notion that fish
should receive analgesics. In koi carp. butorphanol
(0.4 mg/kg IM) has been has been shown to decrease the
Preanaesthetic stabilization,
negative effects of anaesthesia and surgery [Harms et al.,
sedation and analgesia
2005), while the analgesic effects of morphine in goldfish
can be blocked by opiate antagonists like naloxone
It can be challenging to stabilize a fish prior to anaesthesia
(Ehrensing et al., 1982). Of the non-steroidal anti-
and generally anaesthesia is required for detailed examina-
inflammatory drugs, ketoprofen has been evaluated in koi
tion. Nevertheless, visual evaluation can be useful, and
carp but shown to be ineffective compared to controls
regular observations by trained personnel are invaluable
(Harms et al., 2005).
565
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
Anaesthesia, monitoring
anaesthesia and medullary collapse. Fish can be kept out
and recovery
of water for 5 minutes which is often sufficient time for
minor procedures. For longer procedures, fish are removed
MS222, a widely licensed fish anaesthetic, is a white
from the induction tank and placed on a water recirculat-
powder that dissolves in both fresh and seawater. It is
ing machine (Fig. 17.28). A water reservoir containing
highly acidic and must be buffered close to that of the
maintenance anaesthetic solution (generally 5o% of
original fish tank water using sodium bicarbonate. For
 induction dose) is positioned under a perforated surgery
general freshwater applications, two parts sodium bicar-
platform. The fish is positioned on foam or in a V-slot on
bonate to one part MS222 is often acceptable, while 1 :1
-qns leus e uoiy ianem saaianai pue 'uojeid Aagins au
is adequate in salt water due to the intrinsic buffering
mersible pump in the reservoir. The rubber tube is posi-
 capacity ofthe marine environment. Induction results vary
tioned inside the buccal cavity to facilitate water flow over
with species and temperature but 100-200 mg/L MS222
both sets of gills. Water flows out ofthe opercula and drips
often induces stage 3 anaesthesia within 5 minutes
 back into the aquarium and for recirculation. Such anaes-
(Fig. 17.27).
thesia machines have enabled fsh to be anaesthetized for
 Isoeugenol is licensed for use in fish in some countries.
-pnout sanpasoid Augual ioy aunl jo spouad pasuoioid
but is frequently employed by the ornamental fish indus-
ing major surgery.
try by using the non-pharmaceutical grade product known
 Anaesthetic monitoring is limited but should minimally
as clove oil. A recent study in koi carp has demonstrated
include visual appraisal of spontaneous movement and
a wide margin of safety with doses of 40-80 mg/L induc-
tail/mouth pinch withdrawal reflexes. Heart rate can be
ing stage 3 anaesthesia within 4-ll minutes (Gladden
monitored using an ultrasonic Doppler flow detector, or a
et al., 2010).
pulse oximeter placed across the commissure of the mouth
Following placement in the aerated induction solution,
(Fig. 17.29). For recovery, fish are placed in non-medicated
fish often exhibit a brief period of excitement, before
tank water that is strongly aerated. Return of righting
losing their righting reflex, becoming inactive, and sinking
reflexes and swimming behaviours typically return in 5- 15
to the bottom of the container (see Fig. 17.27B). Stage 3
minutes. Ram ventilators [i.e. fish that must be actively
anaesthesia is characterized by slowed opercular move-
 swimming to ventilate), like some sharks, require a con-
ments and an absence of withdrawal reflexes. Fish should
stant stream of aerated water over the gills until they can
be removed at this point to prevent excessively deep
actively swim.
A
B
Figure 17.27 (A) Koi carp placed in an aerated bath containing the anaesthetic agent MS222 is initially in a normal position
in the water column. (B) The same fish following induction of anaesthesia has rolled into lateral recumbency and is non-
responsive to a tail pinch.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia
566
3
A
B
Figure 17.28 Large and small fish anaesthesia machines possess the same essential elements including a reservoir
Courtesy of Or Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
Vet/Ox?
4404
SpO2
MHESKA
国
A
B
Figure 17.29 (A) Anaesthetized catfish being monitored using a pulse oximeter and tongue dip placed over the mandible
(B) Pulse oximetry display from the same fish indicates a pulse rate of 80 and SpOz of 47%. It is important to note that the
heartbeat of fish is biphasic due to the extended contraction of the sinus arteriosus and sinus venosus. Consequently, many
commercial monitors record the piscine heartbeat as two separate events and indicate a heart rate that is double the actual
rate. In this case, the true heart rate is 40. In addition, the SpOz values recorded by machines calibrated for mammals are not
accurate in fish.
Courtesy of Dr Stephen Divers, University of Georgia.
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
REFERENCES
AVMA, 2007. US Pet Ownership &
ostriches [Struthio camelus]. Vet Rec
medetomidine-ketamine and
Demographics Sourcebook.
118, 729-730.
intravenous propofol in ostriches
American Veterinary Medical
Gladden, IN., Brainard, B.M.,
(Struthio camelus). J Avian Med Surg
Association. Accessed online,
Shelton, J.L., et al., 2010. Evaluation
14, 2-7.
http://www.avma.org/reference/
of isoeugenol for anesthesia of koi
Lumeij, J.T., Deenik, J.W., 2003.
marketstats/ownership.asp
carp (Cyprinus carpio]. Am J Vet Res
Medetomidine-ketamine and
Brown, L., 1993. Anesthesia and
71,859-866.
diazepam-ketamine anesthesia in
restraint. In: Stoskopf, M.K. (Ed.).
Harcourt-Brown, N.H., Chitty, I., 2005.
racing pigeons (Columba livia
Fish Medicine. W.B. Saunders,
BSAVA Manual of Psittacine Birds.
domestica) - A comparative study. ↓
Philadelphia, pp. 79-90.
second ed. British Small Animal
Avian Med Surg 17, 191-196.
Carpenter, J.W., 2005. Exotic Animal
Veterinary Association, Cheltenham.
Mohammad, F.K., Al-Zubaidy, M.H.,
Formulary, third ed. W.B. Saunders
Harms, C.A., Lewbart, G.A.,
Alias, A.S., 2007. Sedative and
Co, St Louis.
Swanson, C.R., et al., 2005.
hypnotic effects of combined
Chinnadurai, S.K., DeVoe, R.
Behavioral and clinical pathology
administration of metoclopramide
Koenig, A., et al., 2010. Comparison
changes in koi carp (Cyprinus 
and ketamine in chickens. Lab Anim
of an implantable telemetry device
arpio) subjected to anesthesia and
(NY) 36, 35-39.
 and an oscillometric monitor for
surgery with and without intra-
Neiffer, D.L., 2007. Boney fish (lungfish,
measurement of blood pressure in
operative analgesics. Comp Med 55.
sturgeon and teleosts). In: West, G..
 anaesthetized and unrestrained green
221-226.
Heard, D., Caulkett, N. (Eds.), Zoo
iguanas [lguana iguana). Vet Anaesth
Harrison, G.J., Lightfoot, T.L., 2006.
Animal & wildlife Immobilization
Analg 37, 434-439.
Clinical Avian Medicine. Spix
and Anesthesia. Blackwell
Degernes, L.A., Kreeger, T.J..
Publishing, Palm Beach.
Publishing. Ames, pp. 159-196.
Mandsager, R., et al., 1988.
Heard, D.J., 2004. Anesthesia, analgesia,
Paul-Murphy, J.R., Brunson, D.B.
Ketamine-xylazine anesthesia in
and sedation of small mammals. In:
Miletic, V., 1999. Analgesic effects of
red-tailed hawks with antagonism by
Quesenberry, K.E., Carpenter, J.W.
 butorphanol and buprenorphine in
yohimbine. J wildlife Dis 24,
(Eds.), Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
conscious African grey parrots
322-326.
Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
(Psittacus erithacus erithacus and
Drummond, J.C., 1985. MAC for
second ed. W.B. Saunders Co.
Psittacus erithacus timnehj. Am J Vet
halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane
Philadelphia, pp. 356-369.
Res 60, 1218-1221.
in the New Zealand white rabbit:
Heard, D.J., 2007a. Lagomorphs
Rivera, S., Divers, S.j., Knafo, S.E., et al.
and a test for the validity of MAC
(rabbits, hares and pikas). In:
2011. Sterilisation of hybrid
determinations. Anesthesiology 62.
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
Galapagos tortoises (Geochelone
336-338.
(Eds.), Zoo Animal & wildlife
nigra) for island restoration. Part 2:
Edling, T.M., 2006. Updates in
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
male phallectomy under intrathecal
 anesthesia and monitoring. In:
 Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
anaesthesia. Vet Rec 168, 78-81.
Harrison, G.J., Lightfoot, T.L. (Eds.),
pp.647-653.
Scheller, M.S., Saidman, L..,
Clinical Avian Medicine, vol. 2.
Heard, D.J., 2007b. Rodents. In:
Partridge, B.L., 1988. MAC of
Spix Publishing, Palm Beach,
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
sevoflurane in humans and the New
pp. 747-760.
(Eds.), Zoo Animal & wildlife
Zealand white rabbit. Can J Anaesth
Ehrensing, R.H., Michell, G.F.
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
35.153-156
Kastin, A.1., 1982. Similar
Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Schmitt, PM., Gobel, T., Trautvetter, E..
antagonism of morphine analgesia
pp. 655-663.
1998. Evaluation of pulse oximetry
by MIF-1 and naloxone in Carassius
Hernandez-Divers, S.J., Stahl, S.).
as a monitoring method in avian
auratus. Pharmacol Biochem Behav
Farrell, R., 2009. Endoscopic
anesthesia. J Avian Med Surg 12.
17.757-761.
gender identification of hatchling
91-99.
Fitzgerald, G., Cooper J.E., 1990
Chinese box turtles [Cuora
Schumacher, I., Yelen, T., 2006.
Preliminary studies on the use of
flavomarginata) under local and
Anesthesia and analgesia. In:
propofol in the domestic pigeon
general anesthesia. I Am Vet Med
Mader, D.R. [Ed.), Reptile Medicine
(Columba livia). Res Vet Sci 49.
Assoc 234, 800-804.
and Surgery, second ed. Elsevier, St
334-338
Jaensch, S.M., Cullen, L., Raidal, S.R.,
Louis, pp. 442-452
Forbes, N.A., Harcourt-Brown, N.H..
2001. Comparison of endotracheal,
Sladky, K.K., Kinney, M.E.
1996. BSAVA Manual of Raptors.
αudal thoracic air sac, and clavicular
Johnson, S.M., 2008. Analgesic
Pigeons and Waterfowl, second ed.
air sac administration of isoflurane
efficacy of butorphanol and
British Small Animal Veterinary
in sulphur-crested cockatoos
morphine in bearded dragons and
Association, Cheltenham.
(Cacatua galerita). I Avian Med Surg
corn snakes. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
Gandini, G.C., Keffen, R.H.,
15, 170-177.
233.267-273.
Burroughs, R.E., et al., 1986. An
Langan, I.N., Ramsay, E.C.,
Sladky, K.K., Krugner-Higby, L..
anaesthetic combination of
Blackford, J.T., et al., 2000.
Meek-Walker, E., et al., 2006. Serum
ketamine, xylazine and
Cardiopulmonary and sedative
concentrations and analgesic effects 
alphaxalone-alphadolone in
effects of intramuscular
of liposome-encapsulated and
568
Anaesthesia of zoological species (exotic pets, zoo, aquatic, and wild animals)
Chapter
17
standard butorphanol tartrate
hydrochloride immobilization in 
 mandibular nerve blocks in
in parrots. Am J Vet Res 67.
guineafow] (Numida meleagris) by
Cocodilians. I Zoo Wildlife Med 37.
775-781.
yohimbine hydrochloride. J Wildlife
405-408.
Sladky, K.K., Miletic, V, Paul-Murphy, J.,
Dis 23, 301-305.
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N., 2007.
et al., 2007. Analgesic effcacy and
Touzot-Jourde, G.,
Zoo Animal & Wildlife
respiratory effects of butorphanol
Hernandez-Divers, S.J., Trim, C.M.,
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
and morphine in turtles. J Am Vet
2004. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Med Ass0c 230, 1356-1362.
 controlled versus spontaneous
Ypsilantis, P., Didilis, V.N..
Smith, W., 1993. Responses of
ventilation in pigeons anesthetized
Politou, M., et al., 2005. A
 laboratory animals to some
for coelioscopy. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 comparative study of invasive and
injectable anaesthetics. Lab Anim 27.
227.1424-1428.
oscillometric methods of arterial
30-39.
Wellehan, I.F., Gunkel, C.l., Kledzik, D.,
blood pressure measurement in the
Teare, J.A., 1987. Antagonism of
et al., 2006. Use of a nerve locator to
anesthetized rabbit. Res Vet Sci 78.
 xylazine hydrochloride-ketamine
facilitate administration of
269-275.
569
18
lapter
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Sonia M. Hernandez
Introduction and general concepts
571
species and challenging feld conditions. Specific anatomi-
Prior to capture and anaesthesia
572
al and physiological details are not always available.
although the reader is directed to excellent resources for
Capture techniques and remote drug
delivery
572
specifics (Fowler & Cubas, 200l; Fowler & Miller, 2003).
 In most cases, anaesthetic protocols have been adjusted
Human safety
572
from doses in domestic species and rarely are detailed
Handling and treatment of accidental
pharmacokinetic studies available. Unlike working with
exposure to carfentanil or etorphine
575
small animal patients, veterinarians planning to anaesthe-
Equipment
576
tize wildlife are not often afforded the opportunity to
Remote delivery systems
576
 physically examine patients, or acquire biological samples
to assess their physical status prior to anaesthesia, and that
Darts
577
sometimes translates to choosing anaesthetic cocktails
Anaesthetic agents
578
with a wider safety margin while sacrificing other param-
Induction of anaesthesia
578
eters such as recovery time. Additionally, capture and
Stress and capture myopathy
chemical immobilization of wildlife can pose some sig-
579
nificant human safety considerations. Lastly, morbidity
Capture myopathy
580
and mortality of patients undergoing feld anaesthetic pro-
Monitoring
581
cedures is not uncommon. For example, high ambient
Recovery
581
temperature can lead to hyperthermia.
Anaesthetic agents for selected
 This review will focus on the general principles of wild-
 common wildlife species
582
life anaesthesia, with an emphasis on free-ranging North
American species; however, for more in-depth informa-
tion, particularly species-specific details, the reader is
directed to more detailed references [Kreeger & Arnemo,
INTRODUCTION AND
2002; Carpenter, 2005; West et al., 2007). Other texts such
as Research and Management Techniques For Wildlife and
GENERAL CONCEPTS
Habitats are also very helpful for capture, identification
and handling of wildlife species (Brookhout, 1996). Vet-
The nature of wild animals dictates that any manipulation
erinarians working with wildlife will benefit from collabo-
that requires handling will necessitate chemical immobi-
ration with wildlife biologists and ecologists who can help
lization. Anaesthetizing wild animals is typically done to
design capture techniques that minimize stress and
mark an animal, to apply a radio transmitter, administer
provide invaluable knowledge about the animal's behav.
individual animal treatment, or for the purpose of research.
iour. When anaesthetizing a species for the first time, it is
Anaesthesia of wildlife can be challenging and requires
very useful to contact zoo and wildlife veterinarians who
that veterinarians adjust the general principles of anaes-
routinely work with these species for their expertise.
thesia to the unique anatomy and physiology of wildlife
 Important modification to protocols often take time to be
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
571
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
hierarchy of some animals may be important if individu-
knowledge.
als are going to be separated from a group, or if, for
example, a herd may become 'protective' or aggressive
towards an animal showing drug effects, or towards the
PRIOR TO CAPTURE AND
capture team. Predation can occur, particularly during
induction and recovery, before or after the anaesthetic
ANAESTHESIA
team can protect the animals.
Unfortunately, the body weight of the animal often
As much as possible, veterinarians working in wildlife
needs to be estimated. This may prove diffcult in larger
capture teams should become familiar with the anatomy.
 species that cannot be examined up close prior to darting.
physiology and population dynamics of the species at
However, there are several resources which publish the
hand. In some cases, humane and effective methods of
range of body weight expected for common species
physical capture of wildlife species have been described
(Kreeger & Arnemo, 2002; Fowler & Miller, 2003). The
 often negating, or at least facilitating, chemical immobili-
 gender, life stage and reproductive status are also impor-
zation (Schemnitz, 1999). The team responsible for the
tant details. For example, xylazine is a common ingredient
anaesthetic event should meet several times in advance to
 in anaesthetic cocktails utilized to immobilize free-ranging
plan and organize the logistical, equipment and personnel
bison, yet it may cause abortion. All of this information
needs for the procedures. It is important to assign each
should be carefully recorded. Record sheets should be
person a specifc duty, so that at the time of the anaesthetic
designed ahead of time to collect important data that can
procedure everyone's responsibilities are clear. When
facilitate future anaesthetic periods.
working with dangerous animals, a specifc person trained
Premedication is rarely possible in wildlife species.
and equipped with firearms may be needed. In addition,
However, it may be useful to contain animals in large
a visit to the site of capture prior to the procedure is para-
enclosures and remotely administer neuroleptics, particu-
mount to determine environmental factors, such as land-
larly to those species prone to anxiety or stress and
scape characteristics that may pose a threat to the personnel
or the animals. Field sites can be rocky, muddy, traversed
used to facilitate translocations and zuclopenthixol
by creeks that pose a drowning hazard, or cliffs. It may be
acetate provides up to 4 days of tranquilization in cervids
possible to estimate the time of the day that the animal in
(Read et al., 2000; Woodbury et al., 200l; Read and
question may have had the least amount of food, or
McCorkell, 2002).
remove available food resources. Finally, the team should
discuss the realistic potential for morbidity and mortality
and should agree on what may be considered an 'accept-
able rate: For example, when working with common and
CAPTURE TECHNIQUES AND REMOTE
abundant species, it may be acceptable to expect a 10%
DRUG DELIVERY
loss, while when working with endangered species, even
the loss of one individual might not be acceptable. These
-saue aisuai aio uzn  anesuen au suisia
Physical restraint, whenever possible, will facilitate admin-
istration of anaesthesia and reduce stress for the animal.
thetic protocols, or designing back-up plans that require
This is particularly useful for small mesopredators (eg.
more personnel and equipment.
 Anaesthetic procedures should be planned at a time of
 s io m u (s 'sno 's
year and time of day when they pose the least hazard to
traps or squeeze cages allow the anaesthetist to hand
the species. For example if working with bears, it is impor-
inject, or use a pole syringe (Figs 18.1, 18.2). Small rodents
tant to take into consideration the metabolic changes asso-
can also be trapped in cage traps, transferred to mesh bags 
ciated with hibernation and avoid anaesthesia during this
and hand-injected (Fig. 18.3). Other animals may be
baited to food sources, or attracted to areas with pherom-
period. Ungulates are best anaesthetized in the early
spring or fall and during the coolest period of the day to
ones, allowing the anaesthetist to see and dart them more
easily. If physical restraint is not possible, animals may
avoid hyperthermia. On the other hand, in temperate
need to be located and chased with the use of hunting
zones, hypothermia during winter months is also a major
concern. In addition, vehicles required for the anaesthetic
dogs, helicopters or trucks [Fig. 18.4).
procedure [e.g. helicopters, trucks) may not be efficient
during rainy, ice or snowy conditions. Some landscape
characteristics can pose real dangers. For example steep.
-pe anban eu ss ianem Aqeau n 'uan A
HUMAN SAFETY
tional personnel to corral or herd animals away from
danger and working in such conditions requires protocols
Chemical immobilization of wildlife is inherently a dan-
that produce the shortest induction time. The social
gerous job, particularly for those that lack experience
572
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
18
 can easily be hand-injected
hand inject a raccoon.
Photo courtesy of M. J. Yabsfey
(Caulkett & Shury, 2007). It is wise for at least two people
 chemical  immobilization  procedures.  Human  safety
in the team to be trained in safety, frst aid and CPR. It is 
 should be paramount in any chemical immobilization
also useful, particularly when working with anaesthetics
procedure and the team leader should not be afraid to
in the feld, that a relationship has been established with 
 cancel or postpone a procedure if human safety is at risk
a nearby hospital or physician who is familiar with field
 of being compromised. There are a variety of hazards that
573
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
can be encountered and easily overlooked. As mentioned
before, the capture team should become intimately
familiar with the terrain, weather conditions and equip-
ment available at the field site well in advance to any
procedure to identify potential hazards. Procedures can
take longer than expected and the team should be pre-
pared for a variety of situations, including incoming
inclement weather.
The team should be composed of someone who is very
familiar with the behaviour of the animal to be immobi-
lized. Most animal species have some inherent defence
Hill et al. (l998) reported on the increase of animal-
related injuries to veterinarians working with wildlife. If
an animal is cormered, formulating an escape route for the
capture team should be discussed in advance. Although
the danger associated with some species like carnivores is
 obvious, ungulates can be just as lethal, especially aggres-
sive males during rut Even when anaesthetized, prema-
ture arousal or stimulation can cause an animal to bite or
kick. Large ungulates should be hobbled and other forms
of physical restraint, such as a dedicated person holding
the head of a carnivore, are wise. Members of a herd can
become curious or aggressive towards the capture team
(Fig. 18.5).
 Darts and dart delivery equipment should be treated
like frearms. Anyone handling the equipment should be
adequately trained. Shooting should not take place in
 areas where a person may inadvertently become the target.
juapanpeul ga) Ainlul jo sadki iauio 1o ainsodxa snu
needle sticks, explosions) usually occur when darts are
Figure 18.3 A pocket gopher was first trapped in a
being loaded. Ideally, a dart should be loaded in a quiet
modified cage trap. then transferred to a zippered mesh bag
place where the loader is not distracted by the activities
for hand injection of anaesthetic agents.
of the capture, but where at least another person can
Figure 18.4 A brown bear is
darted from a helicopter.
Photo courtesy of Asa Fah/man.
574
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
18
Figure 18.5 An immobilized North American bison in sternal recumbency is surrounded by trucks and personnel to protect
the capture team from the rest of the curious herd.
Handling and treatment of
watch the loader in the event of injury. The loader should
wear minimum standard personal protective equipment,
accidental exposure to carfentanil
including gloves, long sleeve attire and a face shield.
or etorphine
Damaged darts sometimes cannot be identified until they
are pressurized and thus the same equipment should be
Whenever carfentanil or etorphine are used, multiple vials
donned when a dart is pressurized. Not uncommonly.
of naloxone should be readily available and kept in date.
in two-chambered gas darts, the needle is not secured
The exposure kit should also contain: naloxone: 1 mg/mL,
properly and can shoot forward when the dart is initially
10 mL multidose vials (total l0); fve additional vials
 pressurized. The author always uses a large empty syringe
should be stored in the emergency box. Other items that
case slipped over the dart while it is being pressurized.
are essential include: normal saline intravenous fluids, IV
When working with large dangerous species, a dedicated.
administration set, various gauge IV Butterfly catheters,
trained security person with a backup firearm is essential.
various sized IV catheters and needles, various size syringes
This person should be adequately trained and familiar
(including large sizes for fluid administration), various
with the firepower necessary to incapacitate the species
 size gauge needles, tourniquet (used to help establish IV
at hand.
access), alcohol swabs, gauze pads, tape, disposable gloves,
Most anaesthetics pose some safety hazard for people.
The 'super narcotics' [etorphine and carfentanil] can cause
SPU resuscitator [AMBU) with reservoir attachment and
rapid, severe and profound sedation, respiratory depres-
tubing, carfentanil/etorphine emergency protocol, and
sion, hypotension and cardiac arrest. For perspective, car-
drug package inserts. Lastly, a portable oxygen tank should
fentanil is 10 oo0 times as potent as morphine. Therefore,
be available whenever potent narcotics are being used.
 The protocol for treatment of human narcotic exposure
any exposure has to be taken seriously. Inadvertent intoxi -
cation can occur through small skin cuts, needle sticks
includes:
or ocular and nasal exposure. Symptoms of exposure
1. Do not leave the patient unattended!
include nausea, dizziness, respiratory depression, miosis
2.0
Call for help. One person should be designated to
and quick progression to loss of consciousness, seizures or
radio or call emergency services. This person should
coma. Anyone working with anaesthetics, particularly in
clearly state that someone has been exposed to a
the feld, should have a written emergency protocol clearly
potent narcotic and immediate emergency
to identify and determine the steps that should be taken
assistance is needed. That person should also be
in the event of an exposure. This protocol should be dis-
responsible for providing emergency personnel
cussed with all participating personnel.
exact directions to the site
575
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
3. Flush the exposed areas with copious amounts of
conditions are unpredictable and packing for several sce-
water or saline Avoid contamination of additional
narios is wise. An emergency tacklebox should contain
personnel while doing this
standard emergency drugs (e.g epinephrine, lidocaine.
4.1
 Bring the Human Narcotic Exposure Emergency Kit
 atropine), additional anaesthetic and reversal drugs and
juaed aul ol uasAxo pue
items to support ventilation such as a laryngoscope.
5.1
 Draw up 30 mL of naloxone (3 bottles, 30 mg
endotracheal tubes, and nasal insufflation lines. Oxygen
total) into a 35 mL syringe
cylinders of the appropriate size are paramount, although
6. Draw up 10 mL of naloxone (1 bottle 10 mg) into
not always practical. Additionally, equipment to support
a 12 mL syringe
blood pressure, such as IV catheters and fluids, is impor-
 7. Monitor the patient's pulse and respiration rate
tant. It is important to foresee and plan for equipment to
8. Place the patient on his/her side to prevent
deal with other emergency conditions, such as hyperther-
aspiration and obstruction of airway by the tongue,
mia (water or alcohol) or blankets or tarps to combat
elevate the legs, maintain body temperature and do
hypothermia. Finally traumatic injuries are common, and
not give anything by mouth
an emergency laceration surgical pack, or at minimum,
9.1
 If the patient is awake and talking continue to
antiseptics and suture packs should be available Other
monitor
feld equipment I often find useful includes binoculars,
10. If the patient is losing consciousness or becomes
multipurpose tools, duct tape and thick permanent
 symptomatic proceed to establishing IV access. If
markers.
the patient is unconscious, and IV access cannot be
quickly established, proceed immediately to
administering 10 mL naloxone IM into a large
Remote delivery systems
muscle mass. Continue to repeat naloxone doses
Chemical immobilization of wildlife typically requires
(10-30 mL) until the patient wakes up and is able
remote drug delivery. In the case of small animals that are
to talk. Multiple doses may be required. If IV access
trapped, inhalation agents can be delivered in makeshift
is still inaccessible repeat the 10 mL naloxone IM
anaesthetic chambers. Otherwise, delivery of injectable
until help arrives. Initiate respiratory and cardiac
anaesthetics can be accomplished via hand-injection, pole
resuscitation as needed. If the patient is conscious
syringes, blowguns or other power projection systems via
but symptomatic, administer 8-10 L of oxygen
darts. Darts can cause significant impact trauma. They
using the non-rebreathing facermask. If the patient
should be delivered at the lowest velocity that still pro-
is unconscious, and in respiratory arrest, begin CPR.
vides accuracy at the distance needed. Dart-associated
All treatments and actions should be clearly
problems include: (1) improper dart placement into body
recorded. Ideally, one person will be dedicated to
cavities, joints or other vital structures; (2) dart-impact
noting all actions and becomes responsible for
transferring the information to the emergency
darts that contain an intermal explosive charge: (4) infec-
personnel when they arrive The capture team,
tion of dart wounds. Most dart-associated trauma results
along with a physician, should determine, in
-deu spouad amdes-aid pauueid Aanedoddeun uon
advance how far they should proceed with
propriate use of equipment, or inexperienced personnel
treatment.
Only personnel that have been trained on the use of power
It is important to remember that many other anaesthetic
 projection systems and have practised should be respon-
agents aside from the potent narcotics pose serious
sible for darting. Pole syringes are typically used on
hazards. For example, O2-agonists can cause bradycardia,
animals already under some form of physical restraint but
hypotension and respiratory depression, while ketamine
 are not efficient when the animal can easily move away, as
and related compounds can cause confusion, tachycardia,
pole syringes require some resistance for accurate delivery.
These systems are basically modifed syringes 'on a pole'
hypertension and respiratory depression. Personal protec-
tive equipment should be used any time these drugs are
measuring 3-4 m and allow some distance between an
handled during wildlife immobilization.
animal and the anaesthetist The pole syringes typically
require large gauge needles for fast delivery of drugs. Blow-
 guns are hollow barrels through which a dart is propelled
by the anaesthetist blowing in one, frm exhalation. The
EQUIPMENT
forced exhalation requires practice and blowguns are only
useful in relatively short distances (up to 10 m) with light-
 Field equipment needed for anaesthetic procedures should
weight darts (3 mL). Internal explosive darts typically
-e A o ea e i-n oi ad aq
annot be delivered fast enough to discharge with a
boxes or backpacks. Tackleboxes should be labelled or
blowgun.
coloured for the different jobs, for example, 'physical
Power projection systems include pistols or rifles that
exam', such that they are easily recognized. Field
10 sabieuo iapmod (1) rsep [adoud ol suaisAs oml asn
576
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
18
(2) carbon dioxide or compressed air. There are basically
cases, training is paramount As with any frearm, appro-
three types of rifles and pistols: (1) blowgun-like projec-
priate cleaning and maintenance is essential to ensure
tors that utilize compressed gas or CO2: (2) compressed
 appropriate dart delivery.
pue isian huuad um sionsid pue sa sea
(3) power load powered rifles. Blowgun-like projectors use
Darts
either compressed air or carbon dioxide to propel darts.
Their basic components are a source of compressed gas,
There are several types of dart and the type dictates the
some way to control the gas pressure through a pressure
method by which dnug is delivered into the animal. The
two types currently available commercially in the USA
detachable barrel. Rifles for long-distance work can be
include: (1) two-chambered compressed gas darts; and
fitted with telescopic sights. A common compressed air 
(2) powder explosive powered darts. Two-chambered
projector is the Dan-Inject projector (Fig. 18.6). Both
compressed gas darts are lightweight, typically made of
Palmer Cap-Chur and Pneu-Dart manufacture rife and
plastic and reusable (Fig. 18.7). The anterior chamber
pistol systems that use compressed gas or air with a per-
contains the drug to be delivered and is separated from
manently mounted barrel. These types of projectors are
not very accurate at long distances, lack accurate pressure 
 plunger. The anterior chamber is attached to a hollow
gauges and valve systems but rather have two to three
 needle that is sealed at the end and has a small side-hole.
 The posterior chamber is where the compressed gas is
moderate distances. Power load powered rifles look like 
 injected and contains a plunger valve that acts as a
typical rifles with permanently mounted barrels, and
 one-way valve allowing air to be forcefully introduced to
utilize .22 caliber blanks in several charge strengths with
 build up pressure. The posterior chamber ends in a syringe
different amounts of powder. These rifles are only for long
hub that is fitted with a tailpiece that acts like a rudder.
distance work and have the longest accuracy range. In all 
The dart is charged by filling the anterior drug chamber.
(available in two sizes) are removable for ease of transport.
(A)
B
Figure 18.7 (A) An example of a two-chambered gas dart is the Tel-lnject dart. The needles for two-chambered gas darts are
sealed on the end but have two holes that open on the shaft of the needle. These holes are covered by a silicone collar while
the dart is pressurized. This collar will slide down when the dart enters the animal, allowing drugs to escape through the
holes. (B) Two sizes of internally charged darts (Pneu-Dart).
577
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
placing the needle in front, securing a silicone collar over
they should only be pressurized at the last minute to avoid
the needle hole (Fig. 18.7A) and then charging the pos-
leaking of pressure and accidental discharge.
terior chamber with air (or liquid butane) with a syringe.
As the dart hits the animal, the silicone collar is pushed
Anaesthetic agents
down the needle, the pressurized gas in the posterior
chamber forces the plunger forward, pushing the drug in
 The ideal anaesthetic drug protocol has a wide safety
the anterior chamber out through the needle hole These
margin, low mortality rate, rapid and smooth onset of
darts can be gas sterilized and the needles autoclaved.
action after intramuscular administration, causes minimal
Blowguns necessitate the use of blow darts, which are
excitement phase, allows the retention of some reflexes
lighter versions of the two-chambered compressed gas
that allow monitoring, and produce relaxation that facili-
dart. Powder explosive powered darts contain an explosive
tates ease of handling of the animal. Additionally, ideal
cap that, when discharged, forces the drug into the animal 
 anaesthetics are water soluble stable, have a long shelf life
(Fig. 18.7B). They are composed of an anterior drug
are non-irritating, do not cause hypersensitivity, cause
chamber, a plunger, a posterior chamber that holds the
minimal cardiovascular or respiratory depression, are
explosive cap. a weighted fring pin and a spring that
 rapidly metabolized, are analgesic at subanaesthetic doses.
keeps the fring pin away from the cap. When the dart
and produce rapid and smooth recovery with minimal
hits the animal, the impact causes the metal fring capsule
 side effects. As most experienced anaesthetists know, there
to shift forward, overcoming the force of the spring and
is no such drug! Therefore, all dnug and dnug combina-
allowing the fring pin to impact the cap. causing it to
tions will require compromising some of the properties
explode. The expanding gas forces the plunger forward,
and the anaesthetist will have to determine which com-
pushing the drug through the needle. These darts deliver
promises are most appropriate.
dnug at a speed that can cause tissue trauma. The success
of delivery depends on the dart hitting the animal with
enough force to trigger the explosion. There are both reus-
able (Palmer Cap-Chur) and disposable (Pneu-Darts)
INDUCTION OF ANAESTHESIA
powered explosive darts. Disadvantages of these darts
include explosive cap failure and cost. In addition, these
 Once the animal has been darted or injected, the capture
darts are either aluminium or opaque plastic, which does
team should remain quiet for several minutes, to allow
not allow the anaesthetist to see if the plunger has moved
the anaesthetics to take effect without further stimulating
forward indicating drug delivery. The advantage of the
the animal. The induction time is dependent upon the
prefabricated darts (Pneu-Dart) is that they are simple
properties of the drugs delivered, the level of anxiety or
and do not have to be handled for cleaning. which is
stress under which the animal was darted, the animal's
important when human safety is a concern. Some general
physiological and physical status, its innate sensitivity to
rules of thumb apply to darts and dart delivery. The size
the drugs delivered, and the placement of the dart (eg.
of the dart chosen should be as close as possible to the
if drug is inadvertently delivered subcutaneously, induc-
volume of the anaesthetic dnug cocktail volume. If there
tion time will be longer and unpredictable). One should
is space leftover, the aerodynamic properties of the dart
expect that animals can cover large distances walking or
will be improved if the chamber is topped off with a
running prior to becoming ataxic The capture team
sterile solution that is compatible with the anaesthetics
should have explored the terrain ahead of time and antici-
used, for example, 0.9% NaCl. All dart components
pated where an animal may travel, or potential dangers
should be checked the day of the procedure For example.
in the way. In some cases, vehicles can be used to herd
the plunger should be forced to slide back and forth to
animals away from dangerous areas. It is best to remain
be certain it is sliding smoothly, and the dart should be
within visual distance, although monitoring could be
 pressurized with sterile water or saline in the anterior
 done, for example, with binoculars to avoid stressing the
chamber to observe for leakages or cracks. Finally, several
animal further. Once the animal becomes recumbent, the
back-up darts should be available as dart failure is not
anaesthetist should ensure there is no voluntary move-
umcommon.
ment prior to approaching. When an Q2-agonist has been
 Ideal dart sites are large muscle masses that will allow
 included in the anaesthetic protocol, head lifting or limb
accurate intramuscular delivery. In most animals, the
 st eisusaue jo ll a e aeun za
muscles of the upper hind legs are best; however, in some
light. Premature arousal at this time can be dangerous,
species, particularly those that have substantial subcutane-
particularly with large animals. One person should care-
ous fat over the hindquarters, the base of the neck or the
fully approach the animal. Clapping can be used to deter-
triceps muscle are preferred. Needle lengths for darts are
mine if the animal is capable of responding (eg. observe
chosen based on the thickness of the skin and the depth
to see if the ears twitch). If there is no response, a long
of the muscle mass targeted. Darts are typically loaded
pole can be used to stimulate the animal from a safe
with anaesthetic agents prior to locating an animal, but
distance. If the animal fails to respond, the airway should
578
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
18
anaesthesia. That person should be in charge of informing
the teams if any problems arise that necessitate shortening
the procedure. If the animal is determined to be stable, it
can be manipulated to obtain a body weight perform a
physical exam, and obtain morphometric measurements
or biological samples. The anaesthetist should be allowed
access to the animal for monitoring at least every 5-10
minutes. Whenever possible, equipment that allows con-
q pnos axn asnd se yns suu snonun
employed (see Fig. 18.8).
STRESS AND CAPTURE MYOPATHY
Animals undergoing capture and chemical immobiliza-
tion are likely to be under some degree of stress. Anxiety.
fear, excessive exercise, trauma, exposure to inclement
weather, pain and anaesthetic drugs are all potential trig-
gers of stress. As much as possible, capture and anaesthetic
protocols should be designed to reduce stress. Stress pre-
Figure 18.8 Oxygen supplementation is essential for
vention is largely aimed at avoiding prolonged pursuit or
free-ranging wild animal anaesthesia. A blindfold and gauze
restraint and minimizing adverse effects of the environ-
in the ears decrease external stimuli that might promote
ment and anaesthetics on the animal. Because pain can be
premature arousal, particularly when using protocols that
anbuot aui uo dp alaxo asind  sisuoe-za uieuo
a significant stress trigger, analgesics should be incorpo-
 rated into the anaesthetic protocol whenever painful pro-
monitors oxygenation and heart rate.
Photo courtesy of Asa Fahiman.
cedures such as tooth extractions, biopsies or surgery are
to be performed.
It is important to understand how stress affects the
physiology of animals to anticipate monitor and treat
be checked. If the animal becomes recumbent in an
such effects. Stress is a cumulative and adaptive response
awkward position, such as the head is facing downhill
that allows an animal to interact with its environment
 so that the abdominal viscera place excessive pressure on 
 through receptors. Stress responses are directed at coping
the thoracic cavity, its position should be adjusted. In all
with changes and include a change in behaviour, and
cases, ruminants should be propped in stermal recum-
significant physiological changes led by the autonomic
bency to prevent pressure on the rumen and bloating and
nervous system and the neuroendocrine system. These
the head should be supported in an anatomic position.
 changes result in an increase in muscle activity, body tem-
The head and neck should be extended to open the airway
perature, and overall oxygen demand. The autonomic
as much as possible. At this time, a blindfold should be
-uoo sains ol asuodsai pidei aul sapiaoid ualsAs snoaiau
placed over the eyes and cotton inserted in the ears to
 monly known as the fight-or-flight response, engaging the
decrease visual and auditory stimuli (Fig. 18.8). Once a
sympathetic nervous system and withdrawing the para-
first set of vital signs measurements are obtained, the eyes
 sympathetic nervous system, thereby enacting cardiovas-
should be lubricated. Additional physical restraint, such
cular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, renal, and endocrine
as tying the legs with ropes, may be considered if there
 changes. The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA).
is a concern over premature arousal. The dart should be
a major part of the neuroendocrine system involving
recovered and safely discarded to avoid human exposure.
the interactions of the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland,
The dart site should be identified and inspected for trauma
and the adrenal glands, is also activated by release of
that might require wound treatment The fur of the animal
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and arginine-
at the dart site can be soaked with anaesthetic agent and
vasopressin (AVP). This causes release of adrenocortico-
thus exam gloves should be used to examine the site If
tropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary into the
needed, the site can be flushed with copious amounts of
circulation, resulting in secretion of cortisol and other
water to rinse off the anaesthetic and prevent human
glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex. Catecholamine
exposure.
 secretion by the adrenal medulla, controlled by the sym-
At least one person should be assigned to monitoring
pathetic nervous system, induces changes such as increased
the animal, paying particular attention to ventilation,
heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output. Blood flow
cardiac function, body temperature and depth of
is increased to the muscles and decreased to non-essential
579
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 Table 18.1 Capture myopathy can be classified into four categories that are helpful in determining the outcome
of the case
Syndrome
Characteristics
dinical signs
Pathology
classification
Hyperacute or capture 
 Occurs within a short
Depression, tachypnoea, tachycardia.
Small areas of necrosis of skeletal muscle.
shock syndrome
 period after capture
hyperthermia, hypotension and death
 brain, liver, heart and other organs 
 and immobilization 
Ata xic myoglobinuric
 Becomes evident hours 
 Ataxia, torticolls, myoglobinuria. Animals 
 Swollen and dark kidneys, bladder contains
 syndrome
to days after capture
with severe clinical signs are likely to die
dark urine, appendicular skeletal muscle 
groups contain multifocal, pale, soft, dry
areas. Renal lesions include dilation of
tubules, tubular necrosis, myoglobin casts
Ruptured muscle
Manifests 2448 h
Dropped hindquarter, hyperflexion of hock 
Subcutaneous haemorrhage, multifocal
 syndrome
 after capture
due to uni- or bilateral rupture of the 
 small-large, pale lesions of the limbs.
gastrocnemius
Muscle necrosis can be diffuse 
Delayed-peracute
 Manifest after restraint 
 Animals can look normal, but when
There are typically no lesions or few small.
syndrome
for 24 h
disturbed may try to run and then
 pale foci of the skeletal muscle
 suddenly die due to ventricular fibrillation
 Dehydration and underlying disease can also be impor-
cell volume. Blood glucose levels increase due both to
tant contributors.
increased liver and muscle glycogenolysis, and conversion
The pathophysiology of CM is complex and has been
of lactic acid into glucose in the liver. Ventilation increases,
thoroughly reviewed elsewhere (Spraker, 1993). Generally.
bronchodilation occurs, mental activity and alertness
CM is a result of altered blood flow to tissues, exhaustion
 become more acute. All of these physiological changes are
of aerobic energy, decreased delivery of oxygen and nutri-
appropriate to provide an animal the tools needed for an
ents, increased circulating lactic acid and inadequate
effective escape.
removal of cellular waste from tissues. Increased levels of
circulating myoglobin resulting from rupture of cells can
Capture myopathy
lead to tubular necrosis of the kidneys and renal failure.
Capture myopathy is a form of rhabdomyolysis that con-
Capture myopathy (CM) is a generic name given to a
sists of breakdown of skeletal muscle and leakage of the
syndrome clinically characterized by pain, muscular stiff.
intracellular contents into the blood. Depending on the
ness, incoordination, ataxia, oliguria, paresis, paralysis.
predominating mechanism, CM has been classifed into
metabolic acidosis, depression, and potentially death.
four temporal syndromes: hyperacute, acute, subacute and
The condition is associated with the stress of capture,
chronic; however, a descriptive classification system is pre-
exertion, trauma, handling, long periods of restraint, and
ferred (Table 18.1). Although classifications of CM are
transportation. This condition was originally described
artificial and the pathogenesis of CM is a continuum, they
in free-ranging herbivores, but has since been reported
 are useful for predicting the outcome.
in a variety of mammalian and avian species, including
Treatment of CM is difficult and logistically difficult in
primates, pinnipeds, marsupials, canids, mustelids, tayas-
wild animals. In the early stages, treatments such as fluid
suids, ratites and anatids. Some factors appear to predis-
administration, analgesics, muscle relaxants (e.g. meth-
pose animals to the development of CM. These include
ocarbamol), benzodiazepines (eg. diazepam), dantrolene
high environmental temperatures and relative humidity
(used to treat malignant hyperthermia syndrome), vita-
during capture, handling and transportation, defciencies
mins (eg. vitamins B, E), oxygen therapy. and sodium
in vitamin E/selenium, fear, perception of danger, and
bicarbonate (to combat acidaemia) have all been recom-
a complex interaction between the sympathetic nervous
mended and achieve various degrees of effcacy. Because
system, the endocrine system and muscular activity. Some
treatment is unreliable and not always effective, the focus
anaesthetics, such as opioids, that can promote excite-
should be on prevention. Restraint and handling should
ment, muscle rigidity, hypoventilation, catecholamine
be minimized and transportation should be as short
release and hyperthermia may also contribute to CM.
as possible. The anaesthetic protocol should be designed
085
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
118
to produce a rapid induction and recovery and provide
as much physiological stability as possible. Adverse
effects, such as depressed ventilation, should be addressed
 apuaoa si uoeuaadns uxo pue ai
all cases.
MONITORING
Once induction of anaesthesia is successful, the animal
should be carefully monitored. Excellent reviews have
been written to address the peculiarities of monitoring
non-domestic animals (Heard, 2007). Among all the
excitement, the anaesthetist might have trouble remem-
bering the simplest of details. A written protocol and data
sheet are useful to implement an adequate monitoring
Figure 18.9 Otters can easily become hyperthermic during
plan and will become vital when reviewing the anaesthetic
anaesthetic periods due to their extremely dense and
protocols in the future. Appropriate monitoring relies on
insulating pelts. lce packs are useful for cooling down such
detailed knowledge of the baseline vital values of the
species.
species at hand and those should be researched prior to
any procedure. Vital signs should be recorded at least every
o se yons Kiessasau st uoeindiueu jl sanuu oi-s
measure blood pressure directly or indirectly has become
place the animal on a scale, it should be done early in the
commonplace.
procedure. There is ample evidence to suggest that hypox-
 Body temperature monitoring is essential. Small animals
Buuei-aay ui eisausaeue sunp uoun Aian si euae
with a large surface to body ratio, young and old animals.
animals (Caulkett & Arnemo, 2007: Fahlman et al., 2010).
and those with underlying diseases, are particularly
Oxygenation should be monitored by a pulse oximeter,
susceptible to hypothermia. Tarpaulins, blankets and
the observation of mucous membrane colour, or measure-
other insulation are needed for capture events during win-
ment of blood gases using portable blood gas analysers.
tertime. Hypothermia should be treated using warm packs,
and hypoxaemia prevented or treated with supplermental
friction, etc, otherwise recovery will be prolonged. Hyper-
oxygen. Oxygen "E" tanks have wide applicability as
thermia is common after chasing animals, during warm
they are relatively easy to get to the field and can provide
 seasons or in animals with particularly dense coats. Hyper.
10 L/min for approximately 1 hour. Smaller tanks are also
thermia can also induce increased respiratory rates and
useful for shorter periods (see Fig. 18.8). Oxygen can be
fast, weak or irregular heart beats. Hyperthermia can exac-
administered via nasal insufflation, by mask, or following
erbate hypoxaemia and is directly associated with increased
endotracheal intubation.
mortality. The capture team should be ready to cool the
Anaesthetic depth should be monitored carefully as the
animal with water, alcohol or ice packs (Fig. 18.9). If the
safety of the entire capture team depends on the animal
body temperature of an animal continues to rise despite
remaining anaesthetized. The team should become famil.
attempts to cool it the immediate administration of
iar with the signs associated with premature arousal (ear
reversal agents to antagonize the effects of anaesthesia is
 or facial twitching, chewing, blinking, etc.) for the particu-
recommended.
lar species and anaesthetic protocol in use Supplemental
doses of dnugs, such as ketamine, should be calculated and
drawn up in advance If the procedure is likely to take
RECOVERY
more than 30 minutes, an IV catheter can be placed to
administer supplemental drugs and fluids. Specific dnug
combinations, such as those that include O2-agonists are
Recovery quality and duration will depend on the capture
notorious for being associated with premature arousal in
and feld situation, the anaesthetic protocol, and the
certain species, particularly carmivores. Loud noises and
 species of animal. Most modern anaesthetic protocols for
physical manipulation are stimulatory and should be
wildlife include agents that have antagonists that will either
avoided or kept to a minimum when utilizing those
completely or partially reverse the effects of the anaes-
protocols.
thetic Ketamine cannot be antagonized, consequently.
Heart rate and pulse quality should be carefully moni-
when using ketamine in combination with an 0z-agonist,
tored. Peripheral pulses, such as the auricular or pedal,
enough time should be allowed prior to reversal of the
should be strong and regular. Portable equipment to
sedative to allow for ketamine redistribution, otherwise
581
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
the animal will be ataxic upon reversal which can lead
to injury. All equipment should be removed and carried
ANAESTHETIC AGENTS FOR SELECTED
away to a safe distance. In the case of dangerous animals,
COMMON WILDLIFE SPECIES
all but essential personnel should retreat One person is
assigned to remain with the animal until signs of recovery
Protocols for capturing and anaesthetizing common
appear to be progressing as expected (Fig. 18.10). If possi-
 species wildlife species in North America are summarized
ble, animals should be observed from a safe distance until
on Table 18.2.
they have fully recovered.
Table 18.2 Anaesthetic protocols for capturing wildlife
Species
Preferred IM anaesthetic
Comments
References
 combination
White-tailed deer
4.4 mg/kg of tiletaminezolazepam with
White-tailed deer are fairly easy to
Kreeger & Arnemo,
(Ooocoileus
2.2 mg/kg xylazine
immobilize as long as they are calm.
2002; Caulkett &
virginianus)
Antagonists: 0.125 mg/kg yohimbine
They can become hyperthermic if
Arnemo, 2007
 Alternative protocol: 7.5 mg/kg ketamine
 chased, and develop hypoxaemia and
with 1.5 mg/kg xylazine, antagonized as
capture myopathy easily
above
American Black bear
 47 mg/kg tiletamine-zolazepam
 Physical capture in snares or culvert traps
Kreeger & Armemo,
(Ursus americanus)
Antagonist: None
facilitates immobilizations. Tiletamine
2002; Caulkett,
Alternative protocols: (1) 4.4 mg/kg
zolazepam produces long inductions
2007
ketamine with 2 mg/kg xylazine.
 and recoveries. Premature arousal is
antagonized with 0.15 mg/kg yohimbine
possible with xylazine-ketamine
2) 0.05 mg/kg medetomidine and 2 mg/
combinations
kg tiletamine-zolazepam antagonized
with atipamezole at 4 x the
medetomidine dose
Bobcat (Lynx rufus)
 0.8-2 mg/kg ketamine with 0.0037-
 Physical capture with leghold trap is
Kreeger & Armemo.
 0.0057 mg/kg medetomidine and
 preferred. Tiletamine-zolazepam can
2002; Gunkel &
0.15-0.2 mg/kg butorphanol and
 produce long recoveries 
Lafortune, 2007
antagonized with atipamezole.
Alternative protocols: 10 mg/kg tiletamine
 zolazepam
Coyote (Canis
10 mg/kg ketamine with 2 mg/kg xylazine
Physical capture with leghold trap is
Kreeger & Armemo,
{atrans)
Antagonist: 0.15 mg/kg yohimbine
 preferred 
2002
 Alternative protocol: 10 mg/kg tiletamine
zolazepam
 North American river
15 mg/kg ketamine with 0.5 mg/kg
 Physical capture with leghold trap is
Hernandez-Divers
otter (Lontra
 diazepam or 0.4 mg/kg midazolam
 preferred. Hyperthermia is common in
et al., 2001; Kreeger
canadensis)
 Alternative protocol: 2.5 mg/kg ketamine
this species, particularly if muscle 
& Armemo, 2002
with 0.025 mg/kg medetomidine
relaxation is not complete or premature
antagonized with 0.1 mg/kg atipamezole
 arousal occurs
Raccoon (Procyon
20 mg/kg ketamine with 4 mg/kg xylazine
 Physical capture in Havahart-style traps is
Kollias & Abou-Madi.
/otor)
Antagonist: 0.15 mg/kg yohimbine
 preferred 
2007
Virginia Opossum
10 mg/kg ketamine with 2 mg/kg xylazine
Opossums can be easily physically
Holz, 2007
(Dicelphis
Alternative protocol: 0.1 mg/kg
restrained by hand and respond well to
virginiana)
 medetomidine with 10 mg/kg ketamine
 inhalant anaesthesia in small induction
chambers. Given the slow metabolic 
rate of marsupials, recoveries may be
 prolonged and careful body temperature
monitoring is recommended
582
Chemical immobilization of wild animals
Chapter
18
recovery normally and while it is still safe for personnel to remain close. In this case, the anaesthetist is preventing a Przewalski
horse from raising its head until it is fully recovered.
Photo courtesy of Christian Walzer.
REFERENCES
Brookhout, TA., 1996. Research and
Fahlman, A., Pringle, I., Arnemo, J.
adiotransmitter placement in North
 Management Techniques for Wildlife
et al., 2010. Treatment of hypoxemia
American river otters (Lontra
and Habitats, ffth ed. The Wildlife
during anesthesia of brown bears
cnadensis). I Zoo Wildl Med 32.
Society, Bethesda.
(Ursus arctos). I Zoo wild Med 41,
202-205.
Carpenter, J.w., 2005. Exotic Animal
160-163.
Hill, D.J., Langley, R.L., Morrow, W.M.,
Formulary. Elsevier Saunders,
Fowler, M.E., Cubas, Z.S., 2001. Biology.
1998. Occupational injuries and
St Louis.
Medicine and Surgery of South
illnesses reported by zoo
Caulkett, N., 2007. Bears. In:
American wild Animals. lowa State
veterinarians in the United States.
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
University Press, Ames.
I Zoo Wildl Med 29, 371-385.
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and wildlife
Fowler, M.E., Miller, R.E., 2003.
Holz, P, 2007. Marsupials. In:
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Zoo and wild Animal
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
Blackwell Publishing, Ames,
Medicine. W.B. Saunders Co.
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and wildlife
pp. 409-415.
Philadelphia.
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Gunkel, C., Lafortune, M., 2007. Felids.
Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Caulkett, N., Arnemo, I., 2007.
Chemical immobilization of
In: West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
pp. 341-346.
free-ranging terrestrial mammals.
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and Wildlife
Kollias, G.V., Abou-Madi, N., 2007.
In: Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C.,
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Procyonids and Mustelids. In:
Grimm, K.A. (Eds.), Lumb and
Blackwell Publishing, Ames, pp.
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and
443-457
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and wildlife
Analgesia, fourth ed. Blackwell
Heard, D., 2007. Monitoring. Ini
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Publishing. Ames, pp. 807-831.
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
Blackwell Publishing, Ames,
Caulkett, N., Shury, T., 2007. Human
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and Wildlife
pp.417-427.
safety during wildlife capture.
In:
 Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Kreeger, T.J., Arnemo, J.M.,
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.
 Blackwell Publishing, Ames, pp.
2002. Handbook of wildlife
(Eds.), Zoo Animal and Wildlife
83-91.
Chemical Immobilization.
Immobilization and Anesthesia.
Hernandez-Divers, S.M., Kollias, G.V.,
Sunquest, Laramie.
Blackwell Publishing. Ames,
Abou-Madi, N., et al., 2001. Surgical
Read, M., Caulkett, N., McCallister, M.
pp. 147-158.
technique for intra-abdominal
 2000. Evaluation of zuclopenthixol
E85
Section
2
Anaesthesia of the species
 acetate to decrease handling stress in 
Brookhout, TA. (Ed.), Research and 
West, G., Heard, D., Caulkett, N.,
wapiti. J wildl Dis 36, 450-459.
Management Techniques For Wildlife
2007. Zoo Animal and
Read, M.R., McCorkell, R.B., 2002. Use
and Habitats, fifth ed. The Wildlife
Wildlife Immobilization and
 of azaperone and zuclopenthixol
Society, Bethesda, pp. 106-124.
Anesthesia. Blackwell
acetate to facilitate translocation of
Spraker, T.R., 1993. Stress and capture
Publishing, Ames.
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
myopathy in Artiodactylid. In:
Woodbury, M.R., Caulkett, N.A.,
virginianus). J Zoo wildl Med 33,
Fowler, M.E. (Ed.), Zoo and wildlife
Baumann, D., et al., 2001.
163-165.
Animal Medicine Current Therapy 3.
Comparison of analgesic techniques
Schemnitz, S.D., 1999. Capturing and
W.B. Saunders Company.
for antler removal in wapiti. Can Vet
handling wild animals. In:
Philadelphia, pp. 481-488.
1 42, 929-935.
584
19
tej
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
 Introduction
587
The state of pregnancy
587
INTRODUCTION
Circulatory changes
588
588
 There is no one anaesthetic agent or technique that is ideal
Respiratory system changes
for all parturient animals. In veterinary practice, the choice
Other systems
589
 of anaesthetic methods and drugs is often influenced by
Pharmacology of drugs administered
whether the fetus{es) are alive and wanted, unwanted, or
during pregnancy
685
dead due to obstetrical problems. In any case, the choice
Clinical significance of changes during
must be such as to ensure the safety of the mother and
 pregnancy and parturition
589
any living fetus[es), comfort of the mother during parturi-
 Drug actions
590
tion or hysterotomy and convenience of the obstetrician/
 surgeon. To make a rational choice, the anaesthetist must
Opioids
590
be familiar with physiological alterations induced by preg-
αz-Agonists; ketamine
590
nancy and labour, the pharmacology of the agents used,
Intravenous anaesthetics; neuromuscular blockers 590
 and significance of obstetric complications necessitating
Inhalation anaesthetics
590
assisted delivery of the newborn. Most studies have been
carried out in ewes, but physiological alterations are
Local analgesics
591
 ua ie jo saas nan u aq 
Anticholinergics
591
their magnitude differs. The following brief account of
Anaesthesia for dystocia and
changes in physiology and in actions of dnugs adminis-
caesarean section
591
tered during pregnancy and parturition is a summary of
Horses
591
-xal piepueis ul sunome pue siaded pausiqnd Aueu
 books and should apply to all species of domestic animals.
Anaesthesia for caesarean section
592
A referenced review of this topic has been published by
Care of the newborn foal
592
Pascoe and Moon (2001).
Cattle
592
Care of the newborn calf
593
 Postoperative behaviour
593
THE STATE OF PREGNANCY
Sheep and goats
593
Camelids
594
Physiological and anatomical alterations occur in many
Care of the newborn
594
organ systems during pregnancy and delivery of the
Pigs
594
fetuses. Early in pregnancy changes are due, at least in part,
Dogs and cats
594
to metabolic demands of the fetus(es), placenta and
uterus, due largely to increasing levels of progesterone and
Anaesthetic management
595
Destrogen. Later changes starting around mid-pregnancy
Care of the newborns
596
are anatomical in nature and are caused by mechanical
Limitationsofourknowledge
597
pressure from the enlarging uterus.
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
587
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Table 19.1 Physiological changes with pregnancy and impact on anaesthesia
Physiological changes
Significance for anaesthesia
Central nervous system
Decreased requirement for anaesthetic agents
Risk of deep anaesthesia
Respiratory system
Increased volume of ventilation
Uptake of inhalation agents more rapid
Increased oxygen consumption and
 PaOz decreases more rapidly during decreased ventilation; onset of hypoxia
decreased functional residual capacity
more rapid during apnoea
Cardiovascular system
Blood volume increases to accommodate uterus and fetus(es)
Factors decreasing blood volume and cardiac cutput decrease blood
Heart rate increases but blocd pressure remains unchanged
pressure; maternal hypotension decreases uterine blood flov and causes
Cardiac output increases
fetal metabolic acidosis
Gastrointestinal tract
Gastric emptying slowed
 Retention of gastric contents increases risk for aspiration pneumonia in
 dogs and cats
Reproductive tract
Enlarged uterus
 Uterus compresses diaphragm and decreases ventilation during anaesthesia;
uterus may compress caudal vena cava during dorsal recumbency and
cause hypotension
Circulatory changes
in dorsal recumbency. This decrease in venous return will,
of course cause a fall in cardiac output for the heart
Circulatory changes develop primarily to meet increased
cannot pump more blood than is being returned to it.
metabolic demands of the mother and
fetus(es)
Cardiac work is increased during pregnancy so that at par-
(Table 19.1). Blood volume increases progressively, most
turition cardiac reserve is reduced and pulmonary conges-
of the added volume being accommodated in the increased
tion and heart failure may occur in animals that had
capacity of vessels in the uterus, mammary glands, renal.
 previously well compensated cardiac disease.
striated muscle and cutaneous tissues so that there is no
evidence of circulatory overload in healthy pregnant
Respiratory system changes
a iaeiai si a esed u aseaul sie
than that of red cells, resulting in haemodilution with
During pregnancy, the sensitivity of the respiratory centre
decreased haemoglobin content and haematocrit. The
to carbon dioxide is increased, presumably due to changes
purpose of this increase in blood volume is usually
in hormone levels, so that PaCO2 and senum bicarbo-
assumed to be twofold. First it increases
splacental
nate decrease, although arterial pH is maintained due to
exchanges of respiratory gases, nutrients and waste metab.
long-term renal compensation. Oxygen consumption is
olites. Secondly, it acts as a reserve if there is any abnormal
increased by the demands of the developing fetus(es),
maternal blood loss at parturition so that increased
placenta, uterine muscle and mammary glands. During
autotransfusion of blood can occur from the involuting
labour, ventilation may be further increased by appre-
uterus. Cardiac output increases in pregnancy to a similar
hension or anxiety. Airway conductance is increased
degree as blood volume and there is an additional increase
Auanedde 'paseanoap sl aoueisisan Aeuound leot pue
in cardiac output during all stages of labour. In 3rd stage
from hormone-induced relaxation of bronchial smooth
labour it probably results from blood being expelled from
muscle. Cranial displacement of the diaphragm results
the involuting uterus into the general circulation. Periph-
from increasing volume of the gravid uterus leading to a
eral vascular resistance usually decreases during pregnancy
decrease in functional residual capacity (FRC), so that it
  nu so () ans e ua i o
is possible for airway closure to occur at end-expiration.
serious decrease in venous return due to compression of
Reduction in oxygen storage capacity from reduced FRC
the vena cava and aorta by the enlarged uterus and its
leads to an unusually rapid decline in PaOz during
contents can occur ifthe animal is restrained or positioned
apnoea. Some compensation for the tendency of the FRC
885
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
Chapter
19
to decrease is achieved by increases in the transverse and
used in anaesthesia have large diffusion constants - low
 craniocaudal diameters of the chest cavity and flaring of
molecular weights, high lipid solubility and poor ioniza-
the ribs.
tion - and diffuse rapidly across the placenta. The excep-
tions are the neuromuscular blocking drugs, which are
Other systems
highly ionized and of low lipid solubility.
Maternal blood concentrations of drug depend on total
Liver function is generally well maintained during preg-
dose administered, site or route of administration, rate of
nancy. Plasma protein concentration is decreased but total
distribution and uptake of it by maternal tissues and
maternal detoxification and excretion. Thus drugs with
volume.
rapidly declining plasma concentration after administra-
Renal plasma flow (RPF) and glomerular fltration rate
tion of a fxed dose (e.g. thiopental) result in a short
(GFR) increase progressively, paralleling the increases in
exposure of the placenta, and hence fetus(es), to high
blood volume and cardiac output. Due to increases in
maternal concentrations. Drugs administered continu-
renal clearances blood urea and creatinine levels are lower
ously (e.g. inhalation anaesthetics, infused agents during
than in non-pregnant animals.
TIVA) are associated with a continuous placental transfer
 Uterine blood flow is directly proportional to perfusion
to the fetus(es).
 The concentration of drug in the umbilical vein of a
resistance, so that it can be compromised from vasocon-
fetus is not that to which the fetal target organs such as
striction due to catecholamine release from fright or
the heart and brain are exposed, for most of the umbilical
anxiety.
blood passes initially through the liver, where the drug
may be metabolized or sequestrated. The remainder of the
umbilical blood passes through the ductus venosus to
the vena cava where it is diluted by drug-free blood from
PHARMACOLOGY OF
the hind end of the fetus. Thus, the fetal circulation pro-
DRUGS ADMINISTERED
tects vital tissues and organs from exposure to sudden high
drug concentrations.
DURING PREGNANCY
Clinical significance of changes
The effects of pregnancy on drug disposition, biotransfor-
during pregnancy and parturition
mation and excretion are largely unknown in domestic
animals. The minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of
 Circulatory changes of pregnancy and parturition can put
inhalation agents is decreased due to inconclusive mecha-
 a mother suffering from even normally well compensated
nisms. The increase in RPF and GFR favours renal excre-
heart disease at risk unless care is taken to ensure a
tion of drugs. Any drug administered to the mother is
 minimum cardiac depression from anaesthetic drugs.
liable to cross the placenta to the fetus(es) and induce
Ecbolics used early on in labour can have an adverse effect
effects similar to those observed in the mother.
on cardiovascular function. Oxytocin will induce vasodila-
 Placental transfer of drugs is governed by the physio-
tion and hypotension that will have an adverse effect on
chemical properties of the dnug and anatomical features
both mother and fetus{es) due to decreased tissue and
of the placenta. Transfer of drugs can occur by simple dif-
 placental perfusion. Venous engorgement of the epidural
fusion, facilitated diffusion via transport systems, active
 space decreases the volume of solutions needed to produce
transport and pinocytosis. Of these, simple diffusion is by 
block to any given level.
far the most important and this will be affected by the
Reduction in FRC means that any respiratory depression
surface area and thickness of the placenta. The larger farm
 caused by drugs is more significant in pregnant than in
animals have thick epitheliochorial placentae with rela-
non-pregnant animals and hypoventilation will lead to
tively small areas for diffusion due to their cotyledonary
-d s euaey a reaxu pue eiudea
or patchy diffuse distribution, whereas dogs and cats have
larly undesirable during labour when oxygen consump-
thinner endotheliochorial placentae with larger zonular
 tion is increased. In small animals, induction of anaesthesia
areas of implantation. Thus, the placental diffusion barrier
with inhalational agents will be more rapid than in non-
is greatest in ruminants, pigs and horses and least in dogs
 pregnant animals due to the decrease in FRC and increased
 and cats. However, the diffusion barrier does not appear 
 alveolar ventilation as well as the decrease in MAC, but in
to be of great clinical significance in the transfer of drugs
recumbent large animals shunting of pulmonary blood
from mother to fetus(es) in any species of animal.
may make the maintenance of inhalation anaesthesia
More important is the diffusion constant which is
more difficult.
unique to each drug and determined by molecular weight.
 In monogastric animals, there is an increased risk of
degree of protein binding in matermal blood, lipid solubil-
both vomiting and silent aspiration of gastric contents in
ity and degree of ionization in the plasma. Most dnugs
 parturient animals for the time of last feeding is frequently
685
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
unknown, and intragastric pressure is increased in the
 of depression after matermal administration of thiopental
stomach displaced by the gravid uterus. Risk of regurgita-
and clinical studies have shown that newborms are more
tion of ruminal contents when general anaesthesia is
vigorous when IV agents other than thiopental are used
induced seems to be great in cattle, but perhaps not in
for induction of anaesthesia (Copland, 1977: Elovsson
uan pimy ssal aay iou ym sio pue daau
et al., 1996; Luna et al., 2004). A study comparing thio-
contents.
pental and alphaxalone/alphadalone for induction of
anaesthesia prior to maintenance with halothane for CS
in ewes confirmed that a low dose of the steroid anaes-
Drug actions
thetic was associated with less neonatal depression than
thiopental (Copland, 1977). Measurements of cardiovas-
Opioids
cular parameters in late-term pregnant ewes were used to
Opioids rapidly cross the placenta from mother to fetus(es)
compare anaesthesia induced and maintained with isoflu-
and can cause marked respiratory and central nervous
rane l.3% with anaesthesia induced with propofol,
depression in neonate[s) with sleepiness and reluctance to
2.5 mg/kg, IV followed by an infusion of 0.3 mg/kg/min,
feed. Some clinicians use a short-acting opioid for pre-
tracheal intubation and ventilation with oxygen (Gaynor
 medication in small animals, others wait until the puppies
et al., 1998). Maternal mean heart rate (HR), MAP, and
 or kittens are delivered before administering an opioid to
cardiac output were higher during propofol than isoflu-
the dam. An opioid antagonist such as naloxone can be
rane anaesthesia (depths of anaesthesia may not have
given to the neonate(s). Because the action of naloxone is
been equivalent) but uterine arterial and umbilical venous
 shorter than that of some opioids, depression may returm
flows were not different between the agents. In a study
when naloxone is metabolized and careful observation is
using higher dose rates, anaesthesia induced with propo-
indicated to allow this to be detected and treated by the
fol, 6 mg/kg, IV and maintained with an infusion of
injection of more naloxone.
0.4 mg/kg/min in pregnant ewes induced significant
 maternal and fetal respiratory acidosis and a signifcant
decrease in maternal MAP at 5-15 minutes [Andaluz
02-Agonists; ketamine
et al., 2005). The pharmacokinetic parameters of an injec-
All oz-adrenoceptor agonists rapidly cross the placenta
tion of propofol, 6 mg/kg, IV with or without a continuous
and can cause respiratory and cardiovascular depression
infusion have been determined in instrumented pregnant
in both mother and babies, although the magnitude
ewes (Andaluz et al., 2003). Although propofol rapidly
differs between species and can be counteracted by antago-
crossed the placenta, fetal blood concentrations were
nists. Unless used in small dosage xylazine causes signifi-
low compared with maternal concentrations. In dogs.
cant newborn depression when administered to cows and
administration of one small supplemental bolus of
small ruminants. Xylazine-ketamine combinations are
 propofol before puppy removal has been advocated as
not recommended for caesarean section (Cs) in dogs
causing minimal fetal depression but maintenance of
due to excessive newborn depression. Xylazine-ketamine
anaesthesia with an infusion of propofol has yet to be
 appears to be a satisfactory combination for induction of
evaluated regarding the degree of puppy depression. Neu-
romuscular blocking agents may cross the placenta in
foals and piglets after vaginal delivery or Cs. Information
small amounts but are seldom needed in obstetrical
about the fetal depressant effects of medetomidine or
anaesthesia.
dexmedetomidine in small animals is confusing. Some
clinicians avoid using this agent while others have used it
Inhalation anaesthetics
to their satisfaction as premedication in dogs prior to
mask induction with an inhalant. Atipamezole is the
Inhalation anaesthetics readily cross the placental barrier
reversal agent for medetomidine and, if injected into the
with rapid equilibration between the mother and fetus(es)
newborn, may be sufficiently absorbed to reverse the seda-
The degree of depression they cause in the neonate is
tive effects caused by placental transmission.
directly proportional to the depth of anaesthesia induced
in the mother. While light (1 MAC) anaesthesia with iso-
flurane induced no significant effect on uterine blood flow
Intravenous anaesthetics;
 or fetal metabolic status, it has been found that deep [2
neuromuscular blockers
MAC) anaesthesia induces significant decreases in uterine
Low doses of thiopental, methohexital, propofol and
blood flow and fetal metabolic acidosis within 15 minutes
alfaxalone produce varying degrees of respiratory and
 of start of administration (Palahniuk & Shnider, 1974a).
central nervous depression in neonates. Thiopental has
At 2 MAC isoflurane or sevoflurane, maternal and fetal
been used in low dose for induction of anaesthesia prior
MAP and fetal HR were significantly decreased from awake
to maintenance with an inhalation agent for CS in humans
and 1 MAC values (Okutomi et al., 2009). Values were not
and other species of animals. Newborns exhibit a degree
different between isoflurane and sevoflurane. There is a
590
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
Chapter
19
reduction in requirement for anaesthetic dnugs and a
traction on the uterus and broad ligaments by the surgeon.
decrease in MAC of inhalation agents at term pregnancy.
In contrast, atropine crosses the placenta and elevates fetal
When measured in ewes, MAC is 21 -40% lower in gravid
heart rate.
 as compared with non-pregnant animals (Palahniuk et al.
1974; Okutomi et al., 2009). Use of the less soluble agents
isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane will lead to more
rapid recovery of the newly delivered animals than when
ANAESTHESIA FOR DYSTOCIA AND
more soluble agents such as halothane are employed.
Nitrous oxide will often enable concentration of more
CAESAREAN SECTION
potent soluble anaesthetic agent to be reduced and its use
does not add to depression of the newborn, however,
Horses
 Oxygen must be administered for a few minutes after deliv-
ery to prevent diffusion hypoxia.
The ideal anaesthesia for vaginal delivery of a live foal
 Fetal haemoglobin can carry more O2 for a given PO2
from a healthy mare with dystocia is sedation and epidural
due to the low concentration of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
(see Chapter ll for suitable combinations and doses).
[2.3-DPG) in fetal red cells. This ensures a higher level
Where short duration general anaesthesia becomes neces-
of haemoglobin saturation at the normally low PO2 of
sary, for example for vaginal delivery in a mare with a
umbilical venous blood. Administration of Oz to the
ruptured prepubic tendon, administration of xylazine,
 mother results in a significant increase in fetal oxygenation
1. 1 mg, followed by ketamine, 2.2 mg/kg, IV with the dose
and maternal inspired O2 concentrations of over 50%
rates calculated on the mare's estimated non-pregnant
during general anaesthesia are associated with delivery of
weight induce recumbency without depression of the foal.
more vigorous newborn.
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) or inhalation anaes-
thesia will be required when extensive manipulation and
repositioning of a dead foal is anticipated. Different
Local analgesics
approaches to delivery of the foal may alter the choice of
Local analgesics are not as harmless as sometimes sup-
anaesthetic agents. When the mare is to be hoisted by the
posed. Amide derivatives (e.g lidocaine, mepivacaine.
hind limbs so that the mare's head, neck and shoulders
are on the ground and the hindquarters are elevated into
bupivacaine) are broken down by hepatic microsomal
enzymes. After absorption from the site of injection, sig-
the air, a combination of xylazine or romifdine, guaifen-
 esin, and ketamine with oxygen supplied to the mare has
nificant concentrations may be reached in the fetus(es)
causing depression in the neonate. Sufficiently high con-
been used without maternal mortality. The protocol
involves premedication of the mare with decreased doses
centrations seldom occur after epidural or paravertebral
administration, but may occur after local infltration of
of xylazine or romifidine with butorphanol, 0.02 mg/kg,
followed by induction of anaesthesia with ketamine or
large volumes of local analgesic solutions. Epidural block
Aq paiean aq Aeu siut pue uoisuaodky aonpoid Aeu
diazepam-ketamine Maintenance of anaesthesia is ‘to
infusing fluid to fill the dilated vascular bed, or better, by
effect' with guaifenesin-ketamine-xylazine (GKX) drip
Su 0oeI pappe uaaq sey ypim oi uisauajiens sT I 'sa)
injection of ephedrine. Ephedrine increases venous tone
and thus cardiac preload; it has minimal vasoconstrictor
ketamine and 650 mg xylazine that is administered IV at
a rate that is less than the usual 2 mL/kg/h). Endotracheal
effect on the arterial system. In the past few years, there
have been a number of published investigations compar-
 uaxo pasu a u seau ue saeney uq!
by insufflation into the tube with oxygen, 15 L/min for a
ing ephedrine and phenylephrine for the treatment of
full-sized horse or, preferably, artifcial ventilation with
epidural-induced hypotension in humans during CS.
These indicate that blood pressure support is better during
 Oxygen using a demand valve. Monitoring may be limited
to counting heart rate respiratory rate, and palpation of
infusion of phenylephrine and that ephedrine administra-
the facial artery pulse. After the foal is removed, the floor
tion results in more fetal acidosis. In contrast, administra-
must be totally dried to avoid the mare slipping when
tion of ephedrine to pregnant sheep with epidural-induced
 trying to stand. Xylazine-induced ataxia may be reversed
hypotension increased maternal arterial pressure and
after the mare is standing by IV injection of tolazoline at
uterine blood flow with no change in fetal acid-base status
approximately 25% of the manufacturer's dose rate. In
(Strimper et al., 2005).
managed by fetotomy, mares were initially sedated with
xylazine or detomidine and butorphanol IV, with or
Anticholinergics
without an epidural nerve block (Nimmo et al., 2007).
Because glycopyrrolate does not readily cross the placental
General anaesthesia was subsequently induced with
barrier, it is probably the anticholinergic of choice if anti -
xylazine-ketamine-guaifenesin and maintained with
cholinergics are to be used to minimize the effects of
halothane.
591
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
Anaesthesia for caesarean section
Cattle
Caesarian section (CS) can be accomplished under TIVA
 In cattle, caudal epidural nerve block with lidocaine, pro-
with added local analgesia, but general anaesthesia main-
caine, or xylazine is often administered prior to attempting
uonpul uouuos sou st juase uoeieuui ue Aq pauie
vaginal delivery or CS to decrease abdominal straining.
of anaesthesia with xylazine or romifidine and ketamine,
Recommended dose rates used for the caudal epidural are
with or without guaifenesin, should provide a satisfactory
lidocaine, 5 mL of 2%. 2 mL (80 mg) procaine 4% with
outcome when the foal is alive Guaifenesin has been
epinephrine (Kolkman et al., 2007), xylazine, 0.05-
documented to cross the placenta in cattle and slow activ-
0.07 mg/kg diluted with saline to 5-7.5 mL (Newman,
ity of calves in utero. Clinical impression is that foals may
2008) or xylazine, 0.01-0.016 mg/kg (Kolkman et al.,
be similarly affected after delivery but that breathing is
2007). When the cow is weak, a lidocaine or procaine
satisfactory and the delay before standing is short. Any
epidural may be avoided as these agents may induce ataxia
technique compatible with anaesthesia of a sick horse can
and increase the risk for recumbency. Clenbuterol, 0.15 mg
be used when the foal is known to be dead. Since the mare
injected into a tail vein, has also been recommended
has a distended abdomen and will be in dorsal recum-
before CS to relax the uterus (Kolkman et al., 2007.
bency for a midline incision, controlled ventilation should
2010b). Clenbuterol is prohibited for use in food produc-
be instituted and blood pressure monitored to identify
ing species in some countries.
hypotension. Hypotension may result from pre-existing
There are eight available approaches to coeliotomy for
hypovolaemia (dehydration), exaggerated adverse effects 
CS in cattle that are left or right paralumbar in standing
of anaesthetic agents due to exhaustion or toxaemia, or
or recumbent cows, left oblique in standing cows, and
from aortocaval compression from the utenus and foal.
paramedian, ventrolateral, or midline in recumbent cows
Blood loss during the procedure may be significant and
(Schultz et al., 2008). Sedation with xylazine is often
should be replaced with balanced electrolyte solution IV.
avoided because it may increase contractions of the utenus
Hypertonic saline solution, 4 mL/kg. may be required for
(Newman, 2008; Schultz et al., 2008), although this effect
blood volume expansion. Administration of dobutamine
can be counteracted by administration of clenbuterol
and ephedrine may be used to support arterial blood pres-
where permitted. Administration of xylazine, 0.04 mg/kg.
sure. Recovery from anaesthesia should be managed in a
IV to pregnant cows resulted in a 56% reduction in uterine
similar fashion as for horses after colic surgery.
artery blood flow after 5 minutes accompanied by an
increase in uterine artery vascular resistance and a substan-
tial decrease in maternal PaO2 (Hodgson et al., 2002).
Care of the newborn foal
These changes significantly decreased oxygen delivery to
Foals should start regular breathing of 10-20 breaths/
the calf and may be clinically important for the viability
minute within 30 seconds of birth and normal heart
of the calf. Except for a 5% decrease in PaO2 at 5 minutes,
rates are approximately 70 beats/minute (Corley & Axon,
these changes did not occur after administration of ace-
2005). Resuscitation is indicated for foals with no breath-
promazine, 0.02 mg/kg. Recumbent cows sedated with
ing or heart beat with a delay to breathing or have obvious
xylazine may also be at increased risk for pulmonary aspi-
abnormal breathing patterns, or have heart rates <50 beats/
ration after regurgitation. Nevertheless, xylazine sedation
min. Oxygen supplementation can be achieved with an O2
has been used in cows for CS for many years with satisfac-
flow rate of 5 L/min delivered through a loose fitting mask
tory outcomes. Detomidine, 0.01-0.02 mg/kg, IV or 0.02-
or through a rubber tube inserted into the ventral nasal
0.04 mg/kg, IM is an alternative sedative for this purpose.
meatus. Nasotracheal intubation (see Chapter ll) is the
 The cow is more likely to remain standing and the ecbolic
best option for assisted ventilation, with the tracheal tube
effects are less. Other drug combinations that have been
connected to an anaesthesia machine circle circuit or a
recommended for standing restraint are 7.5 mg of acepro-
resuscitator (Ambu) bag that allows artificial ventilation
mazine with 10 mg butorphanol IV in standing healthy
with air or oxygen (see Fig. 22.1). The reservoir bag should
dairy heifers or xylazine 0.02 mg/kg. butorphanol,
be compressed and the chest wall observed to expand. An
0.01 mg/kg. and ketamine, 0.04 mg/kg, all injected IM for
adequate tidal volume should be achieved with a peak
anxious cows (Newman, 2008). Choice of sedative may be
inspiratory pressure of 15-20 cmHzO. A less optimal situ-
limited by the milk-withdrawal times dictated by country
ation is use of a tight fitting mask and ventilation with the
 specific legislation.
resuscitator bag. The foals should be rubbed down and
A preferred technique for CS is the left paralumbar
dried with a towel and placed in a warm environment.
 approach in standing cows. Ideally, the farm has a covered
Foals delivered by CS may not have received umbilical cord
area with fixed restraints that can be used but some clinics
blood and will benefit from IV bolus of crystalloid fluid
have a portable chute and other facilities, such as an over
[ 10 mL/kg lactated or acetated Ringer's solution) or colloid
head winch and resuscitation equipment, that can be
(2 mL/kg hetastarch). Management of cardiac arrest is
transported to the site A halter is placed on the cow and
covered in Chapter 22 and elsewhere [Palmer, 2007).
tied to the left. A blindfold on the cow may decrease
592
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
Chapter
19
kicking by preventing observation of the surgeon's move-
country's licensing, and appropriate meat and milk with-
ments. Forcible elevation of the tail is a distracting
drawals need to be followed.
technique that can be used to immobilize cattle during
Behaviour of cows with no postoperative analgesic
 injection of local anaesthetic solution unless a caudal epi-
 dnugs after caesarian section were compared and evaluated 
dural has been administered. Options for analgesic tech-
with cows that had natural vaginal delivery using behav-
niques for surgery are proximal or distal paravertebral
iour analysis software (Noldus Observer@). The analysis
nerve blocks or local infiltration. The latter is administered
included activities such as general activity and body posi-
subcutaneously and into the abdominal muscle as an
tions, limb movement, licking, eating, rumination, vocali-
inverted-L block or as a line block at the incision site.
zation, and interaction with neighbours (Kolkman et al.
Choice of technique may be clinician preference Less local
2010a). On the day after surgery, the cows had significantly
 anaesthetic solution is used in the paravertebral block and
less limb movement and more positional transitions, and
analgesia may be more complete when compared with
 spent less time eating and ruminating, than the cows that
infltration. Cows that will be recumbent for surgery are
had vaginal delivery. The cows' behaviour was not different
cast with ropes and the head and legs tied to prevent move-
from the control cows on the third day but they continued
ment. A paramedian incision is usually blocked by infiltra-
sn uaum uoisu yue a uo anssai oi puodsan c
tion of local anaesthetic solution in an L-shape across the
 on the frst, third, and fourteenth day after surgery. The
cranial end of the incision and 2-5 cm lateral to the pro-
degree of pain experienced by cows after caesarian section
 posed incision with injections extending the depth of the
 is not known but it is inconceivable that none is present.
abdominal wall. A midline incision is blocked by line
The results of this study indicate that in the absence of
infiltration. Cows that are sick as a result of toxaemia from
NSAID administration there is general malaise for at least
a dead fetus or uterine torsion should receive balanced
24 hours and local surgical site discomfort for 2 weeks.
electrolyte fluid IV to restore blood volume and, if recum-
bent, intranasal administration of oxygen, 15 L/min.
Sheep and goats
Caudal epidural nerve block can be used to reduce strain-
Care of the newborn calf
ing and provide analgesia for vaginal delivery of lambs.
Analgesia for Cs through a left flank incision can be sup-
One study has evaluated the effect of body position of
calves after delivery by caesarean section and rupture of
plied by epidural nerve block with lidocaine injected at
the lumbosacral space, paravertebral nerve block of the
the umbilical cord (Uystepruyst et al, 2002). Lateral
13th thoracic, first second and third lumbar nerves, Or
recumbency, manual positioning in stermal recumbency.
 and suspension of the calves by the hind limbs for up to
local infiltration using an inverted L block or line block.
A disadvantage of an epidural nerve block is that there will
90 seconds (until the calf resisted) were compared by
blood gas analysis and pulmonary function tests at inter-
be a delay before the ewe or doe is able to stand by herself
to nurse the lambs or kids. It must be remembered that
vals up to 24 hours. PaO2 tensions were signifcantly
the dose rate for local anaesthetic solution for a lumbosac-
higher in the sternal and suspended calves, and tidal
a u yq iae  i a u re am saa
ral epidural should be calculated on the estimated non-
suspended calves. A significant enhancement of passive
pregnant weight.
 transfer of colostral immunoglobulins was documented in
Dehydration and hypovolaemia should be corrected by
 IV administration of electrolyte fluids. Animals with mul-
the suspended calves compared with calves that were not
tiple fetuses may have difficulty breathing when restrained
suspended. All calves had low PaOz tensions immediately
after birth that progressively increased over the subsequent
in lateral recumbency and flow-by administration of
uomeuasaxo uieuieu lm yseu e suisn uaAxo uu/l 5
24 hours, and PaCO2 tensions were high (>8 kPa,
of the dam and fetuses, and probably minimize struggling
>60 mmHg) initially and decreased to 5.3 kPa (40 mmHg)
 initiated by hypoxaemia.
at 12 hours. All groups had a mean base deficit at birth
General anaesthesia is an option in a clinic setting but
that converted to base excess by 12 hours.
the lambs or kids will likely be more depressed than when
only local analgesia is used. Sufficient numbers of person-
nel must be available for one-to-one resuscitation of the
Postoperative behaviour
newborns. Low doses of midazolam-ketamine or propo-
Postoperative analgesia is often neglected in cows under-
fol can be used for induction of anaesthesia followed by
going caesarean section. Questionnaires investigating
 maintenance with sevoflurane or isoflurane. Publications
current use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
 describing use of alfaxalone for CS are yet to appear but
(NSAIDs) have not had a high response rate but the infor-
based on experiences with its predecessor, alfaxalone is
mation obtained indicates administration may be to 50%
 likely to be a satisfactory induction agent for this purpose.
or less of cows (Hewson et al., 2007). Administration of
When administered, IV oxytocin must be injected slowly
an NSAID is recommended within the restrictions of the
as it may acutely induce hypotension. Postoperative
E65
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
analgesia may be supplied by administration of an NSAID.
necessary to provide adequate surgical conditions to
Opioids such as buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg. IM may also
E asn on pue ued suuaadxa o mos aul juanand
be administered at intervals of 6 hours (see Chapter 13).
method that produces minimal depression of the piglets.
Ideally, both the sow and piglets should recover from the
Camelids
effects of the anaesthetic in the minimum of time.
Caesarean section may be carried out under conditions
Dystocia is relatively uncommon in llamas and alpacas
which vary from those encountered on the farm to those
but may be indicated for fetal malpositioning or uterine
provided in an operating theatre Elective CS is carried out
torsion (Anderson, 2009). In contrast to cattle practice,
more commonly for the production of minimal disease
elective caesarean section is not recommended because
herds of pigs, or gnotobiotic animals for research pur-
mortality of crias is high. Rather, the viability of the fetus is
poses, than in farm sows, and is more likely to be per-
monitored by observation of dam behaviour, ultrasonog-
formed in a well-equipped operating room.
raphy, and Doppler ultrasound determination of the fetal
 On the farm, CS is probably best carried out under local
heart rate. Oxygen therapy may be indicated for a severely
or regional analgesia. The sow may be restrained in lateral
distressed pregnant female A jugular catheter should be
recumbency with ropes and the site of incision infltrated
inserted and a dehydrated animal should be resuscitated
with local anaesthetic solution. An epidural nerve block
with IV electrolyte solution. Surgery is performed with the
passaidap pue ixon aq Ae mos au 'pasn aq ose Ke
female haltered and tied in recumbency and local infiltra-
 and supplementation with oxygen through a mask appears 
tion with lidocaine as a line block at the proposed incision
to decrease mortality in the sows and piglets.
site A maximum total dose of 4 mg/kg lidocaine is recom-
Sows that are relatively healthy can be restrained by IV
 mended for these species (Anderson, 2009). The dam may
injection ofxylazine, 1 mg/kg, and ketamine, 2 mg/kg and
be sedated with butorphanol, 0.03-0.1 mg/kg. Xylazine
rope ties on the limbs, and analgesia supplied by a local
 may not be a good choice because the decrease in cardiac
anaesthetic line block. Alternatively. azaperone, where
output and peripheral vasoconstriction will result in a
available, can be used to provide sedation prior to local
decrease in uterine blood flow, maternal oxygenation is
analgesia, although the dnug does cross the placental
decreased unless oxygen is supplied by tube or mask and,
barrier and the piglets are sleepy when delivered. However.
respiratory depression in the offspring seems minimal and
activity. If used, only low doses, 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, IM should
if kept warm they usually survive. The sedative effects of
be administered. Induction of anaesthesia with propofol
azaperone on the sow are rather prolonged and she may
and maintenance with isoflurane or sevoflurane may be
not be able to suckle the piglets for some hours; if left
satisfactory when general anaesthesia is required (Tibary
unattended with the neonatal piglets she may suffocate
et al., 2008). Antibiotics and an NSAID should also be
some by lying on them.
administered (Anderson, 2009).
Under conditions encountered in hospitals, techniques
Care of the newborn
of techniques can be employed. The piglets are not always
Normal alpaca crias should weigh at least 5.5 kg and llama
returned to the dam and, in these circumstances, speed of
crias 7 kg, and preferably more (Whitehead, 2009).
recovery of the sow is less important than under farm
Normal body temperatures are 37.8-38.9"C (100-102"F),
conditions.
heart rates 70-100 beats/minute and respiratory rates
Viable piglets are obtained when anaesthesia is induced
20-30 breaths/minute. Crias must be kept warm and ade-
via facemask and maintained with an inhalation anaes-
quate colostrum intake in the first 24 hours must be
thetic and a high concentration of inspired oxygen. In the
ensured. Assessment of the newborn should include a full 
majority of sows, anaesthesia is rapidly attained with
physical examination. Crias born earlier than 315 (Tibary
agents such as halothane, isoflurane or sevoflurane, espe-
et al., 2008) or 335 (Whitehead, 2009) days of pregnancy
cially if a mild sedative is administered first If the sow is
are termed premature Premature or compromised crias
very large or diffcult to handle, administration of a seda-
should also receive oxygen, IV fluid therapy and dextrose-
tive or a minimal dose of thiopental or propofol can be
containing fluids, and possibly plasma. Administration of
employed.
aminophylline, 2 mg/kg SC, for 3 days initially at 4-hour
 Involution of the uterus after delivery of the piglets may.
 intervals and finishing at 8-hour intervals has been recom-
if the animal is not hypoxic or hypercapnic, be helped by
mended for premature crias based on clinical experience
IV 2-10 IU oxytocin.
(Whitehead, 2009).
Dogs and cats
Pigs
 Many anaestheticagent combinations have been employed
The general principles of anaesthesia for CS in sows are
to provide operating conditions in dogs and cats for CS.
similar to those in all other species of animal - it is
Epidural analgesia with lidocaine, with or without an
594
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
Chapter
19
opioid, has been used for many years in dogs and results
atropine before propofol for induction of anaesthesia,
 in vigorous puppies. Disadvantages of epidural analgesia
 tracheal intubation and administration of oxygen. Inhala-
for this purpose include failure of satisfactory analgesia at
tion anaesthesia is administered once the puppies are
the cranial end of the midline incision, movement of the
 delivered and a line block at the incision site is performed
with bupivacaine 2.5 mg/kg. at the end of surgery
 mesenteric traction or ovariectomy, and hypotension. The
(Traas, 2008).
addition of a sedative or opioid may facilitate restraint but
 Mask induction of anaesthesia with an inhalation agent
does not adequately prevent the complications. In early
after preanaesthetic sedation is a technique for CS that that
years, fentanyl-droperidol or barbiturate were the only
results in vigorous kittens. It is important to note that, in
injectable induction agents used, and while fentanyl
contrast to experience with anaesthesia in dogs, the inclu-
remains a useful option, thiopental is better substituted
sion of propofol in the CS anaesthetic protocol for cats
with propofol or alfaxalone for more vigorous newborns.
has been found to result in unacceptable kitten depression.
It was quickly discovered that the combination of xylazine
In a retrospective evaluation of CS in 159 cats over 13
and ketamine was not suitable for anaesthesia for CS in
years, it was discovered that epidural analgesia had the best
dogs (Navarro & Friedman, 1975). In an extensive survey
kitten survival rate (Elovsson et al., 1996). The percentage
 of 109 veterinary practices in Canada and the USA, involv-
of kittens born dead increased five to six times when anaes-
ing 807 CS producing 3908 puppies, survival rate was 87%
thesia was provided with xylazine or medetomidine-
at 2 hours after delivery and 80% at 7 days (Moon et al.,
2000). Of these, 58% were emergency CS. A wide variety
was propofol-isoflurane. The percentage of drowsy kittens
of anaesthetic protocols were used (1994-1997) with
of those born alive was dramatically higher when anaes-
one-third being propofol-isoflurane and one-third mask
thesia was thiopental-halothane or propofol-isoflurane.
induction, intubation, and maintenance with isoflurane.
Infltration of the incision site after the abdomen is closed
Protocols that included the use of xylazine, ketamine, or
with bupivacaine, 2 mg/kg. will provide several hours of
methoxyflurane were associated with increased risk of
analgesia. If TIVA has to be used for CS in cats, alfaxalone
 puppy deaths. Survival was greater when surgery was not
may turn out to be the best. Although alfaxalone crosses
 an emergency, the dam was not brachycephalic, there were
the placental barrier and will affect the kittens, no notice-
≤4 puppies per litter, and that there were no naturally
 able respiratory depression was observed when the earlier
delivered or deformed puppies in the litter.
product ‘Saffan' was used. Information about use of
In one comparison of anaesthetic combinations for CS
 alfaxalone in CS is yet to be published.
 in 24 pregnant bitches following premedication with chlo-
When the bitch or queen is depressed or toxic and it is
rpromazine, puppies were most depressed after delivery
known that the fetuses are dead, the anaesthetic protocol
from midazolam-ketamine-enflurane and thiopental-
chosen should be appropriate for management of a patient
enflurane, whereas puppies were less depressed when the
with a reduced anaesthetic requirement at high risk for
dam was anaesthetized with propofol-enflurane and most
circulatory failure.
vigorous when delivered during a lidocaine-bupivacaine
epidural block (Luna et al., 2004). In another study, no
Anaesthetic management
difference in puppy mortality (86% overall survival) was 
 recorded between 62 puppies born by CS during propofol-
 Preparation before anaesthesia should include placement
isoflurane and bupivacaine line block for anaesthesia and
of an IV catheter for administration of anaesthetic
127 puppies born by natural or assisted vaginal birth
agents and balanced electrolyte solution during surgery
(Veronesi et al., 2009). Similar results were obtained in a
(Box 19.1). Crystalloid fluid should be administered
study of 141 bitches and 412 puppies born by CS where
before anaesthesia to animals judged to be dehydrated or
survival rate of puppies born by propofol-isoflurane
toxaemic Hair should be clipped from the abdomen. All
 anaesthesia was the same as delivered by epidural analge-
 equipment for newborn resuscitation should be assem-
sia, but the survival rate of puppies from thiopental-
bled. As just described, anaesthesia provided by epidural
isoflurane anaesthesia was lower (Funkquist et al., 1997).
nerve block, or sedation and mask induction and mainte-
 Diazepam has been associated with muscle weakness and
 nance with an inhalation agent, or induction with propo-
decreased ability to nurse or maintain body heat in human
fol (dogs only) and maintenance with an inhalation agent
 babies for hours after delivery. Clinical impression is that
diazepam administration to the dam has the same effect
administered IV should be calculated on the dams esti-
in puppies and, therefore should be avoided.
mated non-pregnant weight A low dose of an opioid may
Combination of epidural with general anaesthesia has
be administered for premedication. Heavy or long-acting
also been recommended (Brock, 1996: Traas, 2008). An
sedation is avoided because it may depress the dam in
example of a sequence of events would be an opioid
epidural performed in the conscious animal followed
the neonates. Administration of oxygen by facemask for
by administration of hydromorphone or fentanyl and
3 minutes before induction of general anaesthesia
595
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Box 19.1 Anaesthetic management of cs in
Box 19.2 Examples of anaesthetic protocols for
dogs and cats
caesarian section
Evaluate patient
Bitch or queen
Assemble newborn resuscitation equipment and drugs
Sedation + lidocaine (± opioid) epidural nerve block
Insert IVcatheter into dam
Bitch
Administer balanced electrolyte fluid if hypovolaemic,
toxic
Opioid IV, propofol IV, intubate trachea and connect to
 Clip hair from surgical site, one surgical prep
breathing circuit, line block at incision site with 2 mg/kg
lidocaine infiltration, then option to administer small
 Perform epidural administration, opioid and/or
propofol supplement until puppies delivered and then
lidocaine, if desired
start administration of sevoflurane or isoflurane or to
Preoxygenate by facemask for 3 min before induction
start inhalation agent after tracheal intubation.
Administer anaesthetic agents using small doses
 At the end of surgery when closing abdomen infiltrate
 Keep time from induction to delivery as short as
incision with bupivacaine, 2.5 mg/kg
possible
Infitrate bupivacaine along incision after abdomen is
Queen
closed
Sedative and/or opioid then induction with sevoflurane or
isoflurane by facemask, intubate trachea, connect to
delivery circuit to maintain anaesthesia with inhalation
agent.
(preoxygenation) is advisable for brachycephalic breeds
At the end of surgery when closing abdomen infiltrate
and animals that are toxic, if not for all CS patients. The
incision with bupivacaine, 2.0 mg/kg.
patient owners may know the time of last feeding or con-
tents of the stomach may be observed on a radiograph.
Induction of anaesthesia using an inhalant delivered by
 of the fetuses. En bloc excision of the uterus and puppies
facemask is not advisable in animals that are known to
or kittens is not advisable when the puppies and kittens
have food or fetal membranes in their stomachs because
 are wanted alive because the extra time taken for ligation
the time taken increases the risk for regurgitation and
will result in hypoxia of the fetuses. Blood loss during this
pulmonary aspiration. Animals with gastric contents
surgical procedure can be significant and rate of adminis-
should be induced rather quickly in a sternal or upright
tration of IV fluids should be increased in compensation.
position and not allowed to lie down until endotracheal
Administration of oxytocin may be indicated to aid uterine
intubation and inflation of the cuff has
been
involution but should be administered very slowly to
accomplished.
avoid abrupt hypotension. Local infiltration of the inci-
Local infltration of the midline with
lidocaine,
sion site with bupivacaine, ≤2 mg/kg, at the end of surgery
2 mg/kg. in dogs is useful adjunct analgesia and mini-
 mizes response of the dam to the incision. Depression of
the newborns by inhalation anaesthetic is related to the
Care of the newborns
concentration and duration of administration. Thus, use
of the lowest effective vaporizer setting and a short time
Upon delivery, fluid should be suctioned carefully. a few
between induction and delivery are optimal. Depending
seconds at a time, from the puppies' or kittens' noses using
on the anaesthetic protocol chosen, once the neonates
a blue bulb syringe or nasal aspirator sold for use in human
have been delivered, additional anaesthetic agent can be
babies. A few minutes of oxygen should be supplied when
administered for closure of the uterus and abdomen, for
the dam has been breathing nitrous oxide. The newborns
example, start or increase inhalant administration or injec-
Pnous
nubbedwith
atoweland
tion of an opioid such as butorphanol if none has already
and stimulated. Breathing spontaneously and vocalizing
been given (Box 19.2).
within one minute of delivery are indicators of puppy
Experimental studies failed to demonstrate aortocaval
vigour and of increased survival (Moon et al., 2000).
compression and hypotension in pregnant anaesthetized
Normal newborn puppy respiratory rates are 10-18
bitches positioned in dorsal recumbency (Probst & Webb,
 breaths/minute. Hypoxia and irregular breathing patterns 
1983). Nevertheless, this may occur in some animals and
have been observed in puppies born after normal vaginal
blood pressure should be checked shortly after the animal
delivery or CS (Silva et al., 2009). Cardiac massage should
is turned onto its back. Rotation into a left lateral oblique
be applied if the heart beat is slow (<170 beats/minute).
uo uoisuanody paon on juaiyns aq Au uoisod
When the newborn puppies and kittens are not vigorous
this cause. Controlled or assisted ventilation may be neces-
and an opioid has been administered to the dam before
sary until the abdominal pressure is relieved by removal
delivery, naloxone can be injected to antagonize its effects.
596
Anaesthesia for obstetrics
Chapter
19
Other reversal agents are flumazenil for diazepam and
publications documenting that, in this specific situation,
 atipamezole for medetomidine Doxapram is a respiratory
phenylephrine infusion is more effective in increasing
stimulant that may also induce arousal due to release of
blood pressure than the traditionally recommended ephe-
 norepinephrine and has been advocated foruse in newborn
drine. These findings may be relevant to obstetrical man-
animals but may be ineffective. Lawler [(2008) has described
agement of sheep. goats, dogs and cats where epidural
 neonatal care in detail, including environmental tempera-
analgesia with local anaesthetic solution is used for caesar-
ture guidelines, nutritional support, normal haematologi-
ian section. However, phenylephrine infusion decreases
cal and chemical values, from birth to weaning.
cardiac output and causes peripheral vasoconstriction, and
these changes may decrease uterine blood flow.
Specialized abdominal wall nerve blocks, the transver-
sus abdominal plane or TAP blocks, have been evaluated
LIMITATIONS OF OUR KNOWWLEDGE
in parturient women for their value in postoperative pain
management. The technique of TAP blocks in dogs and
Intrathecal or epidural analgesia is frequently employed
their potential value for analgesia are currently being
for elective or emergency caesarean delivery in humans.
investigated.
with conversion to general anaesthesia in cases of analgesia
 Published scientifc literature documenting outcomes
failure or for maternal safety. Post-spinal hypotension
from different anaesthetic techniques for obstetrical pro-
-de ui sinn ossaos e ym saunea uan
cedures in different species of animals is sparse. Much
mately 60% of elective caesarean deliveries [Mhyre, 2011)
more information needs to be available before reliable
Administration of colloid solution before or during surgery
consensus statements can be constructed for anaesthetic
did not maintain an acceptable maternal blood pressure
 management of the domestic species for surgical delivery
in several clinical studies. There are many scientific
of newborns in optimum condition.
REFERENCES
Andaluz, A., Trasserras, O., Garcia, F.,
regimen for cesarean section in dogs.
in daily bovine practice in Belgium.
2005. Maternal and fetal effects of
JAm Vet Med Assoc 211, 313-317.
Reprod Dom Anim 42. 583-589.
 propofol anaesthesia in the pregnant
Gaynor, J.S., Wertz, E.M., Alvis, M.,
Lawler, D.F., 2008. Neonatal and
ewe. Vet J 170, 77-83.
et al., 1998. A comparison of the
pediatric care of the puppy and
Andaluz, A., Tusell, I., Trasserras, O.,
haemodynamic effects of propofol
kitten. Theriogenology 70, 384-392.
et al., 2003. Transplacental transfer
and isoflurane in pregnant ewes.
Luna, S.P.L., Cassu, R.N., Castro, G.B.,
of propofol in pregnant ewes. Vet J
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 21, 69-73.
et al., 2004. Effects of four
166, 198-204.
Hewson, C.J., Dohoo, I.R., Lemke, K.A.,
anaesthetic protocols on the
Anderson, D.E., 2009. Uterine torsion
et al., 2007. Canadian veterinarians'
neurological and cardiorespiratory
and cesarean section in llamas and
use of analgesics in cattle, pigs, and
variables of puppies born by
alpacas. Vet Clin Food Anim 25.
horses in 2004 and 2005. Can Vet J
caesarean section. Vet Rec 154,
523-538
48, 155-164.
387-389.
Brock, N., 1996. Anesthesia for canine
Hodgson, D.s., Dunlop, C.l.,
Mhyre, J.M., 2011. What's new in
cesarian section. Can Vet J 37.
Chapman, P.L, et al., 2002.
obstetric anesthesia? Int J Obstet
117-118.
Cardiopulmonary effects of xylazine
Anesth 20, 149-159.
Copland, M.D., 1977. The effects of
 and acepromazine in pregnant cows
Moon, PF, Erb, H.N., Ludders, J.W.,
CT1341, thiopentone and induction-
in late gestation. Am J Vet Res 63.
et al., 2000. Perioperative risk factors
delivery time on the blood gas and
1695-1699
for puppies delivered by cesarean
 acid-base status of lambs delivered
Kolkman, I., Aerts, S., Vervaecke, H.,
section in the United States and
by caesarean operation and on the
et al., 2010a. Assessment of
Canada. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36.
onset of respiration. Aust Vet J 53.
differences in some indicators of
359-368.
436-439.
pain in double muscled Belgian Blue
Navarro, JA., Friedman, J.R., 1975. A
Corley, K.T.T., Axon, I.E., 2005.
cows following naturally calving vs
dinical evaluation of xylazine and
Resuscitation and emergency
caesarean section. Reprod Dom
ketamine HCL for cesarean section
 management for neonatal foals. Vet
Anim 45. 160-167.
in the dog. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
Clin Equine 21, 431-455.
Kolkman, I., Opsomer, G., Lips, D..
70, 1075-1079
Elovsson, L., Funkquist, P., Nyman, G.,
et al., 2010b. Pre-operative and
Newman, K.D., 2008. Bovine cesarian
1996. Retrospective evaluation of
 operative diffculties during bovine
section in the field. Vet Clin Food
anaesthetic techniques for Caesarian
caesarean section in Belgium and
Anim 24, 273-293.
section in the cat. J Vet Anaesth 23,
associated risk factors. Reprod Dom
Nimmo, M.R., Slone, D.E., Hughes, F.E.,
80.
Anim 45, 1020-1027.
et al., 2007. Fertility and
Funkquist, PM., Nyman, G.C..
Kolkman, I., De Vliegher, S.,
complications after fetotomy in 20
Lofgren, A.j., et al., 1997. Use of
Hoflack, G., et al., 2007. Protocol of
brood mares [2001-2006). Vet Surg
 propofol-isoflurane as an anesthetic
the caesarean section as performed
36.771-774
597
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Okutomi, T., Whittington, R.A..
Probst, C.w., Webb, A.1., 1983. Postural
Tibary, A., Rodriguez, I., Sandoval, S..
Stein, D.J., et al., 2009. Comparison
influence on systemic blood
 2008. Reproductive emergencies in
 of the effects of sevoflurane and
 pressure, gas exchange, and acid/base 
 camelids. Theriogenology 70,
isoflurane anesthesia on the
status in the term-pregnant bitch
515-534.
matermal-fetal unit in sheep.
during general anesthesia. Am J Vet
Traas, A.M., 2008. Surgical management
JAnesth 23, 392-398.
Res 44, 1963-1965.
of canine and feline dystocia.
Palahniuk, R.J., Shnider, S.M., 1974a.
Schultz, L.G., Tyler, I.W., Moll, H.D..
Theriogenology 70, 337-342.
Maternal and fetal cardiovascular
 et al., 2008. Surgical approaches for
Uystepruyst, C., Coghe, I., Dorts, T.,
and acid-base changes during
cesarian section in catile. Can Vet J
et al., 2002. Sternal recumbency or
halothane and isofurane anesthesia
49. 565-568.
 suspension by the hind legs
 in the pregnant ewe. Anesthesiology
Silva, L.C.G., Lucio, C.F., Veiga, G.A.L.
immediately after delivery improves
41, 462-472.
et al., 2009. Neonatal clinical
respiratory and metabolic adaptation
Palahniuk, R.J., Shnider, S.M.,
evaluation, blood gas and
to extra uterine life in newborn
Eger, E.1., 1974b. Pregnancy
radiographic assessment after normal
calves delivered by caesarian section.
decreases the requirements for
birth, vaginal dystocia or caesarean
Vet Res 33, 709-724.
 inhaled anesthetic gases.
section in dogs. Reprod Dom Anim
Veronesi, M.C., Panzani, S., Faustini, M.,
Anesthesiology 41, 82-83.
$44,160-163.
et al., 2009. An Apgar scoring system
Palmer, J.E., 2007. Neonatal foal
Strmper, D., Gogarten, W., Durieux,
for routine assessment of newborn
resuscitation. Vet Clin Equine 23,
M.E., et al., 2005. Effects of
 puppy viability and short-term
159-182.
afedrine/theodrenaline, etilefrine
survival prognosis. Theriogenology
Pascoe, PJ., Moon, PF, 2001.
and ephedrine on uterine blood flow
72, 401-407.
Peniparturient and neonatal 
 during epidural-induced hypotension 
Whitehead, C.E., 2009. Management of
anesthesia. Vet Clin N Am Small
in pregnant sheep. Fetal Diagn Ther
neonatal llamas and alpacas. Vet
Anim Pract 31, 315-341.
20, 377-382.
Clin Food Anim 25, 353-366.
598
20
Chapter
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
General principles
599
ventilator ensures accurate delivery of minute ventilation,
 Preanaesthetic evaluation and
a rhythmic cycle of breathing that the surgeon can antici-
preparation
599
pate during the procedure, and more time for the
anaesthetist to devote to patient monitoring. Clinical
Ventilation and oxygenation
600
intrathoracic procedures are most commonly performed
Lung recruitment manoeuvre
601
in dogs and cats; specific management details are included
One-lung ventilation
601
in latter sections of this chapter. Some surgical or medical
Re-expansion pulmonary oedema
603
procedures may inadvertently penetrate the pleural cavity
Choice of anaesthetic agents
603
and create a pneumothorax, for example, ventral cervical
surgery near the thoracic inlet (tracheal ring repair, ventral
Analgesia
603
cervical decompression, or mass excision), oesophageal
Neuromuscular blockade
604
endoscopy, cranial abdominal surgery resulting in a crural
Monitoring
604
 tear, mass excisions over the thorax, and trauma disrupting
604
the integrity of the thoracic wall (fractured ribs, pulmo-
Closure of the thorax
nary bullae, or penetrating wound). Experimental thora-
Recovery from anaesthesia
605
aul 'daaus pue said ui pauoyiad Auanbay si Auono
Anaesthesia for specific procedures
605
general principles for anaesthetic management are the
Diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats
605
same for all species.
Choice of anaesthetic agents
605
Anaesthetic management
606
Recovery from anaesthesia
607
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
607
Choice of anaesthetic agents
607
Preanaesthetic evaluation
Anaesthetic management
607
and preparation
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA)
608
 The incidence of postoperative pulmonary complications
Thoracoscopy
608
qe ran pue seau iae saed u u uiu s
inal surgery (Duggan & Kavanagh, 2010). Factors associ-
The primary concern for anaesthesia of intrathoracic pro-
ated with such complications are a history of smoking.
cedures is management of the pneumothorax that is neces-
increasing age, degree of preoperative dyspnoea, increas-
sary for surgical access created by opening the chest wall
ing ASA score, extent of an intrathoracic tumour, presence
and/or the diaphragm. Ventilation must therefore be con-
of cardiac disease, and duration of surgery exceeding 3
trolled and monitored closely by the anaesthetist or an
hours. Low serum albumin has also been found to be
ate oxygenation and gas exchange (see Chapter 9). Manual
plications and 30-day mortality (Duggan & Kavanagh.
ventilation can be satisfactory but the use of a mechanical
 2010). Thus, the physical status of the veterinary patient
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
599
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
possible medical treatment should be instituted before
Table 20.1 Impact of presenting problem on
anaesthesia to improve the patients' physical status, for
anaesthetic management, in addition to
considerations specificto thoracotomy
example removal of air or drainage of pleural fluid.
or thoracoscopy
The surgical approach varies depending on the specifc
lesion and location, and the surgical techniques utilized
 abdominal, left or right thoracotomy, and median
Inability adequately to oxygenate or ventilate
sternotomy are most common; thoracoscopy may be
Aspiration pneumonia   Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA)
performed instead of or in addition to thoracotomy.
Requirements for management of the various approaches
 Pulmonary contusions
Vehicular trauma, diaphragmatic rupture,
big dog-little dog/cat trauma
 may differ, for example, analgesic techniques for a lateral
aosu e uy uaiap aq lm Auo
Restricted lung
Chylothorax, pyothorax, pneumothorax,
Preanaesthetic preparation of both patient and equip-
 inflation 
flail chest, diaphragmatic rupture, lung
ment is key to avoid or prevent complications. Basic needs
mass (abscess, neoplasia, lobe torsion).
 include one or more often two venous catheters sufficient
thoracic mass, gastro-oesophageal
for rapid fluid therapy, warming devices as heat loss can
intussusception
be severe, and a thermometer, a pulse oximeter, and blood
Potential for hypotension or
pressure monitor. Controlled ventilation, either manual or
cardiova scular collapse
by mechanical ventilator, is necessary. Blood for transfu-
Cardiac disease,
Requires pacemaker, neoplasia,
 sion should be available for some procedures and blood
congenital defects,
pericardial effusion, heartvorms,
typing or cross-matching before anaesthesia may also be
cardiac surgery
peritoneal-pericardial hernia, patent 
advisable for procedures where blood loss is common.
ductus arteriosus
Suction equipment should be available for procedures
Generalized trauma 
involving surgery of pulmonary tissue so that blood and
with haemorrhage
fluid can be removed from the airway as needed. Suction
technique of the trachea should be intermittent rather
Sepsis
than continuous to avoid collapsing the lung from exces-
 Decreased anaesthetic requirement
sive suction.
Ideally, facilities should be available for intensive moni-
Pre-existing CNS
Sepsis, cesophageal rupture, pyothorax
depression
toring that include capnography, blood gas analysis, and
 invasive pressure measurements, however, management of
Cardiac disease
Requires pacemaker, heartworm removal,
an acute diaphragmatic rupture in a dog or cat is likely to
neoplasia, myocardial contusions
be much less complex than a thoracotomy for pericardec-
tomy or experimental cardiac surgery. Many procedures in
dogs, such as lobectomy, pericardectomy, thoracic duct
scheduled for thoracic procedures should be evaluated
ligation, and exploratory, can be performed by thoracos-
with a thorough physical examination. Some patients may
opy when the equipment is available. Although this tech-
be relatively healthy, others will have specific abnormali-
nique has the benefit of decreased postoperative pain for
ties that must be considered in the anaesthetic manage-
the patient, it presents some diffculties for the anaesthetist
ment (Table 20.l). These might include pneumonia,
particularly involving provision of adequate ventilation
diffuse pulmonary neoplasia, a space-occupying mass[es).
and oxygenation. One-lung ventilation (OLV) requires
 pulmonary or myocardial contusions, restricted lung infla-
additional equipment preparation and lengthens the time
tion from pulmonary or external causes, cardiac disease.
from induction to start of the surgical procedure.
pre-existing central nervous system (CNS) depression, or
The species of the patient will have a significant impact
sepsis.
 on choice of anaesthetic agents and anaesthetic manage-
Lung function should be evaluated when respiratory
ment. Anaesthesia of a sheep for experimental thoracot-
 disease is present by assessing the degree of exercise intol-
omy must include plans for management of bloat and
erance [ability to walk without dyspnoea), the pattern of
prevention of aspiration in the event of regurgitation.
breathing. auscultation of the lungs for abnormal sounds.
Maintenance of adequate PaCO2 and PaOz is often diff-
arterial blood gas analysis (PaCO2 and PaO2), and tho-
cultin a horse with a diaphragmatic rupture, and manage-
racic radiography (Miller, 2007). An electrocardiogram
 ment of recovery is more difcult than in a dog.
(ECG) should be obtained to identify any dysrhythmias.
Lung function may be evaluated in dogs and horses with
Ventilation and oxygenation
spirometry. Flow-volume loops are obtained with a pneu-
motachometer and a tightly fitting mask over the patient's
The effects of artificial ventilation and of opening the chest
muzzle Further information may be obtained from com-
on cardiopulmonary function have been discussed in
puterized tomography (CT) in some patients. Whenever
Chapter 9. Controlled ventilation (IPPV) with cyclical
600
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Chapter
20
stretching of the lungs may cause lung damage that results
 inadequate distending pressure, or physical compression
in complications postoperatively. Tollike receptors are 
 in the dependent lung: (2) bronchiolar collapse (airway
thought to play a key role by activating a series of complex
dlosure) in areas of lung with low ventilation; and (3)
signalling pathways that initiate inflammation (Curley
capillary collapse for a number of reasons including abso-
et al., 2009). The impact of IPPV strategy on healthy lungs
lute or relative hypovolaemia (Tusman & Bohm, 20l0).
 may be minimal since several studies comparing ventila-
Administration of 10o% oxygen will potentiate atelectasis
tion at tidal volumes of 12-15 mL/kg with 6 mL/kg for
because of the absence of nitrogen to keep the alveoli open
relatively short times [5 hours) have not identified differ-
after O2 is absorbed. However, reducing the inspired
suaed ui eiuaexodau jo ysu aul saseaiun % uaskxo 
plasma tumour necrosis factor o (TNFo) and interleukin
with acute lung injury: 100% oxygen may be needed for
concentrations (Curley et al., 2009; Beck-Schimmer &
OLV, in the event of cardiovascular collapse, and during
Schimmer, 2010). It has been suggested that a two-hit
colonic surgery.
 process may be required for ventilator-induced injury. Also
recommended is further research into the effect of anaes-
Lung recruitment manoeuvre
thetic agents on the mechanisms of lung injury as down-
A lung recruitment manoeuvre is a ventilator strategy
regulation of these processes offering a degree of protection
has been documented with some anaesthetic agents
designed to reverse lung collapse, restore more uniform
expansion of the lungs, and improve arterial oxygenation
(Curley et al., 2009)
(see Chapter 9). It is a brief and controlled increment in
Use of low tidal volumes of 6 mL/kg of ideal body
airway pressure to open alveoli and bronchioles and is
weight is recommended for ventilation of human patients
 generally followed by the application of positive end-
-uAs ssaisip Aoteidsai anoe pue Ainlu sunl ainoe ym
eXpiratory pressure (PEEP) to maintain the improvement
drome (ARDS) of various aetiologies (Bigatello & Pesenti,
in oxygenation (Tusman & Bohm, 2010). The optimal
2009). Injury in the lung is not homogeneous but occurs
PEEP varies with the individual patient and does not
in small areas. Delivery of a fixed volume breath to the
always increase PaO2. Natural recruitment manoeuvres in
lung results in areas of pressures within the lung that are
awake subjects include coughing. sighing. sneezing. and
different to the measured tracheal pressure. Alveoli that
yimh ul ued e Aeid Aeu Aau pue 'saueuo ieimisod
are closed with fluid-filled terminal airways will not be
reversal of lung collapse in healthy patients after anaesthe-
ventilated and air is then directed at a higher pressure into
sia. The recommended technique for recruitment in
alveoli that are already ventilated (compliant alveoli)
human patients involves increasing PEEP at 5 cmH2O
resulting in their overventilation. A disadvantage of restric-
increments every 5 breaths up to 20 cmHzO and then
tion of tidal volume to avoid barotrauma is that, despite
increasing the airway pressure to 40 cmHzO to deliver a
an increase in respiratory rate it may result in an inability
effectively to maintain PaCO2 within normal limits. In this
larger tidal volume for l0 breaths before a stepwise
decrease of PEEP in increments of 2 cmHzO (Tusman &
instance an option is to allow permissive hypercapnia'
where a higher than normal PaCO2 (<55 mmHg) is pur-
Bohm, 2010). PEEP may have a significant adverse effect
[eP io ainssaid Aeme yaiu Pioae oi pamoe Alasod
on cardiovascular function, usually starting at 10 cmH2O
PEEP, that can be recognized by decreases in heart rate
volume The body of information on ventilator-induced
 saa ro (a) ssd aie sea  ()
lung trauma has largely been acquired from investigations
involving humans and mice, and research involving the
to below 55 mmHg. The procedure is then halted and
PEEP decreased. Blood volume is expanded by infusion of
varied domestic species is needed for accurate veterinary
relevance.
crystalloid or colloid solution before the next attempt at
recruitment.
It is usual to modify the parameters used for ventilation
of healthy lungs for ventilation of animals with damaged
A gradual progressive decrease in SpO2 to below 90%
in dogs with diseased lungs could have one of several
 collapsed lung lobes, by limiting the peak inspiratory pres-
origins, such as progressive lung collapse, decreased car-
 sure to <15 cmH2O whenever possible The decrease in
diovascularf
Recruitment may be indicated when cardiovascular failure
tidal volume achieved by this low pressure is compensated
for by an increase in respiratory rate Similarly, tidal
and pneumothorax have been ruled out and lung collapse
volume must be decreased after lung lobectomy and at the
 is suspected. A simple recruitment technique is to increase
the peak inspiratory pressure over several breaths to
change from two-lung ventilation (2LV) to OLV to avoid
 30-40 cmHzO, holding inspiration for 7-15 seconds. The
over distension of the one lung being ventilated, baro-
lung inflation should be performed gently.
trauma, and pneumothorax.
Lung collapse will occur even in healthy patients without
thoracic disease during anaesthesia. Three areas for poten-
One-lung ventilation
tial collapse are: (1) the alveoli (atelectasis, loss of aeration
Bilateral lung ventilation (2LV) is most frequently used for
of a whole acinus) caused by resorption of oxygen,
 thoracic surgery or thoracoscopy in veterinary patients and
601
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
is satisfactory for most procedures (Leasure et al., 20ll).
is withdrawn from the catheter and the balloon is inflated.
However, OLV may be advantageous in some cases. The
The endoscope is then used to observe the accuracy of
 main indications for OLV are: (1) to isolate diseased lung
balloon inflation. The lumen of the BB can be used to
to prevent contamination of the healthy lung during extir-
insuflate O2 into the collapsed lung. One problem is that
pation of an abscess or when excessive haemorrhage is
a BB may slide around within the bronchus during surgical
anticipated; and (2) to control distribution of ventilation
manipulation and is at risk of being displaced into the
to a selected lung. This situation is desirable when lung
trachea when the patient is moved or during surgery. Some
collapse would improve surgical exposure, to prevent ven-
catheters intended for other uses have been used as BB but
tilation of a lung with a major bronchial or alveolar tear.
complications have been seen, such as damage to the
or to improve visibility or surgical access during thoracos-
bronchial mucosa from a very high pressure created by the
copy. Lung separation can be accomplished by using
balloon (Brodsky. 2009).
a bronchial blocker or a double lumen endotracheal
tube (Brodsky, 2009). Occlusion of the bronchus to the
Double fumen tube
night cranial lobe may be diffcult to achieve (Caccamo
A
double lumen endotracheal tube (Carlens and
et al., 2007).
Robertshaw/Roberts-Shaw) is designed to allow selective
ventilation of the left and right lungs in human patients.
Bronchia! blocker
The main body of the endotracheal tube has a cuff that
A bronchial blocker (BB) is a narrow-diameter tube with
resides within the trachea. One lumen extends beyond the
a cuff or balloon at the end that is inserted into the bron.
tip of the other and can be inserted into one main bron-
chus of the lung to be collapsed (Fig. 20.1). Inflation of
chus and the cuff of that extension can be inflated to
the BB balloon after exhalation allows the lung distal to
isolate the lung. Double lumen endotracheal tubes are
the inflated balloon to remain collapsed. The BB can be
 available as right or left sided depending on which main
inserted through the lumen of a standard endotracheal
bronchus is to be isolated. The tubes can be effectively
tube or the BB may be an integral moving part in the
positioned in large dogs but not so easily in smaller
wall of a special endotracheal tube. Several BBs with
 patients. The position of the tube can be checked using a
different designs are manufactured for use in humans
flexible endoscope. One lung can then be ventilated as
(Narayanaswamy et al., 2009). The Armdt endobronchial
usual and the other either deflated or insufflated with
blocker (Cooke Critical Care) is a balloon-tipped catheter
oxygen to achieve continuous positive airway pressure
with an inner lumen that contains a flexible wire The wire
(CPAP) (see Chapter 9). Problems associated with use of
exits the end of the catheter as a flexible wire loop that can
double lumen tubes include difficulty in placement, dif-
be guided into a selected bronchus by the tip of a flexible
ficulty in occluding the bronchus to the right cranial lung
endoscope. Once the blocker is positioned, the wire loop
lobe, and the need to change (ideally) to a single lumen
Inflatable
balloon
Wire loop
Breathing
circuit
Upper collapsed
left lung
Flexible
Trachea
endoscope
Endotracheal tube
+口
cuff inflated
Dependent
 Bronchial blocker with
 Pilot balloon for
ventilated
inflatable balloon
right lung
endotracheal tube
Figure 20.1 Schematic diagram of lung separation using a bronchial blocker (BB) introduced through an endotracheal tube
p aui oui ysnd ue adosoua aixa e peui dool am e seu (papuedxa umous)  ipu at jo d aul bop e u
bronchus.
602
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Chapter
20
tube for recovery to allow total lung inflation. A recent
report described the use of a 37 Fr right double lumen
Box 20.1 Anaesthetic management
endobronchial tube (Portex Ltd) in a 30 kg Pointer anaes-
for thoracotomy
thetized in left lateral recumbency for right middle lung
lobectomy (Jiménez Pelaez & Jolliffe, 2012). During
Analgesia, unconsciousness, relaxation
surgery, the left lung and right cranial lung lobe were
Artificial ventilation, manual or mechanical
ventilated. Intraoperative PaOz was not reported.
Minimum monitoring is ECG. pulse oximeter, NIBP.
thermometer
Pulmonary effects of OLV
The effects of change from 2LV to OLV have been studied
in experimental dogs and pigs. OLV results in a significant
injury of pulmonary microvessels (Sohara, 2008). Strate-
decrease in PaOz due to the increase in venous admixture
gies to prevent the occurrence of REPE in clinical patients
from the collapsed lung In one study in healthy experi-
include avoiding strong negative pressure in the thorax
mental dogs, shunt fraction increased from 17% to 30%
Buyeu Aiasins suunp pue 'piny io iie suendse uaum
during OLV, although cardiac output, MAP, and O2 deliv-
no specific effort to re-expand lung that has been collapsed
ery were unchanged (Kudnig et al., 2003).
for 12 hours or more; the lung should be allowed to
When ventilation ceases in one lung, the alveoli pro-
re-expand progressively with time. Treatment of REPE is
 gressively collapse. OLV with a decreased inspired FIO2
symptomatic.
may result in desaturation (SpO<90%). Mechanisms to
 manage this include intermittent insuffation of the non-
Choice of anaesthetic agents
dependent (collapsed) lung with oxygen, maintaining
CPAP by slow continuous insufflation of oxygen in the
Anaesthetic agents must be chosen to provide analgesia
non-dependent (collapsed) lung. and instituting PEEP in
and, in most cases, unconsciousness and muscle relaxa-
the dependent (ventilated) lung. PEEP may expand col-
tion (Box 20.1). An exception would be a unilateral tho-
lapsed alveoli and improve expansion of poorly ventilated
racotomy performed on standing horses, using only
alveoli, however, the increase in intrathoracic pressure
sedation and nerve blocks. This is possible because the
when the chest is closed will decrease cardiac output. In
intact mediastinum allows a horse to continue breathing
one study using large healthy dogs and OLV, thoracoscopy
 when one pleural cavity is penetrated. For the majority of
was simulated by placement of three ports (pleural cavity
procedures, general anaesthesia is necessary, most fre-
Open to the air), and the cardiovascular effects of IPPV
quently inhalation anaesthesia, and the choice of agents
with 2.5 and 5.0 cmHzO PEEP were compared with zero
is influenced by the anaesthetist's preferences. Some
PEEP (Kudnig et al., 2006). Under these conditions,
 anaesthetic agents have beneficial effects on the respiratory
cardiac index and MAP were not affected by 5 cmHO.
system. For example, the inhalation agents that decrease
PaO2 and arterial oxygen content were significantly
airway reactivity, ketamine induces bronchodilation, lido-
increased, although since these dogs were healthy the
caine IV prevents surgically-induced reflex bronchospasm,
change was not great.
and atropine can block cholinergic bronchospasm. Except
for some analgesic techniques, the selection of anaesthetic
Re-expansion pulmonary oedema
protocols is not specific for intrathoracic procedures but is
governed by many factors including the patient's age and
It is believed that the frst report of re-expansion pulmo-
 physical health status and the reason for performing the
nary 0edema (REPE) was in 1853 (Sohara, 2008). In more
procedure These have been discussed in the species
recent years, there have been case reports of REPE in
chapters.
human patients and a few reports in the veterinary litera-
ture. REPE is a rare complication that occurs following
Analgesia
rapid expansion of a chronically collapsed lung. for
example, after removal of a large amount of air or fluid
Thoracic surgery is described as being extremely painful.
from the pleural space (Fossum et al., 1992; Soderstrom
Choice of analgesia for thoracic surgery is influenced by
et al., 1995; Tarver et al., 1996) or when forceful ventila-
 the species of patient and the surgical approach. Analgesia
tions are used during anaesthesia rapidly to expand lung
for lateral thoracotomy, for example, can be provided by
that has been collapsed for days or weeks due to an
bolus, continuous infusion, or transdermal administra-
intrathoracic mass or a diaphragmatic hermia (Stampley &
tion of an opioid, nerve blocks that include paravertebral
Waldron, 1993). Experimental studies in a variety of
or intercostal nerve blocks with bupivacaine, epidural
 r s j ui-an p a sas
morphine, interpleural bupivacaine and a non-steroidal
been collapsed for 24 hours or more results in leakage of
anti-inflammatory dnug. Local infltration with bupi-
plasma albumin from the pulmonary microvessels. REPE
-nu on sieade sod adoosoiou aun punie aua
 may be a permeability pulmonary oedema associated with
mize discomfort in recovery.
E09
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
An advantage of epidural opioid administration is the
to the surgical procedure, and will be better managed with
long duration of analgesia and lack of respiratory depres-
 the inclusion of capnography, invasive pressure monitor-
sion obtained compared with systemic administration of
ing. and pH and blood gas analysis. Adequate arterial
an opioid. Epidural administration of morphine, 0.1 mg/
oxygenation will largely depend on whether the lungs are
kg, or oxymorphone, 0.1 mg/kg. provided analgesia after
healthy or diseased and the mode of ventilation employed.
l0y iseal ie pue 'sinoy t7 oi dn ioy sop un Aoiooeiou
 Animals with preanaesthetic pulmonary contusions, pneu-
10 hours, respectively (Popilskis et al., 199l; Pascoe &
 monia, or pulmonary collapse are at greater risk for hypox-
Dyson, 1993). Not all dogs in these studies were analgesic
aemia when anaesthetized and during thoracotomy.
and some required rescue analgesia. Intercostal nerve
Medical treatment, such as pleurocentesis of fluid or air.
blocks performed with bupivacaine for a lateral thora-
 Or systemic antibiotics, can improve pulmonary function
cotomy were found to provide analgesia similar to that
 in these patients and should be done before anaesthesia.
obtained from epidural morphine (Pascoe & Dyson,
Monitoring of oxygen saturation using pulse oximetry in
1993). A comparison of analgesic techniques in dogs after
the pre-, intra-, and postoperative periods is essential and
left thoracotomy revealed significant decreases in PaO2 in
blood gas analysis should be performed for confrmation
dogs for the frst 2 hours after subautaneous administra-
of accuracy, if available. Some pulse oximeters consistently
tion of morphine compared with intercostal or interpleu-
provide values that are lower than that obtained from
ral injection of bupivacaine (Thompson & Johnson, 1991).
measurement of saturation by blood gas analysis. Control-
Interpleural instillation of bupivacaine with repeat doses
 also provides equivalent and longer lasting analgesia for
tidal CO2 (ETCO2) monitoring is useful except when there
thoracotomy with less adverse impact on PaO2 (Thompson
is signifcant lung collapse during the surgical procedure,
& Johnson, 1991; Conzemius et al., 1994). In experimental
especially thoroscopy or thoracotomy. ETCOz is no longer
dogs, lidocaine, 1.5 mg/kg. and bupivacaine, 1.5 mg/kg.
 representative of PaCO2 when there is a severe ventilation-
were injected into the pericardial space to mimic interp-
perfusion mismatch such that ETCO2 may be in the normal
leural administration in patients with a pericardial window
range when the PaCO2 is as high as 90 mmHg. Arterial
(Bernard et al., 2006). Stroke volume was significantly
blood gas analysis can be used to determine the accuracy
decreased but the effect was not different between interp-
of ETCOz measurement in the individual case. Alterma-
leural administration with or without access to the myo-
tively, during a pause in the surgical procedure the tidal
cardium. None of these techniques provide analgesia for
volume can be increased to see if there is a corresponding
all animals, consequently, more than one method of anal-
increase in ETCOz, indicating that hypercarbia is present.
 gesia should be included in the anaesthetic protocol.
Surgery within the chest may obstruct blood flow in the
aorta and vena cava or change the position of the heart
Neuromuscular blockade
and interfere with blood flow. The sound from a Doppler
ultrasound probe over a peripheral artery may diminish
pue ssop auos ul asean jou op sluauanou Aionendsay
or change character as blood flow is affected. Observation
cats despite ventilation to a low PaCOz, In these patients,
of a direct arterial pressure waveform may also warn of an
administration 
of a neuromuscular blocking
agent
acute decrease in blood pressure or cardiac output. Meas-
[NMBA) may be necessary to facilitate the surgical proce-
urement of arterial blood pressure, either indirectly or
dure Neuromuscular blockade is commonly used
to
invasively, is advisable Monitoring of cardiac rhythm with
 provide complete muscle relaxation and controlled condi-
A in ss zaiaui o rssaau s  u
tions for experimental intrathoracic surgery. Provision of
 originate from preanaesthetic traumatic damage or cardiac
adequate analgesia and unconsciousness 
is essential
disease, or from surgical manipulation.
whenever an NMBA is used. Residual neuromuscular
blockade during recovery from anaesthesia may contribute
Cosure of the thorax
to hypoventilation and postoperative complications.
There may be a substantial amount of air remaining in the
Monitoring
pleural cavity at the end of surgery, which will limit normal
 eXpansion of the lungs. Therefore, it is common practice
Monitoring of animals during anaesthesia has been dis-
to insert a chest tube to facilitate evacuation of this air at
cussed in detail in previous chapters. Essential monitoring
the end of surgery and during the recovery period. It is
will vary between patients and should be planned on an
important to note, however, that the diameter of the chest
individual basis. Some patients that are healthy and
tube is insuffcient to allow movement of a normal tidal
without special intraoperative conditions may be ade-
-xoday ieu pue 'uoeeuxa pue uoeieyu sunp aunoa
quately managed with a pulse oximeter, ECG, non-invasive
blood pressure (NIBP) monitoring, and temperature.
closure of subcutaneous tissues. Aspiration of the air from
Other patients may have significant systemic disease or be
the chest and occlusion of the chest tube should improve
relatively healthy but require specifc management relevant
oxygenation.
604
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Chapter
20
Recovery from anaesthesia
Box 20.2 Anaesthetic management of dogs
Specific attention must be paid to the adequacy of ventila-
and cats for diaphragmatic rupture repair
tion (CO2 elimination), oxygenation, and the control of
pain in patients recovering from anaesthesia for thoracic
Evaluate patient for severity of respiratory compromise
 surgery. Animals with thoracic pain breathe shallowly.
and other organ trauma
potentiating lung collapse and exacerbating inadequate
 Choose anaesthetic agents appropriate to individual
gas exchange. Thoracic excursion, respiratory rate and
patient
pattern of breathing are used to assess ventilation with
 Preoxygenate before induction of anaesthesia
more information provided by measurement of ETCO2
 Premedicate with an opioid ± diazepam or midazolam,
and blood gas analysis. A pulse oximeter should be used
induction with ketamine, propofol, or alfaxalone
to track oxygenation before and after disconnection from
Intubate and maintain anaesthesia with an inhalation
the anaesthesia machine circuit. Supplementation with
anaesthetic
 Oxygen is usual after thoracotomy at least for a few hours.
 Check SpOz immediately after induction and correct
When SpO2 is low, placing the patient in stermal position
abnormal value with IPPV and/or change in body
may serve to decrease ventilation-perfusion mismatch and
position
improve oxygenation. Measurement of functional residual
 Be prepared for hypotension when organs are
capacity (FRC) by helium dilution in lightly sedated
extracted from pleural cavity: treat with infusion of
healthy experimental dogs confirmed that FRC was signif-
dobutamine or dopamine
cantly improved when the dogs were in sternal compared
with lateral recumbency (Rozanski et al., 2010). Applica-
 Do not try to re-inflate collapsed lung
 Continue to supply Oz into recovery and monitor SpO2
tion of a circumferential thoracic bandage, such as is often
applied after thoracotomy, resulted in a further significant
 Options for analgesia include systemic opioid and 
epidural opioid ± incisional infiltration with
decrease in FRC. Oxygenation should be measured after
bupivacaine
bandaging: tight bandages should be loosened to correct 
iatrogenic hypoxaemia.
with signifcant cardiac dysrhythmias during surgical
ANAESTHESIA FOR
 breakdown of adhesions. Anaesthetic requirement is often
SPECIFIC PROCEDURES
markedly reduced in these patients.
Choice of anaesthetic agents
Diaphragmatic rupture in
 The choice of anaesthetic agents must be made after listing
dogs and cats
the specific problems of the individual patient, including
Although the majority of diaphragmatic ruptures are
age, presence of brachycephalia, ASA physical status, and
repaired through an abdominal incision, the pleural
other damage that may have incurred such as traumatic
cavity is open to the air and the procedure qualifes as a
myocarditis or haemorrhage Anticholinergic agents would
thoracotomy. The damage frequenty occurs as a result
pue Aeuound yiim siuaed ui panuo aq Aiail iso
of trauma and other injuries may have been incurred
myocardial contusions to avoid increased heart rates and
(Box 20.2). Most commonly in dogs and cats, the dia-
potentiation of ventricular dysrhythmias. It should be
 phragm is repaired first with any other abdominal trauma,
remembered that while myocardial damage is likely
such as abdominal wall lacerations, ruptured urinary
present, indicators of damage such as premature ventricu-
bladder, or caesarian section. The patient is reanaesthe-
Aaeuixidde un iadde jou op (sad) saxaduos 1e
tized at a later date for orthopaedic repair of fractured
36 hours after the initial trauma.
bones. The urgency of the surgery for diaphragm repair
Premedication should not be heavy due to respiratory
depends on the degree of respiratory compromise. Anaes-
depression, unless incorporated into the anaesthesia
thesia may be induced within a short time of admission
induction sequence. For cats, buprenorphine 0.0l-
to the hospital when breathing is laboured and oxgena-
0.02 mg/kg. or butorphanol, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg. IM or IV
tion is tenuous. Ideally, anaesthesia can be postponed for
can be used, followed by induction of anaesthesia with
up to 24 hours if oxygenation can be maintained to allow
the combination of ketamine, 5 mg/kg, and diazepam
restoration of fluid balance and adequate evaluation of
Or midazolam, 0.25 mg/kg. given IV in increments
'to
other organ functions. Management of anaesthesia is
effect', and maintenance of anaesthesia with isofurane
smoother when several hours have elapsed from the inci-
or sevoflurane.
Hydromorphone and oxymorphone,
dent Chronic diaphragmatic rupture, when the trauma
0.05-0.l mg/kg, IM or V or methadone can be used
Occurred several months previously, may be associated
shuae asau aaamoy pabai st eisatieue iaieai araum
605
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
cause respiratory depression and the cats may vomit,
breaths/min and 1l mL/kg. The anaesthetist who is
causing greater respiratory distress in patients with already
 providing manual ventilation should be focused on
compromised breathing. Medetomidine and dexmedeto-
monitoring the patient and providing consistent and
midine are not suitable choices as vomiting may be
appropriate ventilation. Use of a mechanical
induced and cardiac output severely decreased. Anaesthe-
ventilator will allow the anaesthetist to focus
sia may be induced with propofol or alfaxalone, although
more on the patient but the breathing circuit
propofol is associated with hypotension in cats. The dura-
pressure gauge must be observed frequently to
tion of butorphanol may be longer in cats (2.5 hours)
ensure that an increase in airway pressure is
than in dogs, but will require supplementation.
recognized immediately.
Dogs with acute diaphragmatic rupture should not be
Oxygenation may be influenced by body position.
premedicated with opioids that induce vomiting. Vomit.
The patient may become hypoxaemic immediately
ing should not occur after administration of butorphanol,
after induction of anaesthesia and the pulse
buprenorphine, methadone, or fentanyl. Hydromorphone,
 oximeter should be attached as early as possible.
oxymorphone, or morphine can be administered after
Oxygenation may be improved by the start of
the patient is anaesthetized, for example following
 IPPV. Sometimes lung collapse is greater in
 premedication with fentanyl and midazolam. Induction
one body position, for example, the dog is
of anaesthesia should be with an IV injectable agent such
hypoxaemic in left lateral recumbency but not in
as ketamine alfaxalone or propofol, with or without
right lateral or dorsal oblique recumbency and in
midazolam or diazepam, 0.2 mg/kg. Thiopental and pro.
these cases a change in body position may
pofol may potentiate ventricular dysrhythmias during
improve oxygenation.
anaesthesia. Lidocaine, 1-2 mg/kg, IV can be incorporated
Hypotension occurring when abdominalorgans are
into the induction protocol and then continued as
removed from the chest. Hypotension can develop any
an infusion during anaesthesia, 0.025-0.05 mg/kg/min
time after induction of anaesthesia but specifically
(1.5-3.0 mg/kg/h) IV where it will decrease the concentra-
may occur during surgery when the abdominal
tion of inhalation agent needed for anaesthesia. Anaesthe-
 Organs are retrieved from the thoracic cavity. The
sia is generally maintained by an inhalation agent. Nitrous
probable mechanism is vasodilation in the
oxide should not be administered until the abdomen is
abdominal organs resulting in sequestration of
open and only used when oxygenation is adequate. N2O
blood. Treatment with a large bolus of crystalloid
must be turned off before the diaphragm is closed to avoid
fluid is not advisable as return of vascular tone
EXpansion of air remaining in the pleural cavity.
later creates hypervolaemia that may induce
Epidural opioid administration may be indicated for
 pulmonary oedema. Management of low blood
 prolonged postoperative analgesia in some patients.
 pressure in this situation is best with an IV infusion
of vasoactive agent such as dobutamine or
Anaesthetic management
dopamine 5-7 μg/kg/min.
4. Do not re-inflate collapsed lung. Lung that has been
Sedation may adversely affect the animal's ability to
collapsed for several hours by compression from the
breathe adequately and result in hypoxaemia. Therefore,
intestines and liver will have the appearance of a
premedication and induction of anaesthesia are generally
light-coloured liver. The lung should be allowed to
administered within a few minutes of each other and the
re-expand at a slow rate determined by normal
patient is kept under direct observation after administra-
breathing and not by delivery of artificially high
tion of any sedative, analgesic, or anaesthetic agents. If
volume breaths. Re-expansion of the lung in this
possible the abdomen is clipped before anaesthesia while
clinical condition may result in barotrauma and
the animal is being held in a standing upright position.
subsequent development of life-threatening
Plaq osie s! leujue aut 'papadsns st yoeuuois iiny e uaum
 generalized pulmonary oedema.
upright during the induction phase until the endotracheal
5.
Dysrhythmias during surgery. The occurrence of
tube is placed and the cuff inflated.
IWCs during this surgery is common in dogs.
There are five specifc areas of concern during anaesthe-
Lidocaine is the treatment of choice when the
sia for repair of ruptured diaphragm:
frequency of PVCs is judged adversely to affect
1. Artificial ventilation is essential. The depth of breathing
blood pressure Lidocaine can be injected as a
bolus of 1-2 mg/kg IV that will last 10-15 minutes
anaesthesia and artificial ventilation should be
 or the bolus can be followed by a continuous
initiated. Inspiratory pressure should initially be
infusion for the duration of anaesthesia. Lidocaine
limited to less than 20 cmHzO in an attempt to
infusion is not generally recommended in cats, but a
avoid barotrauma. Depth of breathing should be
bolus of lidocaine, 1 mg/kg, IV can be administered
altered to accommodate stiff and compressed lungs
provided that the volume injected is precisely
by using a fast rate and small breaths, i.e. 15-20
controlled.
606
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Chapter
20
Recovery from anaesthesia
overload after ligation and pulmonary oedema in some
patients. Animals less than 3 months of age or lean body
After surgery, oxygen should be supplied into recovery and
type may be at risk for hypoglycaemia during and
oxygenation checked with a pulse oximeter when the
patient is switched to air breathing. Nasal or cage oxygen
after anaesthesia and should receive an infusion of 5%
dextrose in water (D5W) at 3 mL/kg/h with an acetated
supplementation, or 'flow-by' oxygen with a mask, oxygen
or lactated Ringer's solution infusion rate of 3 mL/kg/h.
cylinder and regulator, may be needed. Analgesia is
 Blood glucose should be measured at the start and end
continued by means generally recommended for ovario-
of anaesthesia. Dogs and cats with a PDA may be
hysterectomy, unless other surgical repairs have been per-
extremely small such that monitoring may be more dif-
formed and then analgesia must be matched to those
ficult than usual and requires intense concentration on
procedures.
the part of the anaesthetist. Older dogs may have left
atrial and left ventricular enlargement, pulmonary hyper-
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
tension and oedema and dictate that the anaesthetic
management be adjusted to the inadequacies of cardio-
This abnormality is frequently detected in young animals
vascular function.
by auscultation of a characteristic machinery murmur.
Echocardiography will determine the direction of blood
Choice of anaesthetic agents
flow through the defect, the size of the defect, and the
extent of myocardial abnormality. Repair may involve
Several anaesthetic drug protocols have been used satis-
either sedation or anaesthesia without thoracotomy for
factorily and all include opioid administration for pre-
insertion of a catheter into a vein or artery to introduce a
medication. Induction of anaesthesia with etomidate or
device that will occlude the PDA, or a thoracotomy for
'uoisuao areiaiod oi Aianl ssal aa lm auolexe
direct surgical ligation or to facilitate occlusion. Anaesthe-
 In dogs. premedication with fentanyl and midazolam IV
sia will be the same for the two techniques but thoracot-
can be used to decrease significantly the dose of propo-
omy includes specific management of ventilation and
fol required for tracheal intubation. Thiopental is least
-eue jo uoisiaod ci uouae paseau pue uoeuaxo
popular in these patients as it may further decrease
gesia. Anaesthesia should be relatively straightforward in
blood pressure and sensitize the myocardium to dys-
the younger animals but may require greater attention to
rhythmias during surgical manipulation. Anaesthesia is
treatment of hypotension in dogs with cardiac abnormali-
asal ioy 'pue juae uoeiequi ue yim pauiuiu alensn
ties. Both occlusion achieved by catheter introduction
 patients, sevoflurane or isoflurane are superior to haloth-
and surgical ligation can be associated with signifcant
ane. Lidocaine infusion in dogs will further decrease the
haemorrhage from a tear at the PDA or further down the
inhalant concentration and protect against surgically-
vascular tree.
induced dysrhythmias. A continuous infusion of fentanyl,
A PDA is associated with low diastolic and mean arte-
5-8 μg/kg/h, IV in dogs is another option for continu-
rial pressures that contribute to hypotension during the
ous analgesia and reduction in inhalant anaesthetic
ainssaid ieae uean (e'oz xoa) eisausaeue jo jed is
concentration.
increases after ligation or occlusion and, therefore, hypo-
Analgesia for lateral thoracotomy should include inter-
tension should be managed by use of dobutamine or
costal nerve blocks using bupivacaine, 1 mg/kg. with the
dopamine which can be discontinued at that time Infu-
balance of the total dose of bupivacaine instilled into the
piny ui nsan m uoisuanodaq iea on spiny Al jo uois
thorax at the end of the surgical procedure for interpleural
analgesia. Epidural administration of morphine or oxy-
morphone will provide additional long-term analgesia.
Box 20.3 Anaesthetic management of PDA
Anaesthetic management
Anticipate hypotension; treat with dobutamine or
 Infusion of balanced electrolyte solution IV during anaes-
dopamine. and not by fluid challenge
thesia should be restricted to 6 mL/kg/h to avoid fluid
Limit total IV fluid administration to ≤6 mL/kg/h
overload after ligation. The fluid rate should be reduced
Monitor and control blood glucose in patients 
proportionately when D5W, 3 mL/kg/h, is infused for pae-
<3 months of age
diatric patients. Methods to control and measure accu-
 Thoracotomy requires IPPV and increased use of
rately fluid infusion in the litle animals should be in place
techniques for analgesia
(syringes, syringe driver, burette). Ligation of the PDA is
 Monitor SpOz in recovery: supplemental Oz and blood
accompanied by a sigmificant increase in diastolic and
gas analysis if needed/available
mean arterial pressures, sometimes accompanied by
 Thoracic bandage may limit breathing
bradycardia. The ECG should be observed for PVCs but
they rarely require treatment. Infusion of dobutamine or
607
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
dopamine is usually discontinued at this time. Manage-
pressure of 6 mmHg (Daly et al., 2002). Monitoring the
ment for recovery from anaesthesia is the same as for any
patient by usual means may be misleading as to the extent
thoracotomy.
of cardiac depression since in this study, animals' SpO2
did not reach 90% until an interpleural pressure of
Persistent right aortic arch (PRAA)
10 mmHg. at which point cardiac output was decreased
by 51.5% from baseline.
The main concern for anaesthesia of dogs with PRAA is
Bilateral lung inflation may obscure the surgeon's view
the presence of pneumonia and its impact on oxygena-
and this is partly offset by decreasing the tidal volume and
tion. Preoxygenation is recommended. Anaesthesia should
 increasing the respiratory rate. The surgeon's view may be
be induced with the animal in upright position, as for any
expanded by use of OLV, as previously described. Sponta-
patient at risk for regurgitation, and the trachea intubated
neous thoracic movement can be controlled by adminis-
and cuff inflated before the patient is allowed to assume
tration of an NmBA and the relaxation will facilitate the
lateral recumbency. There are no specifc anaesthetic
 surgical procedure Managerment of neuromuscular block-
 agents recommended for this procedure Anaesthetic man-
ade is described in several previous chapters.
agement follows the principles of management of a
Conversion from thoroscopy to thoracotomy should
thoracotomy.
always be anticipated when preparing for a thoroscopy
procedure. Reasons for the conversion include an inability
Thoracoscopy
to ventilate the patient with the amount of lung collapse
required for surgical view, adhesions or large lesions that
pue sun ioy stes pue ssop u! pasn uaaq sey Adossoseiou
are not conducive to thoracoscopic treatment, a procedure
mediastinal mass biopsy, pericardectomy, lung lobectomy.
that is taking too long, or because of difficulties relating
t surgeon inexperience.
aortic arch, lavage for pyothorax, and investigation of
Analgesia can be provided by administration of a sys-
 spontaneous pneumothorax (Radlinsky, 2009). Dogs may
temic opioid. Epidural opioid analgesia can be provided
be positioned in lateral, dorsal or sternal recumbency
if the surgical procedure is assessed as painful. Postopera-
depending on the area to be viewed. The most common
ainssaid ot paquose uaaq sey Adossoneiou iaye uied aan
of the ports on intercostal nerves. Infiltration with 0.5%
haemorrhage, and trauma to tissues outside the area of
bupivacaine, up to 2.5 mg/kg for dogs or 2 mg/kg for cats.
view. Thoracic insufflation is rarely required and should
aul un uied ieol iuaaaid oi sieade sans jod aun punoe
be discouraged. Incremental positive insufflation of the
recovery. Any bupivacaine remaining from the local infil-
pleural cavity in anaesthetized experimental dogs was
tration can be instilled into the pleural cavity Excision of
found to decrease cardiac output significantly by 2l% at
pericardium is thought not to be a specific contraindica-
an interpleural pressure of 3 mmHg and by 39.4% at a
tion to interpleural bupivacaine.
REFERENCES
Beck-Schimmer, B., Schimmer, R.C.,
Caccamo, R., Twedt, D.C., Buracco, P,
Duggan, M., Kavanagh, B.P., 2010.
 2010. Perioperative tidal volume and
et al., 2007. Endoscopic bronchial
Perioperative modifications of
intraoperative open lung strategy in
anatomy in the cat. J Feline Med
respiratory function. Best Prac Res
healthy lungs: where are we going?
Surg 9, 140-149.
Clin Anaesthesiol 24, 145-155.
Best Prac Res Clin Anaesthesiol 24.
Conzemius, M.G., Brockman, D.J.
Fossum, T.w., Evering, W.N..
199-210.
King. L.G., et al., 1994. Analgesia in
Miller, M.w., et al., 1992. Severe
Bernard, F, Kudnig, S.T., Monnet, E.,
dogs after intercostal thoracotomy: A
 bilateral fbrosing pleuritis associated
2006. Hemodynamic effects of
dinical trial comparing intravenous
with chronic chylothorax in fve cats
interpleural lidocaine and
buprenorphine and interpleural
and two dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 
bupivacaine combination in
bupivacaine. Vet Surg 23, 291-298.
201, 317-324.
anesthetized dogs with and without
Curley, G.F., Kevin, L.G., Laffey, J.G.
Jimenez Pelaez, M., Jolliffe, C., 2012.
an open pericardium. Vet Surg 35.
2009. Mechanical ventilation: Taking
Thoracoscopic foreign body removal
252-258.
its toll on the lung. Anesthesiology
and right middle lung lobectomy to
Bigatello, L.M., Pesenti, A.,2009. Ventilator-
111, 701-703.
treat pyothorax in a dog. I Small
induced lung injury (Editorial)].
Daly, C.M., Swalec-Tobias, K..
Anim Pract 53, 240-244.
Anesthesiology 111, 699-700.
Tobias, A.H., et al., 2002
Kudnig. S.T., Monnet, E., Riquelme, M.,
Brodsky, J.B., 2009. Lung separation and
Cardiopulmonary effects of
et al., 2006. Effect of positive
the diffcult airway. Br J Anaesth 103
intrathoracic insufflation in dogs.
end-expiratory pressure on oxygen
(Suppl), i66-i75.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38, 515-520.
 delivery during 1-lung ventilation in
809
Anaesthesia for intrathoracic procedures
Chapter
20
thoracoscopy in normal dogs. Vet
in dogs epidural morphine vs.
Sohara, Y., 2008. Reexpansion
Surg 35, 534-542.
intercostal bupivacaine. Vet Surg 22.
pulmonary edema. Ann
Kudnig, S.T, Monnet, E., Riquelme, R.
141-147.
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 14.
et al., 2003. Effect of one-lung
Popilskis, S., Kohn, D., Sanchez, J.A..
205-209.
ventilation on oxygen delivery in
et al., 1991. Epidural vs.
Stampley, A.R., Waldron, D.R., 1993.
 anesthetized dogs with an open
intramuscular oxymorphone
Reexpansion pulmonary edema after
thoracic cavity. Am I Vet Res 64.
 analgesia after thoracotomy in dogs.
surgery to repair a diaphragmatic
443-448.
Vet Surg 20, 462-467.
hernia in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Leasure, C.s., Ellisone, G.W.
Radlinsky, M.G., 2009. Need for
203, 1699-1701.
Roberts, J.F., et al., 2011. Occlusion
 conversion from thoracoscopy to
Tarver, R.D., Broderick, L.S., Conces, D.J.
of the thoracic duct using
 thoracotomy in small animals. Vet
 Jr, 1996. Reexpansion pulmonary
ultrasonically activated shears in six
Clin Small Anim 39, 977-984.
edema. I Thorac Imaging 11,
dogs. Vet Surg 40, 802-810.
Rozanski, E.A., Bedenice, D.,
198-209.
Miller, C.1., 2007. Approach to the
Lofgren, I., et al., 2010. The effect of
Thompson, S.E., Johnson, J.M., 1991.
respiratory patient. Vet Clin Small
body position, sedation, and
Analgesia in dogs after intercostal
Anim 37, 861-878.
 thoracic bandaging on functional
 thoracotomy A comparison of
Narayanaswamy, M., McRae, K.,
residual capacity in healthy
morphine, selective intercostal nerve
Slinger, P, et al., 2009. Choosing a
deep-chested dogs. Can I Vet Res 74.
block, and interpleural regional 
lung isolation device for thoracic
34-39.
 analgesia with bupivacaine. Vet Surg
surgery: A randomized trial of three
Soderstrom, M.J., Gilson, S.D.,
20.73-77.
bronchial blockers versus double-
Gulbas, N., 1995. Fatal reexpansion
Tusman, G., Bohm, S.H., 2010.
Jumen tubes. Anesth Analg 108,
pulmonary edema in a kitten 
Prevention and reversal of lung
1097-1101
following surgical correction of
collapse during the intra-operative
Pascoe, PJ., Dyson, D.H., 1993.
 pectus excavatum. J Am Anim Hosp
 period. Best Prac Res Clin
 Analgesia after lateral thoracotomy
Assoc 31, 133-136.
Anaesthesiol 24, 183-197.
609
hapter
Complications
Introduction
611
Abnormal breathing
611
INTRODUCTION
Abnormal or laboured breathing
612
The layout of this chapter is based on identification of an
Bronchodilation
612
abnormal behaviour or measurement in the perianaes-
Tachypnoea or panting
612
- 'si e u s s  a
Irregular breathing patterns
616
 sion, or laboured breathing. Sometimes the cause of the
Arrhythmias
617
abnormality is immediately obvious, such as hypotension
following injection of an anaesthetic agent or change in
Causes and management
617
patient body position, other times it is necessary to work
Tachycardia
623
through a checklist to identify the origin of the abnormal-
Cyanosis and hypoxaemia
623
ity. Potential causes are listed for abnormal signs and have
Causes and management
623
been classified according to categories to aid differential
Cz-Antagonists
625
diagnosis. The following eight categories comprise a good
checklist when troubleshooting a patient's problem: Drugs.
Hypotension
626
Equipment, Mechanical, Other patient problems (than
Causes and management 
627
cardiac or respiratory) and procedure, Cardiac, Respira-
Crystalloids and colloids
627
tory, Allergic and Toxic. The first letter of each category
forms the acronym DEMOCRAT, which is helpful to ensure
Monitoring fluid infusion
634
a thorough and systematic evaluation of the patient is
Expansion capabilities of different colloids
634
performed. Suggestions for management of each cause
Adverse effects of colloid administration
635
are included and further explanations are presented in the
Points to remember
following boxes and text Details of events leading up to
635
Blood loss
635
cardiac arrest and the current approach to cardiopulmo-
xau aul ui uaai aie (aod) uoeisnsan leiqaian Aieu
Huid resuscitation
636
chapter. Hypothermia and hyperthermia are covered in
 Blood product transfusion triggers
637
Chapter 2. Regurgitation is discussed in Chapter 15 and
Intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE)
the ruminant chapters. Myopathy and neuropathy that may
637
Inadequate anaesthesia
638
occur after anaesthesia in horses is discussed in Chapter ll.
Muscle movements
639
Injury associated with anaesthesia
639
ABNORMAL BREATHING
Contrast agents
639
Postoperative infection
689
An animal's breathing pattern during anaesthesia is not
Myopathy and nerve damage
641
 the same as in the conscious state, varies between species.
Visual loss
641
and may be influenced by the specific anaesthetic agent
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
611
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
administered. The breathing pattern may also be changed
heart rate (HR) or blood pressures were recorded. A dose
by the patient's current health status, acid-base status,
rate of 2 μg/kg (equivalent to 10 actuations for a 450 kg
depth of anaesthesia, or other conditions that may develop
horse) is higher than the requirement for bronchodilation
during anaesthesia.
measured in conscious horses, and it may be that less
 albuterol/salbutamol will produce satisfactory results in
Abnormal or laboured breathing
some anaesthetized horses.
Bronchoconstriction is also a component of an allergic
Breathing that is gasping. jerky, shallow, or has excessively
or anaphylactic reaction. Albuterol was administered as
large thoracic excursions, flexion of head and neck, and/or
 part of treatment to one horse that developed respiratory
tracheal airflow that is zero, reduced, or increased, is usually
sunp epau jseus jo ualu oi asuodsan u an
associated with abnormalities that may have serious con-
imaging (Gunkel et al., 2004). The response to albuterol
sequences for the patient (Table 2l.1, Boxes 2l.1-3).
was minimal, although subsequent injection of atropine,
also a bronchodilator, produced a slight positive effect.
The clinicians involved with this horse were persistent
Bronchodilation
with their heroic efforts despite an extremely low PaO2 of
Albuterol (USA name) is the same as salbutamol (Inter-
d 9'5 01 P5211 14 (3 65-79) e 7'5-97
national name) and is administered by inhalation for its
[42 mmHg) after the horse was standing. Treatment
direct β2-adrenergic agonist effect on bronchial smooth
included albuterol/salbutamol, atropine, furosemide, and
muscle as rescue medicine for bronchoconstriction in
O2, and the horse survived to be reanaesthetized without
humans. The stated time of onset is 5-20 minutes. There
complications one month later.
are several products commercially available and Ventolin@
Albuterol/salbutamol has been studied in healthy cats
is the only product that does not contain ethanol as a
with drug-induced bronchoconstriction using measure-
co-solvent. Albuterol/salbutamol has been used to treat
 ments of lung function by whole body plethysmography
horses with recurrent airway obstruction (RAO, “heaves)
(Leemans et al., z
2009). One puff from a metered-dose
that have increased airway resistance and decreased
 inhaler (Ventolin@) induced a significant antispasmodic
lung compliance from bronchoconstriction, airway wall
 effect lasting for 4 hours. In an emergency situation in cats
oedema and mucus accumulation in small airways
with asthma, further doses may be given, such as an addi-
(Derksen et al., 1999; Bertin et al., 20ll). Measurements
tional dose every 30 minutes for up to 4 hours [Padrid,
of pulmonary function determined that 360 μg of aero-
2006).
solized albuterol/salbutamol in conscious horses with
RAO caused significant bronchodilation and that increas-
ing the dose to 720 μg did not significantly enhance bron-
Tachypnoea or panting
chodilation or increase the duration of action (Derksen
et al., 1999). Onset of bronchodilation was rapid within
5 minutes and the effect lasted 0.5-3 hours. Another
hypoventilation depending on the adequacy of alveolar
experimental study (Bertin et al., 20ll) administered
ventilation. Panting is a common side effect of opioid
albuterol (Ventolin) by metered-dose inhaler that deliv-
administration in dogs, most frequently seen with mor-
ered 90 μg albuterol/actuation (puff) in l0 conscious
phine, oxymorphone and hydromorphone and less fre-
horses with RAO. Measured changes in transpulmonary
quently with butorphanol and buprenorphine Rapid
 pressures and lung compliance confirmed that the average
respiratory rates may be seen, especially in small dogs.
dose of albuterol/salbutamol required for maximal bron-
during inhalation anaesthesia. Small ruminants have a
chodilation in the horses studied was 6 actuations (540 μg)
 relatively fast respiratory rate that generally decreases with
but that there was a large variation between horses, with
increasing depth of anaesthesia. Q2-Agonist sedative
maximum bronchodilation achieved between 2 (180 μg)
administration to healthy or febrile horses occasionally
and 10 (900 μg) actuations.
causes short-lived increases in respiratory rates to 40-100
Administration of albuterol/salbutamol may be an
breaths/min, with minimal decreases in PaCO2. No spe-
effective treatment of hypoxaemia in anaesthetized horses.
cific treatment is recommended for the tachypnoea.
 Differential diagnoses of a faster than normal respira-
In a clinical study, horses anaesthetized for surgery for
colic were administered albuterol into the Y-piece of the
tory rate include:
circle breathing circuit during inhalation at a dose rate of
●Light plane of anaesthesia
2 μg/kg (Robertson & Bailey, 2002). Arterial blood col-
●Hypoxaemia
lected 20 minutes later revealed a sigmificant increase in
●High inspired COz from an incorrectly connected
average PaO2 from 8.25kPa (62 mmHg) to 15.8 kPa
circuit, exhausted CO2 absorbent, or a malfunctioning
(119 mmHg). The bronchodilation may have improved
one-way valve in a rebreathing circuit
ventilation in underventilated parts of the lungs and
+
 Hyperthermia from excessive application of extermal
thereby increased O2 uptake No significant changes in
heat, anaesthetic-induced impairment of
612
Complications
Chapter
21
 Table 21.1 Abnormal or laboured breathing: causes and management 
Species
Causes
Management
Drugs
All species 
Excessive depth of anaesthesia, immediately preceding
Check pulse exists
(or sometimes following) cardiac arrest
Discontinue anaesthetic administration, flush circuit with Oz
 may need dobutamine or antagonists
Anaesthesia too light can result in jerky breathing,
Increase anaesthetic administration
may be accompanied by body tremors, brisk 
palpebral reflex
Fentanyl-induced chest splinting
Discontinue fentanyl, spontanecus ventilation if oxygenation
adequate, ± naloxone
Dogs, cats
Residual curarization after NMBA administration
 Check response to peripheral nerve stimulation and eye 
 position, ± IPPV, administer edrophonium or neostigmine
Equipment
 All species
Airway obstruction from kinked ETT, endobronchial
 Assess endotracheal tube placement and size. pharyngeal
intubation, oesophagal intubation, ETT too small,
 packing removed?
mucus plug in ETT, by pharyngeal or tracheal
 foreign body after extubation
 Bain disconnect at ETT connector resulting in 
Check assembly and integrity of circuit
hypercarbia, non-rebreathing circuit broken or
incorrectly connected
 Rebreathing from one-way valve malfunction,
 No movement of one-way valve (open or shut) with breathing
 exhausted COz absorbent in circle circuit,
- dislodge and clean, absent valve flap - replace it, check 
rebreathing diagnosed by capnography waveform
absorbent indicator colour - change it if 75% used or when 
(see Fig. 2.33A)
capnography indicates rebreathing
Mechanical
Dogs, cats
 External chest compression 
Remove compression
Ainway obstruction when not intubated, e.g.
Endotracheal intubation, breathing may be easier with sedation
brachycephalic breeds, nasal polyp, retropharyngeal 
for collapsing trachea or laryngeal paralysis, for postsurgical
abscess, neoplasia, collapsing trachea, laryngeal
swwelling obstruction - dexamethasone, 0.5 mg/kg, IV and
 paralysis, swelling after oral surgery
reanaesthetize and reintubate with head elevated for an hour.
± tracheotomy (see Box 21.1)
Laryngospasm, occurs in cats most frequently and
Extend head and neck, open mouth, pull tongue rostrally, ±
 resolves with repositioning
 topical lidocaine on larynx, ± tracheal intubation 
Horses
 Laryngeal hemiplegia
Endo- or nasotracheal intubation
 Nasal mucosa congestion limits air flow after
Assess swelling before extubation, oral or nasal ETT until horse
extubation
 stands, ± phenylephrine spray into nasal meatus
Tracheal obstruction by blood clot from sinus,
Head elevated/nose down during surgery. leave orotracheal tube
 pharyngeal, dental surgery
until standing and extubate with head down, if tracheotomy
during anaesthesia - be prepared to extract large clot
Laryngospasm, or total laryngeal paralysis, most
 Nasotracheal or orotracheal intubation when horse goes
buunp pueis of buiAn uauw uaas Aquowwon
unconscious + Oz by demand valve, ± emergency
recovery from anaesthesia, usually complete
tracheotomy (see Box 21.1)
 obstruction in horses until unconscious or dead
Abdominal distension (colic) causing hypoxia
 Nasogastric tube, ± caecal trocharization, immediate induction 
of anaesthesia (if in clinic) with IPPV rapid RR with Oz before
transport to OR
613
Table 21.1 Continued
Species
Causes
Management
 Llamas 
 Obligate nasal breathers, nasal mucosal congestion 
 Elevate head during anaesthesia to avoid congestion, sternal
 causes airway obstruction
 position as soon as surgery ends, ± nasotracheal intubation 
until animal sternal enough time for congestion to resolve
Pigs
Laryngospasm, or pharyngeal obstruction from flexed
Topical lidocaine on larynx, Oz, dexamethasone IV, put head and
hea d/neck
 neck in normal position
Other patient problems & procedure
 All species 
 Hypoxaemia from blood loss
Restore blood volume, blood transfusion 
 Pain/inadequate analgesia thoracic or upper
 Increase analgesia medication 
 abdominal surgery
Dogs, cats
 Cervical/thoracic spinal cord damage (big dog-little 
Measure SpOz, supply Oz, IPPV when anaesthetized
 dog-cat-piglet trauma)
Cardiac
All species
 Cerebral hypoxia from hypotension, severe
 Monitor circulation, cardiovascular support, ± IPPV, define
 hypercarbia, or cardiac failure
specific cause
Respiratory
 All species
 Pulmonary oedema: excessive negative intrathoracic
Relieve ainway obstruction, measure PaOz, furosemide IV, supply
 pressure in response to hypoxia, laryngospasm,
Oz by nasal tube
airway obstruction (see Box 21.2)
Dogs, cats
 Hypoxaemia, hypercarbia from limited lung expansion:
Supply Oz, treat individual cause 
 flail chest, pneumothorax, pleural effusion,
 pulmonary cedema
Allergic
 Dogs, cats 
Bronchoconstriction: feline asthma
 Albuterol/salbutamol inhaled (1 or 2 actuations), see text 
 Ana phylactic shock: thiopental, radiological contrast
CPCR or circulatory and respiratory support (see Box 21.3)
agents
Horses
 Bronchoconstriction: recurrent airway obstruction
Atropine, albuterol/salbutamol inhaled (6-10 actuations/adult
(heaves), contrast agent, blood transfusion
 horse), see text, antihistamine, ACVC if hypotensive
Ruminants
Bronchoconstriction: aspiration of ruminal fluid
Head down, Oz, avoid IPPV, postpone surgery, antibiotic,
monitor PaOz
Toxic
All species
Acute release of vasoactive substances from
Decrease anaesthetic administration, treat hypotension and low
 manipula tion of ischaemic tissues
cardiac output
 NMBA: Neuromuscular blocking agent; ETT: endotracheal tube; OR: cperating room/theatre, CPCR: cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
(see Chapter 22).
Complications
Chapter
21
Box 21.1 Tracheotomy
An emmergency tracheotomy should be a rare occurrence
non-adhesive tapes tied around the neck. Postoperative
Preferably, airway obstruction should be anticipated and
nursing care will be easier if a tracheotomy tube with an
either avoided by modification of anaesthetic management
inner cannula is used. The external end of most
or by performing a tracheotomy aseptically under local or
tracheotomy tubes will connect directly to an anaesthesia
general anaesthesia before induction or before recovery
circuit. Care should be taken to prevent the weight of the
from anaesthesia.
breathing circuit from rotating the tracheotomy tube
Technique in dogs and cats
(cuffed or uncuffed), which will abrade the tracheal
mucosa.
 The animal should be positioned on its back with a
sandbag or roll of towels placed under its neck, and the
Technique in horses
pasui a pinous us aul iepnen pand squiaios
An emergency tracheotomy is performed with the horse
midline over the first to the eighth tracheal rings and the
standing or recumbent. The best site for incision is
trachea exposed by separation of the sternohyoideus
midcervical ventral midline, where the sternocephalic
muscles. The trachea may be incised between the third and
muscles diverge and the omohyoid muscles converge
(Honnas, 1999). If there is time, the hair is clipped and 
40% of the circumference. A suture placed around the
cleaned for a surgical procedure. Local anaesthetic solution
distal tracheal ring. or around the proximal and distal rings,
is infiltrated subcutaneously for an elective tracheotomy. A
will be helpful in manipulating the trachea during insertion
4-6 om (1.5-2.5 inch) incision is made midline through the
of the tracheotomy tube (Fig. 21.1). The diameter of the
 skin and subcutis and the paired sternothyrohyoideus
tube should be only slightly smaller than the size normally 
muscles are separated by dissection to expose the trachea.
used for orotracheal intubation. The tube should be
An annular ligament between two tracheal rings is incised
inserted gently and secured so that it cannot be moved.
transversely to separate the tracheal rings enough to allow
The incision should remain open to avoid subcutaneous
insertion of a tracheotomy tube. The tracheal rings should
emphysema, although a few sutures may be placed at
not be incised longitudinally because healing may result in 
either end if the incision is exceptionally long. Sterile gauze
a tracheal stricture. Further details about types of tubes
should be placed between the incision and the external
and care of the tracheotomy site should be obtained from
part of the tracheotomy tube, and the tube secured by
an equine medicine and surgery textbook.
Figure 21.1 A tracheotomy tube is a short tube with a right-angled bend. Tracheotomy tubes may be plain or with a cuff
similar to an endotracheal tube, and may have an inside sleeve that can easily be removed for cleaning. Some tracheotomy
tubes may have a central solid obturator to provide stiffness and a rounded end for initial insertion. Tracheotomy tubes for
horses may be constructed of metal, and of a different design whereby the tube is in two halves with flanges that insert both
rostrally and caudally within the trachea to ensure retention.
615
Section
[3
 Special anaesthesia
Box 21.2 Pulmonary oedema
Cats
cardiac rhythm (PVCs) was recorded the following day and 
for 24 hours. Anaesthesia with different agents 4 days later
There are both published and many anecdotal reports of
for resection of rectal masses was without complication.
fatal pulmonary oedema associated with ketamine
anaesthesia in cats (Van der Linde-Sipman et al., 1992)
Horses
Pulmonary oedema has developed during anaesthesia,
observed during recovery from anaesthesia or developed
There are anecdotal cases of frothy fluid appearing in the
several hours after anaesthesia. The anaesthetic protocol
endotracheal tube soon after induction of anaesthesia with
xylazine-ketamine was initially under suspicion but
xylazine-ketamine. Most reports of pulmonary oedema
protocols including a variety of preanaesthetic drugs with
in horses cite first observation during recovery from
ketamine have been involved. The occurrence is
anaesthesia (Kollias-Baker et al. 1993: Ball & Trim, 1996:
unpredictable as one clinician may see an isolated case and
Borer, 2005: Holbrook et al., 2007). In these situations, the
then not another for 10 years whereas another clinician
 se saanssaid ppesouieui albau buos Aensn si asne
the result of laboured breathing during hypoxia from lung
may see several in one week. The cause of the pulmonary
oedema is not clear but immediate development after
collapse or air embolism, or airway obstruction after
induction of anaesthesia may be a consequence of
extubation fromm laryngospasm, excessive nasal mucosal
pulmonary hypertension while the delayed response may
congestion or oedema, or abnormal body position such as
follow myocardial ischaemia. Pre-existing cardiac disease as
a kinked head and neck or nostril occlusion while in a head
a contributing cause cannot be ruled out. In a survey of
pressing stance. Hypoxaemia increases capillary permeability
120 cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 15 developed
further contributing to oedema formation. Fluid will pour
congestive heart failure in association with anaesthesia, of
from the nostrils when the horse is standing. Treatment
which nine cats received ketamine and one cat received
includes administration of Oz 15 L/min by insufflation 
tiletamine-zolazepam (Rush et al., 2002). Cardiac
through a nasal tube, and furosemide, 1 mg/kg. IV. Blood
gas analysis will determine the duration of Oz therapy.
auscultation before anaesthesia to identify a murmur is
recommended, even in young apparently healthy cats.
which may be required for up to 48 hours. Other
The need for treatment is urgent and includes Oz and
pharmacological agents will be necessary, such as an
diuretic therapy.
antibiotic and NSAID, especially when the horse has
developed neurological deficits.
Dogs
There is little reported on pulmonary oedema associated
Ruminants
with anaesthesia in dogs. Pulmonary oedema developed in
 Pulmonary oedema in sheep has been reported following 
one dog following induction of anaesthesia with
administration of xylazine and other αz-agonists.
diazepam-ketamine (Boutureira et al., 2007). Treatment
Hypoxaemia and pulmonary oedema with subsequent
included postponing surgery, administration of Oz by nasal
insufflation and furosemide, 2 mg/kg. IV. Abnormality of
xylazine-ketamine (Stegmann, 2000).
Irregular breathing patterns
thermoregulation, bacteraemia, or malignant
hyperthermia.
Some irregular breathing patterns observed during anaes-
thesia indicate respiratory centre depression but may be
Opioid-induced panting is usually controllable by inter-
mittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV). Depth of
characteristic of a particular anaesthetic agent, such as
anaesthesia should be assessed using the known amount
ketamine Some breathing patterns occur frequently and
of anaesthetic agent administered and observation of eye
are considered to be a 'normal' abnormality. Irregular
signs and reflexes. The anaesthesia machine and circuit
 lo san ii uu u si a
should be checked for faults and corrected. Hyperthermia
impaired and that fluctuations in PaO2 and PaCO2 are
should be treated by removal of external heating devices
probably occurring.
and application of ice packs if considered necessary. Malig-
 Cheyne-Stokes: The depth of breathing is at first
nant hyperthermia is usually differentiated from other
 shallow but becomes progressively deeper. Breathing
forms of hyperthermia by the production of excessive
then gradually decreases in volume and may cease
amounts of CO2 seen as a rapid increase in indicator
before the pattern begins again. This crescendo-
colour and temperature ofthe CO absorbent, tachycardia,
decrescendo pattern of breathing is commonly
Buuguon sisieue ses pooq pue Hd e pue 'uoisuanaday
observed in horses anaesthetized with xylazine and
respiratory and metabolic acidoses (see Chapter 2).
ketamine.
616
Complications
Chapter
21
Box 21.3 Anaphylaxis and allergic reactions
 Anaphylaxis can be caused by either an anaphylactic or
Other drugs that may be needed are diphenhydramine.
anaphylactoid reaction, they have the same clinical
1-2 mg/kg. IV for dogs and cats, and options for treatment 
appearance and are treated identically (Waddell, 2010).
of bronchoconstriction are aminophylline for dogs and cats,
Aew lo anui  uu ag ew asdelio Aoenu jo jasuo
5-10 mg/kg. IV respectively, atropine, 0.02-0.04 mg/kg. IV
be delayed 30 minutes after exposure to the initiating
for dogs and cats, or 0.01-0.02 mg/kg for horses, and 
substance. In dogs, the shock organ is the liver resulting in
inhaled albuterol/salbutamol (for dose rates see text under
portal hypertension, and in cats and horses the lung is the
abnormal breathing)
shock organ and bronchoconstriction contributes to
Continue to monitor following resuscitation for evidence
respiratory distress. Clinical signs include respiratory distress,
of prolonged clotting time and disseminated intravascular
bradycardia and extreme hypotension, and dogs and cats
that are conscious will vomit and defaecate. In mild allergic
and intestinal protectants are advisable if there is blood in
reactions, dogs and cats may exhibit swollen eyelids and lips.
faeces or vomitus indicating mucosal damage
bright red colour on the inside of the ears and between the
Significance for future anaesthesia
toes, and flushed pink abdominal skin, all of which generally
respond to administration of diphenhydramine, 2 mg/kg. IM.
A recent editorial describes the problems with
differentiation between types and mechanisms of
Causes
anaphylaxis (Armitage-Chan, 2010). The article cites the
Anaesthetic drugs: morphine, meperidine/pethidine,
limited number of published cases of anaphylaxis in
thiopental, atracurium,rocuronium, procaine HCI
animals, despite the much higher number of cases seen
Antibiotics: procaine penicillin
clinically (confirmed by this author's experience of a
Blood products or substitutes: blood, plasma, hetastarch,
relatively large number of allergic/anaphylactic cases). The
dextran 
link between documented existing allergies in a patient and 
Radiographic contrast agent injected IV, intraarterial, or
potential adverse reaction to anaesthetic or associated
eau ydead ueoueoeye
drugs has not been elucidated. In event of a severe
computed tomography (CT), and MRI
reaction in a previous anaesthesia, the cause of the
reaction may not be determined and a subsequent 
Management
anaesthesia protocol would have to avoid all injectable
CPCR if cardiac arrest or severe hypotension, including
epinephrine, 0.015 mg/kg. and O2. Hypotension is treated
e  e  u  a
shop u! byw oe-oz pimy pioleisn jo uoisnju! piden yim
response (Armitage-Chan, 2010). Emergency drugs and
and 10-20 ml/kg in cats and horses, hetastarch 5 ml/kg.
equipment should always be in close proximity to the
and dopamine, 7-10 μg/kg/min. Blood pressure and CRT
location of any anaesthetized animal, and that may be
response are reassessed and further fluid administered as
particularly important for patients anaesthetized for CT
indicated.
scans and myelography.
 Apneustic This pattern has prolonged end-inspiratory
Hiccups: Occasionally hiccups are observed in
 pauses of several seconds duration where the lungs
 anaesthetized dogs as jerky inspirations resembling
remain inflated longer than usual. This pattern is
 Buizaanbs sanioaui juauageuen sueunq u sdnsi
commonly associated with ketamine anaesthesia and
the reservoir bag on the anaesthesia machine to hold
can be observed in cats and horses anaesthetized with
the lungs inflated for 5 seconds. This manoeuvre may
ketamine.
have to be repeated several times and arterial pressure
● Cluster breathing. This pattern is defined as a
should be allowed to stabilize between inflations.
disorderly breathing pattern with grouped series of
 breaths interrupted by non-regular pauses.
yim uanid suneuane ue si siu aunueaiq sioia ●
two to several breaths and apnoea. This pattern may
be observed in horses during early return of
ARRHYTHMIAS
spontaneous breathing while recovering from
inhalation anaesthesia.
Causes and management
●Ataxic breathing: Both rhythm and depth of breathing
are irregular.
This section covers some of the most common arrhyth-
 Kussmaul's breathing: This is a pattern of regular
mias detected during the perianaesthetic period (Table
deep laboured breaths without pauses commonly
21.2). Second degree AV block is a common finding on
associated with severe metabolic acidosis.
 preanaesthetic evaluation of conscious horses and often
617
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
 Table 21.2 Some electrocardiographic abnormalities occurring during anaesthesia; causes and management
Arrhythmia*
Recognition
Causes
Management
Sinus arrhythmia
*II
ECGHR=99BPM
*FILTER=ON*25MM/SEC
*SCALE=1.00mv/cm
*10/18/2012
Dog: HR 99 beats/min; isoflurane  Normal P wave associated
Variation in rate caused by
None
anaesthesia
with each QRST complex
respiratory cycle
 Abolished by atropine and
Rate normal to slow
 glycopyrrolate and increases in
Irregular pattern of increasing
sympathetic tone
and decreasing rate
correlated to inspira tion 
Sinus bradycardia
OCT-201210:10:4250MM/SEC delay=6
（ECG）HR:39bpm
C02RR:0RPM
SP02:96%
NIBP(m
10mm/mLEADIII
Dog: HR 39 beats/min;
Normal P wave associated
CNS depression: anaesthetic drugs,
Anticholinergic (when blood pressure
Greyhound during sevoflurane
with each QRST complex
especially opicids, oz-agonists,
is low): atropine, 0.02 mg/kg IV or
anaesthesia, after
 Dogs <50 beats/min
 propofol, hypothermia
glycopyrrolate, 0.005 mg/kg, IV
premedication with
Cats <80 beats/min
Cardiovascular failure: pre-existing 
 and repeat if necessary
dexmedetomidine and
Horses <26 beats/min
 sino-atrial block in horses.
 Determine and treat cause
hydromorphone
Cattle <50 beats/min
hypoxaemia, decreased venous
Expand blood volume
Sheep/goats <60 beats/min
return, bacterial endocarditis,
 Dopamine infusion, 7-10 μg/kg/min, 
cardiomyopathy, hyperkalaemia,
IV
 congenital heart disease, sick sinus
Transvenous pacing for 'sick sinus
syndrome
syndrome
Vagal reflex: traction on viscera.
 pressure on eye, stimulation of the
phiarynx or larynx
Hypothermia
Premature atrial complex (PAC)
13:46:1825m
IIHR=79
A
618
Complications
Chapter
21
Table 21.2 Continued
Arrhythmia*
Recognition
Causes
Management
B
A. Dog: HR 79 beats/min,
P wave occurs early, may be
Ectopic activity in the atria.
 No specific treatment
isoflurane
 obscured by previous QRST
myocardial disease
 Ensure HR and BP are within normal
B.
Horse: HR 43 beats/min,
complex, may be inverted
 Occasional cccurrence during
ranges
isoflurane
 P wave is followed by a
anaesthesia, small number per
 Eliminate hypercarbia
normal QRs complex 
minute
Check oxygenation
Beats may occur singly. in
 pairs, or in runs
[epe (ewsAxojed)
tachycardia)
Atrial fibrillation (A fib)
A
ad1,25mm
B
A. Dog: HR 83 beats/min,
No P waves
Dogs: structural heart disease, giant
 Dogs: support cardiovascular
before anaesthesia
Baseline ripple effect from 
dog breeds without structural
function with fluid and vascactive
B. Horse: HR 40 beats/min,
 coarse and fine f waves 
disease, complication of
therapy
isoflurane anaesthesia;
QRS complexes normal
non-cardiac disease e.g. GDV
 Horses: atrial fibrillation present
elective procedure
QRS complexes and
Horses with atrial fibrillation before
before anaesthesia carries a
 peripheral pulse are
anaesthesia should be evaluated
 potential risk for poor
 irregularly rregular
for cardiac pathology. On rare
 cardiovascular function during
HR may be slow, normal or
occasions atrial fibrillation may
anaesthesia. Spontaneously
fast
develop spontaneously at any time
occurring atrial fibrillation during 
during anaesthesia
 anaesthesia may not be associated
with hypotension or hypotension
may be responsive to dobutamine.
 and the cardiac rhythm may
return to normal by a few hours
after anaesthesia
619
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Table 21.2 Continued
Arrhythmia*
Recognition
Causes
Management
Second degree atrioventricular
block
A
（0X)HR=93SP02=97%
Hg*UNPLUGGED
B
A. Horse: Preanaesthetic ECG,
Impaired conduction of
Mobitz Type I AV block common in
Usually benign, not usually present
2nd degree AV block Mobitz
 electrical impulse through 
 awake horses due to increased
during anaesthesia except after
Type 1
the AV node, bundle of
vagal tone
α.z-agonist
B.
Dog: During isoflurane
His, or bundle branches 
Oz-Agonist sedatives
 No treatment if infrequent and 
anaesthesia, HR 93 beats/
1st degree AV block is
 May occur transiently after
 whien blood pressure is adequate
min, advanced znd degree
 prolongation of PR interval
administration of atropine or
 Anticholinergic if frequency increases 
AV block, ECG shows 2 P
2nd degree AV block is when
glycopyrrclate
or when blood pressure is low 
waves without QRS
some P waves are not
complexes with normal
followed by a QRS complex
complexes on either side
 (no peripheral pulse)
 Mobitz Type I (Wenkebach) is
progressive prolongation of
PR interval before a
non-conducted P wave
occurs
Mobitz Type Il has uniform 
PR intervals preceding 
 blocked impulses
Advanced 2nd degree AV
 block when more than one
P wave in a row is blocked
 Third degree atrioventricular
block
620
Complications
Chapter
21
Table 21.2 Continued
Arrhythmia*
Recognition
Causes
Management
14:19:4325mm/secECG5mm/mvLeadIIHR=40
B
A. Horse: Presenting problem
P waves only, may be regular
In horses, development of advanced
 Stop anaesthetic administration if no 
 septic hock and pyrexia.
 or in sinus rhythm
AV block during anaesthesia may
pulse, stop or severely decrease
After 10 minutes of
Either no QRS complexes
possibly be associated with
anaesthetic administra tion if
halothane anaesthesia.
(cardiac arrest) or QRS
myocarditis or pericarditis
escape beats present
abrupt ECG change to P
 complexes unrelated to P
associated with recent or
CPCR if cardiac arrest
waves only, resuscitated
waves
concurrent inflammatory process.,
Atropine IV
successfully
QRS complexes may be
e.g. upper respiratory disease,
Dopamine, 7-10 μg/kg/min
B. Dog: Before pacemaker
 normal or abnormal, 
 septic joint
Electrical pacing
implantation, HR 40 beats/
irregular, and less than 40/
Q.z-Agonists occasionally cause 3rd
min, note the regular P
min in dogs and 10-20/
degree heart block that may occur
waves with ventricular
min in horses
 soon after administration or
escape complexes
develop later during inhalation
anaesthesia
 Organic disease of the AV node or
 conduction system
 Premature ventricular complex
(PVC)
25mm/sec
delay=6
（OX）HR=--
SP02=
**ASYSTOLE**
2)AR1
-10-20mmHg
*UNPLUGGED
 Dog: Multifocal PVCs
 Premature wide and bizarre
 Mlyocardial ischaemia (gastric dilation 
 None if occasional ectopic beats
 QRS complex
volvulus, trauma)
IPPV if initiated by hypercarbia
No associated P wave
Cardiomyopathy 
Treat with lidocaine IV if PVCs are
May or may not be a pulse 
Vascactive mediators (splenic
multifocal (different shapes), occur 
deficit
neoplasia, endotoxaemia)
 2 or more in a run, or frequent 
 2 consecutive complexes =
 Catecholamines (dopamine.
e.g. >20/min for dogs
 couplet, 3 = run 
dobutamine, phaeochromocytoma) Lidocaine 2 mg/kg dogs, horses
Every other beat = ventricular
 Anaesthesia (thiopental, halothane.
slovly IV
 bigeminy
hypercarbia)
Lidocaine 0.5 mg/kg cats slowly IV
 Doses can be repeated but watch
 for hypotension
621
Table 21.2 Continued
Arrhythmia*
Recognition
Causes
Management
Ventricular tachycardia (V tach)
MANUAL
RECORD
II
ECG
HR
107
BPM
FILTER
ON
25
MM/SEC
A
170BPM
*FILTER
25
MM/SE0
*SCALE
.00
B
Dog: Weimeraner after
Wide abnormal QRS
 Mlyocardial ischaemia (gastric
Lidocaine in dogs and horses
splenectomy
complexes
dilatation volvulus, trauma)
 Cardiac cutput may be significantly
A. HR 107 beats/min; slow
 At least 3 PVCs in a row
Cardiomyopathy
impaired
accelerated idioventricular
Ventricular rate > 100 beats/
Vasoactive mediators (splenic
CPCR if no accompanying pulses 
rhythm
min in dogs, >150 beats/
neoplasia, endotoxaemia)
B.
HR 170 beats/min; fast
min in cats 
 Phaecchromocytoma
ventricular tachycardia (rate
Rhythm may be regular
>160 beats/min)
 Independent or retrograde
P waves
 May be interspersed vith
normal complexes and
fusion beats (simultaneous
normal and premature beats)
ECG artifact
LEADIII@1.OCm/mVECGRATE
40/min IBP2 SYS.
60 cycle interference seen as a
QRS rhythm regular
 Electrical interference from other
Adjust electrodes, improve skin
thickened baseline, horse ECG
Extra waves of equal size,
monitoring equipment, electrical 
contact, check wires for breaks
on the left and dog ECG on
upright form, or
heating pad, thermocautery
Minimize electrical interference by
the righit
60 cycle electrical
ECG leads over the chest and 
running ECG leads together, try 
 interference, or
respiratory movements cause
turning off cautery or hot water 
Wandering baseline due to
wandering baseline
circulating pad
movement of electrodes
 No ECG lead lying over the thorax
(see Fig. 2.10B)
*Configuration of the ECG will depend on the Lead that is recorded. Commonly, during anaesthesia standard Lead ll is used for cats, dogs.
pigs, and small ruminants, and a base-apex Lead I for horses. Equine atrial premature complex, equine atrial fibrillation, and canine third degree
AV block EC Gs courtesy of Dr Jennifer Adams.
Complications
Chapter
21
develops in all species after administration of o2-agonists
Pain should be managed appropriately. If feasible a
Premature ventricular complexes (PVC) are a common
stomach tube should be passed in a small ruminant to
consequence of myocardial ischaemia in dogs with gastric
decompress the rumen and the patency of a stomach tube
dilation-volvulus, splenic neoplasia, and thoracic contu-
in a horse should be checked. The presence of urinary
sions acquired during a road traffc accident. PVCs occur
retention can be assessed by palpation, ultrasound, or a
commonly in dogs for several minutes after induction of
walk outside for a dog after recovery from anaesthesia.
anaesthesia with thiopental, often as a bigeminal rhythm.
Tachycardia and hypertension caused by release of catecho-
IWCs may occur during halothane anaesthesia in dogs and
lamines from a phaeochromocytoma should be managed
by infusion of nitroprusside For dogs, 25 mg of nitropnus-
a common occurrence during anaesthesia in other species.
side added to 500 mL saline produces a concentration of
50 μg/mL (a smaller volume or more dilute solution can
Tachycardia
be made up for small dogs). The dose to calculate for this
clinical problem is 1 μg/kg/min, however, half that rate
Tachycardia denotes a rapid heart rate, with the rate
 a   i o is aq 
exceeding 180 beats/min in dogs, 240 beats/min in cats,
should be stopped or reduced before reaching the target
and 50 beats/min in horses (Physick-Sheard, 1999; Carr
mean arterial pressure [MAP) otherwise an overcorrection
et al., 200l). Sinus tachycardia is regular and continuous.
will occur. Catecholamines may be released from a phaeo-
When the rhythm originates outside the sinoatrial node
chromocytoma in surges resulting in rapid swings in blood
(atrial tachycardia), the P waves may be a different shape
 pressure, therefore, the infusion rate must be tightly con-
from normal but the QRS complexes are normal. Tachy-
trolled and blood pressure must be continually monitored
cardia may also be paroxysmal.
to facilitate immediate changes in nitroprusside infusion
Ketamine, atropine or glycopyrrolate injected IV fre-
rate in response to changes in blood pressure.
si ie sie pu so ui aei eay isey e asne Aa
close to but does not usually achieve the strict definition
of tachycardia. Hypoxaemia, and sometimes hypercarbia,
CYANOSIS AND HYPOXAEMIA
cause increased heart rates. Excessively increased heart rate
daap Aq panpu uoisuaoda auedooe alensn jou sao
 anaesthesia or inhalant agents. Heart rate may not change
Cyanosis is the bluish colour of skin or mucous mem-
branes caused by the presence of more than 5 g desatu-
during blood loss in the anaesthetized animal until blood
volume is moderately to severely depleted, but will gener.
rated haemoglobin per l00 mL of blood. The blue mucous
ally occur in response to an abrupt severe decrease in blood
membrane colour may be diffcult to detect in an anaemic
pressure caused by anaphylactic reactions. Heart rates may
 patient. The colour of mucous membranes may not accu-
y ains up anenapeu si eisaeue uaum aseau
rately reflect haemoglobin O2 saturation in the presence
 of excessive vasodilation or vasoconstriction.
heart rate increased above that normally expected for the
anaesthetic protocol can be caused by ruminal disten-
● Oral mucous membranes observed to be blue or
sion (bloat) in ruminants, gastric distension in horses.
white. Assessment of mucous membrane colour may
or urinary bladder distension in dogs. Tachycardia due
to endotoxaemia during anaesthesia of horses with colic
 blue drapes or when a light is in close proximity.
has been associated with increased mortality. Endogenous
Vasoconstriction induced by O2-agonists, pain,
(phaeochromocytoma) and exogenous catecholamines
activated sympathetic system, or catecholamine
(administration of dopamine dobutamine or ephedrine)
release may cause oral membranes to look white even
can cause tachycardia or fast heart rates.
when hypoxaemia is not present. In dogs with good
Clearly, management varies depending upon the cause
peripheral perfusion, mucous membranes may be a
of the fast heart rate. The effects of ketamine and anti-
dull pink not bluish in the presence of hypoxaemia.
cholinergics generally wane within 20 minutes. Hypoxae-
● Respiratory movements may be normal or rapid or
mia and hypercarbia should be corrected. Blood pressure
 appear laboured.
 should be measured and treated if low. Tachycardia may
● The cardiovascular system is initially stimulated,
occur in response to haemorrhage and low blood pressure
resulting in tachycardia and hypertension. Prolonged
following recovery from anaesthesia when the barorecep-
hypoxaemia results in bradycardia and hypotension.
tor reflex is no longer depressed by the anaesthetic agents.
ECG changes include reversed polarity of T wave with
Intra-abdominal haemorrhage after castration or laparot.
ST segment depression and slur.
omy is an example where tachycardia is present but bleed-
ing is not apparent. Observation of mucous membrane
Causes and management
colour, CRT, and pulse pressure, and ultrasound or percu-
taneous needle aspiration of the abdominal cavity are
 Management involves administration of O2 and correction
required for the diagnosis of haemorrhage.
of the initiating cause (Table 21.3, Box 21.4). Consequences
623
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
 Table 21.3 Cyanosis or SpOz <90% (hypoxaemia): causes and management
Species
Causes
 Management
Drugs
Dogs, cats
 Sedation plus partial airway obstruction (brachycephalics)
Monitor SpOz, supply Oz by mask
at premedication
 Rapid IV administration at induction decreasing ventilation 
 Inject anaesthetic agents in increments, preoxygenation*
 and/or cardiac cutput, propofol
 Residual respiratory depression in recovery
Anticipate low PaOz in recovery, mask or insufflate O2
Ruminants 
Oz-agonists
Use low dose, supply Oz
Horses
 Increased V/Q inequality during recumbency from
Withhold food before anaesthesia, lateral preferable to
anaesthesia even in healthy horses
z0 Addns Kouaqwnoaj lesuop
Equipment
All species
Oz supply failure: cylinder empty or not turned on, O2
Restore Oz supply
flow meter off or too low
Delivery circuit failure: assembled incorrectly, disconnected,
Check circuit connections and circuit pressure
 high circuit pressure because relief valve closed.
rebreathing bag empty
 Endotracheal tube malfunction: oesophageal intubation,
Check placement of endotracheal tube, air flow in tube,
tube is kinked, compressed, obstructed, in one bronchus
manually inflate lungs to assess flov and resistance 
NzO: accumulation in rebreathing circuit, flow rate too
Check Oz and NzO flow meters, supply Oz for >5 min 
high, 'diffusion hypoxia'
 after NO discontinued
 Measurement error: pulse oximeter lov signal or poor
 Observe signal strength on pulse oximeter, oximeter pulse 
contact
rate should be the same as obtained by another method
Mechanical
Dogs, cats
 Surgeon leaning on the chest
Check personnel positions
Thoracic or abdominal bandages limiting thoracic or
Assess bandages for flexibility, longitudinal cut through
diaphragm movements
bandage
uoissandwoo leabufeud buisneo sabepueq yoau pue peah
 Loosen or cut bandage
after extubation 
Horses, ruminants 
Inadequate diaphragm movement and lung collapse:
IPPV, ± PEEP, for colic horses add albuterol/salbutamol 
dorsal recumbency, abdominal distension (colic, bloat).
 during inhalation (6-10 actuations/adult horse) (see
table tilted head-down
text), CPAP, recruitment manoeuvre (see Chapter 9)
Other patient problems & procedure
 All species 
Obesity or abdominal distension limiting thoracic or
 Monitor SpOz and ventilation, IPPV, drain fluid/air if
diaphragm movements 
 possible 
 Inadequate lung expansion during thoracoscopy under
Increase tidal volume, periodically expand lungs, change to
 general anaesthesia
 one lung ventilation 
 Postopera tive pain resulting in reluctance to expand thorax
Analgesia
624
Complications
Chapter
21
Table 21.3 Continued
Species
Causes
Management
Cardiac
 All species 
Low cardiac cutput or blood pressure: anaesthetic drug
Assess adequacy of circulation, improve by appropriate
 depression
treatment
Respiratory
All species
IPPV from anaesthesia machine, intubate trachea if not
air
 intubated and ventilate from anaesthesia machine or
demand valve, AMBU bag if <80 kg, if no endotracheal
tube (large animals) consider doxapram IV (see Box
 21.4) or relevant antagonists and external compression
of thoracic cage
 Pathology or disease: traumatic injury to ribs, diaphragm
Supply Oz, aspirate pleural air or fluid, IPPV with low
 or lungs, pneumothorax, pneumonia, pleural effusion,
inspiratory pressure <20 cmHzO
intrathoracic masses
Allergic
See Table 21.1 for causes
Table 21.1. Box 21.3, see text
Toxic
 All species 
 Endotoxa emia
NSAID, ACVC
*Preoxygenation: administration of O by mask for a few minutes before and during induction of anaesthesia; V/Q: ventilation/perfusion
inequality within the lungs; PEEP: positive end-expiratory pressure (see Chapter 9); CPAP: continuous positive airway pressure (see Chapter 9);
CPR/CPCR: cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (see Chapter 22); ACVC: circulatory support (see Box 2 1.5).
of hypoxaemia depend on the timing and effectiveness of
administration of an antagonist should be incremental
intervention and may range from death during anaesthesia
 Over a period of minutes, allowing progressive assessment
to blindness after anaesthesia.
and control of the animal.
 Yohimbine is a competitive Oz-receptor antagonist. It is
licensed as an antagonist to xylazine in dogs and has been
α2-Antagonists
used in horses but may cause a serious adverse reaction,
including death, in this species.
Administration of an antagonist may be life saving for an
 animal in a life-threatening situation. However, the con-
 Dogs and cats: Yohimbine, 0.1 mg/kg IV slowly, SC or
 sequences of sedative (or opioid) reversal must be consid-
IM 0.25-0.5 mg/kg.
ered. O.z-Agonist sedatives provide profound sedation and
Horses: Yohimbine, 0.075 mg/kg, IV slowly (Hsu, 2008a ).
 drug and dose-dependent analgesia and may play a large
 Tolazoline is a competitive α- and Oz-receptor antago-
 part in maintaining anaesthesia. Abrupt reversal can result
nist. In some countries, it is marketed for reversal of xyla-
in the patient becoming suddenly awake and trying to
zine sedation in horses and is an effective reversal agent
stand up, unmask ketamine resulting in CNS excitement,
for xylazine in cattle. Measurement of the decline in blood
 Or cardiac arrest as the patient suddenly experiences pain
concentration has led to the recommendation of a cattle
and a surge of catecholamines is released. If there is time,
slaughter withdrawal time of 8 days and withholding of
625
Section
[3
Special anaesthesia
Box 21.4 Doxapram
What is it?
Dose rates
Doxapram is a respiratory stimulant and an analeptic
●Dogs and cats: Doxapram, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg. during
paonpui-bnap jeal ot pasn s! jeul (sueinwiis sN)
inhalation anaesthesia: 5-10 mg/kg for emergency
ventilatory depression and apnoea in newborn animals
treatment of barbiturate overdose
and humans. At low doses, doxapram increases
Horses: Doxapram, 0.2-0.5 mg/kg. IV
ventilation primarily through action on the carotid
●Small ruminants: Doxapram, 1-2 mg/kg. IM, IV
bodies and higher doses may increase ventilation
·Calves, newborn: Doxapram, 2 mg/kg IM, IV
through direct stimulation of respiratory neurons in the
CNS. The tandem pore (Kzp) potassium channel family
The effect is short-lived and doxapram may have to be
mediates background leak' K+ current regulating
repeated in 15-20 minutes.
excitability in neurons and is expressed in carotid
bodies and the brainstem. Doxapram increases carotid
Adverse effects
body discharge by inhibition of K+ current through
Doxapram induces arousal through central stimulation and
pH sensitive K+ TASK-1 and TASK-3 channels (Duprat et al.
release of catecholamines results in increased blood
1997: Cotten et al., 2006: Mulkey et al., 2007: Wilkinson
pressure (Lumb & Jones, 1984). Doxapram may also induce
et al., 2010). Doxapram induces noticeable arousal effects
PVCs in animals with hearts sensitized to catecholamines,
in animals given xylazine or thiopental.
for example, during halothane anaesthesia. Doxapram has
The increase in breathing may speed elimination of
a wide margin of safety between the convulsive dose and
inhalation agents.
respiratory stimulant dose.
milk for 48 hours (Hsu, 2008b). Adverse side effects of
of atipamezole antagonize detomidine sedation in horses
tolazoline administration are tachycardia and hypoten-
(see Chapter ll). Sedation provided by a continuous infu-
sion, thus it is advisable to administer tolazoline slowly
sion of detomidine in standing horses for laparoscopy was
over several minutes to avoid cardiovascular collapse.
reversed within l0 minutes of injection of atipamezole
When tolazoline is used to decrease ataxia attributed to
given at a dose equal to the cumulative dose of detomi-
xylazine after total IV anaesthesia in horses, as opposed to
dine for each horse [van Dijk et al., 2003). No relapse
an emergency situation, a low dose of 0.8-1.0 mg/kg IV
into sedation was noted. A case report has described
provides a satisfactory effect.
the use of atipamezole to treat detomidine overdose. A
pony received a l0-fold overdose of detomidine [total
●Horses and cattle: Tolazoline, 1-4 mg/kg. IV slowly
0.3 mg/kg) with ketamine, a mistake that was recognized
 over several minutes.
when the pony failed to recover at the expected time (Di
Tolazoline has also been evaluated for effectiveness
Concetto et al., 2007). Increments of atipamezole injected
of antagonism in horses sedated with detomidine,
over 30 minutes reached a dose (1.1 mg/kg) that was 3.6
0.02 mg/kg, IV (Hubbell & Muir, 2006). Although tolazo-
times the dose of detomidine and decreased sedation
line did not produce complete reversal, time to recovery
was shortened, ease of walking was improved, and ataxia
tions of horses sedated with detomidine, 0.01 or 0.02 mg/
minimized. The horses appeared to be nervous for
kg, IV, atipamezole, 0.1 mg/kg, IV produced incomplete
15 minutes after reversal. Administration of tolazoline,
antagonism but significant improvement in locomotion
4 mg/kg. IV 20 minutes after horses were sedated with
(Buchner et al., 1999; Hubbell & Muir, 2006). The degree
detomidine, 0.04 mg/kg. IV decreased sedation, head
of antagonism was less than obtained after tolazoline
 position returned to normal, and cutaneous analgesia was
administration (Hubbell & Muir, 2006).
lost (Carroll et al., 1997). No effect of tolazoline on HR,
MAP, respiration rate (RR), or temperature was recorded.
Use of tolazoline and atipamezole in catle has been
HYPOTENSION
described in Chapter 12.
Atipamezole is licensed as an antagonist to medeto-
midine and dexmedetomidine sedation in dogs to be
Extreme changes in clinical signs, such as white mucous
dosed IM as an equal volume as the volume of sedative
membranes (hypotension or hypertension), slow heart
administered, equivalent to a dose of atipamezole five
rate, or lack of peripheral arterial pulse, clearly warn about
times that of medetomidine or dexmedetomidine (see
the need for intense, aggressive treatment Of concern is the
product package information sheet). Various dose rates
fact that these parameters may be within the normal ranges
626
Complications
Chapter
21
and yet the cardiovascular system may need support. For
Crystalloids and colloids
example, heart rate may be normal but the arterial blood
Abbreviations:
pressure too low, or mucous membranes may be pink but
the blood pressure too low. Except for the extreme values.
● HES =hetastarch
evaluation of several parameters is necessary to assess accu-
● HSS =hypertonic saline solution
rately cardiovascular status of anaesthetized patients.
● HHES = hypertonic saline in hetastarch
Mean arterial pressure in awake, healthy adult dogs and
Selection of fluid type and infusion rate for administra-
cats is 90-100 mm Hg (systolic pressure 135-160 mm Hg.
uaiy si eisausaue sunp siuaed Auieay on uon
diastolic pressure 65-80 mm Hg), MAP in conscious
debated. Other requirements may be superimposed on
horses is 95-115 mmHg. and in sheep 90-110 mmHg.
intraoperative maintenance fluid choice, such as the need
Hypotension is MAP <60-65 mm Hg or systolic pressure
≤80 mmHg. Other clinical signs are:
abnormalities, or management of blood loss, and choices
●Prolonged CRT, blood oozing at the operative site
y suoeas eiiae pue isos Aq pa aq Aeu
rather than free flowing
answers among the publications of experimental and clin-
● Weak pulse on palpation. Note that a weak pulse may
ical studies is not easy because experimental designs and
not be indicative of hypotension when an Q2-agonist
 patient populations differ and because the end-points for
fluid therapy are variable and often not clearly defined.
has been recently administered because of
vasoconstriction; conversely, the pulse can fee strong
Isotonic crystalloid fuid, such as 0.9% NaCl, lactated
during hypotension if the artery is dilated
(lactated Ringer's solution [LRS], Hartmann's), or acetated
●Bradycardia may or may not be present Tachycardia
(Normosol@-R, Plasma-Lyte A) balanced electrolyte solu-
tion is the usual choice for maintenance fluid during
 Occurring in response to hypotension in the
conscious animal is often absent during anaesthesia
anaesthesia and is given to compensate for lack of oral
due to baroreceptor receptor reflex suppression
water intake before and after anaesthesia, losses from the
 ST segment slur on the ECG indicating myocardial
lungs, urinary and gastrointestinal tracts, evaporation
hypoxia
 Dysrhythmias may cause hypotension
 and losses created by surgical trauma. For the most part,
●During laparotomy, intestines may be pale pink or
balanced electrolyte solution is preferred to saline, even
white.
though saline produces a larger intravascular volume and
more sustained expansion than LRS (Reid et al., 20ll).
Saline alone in large quantities induces a metabolic acido-
Significance of hypotension
sis. Saline may be the fluid of choice for vomiting patients
●MAP <55 mm Hg is life threatening.
and those with adrenocortical insuffciency or diabetic
● Hypotension of only 15 minutes may contribute to
ketoacidosis.
 Organ malfunction or result in blindness after
Under normal ciraumstances, fluid is filtered from the
an aesthesia.
blood into the interstitial space under a pressure gradient
created by the balance between hydrostatic and oncotic
pressure gradients. Absorption into venous capillaries
does not occur and most of the fltered fluid returns to the
Causes and management
circulation as lymph (Woodcock & Woodcock, 2012). The
Treatment of hypotension should be directed at the cause
-  q   )  x 
(Table 21.4, Boxes 21.5-8).
teins and proteoglycans on the luminal side of the
 Injection of water-soluble sodium or potassium penicil-
 endothelial cells of blood vessels. The subglycocalyx space
lin IV to horses occasionally results in hypotension attrib-
 separates plasma from the capillary wall and the colloid
uted to myocardial depression (Hubbell et al., 1987) or
osmotic pressure (COP) of this space determines the
anaphylaxis (Olsén et al., 2007). Injection of procaine
 transcapillary flow of fluid. Plasma albumin is the major
penicillin IM in horses can cause collapse and death or
determinant of plasma COP in health, but other
various CNS signs, including ataxia, muscle tremors,
 proteins become important in acquired hypoalbuminae-
anxiety and nystagmus. Mechanisms proposed are ana-
mia. During inflammation, the extravascular proportion
phylaxis causing collapse and procaine toxicity following
 of albumin will increase Normal transcapillary escape rate
inadvertent IV injection during IM injection (Olsén et al..
 of albumin (TCERA), an index of vascular permeability, in
2007). It is advisable to administer antibiotics at least 30
humans is about 5% of the plasma albumin per hour
minutes before induction of anaesthesia so that abnormal
(Woodcock & Woodcock, 20l2). This rate can double
behaviour can be recognized immediately.  When IV
during surgery and may be increased 20% or more in
administration during anaesthesia is unavoidable the
 septic shock, and evidence points to a compromised EGL
antibiotic must be injected in small increments and the
in these patients. Plasma substitutes, such as HES, dextran
blood pressure closely monitored for any adverse effect.
 70, or gelatins, increase the circulating COP thus limiting
627
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
 Table 21.4 Hypotension: causes and management 
Species
Causes
Management
Drugs
 All species
Injectable or inhala tion anaesthesia
 Check depth of anaesthesia, ACVC
 Epidural bupivacaine or other local anaesthetic
 Crystalloid, colloid, dopamine or ephedrine
 Accidental Iv bupivacaine, local anaesthetic overdose 
ACVC., lipid rescue (ILE) (see text)
Antibiotics causing myocardial depression
 ACVC, IV antibiotics over several minutes, IV antibiotics to
horses minimum 30 min before induction
Dogs, cats
Acepromazine, ACE inhibitor
ACVC
Opicid IV during anaesthesia
ACVC, anticholinergic for bradycardia
Horses
Acepromazine IV on rare cccasions induces acute
May resolve in 20 min without treatment, IV fluid bolus
hypotension, recumbency, sweating, ± signs of colic
Equipment
 All species 
 NIBP measurement error: either incorrect application or
Follow guidelines for correct NIBP measurement (see Chapter 2)
 inherent monitor variation
 Direct blood pressure error: transducer position incorrect,
Check transducer is level with manubrium, flush catheter,
 catheter lumen obstructed (kink, accumulated red cells)
observe waveform for damping
 Increased circuit pressure from closed or malfunctioning
Check circuit pressure, release valve, decrease vaporizer.
APL valve
monitor pulse strength continuously, start CPR
Mechanical
 All species 
Change in body position (see Fig. 2.11)
Consider turning back to original position, try turning slowly.
 may need dobutamine infusion
IPPV with decreased blood volume
Check for systolic pressure variation, infuse balanced electrolyte 
 solution
Laparoscopy
 Maintain low abdominal pressure, dobutamine or dopamine IV
Aortocaval compression (see Box 21.6)
Tilt animal to one side, if possible, infuse vasoactive drug
Ruminants
 Ruminal distension (bloat)
 Pass stomach tube, rarely need to trocharize, monitor
ventilation, sternal position as soon as possible 
Other patient problems & procedure
All species
 Pre-existing hypovolaemia
 Balanced electrolyte solution IV
 Pre-existing azotaemia, CNS depression 
 Decreased anaesthetic agent dose rates
Sepsis and vasodilation
 Fluids and vasoactive drugs
 Hypoproteinaemia
Colloid or plasma IV
Blood loss
Options: balanced electrolyte at 2x volume lost, colloid 1 :1,
 hypertonic saline, blood transfusion (see Box 21.5, text)
Air embolism (see Box 21.7)
 Stop air leak, flood operative site with saline, discontinue NO,
vasopressors or CPCR, treat neurological deficits
Dogs, cats
 Surgical compression of caudal vena cava
Release liver lobe or adjust surgical manipulation
628
Complications
Chapter
21
Table 21.4 Continued
Species
Causes
Management
Cardiac
 All species
 Bradycardia, tachycardia
 Search for further cause
Arrhythmia
See Table 21.2
Decreased contractility
 Dobutamine IV
Valvular disease
 Avoid bradycardia/tachycardia, maintain cardiac contractility
 and blood volume
Dogs, cats
 Congenital: PDA, PSS
Dobutamine IV (see Chapters 15, 20)
 Cardiomyopathy
Appropriate selection of anaesthetic protocol to minimize 
 cardiac depression, IV dobutamine, avcid volume overload
Pericardial effusion
 Drain fluid before or at the beginning of anaesthesia
Respiratory
 All species
 Hypercarbia (may cause sympathetic stimulation or
IPPV
hypotension)
 Decreased venous return from incorrect IPPV: prolonged
 Followv guidelines for correct application
 inspiratory time, PEEP, large lung inflations
Tension pneumothorax: ruptured alveolus or cesophagus,
 Aspirate air from pleural cavity, seek origin of leak (see Box 
 thoracic inlet, intercostal penetration 
21.8)
 Pleural effusion
 Remove fluid
 Diaphragmatic rupture repair after removal of organs
 Dobutamine IV (no fluid bolus)
 from thoracic cavity
Allergic
Dogs, cats
 Morphine, meperidine/pethidine, atracurium
Thiopental
Rarely, causes anaphylactic shock
 Contrast agents 
Frequently decrease MAP, occasionally cause acute
cardiovascular collapse requiring CPCR
 Manipulation of mast cell tumour
High risk of cardiovascular collapse, diphenhydramine for
 preanaesthetic medication in dogs and cats
Horses
 Meperidine/pethidine, procaine penicillin, contrast agent
Rare cases of cardiovascular collapse, CPCR
Toxic
 All species
 Release of vascactive mediators: endotoxin, pancreatitis,
 Circulatory support
pancreatic abscess, catecholamine-secreting tumours
(Carcinoid syndrome)
ACVC: circulatory support (see Box 21.5): ACE: angiotensin converting enzyme; NIBP: non-invasive blood pressure; APL valve: adjustable
 pressure limiting (pop-off) valve; PDA: patent ductus arteriosus; PSs: portosystemic shunt.
629
Section
|31
Special anaesthesia
Box 21.5 Acvc: treatment of hypotension
Standard treatment of hypotension involves (A) decreasing
V. Vasoactive drugs
anaesthetic agent administration, (C) IV infusion of
Infusion of dobutamine, 0.5-10 μg/kg/min, or dopamine.
crystalloid fluid, (V) stimulation of the cardiovascular system
3-10 μg/kg/min, may be sufficient to improve MAP and
with one or more vasoactive drugs, and (C) IV infusion of
CRT in healthy animals. Dobutamine, 0.5-1.0 μg/kg/min
colloid.
A. Anaesthetic administration
5 μg/kg/min should be started in dogs, cats, and small
Since most anaesthetic agents decrease cardiovascular
ruminants. Dobutamine occasionally induces bradycardia,
such that the blood pressure remains low, and management
function, decreasing administration should result in
improved blood pressure and/or increased cardiac
can include decreasing the infusion rate, administration of 
atropine of glycopyrrolate in dogs and cats, or adding
output. Inhalation agents significantly decrease
blood pressure at higher concentrations. Supplementation
ephedrine, 0.06 mg/kg. IV. Dopamine should be started at
with other agents that induce less vasodilation
5-7 μg/kg/min in dogs. cats, and small ruminants, and the 
while decreasing the concentration of inhalant may
infusion rate decreased as the blood pressure increases. In
reverse hypotension.
horses, dopamine initially induces vasodilation and the MAP
will decrease for 7-10 minutes before increasing,
C. Crystalloid fluids
consequently dopamine is less effective than dobutamine in
Balanced electrolyte solutions, such as lactated or acetated
increasing blood pressure. Exceptions would be treatment
Ringer's are commonly infused to maintain normovolaemia.
of third degree heart block and cardiac arrest where
dopamine, 7-10 μg/kg/min, is most appropriate.
The infusion rate during anaesthesia is initially
5-10 mL/kg/h followed by 3-5 mL/kg/h for maintenance.
Ephedrine, 0.06-0.1 mg/kg. is most effective when low
Rapid IV infusion of 10-20 mL/kg significantly increases
blood pressure is the result of vasodilation. Ephedrine is 
cardiac output and MAP in conscious dogs but the
given as a bolus injection that has up to a 5-minute onset
increases are less dramatic in dogs anaesthetized with
of action and duration up to 40 minutes. The dose of
inhalation agents. An initial bolus of 10 mL/kg may be
ephedrine may be repeated. Transient tachycardia is a
indicated when there is suspicion of a relative or absolute
common side effect.
hypovolaemia (e.g. drug-induced vasodilation or no oral 
Phenylephrine and vasopressin may be administered to
intake for several hours before anaesthesia). If there is no
increase blood pressure by vasoconstriction in animals in
improvement in MAP, then treatment should include
septic shock. Discussion of use and adverse effects of these
administration of a vasoactive agent ± colloid solution.
agents is addressed in the species-specific chapters. Use of
Hypertonic (7.5%) saline (HSS) may be infused IV over
vasoactive agents in management of cardiac arrest is
10 minutes at 4 mL/kg when an immediate increase in
described in Chapter 22.
blood pressure is desired and other efforts, such as
decreasing anaesthetic administration and infusing a bolus
C. Colloids
of balanced electrolyte solution have failed. HsS is primarily
Hetastarch increases intravascular volume by an amount at
used in situations of blood loss and the need for rapid
least equal to the volume infused and increases the colloid
blood volume expansion. The duration of effect is
oncotic pressure. During anaesthesia, an infusion of HES,
short-lived (30 minutes to 2 hours). Infusion of balanced
5-10 mL/kg. IV over 10-15 minutes may be sufficient to
electrolyte solution should be continued. Despite the short
increase MAP. During haemorrhage, one regimen involves
duration of effect, HSS may improve haemodynamic
replacement of halfthe blood volume lost with HES and
function sufficiently to allow timme for institution of further
the remainder with LRS at twice the lost volume; an
appropriate treatment and for surgery to be completed. At
the end of anaesthesia, elimination of anaesthetic agents
and replace blood loss with colloid at a 1: 1 ratio. When
should be followed by improved cardiovascular function
blood loss approaches 17-20% of blood volume a blood
and return of normal physiological compensatory
or packed red cell transfusion may be indicated. A
mech anisms.
discussion about the effects of HES is in the text.
fluid loss into the interstitial space and promote vascular
does not result in absorption of interstitial fluid; conse-
expansion for a longer time than crystalloid solutions.
quently, colloid therapy does not prevent or improve
 Infused macromolecules do not easily penetrate the intact
tissue oedema (Woodcock & Woodcock, 20l2). Anaesthe-
EGL but can escape through sinusoidal capillaries in the
sia with inhalation agents alters the balance of fluid move-
bone marrow, liver and spleen and return to the venous
ment and movement of fluid from the intravascular
system via the lymphatics. Increasing intravascular COP
 cOmpartment may be faster or slower than in a conscious
0E9
Complications
Chapter
21
Box 21.6 Aortocaval compression (A0c)
What is it?
enterotomy and infusion of a vasopressor just increases
Compression of the aorta or caudal vena cava (AOC) may
heart rate without increasing blood pressure. Occasionally
occur from pressure of an abdominal mass when an animal
healthy horses placed in dorsal recumbency develop
is placed in dorsal recumbency. Venous return may be
hypotension that can be immediately reversed by turning
the horse into lateral recumbency.
limited, cardiac output decreases and hypotension
develops. Pressure is immediately restored when the animal
Differential diagnoses
is moved back into lateral position. Decreased venous
return may also be caused by a high intra-abdominal
This is not the same as a decrease in blood pressure due to
pressure.
a change in body position. The exact cause of the latter
effect is not clear but may be due to decreased venous
Common scenarios
return from a change in focus of gravity and slow
In cats, the weight of a gravid uterus may cause caval
mobilization of blood from previously congested areas.
compression (see Fig. 16.12). In dogs. hypotension may
Other causes of hypotension should be investigated
develop in dorsal recumbency due to weight from an
(see Table 21.4), however, AOC should always be
 abdominal or splenic mass. It might be expected that the
suspected if the animal has an abdominal mass or large
larger the size of the mass the greater likelihood of AOC
abdomen.
but that is not necessarily the case. A small mass in a dog
suffering from weight loss may cause hypotension whereas
Management
eooe an ou o  ss snoua ue
Turn dog or cat into an oblique position to reposition the
compression. In horses with colic, impaction of the
mass. Turning a horse into lateral position may result in an
transverse colon will cause AOC and can be relieved by
immediate increase in blood pressure. In the case of a
elevation of the intestine by the surgeon. Unfortunately, it 
horse with colon impaction, sometimes the only course is 
is hard to keep the colon off the caudal vena cava during
to rely on rapid surgical technique of colon evacuation.
subject depending on the composition of the fluid load.
that may impair surgical site healing and dilution of clot-
Induction of vasodilation with anaesthetic agents or
ting factors. Conversely, hypovolaemia results in decreased
epidural analgesia decreases MAP resulting in slowed
cardiovascular function and inadequate tissue perfusion.
transcapillary filtration and an increase in blood volume
 Attempts to define an intraoperative volume infusion rate
that in turn decreases COP. In one study of healthy
ideal for all patients have revolved around discussions of
client-owned horses anaesthetized with sevoflurane, COP
'liberal' or 'high' versus 'restrictive' or ‘low' administration
decreased after 30 minutes of anaesthesia but increased
strategies (Chappell et al., 2008; Bundgaard-Nielsen et al.,
back to the preanaesthesia value by 2 hours after anaes-
2009 ). Unfortunately, there is frequent overlap in the def-
thesia (Wendt-Hornickle et al., 20ll). Not only did the
 nitions of liberal and restricted fluid volumes (Chappell
COP decrease below 15 mmHg (suggested as the level that 
et al., 2008). Furthermore, outcomes are not just influ-
intestinal oedema becomes significant) but COP was
enced by intraoperative but also postoperative fluid infu-
<15 mmHg before anaesthesia in some horses. Half of the
 sion rates. A review of 187 articles relating to fluid therapy
horses received LRS at 7.5 mL/kg/h and the others LRS at
in adult humans identifed only seven sufficiently similar
same rate plus HES 2.5 mL/kg. Administration of HES at
to compare (Bundgaard-Nielsen et al., 2009). Of these,
the rate studied failed to attenuate the decrease in COP.
three reported improved outcomes after major abdominal
Dogs premedicated with acepromazine and morphine
surgery using restrictive fluid administration whereas two
developed a significant decrease in COP (Wright 
&
 studies reported no differences in wound infection, gas-
Hopkins, 2008). Further decreases were measured during
trointestinal recovery, and length of hospital stay. One
45 minutes of halothane or isoflurane anaesthesia for
-[nd paaoidu! payuapi Aragins sjuolos Suialoaul Apns
 Ovariohysterectomy, to a significantly lower value in dogs
pana pue uoeuasxo aaleiadonsod 'uosuny aeuou
given LRs, 10 mL/kg/h, compared with dogs given no
vasoactive hormonal concentrations on a liberal regimen.
fluids. By 45 minutes after anaesthesia, COP had increased
Another  meta-analysis
evaluated studies comparing
in all dogs and had returned to the baseline value in the
perioperative fluid rates in human patients, separating
no fluid group.
them according to fluid rates consistent with supplying
The goal of fluid therapy during anaesthesia is to restore
 average daily fluid and sodium requirements (balanced’')
and maintain normovolaemia. Overtransfusion has been
with regimens that were ‘unbalanced' (over or under
associated with adverse effects, including tissue oedema
administration) (Varadhan & Lobo, 20l0). The number of
631
Section
|31
Special anaesthesia
Box 21.7 Air embolism
Consequences of air embolism
further down the neck. If the cap on the jugular catheter is
dislodged or removed to change the cap for a syringe or
Air ermbolism of the systemic arterial systemm usually occurs
during cardiopulmonary bypass procedures or thoracic
tubing. air may be entrained. Fatalities and non-fatal
 neurological deficits have been described as consequences
and embolism in the cerebral circulation may cause
of catheter cap failure in horses during the perianaesthetic
neurological deficits. Air embolism of the venous circulation
period (Holbrook et al., 2007). Loss of a catheter cap when
(VAE) is more common. Air travels to the right ventricle and
a horse is in its stall depends on whether the horse lowers
some bubbles leaving the heart become trapped in the
its head, when blood flows from the catheter, or lifts its
at e s! bunl aul saloane Aeuowind pnsqo pue shun
head, when air is entrained. If discovered quickly and
of bubbles but when it becomes overwhelmed it releases
 stopped, the horse may develop signs referable to
hypotension, such as appearance of sedation and mild
colic. Severe haemorrhage and fatalities have been
theory is that air bubbles collect in the ventricle and 
obstruct flow into the pulmonary artery, decreasing cardiac
associated with cases of displaced catheter caps in horses.
output. Another that cause of death is due to early
Monitoring and prevention
development of myocardial ischaemia resulting from severe
hypotension (Geissler et al., 1997). Injury to pulmonary
A Doppler NIBP probe placed over the chest in the area of
the right atrium can detect small amounts of air in small 
capillaries can lead to pulmonary oedema and
animals. Sudden acute decreases in ETCOz observed on the
microbubbles from turbulence precipitate platelet
aggregation, leading to a systemic inflammatory response
capnograph waveform indicate a significant decrease in 
cardiac output. Altered Doppler sounds from a peripheral
(Mirski et al., 2007). The heart continues to beat and can
artery without significant ETCOz changes probably indicate
be felt through the chest but when auscultated with a
insignificant amounts of air. Controlled ventilation abolishes
stethoscope, the heart sounds like a washing machine. In
severe cases of VAE, the peripheral pulse disappears, NIBP
entrainment in the event of an accidental vein transection.
Doppler sound ceases, and ETCOz decreases to
0-16 mmHg. signifying a cardiac arrest. The ECG
Treatment
complexes will be normal for several minutes after loss of
An open IV line should be immediately closed. If the air
peripheral pulse. Usually, small amounts of air have no
was entrained from a surgical site, the area should first be
dinical significance but that cannot be guaranteed as small
flooded with saline and then packed off. If an acute
bubbles in an IV line were reported to induce cardiac arrest
decrease in ETCOz occurs during insufflation for
in a small dog (vwalsh et al., 2005) and this author has
laparoscopy, the needle should be removed immediately
personal experience that rapid IV injection of 3 ml of air
and the abdominal pressure released. When a standing
into a cephalic vein caused cardiac arrest in an
horse collapsed following VAE from a catheter, immediate 
anaesthetized 15 kg (research) dog.
cardiac compressions apparently contributed to a successful
outcome. Changing body position in experimental dogs
dinical scenarios
resulted in relocation of air within the heart but had
When a large vein is lacerated, for example, in dogs and
detrimental effects on cardiac output (Geissler et al.. 1997).
cats during dorsal spinal surgery, ventral cervical 
Oz should be supplied, if not already. NzO should be
decompression, forelimb amputation, intra-abdominal
discontinued, if being used. In event of cardiac arrest or
surgery, or mastectomy. air may be entrained when
hypotension, CPCR with use of vasopressors should be
intrathoracic pressure decreases during inspiration (Trim,
started. Air can be aspirated from the heart in dogs and
unpublished observations). Directing pressurized air into an
aul oi asop io ui dll aui yhm laiauien en6nl e buisn sie
empty tooth socket during dentistry has caused
right atrium (central venous pressure catheter) but, unless
subcutaneous emphysema, hypotension, and fatalities in
the catheter is already in place, this may have a low
dogs, cat, and humans (Gunew et al., 2008). Accidental
success rate. Cardiac puncture is a high risk because it may
initiate ventricular fibrillation, pericardial tamponade from 
laparoscopy and result in massive COz embolism (Staffieri
myocardial bleeding. and laceration of a coronary vessel.
et al., 2007). Injection of air bubbles from a syringe or fluid
Neurological deficits in survivors should be treated
IV administration set or disconnection of a fluid line are all
 appropriately. Clinical experience and published reports
causes of air embolism. In conscious horses during
indicate that air embolisms during anaesthesia in dogs and
placement of a jugular catheter with the tip towards the
   s  s re  e s
heart, air entrainment can be heard when the stilette is
intensive care and recover. Early diagnosis of air embolism
removed unless jugular vein compression is maintained 
may decrease mortality.
NIBP: non-invasive blood pressure; ETCOz: end-tidal COz (capnography).
632
Complications
Chapter
21
Box 21.8 Tension pneumothorax
A pneumothorax develops when air enters the thorax,
a) through ruptured lung (e.g rupture of pulmonary
contusions or pleural bleb (Hg. 21.2), pneumonia.
high airway pressure), b) lacerated oesophagus (e.g.
during extraction of a swallowed bone or bougienage
or placement of a feeding tube), c) tracheal tear,
d) penetration of the chest wall (e.g. dog fight, fractured
ribs, invasive subcutaneous tumour excision), e) neck
surgery near the thoracic inlet (e.g. cervical fenestration,
repair of collapsing trachea, tumour excision), or
f) through the diaphragm and its attachments to the
body wall when the abdomen is open (e.g. congenital
defect of the diaphragm or concussive trauma or surgery
in the cranial abdomen or closure of a diaphragmatic
rupture). A tension pneumothorax develops when the site
of air entry into the thorax acts as a one-way valve. Air
enters the pleural cavity or mediastinum on inspiration,
but is trapped and does not leave during expiration. The
volume of air in the thorax increases with each breath,
progressively restricting lung inflation. Hypercapnia and.
Figure 21.2 Pulmonary bleb in a dog. This dog was
ultimately. hypoxia, decreased cardiac output and
anaesthetized for lobectomy for treatment of persistent 
hypotension develop. Immediate treatment of severe or
spontaneous pneumothorax.
tension pneumothorax is to insert a Butterfly needle or
into the pleural space to aspirate air and decrease the
of HES or dextran 70, 20 mL/kg, in dogs are blood volume
intrathoracic pressure. Oz should be supplied and
controlled ventilation may be necessary if air aspiration
et al., 2005). After HES administration COP and blood
does not correct the hypoxaemia. A chest tube must be
volume had returned to preinfusion levels at 12 hours
inserted if the leak continues and surgical closure may be
[Moore & Garvey, 1996) and at 24 hours (Chohan et al.,
appropriate for some leaks. Pawloski & Broaddus (2010)
201l). Gelatins are modifications of bovine collagen with
have provided a detailed review of pneumothorax in
dogs, including practical details of chest tube placement
relatively low molecular weights of 30-35 kDal. The
and drainage.
immediate plasma expansion is almost equal to the
volume infused and the duration of effect is short [Niemi
et al., 2010).
Hypertonic 7.5% saline solution (HSS) is used for rapid
expansion of blood volume in treatment of severe blood
patients with complications and length of hospital stay
loss because the much smaller volume, 4-5 mL/kg, can be
were significantly lower in the 'balanced' fluid administra-
infused quickly. The high osmolality decreases fluid filtra-
tion compared with the 'unbalanced' protocols, although
tion to the interstitial space, which subsequently becomes
there was no apparent difference in outcomes.
more osmolar and pulls out intracellular fluid. The dura-
In an attempt to limit the volume of isotonic crystalloid
tion of blood volume expansion by HSS is 1-2 hours and
fluid needed to maintain a satisfactory MAP one strategy
diuresis occurs. Crystalloid fluid must be given after HSS
has been to use a low infusion rate of crystalloid and to
otherwise the patient will remain hypovolaemic (Barros
bump intravascular volume by periodic boluses or con-
et al., 20ll). The cardiovascular response to resuscitation
tinuous infusion of colloid solutions. Hetastarch is a
with HSS differs in conscious and anaesthetized animals.
hydroxyethylstarch (HES) solution with a high in vitro
Infusion of HSS, 2 mL/kg, over 5 minutes to standing
molecular weight 450-600 kDal manufactured by hydrox-
conscious instrumented sheep that were bled 20 mL/kg
yethylation of glucose molecules in the branched natural
over 20 minutes resulted in blood volume expansion, an
polymer, amylopectin. The molecular weight and degree
increase in MAP to above 70 mmHg within 3 minutes,
of hydroxyl substitution influence the duration of effect.
increased cardiac output, and tachycardia (Frithiof et al.
The duration of intravascular volume expansion for hetas-
2011). This experiment determined that HSS increased
tarch is 12-48 h in humans but normal dogs have an
cardiac output beyond the effect of improved preload pro-
increased concentration of serum amylase, the enzyme
duced by volume expansion and that HES induced chrono-
responsible for degradation of HES. Published durations
tropic and inotropic actions that depended on activation
889
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
of the cardiac β-receptors. Hypertonic resuscitation causes
kg/h, or the same volume of LRS with periodic 250 mL
peripheral vasodilation mainly due to the hyperosmolality-
boluses of LRS or HES (130/0.4) to achieve the target.
induced vascular smooth muscle relaxation. Consequently.
Baseline measurements were made after instrumentation,
in the presence of cardiovascular depression from anaes-
colon anastomosis and closure of the abdomen. The mean
thetic agents, rapid IV administration of HSS may tran-
SmvO2 of all groups was initially <60%. The MAP and
 siently augment hypotension in the anaesthetized animal
 cardiac index were improved in the goal-directed groups
[Kien et al., 199l; Frithiof et al., 2011),
and the goal of SmvO2 >60% was achieved in the colloid
 group. Four hours later, the perianastomotic colon tissue
O2 tension was significantly increased to 147% or 245%
Monitoring fluid infusion
above baseline in the goal-directed LRS and colloid groups,
The wide variation in fluid infusion rates, use of different
respectively. The microcirculatory blood flow in the
animal species and patient populations, and the many
healthy colon mucosa was highest in the colloid group but
alternative research protocols has interfered with the for-
the anastomosis mucosal perfusion was unchanged. Total
mation of a common agreement relating to intraoperative
fluids infused included LRS, 3 mL/kg/h, average 928 mL
fluid administration. One unresolved issue is the best
for each pig for the duration of the experiment, plus an
method for monitoring fluid administration to identify
 average of 831 mL HES in the colloid group or additional
when a human or animal has received sufficient fluid
average 1794 mL LRS in the LRS goal-directed group.
[normovolaemia). Some studies were directed toward
No differences were measured in gut wall glucose (an
comparison of fluid types using infusions of fixed volumes
early marker of impaired intestinal perfusion) or lactate/
and evaluation that included measurement of intravascu-
pyruvate ratio between groups. There was no difference
lar volume expansion by changes in haematocrit [Hct) or
in the wet/dry weight ratios of lung tissue or healthy or
dilution of an injected dye (Evan's blue, indocyanine
anastomotic colon tissue between the two goal-directed
green) and measurement of haemodynamic parameters.
groups. Infusion of HES improved systemic haemody-
Others have worked from the premise that administration
 namic measurements and colon O2 tension but not colon
of a fixed volume of fluid is unlikely to be ideal in every
mucosa microcirculation. There are other options availa-
patient and measurements of MAP and HR can be within
ble in clinical anaesthesia to manipulate the patients'
acceptable ranges in the presence of hypovolaemia. There-
physiological parameters. In a similar experiment from
fore goal-directed measurements are needed to aid in
the same laboratory comparing high and low crystalloid
optimization of fluid load in individual patients, particu-
 therapy, improvement in perianastomotic O2 tension was
Aans iote sunaun no yis ae ien suaed e
only achieved by increasing the inspired O2 to 100%
Pulse pressure variation and systolic pressure variation can
(Kimberger et al., 2007).
be used for goal-directed fluid therapy in patients with
direct arterial pressure measurement, controlled ventila-
Expansion capabilities of different colloids
tion with tidal volumes >7 mL/kg. and in the absence of
arrhythmias (Kehlet & Bundgaard-Nielsen, 2009). Mixed
Administration of a large volume of crystalloid solution
se pasn uaaq sey %og< (eoaws) uoees uaxo snouan
lea1l ol Ajaenbape liey inq aunioa pooiq puedxa Aeu
'1e la 1asiaquy) Adeiau Pimy paioa1p-ieog ioy lasie1 e
hypotension.
Healthy,
.normovolaemic experimental
2009). Guiding fluid management using stroke volume
and central venous pressure produced fewer episodes of
rane anaesthesia (Aarnes et al., 2009). Infusion of LRS,
hypotension and lower lactate concentrations at the end
80 mL/kg. over 1 hour increased blood volume and
of surgery (Lansdorp et al., 2012). Recommendations for
improved cardiac output but increased vasodilation pre-
monitoring changes in stroke volume (using pulse contour
vented a change in systolic and MAP. In contrast, infusion
or oesophageal Doppler methods) in response to fluid
 of 6% HES reversed hypotension in four out of six dogs.
therapy in high-risk patients are being adopted by several
The volume of HES required to achieve this effect was
societies associated with anaesthesia in humans [Michard
4.3-40 mL/kg and the effect occurred within 5-46
& Biais, 2012). Some studies are attempting to define fluid
minutes. Signs of fluid overload, fluid dripping from the
protocols that go beyond normalization of systemic
nostrils, chemosis, and vomiting, were noted after anaes-
haemodynamics and investigate regimens that optimize
thesia in the dogs that received LRS. Infusion of such a
tissue perfusion and oxygenation with minimal adverse
large volume of LRS to animals with normovolaemia is
effect. One such study involved pigs that were anaesthe-
not advisable and a smaller volume coupled with HES and
Ol sisooisue leunsau pue Auonoedel ioy Pazn
 decreasing isoflurane concentration will produce a better
compare intraoperative infusions of LRS or HES using
effect Anaesthetized Beagles were made hypotensive by
SmvO2 >60% as a goal-directed fluid therapy target [Kim-
withdrawal of 14 mL/kg of blood (Muir, 2004). Adminis-
berger et al., 2009). Anaesthesia was maintained with
tration of 6% HES (550/0.7) approximately equal to the
infusions of injectable agents and ventilation was control-
volume of blood loss and given over 13 minutes rapidly
led using 30% O2. The pigs were infused with LRS, 3 mL/
reversed hypotension and increased cardiac output In
634
Complications
Chapter
21
function. The impact on coagulation was investigated in
times the volume of blood loss was needed to correct
dogs anaesthetized with isoflurane and morphine epidur-
hypotension. The haemodynamic parameters remained
als for stifle arthroscopy (Chohan et al., 20ll). Half of the
 above baseline for the 2-hour monitoring period.
 dogs were infused with LRS, 10 mL/kg, IV over 20 minutes 
HSS in combination with colloids has been evaluated
and the remainder with 6% HES (600/0.75). 10 mL/kg.
for expansion of blood volume in the absence of haemor-
over 20 minutes with all dogs then infused with LRS.
rhage. Conscious instrumented sheep received, on sepa-
10 mL/kg/h. In both groups, buccal mucosa bleeding time
rate occasions, LRS, 25 mL/kg. or 7.5% NaCl 6% dextran
 (BMBT), considered to be the best test of platelet plug
70 (HSDex). 4 ml/kg IV, over 30 minutes (Tollofsrud
formation, and prothrombin time (PT) were significantly
et al., 2001 ). The sheep may have been mildly dehydrated
longer at 1 hour compared with before premedication. No
because water was withheld for 12 hours before the experi-
 significant changes were found in activated partial throm-
ment. Using the Evans blue dilution technique to measure
boplastin time [(APTT). von Willebrand's factor antigen
blood volume expansion, it was found that both fluids
concentration (vWF:Ag) or factor VII coagulant activity
induced the same peak intravascular fluid expansion;
(FVIll:C). The surgeons, who were blinded to the fluid
 decreasing rapidly by 30 minutes after LRS whereas HSDex
 treatment, reported no indication of increased bleeding at
maintained expansion for a further 30 minutes before
the operative site. The COP was significantly higher in the
decreasing slowly. Infusion of LRS resulted in increased
HES group (14% below baseline compared with 24%) at
extravascular volume. In contrast, HSDex resulted in a
1 hour of anaesthesia but no difference was measured at
diuresis of several times its fluid volume and decreased
 24 hours. The degree of impaired coagulation may not be
extravascular volume, supporting the recommendation
signifcant for healthy patients but may have an impact on
that HSS should be accompanied by infusion of crystalloid
 animals with abnormal coagulation profles.
solution.
Anaphylaxis is a potential adverse effect of HES admin-
Conscious healthy normovolaemic dogs were given on
istration that is rarely reported. Package information for
separate occasions HHES as 7.5% NaCl in 6% HES
an HES (130/0.4) product in the veterinary market
(1) /1%0710/(0/00)
includes the recommendation for an initial slow infusion
IV over 15 minutes and monitored for 2 hours [Robinson
of a small volume of HES to allow time for observation of
et al., 20ll). Both agents produced a significant increase
the signs of anaphylactic shock; also that HES is contrain-
in blood volume, as calculated using the changes in Hct,
dicated in patients with pulmonary oedema, congestive
lasting for the duration of the experiment. HHES induced
heart failure renal failure not related to hypovolaemia,
significant hypernatraemia at 60 minutes. HHES and man-
 and with intracranial bleeding.
nitol induced similar diuresis and the average amount of
The effect of HES administration in suppression of
urine was approximately four times the volume infused.
hepatic albumin synthesis may be a reason to minimize
The authors concluded that HHES administration should
use of HES in animals with hypoproteinaemia.
not be repeated within 1-2 hours.
Management of septic shock generally requires admin-
Points to remember
istration of a vasoactive agent in addition to fluid therapy
Administration of a fixed volume of fluids as the main
to treat hypotension. Administration of a sublethal dose
ssasxa pg io eiuaeloaod juaaand on Aiaun st aiens
of E. coli endotoxin to halothane-anaesthetized horses
in all patients; consequently fluid therapy must be based
produced a wide variation in cardiopulmonary and bio-
on knowledge of the individual's specifc needs and con-
chemical responses consistent with previously published
tinual assessment of peripheral perfusion during anaes-
results (Pantaleon et al., 2006). In this experiment, resus-
thesia. Nonetheless, morbidity rather than mortality is
citation with crystalloid (Normosol@-R) at rates of 15 or
 primarily affected by the type of fluid and how it is admin-
60 mL/kg, was compared with HSS 7.2% NaCl, 5 mL/kg.
istered (Rafie et al., 2004; Vallet, 201l). Fluid administra-
followed by HES (600/0.75), 10 mL/kg. Fluid infusions
 tion will depend on whether the patient is hypovolaemic
were started at the end of the 30-min endotoxin infusion
 and the horses were monitored for 3 hours. Mean pulmo-
or normovolaemic before induction of anaesthesia, and
other factors, such as use of vasoactive agents or decreasing
-d pe seau asyis sm ansa Aae Aru
the inhalant anaesthetic concentration can be used to
orbital oedema was noticed more frequently in horses
improve haemodynamic performance. When assessing
given the higher dose of crystalloid. No treatment had a
response to colloid administration, it should be remem-
beneficial effect on the changes induced by endotoxin as
bered that measurement of total protein using a refractom-
hypotension persisted and lactate increased in each group.
 eter will not reflect the contribution by the colloid.
Adverse effects of colloid administration
Blood loss
Hetastarch can impair hemostasis by dilution of clotting
Assessment of blood loss during anaesthesia is made from
factors and direct effect on coagulation factors and platelet
the following information:
635
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
 Estimation of the volume on the drapes, in a suction
minutes resulted in decreased MAP to about 40 mmHg in
bottle, on the floor, or in a bucket placed under the
 dogs anaesthetized with halothane or sevoflurane but only
surgical site. Sometimes visualizing the volume of
to 65 mmHg during isoflurane anaesthesia (Teixeira Neto
fluid in a 50 mL drug bottle or 500/1000 mL fluid
et al., 2007). Cardiac outputs were decreased by 46.5-
bag can be used for a reference point. Buckets used in
49.5% during all three anaesthetic agents and HRs
large animal surgery can be premarked in litre
were unchanged during halothane and sevoflurane but
volumes.
increased during isoflurane anaesthesia. There is little
● When blood loss is anticipated, the Hct and TP
detailed information about effects of graded haemorrhage
should be measured after induction of anaesthesia
on cardiovascular parameters in horses. In one study of
and before the start of surgery. The Hct will change
horses weighing an average 486 kg, anaesthetized with
little during haemorrhage when fluid therapy is
halothane (8) or isofurane (l). and receiving lactated
minimal, but will provide an idea of the impact of
Ringer's solution, 10 mL/kg/h, an approximate blood loss
blood loss when measured during infusion of
 of 10 L over 15 minutes caused hypotension and pro-
crystalloid at a 2-3: 1 ratio. The Hct will progressively
longed CRT (wilson et al., 2003). That heart rates, Hct and
increase with time as the crystalloid fluid leaves the
base excess values were unchanged is of significance to
vascular space and increase further during recovery
 monitoring of clinical patients.
from anaesthesia due to splenic contraction.
It is important to realize that anaesthetized animals
● Blood loss can be measured during surgery on small
cannot tolerate the same blood loss as conscious animals
animals by weighing the blood-soaked gauzes and
because cardiovascular reflexes are depressed. Overall, sig-
subtracting the weight of dry gauzes. Using a gram
nificant haemodynamic changes occur in healthy anaes-
scale, l dry gauze and a plastic bag are weighed
thetized animals after blood loss equivalent to 15-20% of
separately. A known number of used gauzes are
the patient's blood volume. Circulatory shock may be pro-
 placed in the bag and weighed. Assuming that 1 gram 
duced in old, debilitated, or anaemic animals with a
weight = (approximately) 1 mL blood, then mL
smaller blood loss.
 blood lost = weight of used gauzes in the plastic bag
- (weight of one dry gauze X number of gauzes plus 
Huid resuscitation
weight of the plastic bag).
● Blood pressure will decrease, cardiac output will
When hypotension is caused by haemorrhage, the decrease
 decrease earlier and to a greater extent than blood
in hydrostatic pressure reduces fluid loss from the intra-
pressure, and HR may not reliably change Blood
vascular space resulting in augmentation of blood volume
pressure may remain constant until severe blood loss
autotransfusion': This effect is short lived but is a signif-
has occurred when crystalloid or colloid fluid therapy
cant physiological protective mechanism.
is provided.
For many years, blood loss has been replaced by infu-
● Calculation of the % of blood loss to normal blood
sion of balanced electrolyte solution at a rate of 2.5-3
volume. Blood volume differs between species, for
times the volume of shed blood. Frequently. this is an
example, values published for conscious healthy
effective method to maintain arterial blood pressure, par-
animals are:
ticularly when accompanied by a decrease in anaesthetic
■Thoroughbreds, 100 mL/kg
administration. The previous section has described the
Pony and draft horses, 72 mL/kg
adverse effects of infusion of large volumes of crystalloid
Dogs. 86 mL/kg
solution; therefore, addition of plasma substitute becomes
■Sheep. 60 mL/kg
necessary at some point during haemorrhage and, ulti-
Cats, 56 mL/kg.
 mately, the administration of an Oz-carrying solution.
There is evidence that when treating haemorrhagic
 In experimental studies, the cardiovascular effects of
hypotension, MAP 65 mmHg may be a suboptimal target.
 blood loss are modifed by the conscious state versus
Conscious, instrumented sheep were subjected to blood
anaesthesia, the anaesthetic agents and the species, and
loss of 35 mL/kg over 1 hour (Rafie et al., 2004). Haemor-
influenced by the volume lost, the speed of loss, and
rhage resulted in a 65% decrease in cardiac output, MAP
whether the end-point was a predetermined volume or the
<45 mmHg. and HR increase to an average of 150 beats/
volume determined by a target blood pressure. For
min. The sheep were resuscitated using LRS or 6% HES
example, when blood was removed from isoflurane-
(670/0.75) in LRS, beginning 30 minutes after the start of
anaesthetized dogs until hypotension developed, mean
haemorrhage. The infusion rates were initially fast and
blood loss was 14 mL/kg (approximately 17% of blood
then slowed as MAP of either 65 or 90 mmHg was
volume) withdrawn over 15 minutes {Muir, 2004). Cardiac
approached, and the sheep were monitored for 3 hours.
output had decreased by >40%. In another study of dogs
The total volumes of infused fluid to achieve MAP
anaesthetized with halothane, isoflurane, or sevoflurane,
65 mmHg were LRS, 18 mL/kg. or HES. 12 mL/kg. but
removal of 32 mL/kg (37-40% of blood volume) over 30
cardiac outputs remained 15-20% below prehaemorrhage
989
Complications
Chapter
21
pa1o1sa1 By/u 19 Jo ase1ane ue 1e saT Jo uoisnyul 'sanlen
 and colloid fluid therapy, decreased anaesthetic agent,
cardiac output and MAP increased to just short of
 and vasoactive agent.
90 mmHg. Plasma volumes for all three treatments were
●Need to maintain Oz delivery to fetus.
similar for the first 90 minutes. Since half of the sheep
 Need for labile coagulation factors in fresh whole
resuscitated to MAP 65 mmHg developed a metabolic aci-
blood for patients with thrombocytopaenia,
dosis and two sheep died, the authors concluded that MAP
haemophilia, hepatic disease, disseminated
65 mmHg was too low for optimal outcome.
intravascular coagulation.
Small volume HES in hypertonic saline resuscitation
may effectively restore cardiovascular parameters but not
Intravenous lipid emulsion (lLE)
tissue perfusion. Isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs were bled
20 mL/kg and MAP and cardiac output were effectively
Intravenous administration of lipid to counter CNS
resuscitated using saline 40 mL/kg [2:1 saline:blood
depression from barbiturate was first published in
loss) or HHES, 4 mL/kg. for the 60 minutes monitoring
1962, but interest in using the lipid effect against drug
period (Udelsmann et al., 2009). In another study of dogs
overdosage did not increase until the late l990s. To
 anaesthetized with isoflurane, splenectomized, and haem-
date, there are many papers addressing ‘lipid rescue""
orrhaged approximately 30 mL/kg over 60 minutes to
(www.lipidrescue.org) of human patients and experimen-
maintain MAP 40-50 mmHg. infusion of either LRS 3:1
tal animals after toxic effects of local anaesthetics and
volume of shed blood, HES (130/0.4) in a 1: 1 volume of
other lipophilic agents have caused cardiovascular col-
shed blood, or HHES (7.5% saline in 6% HES (130/0.4)).
lapse or cardiac arrest (Candela et al., 20l0; Cave et al.,
4.4 mL/kg, reversed the hypotension and increased cardiac
201l; Fermandez et al., 20ll; Mauch et al., 201l; Weinberg
output to or above baseline measurements (Barros et al.,
& Warren, 20l2). Reports of ILE in human patients and
2011). However, blood volume expansion by HHES was
animals have involved the toxic effects of the local anaes-
significantly less than produced by HES, and beneficial
thetic agents lidocaine, mepivacaine, bupivacaine and
effects were decreasing at 90 minutes. Gastric mucosal
ropivacaine, and other drugs including tricyclic antide-
blood flow was restored by infusion of LRS and HES but
pressants, lipophilic β-blockers, and calcium channel
 measurements indicated hypoperfusion persisting in dogs
blockers.
given HHES.
 There are few published reports of use of ILE in the
Fluid therapy in pregnant animals is complicated as
 treatment of toxicities in clinical veterinary patients (Ferm-
changes in the fetus may be significantly different from
andez et al., 20ll ). One puppy with suspected moxidectin
those in the mother. Haemorrhage of 20 mL/kg over 10
toxicosis from ingestion exhibited seizures, slow heart rate,
lueuaand pauaunsul pue pazauisanue u sanu
severe respiratory acidosis, and high lactate concentration
sheep caused maternal hypotension, heart rate decreases
(Crandell & Weinberg. 2009). Treatment consisted of oral
from on average l19 beats/min to 88 (range 40-167)
activated charcoal, IPPV with O2. atropine, and IV fuids.
beats/min, and decreased blood Oz content, uterine blood
Approximately 10 hours after toxic exposure, 20% soybean
flow, and uterine Oz delivery (Moon et al., 2001). Acute
emulsion, 2 mL/kg. was injected IV as a bolus followed by
fetal hypoxaemia and acidaemia were induced, and one
3.75 mL/kg/h for 4 hours. After 2 hours of ILE therapy.
fetus died during haemorrhage. The ewes were successfully
 controlled ventilation was discontinued but the puppy
resuscitated by either an autologous blood transfusion
remained unconscious. It received further intensive care
(reinfusion of lost blood), with 6% HES at 20 mL/kg, Or
until 25 hours after suspected toxic exposure when another
with oxyglobin at 20 mL/kg, however, HES did not restore
infusion of lipid emulsion, 15 mL/kg given over 30
O2 delivery to the fetus. This investigation confirms the
ability of HES to restore adequate circulatory function but,
and improved behaviour.
at some point, administration of crystalloid and/or colloid
A domestic shorthair cat that was recumbent and unre-
is insuffcient and an Oz-carrying product must be
sponsive, exhibiting respiratory distress and cardiovascular
included.
collapse was suspected of lidocaine toxicity after receiving
local infltration of lidocaine, 20 mg/kg (O'Brien et al.,
Blood product transfusion triggers
2010). The cat was given O2 to breathe but initial attempts
at placing an IV catheter failed. Thirty minutes after admis-
●Assessed blood loss at 20-25% of the anaesthetized
sion (one hour after lidocaine injection), the cat was less
patient's circulating blood volume.
lethargic, able to assume sternal position but unable to
●Hct ≤20% during anaesthesia or Hct ≤25% before
hold its head up. A 20% 50: 50 emulsion of soybean and
anaesthesia for surgery (these values may vary
safflower oil, 1.5 mL/kg, was infused over 30 minutes and
according to whether anaemia is acute or chronic,
by the end of the infusion the cat was able to hold its head
and the planned procedure).
up, appeared aware of its surroundings and began groom-
●Failure to restore haemodynamic parameters to
ing behaviour. The maximum suggested dose of lidocaine
acceptable values using a combination of crystalloid
in cats for local analgesia is about 4 mg/kg. When three
89
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
times that dose is infiltrated during general anaesthesia,
local anaesthesia is performed. Fernandez et al. (20ll), in
the frst indication may be death during the recovery
a review directed at the veterinary profession, suggested
lipid dose rates for dogs and cats in the range 1.5-
overdose and was fortunate to survive transportation to a
4 mL/kg (0.3-0.8 g/kg) followed by 0.25 mL/kg/min
referral hospital. The half-life of lidocaine is quite short
(0.05 g/kg/min) IV over 30-60 minutes. They noted that
and supportive therapy may be suffcient to allow detoxi-
additional IV increments may be needed in animals that
fication and patient survival.
Ue io  9- Aaa / 'I se qns aisuodsaiun uiea
An inadvertent IV injection of bupivacaine during local
infusion of 0.5 mL/kg/h, given up to a maximum of 24
infltration may result in an abrupt decrease in blood pres-
hours. Emulsions of long chain triglycerides (LCT) and
sure that is responsive to discontinuing anaesthetic admin-
mixtures of LCT and medium chain triglycerides have been
istration and IV infusion of dobutamine or dopamine.
used in clinical cases and experimental investigations.
However, ILE seems to be a logical treatment for local
Further studies are needed to confirm whether one product
anaesthetic overdose if conventional measures of resusci-
is more effective than the other. Fernandez et al. (201l)
tation, such as O2, IPPV, IV fluids, and vasoactive drugs.
included detailed descriptions of the different formula-
do not produce improvement The optimal dose rate of
tions of lipid emulsions in their review. Adverse effects
lipid emulsion for this purpose in domestic animals has
following administration of lipid emulsion for resuscita-
not been determined and may differ between species.
tion have not been reported but anaphylactoid and allergic
 s a u o) ena 
reactions have been reported during use for parenteral
isoflurane-anaesthetized dogs, induced circulatory col-
nutrition.
lapse and cardiac arrest or bradycardia <l0 beats/min by
There are currently three proposed mechanisms for the
IV injection of bupivacaine, 10 mg/kg. Isoflurane was dis-
effect of lipid emulsion on lipophilic toxins: the lipid
continued and cardiac massage instituted for l0 minutes
sink' theory: the carnitine metabolism theory: and the
before infusion of lipid emulsion (20% soybean oil).
Pidi, aul (zioz 'je ia snjuoi) Aioayi isjuose wunilo
4 mL/kg bolus followed by a continuous infusion of
 sink' theory proposes that the lipid infusion creates a large
0.5 mL/kg/min for l0 minutes, or saline Normal sinus
lipid fraction in the plasma that traps lipophilic toxins. An
rhythm was established in 6/6 dogs within 5 minutes of
 in vitro model adding lipid emulsion to water containing
two lipophilic dyes with log P values comparable to lido-
progressed to baseline values by 30 minutes. In contrast,
caine and bupivacaine and comparing the resultant colour
no dogs given saline recovered adequate circulation
changes seemed to support the concept of a 'lipid sink'
(Weinberg et al, 2003). ILE has had positive results
effect (Papadopoulou et al., 20l2). However, ILE admin-
in animal experiments involving rats and rabbits but not
istered to human volunteers given a non-toxic dose of
in pigs.
bupivacaine IV moderately decreased the total plasma
The use of ILE has been included in practice advisories
concentrations of bupivacaine but had no effect on the
of the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and
plasma non-lipid bound or free (non-protein bound) con-
Ireland, the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
centrations of bupivacaine (Litonius et al., 20l2). The
Pain Medicine, endorsed by the American Heart Associa-
pharmacokinetic results of this study suggested that bupi-
tion Advanced Cardiac Life Support recommendations.
vacaine was redistributed into tissues ata faster rate during
and the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthet-
lipid emulsion infusion but the authors noted that there
ists [Cave et al., 20ll; Weinberg & Warren, 2012). ILE is
might be difference between a non-cardiotoxic dose and
recommended after primary intensive care support,
an overdose of bupivacaine. Carmitine acylcarmitine trans-
including O2, IPPV, IV fluids, and specific antagonists, has
locase is an enzyme that contributes to passage of free fatty
failed to achieve improved responsiveness. It is important
acids bound to acetyl coA across mitochondrial mem-
to establish good oxygenation in the patient as ILE admin-
branes (Picard & Meek, 2006; Fernandez et al., 201l ). Inhi-
seies tuniun 'spaa snonanaiap aey aeu uoens
bition of this enzyme by local anaesthetics results in
arrhythmias, in the hypoxic subject. Interaction of ILE
depleted energy supply for the myocardium. One sugges-
with concurrent administration of CPCR drugs is being
tion is that a lipid infusion overcomes the enzyme inhibi-
investigated, with varying results. Some studies indicate a
tion thus restoring the myocardial energy supply.
beneficial effect of a low (l μg/kg) dose of epinephrine.
Recommended dose rates for ILE in humans for toxic syn-
dromes are 1.5 mL/kg IV over 1 minute followed by an
infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min IV over 30-60 minutes, and
INADEQUATE ANAESTHESIA
the bolus could be repeated 1-2 times for persistent asys-
tole (www.lipidrescue.org). These dose rates are flexible
Signs of light anaesthesia differ between injectable and
depending on the circumstances. These instructions come
inhalant anaesthesia and between species. Signs associated
with light or inadequate anaesthesia include any or all of
the items needed for ILE be immediately available where
the following: presence of a strong palpebral reflex;
889
Complications
Chapter
21
Aue u Alenuaaasau pallau leqaa 'sasioy ui snueeisu
occur following myelography, particularly in large dogs
animal or sometimes dorsocaudally (star-gazing) in horses
with cervical lesions and cervical injections [da Costa
and pigs: autonomic responses such as increased heart rate
et al., 20ll). The risk for seizures in all species after
or blood pressure; increased respiratory rate; and muscle
 myelography should be minimized by facilitating caudal
movements associated with an aspect of surgery or the
 movement of dye in the spinal cord after radiography by
procedure; or muscle tremors. Some of these signs can be
 elevating the head by 45° to the spine and by promoting
caused by other conditions such as hypoxaemia, hypercar-
elimination of iohexol by diuresis with IV fluids, 10 mL/
bia, and hyperthermia, and these must be ruled out. In
kg/h. Elimination of iohexol in horses is facilitated by
horses, ketamine anaesthesia can be associated with spon-
premedication with an Qe-agonist such as xylazine
taneous blinking and nystagmus and should not be
through its diuretic effect It is our practice to maintain
 assumed to be due to light anaesthesia. Horses susceptible
anaesthesia in dogs and cats for 45 minutes after injection
to developing hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis may start
of iohexol as an arbitrary time for elimination before
twitching during anaesthesia if the syndrome is triggered.
allowing the patient to recover slowly from anaesthesia
Management will depend on the cause (Table 2l.5) and
(unless proceeding to surgery). Horses are not kept anaes-
on the clinical scenario, for example, a dog wakening
thetized but moved to a quiet room for recovery, posi-
tioned with the head elevated, given xylazine 0.2 mg/kg
be managed differently from a horse anaesthetized with
IV if anaesthetized with an inhalation agent and O2 by
injectable agents for castration or eye enucleation in the
nasal insufflation. Some horses are more ataxic in recovery
field. The reader is referred to anaesthetic management in
than before anaesthesia and may need assistance to stand.
the species-specific chapters. It is important to remember
An NSAID should be administered some hours before
that during inhalation anaesthesia when the effects of pre-
anaesthesia.
vaporizer setting must be increased to abolish response to
Postoperative infection
surgery. The increased inspired inhalation agent is accom-
panied by a progressive decrease in blood pressure.
Surgical site infections can be influenced by many factors,
Administration of a sedative or analgesic drug usually
such as obesity that decreases wound Oz tensions and
allows a decrease in the inhaled anaesthetic concentration
predisposes towards more difficult hygienic practices, the
that may result in an improvement in blood pressure.
site of the incision and its proximity to contamination,
and the animal's licking or rubbing the surgical site.
Anaesthetic management also influences postoperative
MUSCle MOVEMeNts
infection. Regional analgesia has been documented in
humans to decrease surgical site infection compared with
general anaesthesia, possibly relating to vasodilation and
Twitching or jerks of the muzzle ears, and legs occur
increased wound blood flow facilitating migration
of
occasionally in dogs and cats following administration of
neutrophils. A long duration of anaesthesia is also associ-
 propofol or etomidate for induction of anaesthesia. No
ated with increased incidence of infection because anaes-
specifc treatment is indicated as the twitches will disap-
thetic agents decrease the immune response and decreased
pear affer about l0 minutes. Increasing anaesthetic
cardiovascular function decreases wound perfusion. Both
administration is not the correct treatment for this
hypovolaemia and overadministration of crystalloid fluid
abnormality.
can affect the incidence of surgical site infection, and
Shivering or tremors may be observed in some animals
       
during lightening of anaesthesia or recovery from inhala-
increased infection. There are studies comparing the
tion anaesthesia or after epidural analgesia. Shivering
effects of 30% with 80% inspired O2 on surgical site
is not always associated with hypothermia, although
infection and results of meta-analyses have been inter-
warming should be applied if the patient is cold.
preted with varying results. One recent meta-analysis
determined that hyperoxia did not have an impact on
surgical site infection over a range of surgical procedures
but that a subgroup analysis of trials in which human
INJURY ASSOCIATED WITH
E seM aiaun Arasins [enaioos Ajuo juamapun sjuaed
ANAESTHESIA
 significant benefit of hyperoxia in decreasing surgical site
infection (Togioka et al., 20l2). These results might have
Contrast agents
relevance for horses undergoing colon surgery. Direct
application of O2 within the lumen of ischaermic intestine
Cardiovascular collapse and death occasionally occur after
in anaesthetized experimental ponies was found to
decrease the severity of intestinal mucosa damage (Moore
 s '1 x  ' '1'    1
et al., 1980).
689
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
 Table 21.5 Inadequate anaesthesia: causes and management (Note that it is difficult to provide management for 
every situation and this table is intended only to provide a guide)
Species
Causes
Management
Drugs
 All species
 Insufficient anaesthetic administration or inadequate
juahe oisabieue jansjuiwpe jopue buas jazoden aseanoul
 analgesia, premedication and induction agent effects
waning
 Hyp oventilation
IPPV
Equipment
 All species 
 Circuit incorrectly assembled or disconnected
 Check anaesthesia machine and circuit for faults
Vaporizer: filler port open, insufficient liquid, room too cold
Check vaporizer, fluid level, output 
Inspired anaesthetic concentration lovver than estimated:
Transiently increase Oz flow or increase vaporizer seting.
rebreathing circuit VOC, large patient with low Oz flow
oompress rebreathing bag to empty and fill with fresh gas
 Endotracheal tube too small (resistance to airflow), cuff not
Check endotracheal tube for placement, check for air leak 
 airtight (inspired gas diluted with air), tube out or in
by inflating lungs and listening or feeling neck for
 cesophagus
vibration (large animals)
 Syringe/infusion pump for adjunct agents not turned on or
Check infusion pump and check liquid flow from the 
 inaccurate delivery
extension tubing, check volume delivered :calculated 
Other patient problems & procedure
 All species 
 Increased surgical or procedural stimulus intensity
Increase anaesthesia or analgesia
 Excited patient before anaesthesia resulting in decreased
 Fluid bolus and vasoconstriction: dopamine for dogs and 
 blood volume
cats, ephedrine for horses
 Malignant hyperthermia may mimic light anaesthesia (signs 
 Discontinue inhalation anaesthesia, dantrolene, ice (see 
in Chapter 2)
Chapter 2)
Cardiac
 All species 
 Intraventricular shunting of injectable drugs through 
 Convert to inhalation anaesthesia, auscultation for murmur 
 ventricular septal defect = less effect from standard
 or ultrasound
 induction drug dose rate
Respiratory
 All species 
 Hypoxaemia may mimic light anaesthesia althcugh many
Check membrane colour and SpOz as part of
animals that are hypoxaemic shov no signs
troubleshooting
 Hyp oventilation decreases delivery of inhalant agent:
IPPV usually results in an adequate and stable plane of
 panting in dogs (brachycephalic breeds, opioids), V/Q
 anaesthesia
inequality in large animals
VOC: va porizer-cutside-circle.
640
Complications
Chapter
21
Myopathy and nerve damage
bypass. Many potential contributing causes have been
listed for ION, including eye compression, hypotension,
Ischaemia of tissues due to compression or hypotension
abnormalities in blood supply to the optic nerve, long
during anaesthesia is most often observed in horses and
 duration surgery, large amounts of IV fluids during anaes-
details of safe positioning during anaesthesia and differ-
thesia, and a possible impact of operating table position
ential diagnoses are discussed in Chapter ll. Injury can
(head down) (Roth, 2009). The impact of blood loss and
occur with horses in dorsal or lateral positions, and with
haemodilution on optic nerve O2 delivery has been inves-
flexed or frog-legged limbs. Damage varies from oedema-
tigated as a possible cause of POVL. Studies in pigs and
tous plaques present on the dependent side of the animal,
cats determined that isovolaemic haemodilution did not
over the masseter muscle and over the thorax, flank, or
have a significant effect on O2 delivery to the optic nerve.
thigh, to neuropathy or myopathy of the forelimb or hind
However, simultaneously decreasing the haematocrit and
limb, facial nerve paralysis, and swelling of a masseter
 inducing hypotension significantly decreased O2 delivery.
muscle or one or both gluteal muscles. An NSAID and
1e aq ot Aouaquunoai lesiop ul sasoy ioadxa juaiu auo
analgesia are frst line treatment. Sedation (acepromazine)
risk for external eye compression resulting in blindness,
may be needed for anxious or active horses, and ice may
especially when the head is rotated into an oblique posi-
Pansai seu suans io Aaeiadaq uaum Aiessaau an
tion, however, that does not seem to be the case. Twenty-
in hyperthermia. When standing is diffcult due to radial
five years ago. blindness in horses after halothane
nerve or peroneal or femoral nerve paralysis, the opposite
 anaesthesia was an occasional occurrence and was attrib.
limb may need external bandage support. Some horses
uted to cortical ischaemia from hypotension although
may need to be supported in a sling. Horses that remain
unconfirmed because in those cases blood pressure was
recumbent will need intensive care that may include, in
not measured. Similarly, there have been anecdotal reports
addition to just mentioned treatment, dimethylsulphox-
over the years of POVL in dogs and cats after anaesthesia
ide (DMSO), catheterization of the urinary bladder for
for elective procedures. Many years ago. two patients
drainage, frequent turning, O2 by insufflation, and peri-
under my care had cardiac arrests during anaesthesia, a cat
odic laboratory tests to identify abnormalities. Myopathy
anaesthetized with methoxyflurane for ovariohysterec-
may progress to renal failure due to release of massive
 tomy and a dog anaesthetized with halothane undergoing
amounts of myoglobin, and early aggressive IV fluid
thoracotomy for ligation of a patent ductus arteriosus.
therapy is recommended in an attempt to prevent irrevers-
After resuscitation, the cat was blind for 3 days and the
ible renal damage.
dog for 2-3 months. In these cases involving cardiac
Radial nerve paralysis may develop in adult cattle and
arrest, it was assumed that the visual loss was due to cer-
has been discussed in Chapter 12. Radial nerve damage is
 ebral cortical ischaemia as a result of hypotension.
a rare complication after anaesthesia in large dogs (legs
Recently, the medical records of 20 cats with POVL were
hanging off the table) but should be prevented by care
reviewed (Stiles et al., 20l2). Three cats had suffered
with positioning and padding during anaesthesia. There
cardiac arrests and the blindness was presumed due to
are anecdotal reports of tongue paralysis in dogs, presum-
-euo ue Aa paexa aiam sie iuaia 'eixodu eiqaia
ably due to excessive traction during intubation or posi-
mologist who characterized the blindness as cortical in
tioning that causes occlusion of the lingual artery and
origin, based on normal size pupils, normal direct and
ischaemia for a period of time.
 indirect pupillary light reflexes, positive dazzle reflex, neg-
ative menace response, and lack of ocular lesions. Many
Visual loss
of the cats had received acepromazine and an opioid,
buprenorphine, butorphanol, oxymorphone, or hydro-
Loss of vision after anaesthesia is rare but occurs in
 morphone, for premedication, anaesthesia was induced
humans and animals. In human patients, the most
 with propofol in 14 cats and, except for two cats that suf-
common causes of perioperative visual loss (POVL) are 
 fered cardiac arrest immediately, anaesthesia was main-
retinal artery occlusion (RAO) and ischaemic optic neu-
tained with isoflurane/O. The earliest recovery of vision
ropathy (ION) associated with a wide variety of proce-
was 1 day and the longest 6 weeks (average 4.5 days) in
dures but commonly cardiothoracic surgery, spine, head
 1l cats that were monitored regularly, but vision improved
-iso aud u u si uad a aaum ans yau pue
 over several months in all cats. Seventeen cats had addi-
tion (Roth, 2009). Retinal ischaemia may result 
tfrom
tional neurological abnormalities after recovery from
 Occlusion of the central retinal artery due to external com-
 anaesthesia and 59% of 17 cats with follow-up records
pression of the eye from improper patient positioning.
 recovered fully; one cat was euthanized because of neuro-
including use of a horseshoe headrest where the head is
logical abnormalities. Excluding the cats with cardiac
moved during surgery and the eye becomes compressed.
arrest, 13 cats were undergoing dentistry and four were
This results in unilateral partial or complete loss of vision.
 anaesthetized for endoscopy. and of these a spring-held
Occlusion of a branch of the central retinal artery has been
 mouth gag was inserted in all but one cat The authors
associated with emboli created during cardiopulmonary
were unable to prove by dissection of cadavers that the
641
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
open-mouth position limited blood flow in the maxillary
artery and to the brain, but postulated that the spring-held
cats. In Stiles et al. (2012), hypotension was measured in
mouth gag may be a risk factor for POVL. A recent scien-
seven cats and no blood pressure monitoring was per-
tifc presentation described imaging techniques identify-
formed on a further seven cats. Consequently, hypoten-
ing decreased maxillary artery blood flow in approximately
sion cannot be ruled out as a cause of cerebral hypoxia,
 50% of a group of anaesthetized cats when the mouth was
 especially if the cats were also hypercarbic. Blood pressure
maximally opened using a spring-loaded mouth gag
 monitoring and appropriate response to abnormal meas-
(Barton-Lamb et al., 20l2). All the cats recovered unevent-
wrements should be an integral part of patient manage-
fully from anaesthesia. The anaesthetic combination of
ment during inhalation anaesthesia.
REFERENCES
Aarnes, T.K., Bednarski, R.M., Lerche, P.
'restrictive' perioperative fluid
not affect minimum alveolar
et al., 2009. Effect of intravenous
therapy - a critical assessment of the
anesthetic concentration. Anesth
administration of lactated Ringer's
evidence. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
Analg 102, 779-785.
solution or hetastarch for the
53, 843-851.
Crandell, D.E., Weinberg, G.L., 2009.
treatment of isoflurane-induced
Candela, D., Louart, G., Bousquet, J.-P.,
Moxidectin toxicosis in a puppy
hypotension in dogs. Am J Vet Res
et al., 2010. Reversal of bupivacaine-
successfully treated with intravenous
70, 1345-1353.
induced cardiac electrophysiologic
lipids. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19,
Armitage-Chan, E., 2010. Anaphylaxis
changes by two lipid emulsions in
181-186.
 and anaesthesia. Vet Anaesth Analg
anesthetized and mechanically
da Costa, R.C., Parent, J.M.,
37, 306-310.
ventilated piglets. Anesth Analg 110,
Dobson, H., 2011. Incidence of and
Ball, M.A., Trim, C.M., 1996. Post
1473-1479
risk factors for seizures after
 anaesthetic pulmonary oedema in
Carr, A.P., Tilley, L.P., Miller, M.S., 2001.
myelography performed with iohexol
two horses. Equine Vet Educ 8.
Treatment of cardiac arrhythmias
in dogs: 503 cases [2002-2004]. ]
13-16.
and conduction disturbances. In:
Am Vet Med Assoc 238, 1296-1300.
Barros, J.M.P., de Nascimento, P.,
Tilley, L.P., Goodwin, I.-K. (Eds.],
Derksen, F.J., Olszewski, M.A.
Marinello, J.L.P., et al., 2011. The
Manual of Canine and Feline
Robinson, N.E., et al., 1999.
 effects of 6% hydroxyethyl starch-
Cardiology. W. B. Saunders, Co.
Aerosolized albuterol sulfate used as
hypertonic saline in resuscitation of
Philadelphia, pp. 371-405.
a bronchodilator in horses with
dogs with hemorrhagic shock.
Carroll, G.L., Matthews, N.S.,
recurrent airway obstruction. Am ↓
Anesth Analg 112, 395-404.
Hartsfeld, S.M., et al., 1997. The
Vet Res 60, 689-693.
Barton-Lamb, A., Martin-Flores, M.,
effect of detomidine and its
Di Concetto, S., Archer, R.M.,
Ludders, l., et al., 2012. Evaluation
antagonism with tolazoline on
Sigurdsson, S.F, et al., 2007.
of maxillary arterial flow in cats with
 stress-related hormones, metabolites.
Atipamezole in the management of
and without use of a spring loaded
physiologic responses, and behavior
detomidine overdose in a pony. Vet
dental mouth gag. In Proceedings of
in awake ponies. Vet Surg 26, 69-77.
Anaesth Analg 34, 67-69.
18th IVEECS Symposium, San
Cave, G., Harvey, M., Graundins, A..
Duprat, F., Lesage, F., Fink, M.P., et al..
Antonio, TX, USA, p. 721.
2011. Review article: Intravenous
1997. TASK, a human background Kt
Bertin, F.R., Ivester, K.M., Couetil, L.L.
lipid emulsion as an antidote: A
channel to sense external pH
 2011. Comparative efficacy of
summary of published human 
variations near physiological pH.
 inhaled albuterol between two
experience. Emerg Med Austral 23.
EMBO J16, 5464-5471.
hand-held delivery devices in horses
123-141.
Fernandez, A.L., Lee, J.A., Rahilly, L.,
with recurrent airway obstruction.
Chappell, D., Jacob, M.,
et al., 2011. The use of intravenous
Equine Vet J 43, 393-398.
Hoffmann-Kiefer, K., et al., 2008. A
lipid emulsion as an antidote in
Borer, K.E., 2005. Pulmonary oedema
rational approach to perioperative
veterinary toxicology. J Vet Emerg
 associated with anaesthesia for colic
fluid management. Anesthesiology
Crit Care 21, 309-320.
surgery in a horse. Vet Anaesth Analg
109,723-740.
Frithiof, R., Ramchandra, R.,
32.228-232.
Chohan, A.S., Greene, S.A., Grubb, T.L.
Hood, S.G., et al., 2011. Hypertonic
Boutureira, I., Trim, C.M., Cornell, K.K.,
et al., 2011. Effects of 6% hetastarch
sodium resuscitation after
2007. Acute pulmonary edema after
(G00/0.75) or lactated Ringer's
hemorrhage improves hemodynamic
diazepam-ketamine in a dog. Vet
solution on hemostatic variables and
function by stimulating cardiac, but
Anaesth Analg 34, 371-376.
 dinical bleeding in healthy dogs 
not renal, sympathetic nerve activity.
Buchner, H.H.F., Kubber, P,
 anesthetized for orthopedic surgery.
Am ↓ Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 300,
Zohmann, E., et al., 1999. Sedation
Vet Anaesth Analg 38, 94-105.
H685-H692
and antisedation as tools in equine
Cotten, J.F., Keshavaprasad, B.,
Geissler, H.J., Allen, S.J., Mehihorn, U.,
lameness examination. Equine Vet J
Laster, M.J., et al., 2006. The
et al., 1997. Effect of body
Suppl 30, 227-230.
ventilatory stimulant doxapram
repositioning after venous air
Bundgaard-Nielsen, M., Secher, N.H.,
inhibits TASK tandem pore [K2P]
embolism. Anesthesiology 86.
Kehlet, H., 2009. 'Liberal' vs.
 potassium channel function but does
710-717.
642
Complications
Chapter
21
Gunew, M., Marshall, R., Lui, M., et al.
Kollias-Baker, C.A., Pipers, F.S.,
via blood withdrawal in isoflurane-
2008. Fatal venous air embolism in 
Heard, D.l., et al., 1993. Pulmonary
anesthetized dogs. Am I Vet Res 65.
a cat undergoing dental extractions. J
edema associated with transient
1189-1194.
Small Anim Pract 49, 601 -604.
airway obstruction in three horses.
Mulkey, D.K., Talley, E.M.,
Gunkel, C.l., Valverde, A.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 202.
Stornetta, R.L., et al., 2007. TASK
Robertson, S.A., et al., 2004.
1116-1118.
channels determine pH sensitivity in
Treatment for a severe reaction to
Lansdorp. B., Lemson, I.-
select respiratory neurons but do not
intravenous administration of
van Putten, M.J.A.M., et al., 2012.
contribute to central respiratory
diatrizoate in an anesthetized horse.
 Dynamic indices do not predict
chemosensitivity. I Neurosci 27,
JAm Vet Med Assoc 224, 1143-1146.
volume responsiveness in routine
14049-14058
Holbrook, T.C., Dechant, J.E.,
dinical practice. Br J Anaesth 108,
Niemi, T.T., Miyashita, R..
Crowson, C.L., 2007. Suspected air
395-401.
Yamakage, M., 2010. Colloid
embolism asssociated with post-
Leemans, I., Kirschvink, N., Bernaerts, F.
solutions: a clinical update. J Anesth
anesthetic pulmonary edema and
et al., 2009. A pilot study comparing
24,913-925
neurologic sequelae in a horse. Vet
the antispasmodic effects of inhaled
O'Brien, T.Q, Clark-Price, S.C.
Anaesth Analg 34, 217-222.
salmeterol, salbutamol and
Evans, E.E., et al., 2010. Infusion of a
Honnas, C.M., 1999. Principles of
ipratropium bromide using different
lipid emulsion to treat lidocaine
emergency respiratory therapy. In:
aerosol devices on muscarinic
intoxication in a cat. I Am Vet Med
Colahan, PT., Mayhew, I.G.
bronchoconstriction in healthy cats.
Assoc 237, 1455-1458.
Merritt, A.M., Moore, J.N. (Eds.),
Vet ↓ 180, 236-245.
Olsen, L., Ingvast-Larsson, C.,
 Equine Medicine and Surgery.
Litonius, E., Tarkkila, P., Neuvonen, P.J.,
Brostrom, H., et al., 2007. Clinical
Vol f. Mosby, Inc, St Louis,
et al., 2012. Effect of intravenous
signs and etiology of adverse
pp. 458-460.
lipid emulsion on bupivacaine
reactions to procaine
Hsu, W.H., 2008a. Appendix 2. In:
 plasma concentration in humans.
benzylpenicillin and sodium/
Hsu, W.H. (Ed.), Handbook of
Anaesthesia 67, 600-605.
potassium benzylpenicillin in horses.
Veterinary Pharmacology Wiley-
Lumb, w.V, Jones, E.w, 1984.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 30, 201-207.
Veterinary Anesthesia. Lea & Febiger.
Padrid, P., 2006. Use of inhaled
Hsu, W.H., 2008b. Chapter 2. In:
Philadelphia.
medications to treat respiratory
Hsu, W.H. (Ed.), Handbook of
Mauch, I., Jurado, O.M., Spielmann, N.,.
diseases in dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Veterinary Pharmacology. Wiley-
et al., 2011. Comparison of
Hosp Assoc 42, 165-169.
Blackwell, Ames, pp. 29-58.
epinephrine vs lipid rescue to treat
Pantaleon, L.G., Furr, M.O.,
Hubbell, J.A.E., Muir, W.W., 2006.
severe local anesthetic toxicity - an
McKenzie ll, H.C., et al., 2006.
 Antagonism of detomidine sedation
experimental study in piglets. Ped
Cardiovascular and pulmonary
 in the horse using intravenous
Anesth 21, 1103-1108.
effects of hetastarch plus hypertonic
tolazoline or atipamezole. Equine
Michard, F, Biais, M., 2012. Rational
saline solutions during experimental
Vet ↓ 38, 238-241
fluid management: dissecting facts
endotoxemia in anesthetized horses.
Hubbell, J.A.E., Muir, W.W.,
from fiction. Br J Anaesth 108.
J Vet Intern Med 20, 1422-1428.
Robertson, J.T., et al., 1987.
369-371.
Papadopoulou, A., willers, I.w..
Cardiovascular effects of intravenous
Mirski, M.A., Lele, A.V., Fitzsimmons, L.,
Samuels, T.L., et al., 2012. The use of
sodium penicillin, sodium cefazolin,
et al., 2007. Diagnosis and treatment
dye surrogates to illustrate local 
and sodium citrate in awake and
of vascular air embolism.
anesthetic drug sequestration by
anesthetized horses. Vet Surg 16.
Anesthesiology 106, 164-177.
lipid emulsion: a visual
245-250.
Moon, PF., Bliss, S.P., Posner, L.P., et al..
demonstration of the lipid sink
Kehlet, H., Bundgaard-Nielsen, M.,
 2001. Fetal oxygen content is
effect. Reg Anesth Pain Med 37.
2009. Goal-directed perioperative
 restored after maternal hemorrhage
183-187.
fluid management. Anesthesiology
and fluid replacement, but not with
Pawloski, D.R., Broaddus, K.D., 2010.
110.453-455.
hetastarch, in pregnant sheep.
Pneumothorax: A review. J Am Anim
Kien, N.D., Kramer, G.C., White, D.A..
Anesth Analg 93, 142-150.
Hosp Assoc 46, 385-397.
1991. Acute hypotension caused by
Moore, J.N., White, N.A., Trim, C.M..
Physick-Sheard, PW., 1999.
rapid hypertonic saline infusion in 
et al., 1980. Effect of intraluminal
Cardiovascular system:
 anesthetized dogs. Anesth Analg 73.
oxygen in intestinal strangulation
 Pathophysiology and principles of
597-602.
obstruction in ponies. Am J Vet Res
therapy In: Colahan, PT.
Kimberger, O., Arnberger, M., Brandt, S.,
41, 1615-1620.
Mayhew, I.G., Merritt, A.M.,
et al., 2009. Microcirculation of
Moore, L.E., Garvey, M.S., 1996. The
Moore, J.N. (Eds.), Equine Medicine
 healthy and perianastomotic colon.
effect of hetastarch on serum colloid
and Surgery, Vol. 1. Mosby, St Louis.
Anesthesiology 110, 496-504.
oncotic pressure in
pp. 337-380.
Kimberger, O., Fleischmann, E.,
hypoalbuminemic dogs. J Vet Intern
Picard, I., Meek, T., 2006. Lipid
Brandt, S., et al., 2007. Supplemental
Med 10, 300-303.
emulsion to treat overdose of local
oxygen, but not supplemental
Muir, w.w. Ill, 2004. Comparison of
anaesthetic: the gift of the glob.
Cystalloid fluid, increases tissue
lactated Ringer's solution and a
Anaesthesia 61, 107-109.
Oxygen tension in healthy and
physiologically balanced 6%
Rafe, A.D., Rath, PA., Michell, M.W.
anastomotic colon in pigs. Anesth
hetastarch plasma expander for the
et al., 2004. Hypotensive
Analg 105, 773-779.
 treatment of hypotension induced
resuscitation of multiple
643
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
hemorrhages using crystalloid and
Teixeira Neto, F.l., Luna, S.P., Cruz,
Waddell, L.S., 2010. Systemic
colloids. Shock 22, 262-269.
M.A., et al., 2007. A study of the
anaphylaxis. In: Ettinger, S.J. &
Reid, F., Lobo, D.N., williams, R.N..
effect of hemorrhage on the
Feldman, E.C. (Eds.), Textbook of
et al., 2011. (Abjnormal saline and
ardiorespiratory actions of
Veterinary Internal Medicine, Vol. 1.
physiological Hartmann's solution: a
halothane, isoflurane and
Saunders Elsevier, St Louis.
randomized double-blind crossover
sevoflurane in the dog. Vet Anaesth
pp. 531-537.
study. Clin Sci 104, 17-24.
Analg 34, 107-116.
Walsh, V.P., Machon, R.G., Munday, J.S.,
Robertson, S.A., Bailey, J.E., 2002.
Togioka, B., Galvagno, S., Sumida, S..
et al., 2005. Suspected fatal air
Aerosolized salbutamol (albuterol]
et al., 2012. The role of perioperative
embolism during anaesthesia in a
improves PaOg in hypoxaemic
high inspired oxygen therapy in
Pomeranian dog with pulmonary
 anaesthetized horses - a prospective
reducing surgical site infection: A
calcifcation. N Z Vet J 53, 359-362.
dinical trial in 81 horses. Vet
meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 114,
Weinberg, G., Warren, L., 2012. Lipid
Anaesth Analg 29, 212-218.
334-342.
resuscitation: Listening to our
Robinson, R., Schwendenwein, I..
Tollofsrud, S., Elgjo, G.l., Prough, D.S.,
patients and learning from our
Wacek, S., et al., 2011. Plasma
et al., 2001. The dynamics of
models. Anesth Analg 114, 710-712.
volume and electrolyte changes
vascular volume and fluid shifts of
Weinberg, G., Ripper, R., Feinstein, D.L..
following intravenous infusion of
lactated Ringer's solution and
et al., 2003. Lipid emulsion infusion
hypertonic hydroxyethyl starch
hypertonic-saline-dextran solutions
rescues dogs from bupivacaine-
versus mannitol in healthy dogs. Vet
infused in normovolemic sheep.
induced cardiac toxicity. Reg Anesth
1190, 268-272.
Anesth Analg 93, 823-831.
Pain Med 28, 198-202.
Roth, S., 2009. Perioperative visual loss:
Udelsmann, A., Bonfm, M.R.
Wendt-Hornickle, E.L., Snyder, L.B.C.,
what do we know, what can we do?
Silva, W.A., et al., 2009.
Tang, R., et al., 2011. The effects of
Br J Anaesth 103 (Suppl 1), i31-i40.
Hemodynamic effect of volume
lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) or
Rush, J.E., Freeman, L.M.,
replacement with saline solution and
LRS and G% hetastarch on the
Fenollosa, N.K., et al., 2002.
hypertonic hydroxylethyl starch in
colloid osmotic pressure, total
Population and survival
dogs. Acta Cirurg Brasil 24, 87-92.
protein and osmolality in healthy
characteristics of cats with
Vallet, B., 2011. Intravascular volume
horses under general anesthesia. Vet
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 260
expansion: Which surrogate markers
Anaesth Analg 38, 336-343.
cases [1990-1999). J Am Vet Med
could help the clinician to assess
Wilkinson, K.A., Huey, K., Dinger, B..
Assoc 220, 202-207.
improved tissue perfusion? Anesth
et al., 2010. Chronic hypoxia
Silverstein, D.C., Aldrich, IJ.
Analg 112, 258-259.
increases the gain of the hypoxic
Haskins, S.C., et al., 2005.
Van der Linde-Sipman, IS..
 yentilatory response by a mechanism
 Assessment of changes in blood
Hellebrekers, L.l., Lagerwey, E., 1992.
 in the central nervous system. J Appl
volume in response to resuscitative
Myocardial damage in cats that died
Physiol 109, 424-430.
fluid administration in dogs. J Vet
after anaesthesia. Vet Quart 15.
Wilson, D.V., Rondenay. Y., Shance, P.U.,
Emerg Crit Care 15, 185-192.
91-94.
2003. The cardiopulmonary effects of
Stafferi, F., Lacitignola, L., De Siena, R..
van Dijk, P, Lankveld, D.P.K.
severe blood loss in anesthetized
et al., 2007. A case of spontaneous
Rijkenhuizen, A.B.M., et al., 2003.
horses. Vet Anaesth Analg 30, 81-87.
wnous embolism with carbon
Hormonal, metabolic and
Woodcock, T.E., Woodcock, T.M., 2012.
dioxide during laparoscopic surgery
physiological effects of laparoscopic
Revised Starling equation and the
 in a pig. Vet Anaesth Analg 34,
surgery using a detomidine-
glycocalyx model of transvascular
63-66.
buprenorphine combination in
fluid exchange: an improved
 Stegmann, F.G., 2000. Hypoxaemia and
standing horses. Vet Anaesth Analg
paradigm for prescribing intravenous
suspected pulmonary oedema in a
30, 72-80.
fluid therapy. Br J Anaesth 108.
Dorper ewe after diazepam-ketamine
Varadhan, K.K., Lobo, D.N., 2010.
384-394
induction of anaesthesia. J S Afr Vet
A meta-analysis of randomised
Wright, B.D., Hopkins, A., 2008.
Assoc 71, 64-65.
controlled trials of intravenous fluid
Changes in colloid osmotic pressure
Stiles, I., Weil, A.B., Packer, R.A., et al.,
therapy in major elective open
as a function of anesthesia and
2012. Post-anesthetic cortical
abdominal surgery: getting the
surgery in the presence and absence
blindness in cats: Twenty cases. Vet J
balance right. Proc Nutr Soc 69,
of isotonic fluid administration in
193, 367-373.
488-498.
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 282-288.
644
lapter
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Jennifer G. Adams
History and introduction 
645
Electrolyte abnormalities
663
Cerebral resuscitation
646
Therapeutic hypothermia
664
Prior to anaesthesia
647
Post resuscitation
664
Causes of cardiac arrest/risk factors for
Summary and future therapies
665
anaesthetic mortality
647
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
protocol
648
Basic cardiac life support 'A-B-C'
650
HISTORY AND INTRODUCTION
'A & B' - airway and breathing
650
'C' - Circulation - cardiac compressions
651
Organized efforts to promote resuscitation began centu-
ries ago. The Dutch Humane Society and the Royal
Internal cardiac compressions
653
Humane Society were both founded in the 1700s in
'D' - advanced cardiac life support
654
Amsterdam and London, respectively. after realizing
Cardiac arrest rhythms and electrical
that drowned or otherwise injured individuals could be
shock
654
revived (Stermbach et al., 2005; Cooper et al., 2006). These
The CPCR algorithm
654
-uay siu oi se qnd au uauua on nunos sno
enon and to teach the techniques necessary for resuscita-
Defibrillation 
658
tion. By the 1950s, concerted efforts to educate the lay
Large animal resuscitation
658
public in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) techniques
Monitoring during CPCR
659
were underway. Currently. CPR classes are offered by
numerous local and national agencies or institutions and
Medical therapies for cardiac arrest
660
 many, many lay people have been trained in resuscitation
Routes of administration
660
techniques of humans. With the development of the auto-
Vasopressors
660
mated external defibrillator (AED). bystander CPR' has
Anti-arrhythmic medication
661
become a signifcant factor in saving the lives of humans
Atropine
661
in cardiac arrest. In fact AEDs are readily available in
many public places, for example, the Hartsfield-Jackson
Amiodarone
661
International Airport in Atlanta, Georgia has more than
Lidocaine
661
200 portable AEDs positioned throughout the facility
Other medication or therapy
661
(www.atlantaairport.com). CPR techniques for animals
 Fluid therapy
661
are published and available to pet owners in print form
Sodium bicarbonate
and on the Internet at numerous websites sponsored by
662
pet rescue groups, pet care organizations, and veterinari-
Mannitol
662
ans. Classes in 'pet CPR' are also available from many
Glucose
662
sources.
@2014 Elsevier Ltd
645
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
A report by Beecher and Todd published in 1954 reported
via the basic elements of CPR, such as timely recognition
an anaesthetic mortality of 1:2680 in humans following
 of arrest, inmmediate institution of effective CPR resulting
examination of the anaesthetic records of almost 600 000
in ROSC, and prevention of systemic complications in the
cases at l0 institutions over a 5-year period.
 post-arrest period. Attention to specifc techniques such
a s s eise  se a
as using continuous cardiac compressions and avoiding
decreased in humans; one report states that death is
pauses may allow improved neurological outcome.
expected to occur no more often than 1 in 200 200 cases
Optimal post-resuscitation therapy is important to mini-
(0.0005%) involving healthy patients (Eichhorn, 1989):
mize the damage that occurs following reperfusion of the
another reports 1:13000 (0.008%) when all cases are
ischaemic brain. Homeostatic parameters such as blood
considered (Lagasse, 2002). Veterinary anaesthetic mortal-
pressure acid-base status, electrolytes, blood gases,
ity rates have also improved since the 1950s, but are still
glucose, should be maintained in the normal range. Treat-
much higher than humans. Rates of 1:555 (0.18%) in
ment to decrease neuronal death and improve cerebral
aqo1g) sie Ayiey u! (% 9z'o) 58e:1 'ssop Ayey
function such as therapeutic hypothermia has already been
et al., 2008), and 1:1ll (0.9%) (Johnston et al., 2002)
adopted; others are now being examined, including neu-
s  (007 1 ) (0) 051:1 0
ronal cell growth promotion, inhibition of reperfusion
(excluding colic surgery) are reported most recently. In
 injury and neuronal apoptosis. Clinical signs, electrophysi-
spite of advances in techniques and treatments and wide-
ological testing, diagnostic imaging, and measurement of
 spread training in cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
neuron-specific proteins in serum are used to evaluate
(CPCR), the overall success rate following CPCR attempts
cerebral function and estimate a prognosis following resus-
is still poor in both humans and animals; 17.6% of inpa-
citation (Schneider et al., 2009).
tients and 6.4% of outpatients survived cardiac arrest when
The science behind CPCR techniques has been periodi-
the results of three human studies were combined (Cooper
cally evaluated by The International Liaison Committee on
et al., 2006). A recent study of survival following CPCR at
Resuscitation (ILCOR). This group was formed in 1992 to
represent a consortium of scientists working in the resus-
requiring CPCR at admission survived. It also found that
citation and critical care fields. It presently includes groups
only 6% (12/204) of all dogs and cats experiencing
from the six major continents. The purpose of ILCOR is to
in-hospital cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) survived to dis-
identify information relevant to resuscitation, emergency
charge (Hofmeister et al., 2009). This is similar to an
and critical care medicine, perform an evidence-based
earlier review of CPA in hospitalized patients where only
review of this information, and develop a consensus of
4. 1% of dogs and 9.6% ofcats survived to discharge (Wing-
 guidelines based on the strength of the scientific evidence.
field & Van Pelt, 1992). When patients experience cardiac
In
cooperation with the American Heart Association,
arrest under anaesthesia, the % return of spontaneous
ILCOR produced the first International CPR Guidelines in
circulation (ROSC) and survival to discharge from hospital
2000 and an Intermational Consensus on CPR and Emer-
is usually much higher. In Hofmeister et al. (2009), nine
 gency and Critical Care (ECC) Science with Treatment
of the 12 (75%) animals that survived were anaesthetized
Recommendations in 2005, published in the journals Cir-
at the time CPA occurred; the only survivors of CPA [4/135)
culation and Resuscitation. The group currently meets bian-
in a 4-year period at another veterinary teaching hospital
suau siea s aaaa saepdn ysqnd o sueue lenu
had been under anaesthesia when arrest occurred [Kass &
recent reviews were published in October and November
Haskins, 1992). Even though the outcome of anaesthesia-
2010, and can be obtained at the ILCOR website,
related CPA may be better, successful CPCR is certainly not
www.ilcor.org/en/home/. Although the purpose of ILCOR 
always likely; thus prevention of CPA is the best course.
is to define best practices for humans, much of the research
 is performed in anaesthetized animals, especially dogs and
swine, and is potentially applicable to veterinary medicine.
 Since animals used in research are generally healthy, some
CEREBRAL RESUSCITATION
u asn aie suuy as uaum aaa lm snua
clinical populations. Plunkett and McMichael (2008) pub-
Outcome measures in CPR studies originally focused on
lished a very thorough update of CPCR in small animals
the return of spontaneous circulation and hospital dis-
based on the 2005 ILCOR guidelines.
charge of patients. However, the number of patients with
Most recently, an extensive review of the literature as it
ROSC is much greater than those that actually survive to
specifically pertains to resuscitation of small animal vet-
be discharged with normal or minimal neurological dys-
erinary patients was conducted by a group of 10l veterinar-
function. Hence, more emphasis is now placed on neuro-
ians, specialists in internal medicine anaesthesia, and
logical outcome, long-term survival, and quality of life post
critical care The investigation was conducted very simi-
cardiac arrest. The acronym was changed to CPCR to reflect
larly to the protocol used by the ILCOR group. They devel-
this emphasis. Return of effective cerebral circulation
begins with re-establishment of cardiopulmonary function
animals and explored the literature for evidence. From
646
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
their efforts, called the Reassessment Campaign on Veteri-
nary Resuscitation (RECOVER) initiative, a set of consen-
Table 22.1 Causes of respiratory or cardiac
dysfunction that may lead to arrest
sus guidelines for CPCR in dogs and cats was published
in a supplement to the Jounal of Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care (2012) (see suggested reading) and is availa-
Respiratory
Cardiac
ble at www. veccs.org or www.onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Hypoxaemia
Hypoxaemia
Hypocarbia/hypercarbia
 Hypercarbia
 Non-respiratory acidosis
 Non-respira tory acidosis
Hypothermia
Hypothermia
PRIOR TO ANAESTHESIA
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia
 Electrolyte abnormalities
 Electrolyte abnormalities
Airway problerms
Hypotension
The prevention of anaesthetic complications including
Endotracheal tube obstructed
 Hypovolaemia
cardiac arrest begins prior to the anaesthetic episode. A
Endotracheal tube
Vasodilation
thorough preanaesthetic evaluation including physical
 malpositioned
 Decreased cardiac output
examination,
laboratory
evaluation, and diagnostics
 Anatomical airway obstruction
 Poor cardiac contractility
 appropriate to the patient and problems present is vital to
Anaesthesia ma chine problems
Cardiac arrhythmias
Breathing hoses obstructed
 Decreased venous return
identify pertinent risk factors. A discussion of the anaes-
No oxygen or wrong gas
thetic plan and potential complications for each case
Anaphylaxis
Medication errors
 Medication errors
should take place preoperatively between all members of
Overdose, incorrect dose
 Overdose, incorrect dose
the anaesthesia staff. All equipment, drugs, and supplies
IelA Jo bnup buoM
IelA Jo bnup buoM
required for treatment of anaesthetic complications
 Drug intera ction
 Drug interaction 
should be conveniently within reach of the anaesthetized
 Surgical error/event
 Surgical error/event
patient at all times. Those specific to CPCR should be
immediately available; standard doses of epinephrine and
hypotension, hypovolaemia, cardiac arrhythmia, hypo-
atropine should be calculated and even drawn up prior to
thermia, anaesthesia machine or equipment malfunction,
induction for specifc cases or patients [i.e. birds, small
drug interactions or overdose, and anaphylaxis are the
mammals, very small dogs and cats, severely ill patients).
most common precipitating causes (Table 22.1). These can
 Reference charts with the CPCR protocol and ermergency
be associated with or directly the result of the patient's
dnug dosages should be posted in anaesthesia and surgery
condition, anaesthesia, or surgery. Occasionally, events
areas. All staff potentially involved in performance of
Occur that are not preventable. The classic clinical signs of
CPCR should have formal training. Since cardiac arrest is
cardiac arrest are loss of a palpable pulse, lack of heart
not a common event practice sessions of CPCR tech-
sounds with auscultation, cyanotic mucous membranes
niques should be performed on a regular basis. Review of
[except in sudden arrest where mucous membranes remain
the team's performance following resuscitation events can
pink for a few minutes), apnoea, pupillary dilation, and
identify deficiencies and improve outcome of subsequent
lack of bleeding from surgical incisions. Other signs
cases. Finally, phone numbers for immediate contact with
includevery slow capillary refill time, and loss of the palpe.
 Owners should be available and resuscitation status should
bral reflex. Although it often seems to happen quite sud-
be determined from discussions with the owner at admis-
 denly, some cases of arrest involve more than one problem.
sion. This should be documented in the patient record,
developing over the course of the anaesthetic episode.
saloganes pasassns lleis/ase sjualed aut uo paisod pue
nno semie iou Ae suais leia ui saueuo uapns
are: (1) do not attempt resuscitation (DNAR); (2) resusci-
prior to an arrest. Clinical signs that should prompt the
tation efforts limited to external compressions and medical
anaesthetist to be suspicious of an impending arrest
therapy: and (3) unlimited efforts including internal
include gradually decreasing or increasing heart rate, con-
cardiac compressions (Rieser, 2000).
tinuing change in the mucous membrane colour, capillary
refill time, pupil size, or ocular responses, frequent prema-
ture contractions, frequent atrioventricular heart block,
decreasing end-tidal CO2 levels, decreasing or increasing
CAUSES OF CARDIAC ARREST/RISK
temperature, slower respiratory rates, and very irregular or
FACTORS FOR ANAESTHETIC
gasping respiratory patterns.
 Hypoventilation and the resulting hypercarbia produce
MORTALITY
clinical signs that may mimic a 'light' depth of anaesthesia
 as rapid deep breaths may occur (Kussmaul respiratory
The immediate cause of cardiac arrest under anaesthesia is
pattern); limb motion, muscular twitching. tachycardia,
always associated with respiratory and/or cardiac insuffi-
and hypertension may also be seen. This may mislead the
jo uounysp u snsan Aiiei uaxo jo yoel se ua
 anaesthetist into giving more drugs, further exacerbating
brain and myocardial cells. Hypoxaemia, hypoventilation,
respiratory insuffciency. Unusual respiratory patterns seen
647
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
with some anaesthetic agents (Biot's, apneustic with keta-
Although cardiac arrest or situations that could lead to
mine) may also be confusing as deep or rapid ventilations
arrest may be anticipated more often in more critical
may occur. Short periods of apnoea are not unusual espe-
patients, healthy patients may suffer as well when atten-
cially following induction of anaesthesia. Overdose of
tion to monitoring is less vigilant. Anaesthetic errors per-
anaesthetics results in prolonged periods of apnoea and a
Cheyne-Stokes type of abnormal respiratory pattern in
death include lack of monitoring, inattention to monitor-
which breaths gradually increase and then decrease in
ing. lack of experience or knowledge, failure to treat
depth. This pattern is seen when cerebral blood flow (CBF)
complications such as hypotension or hypoventilation
is decreased and the respiratory centre becomes ischaemic
 correctly, inadequate supervision, lack of communication,
[Muir & Hubbell, 2009). Cardiac arrest may be associated
medication errors, and fatigue [Arbous et al., 200l, 2005;
with specific types of patients or procedures, and at specifc
Johnston et al., 2002; Brodbelt, 2009). Medication errors
times during a procedure Induction, intubation, extuba-
such as overdose, incorrect choice of drug, improper route
tion, during repositioning or movement onto or off trans-
 of administration, selection of the wrong syringe or vial,
port carts/surgery tables, and during transport to other
and incorrect labelling have resulted in mortality and
areas of hospital are times when conditions that could
severe morbidity (Abeysekera et al., 2005).
quickly lead to arrest are perhaps more likely to occur and
Risk of mortality associated with anaesthetic monitor-
be unnoticed. Repositioning under anaesthesia, especially
ing has been evaluated in many studies (Table 22.2). The
from lateral to dorsal or to the opposite lateral can result in
presence of a technician to monitor the patient, the pres-
'sop arel 'seue aie ui uotsuoy araas uappns
ence of experienced staff, and the use of full time staff have
and heavily pregnant females of any species, and patients
been associated with decreased risk of anaesthetic mortal-
with distension of the gastrointestinal tract or abdominal
ity in veterinary and human medicine. Use of documented
masses. However, small patients are not immune to
equipment checklists, monitoring the pulse, and the use
problems during repositioning and even a cat may arrest
 of pulse oximetry have also been associated with decreased
immediately following a change from lateral to sternal
risk of anaesthetic death. Lack of appropriate monitoring
recumbency. Dislodgement or kinking of the endotracheal
of patients during maintenance and recovery has been
tube, especially in small size patients, may also develop
associated with increased anaesthetic mortality in humans.
during repositioning. Risk of an unnoticed complication is
Veterinary studies have recently identified the recovery
increased when monitoring of anaesthetic depth is discon-
period as a factor with the deaths of 50% of dogs, and
tinued or decreased during the process of repositioning.
>60% of cats and rabbits, occurring postanaesthesia, espe-
Some procedures may unexpectedly lead to arrest.
cially in the first 3 hours postoperatively. These findings
 Dental procedures and endoscopy of the upper airway or
differ from earlier studies, suggesting that while intraop-
Desophagus have inadvertently resulted in pneumothorax,
erative monitoring has improved, it should be continued
 pneumomediastinum, and venous air embolism (Mitchell
into the postoperative period (Arbous et al., 200l, 2005;
et al., 2000; Gunew et al., 2008; Ober et al., 2006). Lacera-
Brodbelt et al., 2008; Brodbelt 2009).
tion of a vein during limb amputation in patients breath-
Older patients, sicker patients, emergency procedures.
ing spontaneously and loss of the injection cap from a
procedures of long duration, more complex procedures,
jugular catheter in horses can also result in venous air
and timing of procedures after hours and on weekends
embolism. Insertion of central venous catheters and intra-
have also been consistently found to be associated with
ventricular pacemaker leads can stimulate cardiac arrhyth-
 greater perioperative mortality in small animals, horses.
mias, cause haemothorax or pneumothorax, and rarely.
and humans (Tiret et al., 1986; Gaynor et al., 1999;
cardiac tamponade (Domino et al., 2004; Wess et al.
Johnston et al., 2002: Arbous et al., 2005: Lienhart et al.,
2006). Injection of contrast media or local anaesthetic
2006; Brodbelt, 2009)
intravenously or into the epidural or subarachnoid space
Consistent and thorough monitoring in all patients and
an result in bradycardia, hypotension, and respiratory
anticipation of potential problems in patients and situa-
and/or cardiac arrest [Iff & Moens, 2008; Mosing et al.,
tions with higher risk throughout the anaesthetic episode
2008). Ophthalmic and gastrointestinal (Gl) procedures
and recovery period will minimize the incidence of CPA
involving stimulation of parasympathetic nerves via the
 and potentially improve outcome if an arrest occurs.
Oculo-cardiac reflex or from tension on abdominal organs
respectively, can cause bradycardia and arrest. Gl proce-
 dures may also cause hypotension when diseased or large
CARDIOPULMONARY CEREBRAL
organs or masses are manipulated or exteriorized. Tho-
RESUSCITATION PROTOCOL
racic surgery may stimulate arrhythmias and cause haem-
orrhage. Manipulation of adrenal, thyroid, or pancreatic
masses may also result in hypotension, hypertension, or
Once the heart has stopped, it cannot be actively restarted.
arrhythmia (Gross & Giuliano, 2007: Greene & Marks,
Since the cardiac pacemaker has inherent automaticity.
2007: Harvey & Schaer, 2007).
resuscitation efforts focus on therapies to improve
648
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
 Table 22.2 Risk factors for perioperative mortality in horses, small animals, and humans 
Risk factor
Increased risk
Risk factor
Decreased risk
Patient characteristics
Oldera
Anaesthetic technique
Injectable onlye
Sickera
Use of acepromazines
Very younga
Isoflurane (vs) halothanee
Very small
 Pain management postop"
Largera
Reversal of NMIB 
Some breeds brachycephalic, terriers, draft horses
Procedure
Inadequate preoperative prepa
Anaesthetic management
Pulse monitorings
Emergenciesa
 Pulse oximetryah
Complicated procedures?
Technician present
Longer dura tion?
Experienced staff
After hours or on weekendsa
Full time staffh
Anaesthetic management
Lack of monitoringa
Other
Checklistsh
IV fluids given
Documentation of checklist
Inhalant only usedd.! 
Endotracheal tube used
Use of xylazine
Use of romifidinee
sjewjue llews, ruewnyy sieot, auinba, ishop, isien, saipads lle
Arbous et al., 2001, 2005; Johnston et al., 2002; Brodbelt, 2009.
o sase syas e aea pe uisa Au
conversion. Medications used for ACLS include those for
arrest so that the cardiac pacemaker can restart on its own.
treatment of a primary cause, those which improve myo-
Successful outcome is dependent on the prior status of the
cardial perfusion to enable the heart to restart, and those
myocardium, the amount of damage that has occurred to
for treatment of intra- and post-resuscitation events Or
both the heart and the brain during the arrest, and the
 conditions. The CAB algorithm may not be as applicable to
quality of resuscitation efforts. Cerebral resuscitation is
veterinary anaesthesia since coronary artery disease is not
 now specifically considered in the protocol as neurological
 seen. Distinction between BCLS and ACLS may be prima-
status is considered to be a more important outcome
rily theoretical for veterinary medicine since most resuscita-
parameter than return of spontaneous or sustained circu-
tion events occur in hospital where access to medical
lation (ROSC).
 therapy and defibrillation is available. However, pet owners 
Resuscitation protocols for all patients follow theuniver-
are becoming increasingly educated in all aspects of their
sal 'A-B-C-D' algorithm that represents the major compo-
pets' health. Anecdotal reports of owner administered
nents of CPCR - the airway, breathing, circulation, and
BCLS exist and are only likely to become more common.
dnugs. Guidelines also divide the components of this algo-
-iaul payuapi uaaq sey uoenis Auaaiaa ue aouo
rithm into two major categories - Basic Cardiac Life
vention must be swift, as the duration of arrest prior to
Support (BCLS) and Advanced Cardiac Life
Support
both chest compressions and defibrillation is inversely
[ACLS), even though components of both may be used
related to the success of the return of spontaneous and/or
simultaneously. BCLS includes the initial steps of resuscita-
sustained circulation (ROSC) and survival (Fecho et al.
tion, the'A-B-C' portion ofthe algorithm, wherethe airway.
2009). Although CPCR is performed by available person-
breathing. and circulation are addressed. The patient is
nel, an ideal team includes experienced individuals
identifed as in respiratory and/or cardiac arrest, mouth to
responsible for the following duties:
mouth or nose ventilation may be given, and cardiac com-
pressions are initiated. ILCOR currently emphasizes the
1. A leader to direct resuscitation efforts and evaluate
response
of the high incidence of sudden cardiac arrest from coro-
 2. Cardiac compressions - more than one individual to
nary artery disease in humans, and is now using 'C-A-B' to
take turns
describe initial resuscitation events. Cardiac compressions
3. Ventilation of the patient, including placement of an
and defibrillation are considered more important to
endotracheal tube
outcome than medical therapy (ICCOR,
2010). ACLS
4.
 Draw up and administer dnugs
includes invasive airway control, cardiac rhythm identifica-
5.
 Monitors -
- electrocardiograph, Doppler on limb
tion, medical therapy. and electrical defibrillation or
 and/or cornea, capnography, oximetry
649
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
6. Vascular access - venous and arterial catheters
7. Recorder - events, medications, and time
8. Communication with owner (not the same as 1).
For both ethical and economic reasons, the decision to
perform resuscitation should be based on the patient's
'uasaid aseasip Areud aul on piesan ul sisouoid leiaao
the suspected cause of the arrest, and the wishes of the
owner. The financial and emotional costs of resuscitation
and post-arrest care can be extreme. Healthy anaesthetized
patients that develop a treatable arrhythmia might be
easily resuscitated, whereas a dog with severe damage from
a gastric volvulus, or a septic foal with uroperitoneum may
not be as good a candidate for resuscitation. Cases where
arrest is witnessed are also more likely to be successfully
resuscitated.
Figure 22.1 An Ambu bag being used in an anaesthetized
Basic cardiac life support 'A-B-C'
developed by the Ambu company in Denmark over 50 years
Once an arrest or near arrest situation has been identified
ago. It consists of a self-re-inflating bag and a non-
in an anaesthetized patient, the inhalant anaesthetic
rebreathing valve that can be used with a facemask or
vaporizer should be turned off and sedatives or opioids
directly connected to an endotracheal tube. Room air is most
should be reversed as soon as possible. A search for poten-
commonly used but a line can be attached for oxygen
tially reversible causes such as hypoxaemia, hypercarbia.
supplementation.
hypovolaemia, hypothermia, and metabolic or electrolyte
disturbances, should also be instituted as soon as possible.
This can be performed while the CPCR team assembles,
obstruction may require intubation via a tracheostomy. A
someone begins compressions, and others are gathering
few breaths and attention to the precipitating cause (such
supplies and drawing up emergency drugs.
as decreasing anaesthetic administration) may be all that
is needed if the patient has suffered a primary respiratory
'A & B' - airway and breathing
arrest that was witnessed or very quickly identifed. An
AMBU bag (Fig. 22.1), demand valve (Fig. 22.2), or anaes-
Patients under general anaesthesia are often already intu-
thesia machine can be used to provide ventilation. Room
bated and, in these cases, correct placement, size and
 air may suffice in some cases, but l0o% oxygen is recom-
patency of the endotracheal tube should be verified and
 mended if full cardiac arrest is present or resuscitation
corrected if necessary. Patients who have arrested at induc-
takes longer than a few minutes. Research and clinical
tion, in recovery, or elsewhere should be intubated as
investigations have shown that artifcial ventilation may
quickly as possible Use of a laryngoscope is recom-
not be necessary for the first few minutes in some cases,
mended, when appropriate for the species, to accomplish
the rate can be decreased from previous guidelines, and
intubation quickly and allow immediate confirmation of
that excessive ventilation can be harmful (Aufderheide
 correct placement. Other airway devices such as a laryngeal
et al., 2004; Nagao, 2009). However, when arrest is associ-
mask airway may be used only if the operator is proficient
 ated with asphyxia, as seen with trauma, drowning. or any
in their use. Orotracheal intubation in many veterinary
  aa 'e Asn  g 
species is usually not difficult. Proper placement of the
 is not witnessed and hypoxic conditions may have been
endotracheal tube should be confirmed using auscultation
present for several minutes, ventilation should be
of lung sounds, viewing the tube entering the larynx, and
provided immediately. Cardiac compression:ventilation
capnography. Capnography is a very reliable measure as
ratios of 15: 1 or 30:2 both provided adequate oxygena-
CO elimination is dependent on blood flow through the
tion and haemodynamic profiles with minimal interrup-
lungs. In patients with cardiac arrest, very low levels of
tion of compressions in a dog CPR study. and are
end-tidal COz (ETCO2) are usually encountered. Negligi-
recommended when enough people are present (Hwang
ble ETCO2 will be detected when the oesophagus has been
et al., 2008). Cardiac massage should not stop when
intubated. In rare instances, no waveform may register on
breaths are given or intubation is performed, and com-
the capnogram even though the endotracheal tube is cor-
pressions and ventilations should be performed simulta-
rectly placed, such as severe bronchospasm, severe pulmo-
neously. Once intubated, ventilations shoul d be performed
nary embolism, obstruction of the endotracheal tube, and
 in a consistent fashion at a regular rate Hyperventilation
the presence of a large leak around the endotracheal tube
and high peak inspiratory pressure must be avoided to
(Sanehi & Calder, 1999). Patients with upper airway
avoid compromise of venous return; 10-12 breaths per
650
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
minute is suggested for adult small animals, and 4-8 per
pressure should be ≤20 cmHzO in small animals, and
minute for adult large animal species. Respiratory rate can
20-30 cm HzO in adult large animals (Table 22.3)
be increased up to 20 per minute in neonates and very
(Plunkett & McMichael, 2008; Muir & Hubbell, 2009).
young animals. Inspirations should be as consistent as
 Doxapram increases ventilation by direct stimulation of
possible in duration and depth; approximately 1 second
the carotid chemoreceptors augmented by non-selective
is recommended for most patients. Peak inspiratory
stimulation of central nervous system (CNS) neurons. It
has been used to stimulate respiration and hasten recovery
in sedated and anaesthetized small animals and horses. It
 may be useful if other methods to achieve breathing are
not available, however, its effect is temporary. Ifthe primary
cause of respiratory arrest has not been corrected, apnoea
Or respiratory insufficiency will reoccur. Side effects of this
drug can be significant and include cardiac arrhythmias.
muscle fasciculation, seizures, increased oxygen require-
aa-ou ar q pae da pase pue 'a
 stimulation of the brain which results in increased sympa-
thetic outflow. It is not recommended when intubation is
possible and ventilation can be controlled.
 Use of stimulation at the Jen Chung acupuncture point
VG 26, at the nasal philtrum, is reported to stimulate
respiration (Janssens et al., 1979). Although this is a
simple and quick therapy, several minutes of stimulation
may be required to see results, the technique has not been
documented by experimental studies, and cardiac arrest
occurred in two cats following nasal stimulation [K.
Clarke, personal communication). Use of this technique
Figure 22.2 A demand valve being used in an anaesthetized
should not preclude efforts to identify the primary cause
horse. This is a manual resuscitation device that can be used
of respiratory arrest and initiate CPCR. It is not recom-
in small or large animals to control or assist ventilation. It has
mended by this author.
a one-way valve connected via a pressure hose directly to an
oxygen source. Flow of 100% oxygen is triggered by the
negative pressure created by inspiration or when a button on
'C' - circulation - cardiac
the device is pushed. Flow stops when the button is released
compressions
 or the patient pauses for expiration and the negative
pressure disappears. Expired gas is passively routed to the
 In anaesthetized patients, treatment of a precipitating
environment.
cause should be immediately instituted. Compressions
Table 22.3 Guidelines for ventilation during CPCR
Cardiac compression:ventilation ratios - 15: 1 or 30:2
If not intubated, use tight mask with room air or 100% Oz; or mouth to nose.
 Place ET tube and ventilate with room air or 100% Oz with AMBU bag, demand valve, anaesthesia machine.
Use 100% oxygen for prolonged arrest (> fev min)
Small animal
Large animal
Neonates, very young.
or very small
Respiratory rate
 5-10/min
 5-8/min 
Up to 20/min
 Inspiratory pressure
Max 20 cmH0
Up to 30 cmH0
Max 20 cmH0
 Duration 
 1 second
1-1.5 second
1 second
Confirm patent airway - view larynx, auscultation of lungs, COz monitoring.
Note: End-tidal COz is proportional to PBF when ventilation is consistent. No COz may be present in expired gas if asystole is present.
Do not stop compressions for intubation or ventilation.
PBF: pulmonary blood flow; ET: endotracheal tube. Plunkett & McMlichael, z008; Muir & Hubbell, 2009.
651
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
Figure 22.3 Body position and hand placement for external cardiac compressions in small animals.
should notbe delayed or interrupted toawait the outcome
recoil of the chest should be allowed between compres-
of any treatment. The quality of cardiac compressions has
sions to allow for maximal cardiac filling. In dogs and cats,
been shown to be associated with improved survival, so
rate of compressions should be 100-120 per minute. Com-
careful and consistent technique is important (Yu et al..
 pressions should continue with absolutely as few interrup-
2002; Ristagno et al., 2007).
tions as possible. When unavoidable, interruptions should
The arrested patient should be placed in right lateral
last<10 seconds. Compressions should continue following
recumbency on a firm surface The individual performing
electrical shock or medical therapy for at least 2 minutes
compressions should be positioned above the patient to
 as continued perfusion of the coronary circulation is neces-
optimize compression and recoil distance. In animals
sary for therapy to be effective. Even good compression
10-150 kg. the person's hands should be placed one on
technique produces only 20-25% of normal cardiac
top of the other at the widest part of the chest (Fig. 22.3).
Output in dogs. Coronary perfusion drops dramatically
Compressions should be performed as consistently as pos-
with cessation of compressions, and it then takes a few
sible and should depress the chest diameter at least
minutes for maximum coronary perfusion to return when
30-40%. The duration of the components of each com-
compressions are resumed. Performance of external com-
pression cycle should be approximately equal in duration,
pressions is tiring and multiple rescuers should take turns
ie. 50:50 active compression:passive recoil. Complete
at approximately 2-minute intervals (Box 22.1).
652
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
To accomplish effective compressions in adult horses
Box 22.1 Guidelines for cardiac compressions
and cows, the resuscitator must stand next to the ventral
during CPCR
aspect of the left chest and fall onto one or both knees on
the chest of the patient. The rate necessary to achieve
Place patient on firmm surface in right lateral
ROSC in horses is uncertain. Only one study has measured
recumbency
cardiac output in adult horses following cardiac arrest.
 Compressor should be positioned above patient;
Three minutes of external compressions at 40, 60, or 80
change compressor every 2 minutes
Jeipien aseiane aneiauag ol umous aiam arnuu iad san
80-100 compressions/minute for dogs: 100+ for cats
outputs of 5.65, 6.33. and 8.28 L/min (18-36 % of
 40-80 for large animals; land on chest with knees in
normal) respectively. enough to maintain temporarily
adults
coronary blood flow (Hubbell et al., 1993). The major
Compress chest 30% of chest diameter
emphasis of this study was to show that forward blood
Affow comprete recoil of chest between compressions
flow is possible with CPCR in adult horses. The faster heart
Perform compressions continuousty
rates are quite difficult to achieve with large horses and
 Avoid pauses; limit these to <10s
lower compression rates have been sufficient to result in
return of ROSC and survival of clinical patients. Further
 Continue for 2 min following medical therapy before
studies are needed to determine optimal cardiac compres-
checking ECG
sion rates for horses in cardiac arrest. The technique of
Hand placement for external cardiac
external compressions for adult horses is physically
compressions in small animals
demanding and will be most effective if several individuals
Medium/large dogs - One at widest part of chest, second 
are available to assist. Compressions in foals and calves
on top and parallel; use palms
7-10 kg - both hands over the apex of heart, 4th to 6th
to large dogs at rates of 60-80 times per minute.
intercostal space, or slightly dorsal to the
The cardiac pump and thoracic pump theories are expla-
costochondral junction 
nations proposed for the mechanisms of blood flow
>10 kg - place hands slightly more dorsal
Created by chest compressions. The cardiac pump theory
<7 kg - fingers only one side, thumb of same hand or
suggests that chest compressions compress the ventricles
fist of second hand on opposite side; avoid 
against the chest wall, increasing ventricular pressure,
 compressing with tips of fingers
which closes the atrioventricular valves and produces
 outflow from the heart. The thoracic pump theory main-
tains that the increase in intrathoracic pressure forces
blood out of the chest. Backward flow of blood into the
The use of interposed abdominal compressions was not
chest through the venous system is prevented by valves,
supported by the ILCOR 2005 guidelines. However, since
however, the atrioventricular valves do not participate in
then, some animal studies have shown improved out-
this mechanism and remain open. In both mechanisms.
comes with the use of abdominal compressions without
recoil between compressions allows flow of blood back
chest compressions. Using only rhythmic abdominal com-
 into the heart. The cardiac pump theory is likely possible
pressions provided effective circulation and ventilation in
 only in cats and small dogs. Since the thoracic pump
swine, and sustained abdominal compression has recently
ssn 'sie l u i is si usa
been shown to be advantageous as well, improving coro-
of a significant portion of the chest diameter (30-40%)
mary blood flow to the same degree as the use of vasopres-
and complete recoil between compressions is important
sors (Lottes et al., 2007: Pargett et al., 2008). The 2010
to optimize both venous return and cardiac output
guidelines now include a recommendation for interposed
(Cooper et al., 2006).
abdominal compressions with thoracic compressions in
adult humans when enough well-trained rescuers are
Internal cardiac compressions
 available. Use of this technique requires training and prac-
tice, and it has not been validated in veterinary patients.
Intermal cardiac compressions should be instituted as soon
Devices are available to enhance venous return or
as possible in resuscitation category 3 patients [unlimited
replace the human compressor. These provide consistent
efforts requested by owner) when external compressions
effects and avoid operator fatigue, and are used often in
are not successful. This is best initiated within 5 minutes
research models of CPR to standardize conditions. Since
of arrest For patients with haemoperitoneum, cardiac
the quality of the compressions performed generally out-
tamponade, extreme obesity, or disease of the thorax such
weighs the use of particular devices or techniques, it is best
that appropriate pressure cannot be generated (e.g. rib
to utilize techniques at which one is most skilled. Practice
fracture, pleural effusion, haemothorax, pneumothorax),
with any new technique is recommended before it is
only the internal technique will work. It should also be
added to the CPCR protocol.
used in patients with an open abdomen as access via an
859
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
incision through the diaphragm is readily available. For
abnormal with wide QRs-T waves but others may look
the thoracic approach (Haskins, 1992), the hair is clipped
normal or only somewhat abnormal with changes in the
over the ffth intercostal space, the skin is disinfected with
ST segment (Figure 22.5). Only ventricular fibrillation and
one swipe of antiseptic solution, an incision is made down
ventricular tachycardia are shockable rhythms. Since very
to the parietal pleura with a scalpel, the thorax is opened
fine ventricular fibrillation can be confused with asystole,
with a haemostat, and retractors may be placed if needed.
different leads should be examined to determine the exact
The pericardium may have to be opened to provide the
rhythm. Cardiac compressions should be used rather than
best cardiac compressions. Depending on heart size, com-
defibrillation in cases with fine VF as this rhythm does not
pressions may be performed with a finger and thumb.
 respond well to electrical shock. The presence of fne VF is
between fingers and the chest wall, or using one or two
thought to indicate a longer duration of arrest and poorer
hands. Extra care should be taken with handling of the
asieos on saueup wqaul dA auy Jl 'uoisnyuad Aeuoion
heart and vessels, especially in small patients. The operator
VF during CPCR, electrical defbrillation can then be used
must avoid rotation or displacement of the heart and
(Rush & Wingfeld, 1992)
avoid using the fingertips that could penetrate vessels or
Timing of electrical shocks has been the subject of much
cardiac chambers. The distal aorta may be completely or
research and debate. Previous guidelines suggested that
partially occluded using digital pressure to improve blood
improvement of perfusion with cardiac compressions may
flow to the heart and brain, but for not more than 10
be needed prior to defibrillation. This is no longer consid-
 minutes. Aortic occlusion can be maintained throughout 
ered necessary when a shockable rhythm (VF or PVT) is
CPCR and then gradually released over 15-20 minutes
present at the onset of CPCR. However, compressions
when stable ROSC occurs. The chest cavity and the inci-
should not be delayed while a defbrillator is located and
sion should be thoroughly lavaged and then closed
prepared for use [ICCOR, 2010). Earlier guidelines also
according to usual surgical guidelines. Placement of a
included up to 3 shocks in succession if needed, however,
 chest tube is advisable Antibiotics and pain management
one electrical shock at a time is now recommended
 should be provided; local blocks and systemic therapy are
[ILCOR, 2005: ICCOR, 2010). Outcome is greatly affected
described elsewhere as for a thoracotomy. Infection is not
when compressions are paused, due to the loss of coro-
commonly reported in small animal patients, but has been
nary perfusion in the interim. Compressions should there-
a limiting factor in resuscitated horses {Muir & Hubbell,
fore continue immediately following each single shock.
2009).
 After 2 minutes, compressions are paused briefly to check
the rhythm. For asystole and PEA, medical therapy and
compressions are the only recourse. Applying current to a
'D' - advanced cardiac life support
heart in asystole can result in myocardial damage and is
contraindicated. If fbrillation develops during CPCR for
Animals in cardiac arrest that do not respond to cardiac
 compressions and ventilation require medical therapy to
asystole or PEA, electrical shock can then be used
improve coronary perfusion, and electrical therapy in
appropriate cases. The cardiac rhythm present should be
The CPCR algorithm
identifed and appropriate treatment instituted. The fol-
lowing paragraphs, Figure 22.4 and Table 22.4 summarize
When cardiac arrest occurs during anaesthesia, the inhala-
ACLS treatment.
tion anaesthetic agent should be discontinued and antago-
nists for reversible agents administered (see Fig. 22.4).
When the patient is intubated, it should be artificially
Cardiac arrest rhythms and
ventilated twice, l seach, and cardiac compressions started.
electrical shock
If not intubated, the patient's nose can be covered with a
tight fitting facemask, the head and neck extended, and two
Asystole, pulseless electrical activity (PEA, formerly known
manual breaths given with a rebreathing or resuscitator
as electromechanical dissociation) (Fig. 22.5), ventricular
bag. This manoeuvre may reverse primary respiratory arrest
fibrillation (VF) (Fig. 22.6) and pulseless ventricular tachy-
 and can improve oxygenation enough to facilitate the eff-
cardia (PVT) are the rhythms most often associated with
ccy of cardiac compressions. Intubation can then be per-
cardiac arrest Asystole is most common in arrested veteri-
formed at the same time as compressions are started.
nary patients. PEA includes any electrical activity that is
Ideally, compressions and ventilation begin simultane-
not associated with a palpable pulse. Severe bradycardia
ously when enough rescuers are present. When a shockable
as a cause of PEA is not uncommon especially in anaes-
rhythm (VF or PVT) is present at the onset of arrest, defibril-
thetized patients due to vagal stimulation. Hypothermia,
lation can be performed immediately, but compressions
increased intracranial pressure, electrolyte abnormalities,
 should be performed while the defibrillator is prepared for
and medications can cause also cause bradycardia. Idiov-
use When a shockable rhythm is not present at onset
 s a r  i r
(asystole or PEA), compressions should be performed for
examples of PEA. Some ECG complexes appear quite
2 minutes. If ROSC does not occur within 2 minutes,
654
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
Start compressions
Turn off inhalant
Attach monitors
Give 2 breaths
Give antagonists
No pulse
Get defibrillator
Intubate/ventilate
·Naloxone
+ Flumazenil 
Start recording
+ Atipamezole
10 breaths/minute
Yes
No
Use 100% O2
Check rhythm
 Avoid hyperventilation 
Shockable?
Compressions:
100-120/min SA;
VT or PVT
Asystole/PEA
40-80/min adult LA
80-100 foal/calf;
150-200 rabbit
Shock 2-10
joules/kg
Consider:
Internal compressions
Compressions 2 min
 or defibrillation
0.2-1 joules/kg
Establish IV/lO
Compressions 2 min
 Do not stop compressions 
Establish IV/lO
 for breaths/medication
Give vasopressor
Minimise pauses
Atropine if anaesthetized
 Allow complete recoil
 Change compressor q 2 min
No
Shockable
rhythm?
 Treat hypovolaemia when
Shockable
needed: crystalloids, colloids,
Yes shock
rhythm?
HSS, blood
Yes
No
Treat hyperkalaemia - fluids,
Compressions 2 min
dextrose, +/- insulin, Ca2+
Give vasopressor
 Magnesium for persistent
ventricular arrhythmias
Compressions 2 min
Na HCO3 for metabolic 
Treat reversible causes
 acidosis present prior to
arrest
No
No
 Calcium if hypocalcaemic 
Shockable
 Glucose if hypoglycaemic
rhythm?
Yes
Shockable
Vasopressors:
Yes shock
rhythm?
Epinephrine q 3-5 min
Vasopressin may replace
Progress - evaluate ETCO2
Ist or 2nd dose of
BP,blood gases
epinephrine
Compressions 2 min
Anti-arrhythmics:
Give anti-arrhythmic
Identify reasons for arrest -
Treat reversible causes
PCV/TS;electrolytes,
 Amiodarone (preferred)
 glucose, blood gases
Lidocaine
solution.
655
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Table 22.4 Drug dosages for advanced life support
Treatment
Dose mg/kg IV
Indication and comments
Epinephrine
0.01
Cardiac arrest
1 mg/mL or 1:1000
1-5 μg/kg (LA)
Dilute to 1: 10000
0.05-5 μg/kg/min
Hypotension due to vasodilation
Vasopressin (20 U/mL)
0.1-0.8 U/kg
Cardiac arrest
0.01-0.04 U/kg/min
Hypotension due to vasodilation
Atropine (0.54 mg/mL)
0.04
 Bradycardia; 3rd degree AV block;
0.02-0.04 (LA)
bronchoconstriction
Naloxone (0.4 mg/mL)
0.04
Opioid reversal
Flumazenil (0.1 mg/mL)
2'0-600'0
Benzodiazepine reversal
Atipamezole (5 mg/mL)
0.001-0.020 (SA)
Qz-Agonist reversal; to avoid excitement, dilute
0.02-0.20 (horse)
and give very slowly IV; use lowest dose
Tolazoline (100 mg/mL)
0.5-1.5 (horse or camelid)
possible; decrease dose with time lapsed
0.5-2 (ruminants)
since administration; sudden dea th has been 
Yohimbine (25 mg/ml)
0.1 (SA) 0.075 (horse)
reported with use in awake horses and
carmelids
Amicdarone *
5
Refractory ventricular tachycardia
(50 mg/ml)
Lidocaine 2%
1-2 (dog, horse) ± 0.02-.08 mg/kg/min
Ventricular tachycardia when amicdarone not
0.5-1 (cat)
available
 Dobutamine*
 1-15 μg/kg/min 
Hypotension due to poor cardiac contractility
(12.5 mg/mL diluted to 100 or 200 μg/ml)
Dopamine*
1-10 μg/kg/min to increase contractility:
 Hypotension due to poor cardiac contractility
(40 mg/mL diluted to 100 or 200 μg/mL)
 >10 = vasopressor activity 
or vasodilation; AV conduction block
Ephedrine (50 mg/mL, or diluted)
0.06-0.2
 Mild hypotension
Norepinephrine*
 0.05-0.3 μg/kg/min for vasoconstriction
 Hypotension due to vasodilation
(1 mg/mL)
Phenylephrine 1% *
0.005-0.01
Hypotension due to vasodila tion
Calcium chloride 10%
50 (SA)
Hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia, Ca channel
blocker toxicity; give slowly, monitor for
arrhythmias 
Calcium gluconate 23%
0.5-1.5 mL/kg (SA)
 Hypocalcaemia, hyperkalaemia, Ca channel
0.2-0.4 mL/kg (LA)
blocker toxicity; give slowly, monitor for
arrhythmias
Dextrose 25%
 0.7-1 g/kg of 25% dextrose over 3-5 min
 Hypoglycaemia or hyperkalaemia
Dextrose 50%
1 mL/kg dilute 1 :4; give over 5 min (SA)
Dextrose 5%
4.4-6.6 mL/kg of 5% (adult horse)
4-8 mL/kg/min (neonatal foals)
 Magnesium sulphate 50 %
0.2 mEq/kg (SA)
Hypomagnesaemia, hypocalcaemia, torsades
25-50; 2 mg/kg/min (horse)
des pointes, persistent ventricular tachycardia
 Na Bicarbonate 5 or 8.4 %
mEq = BW (kg) × 0.3** × deficit
Metabolic acidosis
(**0.5 for neonates) give V deficit initially 
 Prolonged CPR (>10 min)
and re-evaluate
Fluids 
Normovolaemic patients
 Hypovolaemic patients should be treated as 
Crystalloids
 20 ml/kg dog. horse
needed with crystalloids, colloids, blood, etc.
10 mL/kg cat
Avoid hypervclaemia
656
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
Table 22.4 Continued
Treatment
Dose mg/kg IV
Indication and comments
 Colloids
5-10 mL/kg dog; 2-3 mL/kg cat
Avoid hypervolaemia
Hypertonic saline 7.5%
2-4 mL/kg 
HSS/Hetastarch
2 mL/kg HSS and 5 mL/kg hetastarch
(dog, horse) or 24 mL/kg of
combination over 10 min
Defibrill ation
External 2-10 joules/kg
Ventricular fibrillation; 
Internal 0.2-1 joules/kg
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia
LA: large animals; SA: small animals; HSs: hypertonic saline; * must be diluted prior to use.
Burns, 2008; Plunkett & McMichael, 2008; Cole, 2009; Muir & Hubbell, 2009; Riordan & Schaer, 2009; Scofield, et al, 2010.
ADULTMANUALRECORD*IIECGHR=95BPM*FILTER-ON*25MM/SEC
*SCALE=5.00mv/cm*12/18/2009
BP1152（119)100mmHg
*12/18/20098:33
RECORD
BP119（18）19mmHg
Figure 22.5 Development of pulseless electrical activity (PEA) in a critically ill dog (ECG trace is above arterial pressure trace)
aag peae peu aned aun a ym ie suawas is aul jo azis au ui ahueun lews e si isy ie aueup Auo au aion
pulseless for over a minute.
Courtesy of Dr Amie Koenig.
（A)
RATE66/m1n
IBP1
B
Figure 22.6 (A) Fine and (B) coarse ventricular fibrillation.
657
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
compressions can be paused briefly for a rhythm check. If
 is available, familiarity with appropriate technique and
a shockable rhythm is present, administer a vasopressor IV
settings is most important Ideally, hair should be clipped
or IO, apply one shock, and continue compressions with
from the chest Both paddles and pads are now available
minimal delay. After another 2 minutes, repeat the check,
with many defibrillators. The pads come in small sizes that
vasopressor, and shock when applicable, and then imme-
work well for smaller patients. Conductive paste should
diately continue compressions. The basic routine is
be applied to defbrillator paddles; alcohol should not be
repeated sequences of compressions 2 min, vasopressor IV
used on the paddles or ECG leads as it may ignite during
or IO ±a shock, compressions 2 min, with the vasopressor
defibrillation. Paddles can be placed on the same side of
IV or IO ± shock administered every 3-5 minutes. The
the chest or on opposite sides (Fig. 22.8). The operator
individuals applying shocks and giving medications should
should ensure that good contact between the patient and
be ready before compressions have stopped to minimizethe
the electrodes is present and that no one is touching the
duration of pauses. Since it takes time for dnug levels to
patient, the table, or anything attached to the patient
increase, medication is given during the same pause with
before applying a shock. The defbrillator must be allowed
the shock and followed by compressions so that drugs will
 to charge to the selected setting before the shock is applied
be better circulated to the tissues in hopes of facilitating
to the chest. If unsuccessful, the energy seting should be
ROSC before the next pause. Compressions should not be
increased for subsequent shocks. Recommended defibril-
stopped for administration of dnugs, for intubation, or for
lator settings are listed in Table 22.3, however, guidelines
ventilation. If PEA or asystole is present, the above routine
vary with different types of machines. Manufacturers' rec-
is followed without the use of electrical shocks.
ommendations should be reviewed as they have usually
Anti-arrhythmic therapy should be administered when
validated the settings for their particular model. Great care
VF/PVT is not converted following three cycles of
should be taken with the use of defibrillators as injury to
compressions/vasopressor therapy. Potentially reversible
the patient and the resuscitation team including burns or
causes of arrest should be pursued throughout the resus-
electric shock can occur.
-oay 'eaxoy 'eiaeioday se yns 'oa uo
thermia, electrolyte abnormalities, and hypoglycaemia.
LARGE ANIMAL RESUSCITATION
Defibrillation
Both monophasic and biphasic waveform defibrillators
Since anaesthetic recovery in adult large animals requires
are available (Fig. 22.7). Biphasic units utilize current in
the attainment of a standing position, a prolonged course
two directions, using lower energy settings to achieve def-
of CPCR may be a problem since hypotension (MAP
brillation. Monophasic machines generate greater current
<70 mmHg) for more than 20-30 minutes can result in
in one direction. Some authors feel the occurrence of myo-
myopathy even in patients that have not arrested. Recovery
cardial damage secondary to electrical shock is less with
is often accompanied by excitement and further injury to
biphasic machines, however, other studies using monopha-
the patient, especially if significant brain injury has also
sic waveforms have not seen such damage If a defibrillator
Occurred. The anaesthetist must be mindful of human
Figure 22.8 Defibrillator paddles are placed over the base of
Figure 22.7 Defibrillator.
the heart and over the sternum at the apex of the heart.
658
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
safety as well as patient safety in these circumstances. In
 third eyelid to identify arterial pulsation more readily than
 spite of these issues, successful resuscitation has been
when placed on an extremity. Direct blood pressure moni-
reported in ponies and adult horses (Frauenfelder et al.,
toring provides real-time assessment of blood pressure.
1981; Kellagher & Watney. 1986; McGoldrick et al., 1998).
 The presence of a waveform indicates a cardiac contraction
and one cow (Raptopoulos & Karatzias, 198l) using both
or a compression strong enough to produce peripheral
 External and internal cardiac compression techniques. The
flow. Waveform changes may reveal the quality of cardiac
eventual outcome following use of intermal compressions
contractility and the presence of vasodilation or vasocon-
was unfortunately most often euthanasia due to infection
striction. Pupil size is a reliable indirect indicator of CBF
in the pleural cavity (Muir & Hubbell, 2009). The basic
Dilation occurs when CBF is inadequate; therefore, a
guidelines for BCLS in foals, calves, ponies, and small
decrease in pupil size indicates improvement Mixed
horses are the same as for small animals. Dosages of some
 venous oxygen saturation reflects overall tissue perfusion
drugs may differ (see Table 22.4). The major difference is
 and oxygen extraction and is a more accurate measure of
in the technique for external cardiac compression in
efficacy of blood flow to the body. However, a central
 adults, as described earlier. Defbrillation is also similar in
 venous catheter must be in place to obtain mixed venous
calves and foals and the smaller large animal species such
 samples. Jugular venous oxygen saturation can reflect cer-
as sheep, goats, and swine. Direct defibrillation of the
ebral oxygenation and extraction. Electrocardiography
heart is technically not a problem in large patients, but
 may reveal myocardial changes via waveform abnormali-
access through the thoracic wall may be inadequate
ties but it is most important for identification and treat-
without a rib resection, takes time, and the incidence of
ment of arrest rhythms. The best indirect monitor of
complications is high. Transthoracic defibrillation 
in
cardiac output and pulmonary blood flow is ETCO2 from
'sueunq ui uaa inoyp aq otpauodau si by oot<sjuaed
@pnography When ventilation is consistent, ETCO2 is
The greater the body size, the more impedance of the flow
proportional to blood flow through the lungs. As flow
of current and the less effective is the shock. Reports of
improves with effective CPCR, ETCO2 increases and vice
successful electrical defibrillation performed in adult
versa. In fact, decreasing ETCOz is one of the best indica-
horses required several shocks in succession at high energy
tors of impending cardiac arrest, while sudden or persist-
settings. The equipment was specifcally designed for this
ent increase is one of the best indicators of ROSC (ICCOR,
purpose including the defibrillator, the electrodes were
2010).
implanted under the skin to decrease impedance, and a
Goals of effective CPCR are: ETCO2 ≥30-40 mmHg:
team of individuals was trained to perform external com-
mean arterial pressure ≥50 mmHg: normal K', Ca²,
pressions (Tacker et al., 1973: Geddes et al., 1974).
and glucose, normal acid base status, and normoxia
(Box 22.2). Autoregulation of CBF is impaired following
cardiac arrest and cerebral blood flow is greatly affected by
 Oxygen, carbon dioxide concentration, and mean arterial
MONITORING DURING CPCR
blood pressure Hypocarbia (PaCO2<30 mmHg) decreases
CBF; hypercarbia (PaCO, ≥60 mmHg) causes vasodilation
Some clinical signs and monitoring aids commonly used
and increased CBF and increased ICP Arterial oxygen
during anaesthesia are not useful during CPCR. Mucous 
levels should be maintained within the normal range
membrane colour is unreliable due to poor peripheral
(80-l00 mmHg) to avoid further tissue damage. Poorer
 perfusion and the use of vasopresors. Palpation of pulses
outcomes have been documented post resuscitation when
is diffcult, wastes time, and can be unreliable due to back-
hyperoxia persists [Pilchera et al, 20l2; Kilgannon et al,
flow into veins during compressions. Measurement of arte-
2010). Since reperfusion of ischaemic tissues results in the
rial blood gases taken before ROSC will be misleading.
 production of oxygen radicals and other deleterious sub-
Poor perfusion of tissues should result in metabolic aci-
stances when more oxygen is present, greater concentra-
dosis and hypercarbia, however, with oxygen supplemen-
tions of these substances will be produced, and more
tation, the respiratory alkalosis caused by controlled
tissue damage occurs.
ventilation and the lack of adequate venous return, a
normal or increased PaO2 can be measured. PaCO2 levels
do not reflect tissue metabolism, but rather pulmonary
Box 22.2 Goals for performance of
blood flow and ventilation. Pulse oximetry may also be
effective CPCR
misleading initially as it can take several minutes for hae-
moglobin desaturation to develop after cardiac arrest
ETCO2 30-40 mmHg
when the patient was breathing 100% oxygen.
MAP >50 mmHg
An indirect blood pressure monitor using Doppler ultra-
 Normal acid-base status via central or jugular venous
sound offers some information as the disappearance and
blood gases
reappearance of peripheral pulses is audible If available.
Normal electrolytes and glucose
an extra probe can also be placed on the cormea under the
659
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
flow via vasoconstriction, increased myocardial dysfune-
MEDICAL THERAPIES FOR CARDIAC
tion post arrest, and decreased cerebral perfusion [ Angelosa
ARREST (see Table 22.4)
et al., 2008; Ristagn0 et al., 2009). It is also less effective
in acidotic environments that can develop with prolonged 
arrest (>10 min). A higher incidence of cardiac arrhythmia
Routes of administration
in the post-resuscitation period has also been associated
Intravenous (IV), intraosseous (IO), intratracheal (IT), or
with epinephrine The ‘high dose' therapy (0.l mg/kg
via an ET tube are all possible routes of administration of
versus 0.0l mg/kg) has not been associated with
increased survival, may be detrimental, and is no longer
medications (Plunkett & McMichael, 2008). Venous access
should be acquired as soon as possible without interfering
recommended.
with resuscitation. Patency of existing venous catheters
Vasopressin has been demonstrated to improve outcome
should be verifed to ensure appropriate drug delivery. Use
in humans and animals with cardiac arrest, especially
of a central venous catheter is ideal. Medications admin-
those with asystole (Wenzel et al., 2004; Grmec & Mally.
istered through a peripheral catheter should be followed
2006; Mally et al., 2007, Stroumpoulis et al., 2008). Also
 known as antidiuretic hormone [ADH), vasopressin is an
by larger than normal volumes of flush solution to facili-
tate their transfer into the systemic circulation. Medica-
endogenous peptide released by the neurohypophysis to
tions administered by the IO route enter the circulation
regulate water balance that generally has no effect on
almost as quickly as when injected IV. An IO needle is
blood pressure at physiological doses in healthy patients.
However, at high doses, vasopressin produces intense
is poor. Intratracheal administration is now recommended
vasoconstriction, acting on vasopressin l receptors of vas-
only when IV or IO are not readily available Larger doses
cular smooth muscle It has been shown to improve pul-
are necessary for IT administration, up to 3-10x greater
monary blood flow and gas exchange (Loeckinger et al.
for epinephrine. Sterile water should be used for dilution
2002) and coronary and cerebral circulation (Prengel
of drugs rather than saline as absorption of the drug is
et al., 2005). It has no adrenergic effects, is still effective
greater. Drugs administered via the trachea or endotra-
in acidotic states, and is not associated with arrhythmia in
cheal tube should be instilled with a long catheter to reach
 the post-resuscitation period.
the bronchi or flushed to transport them to the bronchi
There is no definitive work that has determined which
where absorption is faster. Calcium and sodium bicarbo-
vasopressor medication(s) to use, what dose to use, or
nate should not be administered IT. Intracardiac injection
when to give such therapy. Vasopressin was previously
is not recommended due to damage to cardiac muscle.
recommended to replace one dose of epinephrine in
Cardiac compressions must be continued during and fol-
patients with PEA, VT, or VF; and as an alternative to
lowing administration of all medications to promote
epinephrine during CPCR in patients with asystole
movement of the dnugs into the coronary circulation.
(ILCOR, 2005: AHA, 2005). Some authors have recom-
mended using multiple doses of vasopressin, combining
it with epinephrine, or alternating vasopressin with epine-
Vasopressors
phrine (Krismer et al., 2004; Wenzel et al., 2004). Recent
 pue auydauida sueduos sueunq ui sle pazuopuel
Both adrenergic and non-adrenergic drugs have been used
vasopressin have not shown a difference between eventual
in resuscitation of the arrested patient. Although no
outcome when either drug was used (Gueugniaud et al.
studies exist that document a better outcome when vaso-
2008; ICCOR, 20l0). Since no difference has been docu-
seq adeiaun oiiauape 'oqaseid e snsiaa pasn aie siossaid
mented, the European Resuscitation Council has never
been the mainstay of ACLS since the use of epinephrine
recommended vasopressin over epinephrine for treatment
was introduced in the early 1900s (Cooper et al., 2006).
of cardiac arrest. However, because of evidence for better
Intense vasoconstriction of peripheral vessels is thought to
short-term outcomes and this lack of a difference, the 2010
increase venous return to the heart and improve coronary
ICCOR group and the 20l0 AHA guidelines take a differ-
perfusion. In some species, it may preferentially increase
ent view and continue to suggest that one dose of vaso-
flow to the brain with greater constriction of the external
pressin may replace epinephrine during the first or second
versus the internal carotid arteries. Historically, epine-
resuscitation cycle in all patients with cardiac arrest.
peipies iog Adeiaul eipau Aed au uaaq sey auud
Most of the research and clinical studies on CPCR has
arrest. A sympathomimetic catecholamine, epinephrine
focused on healthy animals with induced VF or humans
aydad pue jea aui ui siiaai-d pue o yoq uo si
with VF or PVT at the onset of cardiac arrest. Asystole is
It produces profound vasoconstriction via Q-receptor
the more common initial rhythm in animals, and there
activity on peripheral vasculature Its cardiac β-effects
are no prospective controlled trials of techniques or
increase heart rate and contractility. Negative effects of
medical therapy used for CPCR in clinical veterinary
epinephrine include a tendency for increased cardiac met-
patients for comparison, so it is diffcult to extrapolate
abolic oxygen requirements, decreased coronary blood
findings of the human literature to our patients. One
660
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
recent retrospective analysis of factors associated with sur-
 seen in five dogs when IV amiodarone was given for ven-
vival in dogs and cats with cardiac arrest did find a positive
tricular arrhythmias. Clinical signs resolved when the
association with the use of vasopressin (Hofmeister et al..
infusion was stopped, and corticosteroids were also
 2009), and successful ROSC in an anaesthetized dog using
 administered to some of the dogs (Cober et al., 2009). An
multiple doses of vasopressin during CPCR has been
 aqueous preparation of amiodarone (Amio-Aqueous@) is
reported (Schmittinger et al., 2005). The laboratory
now approved in the USA that has fewer side effects
studies in animals with induced cardiac arrest have con-
(Somberg et al., 2004; ICCOR, 2010).
sistently shown better outcomes with vasopressin, even
'[e la [azuam) (uu oi<) isaue jo suoeinp suol iaye
2000; Stadlbauer et al., 2003; Stroumpoulis et al., 2008).
Lidocaine
 and vasopression has been associated with better outcome
Lidocaine is a local anaesthetic and anti-arrhythmic drug
in patients with asystole [Mally et al., 2007; Wenzel et al.,
 that prevents the influx of sodium into cells, inhibiting
 2004). Vasopressin may therefore be a reasonable alterna-
depolarization of the cell membrane, thereby blocking the
tive or adjunct to the use of epinephrine in animals
 generation or conduction of an action potential. It has
(Plunkett & McMichael, 2008; Scroggin & Quandt, 2009).
minimal effects on normal cardiac pacemaker cells, but is
active in the Purkinje fibres of the ventricles, especially in
damaged or ischaemic tissue. Lidocaine is not useful for
Anti-arrhythmic medication
ventricular fbrillation and, in fact, increases the defbril-
Atropine
lation threshold, and should be avoided if defibrillation
is possible. It may be useful to control ventricular arrhyth-
Atropine is a muscarinic receptor (M2) antagonist that
 mias post ROSC when amiodarone is unavailable. Prepa-
increases heart rate by blocking parasympathetic input to
rations without preservative are best for intravenous use
cardiac muscle, resulting in increased automaticity of the
rather than those used for local anaesthesia. Overdose is
sinus node and improved conduction at the atrioventricu-
characterized by central nervous system side effects such
lar node Atropine was previously recommended for use
as excitement, tremors, and collapse If this occurs, the
in the management of asystole, PEA, or PEA with brady-
infusion should be slowed or stopped temporarily and
cardia (ILCOR, 2005), however, it is no longer recom-
restarted at a lower rate.
mended for routine use in humans with cardiac arrest.
Glycopyrrolate or atropine is still recommended for
patients with symptomatic bradycardia (AHA, 2010). Since
Other medication or therapy
vagal tone can be increased by anaesthetic dnugs and
Huid therapy
 surgery, it is still recommended in CPCR for anaesthetized
patients (Plunkett & McMichael, 2008). When atropine
Fluid therapy is an important adjunct to the medical
has been given, pupillary response may not be a reliable
therapy of CPCR, however, it is primarily effective when
jsae-sod aun ui suouou ioy soop ul uais ieu
aul si siun uaum aleiasa siaeiooay ane suad
period since it causes mydriasis.
primary cause of the arrest. More commonly, too much
fluid is given to patients in cardiac arrest rather than inad-
Amiodarone
equate amounts. This can be harmful as excessive fluid
volume increases right atrial pressure (RAP). Increased
Amiodarone is currently recommended when ventricular
 RAP without an increase of systolic pressure will decrease
fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia are refractory to
-ldoid si moy pooiq Aieuoion anus uoisnyiad Aeuoion
repeated electrical conversion (ILCOR, 2005: Plunkett &
 tional to the difference between aortic pressure and RAP
McMichael, 2008; ICCOR, 2010). Outcome was improved
 Crystalloid solutions decrease osmotic pressure and dilute
when amiodarone administration was compared with
 plasma proteins and coagulation factors, which may cause
lidocaine or placebo (Dorian et al., 2002). It is a mixed
tissue oedema and hypocoagulability. To avoid hypervol-
class anti-arrhythmic drug, with actions at sodium, potas-
aemia in normovolaemic patients, infusions of balanced
sium, and calcium channels as well as 0- and β-adrenergic
electrolyte solution in normovolaemic patients should be
effects. Amiodarone must be diluted and should be given
on the order of 20 ml/kg in dogs. 10 ml/kg in cats
 slowly IV whenever possible. It can be given as continuous
      '  )
infusion post resuscitation as well if ventricular arrhyth-
(Muir & Hubbell, 2009). Improved circulation is obtained
mias persist or recur. Significant hypotension can develop
when crystalloid and colloid solutions are used together.
with intravenous use, thought to be associated with the
Many combinations of dosages have been reported, and
solvent vehicle used and the speed of administration.
Table 22.4 lists the more common doses. Recently, use of
 Reversible hepatic dysfunction is reported in dogs, associ-
a low dose of a combination product with 6% hydroxy-
ated with chronic oral therapy (Jacobs et al., 2000). Severe
ethylstarch (colloid) and 7.2% hypertonic saline (HSS) at
skin reactions with erythema, urticaria, and pnuritus were
2 ml/kg/l0 minutes was reported to improve cerebral
661
Section
3
 Special anaesthesia
microcirculation and neurological scores in swine and cer-
mEq of bicarbonate = Bw (kg)x [base deficit or
 ebral perfusion pressures in swine and humans (Noppens
[24 - HCO3)] x 0.3 (or 0.5 for neonates).
et al., 2006: Bender et al., 2007). Hypertonic saline
improves cardiac function during and after ROSC and is
This calculation is an estimate of the total extracellular
fluid (ECF) defcit of bicarbonate, however, this amount is
used to treat or prevent cerebral oedema. It increases
 serum sodium levels and osmolarity, creating an osmotic
rarely necessary and no more than %-/2 of the deficit
gradient between the blood and the tissues that promotes
should be given at a time over 15 minutes. When ROSC
the passive movement of fluid into the vascular system.
occurs, acid-base status should then be re-evaluated after
This increases plasma volume, producing greater cardiac
an hour to allow equilibration between the tissues and the
output and higher mean arterial pressure and decreases
ECF Blood volume status and blood pressure defcits
should also be addressed. Sodium bicarbonate decreases
oedema and intracranial pressure (ICP). The combination
 serum potassium and ionized calcium levels, therefore,
of increased MAP and decreased ICP results in improved
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP). It may also improve
administration should be postponed until after correction
 of ionized hypocalcaemia or hypokalaemia.
perfusion by decreasing resistance in injured tissues by
reducing oedema in vascular endothelium and by improv.
ing viscosity. Hypertonic saline should be used very care-
Mannitol
 e in    u a
A potent osmotic diuretic, mannitol has been the mainstay
swelling and hypomyelinosis. Hypertonic saline also effec-
of therapy to treat or prevent cerebral oedema and
tively increases blood volume in patients with trauma,
increased ICP, and improve CPP in patients with cerebral
haemorrhage, sepsis, and endotoxaemia.
disease or injury. Mannitol stimulates a reflex vasocon-
striction in the cerebral vessels and improves blood viscos-
Sodium bicarbonate
ity in the frst few minutes after administration. The
osmotic effect of pulling fluid out of the tissues into the
Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCOs) therapy is still debated.
vasculature is seen after approximately 15-20 minutes.
Earlier guidelines suggested that NaHCO be given at
Cerebral oedema is not common in the immediate post-
0.5-1 mEq/kg IV at 10 minute intervals during CPCR.
resuscitation period but may develop later when signifi-
However, both the 2005 and 2010 guidelines do not rec-
cant neuronal cell damage has occurred. Mannitol is used
ommend it for routine use during CPCR in humans. This
in the post-resuscitation phase in patients with neurologi-
is based on the premise that the acidosis seen during
cal deficits and administered at 0.5-1.5 g/kg IV over 20
CPCR is a lactic acidosis secondary to the lack of perfusion
minutes, up to three times a day. Mannitol is administered
and the subsequent increase in anaerobic metabolism in
intermittently rather than as an infusion to avoid increased
tissues, and is best treated by restoration of blood flow.
permeability of the blood-brain barrier by continuous
Potential side effects of NaHCO, therapy that are fre-
 eXposure The diuretic effect of mannitol precludes its use
quently identified are hypermatraemia, intracellular acido-
in
hypovolaemic patients until after fluid volume is
sis, and decreased tissue oxygenation due to a left shift of
replaced, especially since a rebound hypotension may
the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve. However, it is not
Occur following its use. Acute renal failure has developed
clear how often these effects occur in levels significant
 in people when serum osmolality exceeded 320 mOsm/L,
enough to be detrimental. Acidosis and hyperkalaemia
therefore, monitoring of serum osmolality is recom-
often develop after 10 minutes of CPCR, and these abnor-
mended when either mannitol or HSS is used. Results of
malities could be countered with bicarbonate therapy.
Some studies have shown better outcomes with the use of
for ICP control as it has a longer duration, can be given
sodium bicarbonate in CPCR (Bar-Joseph et al., 1998;
more often, has fewer adverse side effects, has positive
Leong et al., 2001). These authors believe that the decision
effects on the myocardium, cardiac output, and peripheral
of the ILCOR group in regard to the use of bicarbonate is
circulation, and may be associated with better outcomes
not based on thorough controlled and randomized clini-
[Krieter et al., 2002; Noppens et al., 2006; Bender et al.,
cal trials of its use in CPCR. Bicarbonate therapy is recom-
2007). Rebound hypotension following therapy is less
mended when metabolic acidosis was present prior to
likely with HSS since the sodium is reabsorbed by the
arrest, in cases with extreme hyperkalaemia, for calcium
kidneys.
channel blocker overdose, and in patients where loss of
bicarbonate via the kidney or gastrointestinal tract is sig-
Glucose
nificant. The dose utilized and the osmolality of the solu-
tion given may be factors to consider. Acid-base status
 Glucose is required only when the patient is hypoglycae-
should therefore be evaluated using mixed venous or
jugular venous blood samples when NaHCO, is utilized.
caemia and hyperglycaemia have been associated with
The amount of bicarbonate needed can be calculated as
poorer outcomes in critically ill patients. Therapy should
follows:
be guided by periodic assessment of blood glucose levels.
662
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
Treatment for severe hyperglycaemia is recommended but
0.7-1 g/kg of 25% dextrose IV administered over 3-5
hypoglycaemia must be avoided (ICCOR, 2010). Neonates,
 minutes in small animals will decrease potassium levels in
toy breeds, birds, small mammals, and patients with
less than 1 hour. Insulin is not always necessary but 0.5 U/
 insulinoma, liver failure, portosystemic shunt, diabetes,
kg of regular insulin can be given to smallanimals. Glucose
and sepsis may require IV dextrose to maintain normal
concentrations should be monitored closely. Sodium
glucose levels during anaesthesia.
bicarbonate can be given to produce alkalinization that
encourages the shift of H* out of cells and K* into cells to
Electrolyte abnormalities
maintain electroneutrality. For example, 1-2 mEq/kg or
/2-% of the ECF deficit of bicarbonate (see above) can be
Electrolyte abnormalities secondary to a primary disease
 given slowly IV in both small and large animals. Calcium
can cause cardiac arrest and interfere with therapy.
an be given as a more immediate palliative treatment for
Calcium, potassium, and magnesium are most often
severe hyperkalaemia to antagonize its effects on the myo-
 involved and will be briefly discussed here.
cardium by restoration of the resting membrane potential
that decreases hyperexitability of myocytes. Ten percent
Calcium
calcium gluconate, 0.5-1.5 ml/kg IV, can be administered
Calcium is not recommended during CPCR except in cases
over 5-10 minutes to small animals and 23% calcium
of pre-existing hypocalcaemia. Poorer outcome has been
gluconate, 0.2-0.4 ml/kg, in 1-2 L of 5% dextrose admin-
seen when patients are given calcium, presumably because
istered to large animals. The ECG should be monitored
cell death is associated with increased release of intracel-
during administration of calcium (Burns, 2008; Riordan &
lular calcium. Therapy should be conservative and guided
Schaer, 2009). Abdominal drainage or cystocentesis may
by ionized calcium measurements whenever possible.
be necessary to remove the source of potassium in cases of
Ionized calcium levels are decreased by general anaesthe-
uroperitoneum or urinary tract obstruction, respectively.
sia and alkalosis, and can be seen with endotoxaemia and
 gastrointestinal disease, especially in horses. Heavily preg-
Hypokalaemia
nant or lactating females may also become hypocalcaemic
when ill or anaesthetized. Overdose of calcium channel
Hypokalaemia occurs less commonly but may be associ-
ated with alkalosis, diarrhoea and diuretic therapy.
blockers may produce decreased myocardial contractility
that may respond to calcium administration. The effects
Hypokalaemia can lead to muscular weakness and cardiac
of hyperkalaemia may be temporarily ameliorated by
arrhythmia, and may cause the myocardium to become
calcium infusion as it is thought to readjust the change in
 refractory to the effects of some anti-arrhythmic drugs.
resting membrane potential back to normal (Hyperkale-
Animals with significant hypokalaemia should receive IV
mic Periodic Paralysis in horses, uroperitoneum), allowing
fluids that contain up to 40 mEq/L of potassium. Saline
more time for other treatments given to decrease potas-
should be used in patients with alkalaemia, whereas an
sium to be effective.
alkalinizing fluid such as acetated or lactated electrolyte
solution should be used in acidaemic patients. A separate
Hyperkalaemia
infusion of potassium chloride (KCl) can be given to
 patients that require rapid fluid resuscitation. The usual
Hyperkalaemia is a cause of life-threatening cardiac
guideline is to avoid administration rates for potassium
arrhythmia. It is seen in cases with urinary tract obstruc-
greater than 0.5 mEq/kg/min. In severely hypokalaemic
tion, uroperitoneum, severe dehydration, Addison's
(<2.0 mg/dl), non-oliguric small animals, the infusion
disease, acute renal failure, and acidosis. It develops quickly
rate for potassium may be increased to 1-1.5 mEq/kg/
during CPR, doubling in magnitude by 10 minutes, and
min. The rate should be tailored to the individual patient's
can be associated with post-arrest arrhythmias. Bradycar-
need, and the electrocardiogram should be monitored
dias, tachycardia, and normal heart rates can be seen,
continuously (Riordan & Schaer, 2009). It may be diffcult
although slower heart rates and heart block may be more
to improve serum potassium concentrations intravenously
common since sinus node activity is sensitive to potassium
concentrations. Treatments to decrease serum potassium
 nasogastric tube is often necessary.
 concentration depend somewhat on the severity of hyper-
kalaemia. Serum levels ≤6.5 mEq/L may respond to dilu-
jo uoesiupe snouau lim sisan pue uon
Magnesium
isotonic electrolyte solution that is potassium free (0.9%
 Magnesium is not recommended for routine use. However,
saline) or potassium defcient (Normosol R@, lactated
it is an important emergency treatment for torsades des
Ringer's solution). Higher blood potassium concentra-
 pointes in dogs and horses to prevent ventricular fbrilla-
tions may require infusion of dextrose with or without
tion, and may help with refractory ventricular tachycar.
insulin to facilitate movement of K+ into cells by activation
dias. It may also be necessary to affect a response to
of the Na+K+ ATPase pump. Five percent dextrose solution,
calcium administration when hypocalcaemia is present.
4.4-6.6 ml/kg IV, can be given to large animals, and
Hypomagnesaemia is likely more common than is
99
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
important areas of concern are brain injury, myocardial
general anaesthesia in dogs and cats (Brainard et al., 2007)
and is associated with critical illness in horses (Johansson
sistence of pre-existing problems. Therapy is therefore
et al., 2003) and dogs (Khanna et al., 1998)
 directed to all these areas, initially to stabilize the patient
aul jl 'suoeoiduos juaaaid io jeal on Adeau uaui pue
Therapeutic hypothermia
initial damage is severe or not adequately reversed in the
immediate post-ROSC period, the patient may develop a
Therapeutic hypothermia is recommended by the 2010
condition similar to that of septic shock with evidence of
ICCOR guidelines for all patients that achieve ROSC but
 a systemic inflammatory response, and may succumb to
remain comatose. Both increased survival and better neu-
infection or multiorgan failure.
rological outcome have been associated with its use in
Following ROsC, a short period of hyperperfusion
many species (Alzagaa et al., 2006; Polderman, 2008).
-lad iood jo pouad iaguol e Aq pamooy sl ieul sinoo
Mild to moderate hypothermia is considered one of the
fusion due to myocardial dysfunction, vasodilation, and
more useful treatments for cerebral protection since it is
ardiac arrhythmias. During this latter period, the brain is
directed at multiple pathways of neuronal death. It is
especially susceptible to further injury as autoregulation
thought to prevent tissue damage by several mechanisms,
 of CBF is usually dysfunctional, and CPP is dependent on
including decreasing the metabolic requirements
of
systemic MAP. Hypovolaemia may be present following
tissues, especially the brain, by reducing the cellular
 cardiac arrest and should be treated, avoiding hypervolae-
inflammatory response to ischaemia. Its use is not
mia or inappropriate increases in right atrial pressure.
common in clinical veterinary medicine, however, it has
 Blood pressure should be monitored frequently and, if
been used successfully in a dog with refractory seizures
possible, continuously with placement of an arterial cath-
following a traumatic brain injury (Hayes, 2009). It is
eter. A mean arterial pressure of >65 mmHg or a systolic
u snoau Aeuaod si pue leeid iou Aqeqoid
 pressure >80-90 mmHg should be maintained. If availa-
large animal species that must stand following general
ble, echocardiography is recommended to identify myo-
anaesthesia. Since patients often become hypothermic
cardial dysfunction and to determine the need for inotrope
umder anaesthesia and temperature may continue to
therapy. Administration of one or more inotropes is indi-
 decrease with cardiac arrest, avoidance of rewarming may
      m 
be appropriate Maintenance of a temperature a few
 patients that are hypotensive but not vasodilated or hypo-
degrees below the normal range may be helpful. However.
volaemic. Dobutamine is usually preferred for post-
 severe hypothermia should be avoided as it is a risk factor
papaau st Adeiaul nossaidose quauageueu uoeiosnsal
for cardiac arrest itself, especially in cats.
if vasodilation is a significant cause of hypotension. Vaso-
pressin, norepinephrine, epinephrine, or dopamine can be
used as continuous infusions to support blood pressure.
Treatment should be titrated to the lowest possible
POST RESUSCITATION
effective dose to avoid excessive vasoconstriction of
peripheral and splanchnic  vasculature Hypertension
Patients that suffer cardiac arrest and are quickly resusci-
(MAP >100 mmHg) should also be avoided as this may
tated may require little supportive therapy. However, those
exacerbate reperfusion injury. The ECG should be moni-
who do not recover quickly may develop numerous prob-
tored and significant dysrhythmias treated accordingly.
lems post ROSC. Re-arrest following ROSC is common,
Persistent ventricular tachycardia is not uncommon. Infu-
especially when pre-existing conditions are severe or the
sion of lidocaine or amiodarone may be necessary to
u ai uaq nu s ann 
maintain sinus rhythm (see Table 22.4).
many more patients are successfully resuscitated than are
D   n  
actually discharged from the hospital. Therefore, treat-
arrest Hypoxaemia and hyperoxia are both detrimental.
ment during the post-arrest period is essential to survival
as well as to ensure an outcome with a good quality
 should be titrated to achieve arterial oxygen levels between
of life Immediate good quality post-arrest care
15
 80 and 100 mmHg. Flow-by oxygen or nasal insufflation
re-emphasized in the 2010 ICCOR guidelines. The follow-
therapy can be utilized, however, some patients may
ing information is a summary of the most important
have to remain connected to the anaesthesia machine
aspects of care in the post-ROSC period. See the suggested
and artificially ventilated to maintain carbon dioxide
readings for more details on this topic.
tension within the normal range (PaCO2 35-45, ETCO2
The whole body ischaemia that occurs during arrest is
30-40 mmHg). Hyperoxia can be avoided by using a
followed by poor perfusion during CPCR, and then further
mixture of oxygen and air. Some anaesthesia machines
-oud au inu uoisnaai yim sinno aeuep anss
will mix these gases automatically and others require
physiological changes that occur in the post-arrest period
manual adjustment ofthe flow meters. Hypocarbia should
are considered to be a separate syndrome. The most
be avoided as this greatly decreases CBF Pulse oximetry
664
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
can be used to identify hypoxaemia, however, it does not
increases in ICP during such procedures. Seizure activity
u usaai aeqiaexa u ie eiad azu
 should be immediately treated with diazepam or mida-
When available, blood gas analysis should be performed
zolam. If needed, longer-acting anticonvulsant therapy
-iad juaisisuosul pue uoisuaoday asneaq Alesipouad
should be instituted.
fusion can affect capnography and pulse oximetry meas-
Although neurological outcome of cardiac arrest survi-
urements. Sedation of the patient may be necessary to
 vors has not been evaluated in clinical veterinary medicine
facilitate ventilation. Analgesic agents should be utilized
 as thoroughly as in people, one retrospective study of 18
as pain can impair cardiopulmonary function through
survivors to discharge of cardiac arrest at a veterinary
mechanisms such as tachycardia, vasoconstriction, and
teaching hospital over a 5-year period found that two of
laboured breathing.
the 18 had neurological deficits at discharge. Both were
 Temperature should be monitored closely. Inability to
dogs and one was normal at a 2-month follow-up exami-
maintain a normal temperature may be seen in some
nation (Waldrop et al., 2004). Clinical investigations in
 variable.
humans and research studies using animal species have
Patients can be allowed to remain mildly hypothermic by
looked at neurological outcome Most authors recom-
avoidance of rewarming but, some species such as birds,
 mend observation for 24-48 hours to determine a prog-
 small mammals, and cats, may be more prone to compli-
nosis. A poor outcome is expected when corneal reflexes,
cations with hypothermia. Hyperthermia should
be
pupillary responses, withdrawal response to pain, and
 avoided since it increases metabolic oxygen requirements.
Bumoy sinou tz ie juasqe uieuai sasuodsan ioou
Metabolic status should be monitored regularly with serial
ROSC.
measurement of glucose and electrolytes, and organ func-
Supportive care, similar to basic care of anaesthetized or
tion should be evaluated as needed with laboratory tests
poo e ansua on uodu si suaed ain i
of kidney and liver function, and coagulation. Urine
outcome in the post-ROSC period. Nutrition should be
output should be monitored as part of the assessment of
 provided as soon as possible depending on the particular
 renal function and efficacy of fluid therapy. In dogs, place-
patient's abilities. Catheter sites and bandaged areas
ment of a urinary catheter with a closed urine collection
should be examined regularly. The eyes should be exam-
system facilitates accurate evaluation.
ined for corneal damage and lubricated often. Comforta-
Neurological status is a major component of post-ROSC
 ble padding for pressure points and painful areas should
care and eventual outcome The brain is very susceptible
be provided. Patients should be examined regularly for
to continued injury in the post-arrest period because of
passage of faeces or urine to prevent scalding of skin or
cardiovascular dysfunction, reperfusion injury, lack of CBF
soiling of bandages, catheters, and drains. Positioning in
autoregulation, and regional damage or dysfunction of the
 sternal recumbency is usually better for gas exchange and
cerebral microcirculation. Optimization of neurological
may help avoid regurgitation and aspiration of gastric con-
recovery frst involves appropriate cardiovascular and res-
tents in depressed or comatose individuals.
piratory interventions as previously discussed. In addition,
therapy for intracranial hypertension and cerebral oedema
may be necessary. As previously mentioned, these are not
SUMMARY AND FUTURE THERAPIES
always seen post ROsC but may be more likely if pre-
cause of the arrest, or if arrest or resuscitation was pro-
In spite of much research in animals and humans, clinical
longed. A test dose of mannitol or HSS may be helpful in
trials in humans, and years of debate by those directly
diagnosis if improvement is observed following adminis-
involved, there are very few definitive conclusions in
tration. If dysregulation of CBF is suspected, MAP should
 regard to recommendations for treatments that will ensure
maintained at a higher value (l00 mmHg) than that
an excellent long-term outcome following CPCR. The best
usually needed to ensure adequate CPP Hyperventilation
 therapies to date are the application of early and excellent
can be used to treat sudden increases in ICP and to allow
quality basic life support, defibrillation as soon as a shock-
-ady 'aamo deau shouaaul yo jasuo aui og a
able rhythm is identified, and thorough post-resuscitation
ventilation will eventually be ineffective as the brain
are. Outcome is much better in those patients who
'resets' to the lower COz level and intracranial hyperten-
a ' si ar a m ila  
sion will return. Elevation of the head to approximately
 likelihood of survival decreases greatly and only becomes
30° from horizontal with the head and neck straight and
worse with time. Specific guidelines for veterinary anaes-
the jugular veins unobstructed (e.g. loose neck wraps) can
thesia patients will not be known until controlled and
help to decrease ICP. Great care should be taken when
randomized trials of clinical veterinary patients are
performing procedures that could decrease PaO2 or stimu-
conducted.
late coughing or sneezing, such as endotracheal tube
 Therapies that may be included in the future could
exchange or suctioning and changing nasal oxygen tubing.
be some of the following intravenous erythropoietin,
Sedation may be necessary in some patients to avoid
which improves myocardial haemodynamics during CPCR
665
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
(Grmec et al., 2009): treatments aimed at preventing
(Wang et al., 2008); and combination medical therapy
mitochondrial dysfunction (Ayoub et al., 2008): injection
using corticosteroids (Mentzelopoulos et al., 2009) and/
of mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow to replace
 or beta-blockers and/or cerebral vasodilators (Xanthos
myocardial  cells  damaged  by  ischaemia/reperfusion
et al., 2009) in addition to vasopressors during ACLS.
REFERENCES
Abeysekera, A., Bergman, I.J..
Beecher, H.K., Todd, D.P, 1954. Ann
ventricular fbrillation N Engl I Med
Kuger, M.T., et al., 2005. Drug error
Surg 140, 2-34.
346. 884-890.
in anaesthetic practice: a review of
Bender, R., Breil, M., Heistera, U., et al.,
Eichhorn, J.H., 1989. Prevention of
896 reports from the Australian
2007. Hypertonic saline during CPR:
intraoperative anesthesia accidents
Incident Monitoring Study database.
Feasibility and safety of a new
and related severe injury through
Anaesthesia 60, 220-227.
protocol of fluid management
 safety monitoring. Anesthesiology
Alzagaa, A.G., Cerdanb, M., Varonc, I..
during resuscitation. Resuscitation
70, 572-577.
2006. Therapeutic hypothermia.
72.74-81
Fecho, K., Jackson, F., Smith, F., et al..
Resuscitation 70, 369-380.
Brainard, B.M., Campbell, V.L.
2009. In-hospital resuscitation:
American Heart Association [AHA].
Drobatz, K.l., et al., 2007. The effects
 opioids and other factors influencing
2010. Guidelines for
of surgery and anesthesia on blood
survival. Ther Clin Risk Manag 5.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and
magnesium and calcium
961-968.
Emergency Cardiovascular Care.
concentrations in canine and feline
Frauenfelder, H.C., Fessler, J.F.
Circulation 122 (18, suppl 3).
patients. Vet Anaesth Analg 34.
Latshaw, H.S., et al., 1981. External
S640-S933
89-98.
cardiovascular resuscitation of the
Angelosa, M.G., Butkea, R.L.
Brodbelt, D.C., 2009. Perioperative
anesthetized pony. I Am Vet Med
Panchala, A.R., et al., 2008.
mortality in small animal
Assoc 179, 673-676.
Cardiovascular response to
anaesthesia. Vet J 182, 152-161.
Gaynor, J.S., Dunlop, C.l., Wagner, A.E.,
 epinephrine varies with increasing
Brodbelt, D.C., Blisset, K.J.
et al., 1999. Complications and
duration of cardiac arrest.
Hammond, R.A., et al., 2008. The
mortality associated with anesthesia
Resuscitation 77, 101-110.
risk of death: the Confdential
in dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Arbous, M.S., Brobbee, D.E.,
Enquiry into Perioperative Small
Assoc 35, 13-17.
Van Kleef, J.W., et al., 2001. Mortality
Animal Fatalities. Vet Anaesth Analg
Geddes, L.A., Tacker, N.A.,
associated with anaesthesia: a
35. 365-373.
Rosborouci, J.P., et al., 1974.
qualitative analysis to identify risk
Burns, TA., 2008. Potassium,
Electrical dose for ventricular
factors. Anaesthesia 56, 1141 -1153.
hyperkalemia. In: Lavoie, J.P.
defbrillation of large and small
Arbous, M.S., Meursing, A.E..
Hinchcliff, K.W. (Eds.), Blackwell's
 animals using precordial electrodes.
Van Kleef, J.W., et al., 2005. Impact
 Five Minute Veterinary Consult:
J Clin Invest 53, 310-319.
 of anesthesia management
Equine, second ed. wiley-Blackwell,
Greene, S.A., Marks, S.L., 2007.
characteristics on severe morbidity
Ames, p. 618.
Gastrointestinal disease. In:
 and mortality. Anesthesiology 102.
Cole, S., 2009. Cardiopulmonary
Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C..
257-268.
resuscitation. In: Silverstein, D.C.,
Grimm, K.A. (Eds.), Lumb & Jones
Aufderheide, T.P., Sigurdsson, G..
Hopper, K. [Eds.), Small Animal
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia,
Prrallo, R.G., et al., 2004.
Critical Care Medicine. Saunders
fourth ed. Blackwell Publishing.
Hyperventilation-induced
Elsevier, St Louis, pp. 14-21.
Ames, pp. 927-932.
hypotension during
Cooper, JA., Cooper, J.D., Cooper, I.M.,
Gross, M.E., Giuliano, E.A., 2007.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
2006. Cardiopulmonary
Ocular patients. In: Tranquilli, W..
Circulation 109, 1960-1965.
resuscitation: history, current
Thurmon, J.C., Grimm, K.A. (Eds.],
Ayoub, I.M., Radhakrishnan, I.
practice, and future direction.
Lumb & Jones Veterinary Anesthesia
Gazmuri, R.J., 2008. Targeting
Circulation 114, 2839-2849.
and Analgesia, fourth ed. Blackwell
mitochondria for resuscitation from
Cober, R.E., Schober, K.E.
Publishing, Ames, pp. 943-954.
crdiac arrest. Crit Care Med 36.
Hildebrandt, N., et al., 2009
Grmec, S., Mally, S., 2006. Vasopressin
S440-S446
Adverse effects of intravenous
improves outcome in out-of-hospital
Bar-Joseph, G., Weinberger, T., Castel, T.,
amiodarone in 5 dogs. J Vet Int Med
crdiopulmonary resuscitation of
et al., 1998. Comparison of sodium
23.657-661
ventricular fbrillation and pulseless
bicarbonate, Carbicarb, and THAM
Domino, K.B., Bowdle, T.A..
ventricular tachycardia: a
during CPR in dogs. Crit Care Med
Posner, K.L., et al., 2004. Injuries
observational cohort study. Critical
26, 1397-1408.
and liability related to central
Care 10 (1), R13.
Bidwell, L.A., Bramlage, L.R.,
vascular catheters, a closed claims
Grmec, S., Strnad, M., Kupnik, D., et al.,
Rood, W.A., 2007. Equine
analysis. Anesthesiology 100,
2009. Erythropoietin facilitates the
perioperative fatalities associated
1411-1418.
return of spontaneous circulation
with general anaesthesia at a private
Dorian, P, Cass, D., Schwartz, B., et al.,.
and survival in victims of out-of-
 practice-a retrospective case series.
2002. Amiodarone as compared with
hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation
Vet Anaesth Analg 34, 23-30.
lidocaine for shock-resistant
80, 631-637.
666
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
Gueugniaud, P-Y., David, I.-S.,
amiodarone. J Vet Int Med 14,
Leong, E.C.M., Bendall, J.C., Boyd, A.C.,
Chanzy, E., et al., 2008. Vasopressin
96-99.
et al., 2001. Sodium bicarbonate
and epinephrine vs. epinephrine
Janssens, L., Altman, S., Rogers, PA..
improves the chance of resuscitation
alone in cardiopulmonary
1979. Respiratory and cardiac arrest
after 10 minutes of cardiac arrest in
resuscitation. N Engl I Med 359,
under general anaesthesia: treatment
dogs. Resuscitation 51, 309-315.
21-30.
by acupuncture of the nasal
Lottes, A.E., Rundell, A.E., Geddes, L.A.,
Gunew, M., Marshall, R., Lui, M., et al.
philtrum. Vet Rec 105, 273-276.
et al., 2007. Sustained abdominal
2008. Fatal venous air embolism in
Johansson, A.M., Gardner, S.Y.,
compression during CPR raises
a cat undergoing dental extractions.
Jones, S.L., et al., 2003.
 coronary perfusion pressures as
JSmall Anim Pract 49, 601-604.
Hypomagnesemia in hospitalized
much as vasopressor drugs.
Harvey, R.C., Schaer, M., 2007.
horses. J Vet Int Med 17, 860-867.
Resuscitation 75, 515-524.
Endocrine disease. In: Tranquilli.
Johnston, G.M., Eastman, J.K.,
Mally, S., Jelatancev, A., Grmec, S., 2007.
W.J., Thurmon, J.C., Grimm, K.A.
Taylor, P.M., et al., 2002.
Effects of epinephrine and
(Eds.), Lumb & Jones Veterinary
Confdential enquiry of perioperative
vasopressin on end-tidal carbon
Anesthesia and Analgesia, fourth ed.
equine fatalities (CEPEF): mortality
dioxide tension and mean arterial
Blackwell Publishing, Ames. pp.
results of Phases 1 and 2. Vet
blood pressure in out-of-hospital
933-936.
Anaesth Analg 29, 159-170.
crdiopulmonary resuscitation: an
Haskin, S.C., 1992. Internal cardiac
Kass, P.H., Haskins, S.C., 1992. Survival
observational study. Critical Care
compressions. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 following cardiopulmonary
11 (2), R39.
200, 1945-1946.
resuscitation in dogs and cats. Vet
McGoldrick, T.M.E., Bowen, I.M..
Hayes, G.M., 2009. Severe seizures
Emerg Crit Care 2, 57-65.
Clarke, K.W., 1998. Sudden cardiac
associated with traumatic brain
Kellagher, R.E.B., Watney, G.C.G., 1986.
arrest in an anaesthetized horse
 injury managed by controlled
Cardiac arrest during anaesthesia in
associated with low venous oxygen
hypothermia, pharmacologic
two horses. Vet Rec 119, 347-349.
tensions. Vet Rec 142, 610-611.
 coma, and mechanical ventilation
Khanna, C., Lund, E.M., Raffe, M., et al.,
Mentzelopoulos, S.D., Zakynthinos,
in a dog. I Vet Emerg Crit Care 19.
1998. Hypomagnesemia in 188
S.G., Tzouf, M., et al., 2009.
29-34.
dogs: a hospital population-based
Vasopressin, epinephrine, and
Hofmeister, E.H., Brainard, B.M.,
prevalence study. I Vet Int Med 2.
corticosteroids for in-hospital cardiac
Egger, C.M., et al., 2009. Prognostic
304-309.
arrest. Arch Intern Med 169, 15-24.
indicators for dogs and cats with
Kilgannon, JI.H., Jones, A.E.
Mitchell, S.., McCarthy, R., Rudloff, K.,
cardiopulmonary arrest treated by
Shapiro, N.l., et al., 2010.
et al., 2000. Tracheal rupture
cardiopulmonary cerebral
 Association between arterial
associated with intubation in cats:
resuscitation at a university teaching
hyperoxia following resuscitation
20 cases [1996-1998). J Am Vet Med
hospital. I Am Vet Med Assoc 235.
from cardiac arrest and in-hospital
Assoc 216, 1592-1595.
50-57.
mortality. J Am Med Assoc 303,
Mosing, M., Iff, I.K., Nemetz, W., 2008.
Hwang, S.O., Kim, S.H., Kim, H., et al..
2165-2171
Cardiopulmonary arrest and
2008. Comparison of 15:1, 15:2.
Krieter, H., Denz, C., Janke, C., et al..
resuscitation following an extradural
and 30:2 compression-to-ventilation
2002. Hypertonic-hyperoncotic
injection in a normovolemic dog.
ratios for cardiopulmonary
solutions reduce the release of
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18, 532-536.
 resuscitation in a canine model of a
simulated, witnessed cardiac arrest.
ardiac troponin i and s-100 after
Muir, W.W., Hubbell, J.A.E., 2009.
Acad Emerg Med 2, 183-189.
successful cardiopulmonary
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In:
Hubbell, JLA.E., Muir, w.W., Gaynor, J.S.
resuscitation in pigs. Anesth Analg
Muir, W.w., Hubbell, JA.E. (Eds.),
95.1031-1036
Equine Anesthesia, Monitoring and
1993. Cardiovascular effects of
Krismer, A.C., Wenzel, V.,Karl, H., et al.
Emergency Therapy, second ed.
thoracic compression in horses
2004. Vasopressin during
 Saunders/Elsevier, St Louis, pp.
subjected to euthanasia. Equine Vet J
25.282-284
ardiopulmonary resuscitation: A
418-429.
ICCOR, 2010. International Consensus
progress report. Crit Care Med 32
Nagao, K., 2009. Chest compression-
 on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
(9, Suppl), S432-S435.
 only cardiocerebral resuscitation.
Lagasse, R.S., 2002. Anesthesia safety:
Curr Opin Crit Care 15, 189-197.
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care
Science with Treatment
model or myth? A review of the
Noppens, R.R., Christ, M.,
Recommendations 2010 Circulation
 published literature and analysis of
Brambrink, A.M., 2006. An early
122 (16, suppl 2), S298-S421
aurrent original data. Anesthesiology
bolus of hypertonic saline
Iff I., Moens, Y., 2008. Two cases of
97.1609-1617.
hydroxyethyl starch improves
bradyarrhythmia and hypotension
Lienhart, A., Auroy, Y., Pequignot, F.
long-term outcome after global
 after extradural injections in dogs.
et al., 2006. Survey of anesthesia-
cerebral ischemia. Crit Care Med 34,
Vet Anaesth Analg 35, 265-269.
 related mortality in France.
2194-2200
 International Liaison Committee on
Anesthesiology 105 (6), 1087-1097.
Ober, C.P., Spotswood, T.C.,
Resuscitation (ILCOR), 2005.
Loeckinger, A., Kleinsasser, A..
Hancock, R., 2006. Fatal venous air
American Heart Association, and
Wenzel, V., et al., 2002. Pulmonary
embolism in a cat with a
European Resuscitation Council.
 gas exchange after cardiopulmonary
retropharyngeal diverticulum. Vet
Circulation 112, Il1-1-l1-4
resuscitation with either vasopressin
Radiol Ultrasound 47, 153-158.
Jacobs, G., Calvert, C., Kraus, M., 2000.
Or epinephrine. Crit Care Med 30.
Pargett, M., Geddes, L.A..
Hepatopathy in 4 dogs treated with
2059-2062.
Otlewski, M.P., et al., 2008.
667
Section
3
Special anaesthesia
Rhythmic abdominal compression
Sanehi, O., Calder, I., 1999.
associated with anaesthesia -
CPR ventilates without supplemental
Capnography and the differentiation
a prospective survey in France.
breaths and provides effective blood
between tracheal and oesophageal
Can Anaesth Soc J 33.
drculation. Resuscitation 79.
intubation. Anaesthesia 54.
336-344.
460-467.
604-605.
Waldrop. J.E., Rozanski, E.A.,
Pilchera, I., Weatherall, M., Shirtcliffe,
Schmittinger, C.A., Astner, S., Astner, L.
Swank, E.D., et al., 2004. Causes of
P, et al., 2012. The effect of
et al., 2005. Cardiopulmonary
cardiopulmonary arrest, resuscitation
hyperoxia following cardiac arrest - A
resuscitation with vasopressin in a
management, and functional 
systematic review and meta-analysis
dog. Vet Anaesth Analg 32, 112-114.
 outcome in dogs and cats surviving
 of animal trials. Resuscitation 83,
Schneider, A., Bottiger, B.w., Popp. E..
ardiopulmonary arrest. J Vet Emerg
417-422
2009. Cerebral resuscitation after
Crit Care 14, 22-29.
Punkett, S.l., McMichael, M., 2008.
ardiocirculatory arrest. Anesth Analg
Wang. T., Tang, W., Sun, S., et al., 2008.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
108, 971-979.
Intravenous infusion of bone
small animal medicine: an update. J
Scofeld, D.B., Alexander, D.L.,
marrow mesenchymal stem cells
Vet Int Med 22, 9-25.
Franklin, R.P., et al., 2010. Review of
improves brain function after
Polderman, K.H., 2008. Hypothermia
fatalities and adverse reactions after
resuscitation from cardiac arrest.
 and neurological outcome after
administration of α-2 adrenergic
Crit Care Med 36.
ardiac arrest: state of the art. Eur J
agonist reversal agents in the horse.
S486-S491.
Anaesth 25 (S42), 23-30.
Proc Am Assoc Eq Pract 56, 44-49.
Wenzel, V., Krismer, A.C., Arntz, R..
Prengel, A.W., Linstedt, U., Zenz, M..
Scroggin, R.D., Quandt, I., 2009. The
et al., 2004. A comparison of
et al., 2005. Effects of combined
use of vasopressin for treating
vasopressin and epinephrine for
administration of vasopressin,
vasodilatory shock and
out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary
epinephrine, and norepinephrine
ardiopulmonary arrest. J Vet Emerg
resuscitation. N Engl I Med 350,
during cardiopulmonary
Crit Care 19, 135-137.
105-113.
resuscitation in pigs. Crit Care Med
Somberg, J.C., Timar, S., Bailin, S.J..
Wenzel, V., Lindner, K.H., Krismer, A.C.,
33.2587-2591.
2004. Lack of a hypotensive effect
et al., 2000. Survival with full
Raptopoulos, D., Karatzias, C., 1981.
with rapid administration of a new
 neurologic recovery and no cerebral
 Successful resuscitation after cardiac
aqueous formulation of intravenous
pathology after prolonged
arrest in a cow. Veterinary Record
Amiodarone. Am I Card 93.
ardiopulmonary resuscitation with
109, 17.
576-581.
vasopressin in pigs. I Am Coll
Rieser, T.M., 2000. Cardiopulmonary
Stadlbauer, K.H., MD,
Cardiol 35. 527-533.
resuscitation. Clin Tech Small Anim
Wagner-Berger, H.G., Wenzel, V.
Wess, G., Thomas, W.P, Berger, D.M.
Pract 15. 76-81.
et al., 2003. Survival with full
et al., 2006. Applications,
Riordan, L.L., Schaer, M., 2009.
neurologic recovery after prolonged
complications, and outcomes
Potassium disorders. In:
ardiopulmonary resuscitation with
of transvenous pacemaker
Silverstein, D.C., Hopper, K. (Eds.),
a combination of vasopressin and
implantation in 105 dogs
Small Animal Critical Care Medicine.
epinephrine in pigs. Anesth Analg
[1997-2002). J Vet Intern Med 20,
Saunders Elsevier, St Louis, pp.
96, 1743-1749.
877-884.
229-233
Sternbach, G.L., Varon, I., Fromm Jr, R.,
Wingfield, W.E., Van Pelt, D.R., 1992.
Ristagno, G., Tang. W., Chang, Y.T.
et al., 2005. The Resuscitation
 Respiratory and cardiopulmonary
et al., 2007. The quality of chest
Greats: The humane societies.
arrest in dogs and cats: 265 cases
compressions during CPR overrides
Resuscitation 45, 71-75.
(1986-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc
importance of timing of
Stroumpoulis, K., Xanthos, T., Rokas, G.
200, 1993-1996.
defbrillation. Chest 132, 70-75.
 et al., 2008. Vasopressin and
Xanthos, T., Bassiakou, E.
Ristagno, G., Tang, W., Huang, L., et al..
 epinephrine in the treatment of
Koudouna, E, et al., 2009.
 2009. Epinephrine reduces cerebral
cardiac arrest: an experimental study.
Combination pharmacotherapy in
 perfusion during cardiopulmonary
Crit Care 12, R40.
the treatment of experimental
resuscitation. Crit Care Med 37.
Tacker, W.A., Geddes, L.A..
crdiac arrest. Am J Emerg Med 27.
1408-1415
Rosborough, J.P., et al., 1973.
651-659.
Rush, J.E., Wingfeld, W.E., 1992.
Ventricular defbrillation of a 341 kg
Yu, T., Weil, M.H., Tang. W., et al., 2002.
Recognition and frequency of
horse using precordial electrodes.
Adverse outcomes of interrupted
dysrhythmias during
Can I Comp Med 37, 382-390.
 precordial compression during.
ardiopulmonary arrest. I Am Vet
Tiret, L., Desmonts, J.M., Hatton, F..
automated defbrillation. Circulation 
Med Assoc 200, 1932-1937.
et al., 1986. Complications
106, 368-372.
668
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
Chapter
22
SUGGESTED READING
As previously mentioned, the most
Circulation 122 (16 suppl 2),
Wang. T, Tang, W., Sun, S., et al., 2008.
recent ILCOR review of the
S249-S638
 Intravenous infusion of bone
guidelines for CPCR in humans was
Muir, W.w., Hubbell, J.A.E., 2009.
marrow mesenchymal stem cells
 published in the October and
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In:
improves brain function after
November 2010 issues of
Muir, W.w., Hubbell, JA.E. (Eds. ),
resuscitation from cardiac arrest. Crit
Resuscitation [ERC) and Circulation
 Equine Anesthesia, Monitoring and
Care Med 36, S486-S491.
(ICCOR and AHA). Further
Emergency Therapy, second ed.
Wenzel, V., Lindner, K.H., Krismer, A.C.,
updates to the 2010 guidelines
Saunders/Elsevier, St Louis, pp.
et al., 2o00. Survival with full
will appear soon thereafter and
418-429.
 neurologic recovery and no cerebral
can be found at www.erc.edu/
Neumar, R.w., Nolan, I.P., Adrie, C.
 pathology after prolonged
index.php/ilcor/en/ or
et al., 2008. Post-cardiac arrest
cardiopulmonary resuscitation with
www.ilcor.org/en/home/.
syndrome epidemiology.
vasopressin in pigs. I Am Coll
American Heart Association [AHA],
pathophysiology, treatment, and
Cardiol 35, 527-533.
2010. Guidelines for
 prognostication, a consensus
Wenzel, V., Krismer, A.C., Arntz, R.,
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and
statement from ILCOR. Circulation
et al., 2004. A comparison of
Emergency Cardiovascular Care. 2010
118, 2452-2483.
vasopressin and epinephrine for
Circulation 122 (18, suppl 3),
Plunkett, S.J., McMichael, M., 2008.
 out-of-hospital cardiopulmonary
S640-S933
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in
resuscitation. N Engl I Med 350,
Cooper, J.A., Cooper, I.D., Cooper, I.M.,
small animal medicine: an update.
105-113.
2006. Cardiopulmonary
JVet Intern Med 22, 9-25.
Wess, G., Thomas, W.P., Berger, D.M..
resuscitation: history, current
 Reassessment Campaign on Veterinary
et al., 2006. Applications,
 practice, and future direction.
Resuscitation ( RECOVER) Initiative.
 complications, and outcomes of 
Circulation 114, 2839-2849.
2012. RECOVER evidence and
 transvenous pacemaker implantation
Hofmeister, E.H., Brainard, B.M.,
 knowledge gap analysis on veterinary
in 105 dogs (1997-2002). J Vet
Egger, C.M., et al., 2009. Prognostic
CPR. Parts 1-7. J Vet Emerg Crit
Intern Med 20, 877-884.
indicators for dogs and cats with
Care 22 (S1), S4-S131.
Wingfeld, W.E., Van Pelt, D.R., 1992.
cardiopulmonary arrest treated by
Rush, J.E., Wingfeld, W.E., 1992.
Respiratory and cardiopulmonary
cardiopulmonary cerebral
 Recognition and frequency of
arrest in dogs and cats: 265 cases
resuscitation at a university teaching
dysrhythmias during
[1986-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
hospital. I Am Vet Med Assoc 235,
crdiopulmonary arrest.
200, 1993-1996.
50-57.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 200,
Xanthos, T., Bassiakou, E.,
 International Liaison Committee on
1932-1937
Koudouna, E, et al., 2009.
Resuscitation (ILCOR), 2005.
Schneider, A., Bottiger, B.W., et al.
Combination pharmacotherapy in
American Heart Association, and
 2009. Cerebral resuscitation after
the treatment of experimental
European Resuscitation Council,
cardiocirculatory arrest. Anesth Analg
cardiac arrest. Am I Emerg Med 27,
Circulation 112, Ill-1-1l1-4.
108, 971-979.
651-659.
Intermational Consensus on
Scroggin, R.D., Quandt, I., 2009. The
Yu, T., Weil, M.H., Tang. W., et al., 2002.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
use of vasopressin for treating
Adverse outcomes of interrupted
(ICCOR) and Emergency
vasodilatory shock and
precordial compression during
Cardiovascular Care Science With
cardiopulmonary arrest. J Vet Emerg
automated defbrillation. Circulation
Treatment Recommendations, 2010.
Crit Care 19, 135-137.
106, 368-372.
669
Index
Page numbers followed by 'f' indicate fgures, 't' indicate tables, and b' indicate boxes.
A
abnormalities,55-56
dog. 433t, 438
see also blood gas analysis
induction of anaesthesia, 144
abaxial sesamoid injection,262-263
acidosis
eye movements, 23-24
ABCD resuscitation protocol, 649
metabolic hyperchloraemic, 55-56
horse, 284, 289
acceleromyography, 178-179, 179f
respiratory, 51
pig.389t,395
ACE inhibitors, dog, 414t, 415
acupuncture, respiratory stimulation,
reptiles, 554t
acepromazine, 81-83
651
sheep and goat, 360
Qz-agonist combination, horse, 252,
administration of anaesthetics,
small mammals, 145
253t
209-242
TIVA, 145, 289
butorphanol combination
inhalation anaesthetics, 214-240
Alfaxan@ see alfaxalone
dog. 433t
intravenous anaesthetics, 209-214
alfentanil, 114
horse, 253t, 280
administration sets, 213-214
allergic reactions, 618f
contraindications, 82
infusion rates, 213b
see also anaphylaxis
etorphine combination see
adrenaline [epinephrine)
allodynia, 102-103
Immobilon
advanced life support, G56t-6571
alpaca (Lama pacos), 368
opioid combination
rabbit, 536t
see also camelids
dog. 433t
 advanced cardiac life support, 649,
Q-agonists, 85-91, 252, 625-626
horse, 253t
654, 656t-657t
actions of, 86b, 87-91
pethidine combination, dog. 433t
African pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix
analgesia, 87, 252
 premedication, 81
atelerix albiventris).549,549f
cardiovascular, 87-88
cat, 510t, 513
age considerations, general anaesthesia
respiratory. 88
dog. 422, 433t
in dogs, 417-418, 417t
sedation, 87
horse, 277, 281t, 290t
air embolism, 213, 632b, 648
camelids, 371t
sedation
air, medical grade, 216
cat, 504-505, 504t
cat, 504
airway, 650-651
ketamine combination, 505
cattle, 317t
horse, 300
opioid combination, 505
dog. 407, 408t
laryngeal mask, 233-234, 234f,
premedication, 510t
horse, 247
395
cattle, 317-318
pig,389,389t
pig.386,386f
nerve blocks see cattle, nerve
sheep and goat, 354, 355t
resistance, 196, 198
blocks
side effects, 82
see also endotracheal intubation
caudal block, 257b
TIVA, horse, 290t
albumin, total, 54t
dog
acetaminophen (paracetamol), 106
albuterol see salbutamol
 intraoperative supplementation,
acetylcholine, 5
alcuronium, 185
448-449
nicotinic receptors, 171-172
alfaxalone [alphaxalone), 5, 142-145
sedation, 408t, 409-410
release of, 171
camelids, 373
horse
acetylcholinesterase, 171
cat, 510t, 516t, 518
acepromazine combination,
Ach see acetylcholine
induction of anaesthesia, 144,
253t
acid-base balance, 53-56, 54t
510t
analgesia, 252
673
Index
benzodiazepine/ketamine
anaesthetic gases, 215-217, 215t
aortocaval compression, 631b
combination, 291
analysers, 24-25, 25f
APACHE score, 405
caudal block, 257b
cylinders see individual gases
apneustic breathing, 523, 617,
ketamine combination, 280-281
flowmeters, 217-218, 218f
647-648
opioid combination, 253t
pressure gauges, 217, 217f
apnoea, postoperative, 190
PIVA, 295-296
regulators, 217
apnoea alarms, 42-43
sedation,247-250,277-278
room pollution, 237b
arachidonic acid, 105f
TIVA, 260f, 290t, 291
scavenging systems, 235-238,
arrhythmias, 8, 617-623
infusions, 250-251, 251b
236f-237f
bradycardia, 12
pharmacokinetics, 87
tension, 69-70
cardiac arrest, 654
pig, 389-390
see also individual gases
causes, 617-623, 618t-622t
PIVA,295-296
anaesthetic record, 21f
defbrillation, 656t-657t, 658, 658f
 in pregnancy, 590
analgesia, 3, 101-133
dog. 465-466, 465t
sheep and goat, 355-356, 355t
birds, 559-560, 562t
ECG, 618t-622t
side effects, 250, 505
cat, 503-508
intrathoracic procedures, 606
TIVA, 260f, 290t, 291
cattle, 315-319
management, 617-623
see also individual drugs
intranasal local, 332
tachycardia, 12, 623
Q-antagonists, 91-92, 91b
intravenous regional, 331-332,
see also specific arrhythmias
cattle, 318
332f
arterial blood pressure see blood
dog. 412t
dog. 406-412
pressure
see also individual drugs
pain scores, 463-464
asystole, 654
Althesin@, 138, 142-143
postoperative, 462-464
ataxic breathing, 617
alveolar tension of inhaled
ensuring. 189
ataxic myoglobinuric syndrome.
anaesthetics, 68-69, 68f-69f
epidural/intrathecal see epidural
580t
Ambu bag. 650f
 analgesia
atelectasis, horse, 268, 269f
American Black bear (Lrsus americarus)
fish, 565
atipamezole, 91-92, 249, 626
general anaesthesia, 582t
horse, 253-258
advanced life support, 656t-657t
se also bear
premedication, 278
bear, 582t
amethocaine, 118-119
supplementary. 295
bobcat, 582t
aminopyridine, cattle, 318
intrathoracic procedures, 603-604
cmelids, 371t
amiodarone, advanced life support,
intravenous regional see intravenous
cat, 505
6561-657t, 661
regional analgesia
cattle, 317t, 318
amitriptyline, 413-414
local see local analgesia
dog. 412, 412t
AnaCon Da injection vaporizer, 220
pig, 391-392
mustelids. 548t
anaemia, 14
pre-emptive, 103
pig. 396
anaeroid manometer, 37, 37f
reptiles, 551-552, 554t
atmospheric pressure, 65-66, 672
anaesthesia, 3-18
small mammals, 539-540
atracurium,183-184
definition, 3
see also nerve blocks; and individual
dog. 449, 451t, 452
recovery from, 70
drugs
dose, 182t, 452
veterinary. 4
 analgesiometry, 104
duration of action, 182t
see also general anaesthesia/
anaphylaxis, 618f
horse, 299
anaesthetics; local
colloid administration, 635
onset time, 182t
anaesthesia/anaesthetics
anion gap. 54
1665 81d
anaesthesia machine, 215f
reference range, 54t
sheep and goat, 365
anaesthesia workstation, 215-220, 215f
anti-arrhythmics, 656t-657t, 661
atrial fbrillation, 618t-6221
deaning and sterilization, 239-240
antibiotics
atrioventricular block, 618t-622t
cinical use, 238-240
dog. 413, 414t
atropine,94-95
common gas outlet, 220
horse, 274
advanced life support, 656t-657t,
flowmeters, 217-218, 218f
anticholinergics, 93-95
661
gases and cylinders, 215-217, 215t
cat, 513
cat, 504t
injection vaporization, 220
dog. 408t
premedication, 510t
large animals, 226f
premedication, 421-422
dog. 408t, 451-452
 MRI compatible machines, 220
horse, 277-278, 297-298
premedication, 421-422
oxygen flush valve, 220
 in pregnancy. 591
horse, 250, 277, 297-299
pressure gauges, 217, 217f
premedication, 93-95, 277-278,
pig.389t
regulators, 217
421-422, 513
butorphanol-medetomidine-
small mammals, 215f
see also individual drugs
ketamine combination, 396
vaporizers, 71-72, 71f 218-220.
anticholinesterases, 93
butorphanol-midazolam
219f
antipsychotics, dog, 413-415, 414t
combination, 395
674
Index
butorphanol-midazolam-
catheter insertion,564,564f
cat, 527-530
xylazine combination, 395
endotracheal intubation, 562f
dog. 475-476, 475f
sheep and goat, 357, 365
fluid infusion, 560f
see also paravertebral nerve block
auriculopalpebral nerve block
general anaesthesia
bradycardia, 12
cattle, 320, 320f
inhalation agents, 561-563, 563f
bradykinin, 102
dog, 474-489, 474f
intravenous agents, 561, 562t
brain, anaesthetic gas tension, G9-70
horse, 262
recovery. 564, 565f
breath-holding. 8
auscultation, 12
nerve blocks, 560-561
breathing, 650-651
axis deer [Axis axis]. 374
restraint, 560, 561f
abnormal, 611-617, 613t-614t
axons, 115
sedation, 559-560, 562t
bronchoconstriction, 612
azaperone, 83
ventilation, 563-564, 563f
inregular pattern, 616-617
pig 389t, 390, 395
BIS see bispectral index
tachypnoea/panting, 612-616
bison, immobilization, 575f
see also specific patterns
B
bispectral index (BIS), 7, 9, 25-26
 breathing systems see delivery
blood
(breathing) systems
Badcock seal, 238
loss, 42, 42f, 525-526, 635-637
breed characteristics, dog, 416-417,
badger [Meles meles), 548, 548t
fluid resuscitation, 636-637
416b, 417f
Bain circuit, 227-228, 228f
monitoring, 42, 42f, 458-459
Bridion" see sugammadex
ball flowmeters, 218
transfusion triggers, 637
bronchoalveolar lavage. dog. 466-467
ball python, 551t
viscosity, 210
bronchodilation, 612
barbiturates, 92. 138-140
volume, 27t
bronchoscopy, dog. 466-467
seealso individual drugs
paediatric patients, 42
bupivacaine, 118
base excess, 53-54, 672
blood gas analysis, 43-47, 53-55
caudal block, 257b
reference range. 54t
hyper/hypocarbia, 44, 44t
dog, epidural analgesia, 478-479
 basic cardiac life support, 649-650
mixed venous, central venous and
dose, 117t
bear
venous PO, 47
horse, 257b
general anaesthesia, 5821
Oxygen affnity, 46-47, 46f
sheep and goat, 346-347, 348t
remote injection, 574f
oxygen content, 45-46
digital nerve block, 352
bearded dragon, 551t
oxygenation, 44-45
femoral nerve block, 352
benzodiazepine antagonists, 85
blood pressure, 27t, 30-38, 30b
buprenorphine, 92-93, 112t, 113
dog. 412, 412t
cat, 501t
birds, 562t
benzodiazepines, 80, 84-85
cattle, 315, 339
cat,504t
camelids, 371t
 direct measurement, 35-38.
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
ketamine combination, 373
35f-38f
511
cat, 504t, 505
dog. 454-455, 454b
 premedication, 510t
dog, 407-409, 408t
high see hypertension
dog. 408t, 412t, 422, 424
fentanyl combination, 439
horse, 273f
epidural analgesia, 480
premedication, 422-423
indirect measurement, 30, 31f
midazolam combination, 433t
horse,253,278,280
Doppler ultrasound, 29-30.
postoperative analgesia, 464t
Qzagonist/ketamine
31f-32f
horse, 256, 256t
combination, 291
oscillometry, 32-35, 33f
pig. 389t, 391
ketamine combination, 282
standards, 35
sheep and goat
muscle relaxation, 298
low see hypotension
epidural injection, 351
muscle relaxation, 191
and neuromuscular blockade, 186
sedation, 355t, 356-357
sheep and goat, 356
boa constrictor, 551t
small mammals, 540t
see also individual drugs
bobcat ( Lyrmx rufus), general
butorphanol, 92-93, 112t, 114
bicarbonate, 53, 672
anaesthesia, 582t
birds, 562t
reference range, 54t
body temperature, 56-57
bobcat, 582t
cat, 501t
cat, 501t, 526
camelids, 369, 372
Bier block see intravenous regional
dog. 461
cat, 504t
analgesia
hyperthermia see hyperthermia
 castration/ovariohysterectomy.
bile duct calculi, dog. 470t
hypothermia see hypothermia
511
biliary system disease, dog. 470
and neuromuscular blockade, 185
 premedication, 510t
biochemical tests, 12-13
pig.399
cattle, 317t, 319
bioflms, 234-235
sheep and goat, 366-367
dog. 408t, 412t, 422
Biot's breathing. 617, 647-648
small mammals, 543t
acepromazine combination, 433t
Bird Mark 7 ventilator, 204f
wild animals, 581, 581f
Q-agonist combination, 433t
birds, 558-564, 560f
box tortoise, 551t
midazolam combination, 433t
analgesia, 559-560, 5621
 brachial plexus block
postoperative analgesia, 464t
675
Index
horse,256,256t
sedation, 371-372
carfentanil, 114-115
acepromazine combination,
see also individual species
accidental exposure, 346, 575-576
253t, 280
apillary refill time, 29-30
sheep and goat, 357
Qzagonist combination, 253t
capnography, 49-53, 50f, 650-651
carprofen, 106-107, 108t
dose.256t
interpretation, 51f
cat, 508t
pig. 389t, 390-391
sheep and goat, 365-366
horse. 254t
 atropine-medetomidine-
troubleshooting,51t
pig.391
ketamine combination,396
apture myopathy, 580-581, 580t
sheep and goat, 364
atropine-midazolam
capture shock syndrome, 580t
side effects, 107
combination, 395
capture of wild animals, 572,
castration
atropine-xylazine combination,
573f-574f
camelids, 369
395
arboetomidate, 146
cat,509-512
reptiles, 554t
crbon dioxide, 216
cattle, 326
sheep and goat, 355t, 356
absorption see rebreathing circuits
horse, 265-266, 265f
small mammals, 540t
cylinders, 216
pig.401
butyrophenones, 83
end-tidal, 499
cat, 499-534
see also individual drugs
PaCOz, 44t, 53, 501t
analgesia, 503-508
TCO,53
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
c
transcutaneous analysis, 53
509-512
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, dog
gabapentin, 123t
 caesarian section
414t
lidocaine, 123t
camelids, 369
cardiac arrest, 52
NSAIDs, 108t, 507-508, 508t
cat, 594-597, 596b
causes, 647-648, 647t
opioids, 112t, 505-507
cattle, 592
electrical shock, 654
tramadol,123t
dog. 594-597
medical therapies, 656t-657t,
aortocaval compression, 631b
horse, 592
660-664
blood gas analysis, 44t
pig, 402
anti-arrhythmics, 661
blood loss, 525-526
se also obstetric anaesthesia;
fluids, 661-662
cardiovascular monitoring.
pregnancy
 routes of administration,
524-526
calcitonin gene-related peptide, 102
660
castration, 509-512
calcium
vasopressors, 660-661
cyanosis, 624t-625t
advanced life support, 663
rhythms, 654
diaphragmatic rupture, 605-607,
horse, 297
cardiac compressions, 651-653, 652f,
605b
calcium channel blockers, dog. 414t,
653b
endotracheal intubation, 514-516,
415
internal, 653-654
515f-516f
calcium chloride, advanced life
cardiac disease, dog, 464-466
euthanasia, 512
support, 656t-657t
cardiac index, horse, 273f
fasting, 512
calcium gluconate, advanced life
cardiac output, 39-42
feral, 511-512
support, 656t-657t
and anaesthetic uptake, 72
general anaesthesia, 510t, 512-522
camel, 376-377
cattle, 315
adjunct agents, 522
endotracheal intubation, 377, 377f
decreased, 52
administration, 521-522
general anaesthesia, 376-377
horse, 269-270
induction, 141-142, 141t, 144,
heart rate, 376
measurement
146, 510t
local analgesia, 377
Fick method, 40, 40f
inhalation agents, 520-522
camelids, 368-374
flow method, 41-42
intravenous agents, 513-514,
endotracheal intubation, 370-371,
impedance cardiography, 42
513f-514f, 516-520, 516t
370f
indicator dilution method.
MAC values, 24t, 520-521
fasting. 369
40-41
monitoring, 522-527
 general anaesthesia, 369-374
pulse contour method, 41
premedication, 510t, 513
inhalation agents, 373
cardiac thrill, 12
preparation, 512
management, 373-374
cardiomyopathy, dog. 465, 465t
recovery, 526-527
preparation, 369
cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
hypotension, 524-525, 628t-629t
venepuncture, 370, 370f
see resuscitation
local analgesia, 527-530
heart rate, 374
cardiovascular disease, 13-15
muscle relaxation, 522
local analgesia, 368-369
cardiovascular function, 27t
nerve blocks, 512, 527-530
caesarian section, 369
cat, 524-526
brachial plexus, 527-530
castration, 369
horse, 267-268
dental nerve, 527
caudal epidural, 368-369, 369t
 pregnancy-related changes, 588,
digital, 527, 528f
obstetric anaesthesia, 369, 594
588t
epidural, 528-529
676
Index
peroneal/tibial, 529
fluid infusion, 339
central nervous system (CNS)
sciatic, 529-530
general anaesthesia, 332-340
monitoring, 21-26
obstetric anaesthesia, 594-597,
hypoventilation and hypoxia.
 anaesthetic gas analysers, 24-25,
596b
321f
25f
ovariohysterectomy, 509-512, 525f
inhalation agents, 337-338
BIS, 7, 9, 25-26
pain assessment, 508-509
intravenous agents, 333
EEG see EEG
physiology/biochemistry, 501 -502,
monitoring. 339-340
eye signs, 23-24, 23f-24f
501t
premedication, 332-333
neurotransmitters, 5
acid-base balance, 54t
recovery, 340, 340f
pregnancy-related changes, 588t
 body temperature, 526
techniques, 332-334
synapses, 5f
respiratory rate, 524
local analgesia, 319-332
noradrenergic, 86f
preoperative evaluation, 500-503
castration,326
central venous POz, 47
diagnostic tests, 502
complications, 319-320
central venous pressure (CVP), 38-39,
disease impact, 502
intranasal, 332
39f
history, 500
intravenous regional, 331-332,
cerebral function, monitoring of 7
physical examination, 500-502
332f
cerebral resuscitation, 646-647
vaccination, 502
see also nerve blocks, below
Cerenia@ se maropitant
pulmonary oedema, G16b
muscle relaxation, 338
charcoal, activated, 236, 236f
restraint, 502-503, 503f
nerve blocks
chemical immobilization, 571-584
intravenous injection, 513-514,
auriculopalpebral, 320, 320f
anaesthetic agents, 578
513f-514f
cudal epidural, 326-328
equipment, 576-578
sedation, 503-508, 504t
cormual, 320-321, 321f
remote drug delivery, 572, 574f.
acepromazine, 504
digital, 330-331, 330f-331f
576-577
Qz-agonists, 504-505
inverted L, 322, 322f
darts, 577-578, 577f
benzodiazepines, 505
Jumbar epidural, 329-330,
gas pistols/rifles, 577f
TIVA,520
329f
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, 616,
tracheotomy, 615b
lumbosacral epidural, 329
647-648
ventilation,523-524,523f
paravertebral, 322-325.
chinchilla, physiology/biochemistry.
cataracts, dog, 472
323f-324f
543t
catheters, 209-213
peribulbar, 322
chloral hydrate, 92, 148-149
choice of, 210
Petersen eye block, 321-322,
cattle, 318-319
epidural, 350, 350f
321f
horse
flow rates, 210
pudendal, 325-326, 325f
barbiturate combination, 292
infection, 210-211
retrobulbar, 322
TIVA, 290t
insertion technique, 211, 211b
obstetric anaesthesia, 592-593
chloralose, 149
over needle, 210f
physiology/biochemistry
chloramphenicol, 413
small vein sets, 210f
cardiac output, 315
chlordiazepoxide, 84
soaker, 481
heart rate, 315, 339
chloroform, 155
triple lumen, 212f
respiratory rate, 339
chlorpromazine, 82-83
catheter insertion
positioning for surgery, 339
cinchocaine, 118
dog. epidural block, 476-478.
pulmonary aspiration, 314
circle circuit, 222-226, 224f-226f
477f
pulmonary oedema, 616b
circulation, 651-653, 652f 653b
horse
regurgitation, 313-314, 314f
IPPV effects, 200
caudal block, 258-259, 259f
restraint, 315
monitoring, 26-42, 27t
jugular vein, 276-277, 276f
salivation, 315
arterial blood pressure, 27t,
cattle, 313-343
sedation, 315-319
30-38
analgesia, 315-319
acepromazine, 317t, 318
blood loss, 42, 42f, 458-459
NSAIDs, 108t, 319
Qz-agonists, 316-318, 317t
cardiac output, 39-42
opioids, 112t
Q-antagonists, 317t, 318
heart rate monitors, 27-29
sedative-opioid combinations,
chloral hydrate, 318-319
left atrial pressure, 39
317t, 319
ketamine, 317t
pulse rate/rhythm, 26, 27f
blood gas analysis, 44t
sedative-opioid combinations,
tissue perfusion, 27t, 29-30
blood pressure, 315, 339
317t, 319
 pregnancy-related changes, 588.
calf, newborn, 593
caudal block, 121
588t
cyanosis, 624t-625t
amelids, 368-369, 369t
cisatracurium, 184
dehorning/disbudding, 321
cattle, 326-328, 327f
dose, 182t
endotracheal intubation, 314-315,
horse, 258-260, 258f-259f
duration of action, 182t
333-334.334f
opioids, 257, 257b
onset time, 182t
fasting. 315, 332
sheep and goat, 352
denbuterol, hypoxia prevention, 271
677
Index
dimazolam, 85
CVP see central venous pressure
premedication, 277-278, 281t,
dog. 408t
cyanosis, 623-626, 624t-625t
290t
horse, 253, 290t
cyclo-oxygenase (COx), 105-106
TIVA, 290t
domipramine, dog, 413-414
see also NSAIDs
infusion, 251b
donidine, 91
cyclodextrins, 137
pig, epidural analgesia, 401
duster breathing. 617
cyclopropane, 155
sheep and goat, sedation, 356
CNS see central nervous system
cystoscopy, dog. 468
detomidine-ketamine-tiletamine-
coaxial circuits, 229
zolazepam (DKTZ), catt]e.
cocaine, 118
D
337
coeliotomy, cattle, 592
dexmedetomidine, 87, 89-90
colloids, 627-635, 630b
Dalton's law, 65-66
cat, 504-505, 504t
advanced life support, 656t-657t
darts, 577-578, 577f
 premedication, 510t
xpansion capabilities, 634-635
deer, 374-376
dog
side effects, 635
general anaesthesia, 374-376, 5821
continuous infusion, 445t
colonoscopy, dog. 467
defbrillation, 656t-657t, 658, 658f
epidural analgesia, 480
Colorado State Acute Pain Scale.
dehorning/disbudding
intraoperative supplementation,
463-464
cattle, 321
448-449
common gas outlet, 220
sheep and goat, 347-348, 347f
ketamine combination, 435
compartmental syndrome, 271-272
delayed-peracute syndrome, 580t
opioid combination, 433t, 439
complications, 611-644
delivery (breathing) systems, 71-72.
premedication, 423
abnormal breathing, 611-617
220-229
sedation, 408t, 409-410
anaesthesia-associated injury.
leaks, 239f 239t
horse, 250
639-642
non-rebreathing circuits, 221t,
infusion, 251b
arrhythmias, 8, 617-623
227-229
pig. 390
cyanosis and hypoxaemia, 623-626
rebreathing circuits, 221-227, 221f,
sheep and goat
hypotension, 30, 626-638
221 t
epidural injection, 351
inadequate anaesthesia, 638-639,
troubleshooting 239
sedation, 356
640t
demand valve, 651f
 dextrose, advanced life support,
muscle movements, 639
dendrites, 115
656t-657t
computed tomography dog. 471
dental nerve block, cat, 527
diabetes mellitus, dog, 414t, 415-416,
computer-controlled anaesthesia, 8-9
depolarizing (non-competitive)
416t
constant rate infusion, 249-251
neuromuscular blockers, 173,
diaphragmatic rupture, 605-607, 605b
continuous infusion valve, 37f
180-181
anaesthetic agents, 605-606
continuous positive airway pressure see
depth of anaesthesia, 6-10
anaesthetic management, G06
CPAP
hypoventilation, 45f
diazepam, 84-85
contrast agents, side effects, 639
desensitization,172
birds, 562t
Control of Substances Hazardous to
desflurane, 7-8, 164
camelids, 371t
Human Health (COSHH)
cardiovascular effects, 163f
cat, 504t, 505
regulations, 159
cat, 520-521
induction of anaesthesia, 510t
conversions, 672
chemical structure, 162f
cattle, 335t
corn/rat snake, 551t
dog. 442
ketamine combination, 336
comeal reflex, 24
horse, 294
dog. 408t, 423-424, 433t
comual nerve block
MAC,157t, 164
fentanyl combination, 439
cattle, 320-321, 321f
partition coeffcients, 69t
ketamine combination, 435
sheep and goat, 347-348, 347f
physical characteristics, 156t
opioid combination, 439
corticosteroids, dog, 414t, 415
pig.385
horse, 253, 278,280, 281t
coughing. 8, 11-12
sheep and goat, 363-364
mustelids, 548t
COX-inhibiting nitric oxide donors
vaporizer, 219
pig. 389t
(CINODs), 107
detomidine, 87, 89
rabbit, 536t
coyote [Canis latrans), general
accidental exposure, 346
sheep and goat, 355t, 356
anaesthesia, 582t
cattle, sedation, 317, 317t
ketamine combination, 355t,
CPAP, 201-202
caudal block, 257b
360-361
craniotomy, dog, 471
morphine combination, 257b
diethyl ether see ether
creatinine,672
horse, 248f 249
diffusion hypoxia, 70, 160
Cremophor EL, 138, 142-143,
acepromazine combination,
digital nerve block
146-147, 360, 518
253t
cat, 527, 528f
histamine release by, 136b, 438
butorphanol combination, 253t
cattle, 330-331, 330f-331f
αystalloids, 627-635, 630b
caudal block, 257b
dog. 476, 476f
advanced life support, 656t-657t
ketamine combination, 280-281
sheep and goat, 352
89
Index
DINAMAP, 34
health risks, 405
pacemaker implantation, 466
diprenorphine, 115
hepatic disease, 470, 470t
physiology/biochemistry
Diprivan@, 137, 140
induction, 439-440, 439b,
acid-base balance, 54t
dipyrone see metamizole
444-445, 444b, 444t
body temperature, 461
dissociative agents see ketamine;
inhalation agents, 441-464
respiratory rate, 455f
tiletamine-zolazepam
intraoperative supplements,
positioning for surgery, 453
distribution of drugs, 66f
445-449
 preanaesthesia examination,
diuretics, dog, 414t
intraosseous injection, 427
418-419
dobutamine, 630b
intravenous agents, 424-427,
diagnostic tests, 419
advanced life support, 656t-657t
424f-427f, 431-439, 445t
disease significance, 419-420
cat, 630b
MAC values, 24t, 441-442
owerweight/obesity, 418-419,
dog. 456-457, 458t, 630b
monitoring. 453-456, 453f
418f
horse, 297, 630b
neurological disease, 470-471,
thoracic auscultation, 418
preparation,458b
471 t
pulmonary oedema, 616b
sheep and goat, 367
ocular surgery, 471-472
pulse oximetry. 49
dog. 405-498
orthopaedic surgery, 472
restraint,424f
analgesia, 406-412, 408t, 422-424
premedication, 408t, 421-424
sedation, 406-412, 408t, 422-424
gabapentin,123t
preparation, 413-421
Q-agonists, 408t, 409-410
ketamine,123t
puppies, 417-418
benzodiazepines, 407-409
lidocaine, 123t
recovery, 460-464, 461b, 461f
opioid combination, 411, 422
NSAIDs, 108t, 411
renal disease, 472. 473t
phenothiazines, 407
opioids, 112t, 408t, 410, 410b,
safety, 413b
sighthounds, 417
464t
vascular port, 427
TIVA, 440-441
pain scores, 463-464
hypotension, 456-457, 457f,
propofol-fentanyl, 441
postoperative, 462-464
628t-629t
tracheotomy. 615b
tramadol, 123t, 410-411
induction of anaesthesia
trauma, 473
aortocaval compression, 631b
alfaxalone, 144
big dog-little dog. 473
arrhythmias, 618t-622t
etomidate, 146
high-rise syndrome, 473
blood gas analysis, 44t
local analgesia, 473-489, 474f
hit-by-car, 473
blood loss, 458-459
infltration, 481
ventilation, 459-460
blood pressure measurement, 31f,
intra-articular, 482
troubleshooting, 460t
33f,38f
intravenous regional, 482
dopamine, 5
brachycephalic breeds, 416-417,
transdermal lidocaine patch, 489
advanced life support, 656t-657t
416b, 417f
see also nerve blocks, below
dog. 456-457
cardiovascular support, 456-459,
muscle relaxation, 449-452
horse, 297
458t
administration, 450
preparation,458b
cyanosis, 624t-625t
dose rates, 452
sheep and goat, 367
diabetes in, 414t, 415-416, 416t
drugs used for, 449-450, 451t
dopexamine, horse, 297
diaphragmatic rupture, 605-607,
termination,450-452
Doppler ultrasound
605b
nerve blocks, 473-489, 474f
blood pressure measurement,
emdotracheal intubation, 427-431,
auriculopalpebral, 474-489,
29-30,31f-32f
428f-430f, 460t
474f
pig, 398,398f
complications, 430t
brachial plexus, 475-476, 475f
dorsal hemolaminectomy, dog. 471
pharyngotomy, 431, 432f
digital, 476, 476f
double burst stimulation, 177, 177f
fasting. 420-421
epidural/intrathecal, 476-481,
doxapram, 271, 626b
fluid infusion, 456
477f, 479f
cat, 626b
gastro-oesophageal reflux, 420-421
intercostal, 481
cattle, 626b
general anaesthesia, 412-441
interpleural, 481-482
dog. 412, 412t, 626b
administration systems,
mandibular/maxillary, 482-484,
horse, 626b
443-445
483f
side effects, 626b
age characteristics, 417-418, 417t
ocular, 484-485
ventilation effects, 651
breed characteristics, 416-417,
paravertebral, 485-487, 486f
droperidol, 83
416b, 417f
pelvic limb, 487-488
pig. 389t, 390
cardiac disease, 464-466, 465t
peroneal/tibial, 488-489
drug allergy. 16
concurent drug therapy.
RUMM, 489
drug interactions, 16-17
413-416, 414t
obstetric anaesthesia, 594-597,
inhalation anaesthetics, 159
endoscopy 466-468
596b
neuromuscular blockers, 185
exploratory laparotomy.
Oxygen delivery, 462, 462f-463f,
drug metabolism, 13-14, 13f
468-470, 468t
463t
drug transport, 14
679
Index
Dynamic and Interactive Visual
dog. 458, 458t
pig.391
Analogue Scale (DIVAS), 508
sheep and goat, 367
sheep and goat, 357
dynorphins, 110
epidural analgesia, 121-123
femoral nerve block
cat, 528-529
dog. 488
E
complications, 122-123, 480-481
sheep and goat, 352
continuous block, 122
fenpipramide, 95, 113
ECG,20,28-29,29f
contraindications, 122
fentanyl, 92-93, 112t, 114
arrhythmias, 618t-622t
dog, 476-481, 477f, 479f
cat, 499
artifact, 618t-622t
drugs used for, 121-122, 478-480
dog. 408t, 423-424, 433t
edrophonium, 187
horse, 258-266, 258f
benzodiazepine combination,
dog. 451, 451t
loss of resistance test, 349, 478, 529
439
sheep and goat, 365
pig. 400-401
continuous infusion, 445t
EEG,6-7,25-26
sheep and goat, 348-351, 348t
propofol combination, 441
cerebral function monitors, 7
epidural catheters, 350, 350f
TIVA, 441
evoked responses, 7
epidural space, 121
pig.391
power spectrum analysis, 7
epinephrine see adrenaline
sheep and goat, 355t, 364
electrocardiography see ECG
ether, 161
side effects, 423
electroencephalography see EEG
MAC, 161
feral cat, 511-512
electroimmobilization, cattle, 315
physical characteristics, 156t
ferret [Mustela putorius furo), 536, 548
electrolytes, 15
ethylene oxide, 240
general anaesthesia, 540t
imbalance, 663-664
etomidate, 5, 145-146
physiology/biochemistry, 5431
and neuromuscular blockade,
cat, 516t, 518-519
Fick method, 40, 40f
186
induction of anaesthesia, 146,
flters, 234-235
electromyography (EMG), 7, 180
510t
frocoxib, 108t, 109
elephant, 377-379
dog. 433t, 437-438
horse, 254t
endotracheal intubation, 379
eye movements, 23-24
frst order elimination, 74
general anaesthesia, 377-378
horse, 284
fsh.564-566
inhalation agents, 378-379
pharmacokinetics, 137t
analgesia, 565
weight, 377
sheep and goat, 360
general anaesthesia, 566, 566f-567f
elimination, 66f
etorphine, 93, 114
sedation, 565
elimination half-life, 73, 73f
accidental exposure, 346, 575-576
FloTrac"# system, 41
EMLA cream, 118, 530
acepromazine combination see
flowmeters, 217-218, 218f
endorphins, 102, 110
Immobilon@
fluanisone, 83
endoscopy
elephant, 378
fluid balance, 15
dog. 466-468
horse, 284
fluid infusion
see also specifc procedures
sheep and goat, 357
advanced life support, 656t-657t,
endotracheal intubation, 231-233,
eugenols, 146-147
661-662
231f, 672
European Union, cascade system, 4
birds, 560f
birds, 562f
euthanasia, cat, 512
blood loss, 636-637
camel, 377, 377f
Evoked responses, 7
cattle, 339
camelids, 370-371, 370f
expiratory reserve volume, 196-197
dog. 456
cat, 514-516, 515f-516f
eye movements,8, 23-24, 23f
horse, 296
cattle, 314-315, 333-334, 334f
eye signs, 23-24, 23f24f
hypotension, 627, 628t-629t, 630b
deaning and sterilization, 240
pupil size, 8, 24f
monitoring. 634
uffs,231-232
rabbit,536t
dog. 427-431, 428f-430f, 460t
F
rates, 213b
eephant, 379
reptiles, 552f
horse, 284-287, 286f
facemasks, 229, 230f
sheep and goat, 365
occlusion of, 232f
dog: 444-445, 444b, 444t, 462f
small mammals, 539f
pig. 393-395, 394f-395f
rodents, 541f
flumazenil, 85
pressure measurement, 232f
facial nerve paresis, horse, 274f
advanced life support, 656t-657t
sheep and goat, 358-360, 359f
fallow deer (Dama dama), 374
dog, 412, 412t
small mammals, 233f, 545f, 546t
Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT), 7
sheep and goat, 356
enflurane, 7-8, 162
fasting, 11, 15-16
flunixin, 108t, 109
partition coeffcients, 69t
camelids, 369
horse, 254, 254t, 301
physical characteristics, 156t
cat, 512
pig.391
enkephalins, 110
cattle, 315, 332
sheep and goat, 364
ephedrine, 630b
dog 420-421
fluoxetine, dog. 413-415
advanced life support, 656t-657t
horse, 274
fluphenazine, 82
089
Index
foal see horse
see also induction; premedication;
horse, 293
food, withholding of, 15-16
and individual species
MAC, 157t
fospropofol, 142, 142f
gentamicin, horse, 274
partition coeffcients, 69t
dog. 437
gerbil (Mesocricetus auratus), 546-548
physical characteristics, 156t
free fall control, horse, 278, 279f
general anaesthesia, 540t
side effects
free water effect, 55
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
 arrhythmias, 8, 161
functional plasticity, 102
Gerbillidae, 546-548
hepatotoxicity, 158, 162
furosemide, rabbit,536t
Glasgow Composite Pain Tool, 104
hamster, 546-548
Glasgow Pain Scale, 463-464
general anaesthesia, 540t
G
glomerular filtration rate, 14-15
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
glucose,672
hanging drop technique, 330, 349-350
G-proteins, 4-5
advanced life support, 662-663
hare {Lepus eropaeus), 544-546
GABA,5.102
blood, 58
Hartmann's solution, 627
GABAg receptor, 5-6
glutamate, 5, 102
heart rate
GABA, receptor agonists, 138-147
glycopyrrolate, 94-95
camel, 376
gabapentin, 125-126
cat,504t
camelids, 374
dose, 123t
dog. 408t, 451-452
cat, 501t
horse, 123t
premedication, 421-422
cattle, 315, 339
gallamine triethiodide, 185
horse, 250, 277,297-299
pig,398-399
y-amino-butyric acid see GABA
pig.389t
sheep and goat, 366, 366f
gas pistols/rifles, 577f
rabbit, 536t
small mammals, 543t
gases
sheep and goat, 357
heart rate monitors, 27-29
concentration in solution, 67
goat see sheep and goat
ECG see ECG
solubility coeffcients, 66-67
gopher, capture, 574f
Oesophageal stethoscope, 28, 28f
tension [partial pressure), 65-66
Greek tortoise, 551t
heat and moisture exchangers (HME).
se also inhaled anaesthetics; and
green iguana, 551t
235
individual gases
guaifenesin, 191
hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus), 549
gastric dilation-volvulus, dog, 469
camelids, 372
helium-oxygen (Heliox), 216-217
gastro-oesophageal reflux, dog.
ketamine combination, 371t
cylinders, 216-217
420-421
cattle, 333
Hellabrunn mixture, 542
 gastrointestinal tract, pregnancy-related
ketamine combination, 336-337
Henry's law, 66-67
changes, 588t
thiopental combination,
hepatic disease, dog. 470, 470t
gastroscopy dog. 467
335-336, 335t
herbivores, sheep and goat see sheep
gate control method, horse, 278-279,
horse, 281t
1e08 pue
279f
muscle relaxation, 298
hetastarch, 630b, 633
general anaesthesia/anaesthetics, 3-6
triple drip technique, 260f, 290t,
advanced life support, 656t-657t
classic signs, 7-8
291
hiccups, 617
computer control, 8-9
ketamine-xylazine combination see
high frequency ventilation, 205-206
depth of, 6-10, 190
triple dnip technique
jet (HFJV), 205
drugs see individual anaesthetic drugs
pig, tniple drip technique, 396
oscillatory (HFOV), 205
EEG changes, 6-7
sheep and goat, ketamine
positive pressure (HPPPV), 205
inadequate dose, 638-639, 640t
combination, 361
hormones, stress-related, 103-104
induction see induction of
guinea pig (Cavia porcellus), 546-548
horse, 245-311
anaesthesia
general anaesthesia, 540t
airway, 300
inhalation anaesthetics see
nasal intubation, 547f
analgesia, 253-258
inhalation anaesthetics
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
Qagonists, 252
intrathoracic procedures, 599-609
gabapentin,123t
intravenous anaesthetics see
H
ketamine,123t
intravenous anaesthetics
lidocaine, 123t
mechanisms, 4-6, 5f
haematocrit, 210, 672
NSAIDs, 108t, 253-255, 254t
method, 11
haemoglobin
opioids, 112t, 252-253, 253t,
mortality, 646, 649t
Oxygen affinity, 46-47, 46f
255-257, 256t
obstetrics see obstetric anaesthesia
oxygen saturation, 48t
tramadol, 123t
overdosage. 8
preoperative, 15-16
aortocaval compression, 631b
patient evaluation, 11-13
Hallowell 2000 ventilator, 204f
arrhythmias, 618t-622t
patient preparation, 15-16
Hallowell workstation, 226f
azaperone contraindication, 83
pre-existing drug therapy. 16-17
halothane, 5, 7-8, 161-162
blood gas analysis, 44t
preanaesthesia preparation, 647
cardiovascular effects, 163f
blood pressure, 273f
risk, 10-11, 10t
dog. 442
measurement, 34, 36f, 267-268
681
Index
cardiac index, 273f
peroneal (fbular), 264-265,
hypercarbia, 44, 44t, 55, 647-648
colic, 255
265f
sheep and goat, 365, 366b
anaesthesia, 301-303
saphenous, 265
hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis,
cyanosis, 624t-625t
supraorbital, 260f, 261-262
55-56
endotracheal intubation, 284-287,
tibial, 264
hyperkalaemia, 663
286f
ulnar, 264, 264f
hypertension, 34
epidural/intrathecal analgesia,
obstetric anaesthesia, 591-592
hyperthermia, 57, 57t
258-266
oxygen delivery, 287, 300
malignant, 57
foal
 peripheral nerve stimulation.
pig. 387-388, 388b, 388f
general anaesthesia, 303-304
175f-176f
opioid-related, 111
mares with, 274-275. 304
physiology/biochemistry
see also body temperature
newborn.592
acid-base balance, 54t
hypertonic saline, advanced life
sedation, 304
cardiac output, 269-270
support, 656t-657t
general anaesthesia, 266-267, 281t
PIVA,295-296
Hypnorm@, 83, 93, 541-542
atelectasis, 268, 269f
positioning for surgery, 285-287,
hypnotics, 79-80
cardiac output, 269-270
287f-288f
hypocarbia, 44, 44t, 55
cardiovascular function,
pulmonary oedema, 616b
hypoglycaemia, 58
267-268
pulse monitoring, 27f
hypokalaemia, 663
circulatory depression, 296-298
sedation, 247-253, 300
hyponotic/anaesthetic agents
co-induction, 277-278
O-agonists, 247-250
horse, 283-284
for colic, 301-303
benzodiazepines, 253
see also individual drugs
diffusion impairment, 268-270
phenothiazines, 247
hypoproteinaemia, 14
hypoxia prevention, 270-271,
sedative-opioid combinations,
hypotension, 30, 626-638
270b
252-253,253t
blood loss, 635-637
induction, 278-284, 281t
side effects of anaesthesia
cat, 524-525, 628t-629t
inhalation agents, 292-298
atrioventricular block, 29
causes, 627, 628t-629t
intravenous agents, 275-277,
sinus arrhythmia, 29
dog. 456-457, 457f
275f, 284-292
subarachnoid anaesthesia, 259-260
and epidural analgesia, 123
jugular venepuncture, 275-277,
tissue blood flow, 267-268
horse, 296-298, 628t-629t
275f
TIVA, 281t, 287-292
sheep and goat, 367
lung volume, 270
long procedures, 292
significance, 627
MAC values, 24t
medium duration procedures.
treatment, 627, 628t-629t, 630b
neuropathy, 273-274, 274f
290-291, 290t
hypothermia, 56-57, 56t
postanaesthetic myopathy
short procedures, 288-289
mustelids, 548t
(rhabdomyolysis), 271-274,
top-up, 289-290
and neuromuscular blockade, 180
272f
triple drip technique, 260f, 290t,
and postoperative apnoea, 190
premedication, 277-278, 281t
291
small mammals, 537. 538f
preparation, 274-277
tracheotomy, 615b
therapeutic, 664
pulmonary function, 268-270
ventilation, 287,289f
see also body temperature
recovery, 300-301
IPPV, 298
hypoventilation, 45f, 647-648
size and temperament, 266-267
weight determination, 275
cat, 523-524
venous admixture, 269
humidity exchangers, 234-235
cattle, 321f
hypotension, 296-298, 628t-629t
Humphrey ADE circuit, 229
hypoxaemia, 45, 623-626
local analgesia, 258
hydromorphone, 92-93
hypoxia
castration, 265-266, 265f
cat, 504t
cattle, 321f
see also nerve blocks, below
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
diffusion, 70
mares with foal, 274-275, 304
511
horse, 270-271, 270b
muscle relaxation, 298-299
dog. 408t, 422
nerve blocks, 260-266, 260f
 acepromazine combination,
auriculopalpebral, 262
433t
cudal epidural, 258-260,
Q-agonist combination, 433t
idazoxan, 92
258f-259f
methadone combination, 433t
imidazole derivatives, 145-146
infraorbital, 260-261, 260f-261f
midazolam combination, 433t
Immobilon@, 93
mandibular, 260f, 261
 postoperative analgesia, 464t
Large Animal, 82, 114, 284, 378
median, 264, 264f
5-hydroxytryptamine see serotonin
side effects, 284
mental, 260f 261
hyoscine, 94
Small Animal, 82-83
musculocutaneous, 264
horse, 277, 297-298
see also etorphine
palmar/plantar, 262-264, 262f
hyperalgesia, 102
impedance, 197
paravertebral, 266
opioid-related, 112
impedance cardiography. 42
682
Index
indicator dilution method, 40-41
occupational exposure, 159
patent ductus arteriosus, 607-608,
induction of anaesthesia, 20
partition coeffcients, 69t
607b
alfaxalone, 144
pharmacology. 155-168
persistent right aortic arch, 608
cat,510t
physical effects, 158
preanaesthetic examination,
cattle, 338
pig. 397-398
599-600
dog. 439-440, 439b
potency, 70
preparation, 599-600
horse, 278-284
in pregnancy, 590-591
 presenting problems, G00t
facilities, 278-279
recovery from, 70
recovery. 605
intravenous, 279-280
reptiles, 554-556, 555f
thoracoscopy. 608
small mammals, 540t
safety, 70
thorax closure, 604
wild animals, 578-579
sheep and goat, 362-364
ventilation and oxygenation,
see also individual drugs
small mammals, 540-541
600-603
induction chambers, 229
uptake, 67-72
Jung recruitment manoeuvre, G01
infection
alveolar, 72
one-lung ventilation, 601 -603
catheter-related, 210-211
cardiac output, 72
 re-expansion pulmonary
postoperative, 639
uptake and elimination, 156,
oedema.603
infltration analgesia, sheep and goat,
156t-157t
intravenous anaesthetics, 72-76,
354
vaporizers, 71-72, 71f
135-153
infraorbital nerve block, 260-261,
volatility, 70
administration, 209-214
260f-261f
seealso individualanaesthetic agents
infusion apparatus, 213-214
infusions, drugs
injectable anaesthetics see intravenous
intraosseous needles, 211-213,
Q-agonists, 250-251, 251b
anaesthetics
212f
sedative-opioid combinations,
injection vaporization, 220
 syringes, needles and catheters,
252-253
Innovar-VET, 93
209-213
infusions, fluids see fluid infusion
insectivores, 549
vascular access ports, 213
 infusion apparatus see administration
insulin, dog, 414t, 415-416, 416t
birds, 561, 562t
sets
intensive care, lung ventilation, 206
cat, 513-514, 513f-514f, 516-520,
infusion rates, 213b
intercostal nerve block, dog. 481
516t
constant, 249-251
intermittent positive pressure
cattle, 333
inhalation anaesthetics, 67-72, 156
ventilation see IPPV
compartmental models, 73-75
administration, 214-240
International Liaison Committee on
multiple compartments, 75
 anaesthesia workstation,
Resuscitation (ILCOR), 646,
one compartment, 74-75,
21 5-220
649, 653
74f-75f
delivery (breathing) systems.
interpleural nerve block, dog, 481 -482
two compartments, 75.75f
220-229
intolerance to drugs, 16
dog. 424-427, 445t
patient devices, 229-235
intra-articular analgesia, 120-121
dnug delivery, 76, 76f
analgesia, 156
dog. 482
elimination half-life, 73, 73f
biotransformation and organ
sheep and goat, 353
formulation, 136b, 137-138
toxicity, 158
intracranial pressure, dog, 471t
cyclodextrins, 137
birds, 561-563, 563f
intranasal local analgesia, 332
lipid emulsion, 137
blood solubility and alveolar
intraocular pressure, dog. 472
micelles, 138
tension, 68-69, 68f-69f
intraoesophageal pressure, 195-196,
propylene glycol, 137-138
breathing system, 71-72
196f
water based, 137-138
camelids, 373
intraosseous injection
GABAa receptor agonists, 138-147
cardiovascular effects, 163f
dog. 427
eugenols, 146-147
cat, 520-522
needles, 211-213, 212f
imidazole derivatives, 145-146
cattle, 337-338
intrathecal analgesia, 121-123
phenols, 140-142
chemical stability, 157-158
dog. 476-481, 477f, 479f
steroids, 142-145
comparative studies, 165-166
horse, 258-266
horse, 275-277, 275f
dog. 441-464
sheep and goat
legal requirements, 136b
drug interactions, 159
dexmedetomidine, 351
NMDA receptor agonists, 147-149
elephant, 378-379
opioids, 351
dissociative agents, 147-148
elimination, 70-71
xylazine, 351
phamacodynamics, 136b
flammability, 157-158
 intrathoracic procedures, 599-609
phamacokinetics, 136b, 137t
horse, 292-298
analgesia, 603-604
pig. 392-393, 392f-393f, 395-397
supplementary analgesia, 295
diaphragmatic rupture, 605-607,
rabbit, 141t, 145
volatile agents, 292-295
605b
reptiles, 554, 555f
MAC see minimum alveolar
monitoring. 604
sheep and goat, 358, 358f-359f
concentration
neuromuscular blockade, 604
sites of action, 138
683
Index
target-controlled infusion, 76
K
palpebral reflex, 23-24
total apparent volume of
pharmacokinetics, 137t
distribution (Va). 72
ketamine, 5, 7-8, 121, 124, 147-148
pig, 389t, 390, 395-396
total elimination clearance (Cle),
accidental exposure, 346
guaifenesin-xylazine
73. 73f
bear, 582t
combination, 396
total intravenous anaesthesia see
birds, 562t
xylazine-midazolam
total intravenous anaesthesia
bobcat, 582t
combination, 396
see also individual anaesthetics
camel, xylazine combination,
PIVA,296
intravenous regional analgesia (IVRA),
376-377
 in pregnancy, 590
120
camelids, 372-373
protein binding, 147
cattle, 331-332, 332f
 benzodiazepine combination,
raccoon,582t
dog. 482
373
reptiles,554t
sheep and goat, 353, 354f
guaifenesin combination, 371t
sheep and goat, 360-361, 364
inverted L block
xylazine combination, 371t, 372
diazepam combination, 355t,
cattle, 322, 322f
xylazine-benzodiazepine
360-361
sheep and goat, 352
combination, 371t
guaifenesin combination, 361
IPPV
cat, 516t, 519
medetomidine combination, 361
harmful effects, 200-201
U-agonist combination, 505
propofol combination, 362
horse, 298
induction of anaesthesia, 510t
xylazine combination, 355t, 361
intact chest wall, 197-199
premedication, 510t
side effects, 11
low expiratory resistance, 199
cattle, 336
small mammals, 540t, 541
rapid gas flow rate, 199
diazepam combination, 336
xylazine combination, 542
short application, 199
 guaifenesin combination,
TIVA, 290t
subatmospheric pressure on
336-337
ketofol
expiration,199
medetomidine combination.
dog. 437
intrathoracic procedures, 600-601
336
sheep and goat, 362
management, 202-206
sedation, 317t
ketoprofen, 108, 108t
lung ventilators, 202-205,
xylazine combination, 335t, 336
cat, 508t
203f-204f
coyote, 582t
horse, 254t
manual ventilation, 202
deer, 582t
pig. 391
open pleural cavity, 199-200
 medetomidine combination,
'kitty magic', 505
crculatory effects, 200
375
Kussmaul's breathing, 617, 647-648
lung collapse, 199-200, 200f
xylazine combination, 375
mediastinal movement, 200
dog. 433t, 434-435
L
paradoxical respiration, 199-200
continuous infusion, 4451
weaning from, 205
dexmedetomidine combination,
L-659,066, 92
isoeugenol, 566
435
Lack circuit, 228-229, 229f
isoflurane, 5,7-8, 162-163
diazepam combination, 435
lactate, reference range, 54t
cardiovascular effects, 163f
 intraoperative supplementation,
lactated Ringer's solution, 627
cat, 510t
448
Jagomorphs see hare; rabbit
chemical structure, 162f
medetomidine combination.
laparoscopy, dog, 467
dog. 442, 444t
435
laparotomy, dog. 468-470, 468t
eye movements, 23f
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine
Jarge animals
horse, 293
infusion, 447b
anaesthesia workstation, 226f
MAC, 24t, 157t
 propofol combination, 437
resuscitation, 658-659
partition coeffcients, 69t
dose, 123t
seealso individual species
physical characteristics, 156t
eye movements, 24f
laryngeal mask airways, 233-234,
pig.385
horse, 123t, 280-283, 281t,
234f
reptiles, 554, 554t
289-290
pig.395
sheep and goat, 363-364
Q-agonist combination,
laryngoscopes, 234, 234f
 small mammals, 540t
280-281
laryngoscopy, dog. 467-468
vaporizer, 219f
Q-agonist/benzodiazepine
laryngospasm, 8, 526-527
combination, 291
 left atrial pressure, 39
 benzodiazepine combination,
leopard gecko, 551t
282
leopard tortoise, 551t
jugular venepuncture
PIVA, 296
leukotrienes, 105f
horse, 275-277,275f
TIVA, 290t
levobupivacaine, 118
catheterization, 276-277, 276f
mustelids, 548t
sheep and goat, 346
jugular venous pressure, 12
opossum,582t
licofelone, 110
684
Index
lidocaine, 118-119
regional, 119-120,119f
maropitant, dog, 411
advanced life support, 656t-657t,
side effects, 116-118
mavacoxib, 108t, 109
661
splash blocks, 119
maxillary nerve block, dog. 482-484,
camelids, 369, 369t
topical, 119
483f
cattle, 319
see also individual drugs
Maxima circuit, 228-229
caudal block, 327
local analgesia
mean arterial pressure [MAP), 29-30,
lumbar epidural block, 329-330
camel, 377
32-33
cudal block, 257b, 327
cmelids, 368-369
mechanomyography. 179
 morphine combination, 257b
caesarian section, 369
meclofenic acid, horse, 254
xylazine combination, 257b
castration, 369
medetomidine, 87, 89-90
dog
caudal epidural, 368-369
bear, 582t
crculatory support, 458t
cat, 527-530
birds, 562t
continuous infusion, 445t
cattle, 319-332
bobcat, 582t
epidural analgesia, 478-479
castration, 326
camelids. 371t
intracameral, 485
dog. 473-489, 474f
cat, 504-505, 504t
intraoperative supplementation,
horse, 258
premedication, 510t
447-448
castration, 265-266, 265f
cattle, 317-318
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine
paravertebral, 266
caudal block, 328
infusion, 447b
 in pregnancy. 591
ketamine combination, 336
transdermal patch, 489
sheep and goat, 346-354
deer, ketamine combination, 375
ventricular arrhythmias, 466
dehorning. 347-348, 347f
dog
dose, 117t, 123t
intra-articular, 353
epidural analgesia, 480
horse, 123t, 258
see also nerve blocks
 intraoperative supplementation,
caudal block, 257b
loss of resistance test, 349, 478, 529
448-449
PIVA, 295
lower airways conductance (Glaw),
ketamine combination, 435
Jumbar epidural block, 329-330
196-197, 197f
opioid combination, 433t, 439
pig.401
Jumbar epidural block
premedication, 423, 433t
PIVA,295
cattle, 329-330, 329f
sedation, 408t, 409
sheep and goat, 346-347, 348t, 364
sheep and goat, 349f
elephant, 377-378
caudal block, 352
lumbosacral epidural block, 329
horse, 250
digital nerve block, 352
lumbosacral junction, 348, 349f
infusion, 251b
epidural injection, 351
Jungs
mustelids, 548t
inverted L block, 352
collapse, 199-200, 200f
opossum, 582t
paravertebral nerve block, 352
gas exchange, 195-207
pig, 389t, 390
 peroneal/tibial nerve blocks.
ventilation see ventilation;
atropine-butorphanol-ketamine
352-353
ventilators
combination, 396
retrobulbar block, 354
 lung recruitment manoeuvre, 601
sheep and goat
systemic administration, 123-124
lung volume, horse, 270
ketamine combination, 361
ligand-gated receptors, 4-5
sedation, 356
lingual artery, 27f
M
median nerve block
lipid emulsion, 137
dog. 489
carriers, 137
MAC see minimum alveolar
horse, 264, 264f
intravenous, 637-638
concentration
mediastinum, movement, 200
lipid [Meyer-Overton} theory of
McGill pain questionnaire, 104
meglumine, pig. 391
anaesthesia, 5-6
Magill circuit, 228-229, 229f
meloxicam, 108, 108t
Jithium dilution cardiac output
magnesium,92
birds, 562t
(LiDCO(TM( method, 41
advanced life support, 663-664
cat,508t
Liverpool Triad, 4
magnetic resonance imaging see MRI
horse, 254t
llama (lama glama), 368
malignant hyperthermia, 57
pig. 391
see also camelids
pig, 387-388, 388b, 388f
reptiles, 554t
local anaesthesia/anaesthestics, 3,
see also body temperature;
side effects, 107
115-124
hyperthermia
small mammals, 540t
anatomy and physiology, 115-116
Mallard ventilator, 289f
mental nerve block, 260f 261
dose, 117t
mandibular nerve block
meperidine see pethidine
epidural/intrathecal analgesia,
dog. 482-484, 483f
mepivacaine, 118
121-123
horse, 260f 261
cattle, 319
intra-articular analgesia, 120-121
 mannitol, advanced life support, G62
caudal block, 257b
intravenous regional analgesia, 120
Mapleson A circuit, 228-229, 229f
horse, 257b
pharmacology, 116
Mapleson E circuit, 227, 227f-228f
sheep and goat, 346-347
685
Index
Merlin Small Animal Ventilator. 203f
minimum alveolar concentration
apnography, 49-53, 50f
metabolic acidosis, hyperchloraemic.
[MAC), 9-10, 24-25, 24t, 66,
pulse oximetry, 20, 47-49, 48f,
55-56
156, 157t
48t
metamizole
factors affecting. 9
rate monitors and apnoea
dog. 411-412
pregnancy, 589
alarms, 42-43
horse, 254
see also individual anaesthetics
tidal and minute volume
methadone, 92-93, 112-113, 112t
minimum infusion rate (MIR), 10
monitors, 43
cat, 504t, 506
mink [Mustela lhutreaola), 548, 548t
transcutaneous CO, analysis, 53
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
minute volume monitors, 43
urine volume, 58
511
Misuse of Drugs Act (1971), 113-114
see also individual species
dog. 408t, 433t
mitogen-activated protein kinases
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
acepromazine combination,
(MAPK), 106
(MAOIs), 413-414
433t
mitral regurgitation, dog. 464-465,
morphine, 92-93, 112, 1121
epidural analgesia, 480
465t
camelids, 371t, 372
postoperative analgesia, 464t
mivacurium,184
cat, 504t
dose, horse, 256t
dose, 182t
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
horse, 256t
duration of action, 182t
511
acepromazine combination,
onset time, 182t
caudal block, 257b
253t
mixed venous PO2, 47
detomidine combination, 257b
sheep and goat, 355t, 356
MK-467,92
idocaine combination, 257b
methaemoglobinaemia, local
moisture exchangers, 234-235
xylazine combination, 257b
anaesthetic-induced, 117
monitoring, 4, 19-63
dog. 408t, 422, 446-447
methohexital, 139
acid-base balance, 53-56
 acepromazine combination,
cat, 517
anaesthetic record, 21f
433t
dog. 434
blood glucose, 58
continuous infusion, 445t
horse, 284, 290
body temperature, 56-57
epidural analgesia, 479
pharmacokinetics, 137t
wild animals, 581, 581f
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine
TIVA,290
cerebral function, 7
infusion,447b
methotrimeprazine, 82-83
crculation, 26-42, 27t
postoperative analgesia, 464t
methoxamine, horse, 297
arterial blood pressure, 27t,
epidural injection, 122
 methoxycarbonyl-carboetomidate,
30-38
horse, 256t
146
blood loss, 42, 42f, 458-459
caudal block, 257b
 methoxyflurane, 162
cardiac output, 39-42
dose, 256t
physical characteristics, 156t
CVP, 38-39, 39f
xylazine combination, 253t
side effects, renal toxicity, 158
heart rate monitors, 27-29
pig.391
methyoxycarbonyl-etomidate, 146
Jeft atrial pressure, 39
 epidural analgesia, 401
metomidate,146
pulse rate/rhythm, 26, 27f
reptiles, 554t
pig.389t
tissue perfusion, 27t, 29-30
sheep and goat, 355t
micelle formulations, 138
CNS, 21-26
epidural injection, 351
midazolam, 84-85
 anaesthetic gas analysers, 24-25,
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine (MLK)
birds, 562t
25f
infusion, dog, 447b
camelids, 371t
BIS, 7, 9, 25-26
mouse [Mus musculus], 546-548
cat, 504t, 505
EEG see EEG
general anaesthesia, 540t
induction of anaesthesia, 510t
eye signs, 23-24, 23f-24f
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
cattle, 335t
during resuscitation, 659, 659b
propofol utilization rate, 141t
dog. 408t
fluid infusion, 634
MRI compatible machines, 220
fentanyl combination, 439
general considerations, 20-21
MS222, 566, 566f
opioid combination, 433t, 439
intrathoracic procedures, 604
mule deer (Odocoileus hemiomus),375
horse, 253,278, 280, 281t
neuromuscular blockade, 58,
muntjac deer [Muntiacus reevesi). 374
pig. 389t
174-180
Murphy eye, 231,231f
 butorphanol-atropine
factors affecting, 180
muscle contraction, assessment of,
combination, 395
muscle contraction, 178-180
178-180
butorphanol-atropine-xylazine
 peripheral nerve stimulation.
acceleromyography, 178-179, 179f
combination, 395
174-180
electromyography. 7, 180
ketamine-xylazine combination,
recognition of paralysis, 180
mechanomyography, 179
396
prioritization, 22t
subjective, 178
reptiles, 554t
recovery period, 20
muscle movements, 639
sheep and goat, 355t, 356
respiratory system, 23f, 42-53
muscle relaxation see neuromuscular
small mammals, 539, 540t
blood gas analysis, 43-47
blockade/blockers
686
Index
musculocutaneous nerve block
dog. 449-452
blood-gas partition coeffcient,
dog. 489
administration, 450
66-67
horse, 264
dose rates, 452
cat, 520-521
mustelids, 548, 548t
drugs used for, 449-450, 451t
cattle, 338
se also individual species
reversal, 450-452
cylinders, 216
myasthenia gravis, 186
drug interactions, 159
dog. 442-443
myelin sheath, 115
factors affecting. 185-186
flowmeter, 218f
myelography, dog. 471
blood pressure/flow, 186
horse, 294
myopathy. 641
body temperature, 185
MAC, 157t, 159-160
postanaesthetic (rhabdomyolysis).
drug interactions, 185
physical characteristics, 156t
horse, 271-274, 272f
electrolyte imbalance,
,186
pig.385
extracellular pH, 186
sheep and goat, 364
N
neuromuscular disease, 186
NMDA receptor, 5-6, 102
pharmacokinetics, 185
NMDA receptor agonists, 147-149
N-methyl d-aspartate see NMDA
horse, 298-299
nociception, 102
nalbuphine, 115
indications, 188
nodes of Ranvier, 115
nalorphine, 115
intrathoracic procedures, 604
Noldus Observer? software, 593
naloxone, 115, 346,575
monitoring, 58, 174-180,
non-anaesthetics, 4
advanced life support, 656t-657t
298-299
non-depolarizing (competitive)
cat, 506
factors affecting, 180
 neuromuscular blockers,
dog. 412, 412t
muscle contraction, 178-180
172-173, 181-182
crculatory support, 458t
peripheral nerve stimulation,
no longer in use, 184-185
rabbit, 536t
174-180
non-rebreathing circuits, 221t, 227-229
naltrexone, 115
 recognition of paralysis, 180
Bain circuit,227-228, 228f
naproxen, horse, 254t
muscle sensitivity to, 173-174
coaxial circuits, 229
nasotracheal intubation, camelids,
Ach receptors, 174
Humphrey ADE circuit, 229
370-371
fbre and end-plate size, 174
Magill and Lack circuits, 228-229,
needle stick injuries, 575
perfusion, 174
229f
needles, 209-213
non-depolarizing (competitive),
T-piece circuit, 227, 227f-228f
intraosseous, 211-213, 212f
172-173, 181-182, 189-190
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
neostigmine, 93, 186-187
peripherally acting, 170
see NSAIDs
dog. 451, 451t
pig 399-400, 399t
noradrenaline (norepinephrine), 5, 86,
horse, 299
postoperative complications,
102
nerve blocks
190-191
advanced life support, 656t-657t
birds, 560-561
in pregnancy, 590
dog. 458t
cat, 512, 527-530
recovery from, 189
horse, 297
cattle,320-332
requirements
Normosol@-R, 456, 539,627,635,663
dog. 473-489, 474f
of drugs, 180
North American elk (Cervus
horse, 260-266, 260f
for practical use, 188-189
canadiensis),375
pig. 400-402
residual, 190-191
North American river otter [Lontra
reptiles,552-553
reversal, 186-188, 299, 450-452
canadensis), general
sheep and goat, 348-351
drugs for, 186-188
anaesthesia,582t
small mammals, 540
sheep and goat, 365
see also otter
see also specific nerves
technique, 189-190
NSAIDs, 105-110, 108t
nerve damage. 641
see also individual drugs
cat, 108t, 507-508, 508t
nerve fbres, 115
neuromuscular disease, 186
cattle, 108t, 319, 593
neurokinin A, 102
neuromuscular transmission, 171-172
coxibs, 106
neuroleptanalgesia, 93
acetylcholine release, 171
dog. 108t, 411, 414t
small mammals, 541-542
desensitization, 172
horse, 108t, 253-255, 254t
neurological disease, dog, 470-471,
effector mechanisms, 171 -172
colic, 255, 301
471t
neurons, 115
phammacokinetics, 254-255
neuromuscular blockade/blockers, 6,
neuropathy, horse, 273-274, 274f
pharmacology 105-106
169-194
neurotransmitters, 5
pig. 391
cat, 522
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
sheep and goat, 364
cattle, 338
171-172
side effects, 106-107, 254
centrally acting, 170, 191
nitric oxide, 107
see also individual drugs
continued, 190
hypoxia prevention, 271
nuclear factor kB, 106
depolarizing (non-competitive).
nitrous oxide, 5, 7-8, 126, 155,
Numerical Rating Scale [NRS), 508
173, 180-181
159-160, 216
nystagmus,8
687
Index
0
organ toxicity of anaesthetics, 158
pain
 organophosphate anthelmintics, dog.
assessment, 103-105, 103b
obesity, dog, 418-419, 418f
414t
cat, 508-509
obstetric anaesthesia, 587-598
orotracheal intubation, 650-651
sheep and goat, 367-368, 368t
cmelids, 369, 594
camelids, 370-371
behaviours, 103b
cat, 594-597, 596b
orthopaedic surgery, dog, 472
definition, 102
cattle, 592-593
oscillometry, 32-35, 33f
gate theory of, 102
dog. 594-597, 596b
high-definition, 35
physiology, 102-103
horse, 591-592
otter [Lutra lutra), 548
relief see analgesia
limitations, 597
capture, 573f
pain scales, 104-105, 104f
pig, 402,594
general anaesthesia, 548t, 582t
Dynamic and Interactive Visual
sheep and goat, 593-594
monitoring,581f
Analogue Scale, 508
 Occupational exposure, inhalation
ovariohysterectomy, cat, 509-512
Numerical Rating Scale, 508
anaesthetics, 159
overdosage. 16
Visual Analogue Scale, 508
ocular surgery, dog. 471 -472
overventilation, 190
palmar/plantar nerve block, 262-264,
oesophageal stethoscope, 28, 28f
oxygen, 216
262f
Ohm's Law, 196
affnity, 46-47, 46f
abaxial sesamoid injection,
one-lung ventilation, 233, 601-603
cylinders, 215t
262-263
bronchial blocker, 602, 602f
flowmeter, 218f
indications, 263-264
double lumen tube, 602-603
inspired concentration, 271
 metacarpal/metatarsal injection,
 pulmonary effects, 603
liquid, 216
263
opioid antagonists, 115
PaOz, 44t, 45, 501t
palmar terminal digital nerve block,
dog. 412t
Oxygen delivery, 45-46
263
see also individual drugs
dog, 462, 462f-463f, 463t
palpebral reflex, 23-24, 24f
opioids, 110-115, 112t
horse, 287,300
pancuronium,182
birds, 562t
 intrathoracic procedures.
cattle, 338
camelids, 372
600-603
dog. 449, 451t
cat, 504t, 505-507
wild animals, 579f
dose, 182t
Qz-agonist combination, 505
see also endotracheal intubation
duration of action, 182t
premedication, 510t
Oxygen dissociation curve, 46f
horse, 299
cattle, premedication, 112t
Oxygen flush valve, 220
onset time, 182t
dog, 112t, 408t, 410, 410b
Oxygen generators, 216
pig.399t
epidural analgesia, 479
oxygen saturation, 45-46
panting,612-616
intraoperative supplementation,
sheep and goat, 366
PaO2, 45
445-447, 447b
oxymorphone, 92-93
cat, 44t, 501t
premedication, 422
cat, 504t
cattle, 44t
sedative combination, 411, 422,
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
dog. 44t
433t, 438-439
511
 and haemoglobin saturation, 48t
endogenous, 5, 110
dog. 408t
horse, 44t, 268
horse,112t,252-253,253t,
 acepromazine combination,
pig.44t
255-257,256t
433t
sheep and goat, 44t
caudal block, 257, 257b
benzodiazepine combination,
papaveretum, 113
PIVA,296
439
paracetamol, 106
premedication, 278
epidural analgesia, 479-480
paradoxical respiration, 199-200
routes of administration,
postoperative analgesia, 464t
paralumbar plexus block, dog. 487-488
256-257
dose, horse, 256t
parasacral plexus block, dog. 488
pharmacology, 110-111
horse, 256t
 paravertebral nerve block
pig. 390-391
small mammals, 540t
cattle, 322-325, 323f-324f
dependence, 391-392
dog. 485-487, 486f
PIVA, 296
P
horse, 266
 in pregnancy, 590
sheep and goat, 352
reptiles, 554t
pacemakers, dog, 466
 partial intravenous anaesthesia (PIVA).
sheep and goat, 364
PaCO, 53
horse, 295-296
epidural/intrathecal injection,
cat, 44t, 501t
partial pressure, 65-66
351
cattle, 44t
 partition coefficients, inhaled
sedation/analgesia, 356-357
dog. 44t
anaesthetics, 69t
side effects, 111-112, 410, 507
horse, 44t
 patent ductus arteriosus (PDA},
small mammals, 540t
pig.44t
607-608, 607b
see also individual drugs
sheep and goat, 44t
dog. 465t, 466
889
Index
patient preparation, 15-16
horse, 44t
sedation,388-390,389t
fluid and electrolytes, 15
pig. 44t
acepromazine, 389
food and water, 15-16
sheep and goat, 44t
Qz-agonists, 389-390
haemoglobin level, 15-16
pharmacodynamics, 65
azaperone, 390
patient state index (PSI). 7
pharmacogenetics, 17
 dissociative agents, 390
PCOz, 43, 672
pharmacokinetics, 65-77, 66f
droperidol, 390
pedal reflex, 24
inhaled anaesthetics, 67-72
pipecuronium bromide, 185
PEEP, 201-202
intravenous anaesthetics, 72-76
PIVA see partial intravenous
 pelvic limb blocks
physical principles, 65-67
anaesthesia
dog. 487-488
see also individual drugs
placental transfer, 589
see also specific nerves
pharyngotomy, dog. 431, 432f
plasma cholinesterase, 181
penicillin, horse, 274
phencyclidine, 147
plateau principle, 74-75
penis, acepromazine effects on, 82
phenobarbital, dog, 414t, 415
pneumomediastinum, 648
pentazocine, horse, 256
phenols, 140-142
pneumothorax, 648
pentobarbital, 139-140
phenothiazines, 80-83
and intrabronchial pressure, 200f
cat, 517
cat, 504t
tension, 618f, 633b
cattle, 336
dog. 407, 408t
POz, 43, 672
dog. 434
horse, 247
mixed venous, central venous and
pig. 396
see also individual drugs
venous,47
sheep and goat, 355t, 361
phenylbutazone, 108t, 109
Polamivet, 113
peribulbar block
horse, 254,254t
polecat [Mhustela putorius), 548, 548t
cattle, 322
phenylephrine, 630b
Polysorbate 80, 138
dog. 484-485
advanced life support, 656t-657t
pop-off valve, 222, 223f, 225b
 peripheral nerve stimulation, 174-180.
dog. 458t
porcine stress syndrome, 387
175f
horse, 297
portosystemic shunt, dog, 470t
site of, 174-175, 175f-176f
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 106
positioning for surgery
strength and pattern, 175-178
physical status classification, 10t
cattle, 339
double burst, 177, 177f
PiCCO" system, 41
dog. 453
single twitch, 176-177
pig. 385-403
horse, 285-287, 287f-288f
tetanic, 177-178, 178f
airway, 386, 386f
sheep and goat, 365, 365f
train-of-four, 177, 177f
analgesia, 391-392
 positive end-expiratory pressure see
peritonitis, dog, 469
NSAIDs, 108t
PEEP
peroneal (fbular) nerve block
opioids, 112t, 390
positive inotropes, horse, 296-297
cat, 529
blood gas analysis, 44t
postanaesthetic myopathy
dog. 488-489
endotracheal intubation, 393-395.
[rhabdomyolysis), horse.
horse, 264-265, 265f
394f-395f
271-274, 272f
sheep and goat, 352-353, 353f
fasting. 391
 postoperative infection, 639
 peroxisome proliferator-activated
general anaesthesia, 390-400
power spectrum analysis. 7
receptors (PPAR), 106
inhalation agents, 397-398
 prairie dog physiology/biochemistry.
persistent right aortic arch (PRAA),
intravenous agents, 392-393,
543t
608
392f-393f 395-397
 pre-existing drug therapy. 16-17
perzinfotel, 124
monitoring,398-399.398f
preanaesthetic examination, 11-13
Petersen eye block, 321-322, 321f
premedication, 391
biochemical tests, 12-13
pethidine, 112t, 113
preparation, 390-391
 cardiovascular and respiratory
cat,504t
recovery. 399
disease, 13-15
castration/ovariohysterectomy.
local analgesia, 400-402
dnug metabolism, 13-14, 13f
511
caesarian section, 402
drug transport, 14
dog. 408t, 422
castration,401
renal disease, 14-15
acepromazine combination,
epidural, 400-401
pregabalin, 126
433t
malignant hyperthermia, 387-388,
pregnancy, 587-589
postoperative analgesia, 464t
388b,388f
phamacology of, 589-591
horse, 256t
muscle relaxation, 399-400, 399t
physiological changes, 588t
pig. 391
obstetric anaesthesia, 402, 594
drculation, 588
sheep and goat, 356
physiology/biochemistry
dinical significance, 589-590
pH, 53
body temperature, 399
respiratory system, 588-589
cat, 44t
heart rate, 398-399
see also obstetric anaesthesia
cattle, 44t
respiratory rate, 398-399
premature atrial complex, 618t-622t
dog. 44t
 propofol utilization rate, 141t
premature ventricular complex,
xtracellular, 186
restraint, 385-386, 386f
618t-622t
689
Index
premedication, 11, 95-96, 95b
pulse contour method. 41
remifentanil, 9, 112t, 114
cat, 510t, 513
pulse oximetry, 20, 47-49, 48f, 48t
sheep and goat, 364
cattle, 332-333
reflectance, 49
Remifusor@, 8-9
dog. 408t, 421-424
pulse rate/rhythm, 26, 27f
remote drug delivery, 572, 574f,
horse,277-278, 281t
PulseCO"* system, 41
576-577
sheep and goat, 357-358
pulseless electrical activity, G54, 657f
darts, 577-578, 577f
small mammals, 540t
pulseless ventricular tachycardia, 654
gas pistols/rifles, 577f
see also individual drugs
pupil size, 8, 24f
renal disease, 14-15
pressure, 672
dog. 472, 473t
pressure gauges, 217, 217f
R
reproductive tract, 588t
prilocaine, 118
see also obstetric anaesthesia;
procaine, 118
rabbit (Oryctolagus cumiculus), 536,
pregnancy
sheep and goat, 347-348
544-546
reptiles,549-558
promazine, 82-83
emergency drug calculator, 536t
analgesia, 551-552, 554t
promethazine, 82-83
endotracheal intubation, 545f,
fluid infusion, 552f
proparacaine, 119
546t
general anaesthesia
propionylpromazine,82
general anaesthesia, 540t
inhalation agents, 554-556,
propofol, 5,9, 140-142, 142f
intravenous agents, 141t, 145
555f
blood concentrations, 76f
nasal intubation, 547f
intravenous agents, 554, 555f
camelids, 371t, 373
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
monitoring, 556-557
cat, 510t, 516t, 517-518
rabies, pig, 390-391
recovery. 557-558,559f
induction of anaesthesia,
raccoon (Procyon lotor]
husbandry, 551t
141-142, 141t, 510t
capture, 573f
intravenous catheterization, 553f
TIVA, 520
 general anaesthesia, 582t
nerve blocks, 552-553
cattle, 335t, 337
radial nerve block, dog. 489
sedation, 551-552, 554t
dog. 433t, 436-437
rat [Rattus norvegicus), 546-548
venipuncture, 550f
continuous infusion, 445t
general anaesthesia, 540t
ventilation, 556, 556f-558f
fentanyl combination, 441
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
reserpine, 92
intraoperative supplementation,
propofol utilization rate, 141t
respiration
449
re-expansion pulmonary oedema, 603
paradoxical, 199-200
ketamine combination, 437
rebreathing bag. 222,225b
spontaneous, 195-197
thiopental combination, 437
rebreathing circuits, 221-227, 221f,
respiratory acidosis, 51
TIVA, 441
221t
respiratory disease, 12-15
eye movements, 23-24
circle circuit, 222-226, 224f-226f
respiratory monitoring, 23f, 42-53
horse,283-284, 289,292
to-and-fro circuit, 226-227, 227f
blood gas analysis, 43-47
mean utilization rate, 141t
recovery period, 20
capnography, 49-53, 50f
pharmacokinetics, 137t
birds, 564, 565f
pulse oximetry, 20, 47-49, 48f, 48t
pig. 389t, 396
cat, 526-527
rate monitors and apnoea alarms,
reptiles, 554t
cattle, 340, 340f
42-43
sheep and goat, 355t, 361-362
dog. 460-464, 461b, 461f
tidal and minute volume monitors,
ketamine combination, 362
horse, 300-301
43
small mammals, 141t, 540t, 542
intrathoracic procedures, 605
transcutaneous CO, analysis, 53
TIVA, 289, 292
pig,399
respiratory paralysis, 8
Propofusor@, 8-9
reptiles, 557-558, 559f
respiratory rate
propylene glycol, 137-138
sheep and goat, 367
cat, 501t, 524
prostacyclin, 107
small mammals, 543-544
cattle, 339
prostaglandins
wild animals, 581-582, 583f
dog. 455f
and pain sensitivity, 102
recruitment manoeuvres, 201-202, 271
pig. 398-399
synthesis, 105f
Recuvyra" TD fentanyl solution,
sheep and goat, 365
protein binding. 14
423-424
small mammals, 543t
ketamine, 147
red deer [Cervus elaphus), 374
 respiratory system, pregnancy-related
 proxymetacaine see proparacaine
red-eared terrapin, 551t
changes, 588-589, 588t
pruritus, opioid-related, 111
red-footed tortoise, 551t
restraint
 pudendal nerve block, 325-326, 325f
reflexes see specific reflexes
birds, 560, 561f
pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 39
regional anaesthesia see nerve blocks
cat, 502-503, 503f
pulmonary function, horse, 268-270
regulators, 217
intravenous injection, 513-514,
 pulmonary gas exchange, 195-207
regurgitation
513f-514f
pulmonary oedema, 616b
cattle, 313-314, 314f
cattle, 315
re-expansion, 603
dog. 461-462
dog. 424f
069
Index
horse, 285-287, 287f-288f
s
sheep and goat, 363-364
pig. 385-386, 386f
 small mammals, 540t
resuscitation, 645-669
safety
vaporizer, 219f
advanced cardiac life support, 649,
inhalation anaesthetics, 70
sheep and goat, 346-368
654,656t-657t
wild animals, 572-576
analgesia, 0pioids, 356-357
algorithm, 654-658, 655f
Saffan@ see Cremophor EL
blood gas analysis, 44t
basic cardiac life support, 649-650
salbutamol, 612
blood pressure measurement, 36f
airway and breathing, 650-651
hypoxia prevention, 271
cyanosis, 624t-625t
circulation, 651-653, 652f,
saphenous nerve block, 265
endotracheal intubation, 358-360,
653b
sarmazenil, 85
359f
cerebral, 646-647
dog, 412, 412t
epidural analgesia, 348-351, 348t
defbrillation, 656t-657t, 658, 658f
Savannah monitor, 551t
catheters, 350, 350f
history, 645-646
scavenging systems, 235-238,
opioids, 351
large animals, 658-659
236f-237f
fasting, 357
monitoring. 659.659b
Schwann cells, 115
fluid infusion, 365
protocol, 648-658
sciatic nerve block
general anaesthesia, 357-368
recovery period, 664-665
cat, 529-530
adjunct agents, 364
retrobulbar block
dog. 488
breathing system, 363
cattle, 322
sheep and goat, 352
inhalation agents, 362-364
dog. 484-485
scruffing, 503
 intravenous agents, 358,
sheep and goat, 354
second gas effect, 160
358f-359f, 360-362
Revivon@, 93, 284, 378
sedation, 79-100, 277-278
monitoring, 365-367
rhinoscopy. dog. 468
birds, 559-560, 562t
preparation, 357-358
robenacoxib, 108t, 109
camelids, 371-372
recovery, 367
cat, 508t
cat, 503-508, 504t
hypotension,367
rocuronium,183
cattle, 315-319, 317t
local analgesia, 346-354
dog. 449, 451t, 452
dog, 406-412, 408t, 422-424
dehorning. 347-348, 347f
dose, 182t, 452
fish,565
infltration and topical, 354
duration of action, 182t
horse, 247-253, 277-278, 300
intra-articular, 353
horse, 299
foal, 304
intravenous regional, 353, 354f
onset time, 182t
pig, 388-390, 389t
lumbosacral junction, 348, 349f
pig.399t
reptiles, 551-552, 554t
muscle relaxation, 365
rodents, 546-548
sheep and goat, 354-357, 355t
nerve blocks, 348-351
see also individual species
small mammals, 539-540
caudal epidural, 352
roe deer (Capreolus capreolus). 374
see also individual drugs
cormual, 347-348, 347f
romifdine, 87, 90-91
sedative-opioid combinations, 92-93
digital, 352
accidental exposure, 346
cattle, 317t, 319
femoral, 352
cat, 505
dog. 411, 422, 438-439
inverted L, 352
cattle, caudal block, 328
horse, 252-253,253t
paravertebral, 352
dog, 408t, 410
infusions, 252-253
peroneal, 352-353
horse, 248f, 249-250
Selectatec vaporizer, 219-220
retrobulbar, 354
acepromazine combination,
selegiline, 413-414
sciatic, 352
253t
septic shock, 457
tibial, 352-353
butorphanol combination, 253t
serotonin,102
obstetric anaesthesia,593-594
ketamine combination, 280-281
serotonin syndrome, 415
pain assessment, 367-368, 368t
premedication, 277-278,281t,
sevoflurane, 5, 7-8, 164-165
 physiology/biochemistry
290t
cardiovascular effects, 163f
body temperature, 366-367
TIVA, 290t
cat, 510t
heart rate, 366, 366f
infusion, 251b
chemical stability, 157
respiratory rate, 365
rope-based recovery system, horse,
chemical structure, 162f
positioning for surgery, 365, 365f
300-301, 301f-302f
CO, absorbent reaction, 442
premedication,357-358
ropivacaine, 118-119
dog, 442, 444t
pulmonary oedema, 616b
caudal block, 257b
eye movements, 23f
sedation, 354-357, 355t
dose, 117t
horse, 293-294
Q-agonists, 355-356
horse, 257b
MAC,24t, 157t
benzodiazepines, 356
sheep and goat, 347
partition coeffcients, 69t
dissociative agents, 356
rotameter flowmeters, 218f
 physical characteristics, 156t
'sighing',201-202
RUMM blocks, dog, 489
pig.385
signs of anaesthesia, 7-8
ruptured muscle syndrome, 580t
reptiles, 554, 554t
single twitch stimulation, 176-177
691
Index
sinus bradycardia, 618t-622t
swimming pool, recovery in horse, 301,
coyote, 582t
small mammals, 536-544
deer, 375-376, 582t
anaesthesia workstation, 215f
synapses, 5f
dog. 433t, 435-436
analgesia, 539-540, 540t
noradrenergic, 86f
horse, 280-283, 281t
endotracheal intubation, 233f, 545f,
synaptic relays, 5f
pig, 389t, 390, 395, 397
546t
syringe pumps, 213-214, 214f
reptiles,554t
endotracheal tubes, 233f
syringes, 209-213
sheep and goat, 355t, 362
fluid infusion, 539f
tilting table, horse, 279, 280f
 general anaesthesia, 537t, 540t
T
tissue perfusion, 27t, 29-30
complications, 537t
TIVA see total intravenous anaesthesia
induction,540t
T-piece circuit, 227, 227f-228f
to-and-fro circuit, 226-227, 227f
 inhalation agents, 540-541
tachycardia, 12, 623
tolazoline, 92, 625-626
intravenous agents, 14lt, 145,
ECG, 618t-622t
advanced life support, 656t-6571
541-542
tachypnoea, 612-616
camelids, 371t
monitoring.542-543
Tafonius ventilator, 289f
cattle, 317t
premedication, 540t
target-controlled infusion (TCl), 8-9,
tolfenamic acid, 108t
recovery, 543-544
76
cat, 508t
hypothermia, 537, 538f
Telazol@ see tiletamine-zolazepam
 topical analgesia, 119
nerve blocks, 540
 temperature see body temperature
sheep and goat, 354
neuroleptanalgesia, 541 -542
tension (of gases), 65-66
total apparent volume of distribution
physiology/biochemistry, 543t
in brain tissue, 69-70
(V), 72
sedation, 539-540, 540t
tension pneumothorax, 618f, 633b
total elimination clearance (Cle). 73,
ventilation, 542, 542f
tepoxalin, 108t, 109-110
73f
seealso individual species
tetanic stimulation, 177-178, 178f
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA),
soaker catheters, 481
tetany, 177-178, 178f
135.246-247
sodium bicarbonate, advanced life
Thalamonal, 93
alfaxalone, 145
support, 656t-657t, 662
thermodilution cardiac output
cat, 520
solubility coefficients, 66-67
measurement, 40-41
dog. 440-441
spinal malacia, horse, 273-274
thiamylal sodium, 140
 propofol-fentanyl, 441
standard base excess see base excess
thiopental (thiopentone), 138-139
horse, 281t, 287-292, 290t
star gazing. 365
cat, 516-517, 516t
long procedures, 292
steroid anaesthesia, 142-145
cattle, 333-335
medium duration procedures,
stethoscope, oesophageal, 28, 28f
 guaifenesin combination,
290-291, 290t
stoat [Mustela ermine), 548, 548t
335-336, 335t
short procedures, 288-289
stress
dog. 431-434, 433t
top-up, 289-290
pig.387
propofol combination, 437
triple drip technique, 260f, 290t,
wild animals, 579-581
eye movements, 23-24
291
stress hormones, 103-104
horse, 281t, 283
total protein, 672
 strong ion difference (SID). 54
TIVA, 289-290
total respiratory resistance, 196-197
reference range, 54t
pharmacokinetics, 137t
total weak acids, 55
strong ion gap. 55
pig,389t, 397
reference range, 54t
reference range, 54t
sheep and goat, 355t, 362
toxaemia, 11
subarachnoid anaesthesia, horse,
thoracic compliance, 198f
 tracheal mucosa perfusion pressure.
259-260
thoracoscopy, 608
231
substance P, 102
thromboxane, 105f, 107
tracheotomy, 615b
succinylcholine see suxamethonium
tibial nerve block
tracheotomy tube, 232-233, 615f
sufentanil, 114-115
cat, 529
train-of-four stimulation, 159, 172,
sugammadex, 187-188
dog. 488-489
177, 177f
dog. 449, 451t, 452
horse, 264
tramadol, 124-125
supraorbital nerve block, 260f,
sheep and goat, 352-353, 353f
cat, 502, 504t
261-262
tidal volume monitors, 43
castration/ovariohysterectomy,
suxamethonium, 93, 180-181
tiletamine-zolazepam, 147-148
511
dog. 449-450
accidental exposure, 346
dog. 410-411
dose rates and duration, 181
bear, 582t
dose, 123t
horse, 299
bobcat, 582t
horse, 123t, 256
pig.399t
camelids, 373
caudal block, 257b
side effects, 181
cat, 516t, 519-520
side effects, 125
suxibuzone, 108t, 109
 premedication, 510t
tranquillizers, 79-80
horse, 254t
cattle, 335t, 337
transcutaneous CO, analysis, 53
692
Index
 transoesophageal Doppler
venepuncture, camelids, 370, 370f
water dragon, 551t
echocardiography cardiac
wnous PO,47
weasel, short-tailed [Mustela ermine],
output(TEECO), 41-42
ventilation
548, 548t
 transpulmonary pressure, 195-196,
birds, 563-564, 563f
weight, 672
196f
cat, 523-524, 523f
dog. 418-419, 418f
transtracheal wash, dog. 466-467
CPAP, 201-202
elephant,377
trauma
dog. 459-460
horse, 275
anaesthesia-associated, 639-642
troubleshooting, 460t
wild animals, 572
dog. 473
during resuscitation, G51t
whisker reflex, 24
big dog-little dog 473
future directions, 206
white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
high-rise syndrome, 473
high frequency, 205-206
virginiaus),375,582t
hit-by-car, 473
horse, 287,289f
wild animals
trazadone, dog. 413-415
IPPV, 298
capture, 572, 573f-574f
trichlorethylene, 155
hypoxia prevention, 271
capture myopathy, 580-581, 580t
tricyclic antidepressants (TCls),
intensive care setting, 206
chemical immobilization, 571-584
413-414
intrathoracic procedures, 600-603
feral cat, 511-512
 triple drip technique
IPPV
general anaesthesia
horse, 260f, 290t, 291
harmful effects, 200-201
agents, 578, 582, 582t
pig.396
intact chest wall, 197-199
induction, 578-579
tubocurarine, 184-185
management, 202-206
monitoring, 581, 581f
tuborphanol, camelids, 371t
 open pleural cavity, 199-200
Oxygen delivery, 579f
weaning from, 205
recovery, 581-582, 583f
U
lung recruitment manoeuvre, 601
human safety, 572-576
manual, 202
remote drug delivery, 572, 574f,
ulnar nerve block
and neuromuscular blockade, 189
576-577
dog. 489
one-lung, 233, 601-603
stress, 579-581
horse, 264, 264f
overventilation, 190
unconsciousness, ensuring, 189
PEEP,201-202
X
 University of Melbourne Pain Scale.
recruitment manoeuvres, 201-202
104
reptiles, 556, 556f-558f
xenon, 5, 160-161
uptake, 66f
small mammals, 542, 542f
MAC, 157t, 160
inhaled anaesthetics, 67-72, 68f
spontaneous respiration, 195-197
physical characteristics, 156t
urea, 672
see also endotracheal intubation
xylazine, 85, 87-89
urine
ventilators, 202-205, 203f-204f
accidental exposure, 346
output, 58
essential characteristics, 203-205
bear, 5821
tests, 12-13
settings, 205
birds, 562t
venting, 238
camel, ketamine combination,
V
Ventolin see salbutamol
376-377
ventral cervical decompression, dog
camelids, 369t, 371t
vaporizer-in-circle systems, 223-226
471
ketamine combination, 371t,
vaporizers, 71-72, 71f, 218-220, 219f
ventricular arrhythmias, dog, 465-466,
372
vascular ports, 213
465t
ketamine-benzodiazepine
dog. 427
wntricular fbrillation, 654, 657f
combination, 371t
vasoactive drugs, 630b
ventricular tachycardia, 618t-622t
cat, 504t, 505
vasopressin, 630b
veterinary anaesthesia, 4
cattle
advanced life support, G56t-657t
Vigileo""system, 41
caudal block, 328
dog. 458t
Virginia Opossum (Didelphis virginana).
ketamine combination, 335t
vasopressors, 660-661
general anaesthesia, 582t
lidocaine combination, 330
vasovagal response, 24
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), 508
lumbar epidural block, 329-330
vecuronium, 182-183
visual loss, 641-642
sedation, 316-317,317t
dog. 449, 451t
volatile anaesthetic agents see
cudal block, 257b, 328
dose rates, 452
 inhalation anaesthetics
lidocaine combination, 257b
dose, 182t
voltage-gated ion channels, 4-5
morphine combination, 257b
duration of action, 182t
vomiting, opioid-related, 111
coyote, 582t
horse, 299
deer, 375-376, 582t
onset time, 182t
ketamine combination, 375
pig.399t
dog. 250, 408t, 409, 433t
vedaprofen, 108t
warming devices, 538f
epidural analgesia, 480
horse, 254t
water, withholding of, 15-16
sedation, 408t, 409
69
Index
epidural injection, 122
epidural analgesia, 401
cat, 625
horse, 248-249, 248f
guaifenesin-xylazine
cattle, 318
acepromazine combination,
combination, 396
coyote, 582t
253t
ketamine-midazolam
deer, 582t
butorphanol combination, 253t
combination, 396
dog, 412, 412t, 625
caudal block, 257b
sheep and goat, 355t
horse, 625
ketamine combination, 280-281
epidural injection, 351
raccoon,582t
morphine combination, 2531
ketamine combination, 355t,
premedication, 277-278, 281t,
361
z
290t
sedation, 355-356
TIVA,290t
side effects, 250, 317
zero order elimination, 74
infusion, 251b
small mammals, ketamine
zolazepam, 85
lumbar epidural block, 329-330
combination, 542
horse, 253, 281t
opossum,582t
tilatamine combination,
pig.389,389t
Y
282-283
 butorphanol-atropine-
Zoletil@ see tiletamine-zolazepam
midazolam combination,
yohimbine, 91-92
395
advanced life support, 656t-657t
694