FelineSoftTissue
and
General
Surgery
S.J.Langley-Hobbs
J.L.Demetriou
J.F.Ladlow
SAUNDERS
There is no such thing as "Just a cat."
Robert A. Heinlein
小尾巴宠物健康中心
http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Feline soft tissue and general surgery
Content Strategist: Robert Edwards
Comntent Development Specialist: Catherine Jackson
Project Manager: Sukanthi Sukumar
Designer: Miles Hitchen
llustration Manager: Jennifer Rose
llustrator: Antbits Ltd
Feline soft tissue and
general surgery
Edited by
SorrelI J. Langley-Hobbs MA, BVetMed, DSAS(O), DipECVs, MRCVS
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery, University Surgeon, Head of Small Animal Surgery, Department of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Jackie L. Demetriou BVetMed. CertSAs, DipECVs, MRCVS
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery, Hon. Assoc. Professor of Small Animal Surgery, University of Nottingham,
Dick White Referrals, Suffolk, UK
Jane F. Ladlow MA, VetMB, DipECVs, MRCVS
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery, Lecturer, Soft Tissue Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh  London  New York  Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney  Toronto  2014
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
 Except Chapter 17 @ Mark W. Bohling and figures in Chapters 4l and 47 @ Alison Moores
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means. electronic or mechanical.
including photocopying. recording. or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publisher. Details on how to seek penmission, further information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our
arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found
at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than as
may be noted hereinj.
ISBN 978 0 7020 4336 9
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the Bnitish Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Notices
 Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understand-
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any informa-
tion, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful
of thei own safety and the safety of others. including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or phamaceutical products identifed, readers are advised to check the most curent information
provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recom-
mended dose or fommula. the method and duration of administration. and contraindications. It is the responsibility of
 pue salesop auanap o sasouseip aye ol 'guaged raun jo aapa[mouy pue auatada umo raun uo su[ar siauongoeid
the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law. neither the Publisher nor the authors, contibutors., or editors. assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or
Operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
your source for books,
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together
The
 to grow libraries in
 pubisher's 
 policy s to use
FL.SF's IIR
Book Aid
developing countries
peper manufactured
from sustalne ble forests
Printed in China
Preface
There are many general and oncologic soft tissue surgical conditions 
 and medical management of such diseases the reader should refer to
that are unique to the cat, which more than justifies the need for a
 such texts. Additionally, there are excellent and thorough texts on both
book dedicated to the subject. Examples of such conditions include 
feline dentistry and feline ophthalmology, so no attempt was made
feline injection site sarcomas, hyperthyroidism, axillary wounds.
 to replicate these subjects. Periorbital and eyelid surgery is included
megacolon and feline lower urinary tract disease There are significant
[eauas Aq paduane uayo s! Aiazins jo adi sui ieu nay sem i se
anatomic differences between cats and dogs, which affect and influ-
 and specialist surgeons but intraocular surgery would usually be per-
 ence surgical approaches and management of specific conditions.
formed by an ophthalmologist and similarly advanced dentistry tech-
Cats are popular pets, and are growing in popularity, with 33% of
niques by a specialist dentist.
Americans owning a cat, and more than half of those owning more
'ad yim siea ed isy au sied uaas oiui aiai si yooq au
than one cat. Cats are also living longer, therefore conditions that are
intra and postoperative assessment and care of the surgical patient
paziuosai suraqaie 'iseoau se pons 'suaed apio ym paneiosse
with separate chapters included on nutrition and blood transfusion.
osie si wiiua 'saas sn un auana uau yi
 The second part covers diagnostics including radiology, magnetic
becoming more common, possibly due to the felines' increased lon-
resonance imaging, scintigraphy and endoscopy from the nose to the
 gevity and also due to an increased awareness of this illness by both
bladder. A separate chapter is included on the cat ward. Further chap-
owners and veterinarians. Curative treatment options such as thyroid-
ters cover instruments, sutures, implants, drains and feeding tubes.
ectomy become especially appealing when this condition is diagnosed 
The third part in the book is the final introductory topics that covers
at a younger age. Owners' expectations are also increasing, perhaps
some principles of diagnosis and surgery for oncology cases. In order
due to improved and more widespread access to information from the
t0 recognize the importance of multimodal cancer treatment, chapters
media, and as a result owners are also aware of the requirement to
are included on radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
treat cats as a separate species. This book will enable the veterinarian
 The final four parts of the book cover surgical disease of the skin
to be fully informed and up-to-date on the management of all soft 
 and adnexa, abdominal cavity, thoracic cavity and finally the head and
tissue surgical conditions in this species, so as to be able to offer the
neck. The general format of each chapter follows a similar pattern. A
client and animal the best possible treatment advice.
brief description of the anatomy of the organ or part of the body is
The book should appeal to veterinarians in general practice, special-
followed by sections on general considerations such as specifc con-
ist veterinarians and veterinary students. Its aim is to provide a useful
cerns or imaging that is recommended for investigation of relevant
description of how to perform many surgical procedures in the cat,
diseases. Then all the most common surgical diseases from congenital,
from straightforward procedures, which a general practitioner may
 acquired to neoplastic are described. This section is followed by the
yooq aul ans pazeads arou on 'uad ot juaaduos jaa
 surgical techniques performed on the organ or part of the body with
covers in detail surgical procedures specific to the cat that are either
specific descriptions included in textboxes so the reader is guided as
not described in detail in other textbooks or are described for the dog:
to how to perform the surgery. The end of the chapter highlights the
such as total ear canal ablation, mandibulectomy, perineal urethros-
relevant aspects of specific postoperative care, complications that can
tomy, colectomy, adrenalectomy or hypophysectomy. This textbook is 
 Occur and the prognosis for the specific diseases. The emphasis on the
intendedto be a partner to Feline OrthopedicSurgery and Musculosheletal
sections of the chapters varies according to the organs and diseases
Disease. Together they will form a comprehensive pair of textbooks
being covered.
that cover the management of most surgical diseases in the cat.
There are many excellent books on feline diseases and their medical
S.J Langley-Hobbs
management available on the market and this book is not designed
J.L. Demetriou
to replace such textbooks. For more information on the pathogenesis
LF. Ladlow
ix
Contributors
Kimberly A. Agnello DvM, Ms, DipAcvs
Vanessa R. Barrs BVsc(Hons), MVetclinstud,
Consultant in Surgery.
MACVSc(Small Animal), FANzcVSc(Feline), GradCertEd(Higher Ed)
Faculty Surgeon,
 Registered Feline Medicine Specialist,
School of Veterinary Medicine,
Director of the University Veterinary Teaching Hospital,
University of Pennsylvania.
Associate Professor and Head of Small Animal Medicine,
 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Faculty of Veterinary Science,
The University of Sydney.
Davina M. Anderson MA, VetMB, PhD, DSAs(ST), DipECVs, MRcvs
NSW, Australia
RCVS Recognised Specialist in Small Animal Surgery (Soft Tissue),
Julia A. Beatty BSc(Hons), BVetMed, PhD,
Anderson Moores Veterinary Specialists Ltd,
FANzCVSc(Feline Medicine), GradCertEd(HigherEd), MRcVS
Winchester, UK
RCVS Recognised Specialist in Feline Medicine.
 Associate Professor of Small Animal Medicine,
Lillian R. Aronson VMD, DipAcVs
Faculty of Veterinary Science,
Associate Professor of Surgery.
The University of Sydney.
University of Pennsylvania,
NSW, Australia
School of Veterinary Medicine,
 Philadelphia, Pennysylvania, USA
Mark W. Bohling DVM, PhD, DipAcVS
Assistant Professor of Surgery.
Nicholas J. Bacon MA, VetMB, CertVR, CertsAs, DipECvs,
Department of Small Animal Clinical Science,
DipACVS, MRcvs
College of Veterinary Medicine,
ACVs Founding Fellow, Surgical Oncology.
University of Tennessee,
Imparato Clinical Associate Professor, Surgical Oncology.
Knoxville, Tennessee, USA
Oncology Service Chief,
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences,
Malcolm J. Brearley MA, VetMB, Msc(Clin Onc),
College of Veterinary Medicine,
DipECVIM-CA(Oncology), FRCVS
University of Florida,
RCVS Emeritus Specialist in Veterinary Oncology.
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Frostenden,
Suffolk, UK
Stephen J. Baines MA, VetMB, PhD, CertVR, CertSA5, DipECVS,
DipClinOnc, MRCVS
Paolo Buracco DVM, DipECVS
 European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Full Professor of Veterinary Surgery.
RCVS Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Department of Animal Science,
RCVS Specialist in Veterinary Oncology.
University of Turin.
Willows Referral Service,
Grugliasco (Turin), Italy
Solihull, UK
xili
Contributors
Rachel Burrow BVetMed, CertSA5, CertVR, DipECVs, MRCVS
Robert J. Hardie DVM, DipAcvs, DipECVS
Lecturer in Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery.
Clinical Associate Professor,
 Small Animal Teaching Hospital,
Small Animal General Surgery.
Wirral, UK
University of Wisconsin,
School of Veterinary Medicine,
Nicole J. Buote DvM, DipAcvS
Department of Surgical Sciences,
Veterinary Specialist,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Surgeon,
VCA West Los Angeles,
Andrea Harvey BVSc, DSAM(Feline), DipECVIM-CA, MRcVS
Los Angeles, California, USA
RCVS Recognised Specialist in Feline Medicine,
Marge Chandler DVM, Ms, MANzcVSc, DAcvN, DAcViM,
Feline Medicine Clinician,
DipECVIM-CA, MRCvs
Small Animal Specialist Hospital.
Small Animal Nutrition Service,
Sydney, Australia
University of Edinburgh,
Roslin, UK
 David Holt BVsc, DipAcvs
Professor of Surgery.
Jackie L. Demetriou BVetMed, CertSAs, DipECVs, MRcvS
University of Pennsylvania.
 European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
School of Veterinary Medicine,
Hon. Assoc. Professor of Small Animal Surgery.
 Philadelphia, Pennysylvania, USA
University of Nottingham,
Dick White Referrals, 
Mark W. Jackson BSc, DVM, PhD, DipAcVIM
Suffolk, UK
Senior Lecturer,
Small Animal Internal Medicine,
Jane M. Dobson MA, DVetMed, DipECIVM-CA(Int Med & Onc),
University of Glasgow,
MRCVS
Glasgow, UK
University Reader in Veterinary Oncology.
Department of Veterinary Medicine,
Debra A. Kamstock DVM, PhD, DipAcVP
University of Cambridge.
Chief Pathologist/Director,
Cambridge, UK
KamPath Diagnostics and Investigation; 
Faculty Affliate,
Gary W. Ellison DvM, Ms, DipAcvs
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
 Professor and Service Chief,
Colorado State University;
 Small Animal Surgery.
President,
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences,
 Oncology Pathology Working Group.
University of Florida,
A joint venture of the Veterinary Cancer Society and the American
 Gainesville, Florida, USA
College of Veterinary Pathologists,
Colorado, USA
Edward J. Friend BVetMed, CertSAs, DipECVs, MRcVS
Teaching Associate in Small Animal Surgery.
Sabine B.R. Kastner Prof Dr med vet, MVetsci, DipEcVAA
School of Veterinary Science,
Professor in Veterinary Anaesthesiology.
University of Bristol.
University of Veterinary Medicine,
Bristol, UK
Hannover Germany
Gabriele Gradner DvM, DipEcVS
Barbara Kirby B5, RN, DVM, Ms, DipAcVs, DipECVS
Clinical Department of Small Animal Surgery.
University of Veterinary Medicine,
Section of Veterinary Clinical Sciences,
Vienna, Austria
University College Dublin,
Dublin, lreland 
Zoe Halfacree MA, VetMB, CertVDl, CertSAs, FHEA,
 DipECVs, MRCVS
Patrick R. Kircher Prof Dr med vet, PhD, DipEcVDI
Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Surgery.
Head of Division for Diagnostic Imaging.
 Clinical Sciences and Services,
Vetsuisse-Faculty.
 Small Animal Medicine and Surgery Group.
University of Zurich,
The Royal Veterinary College.
Zurich, Switzerland
Hatfield, UK
Jolle Kirpensteijn DVM, PhD, DipAcVs, DipECvS
Elizabeth Hardie DVM, PhD, DipACVS
Professor in Surgery.
Department Head, Clinical Sciences,
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals,
College of Veterinary Medicine.
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA
Utrecht University.
 Utrecht, The Netherlands
Clare Knottenbelt BVSc, MSc, DSAM, MRCVS
 Professor of Small Animal Medicine and Oncology.
University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK
xiv
Contributors
Jane F. Ladlow MA, VetMB, DipECVs, MRcVS
Pieter Nelissen DVM, CertSAs, MRcvS
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Consultant in Small Animal Surgery.
Lecturer, Soft Tissue Surgery.
Dick White Referrals,
University of Cambridge.
Suffolk, UK
Cambridge, UK
Mauria O'Brien DVM, DAcVECC
Sorrel J. Langley-Hobbs MA, BVetMed, DSAs(O), DipEcVs,
Clinical Assistant Professor,
MRCVS
Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care,
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
College of Veterinary Medicine,
University Surgeon,
University of Illinois,
Head of Small Animal Surgery.
Urbana, Ilinois, USA
Department of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Cambridge,.
Stefanie Ohlerth PD, Dr med vet, DipECVDI
Cambridge, UK
Senior Lecturer,
 Diagnostic Imaging.
 John Lapish BSc, BVetMed, MRCVS
Vetsuisse Faculty.
Chairman,
University of Zurich,
Veterinary Instrumentation,
 Zurich, Switzerland 
 Sheffield, UK
Laura J. Owen BVsc, CertsAs, DipECVs, MRcVs
Philip Lhermette BSc(Hons), CBiol, MSB, BVetMed, MRCVS
European Specialist in Smal Animal Surgery.
Principal Veterinary Surgeon,
Lecturer, Soft Tissue Surgery.
Elands Veterinary Clinic,
University of Cambridge.
Sevenoaks, Kent;
Cambridge, UK
The University of Nottingham School of Veterinary Medicine and Science,
Caryn E. Plummer DVM, DACVO
Nottingham, UK
Assitant Professor and Service Chief,
Comparative Ophthalmology College of Veterinary Medicine,
Lea M. Liehmann DipEcvs
University of Florida,
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Department for Companion Animals and Horses,
 Clinic for Small Animals: Small Animal Surgery.
Barbara Posch CertVR, DEcvDl, MRcvs
University for Veterinary Medicine,
 Staff Radiologist,
Vienna
The Queen's Veterinary School Small Animal Hospital,
University of Cambridge,
Victoria Lipscomb MA, VetB, CertSAs, FHEA, DipEcVs
Cambridge, UK
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
 Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Surgery.
Kathryn M. Pratschke MVB, MvM, CertsAs, DipEcVs, MRcvS
Head of Soft Tissue Surgery.
RCVS Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences,
 European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Royal Veterinary College,
School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of London,
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
Hatfield, UK
University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK
 Jeffrey P. Little DVM
Small Animal Surgeon,
 Suzanne Rudd DipAVN(Medical), RVN
Department of Surgical Sciences,
Senior Feline Veterinary Nurse,
School of Veterinary Medicine,
   a 
University of Wisconsin,
Bristol, UK
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Bernard Seguin DVM, Ms, DipAcvs
 Janet K. McClaran DVM, DipAcVS
ACVs Founding Fellow (Surgical Oncology).
Staff Surgeon,
 Associate Professor,
 The Animal Medical Center,
Department of Clinical Sciences,
New York, New York, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine.
 Oregon State University.
Bjorn P. Meij DvM, PhD, DipECVS
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
Associate Professor,
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals,
Chris Shales MA, VetMB, CertSAs, DipECVs, MRCVS
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine.
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Utrecht University, The Netherlands 
RCVS Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Willows Veterinary Referral Service,
Alison L. Moores BvSc(Hons), CertSAs, DipEcvs, MRcvs
Solihull, UK
European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Thomas Sissener Ms, DVM, CertsAs, DipEcvs, MRcvs
Anderson Moores Veterinary Specialists, 
 Surgeon and European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Winchester, UK
Oslo, Norway
XV
Contributors
Ramesh K. Sivacolundhu BSc, BVMs, MVs, FANzcVS
Robert N. White BSc(Hons), BVetMed, CertVA, DSAS(Soft Tissue),
 Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
DipECVS, MRcvS
Director of Surgery and Oncology.
 European Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Balcatta Veterinary Hospital,
RCVS Specialist in Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery.
Perth, Australia
Willows Veterinary Referral Service,
Solihull, UK
Kinley D. Smith MA, VetMB, PhD, CertSAs, MRcVS
 Clinician in Small Animal Surgery.
Dick White BVetMed, PhD, DSAS, DVR, FRCVS, DipACVS, DipECVS
Small Animal Hospital,
ACVS, European and RCVs Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine.
RCVS Specialist in Veterinary Oncology.
University of Glasgow,
 ACVS Founding Fellow (Surgical Oncology).
 Glasgow, UK
Director, Dick White Referrals,
Suffolk, UK
Andrew Sparkes BVetMed, PhD, DipEcVIM, MRcVS
Veterinary Director.
John M. williams MA, VetMB, LLB, CertVR, DipEcVs, FRCVS
International Society of Feline Medicine and International Cat Care,
Honorary Visiting Professor,
Wilts, UK
University of Liverpool;
Soft Tissue Surgeon,
Michael S. Tivers BVsc, PhD, CertsAs, DipEcVs, MRcVS
Northwest Surgeons,
Cheshire, UK
Cave Veterinary Specialists,
West Buckland, UK
Donald A. Yool BvMs, PhD, DipEcvs, CertsAs, MRcvs
Senior Lecturer,
S.A. van Nimwegen DVM, PhD, DipEcvs
Head of Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery.
 Specialist in Small Animal Surgery.
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies,
Assistant Professor,
University of Edinburgh.
Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals.
Edinburgh, UK
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University Utrecht,
The Netherlands
xvi
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the following colleagues for their gen-
Graham Hayes MA, VetMB, CertSAS, DipECVS, MRCVS
erous contributions to this book, including reading chapters, taking 
Christina Knudsen DVM, MRCVS
photographs, and other contributions:
Liz Leece BVSc, CVA, DipECVAA, MRCVS
Sam McMillan VTS(Anaesthesia), DipAVN(Medical). RVN
Hayley Carne BSc(Hons), RVN
Nic Rousset BSc, BVSc, MRCVS
Rob Foale BSc, BVetMed, DSAM, DipECVIM-Ca, MRCVS
Julie Sales DCR
Jon Hall MA, VetMB, CertSAS, MRCVS
Silke Stein DVM, DipECVS
Karen Harris BVetMed, MRCVS
Chrissie Willers
xi
Section
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, J.L. Demetriou, J.F Ladlow
The perioperative period
The success of a surgical procedure is reliant on thorough preoperative
the signs of pain are not obvious. The subsequent two chapters are
 preparation and good postoperative nursing and nutrition, in addi-
also focused on postoperative care. During the postoperative period
 paseaul ue uaaq sey aiaul sieak juaai ul aniuupat ieiins oi uon
the cat needs regular assessment to ensure it has a smooth recovery
awareness of pain assessment and treatment in cats and also the
from surgery so complications are avoided, or recognized and treated
development of cat friendly environments.
Buisanu aaneiadoisod jyuanouh no op Aaul uaum aduond
 Initially, a thorough preoperative assessment of the patient is
can improve the recovery for the cat, and decrease the stress of
aul ul iaideup isiy aul ul lelap ul paiaaon sl siul pue paiinbal
hospitalization.
Aueu aie aiaul pue 'juassasse oi yeoidde weo e paau seo yooq
aul pue sonpoid pooiq io pooiq aunbai Aeu sjuaed jesiaing 
aspects of both the physical examination and the environment in
 mechanisms and practicalities associated with giving a cat a blood
which the cat is examined that can be adapted to suit the nature
transfusion are well described. If there is pre-existing blood loss or
of the cat.
anemia, then the transfusion can be given preoperatively If it is antici-
The second chapter on anesthesia and analgesia focuses on cats with
pated that there may be significant blood loss intraoperatively, then
surgical diseases of the various organ systems including the thorax,.
blood should be readily available in case it is needed. In either case
abdomen, and head and neck. Analgesia of the cat should continue 
the cat should be blood typed and cross-matched in preparation for
a safe transfusion.
 and progress made in the assessment of pain in the cat. Pain in cats
Cats that are unwell and hospitalized are not always keen to eat,
is not always easy to detect particularly as cats are often anxious and
 and inappetent cats, particularly if overweight, are at risk of hepatic
stressed due to their visit to the veterinarian. Pain scoring of cats
lipidosis. The importance of adequate nutrition and encouraging oral
should be something that is done routinely in both the preoperative
feeding cannot be overlooked and this topic is discussed in detail in
 and postoperative period. A catthat has had surgery performed should
Aaneiadoisd ieaieu sie yooq autjo zed sujo iandeu ieuy au
always be given the benefit of the doubt and given analgesia even if
can usually be discharged more quickly and recover more swiftly.
oter
Preoperative assessment for surgery
V.R.Barrs, J.A.Beatty
Pre-operative assessment of the patient provides a solid foundation
The specific history relates to the presenting complaint (Box 1-2).
for a safe and successful surgical procedure The assessment relies
 This establishes what abnormalities the owner has noticed, their dura-
heavily on information obtained from a thorough history and physi-
tion and the pattern of disease It is the responsibility of the clinician
cal examination. It establishes the baseline physiologic data for the
to fnd a way of communicating with each owner that best facilitates
individual, facilitates assessment of intercurrent disease and its poten-
 aa a nu   a y m u
tial relevance, identifies current medications that may need adjust-
jsoule aiaul paodai s! wualqoid e jl 'aq ol ll saianiad iaumo au
 ment in the perioperative period and directs appropriate preoperative
certainly is one.
testing.
 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
ARRIVAL AND HISTORY TAKING
A complete preoperative physical examination is essential to identify
Evaluation of the patient begins at reception. Sick cats often present
factors that may affect surgical outcome. Most cats will allow a thor-
for lethargy and inappetence regardless of their underlying disease.
ough examination and respond best to minimal restraint. Special care
Cats should be observed in their carriers by staff on arrival to identify
should be taken with cats that are particularly timid or aggressive.
injured or dyspneic patients that require immediate stabilization.
Maintaining a quiet environment and avoiding sudden movement is
helpful. Doors and windows should be closed. Further information
History taking
on providing an appropriate environment for examining cats and the
most cat friendly consulting room is provided in Chapter 9.
Regardless of the surgical procedure planned, the clinician should
Handling and acclimatization
Kioisiy pyiads aul pue Aioisiy leiauag aul shied oml ul paiapisuos aq
The general history involves collection of background epidemiological
The demeanor of the cat and its resting respiratory rate and effort
information for the patient (Box l-1). Signalment should be con-
should be observed while it is in its carrier. If the cat appears relaxed,
firmed. Owners may, unwittingly, provide inaccurate information on
it should be stroked and talked to before lifting it onto the floor or
their cat's age, breed or sex. It should be ascertained whether the cat
table If the cat appears aggressive (eg. ears back and flattened) it is
was acquired as a kitten or as an adult of unknown background. A
prudent to remove the cat from the top of its carrier swiftly by scruffng
reasonable estimate of age can be made in cats that are still growing
the back of the neck with one hand and supporting the cat's body
(up to 18-24 months) and in geriatric cats if there is iris discoloration 
Or age-associated disease, eg., most cats with hyperthyroidism are over
ened when approached to be removed from their cage. Hesitating to
10 years old. Information regarding the cats' living circumstances is
remove these cats can precipitate aggressive swiping or biting. A non-
important. Owners of cats living in apartments can usually provide
aggressive cat can be removed from its carry cage at the start of the
detailed information on toileting. appetite and activity levels that
consultation and given time to acclimatize while the history is taken.
owners of cats that roam will be unable to provide. Owners should
The cat can sit on the consulting table while being gently held or
be questioned about current medications with the drug, dose, fre-
stroked by the owner, or if the cat is not injured or dyspneic, it can
quency and time of last dosing being recorded. In presurgical patients.
explore the room. This can reduce anxiety in an unfamiliar environ-
 special attention should be given to medications that may affect coag.
ment before the physical examination begins and permits observation
ulation (e.g., heparins, warfarin, aspirin, and clopidogrel) and wound
of the cat's mentation and gait The ‘window of opportunity' for
healing (e.g., prednisolone).
examination of the cat can be small and the examination should
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00001-9
E
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Box 1-1 General history: An outline of questions to assist
 in obtaining background information 
Confirm signalment (age, sex, breed)
 Determine origin of cat
shelter/breeding cattery/pet-shop/stray?
geographic origin/travel history?
age when acquired?
 Present environment
outdoor access? (free roaming/restricted?)
rural/urban?
other pets? (number/species/health status)
exposure to other animals?
toxin exposure?
Diet
amount and type including supplements and treats
ingestion of prey? (e.g.. rodents, reptiles, birds)
 Previous medical problems 
type of illness, management, outcome 
current medications (prescription, over-the-counter, holistic)
Vaccination and parasite control status
 Box 1-2 Specific history: An outline of questions to assist
 in characterizing the presenting complaint
What is the presenting complaint?
Is this a recurrence of a previously investigated problem?
What were the first signs?
What is the duration of these signs?
Figure 1-1 Removing cat from a top-loading box. (A) An anxious or
Are signs intermittent or continuous?
aggressive cat can be held at the scruff and under the abdomen and
Are signs static, progressive or resolving?
swiftly removed. (B) A friendly cat can be supported under the chest and
 Present status
abdomen for removal.
weight loss/gain?
 activity level, demeanor?
appetite, water intake?
the physical examination, after acclimatization. This avoids artefac-
urination and defecation characteristics?
 tual, anxiety-induced increases or decreases in blood pressure, known
any gastrointestinal or respiratory signs?
as the 'white-coat' effect (Fig. 1-2, Box 1-3). Doppler techniques are
preferred over oscillometric techniques for measurement of SBP in
sz'ainseauu ol iaisey pue aieinoe aiou aie Aau se sieo snoipsuon
 proceed from least invasive to most invasive procedures, with abdomi-
Head-to-tail examination
nal palpation, rectal temperature and manipulation of an area sus-
The physical examination can be completed by starting at the head
 pected to be painful generally performed last.
and working caudally. The cat should frst be weighed using accurate
scales and its body condition score assessed using established 5-point 
:(g iandeu aas) saiss suos zuiod-g 10
BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT
Head
Assess the shape and symmetry of the head
Measurement of systolic blood pressure (SBP) is indicated in any cat
Look/feel for muscle atrophy
with evidence of target organ damage, including cats with chronic
Eyes
kidney disease (CKD), retinopathy or choriodopathy, intracranial
Check pupil shape and symmetry
signs, cardiovascular signs (murmur, gallop, arrhythmia) or epistaxis.
Examine for discharge or blepharospasm
SBP pressure should also be measured in obese cats and where thyroid
Retract upper and lower eyelids to examine conjunctiva and
 Or adrenal disease is suspected. Given that CKD and hyperthyroidism
sclera (Fig. 1-3)
are the most common causes of hypertension in cats, it is prudent to
Examine cormea, iris and anterior chamber
measure blood pressure routinely in any cat that is 10 years of age or
 Prolapse nictitating membrane by placing thumb over upper
 older.' Measurement of SBP should be carried out at the beginning of
eyelid and retropulsing globe with lower lid retracted (Fig. 1-4).
4
Preoperative assessment for surgery
Chapter
1
AauouewouAyds yaiddoa buisn suawanseau anssaid poona sloisrs -l xg
1. To minimize the 'white-coat' effect bring the cat, with the owner.
4.
Apply coupling gel to the Doppler probe and place the probe on 
se yns sasiou snoauexa wouy Aeme woou uoeinsuon jainb e oui
the area prepared, level with the first phalanx and directly over
0 aziiewpe oi jen aul oj sainuiu ual oi anly moll shop buyieg
the median artery to obtain a pulse signal. The cuff should be 
these conditions.
positioned level with the heart. Inflate the cuff to 20-30 mmHg
 2. With the cat in sternal recumbency or sitting. use an alcohol soaked 
beyond where the pulse is no longer audible. Slowly deflate the 
swab to wet the hair on the palmar aspect of one forelimb adjacent 
cuff. The point at which the pulse is again first audible is the 
:by) xueleyd isuy aut ot jewlxoid isn! pue ped ledleneiaw au1 ol
 systolic blood pressure (Figs 1.2B, 1.2C).
1.2A). Clipping the hair is NOT necessary in most cats. A hindlimb
 5. Leaving 30 to 60 seconds between each reading. take five
or the tail can also be used.
consecutive readings, discard the first, and then calculate the
 3. Measure the circumference of the forelimb mid-way between the
mean systolic blood pressure. Record the cuff size used.
carpus and the elbow, where the cuff will be placed. The cuff width
6. Perform fundoscopy to look for evidence of hypertensive 
should be >30% and closest to 40% of the circumference. An
choriodopathy or retinopathy (Hg. 1.2D).
undersized cuff overestimates, and an oversized cuff underestimates
 blood pressure. Place the cuff.
A
Doppler 3/4
A TRARWNE EOPPR ER
B
Figure 1-2 (A) An alcohol swab is used to wet the hair on the palmar aspect of the forelimb adjacent to the metacarpal pad before placement of
the Doppler ultrasound probe. Clipping of the hair is not necessary and could contribute to "white-coat" hypertension. (B) Equipment for indirect 
anbuual ) jan buinos pue yn anssad pog anauoueuouuds opaiap moly lalddog juose un en ayi u yuauanseau ainssad poog 
for blood pressure measurement with cat gently restrained. The cuff is placed mid-way between the carpus and elbow. The Doppler probe is held 
lightly over the median artery on the palmar aspect of the forelimb adjacent to the metacarpal pad. (D) Indirect ophthalmoscopy using a Finnoff 
transilluminator and a 20-30 diopter lens. The examination can usually be completed in low ambient light without topical mydriatics. Otherwise,
1% tropicamide can be used. (f8) With thanks to Henleys Medical Supolies Lto.).
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Figure 1-3 Examination of the sclera.
Figure 1-5 Examination of the gums
 Otoscopic examination to the level of the tympanic
membranes, if permitted by the cat Sedation or anesthesia is
required for complete visualization if the cat has sensitive or
painful ears
Mouth and hydration status 
Examine lips/commissures
 Elevate upper lip to assess mucous membrane color, moistness.
capillary refll time (CRT) (Fig. 1-5). In comparison to the dog.
the normal mucous membrane color for cats is paler. Assess the
cat's hydration status (Table 1-1). Signs of dehydration include
dry or tacky mucous membranes, a loss of skin turgor (skin
A
tenting between the shoulder blades), prolonged CRT and
enophthalmos. Skin tenting as a measure of hydration can be
unreliable in geriatric or emaciated cats and the moistness of
mucous membranes is more diffcult to assess in cats than
in dogs
 Assess teeth and gingiva
The mouth should be opened (Fig. 1-6). The fauces, tongue and
soft palate can be inspected. Subtle jaundice can sometimes be 
detected first on the soft palate
 The underside of the tongue is examined for masses or string
foreign bodies by pressing the thumb of the second hand into
 the intermandibular space to elevate the tongue
Nose
Assess nasal planum for altered pigmentation, ulceration or
cmusts
Asu paseanu yml are as rg saneu ssass
effort), discharge and patency (microscope slide fogs on
?
exhalation)
Assess nasal bridge for shape and symmetry
Figure 1-4 Examination of the nictitating membrane. (A) The lower lid is 
 Thyroid gland, larynx trachea, jugular vein
retracted downwards while (B) placing gentle pressure on the globe.
With the head fully extended the thyroid lobes can be palpated
by sliding the thumb and forefinger in a continuous movement
from the larynx to the thoracic inlet Enlarged thyroid lobes are
Fundic examination is essential when there is suspicion for
palpated as a flick through the fingers (Fig. 1-7)
chorioretinal disease (e.g., toxoplasmosis, feline infectious
The larynx can be gently palpated to elicit a swallow allowing
 peritonitis (FIP) or whenever blood pressure is measured
non-invasive assessment of the gag reflex. One or two soft
(Fig. 1-2D)
coughs may be elicited
Ears
While the head is elevated the jugular vein is inspected for
 Examine pinnae
distension and/or pulsation. The hair may be damped down if
 Inspect and smell external ear canal for evidence of infection
the vein is not visible
Preoperative assessment for surgery
Chapter
Table 1-1 Assessment of hydration status
% Dehydration
Attitude
Eyes
Mucous membranes
Skin tent
Capillary refill time
 Normal 
 Normal
Dry
Mildly prolonged
Normal or mildly
<2 seconds
prolonged
6-9
Mildly lethargic
 Mildly sunken 
Tackyrdry
Prolonged
Prolonged
>3 seconds
10-12
Lethargic
 Deeply sunken 
Dry ± cold 
 Persists
Prolonged
>15%
Moribund, death impending
 Deeply sunken 
Dry/cold
 Persists
Prolonged
(A)
B
C
Figure 1-6 Examination of the oral cavity. (A) The cat is reassured and the head is grasped firmly.
(B) The neck is fully extended so that the nose points directly upwards. The index finger is placed
on the lower incisors to open the jaw. (c) The tongue is raised by pushing the thumb up between
D
the mandibles. (D) Good visualization of the tongue, hard and soft palate and sublingual area is
achieved.
Peripheral lymph nodes
Thorax
Mandibular lymph nodes are located rostral and lateral to the
Cardiovascular System
mandibular salivary gland. They are palpated by grasping the
 Palpate the cardiac apex beat noting intensity and presence
soft tissues ventral to the vertical ramus of the mandibles
of any thrills
and sifting through tissues until the node is felt as a small
 Place the diaphragm of the stethoscope over the sternum
bean' that is harder and smoother than the lobulated
with the cat standing or sitting and auscultate the heart in
salivary gland
sternal and parasternal locations. In a veterinary hospital 
Superficial cervical (prescapular) lymph nodes lie medial to the
environment the normal feline heart rate ranges from 140 to
point of the shoulder, near the clavicle remnant
 200 beats per minute
The popliteal lymph nodes lie between the gastrocnemius
Take the heart rate and palpate the femoral pulses simultane-
muscle bellies in the pelvic limbs and must be differentiated
ously, noting the pulse amplitude, pulse symmetry and any
from surrounding fatty tissue
pulse deficits. Evaluation of femoral pulses is more diffcult in
ual iendesad uao pue sapou ydual ieunlu Krelxe au
the cat than the dog as they are more easily occluded during
nodes, are not palpable unless enlarged
firm palpation, but their presence should be ascertained
Section
 The Perioperative Period
 Figure 1-8 Abdominal palpation, two-handed technique
Figure 1-7 Thyroid palpation.
Listen for murmurs, grade them from I to VI and find the
point of maximum intensity (PMl). Murmurs can be induced
if the stethoscope is pressed too firmly against the chest
Listen for gallop (extra, abnormal) heart sounds. S4 is the
gallop sound most often heard in cats. It arises from atrial
contraction against a diastolically compromised ventricle,
cats. It is caused by sudden cessation of rapid ventricular
flling with vibration of the walls and muscles
Figure 1-9 Abdominal palpation one-handed technique, R kidney
Assess the rhythm of the heart as regular, regular-irregular
palpation
(e.g. sinus arrhythmia, rare in cats compared with dogs) or
irregular-irregular (eg., atrial fibrillation)
Respiratory System
 Dyspnea is best detected by observation, not auscultation.
Percussion of the thorax can help identify areas of decreased
Rate and effort should be determined while the cat is still in
resonance caused by fluid, consolidation or a mass
its carrier. The presence of a subtle increase in inspiratory
Abdominal palpation
effort is easier to appreciate from above The presence of
Examine the animal from behind. Start at the mid-abdomen
audible respiratory noise (stridor, stertor, wheeze) should be
pressing gently at frst, and then slowly increasing the pressure
noted
in increments. If you apply too much pressure initially the
 Normal respiratory rate is 16 to 32 breaths per minute
 patient may splint the abdomen and normal structures will not
 In cats the cranial thoracic cage is compressible Abnormal
be palpable
resistance can indicate an intrathoracic mass
The abdomen can be palpated using a one or two-handed
technique (Figs 1-8 and 1-9). For the latter, the flat of each hand
 8"h intercostal space (level of tracheal bifurcation). Move the
is placed against the abdominal wall in a mid-abdominal
stethoscope dorsally, ventrally, cranially and caudally to
location and slowly pressed together. The kidneys are palpated
auscultate all areas of the lungs. Record the exact location of
frst. The right kidney lies cranial to the left kidney and if not
 any abnormal lung sounds and their characteristics, eg..
palpable with the cat standing, the forelegs are lifted off the
crackles, wheezes
table with the left hand under the chest The right kidney then 
Auscultate over the trachea and larynx. Upper respiratory
drops into a more caudal location and can be grasped with the
sounds may be referred to the lower respiratory tract. If
night hand. The left kidney is easily palpable with the cat in a
sounds are loudest over the upper respiratory tract, it is likely
standing position. The size of the kidneys should be noted as
that this is their origin
well as any irregularities of the renal cortex
If the cat is purring. options are to reposition it, show the cat
Next reach forward into the cranial abdomen. The caudal border
10 xuel ay aedled kuag 'asou a den io dei sunuu e
of a normal liver can usually just be palpated as a sharp edge on
Al 1o 'dee e si aiau 1un suund au qanoy anejnsne
the cranioventral abdomen adjacent the costal arch
again later
 A palpable spleen usually indicates splenomegaly
8
Preoperative assessment for surgery
Chapter
1
Small intestinal loops are palpated in the ventral third of the
 abdomen and should be evaluated for wall thickening
Box 1-4 VITAMIN D acronym used to create differential
Enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes may also be palpable
 diagnoses list
The descending colon is palpable when feces are present.
Vascular: ischemia + hemorrhage
Feces are usually compressible whereas intestinal masses 
are not
Infection/inflammation/immune-mediated: (bacterial, fungal, viral,
 Musculoskeletal, skin and coat
protozoal, parasitic)
Examine each forelimb from scapula to toes. Examine forelimb
Trauma
muscles for symmetry, palpate for masses under the hair coat
 Anomalous: congenital + inherited disease
Check feet, flex carpus and elbow, check toes and nails. Cats
 Metabolic/toxic/nutritional
Idiopathic
may be the only physical abnormality with some neoplasms
Neoplastic: primary, metastatic 
Palpate the muscles of the back and trunk. Apply pressure over
 Degener ative 
the vertebrae to detect back pain
Palpate rear limb muscles, check toes and nails
If the animal has presented for a musculoskeletal problem a
more detailed examination is required
Thorough history +
Examine the hair coat, combing the coat the wrong way.
physical examination
Thoroughly examine the skin color and coat consistency. Check
for alopecia
Ventral abdomen
dentify the problems
Lay the cat in lateral or dorsal recumbency and examine the
ventral abdomen. Check the skin and palpate the nipples,
inguinal and axillary areas carefully
Rectal temperature
Assess each problem
Normal temperature 37.8-39.2°C
-what body system?
where? (localise lesions)
Use lubricant to insert the thermometer gently into the rectum.
-how? (pathogenetic mechanisms)
Cats often clamp their internal anal sphincter, preventing the 
thermometer from entering further. Wait for a few seconds and
stroke the cat. Once the cat has relaxed then gently insert the
thermometer at least 2 or 3 cm into the rectum. The
Formulate & rank differential diagnoses
thermometer must be held at an angle so that the bulb lies
(likely, possible or unlikely)
against the rectal wall. If the thermometer is held in the lumen
of the rectum or in feces it may record an erroneously low value.
Rigid thermometers are preferred to more flexible thermometers
 Plan for further diagnostic
since the latter may bend away from the rectal wall
 investigation or treatment
While measuring the temperature inspect the perineum and
tail base
 Figure 1-10 Flow diagram of problem-based patient assessment
Examine the thermometer for the presence of fecal material and
note color, presence of blood, mucus, and so on.
A list of differential diagnoses is made for each problem by following
 Due to their small size digital rectal examinations are only
this pathway of clinical reasoning. Differential diagnoses should be
performed in cats if clinical signs of rectal, urethral or, rarely.
ranked as likely, possible or unlikely. To assist in considering possible
prostatic disease are present. Some cats require sedation to
etiologies, acronyms such as VITAMIN D are useful (Box 1-4). Plans
perform a rectal examination.
for the diagnostic investigation are then formulated and recorded in
the medical record. The problem-based approach is summarized in
Figure l-10. For presurgical patients, where the history and physical
PROBLEM-BASED PATIENT ASSESSMENT
examination reveal evidence of intercurrent disease, an assessment
 needs to be made as to whether these problems or their management
Once the history and physical examination are complete, the next
auny iauaum pue ainpanoid iesigins pasodoid aul uo pedul pinos
step is to determine and assess the active problems based on the
investigation or treatment is required. Implications of this assessment
should be fully discussed with owners prior to obtaining consent for
information acquired. A problem is defined as anything that interferes
with the patient's well-being that requires further attention or man-
surgery.
agement. A problem may be a specifc diagnosis, a clinical sign. a
syndrome an abnormal physical fnding. an abnormal laboratory
test result or an abnormal diagnostic imaging fnding. It may be
PREOPERATIVE LABORATORY DATABASE
something requiring immediate investigation and/or treatment or
something that is not of immediate concern but is potentially impor-
The minimum database
tant. Once the problem list is defined, except for specific diagnoses,
each problem is assessed in terms of:
The minimum database required prior to anesthesia and surgery will
 The body systems involved
depend on the physical status of the cat and whether the surgical
 The anatomic localization of lesions
procedure is minor (< 60 minutes) or major. For healthy cats, or cats
 The possible pathogenetic mechanisms
less than 7 years of age undergoing minor surgery (e.g. repair of a
The possible etiologies.
( uanoid eeid ieo '(d) aa las ped e (uoase us
6
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
and urine specifc gravity are recommended. For the same patients
undergoing major surgery, and for healthy cats of 7 years or older or
Box 1-5 Tests of primary hemostasis: Buccal mucosal
unu uiaun sassau ssis uuaea-a-uu m sm
bleeding time (BMBT)
surgery a complete blood count (CBC), urinalysis (UA) and biochem-
istry panel (urea, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine ami-
A spring-loaded cutting device is used to make a standardized 
notransferase (ALT), glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride, TP) are
incision in a non-vascular area of buccal mucosa 
recommended. For cats with non-life-threatening systemic illnesses
The edge of a sheet of filter or blotting paper is used to absorb the
undergoing major surgery or for cats with life-threatening illness
blood without disturbing the clot and the time taken for bleeding
undergoing any surgery a CBC, UA and complete biochemical and
from the incision to cease is measured (reference range 1.0-2.4
electrolyte panel is recommended. These guidelines are adapted from
minutes)
the American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification 
system? (see Chapter 2).
 Retrovirus testing
Screening for acquired defects
Serological testing for feline leukemia vinus (FeLV) antigen and feline
Uremia and paraproteinemia (normal or abnormal plasma protein
immunodefciency vinus (FIV) antibody is recommended for all cats.
appearing in large quantities as a result of a pathological condition)
Cats returning a positive FeLV antigen test should have the result
can be associated with thrombocytopathias and platelet function
confirmed by virus isolation, immunofluorescence assay or polymer-
testing is indicated Indications for screening of secondary coagulation
ase chain reaction (PCR). A positive FIV antibody test in a cat older
defects include patients with hepatic insufficiency, biliary obstruction,
than 6 months of age that has not been vaccinated for FIV indicates
intestinal malabsorption, exocrine pancreatic insuffciency, hypopro-
that the cat is infected. Where vaccination status is unknown, a PCR
teinemia and neoplasia.
test will determine whether the positive antibody test is a result of
vaccination or infection. While the prognosis for FeLV infected cats is
Tests of primary hemostasis
uoy paioipaid aq rouue sieo paoajurald ioy sisougoid aul 'papieng
its infection status alone as many FIV-infected cats have a normal
Platelet function can be assessed by measurement of buccal mucosal
life-expectancy.
bleeding time (BMBT) in-house (Box 1-5). Sedation may be required.
uoesaiase iaaiei susn ona ul passasse aq ues uosuny iaaeld
studies and platelet function analyzers.
Coagulation testing
Abnormalities in coagulation mechanisms confer a risk of excessive
Tests of secondary hemostasis
 bleeding or thrombosis. Acquired and heritable defects in primary and
If a coagulopathy is suspected, screening tests include activated coagu-
secondary coagulation are recognized in the cat.
lation time (in-house) initially, or preferably a laboratory-based
coagulation profle, including prothrombin time activated partial
Screening for heritable defects
thromboplastin time, thrombin time and fibrinogen. Explanations of
 Most heritable defects, other than vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy
these tests are detailed in Chapter 5.
 of Devon Rex cats, are clinically silent but manifest as excessive surgi-
cal or postsurgical bleeding
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy of Devon Rex cats is a com-
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
bined factor deficiency (Il, VII, IX and X).° All Devon Rex cats should
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
have activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) measured prior to 
elective surgery to identify affected cats. This coagulopathy is associ-
ated with spontaneous bleeding which can be severe, and careful
Current medications and
history taking may reveal previous episodes of lameness associated
antimicrobial prophylaxis
with hemarthrosis. Oral vitamin K treatment normalizes coagulation.°
Although not associated with a bleeding tendency, erythrocyte pynu-
Adjustments or short-term discontinuation of medications may be
vate kinase (EPK) deficiency in Abyssinian and Somali cats can cause
required if they increase the anesthetic risk (eg., induce bradycardia
cyclic anemia and genetic testing is advised in these breeds prior to
or hypotension), are contraindicated in fasting animals or can
surgery, especially if anemia is present.
 pasn Aluowon sama suleay punom no uoeinseos paje Aiasaape
 Other heritable coagulopathies in the cat differ from those in the
in cats that require review include non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
dog in that they are rare and are often not breed related. The absence
drugs (e.g. meloxicam), angiotensin converting enzyme-inhibitors
of a well-defined risk population for screening means that, except for
(e.g. benazepril), calcium channel blockers (e.g. amlodipine), beta
cats related to known affected cats, heritable coagulopathies are
blockers (eg., atenolol), prednisolone, antiplatelet drugs (e.g, clopi-
unlikely to be diagnosed until clinical signs are evident. Inherited
dogrel) and anticoagulants (e.g.. low-molecular weight heparin). For
thrombocytopathias are exceedingly rare, with Chediak-Higashi syn-
cats with diabetes mellitus receiving insulin, a reduced dose of insulin
drome (Persian cats) and von Willebrand disease reported.? Single
aneiadoisod io -enu! pione ot Aaains jo Sujuou au uo uanig s!
factor deficiencies VIlI (hemophilia A), IX (hemophilia B), X, XIl and
hypoglycemia. Depending on the morning blood glucose reading
combined VIll/XIl, IX/XIl occur infrequently. The hemophilias are
'Z landeu aas) uaai si unsul un uonpa1 'aieai io os e
sex-linked but females can be affected as the trait usually does not
Table 2-3).
affect survival. The activated coagulation time (ACT) and activated
Antimicrobial prophylaxis may be indicated perioperatively depend-
 partial thromboplastin time (APTT) will be prolonged in these factor
ing on the type of wound, surgical site operative time use of surgical
deficiencies.
implants, level of contamination, and systemic immunocompetence
10
Preoperative assessment for surgery
Chapter
1
 Iso-oncotic (5%) human serum albumin (HSA) can be given as
Table 1-2 A classification system for surgical incisions
a CRI in cats with albumin of <20 g/L administered through a periph-
eral vein at 2 mL/kg/hour for ten hours per day (total volume 20 mL/
Classification
Description
kg/day) until albumin reaches 20 g/L;? however, this should be
administered with caution. In a study of 170 hypoalbuminemic cats
 Clean
No entry into the respiratory.
 treated with HSA the median number of days of HSA infusion required
gastrointestinal or genitourinary tracts
No break in asepsis
for serum albumin to reach 20 g/L was three days. The albumin solu-
tion was made from 25% commercial HSA [Albital, Hardis S.PA,
No inflammation and no infection 
 Naples, Italy) diluted to 5% in 0.9% saline While hypersensitivity
 Clean-contaminated
 Entry into the gastrointestinal, respiratory
or genitourinary tracts without significant
tremors occurred in 36.5% and perivascular inflammation at catheter 
spillage and in the absence of known 
infection
sites occurred in 34% of cats treated with HSA. Once
cats have been exposed to HSA, antibodies develop such that
Minor break in asepsis
 re-administration of HSA risks life-threatening anaphylaxis.
Contaminated
 Entry into the gastrointestinal tract with
spillage and entry into the genitourinary or
biliary tracts when infection is present
Dirty
SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR
 Entry into a collection of purulent material 
Foreign body, devitalized tissue or old and 
ORGANS SYSTEMS
contaminated wound debridement 
Fecal contamination
Skin and adnexa
(From Hart D. Postlethwait R, Brown I, et al. (1968) Postoperative Wound
Infections: a further report on ultraviolet irradiation with comments on the
 There are not many specifc preoperative considerations for conditions
recent (1964) National Research Council Cooperative Study Report. Annals of
 of the skin and adnexa, which include superficial wounds, mammary
Surgery 167(5):728-43. Reprinted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health,
masses and vaccine associated sarcomas. However, affected cats may
ww./w.com with permission.)
be elderly and therefore have intercurrent disease, such as hyperthy.
roidism or diabetes mellitus, which may need preoperative treatment.
Cats that have suffered wounds may have trauma to other organs and
systems. Wounds may be contaminated or infected so preoperative
of the patient. Surgical wounds can be classifed as clean, clean-
contaminated, contaminated or dirty (Table 1-2). Antimicrobial
antibiotics should be given unless a sample is going to be submitted
for culture and sensitivity, in which case the administration of the
 prophylaxis is unnecessary for clean wounds where the gastrointesti-
nal, genitourinary, oropharyngeal or respiratory tract is not entered,
 antibiotic is delayed until after the sample is obtained.
unless surgical time exceeds 90 minutes. For clean-contaminated and
contaminated procedures, such as gastrointestinal surgery, antimicro-
Gastrointestinal disease
bial prophylaxis is usually indicated (see Gastrointestinal disease
section below)
Intestinal obstruction
Preoperative considerations for cats with obstructive small intestinal
Anemia and hypoproteinemia
disease (e.g., foreign bodies) include fluid and electrolyte imbalances,
anemia, hypoproteinemia and sepsis. Intestinal obstruction results in
Consideration should be given to a preoperative blood transfusion
where the hematocrit is <20% or if the clinical status of the patient
while absorption of intraluminal fluid and electrolytes is decreased.
suggests an uncompensated or acute anemia. Factors to consider when
Dehydration may be severe. The most common electrolyte abnormali-
deciding whether to transfuse include severity and chronicity of the
anemia, the degree of regeneration, presence of intercurrent cardiores-
 denal obstructions can result in metabolic alkalosis subsequent to loss
piratory disease, the anticipated blood loss during surgery and the 
of hydrochloric acid containing gastric secretions in vomitus. However.
duration of the procedure (Chapter 5).
metabolic acidosis can also occur in association with fluid depletion
Serum albumin concentrations should be maintained above 20 g/L
from vomiting, insensible water losses, lack of intake or catabolism
preoperatively. Fresh frozen feline plasma can be administered at
 of body stores. More distal small intestinal obstructions also result in
4-6 mL/minute in acute crises such as hypovolemic shock, or for
metabolic acidosis from loss of sodium, water and bicarbonate-rich
normovolemic patients at 6-22 mL/kg in a 24-hour period. However.
duodenal secretions. Fluid and electrolyte abnormalities should be
plasma transfusion alone is ineffective in increasing intravascular
corrected before anesthetic induction if possible. Preoperative fresh
 protein levels, especially if losses are ongoing, since large volumes of
whole blood or fresh frozen plasma transfusion may be indicated in
plasma are required to increase the albumin by only small increments
anemic and/or hypoalbuminemic cats, especially where there is con-
(22 mL/kg of plasma is estimated to increase the albumin by 5 g/L).
current hypovolemia.
Further, the availability of fresh frozen feline plasma is limited in
some countries. Colloid oncotic pressure (CoP) can be provided
instead with synthetic colloids such as hydroxyethyl starch (heta-
Antimicrobial therapy in intestinal surgery
u yienseiau yo asop aui ieu papuuuoai si l! ieiaua ul (uies
Perioperative antimicrobial therapy is indicated in patients with
cats not exceed 20 mL/kg/day administered as a l mL/kg/hour con-
obstructive intestinal disease, for non-obstructive intestinal disease
stant rate infusion (CRI).8 When using synthetic colloids for ongoing
where ileus is present and for patients undergoing intestinal biopsies.
management of critically ill hypoproteinemic patients, measurement
Cefazolin (20 mg/kg IV) is considered an appropriate prophylactic
of colloid osmotic pressure is recommended.
antimicrobial to prevent surgical site infections of the upper small
11
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
intestine of cats and dogs," while for distal small intestinal and
fluid support is essential. A crystalloid replacement IV fluid, 0.9%
colonic surgery second generation cephalosporins (eg. cefoxitin
NaCl or Hartmann solution, should be used initially. Maintenance
15-30 mg/kg IV or cefmetazole 15 mg/kg IV) are recommended.0.11
solutions such as 0.45% NaCl/2.5 % glucose are hypotonic contain
These recommendations are based on the conception
that
less sodium to hold water in the intravascular space and are not suit-
Gram positive cocci and enteric Gram negative bacilli are prevalent
able for fluid resuscitation. In collapsed cats, fluid resuscitation with
 in the upper gastrointestinal tract, while the distal small intestine
an initial bolus of 20-30 mL/kg (100 mL/cat) may be required. The
u pue eaeq pqonae pue siqaiae jo siaquu aaiel sueo
fluid rate can then be reassessed based on improvement in cardiovas-
the colon anaerobes predominate over aerobic organisms." However.
cular function and the degree of azotemia. Ability to measure central
it should be noted that even in the upper small intestine of healthy
-oii susixa-aid ym sies ui aleiadsa 'iasn si ainssaid snouaa
  a ' d   s  si
vascular disease. Ideally, azotemia prior to anesthesia should be
bacilli and anaerobic organisms are typically present.12 Prophylactic
 addressed by urethral catheterization and IV fluid diuresis or by peri-
antimicrobial agents should be administered 30 to 60 minutes
toneal dialysis.
asins sunp snou aau ol auo Aiaa pateadan Kiains anoyaa
 Hyperkalemia is the most common electrolyte abnormality in cats
and discontinued at the conclusion of surgery. Where infection
with urethral obstruction. The clinical consequences of hyperkalemia
is identifed intra-operatively. therapeutic antimicrobials should
reflect altered muscle and cardiac conduction fiber function. Weakness
and bradyarrhythmias may be seen. Classic ECG changes in hyperka-
Chapters 27 to 30).
lemia include bradycardia, peaked T waves, flattened P waves, increased
duration of QRS, ST segment depression and shortened QT interval,
Hepatobiliary disease
Or arrhythmic patients using 10% calcium gluconate with simultane-
Surgical treatment of portosystemic shunts should generally be
ous ECG monitoring (1 mL/kg by slow IV infusion over five to ten
delayed until the patient can be medically stabilized. Presurgical con-
minutes). It antagonizes the effects of hyperkalemia on cell mem-
siderations include poor wound healing, hypoalbuminemia, hypogly-
branes (and therefore does not affect serum potassium level). Calcium
cemia, coagulopathies, hepatic encephalopathy and seizures. The
gluconate works immediately and its effect lasts for 20-30 minutes.
goals of medical management include decreasing bacterial ammonia
It also corrects ionized hypocalcemia, which is common in urethral
production (e.g., cleansing enemas, oral lactulose, lactulose retention
obstruction and often subclinical until acidosis is reversed. Soluble
enemas, antibiotics), maintaining hydration and electrolyte balance.
(regular) insulin, which works by driving potassium ions intracellu-
preventing gastrointestinal ulceration (H2 blockers, proton pump
larly, can be used as an alternative (0.1-0.25 U/kg IV + glucose bolus
inhibitors), seizure control (eg.: phenobarbitone, levatiracetam) and
0.5 g/kg IV). Administration of a glucose bolus alone, with the inten-
nutritional support. Parenteral or partial parenteral nutrition may be
tion of stimulating endogenous insulin secretion, is often ineffective
considered in cats with poor body condition, and parenteral glucose
administration is indicated in hypoglycemic patients. Serum albumin
Specific treatment for metabolic acidosis should be considered
concentrations should be maintained above 20 g/L preoperatively.
when the cat is obtunded and the venous pH is <7 or bicarbonate
Fresh frozen feline plasma can be administered, if available. Otherwise
<12 mmol/L. Treatment with bicarbonate carries potential risks
synthetic colloids can be used to raise CoP For patients with pro-
including CSF acidosis, decreased release of oxygen from hemoglobin,
longed APTT, preoperative whole blood or fresh frozen plasma trans-
increased osmolality  and precipitation of hypocalcemic tetany.
fusion and vitamin Kl treatment are indicated Blood typing should
Appropriate patient selection and careful administration are required.
be performed in case intraoperative blood transfusion is required,
 The following formula is used to calculate the required dose of
 particularly for cats with intrahepatic shunts. For more information
bicarbonate:
 on general considerations for patients with hepatobiliary disease see
Chapters 31 and 32.
dose of bicarbonate (mmol) = 0.3x body weight (kg)
× (desired-actual bicarbonate mmol/L)
Genitourinary disease
 The desired bicarbonate level should be set at approximately 15 mmol
ie., not too high. One-third of the calculated dose is given IV over 15
Chronic kidney disease
minutes. If bicarbonate is still low the remainder of the calculated
Presurgical considerations for patients with intercurrent CKD include
dose is given. Otherwise the remainder is administered over 12 hours
hydration status, SBP, electrolyte/acid-base abnormalities and the
with IV fluids.
 potential for primary hemostatic dysfunction. It is prudent to admit
cats with CKD to hospital 24 hours prior to surgery to evaluate and
correct electrolyte/acid-base disorders and fluid deficits. Maintaining
Cardiorespiratory conditions
aaissaoxa siuaaaid poad so iad ju aul gunp spimy Al uo sie asa
Cardiac murmurs may be detected on physical examination when
dehydration in patients with an obligatory polyuria. Azotemia can
other cardiovascular parameters are normal. Such incidental murmurs
interfere with platelet function, increasing the risk of surgical bleed-
are common in cats, and may be physiologic (e.g. due to dynamic
ing. A BMBT is recommended preoperatively.
right ventricular outflow tract obstruction) or pathologic and hemo-
 dynamically significant or otherwise A decision must to be made as
to whether to investigate incidental murmurs further. The grade of
Urethral obstruction/urinary tract rupture
 murmur does not differentiate pathologic from physiologic murmurs
In cases of urethral obstruction or urinary tract rupture, medical
Or correlate well with the severity of any underlying cardiovascular
 stabilization is required prior to surgery. The metabolic consequences 
disease. For cats older than 8 years of age with cardiac murmurs and
of urethral obstruction / urinary tract rupture include electrolyte
no signs of congestive heart failure (CHF) on physical examination, a
abnormalities (hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia).
serum T4 and SBP measurement are recommended initially. Cardiac
metabolic acidosis, central nervous system and cardiovascular depres-
biomarkers may assist in differentiating cats with asymptomatic
sion and hypovolemia, which are progressive and life threatening. IV
heart disease from healthy cats and from cats with CHE13.14 For
12
Preoperative assessment for surgery
Chapter
1
example, elevations in the natriuretic peptide NT-pro-BNP are an
Head and neck
indication for further investigation including thoracic radiographs
and echocardiography.
Hyperthyroidism
The absence of a murmur should not be taken as evidence of a
Important preoperative considerations in hyperthyroid cats are renal
normal cardiovascular system. Cats may have compensated cardiac
function, cardiac function and SBP Ideally euthyroidism should be
disease with no physical abnormalities. An S4 gallop sound is not
uncommon in cats and usually indicates underlying structural cardiac
complications associated with hyperthyroid heart disease and postop-
disease. If a gallop sound is auscultated, electrocardiography, SBP.
 erative complications such as thyroid storm (the acute exacerbation
thoracic radiographs and echocardiography are indicated. Where a
cardiac murmur is detected on physical examination the potential for
antithyroid drugs (eg. carbimazole, methimazole) is effective in
iatrogenic relative volume overload should be recognized. It is prudent
reducing heart rate when euthyroidism is achieved, usually after two
 not to exceed 1.5-2 × maintenance rates for IV fluids preoperatively
 Or more weeks. An alternative treatment for tachycardia or tachycardia-
in cats with systemic hypertension or cardiac murmurs. Measurement
based arrhythmias for cats that are not in congestive heart failure is a
of central venous pressures is also useful in these patients. Cats with
beta-adrenergic dnug (atenolol 6.25-12.5 mg once or twice daily, Or
symptomatic cardiorespiratory disease such as congestive heart failure
01 0MI Bupuauuoo (Aliep saun aaiul ol om su 5-5'7 [oloueidond
Or pleural effusion must be stabilized prior to anesthesia. For example,
-et aeueu pasn aq ose ue sup asau s iaeadoaid sep aa
in cases of pyothorax, drainage of effusion by needle thoracocentesis
being treated with antithyroid drugs. Atenolol confers an advantage
perioperative mortality.15
over propranolol because of its once daily dosing regimen, and as a
selective beta-l adrenergic blocker can be given to cats with asthma.
Although hyperthyroidism increases glomerular filtration rate,
Thoracic trauma
decreases serum creatinine concentration and can mask underlying
 Pulmonary contusions have been reported in up to 50% of animals
CKD, there is no significant difference between the survival times of
with thoracic trauma and are a potential indication for limited fluid
cats that develop azotemia post-treatment and those without azo-
volume resuscitation. Limited fluid volume resuscitation is defined as
temia.1 Thus induction of euthyroidism to determine which cats will
the smallest volume of fluid possible to restore the intravascular com-
become azotemic prior to thyroidectomy confers no survival advan-
 partment and resolve shock while minimizing fluid extravasation into
tage. A reversible thiourylene trial is recommended for cats that are
the brain or lungs and the risk of disrupting an incipient blood clot.
azotemic at presentation to determine the extent of underlying CKD
The mean arterial blood pressure should be maintained between
before thyroidectomy as this may affect their suitability for surgery.
60-70 mmHg to keep the brain and kidneys perfused. Hypertonic
A cardiac evaluation is recommended to assess for the presence and
saline 7.2-7.5% can be given at a dose of 3-8 mL/kg but should not
 significance of thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy. Thoracic radiographs are
be given faster than 1 mL/kg/minute. It can be mixed with colloids
recommended and echocardiography and ECG may be indicated,
that increase volume expansion over 30 minutes to 2-3 hours.
especially in cats with gallop sounds or arrhythmias. SBP should be
Hydroxyethyl starch can be used at a dose of 5 ml/kg over 10 to 15
measured in all cases and if hypertension does not resolve after induc-
minutes with a maximum dose of 20 ml/kg/day.? These treatment
tion of euthyroidism preoperatively, treatment with the calcium
regimens should be followed by slow rate crystalloids to avoid
channel blocker amlodipine (0.13-0.3 mg/kg once daily) is indicated.
dehydration.16
For in depth information on feline hyperthyroidism see Chapter 53.
 REFERENCES
1. Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R, et al.
5. Dyson DH. Pre operative assessment. In:
10. Howe LM, Boothe, HW. Antimicrobial use
Guidelines for the identification,
Hall LW, Taylor PM, editors. Anesthesia of
in the surgical patient. Vet Clin Small
evaluation and management of systemic
the cat. London: Bailliere Tindall; 1994.
Anim 2006;36:1049-60.
hypertension in cats. J Vet Intern Med 
p.105.
11.
 Fossum Tw, Hedlund CS. Gastric and 
2007;21:542-58.
6.
Maddison JE, Watson AD, Eade IG.
intestinal surgery. Vet Clin Small Anim
2.
 Jepson RE, Hartley V, Mendl M, et al
Exner T. Vitamin K-dependent multifactor
2003;33:1117-45.
A comparison of CAT Doppler and 
coagulopathy in Devon Rex cats. J Am Vet
12.
 Sparkes AH, Papasouliotis K, Sunvold G,
oscillometric memoprint machines for
Med Assoc 1990;197:1495-7.
et al. Bacterial flora in the duodenum
non-invasive blood pressure measurement
 7. Parker MT, Collier LL, Kier AB, Johnson
 of healthy cats and effect of dietary
in conscious cats. I Fel Med Surg
GS. Oral mucosa bleeding times of
 supplementation with fructo-
2005;7:147-52.
normal cats and cats with Chediak-
 oligosaccharides. Am I Vet Res
 3. Acierno MJ, Seaton D, Mitchell MA,
Higashi syndrome or Hageman trait.
1998:59;431-5.
da Cunha A. Agreement between directly
Vet Clin Pathol 1988;17:9-12
13. Connolly Dl, Magalhaes RJ, Syme HM,
 measured blood pressure and pressures
8.
 Chan D. Colloids: current 
et al. Circulating natriuretic peptides in
obtained with three veterinary-specific
recommendations. Vet Clin North
cats with heart disease. J Vet Intern Med
oscillometric units in cats. J Am Vet Med
Am Small Anim 2008;38:587-93.
2008;22:96-105.
Assoc 2010;237:402-6.
Vigano F, Perissinotto L, Bosco VR.
14. Ettinger Sl, Yee K, Beardow, et al.
4. Voss K. Chapter 1 Patient Assessment. In:
Administration of 5% serum albumin in
Diagnostic test parameters in cats with
Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ.
critically ill small animal patients with
heart disease and their correlation with
editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
hypoalbuminaemia: 418 dogs and 170
NT-proANP, NT-proBNP and troponin I
musculoskeletal disease. Elsevier; 2009.
cats [1994-2008). I Vet Emerg Crit Care
measurements. J Vet Intern Med
p. 8-10.
2010;20:237-43.
2010;24:671 (abstract).
13
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
15. Barrs VR, Allan GS, Martin P, et al. Feline
17. Ward CR. Feline thyroid storm. Vet Clin
19. Williams TL, Elliotl J, Syme HM.
 pyothorax: a retrospective study of 27
Small Anim 2007;37:745-54.
 Association of iatrogenic hypothyroidism
cases in Australia. J Fel Med Surg 2005;7:
18.
Flanders JA. Surgical options for the 
with azotaemia and reduced survival time
211-22.
treatment of hyperthyroidism. I Fel Med
in cats treated for hyperthyroidism. J Vet
16. Hammond TN, Holm JL. Limited fluid
Surg 1999;1:127-34.
Int Med 2010;24:1086-92.
volume resuscitation. Compend Contin
Ed 2009;7:309-26.
14
te
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
S.B.R.Kastner
Choosing an anesthetic protocol for a specific patient depends on the
different analgesic, sedative-hypnotic and muscle-relaxing drugs, with
pre-anesthetic examination, the presence of systemic disease, and type 
 the aim of reducing the concentration of volatile anesthetics required
and duration of the intended procedure. When anesthetizing a dis-
(Table 2-1).
eased cat it is importantto take the disease process and its pathophysi-
ology into consideration. A young healthy cat might be able to
New drugs
compensate for the effects of drugs, whereas a compromised animal
might not be able to compensate. For a more detailed description of
Since the recent publication of the Feline Orthopedic Surgery and
general anesthesia techniques, drugs, and equipment the reader is
Musculosheletal Disease textbook,l2 the variety of drugs available for
referred to Chapters 17 and 18 of Feline Orthopedic Surgery and Muscu-
anesthesia and analgesia in cats has changed very little. However,
the use of tramadol in small animal practice has risen dramatically.
mentioned chapters. To avoid repetition this chapter will concentrate
It has the advantage of oral administration. A new non-steroidal
specifically on anesthesia and analgesia of cats with intercurrent sys-
anti-inflammatory dnug (robenacoxib) is licensed for use in cats,
temic disease that might have implications for anesthetizing them for
 and anti-epileptic agents (gabapentin and pregabalin) are being used
surgery and cats with diseases of specifc organ systems and the dif-
more commonly in small animal practice. These dnugs will be
ferent considerations that might arise in such situations.
described below.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Tramadol
 Tramadol is an atypical opioid with weak μ-receptor binding activity
Sedation
 in combination with serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibition
as its analgesic mechanism. Cats produce the active metabolite,
Excitement or stress caused by excessive restraint will induce high
which is responsible for the opioid analgesia, more effectively than
levels of circulating catecholamines, which will not be tolerated by
dogs. Oral bioavailability is high in cats (93%). For cats a dose of
severely compromised cats. Stress will lead to increased anesthetic
1-2 mg/kg IV and oral dosing of 2-4 mg/kg twice a day has been
requirements and consequently more severe cardiovascular depres-
recommended clinically. In experimental animals 2-4 mg/kg was
sion. Pre-medication can help alleviate this stress. A full description
effective and dosing every six hours seemed to be necessary to main-
of dnugs that can be administered in cats and their indications is
tain analgesia at a maximal effect.? The liquid formulation often con-
described in Feline Orthopedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal Disease.
am jou st pue uoaies shoidos sanpui yoium 'lo juaddad suie
liked by cats.
Anesthesia
Injectable anesthetics can be used for induction of anesthesia followed 
Robenacoxib
by inhalational anesthesia for maintenance or they can be used as the
 Robenacoxib is a selective COX-2 inhibitor in the cat (ex vivo and in
sole anesthetic agent (total intravenous anesthesia [TIVA]). Inhalation
vivo) and is licensed for the treatment of acute musculoskeletal pain
anesthesia is still the preferred technique for producing general
and postoperative pain after soft tissue surgery in the cat. Because
anesthesia for prolonged and invasive surgical procedures because the
of the high degree of COX-2 selectivity the gastrointestinal toxicity
depth of anesthesia can easily be adapted and drug accumulation is
is low. Maximal plasma concentrations in the cat are reached after
not a problem with modern inhalation anesthetics. Modern protocols
0.5 hours and one hour after oral and subcutaneous application,
use the principle of balanced anesthesia, with a combination of
respectively.4.5
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00002-0
15
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
Table 2-1 Infusions used in conjunction with inhalational or injectable anesthetics for balanced anesthesia in cats
Drug
Induction/loading dose (mg/kg)
Maintenance dose
Comment
Fentanyl
0.003-0.005 IV
0.005-0.015 mg/kg/hour
VRI to effect 
IPPV
Bradycardia
 Alfentanil
0.0025-0.005 IV
0.03-0.3 mg/kg/hour
VRI
IPPV
Bradycardia
Sufentanil
0.001-0.003 IV
0.001-0.006 mg/kg/hour
VRI
IPPV
Bradycardia
 Remifentanil 
0.012-0.036 mg/kg/hour
VRI
IPPV
 Bradycardia
Ketamine
0.3-0.5 IV 
0.1-1.2 mg/kg/hour
CRI
High doses lead to
(common 0.3 mg/kg/hour)
ketamine'signs'
Medetomidine
0.0005-0.001 IV over ten minutes very slowly
0.001-0.002 mg/kg/hour
CRI
Bradycardia
 Dexmedetomidine
 0.0005-0.001 IV over ten minutes very slowly
0.0005-0.001 mg/kg/hour
CRI
Bradycardia
Morphine +
 Premedication and induction doses
3.3 μg/kg/minute
CRI
5 mg morphine
ketamine (MK)
10 μg/kg/minute
15 mg ketamine
infused at 10 mL/kg/hour
in 250 mL NaCl
postoperative 2 mL/kg/hour
 CRl, constant rate infusion; IPPV, intermittent positive pressure ventilation; VRl, variable rate infusion.
Anti-epileptic medication
SYSTEMIC AND METABOLIC DISORDERS
Originally introduced as anti-epileptic drugs, gabapentin and its 'suc-
cessor', pregabalin, are used as adjunctive drugs in combination with
other analgesics for the control of neuropathic conditions, osteoar-
 Cats presenting for general and oncological surgery may have concur-
thritis and tumor-related pain. The exact analgesic mechanism is still
sauanu ieu io eisausaue on iod suneann spaau ieut aseasip uan
not clear and they do not change nociceptive thresholds. Controlled
the choice of anesthetic agents and analgesics that can be safely
studies for cats are not available. Dose recommendations for gabap-
administered. Anemia, hypoproteinemia, diabetes and obesity will be
discussed in the following sections.
[l ep e sau anu on omi Aeio sy/su oz-s wo asuei uua
treatment can induce sedation and sleepiness, long-term treatment
leads to weight gain.
Anemia
Fluid administration
Arterial oxygen content depends on hemoglobin concentration (or
packed cell volume (PCV)) and saturation with oxygen. A normal
arterial oxygen content of 16-20 mL/dL is reached with 12-15 mg/
dL hemoglobin. In anemia, compensatory increases in cardiac output
with most anesthetics vascular tone is reduced and intravascular
are required to maintain adequate oxygen delivery, which increases
volume has to be replaced to maintain an adequate perfusion
myocardial work and in combination with low oxygen content can
pressure.
lead to myocardial hypoxia and death. Therefore, anemia should be
 In a systemically healthy patient any isotonic crystalloid solution
 treated before anesthesia and 100% oxygen given during anesthesia.
(i.e., lactated Ringer solution, saline) can be used ata rate of 5-10 mL/
There are no standard, clear cut transfusion triggers available for
kg/hour depending on the expected fluid and blood loss during the
cats. However, transfusion is recommended with a PCV of less than
13% in chronic anemia and 20% in acute anemia. Signs of hemor-
body cavities the lower rate should be chosen in cats to avoid overzeal-
rhagic shock can become evident when 20% of the circulating blood
ous dilution and disturbance of colloid osmotic pressure and pulmo-
ym se ul isol s (uatamapoq jo % Aianeuxadde sie u) anioa
nary edema formation. A large study on small animal perioperative
concomitant anemia and reduced cardiac performance a careful indi-
mortalities found an increased anesthetic risk for cats receiving intra-
vidual decision for transfusion has to be made and volume overload
Auo aeid u ieu pe au otpaat aquu sul zs'spiny snouan
needs to be avoided.
diseased, high-risk feline patients will be treated with infusions;
Whole blood is recommended with acute hemorrhage and erythro-
  a a m  a oe  i 
cyte concentrate for treatment of chronic normovolemic anemia, to
 controlled properly which can occur when using large giving sets.
avoid volume overload. If stored blood is used in planned procedures
the transfusion should be scheduled the day before surgery to allow
aui jo Aede suu-uaaxo ui saueuo au ioy uosuadu ion
Emergency resuscitation
stored products. In cats, blood transfusion requires blood typing or
Cats with systemic disease may require emergency resuscitation. A list
 cross-matching even with the first transfusion because of preformed
of recommended drugs and doses is included in Table 2-2.
antibodies (Chapter 5).
16
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
2
Table 2-2 Drugs used in emergency situations and cardiovascular resuscitation
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Indication
Comments
Epinephrine
0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV/O, repeat every
Asystole
Avoid high dose in sinus rhythm
(1: 10,000 = 0.1 mg/mL)
five minutes if no effect or 
(electromechanical dissociation)
CRI 0.001-0.01 mg/kg/minute
Norepinephrine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV
Hypotension
0.001-0.01 mg/kg/minute
Dopamine
0.002-0.001 mg/kg/minute
Hypotension
Dobutamine
0.005-0.02 mg/kg/minute
Hypotension, low cardiac output
Vasopressin
0.4-0.8 U/kg IV one dose
Increase myocardial blood flow
Atropine
0.02-0.05 mg/kg IV/IM
Bradycardia, AV block
Glycopyrrolate
0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV/SC
Bradycardia, AV block
Lidocaine
0.5-1 mg/kg IV
Ventricular premature contractions,
Contraindicated if bradycardia
0.01-0.04 mg/kg/minute
ventricular tachycardia,
Calcium gluconate (10%)
0.5 mL/kg slow IV
Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia.
Tachycardia possible
electromechanical dissociation
spin
Volume depletion, shock therapy
 Can cause hypernatremia
Isotonic saline 
10-(50) mL/kg/hour
Lactated Ringer 
10-(50) mL/kg/hour
Hypertonic saline 
4-6 mL/kg over ten minutes
Hydroxyethyl starch
10-20 mL/kg (5-10 mL/kg/hour) daily
dose should not exceed 20 mL/kg
Furosemide
 2-5 mg/kg IV
 Pulmonary edema, brain edema, oliguria
repeat after ten minutes
Methylprednisolone
10-30 mg/kg IV
Post resuscitation
dexamethasone
0.5-2 mg/kg IV
 Esmolol
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV
 Sinus tachycardia
CRI: 0.01-0.05mg/kg/minute IV
adequately controlled; if this is not possible then short-acting agents
Hypoproteinemia
uea oi unau Aea moe sa Araoan os yim
Many drugs used for anesthesia are reversibly bound to transport
 In diabetic animals the management of blood glucose levels in the
proteins in the albumin fraction of blood. Only the unbound amount
perioperative period is the major consideration for the veterinary
of drug is pharmacologically active. If the plasma protein (albumin)
surgeon. Fasting times should be kept short: surgery should be
bound fraction in blood is decreased, then more unbound drug is
scheduled for the morning to avoid long periods of fasting. In animals
available, resulting in an increased (anesthetic) effect. Therefore, there
being admitted on the morning of surgery owners should be advised
is the potential for an increased anesthesia effect in hypoproteinemic
to feed the animal for the last time late at night instead of the early
animals and the principle of giving anesthesia to effect and incremen-
evening.
tal dosing should be followed.
 Insulin administration after fasting increases the risk of hypoglyc-
 Decreased albumin concentrations lower plasma oncotic pressure
 emia. However, insulin activity is necessary to enable metabolism and
Aaul se paneiaion lam iou aie spimy pioleisio jo sunoue yaiu pue
uptake of nutrients by the tissues. In addition, preoperative stress with
increase the risk of pulmonary edema. If the plasma protein concen-
the release of catecholamines and corticosteroids increases glucose
all spmy [epioos suiag uaq (ip/8 s'e) 7/ 5e moaq sl uoen
levels and insulin requirements. Therefore, insulin should not be
hydroxyethyl starch or plasma transfusion should be considered.
the proportion of the animal's usual insulin dose varies from one half
to one quarter of the usual dose. Ideally this is adapted according to
Diabetes
the glucose levels on the morning of surgery (Table 2-3).
Diabetic patients may present for a variety of diabetes-related or unre-
 If the cat is on a twice-daily insulin regime it can often be returned
lated procedures. There are no specific indications or contraindica-
to its usual feeding and insulin regime in the evening after surgery. If
tions for a special type of anesthetic agent in diabetic cats. Whenever
the animal is inappetent it can be maintained on a dextrose infusion
possible anesthesia should be undertaken  when  the diabetes  is
and given regular/soluble insulin every six hours.
17
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
Table 2-3 Blood glucose management during anesthesia in
Box 2-1 Goals for anesthesia of the obese cat
diabetic patients 
Avoid SC administration of drugs and be aware of respiratory
Blood glucose
Insulin
Dextrose (2.5-5%)
depression/obstruction—monitor the patient closely
in the morning
infusion
Pre-oxygenate as long as stress-free
(pre insulin)
Rapid induction (Iv) is preferred for rapid control of airways
Anesthesia maintenancepreferably with an inhalational agent
<5.5 mmol/Ll
No
Start 2-4 mL/kg/hour
 Patients usually benefit from intermittent positive pressure ventilation
5.5-11 mmol/L
One-quarter of
Start 2-4 mL/kg/hour
(± positive end expiratory pressure)
the usual dose
Calculate ventilation parameters like tidal volume for intermittent 
>11 mmol/L
Half the usual
 No infusion necessary until
 positive pressure ventilation based on lean body mass
dose
glucose <8 mmol/L
Continue monitoring into recovery and after tracheal extubation
Return to feeding as soon as possible as obese patients don't tolerate
acute starvation due to the risk of hyperlipemia
Ideally, 'managed weight loss' preoperatively would help improve risk 
lipid-soluble drugs. Most anesthetic agents are fat soluble. Excessive
body fat in/on the chest and abdomen leads to reduced chest wall and
lung compliance, reduced total lung capacity, reduced expiratory
reserve volume reduced functional reserve capacity (FRC) and
increased work of breathing. Reduced FRC means reduced oxygen
reserves and the patient can desaturate rapidly if it becomes apneic
Or intubation fails. The FRC may decrease below closing capacity
and atelectasis and hypoxemia may occur during normal tidal
breathing.
 The goals of the anesthetic protocol in obese cats are listed in
Box 2-1.
SKIN AND ADNEXA
Patients with skin and adnexal problems (Chapters 17 to 22) may not
have any specific anesthetic requirements related directly to the
lesions. However tumors are often seen in older cats who are prone
Figure 2-1 Morbidly obese cat.
Or masses may be infected or ulcerated and therefore cause systemic
eisaisaue on ioud uoezqes aaenadoaid annan pue ssau!
The glucose target range during surgery lies between 8.3 and
(Chapter 1).
14 mmol/L; glucose monitoring during surgery is recommended every
 If lesions are on the distal limbs then appendicular nerve blocks
30 to 60 minutes. A 2.5-5% dextrose infusion is given according to
like the femoral. sciatic or brachial may be useful for giving specifc
the cat's systemic glucose concentrations (Table 2-3).
analgesia of the area and reducing the requirement for systemic anes-
If the cat is on oral hypoglycemic agents, eg. glipizide, then these
thetic drugs.
should be withheld on the day of surgery instead, the glucose con-
If masses are large then analgesia after resection is essential.
centration is monitored and stabilized with short-acting soluble
Consideration can be given to using wound infusion catheters
insulin and dextrose infusion if necessary
(Chapter ll) in addition to multimodal analgesia with non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids and other adjuncts such as ketamine
Obesity
and the alpha-2 agonists.
There is an increasing incidence of obesity in domestic catsa (Fig. 2-1).
Brachial plexus block
 In obese animals the veterinarian is faced with a variety of general
problems as well as specific anesthesia-related problems. Venous
A brachial plexus block in the cat is performed under general anesthe-
access as well as palpation of arterial pulses is impaired. Increased fat
sia. A brachial plexus block at the height of the shoulder is suitable
in the throat region may make endotracheal intubation more difficult
for operations on the front limb within or distal to the elbow. A 22G
and may also increase the risk of airway obstruction. Increased super-
5 cm needle is inserted medial to the shoulder joint and advanced
ficial fat obtunds thoracic auscultation and obscures landmarks for
 parallel with the spine directed towards the costochondral junction of
locoregional techniques and may act as a thermal insulator and
the ribs. If no blood can be aspirated, lidocaine or bupivacaine diluted
increase the risk of heat stress.
to a volume of 5 mL to facilitate spread is injected during withdrawal
 Increased total body fat is accompanied by decreased total body
to reach the radial, ulnar, median and musculocutaneous nerves
water (on a mL/kg basis) resulting in decreased volume of distribution
(RUMm block). The use of a nerve stimulator to locate the nerves and
for water-soluble drugs and increased volume of distribution for
set specific depots improves the results (Fig. 2-2).
18
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
2
三
Figure 2-3 Self-made wound catheter placed after removal of a large
fibrosarcoma.
Figure 2-2 Use of a nerve stimulator allows a more specific block of the
brachial plexus.
Femoral nerve block
eaie pauisap aul ul Aiains sunp Aisnoaueiroqns paseid Alensn s!
and can either be continuously perfused with a local anesthetic (lido-
Anesthetizing the femoral nerve desensitizes the medial part of the
caine (1%) 0.2-0.4 mg/kg/hour) or repeated boluses of a long-acting
thigh, tibia and tarsus and achieves motor blockade of the quadriceps
  al   a   
femoris muscle. After aseptic preparation of the inguinal area, a 22G
[0.25%] frst dose followed by 0.5 mg/kg every six hours for one to
needle is inserted 1-2 cm in a craniodorsal direction immediately
two days).?
cranial to the femoral artery, below the inguinal ligament.
Use of a nerve stimulator induces a twitch distal (extension of the
knee) to the stimulating site and helps to verify appropriate needle
placement. Ultrasound-guided nerve infltration will also improve
ABDOMINAL SURGERY
results.
Multimodal analgesia should be provided where possible in patients
Sciatic nerve block
undergoing a laparotomy. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
tion is contraindicated in patients that may be suffering from gastroin-
The sciatic nerve block gives motor block to the caudal muscles of the
testinal ulceration and patients that are hypovolemic. Pure μ agonist
thigh and desensitizes the surrounding tissue and skin. Landmarks for
isaaieue juanaxa aie auopeau pue aunudiou se qns sioio
needle insertion in the laterally recumbent animal are the greater
dnugs, but they can cause nausea, constipation and urine retention,
trochanter of the femur and the ischiatic tuberosity. At the level of 
 particularly after prolonged usage Pethidine unlike morphine, relaxes
one-third of the distance between the two points, a 22G needle is
intestinal spasms. Butorphanol is a moderate analgesic for visceral
inserted in a cranial direction. Using a nerve stimulator will result in
pain but poor for somatic pain, therefore it is good for abdominal
dorsal flexion of the foot.
procedures, although its duration of action is quite short lived.
Another good analgesic agent for abdominal surgery is buprenor-
phine, which has the benefit of a longer duration of action, good
Wound catheter infusion systems
efficacy and fewer side effects than pure μ agonist opioids.
Fenestrated wound catheters (Chapter ll), can be used for analgesia
of defined wound regions, for example after ear canal ablation or
Epidural anesthesia
large tumor excisions like fibrosarcoma removal (Chapter 17). Com-
mercial systems come in different lengths with bacterial filters, a
This provides useful adjunctive analgesia for both abdominal and
flow restrictor and a balloon pump (i.e, ON-Q PainBuster, Kimberly
thoracic procedures. Contraindications for epidural anesthesia are
Clark or Diffusion/Wound catheter, MILA International Inc Erlanger.
septicemia, coagulation disorders, hypovolemia, shock, skin infec-
KY, USA), but it is also possible to purchase the catheter and filter
tions at the puncture site and deformity, dislocations or fractures of
without the pump. The catheter can also be constructed from red
the spine or pelvis. Possible complications include local skin infec-
rubber or polyethylene tubing (Fig. 2-3). The elastomeric reservoir
au ae aie asa iq pio ieus a on een pue suuau 'un
(pump) delivers fluid at a rate of 0.5-5 mL/hour; alternatively. a
procedure is described in Chapter 18 of Feline Orthopedic Surgery and
 syringe pump can be used in non-ambulatory patients. The catheter
Musculosheletal Disease.
19
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
dine or ranitidine) may be indicated in cats with a high risk of gas-
troesophageal reflux or regurgitation; elevation of the pH of gastric
fluid ameliorates the potential effects upon the esophagus or lungs
should regurgitation and/or aspiration occur.
 If there is megaesophagus, gastric fluid retention, or proximal small
 intestinal obstruction there is a risk of regurgitation and therefore
aspiration at the time of induction. It is important to achieve a smooth
induction and intubate the patient promptly; stomach tubes and
suction apparatus should be made available.
HEPATOBILIARY DISEASE
As many drugs are metabolized by the liver, care should be taken when
using them in patients with hepatobiliary disease It may still be pos-
  a         
sible to use such drugs but lower doses should be used and they
the loss of the P wave and wide QRS complexes.
should be administered less frequently. Intravenous anesthesia can be
used for induction and then the cat should be maintained on inhala-
tional gases such as isoflurane or sevoflurane: halothane should be
Box 2-2 Changes seen with hyperkalemia
 avoided as it can causehepatotoxicity. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
dnugs are contraindicated in cats with hepatic disease.
Peaked T wave
 Prolonged PR interval, wide QRS complexes
Small or loss of P wave (atrial standstill)
UROGENITAL DISEASE
Shortened Q-T interval
 In general, almost all anesthetics decrease glomerular filtration by
either directly altering renal blood flow (RBF) or indirectly by chang-
ing cardiovascular conditions or neuroendocrine activity. Inhalation
Box 2-3 Stabilization and treatment of hyperkalemia and
anesthetics decrease RBF and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in a
atrial standstill
dose-dependent manner directly related to systemic blood pressure.
Renal autoregulation is preserved at low end-tidal concentrations of
Restoration of myocardial contractility and
autoregulation and decrease RBF If disease such as renal or postrenal
conductivity
failure and azotemia is present, then the cat's response to the anes-
0.1 mg/kg 10% calcium chloride (0.5 ml/kg calcium gluconate) over
thetic drugs administered may be altered in this situation. Acidosis
 20 minutes IV re-establishes normal gradient between resting and
might increase the fraction of unbound drugs in the blood and lower
threshold potential
doses of highly protein bound anesthetic dnugs are needed. Acidosis
NB: does not change potassium concentrations
also contributes to the development of hyperkalemia. In hyperkalemia
Lowering plasma potassium concentration
the resting potential of cardiac muscle cells is changed and bradycar-
dia can occur due to decreased conductivity, contractility and excita-
50% glucose (1-2 mL/kg IV) induces endogenous insulin release
bility. Changes associated with hyperkalemia in the ECG trace are
Insulin 0.25 IU/kg in 2 g/lU glucose IV followed by glucose containing 
illustrated in Figure 2-4 and listed in Box 2-2.
and potassium free fluids (e.g. 5% glucose in 0.9% NaCl):
monitor for hypoglycemia
Treat acidosis (H+/K+ shift)
Chronic renal failure
Sodium bicarbonate 1-2 mmol/kg IV
Patients with chronic renal failure might present with hypokalemia
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (prevents respiratory acidosis)
and anemia because of bone marrow suppression, chronic blood loss
via the gastrointestinal tract, reduced erythrocyte life span and sup-
pressed erythropoietin production. If the packed cell volume is
decreased, then administration of a blood transfusion before anesthe-
Principles of anesthesia for cats in renal or postrenal failure are
sia may be recommended (see Chapter 5 for further information).
listed in Box 2-3.
Chronic renal disease can also be associated with hypertension
'aasan oepie panan inq inno peipie yay Aioiesuaos pue
Urethral obstruction or bladder rupture
Arterial blood pressure should be estimated preoperatively by Doppler
or oscillometric techniques and hypertension be controlled by
Urethral obstruction or a ruptured bladder are often associated with
 amlodipine or calcium channel blockers. However, calcium channel
hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hypocalemia, hyperphosphatemia, Or
blockers have to be used with caution as they can promote hypoten-
hyperkalemia. If possible, correction of electrolyte disturbances is rec-
sion during anesthesia.
ommended before general anesthesia. If plasma potassium is increased
20
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
2
above 5.5 mmol/L then this should be corrected (Box 2-4) before
The use of dopamine to promote renal perfusion, diuresis and natriu-
induction of anesthesia because of the possible interference with
resis is questionable in cats. Dopamine (DAl) receptors present in the
 cardiac performance by the hyperphosphatemia.
kidney of cats might be different from other species and an increase
in renal perfusion might be more related to cardiovascular stimula-
tion. Even low doses of dopamine carry the risk of alpha adrenergic
Postoperative oliguria
related vasoconstriction with decreased renal blood flow (RBF). There-
Postoperative oliguria [<0.5 mL/kg/hour urine production) requires
fore, dobutamine (1-10 μg/kg/minute) might be a better choice as it
immediate attention. In the absence of congestive heart failure a fluid
has little effect on C-adrenergic receptors and increase in RBF is
bolus of isotonic NaCl or a balanced electrolyte solution can be given
 obtained by increasing cardiac output.
at 5 mL/kg. Furosemide at 1-2 mg/kg or as a constant rate infusion
aul u apiuasony 'iaamoh 'sisanp sanouond inoy/sy/su I-g'o ie
Prepubertal neutering
 presence of hypovolemia can increase nephrotoxicity of other drugs.
sensitivity to drugs, suffer a prolongation of their effects, and have a
limited capacity for cardiovascular compensation. This has important
implications in terms of anesthesia, and the choice of what to use for
Box 2-4 Goals for anesthesia of a cat with renal or post
 early or prepubertal neutering. Table 2-4 lists a number of protocols
renal failure
that have been used successfully for early age neutering." including a
uaaig aie suaniy Aqaiaum olosoioid penb, aui se umouy losoiond
Assess fluid balance
equal volumes of drugs dependent on their surface area rather than
Control electrolyte disturbances 
body weight.
Control acidosis
 Younger animals have a large body surface area, a reduced ability
Control blood pressure (preoperative hypertension)
to thermoregulate and limited subcutaneous fat reserves so they are
 Avoid nephrotoxic substances like aminoglycoside antibiotics,
tively so surgical times should be kept as short as possible, weting of
 NSAIDs, free hemoglobin, iodinated radiographic contrast agents
hair kept to a minimum and adequate warming used intraoperatively
Avoid intraoperative hypotension and prevent renal hypoperfusion:
 and postoperatively.
avoid alpha-2 agonists
analgesia with μ-agonistic opioids
low doses of volatiles
Cesarean section
IV fluids
 In animals being prepared for cesarean section, there are additional
 promote cardiac contractility with dobutamine or dopamine
considerations. Oxygen should be administered by mask or flow
by pre-induction. It is recommended to use rapidly metabolized
Or reversible agents so the fetuses are not unduly affected by
Table 2-4 Useful protocols for general anesthesia in kittens undergoing early age neutering
Agent(s)
Dose and route
Analgesia
Comments
Medetomidine +
30-40 μg/kg IM 
Reasonable
Good depth of anesthesia in kittens >1.5 kg
Ketamine
7-10 mg/kg IM
Quad:
Medetomidine +
600 μg/m² IM 
Very good, six to 12 hours postoperatively
Good depth of anesthesia 
Ketamine +
60 mg/m² IM 
Quick induction and recovery 
Midazolam +
3 mg/m² IM 
Multimodal analgesia
 Buprenorphine
180 μg/m² IM 
Reversal agent can be usedb
Propofol
Unpremedicated: 8.0 mg/kg IV 
 Dependent on premedication
IV route may be difficult in kittens
Premedicated: 6.0 mg/kg IV
Isoflurane
Mask Induction
None
Strong. unpleasant odor
Sevoflurane 
 Mask Induction 
None 
 Mild, inoffensive odor
Expensive
 Rapid uptake and elimination compared to
isoflurane
The dosing protocol for the quad protocol, whereby equal volumes of each drug are administered IM, BSA = (K X BVw 67) / 100; K = 10.4 (cats), body weight (BVW)
measured in kg, body surface area (BSA) is measured in m².
Atipamezole (Antisedan: Pfizer) is recommended as a reversal agent, at 10-50% volume of the previously administered medetomidine (Domitor; Pfizer), no sooner than
 20 minutes after initial intramuscular injection. Note that its use at 10% volume is unlicensed in cats.
IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular.
(Modified from Joyce A & Yates D. Help stop teenage pregnancy. Early-age neutering in cats. J Fel Med Surg 2011;13:3-10, with permission from Elsevier.)
21
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
the anesthetic agents. Almost all drugs will cross the placenta so it is
Thoracotomy
difficult to avoid any transplacental transfer. Alpha-2 agonists result
 in lower puppy survival and therefore should also be avoided in cats.
 Thoracotomy can be associated with a high degree of pain, with the
 Then the cat should be induced with a short-acting intravenous anes.
thetic agent such as propofol or alfaxalone. Nitrous oxide should be
e uuaau ieins ioleu e yons suuad aiojaa yeoide
 avoided if possible until the fetuses are removed. A midline lidocaine
thorough evaluation of the cardiopulmonary function of the patient
block or epidural/spinal anesthesia should be considered to reduce
is necessary. Stabilization procedures should be performed as far as
qanoue 'pambai eisaqisaue shoasea io snouaaenut jo junoue a
 possible and the risk of intraoperative blood loss should be assessed
performing an epidural will result in an inevitable delay in starting
and necessary preparations made.
surgery due to the time taken to perform the procedure The author
Opening of the thoracic wall will lead to retraction of the lung and
has had good results with gaseous anesthetic agents when performing
atelectasis formation with reduction of the alveolar area for gas
exchange and consecutive hypoxemia. Therefore, controlled ventila-
cesareans.
 When positioning for surgery the head can be elevated slightly to
tion should be established before opening the chest A combination
reduce pressure on the diaphragm by the enlarged abdominal con-
 of intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IppV) with peak pres-
tents. In addition, a slight rotation to the side avoids the full weight
sures of 10-20 cm HzO and positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP)
 of the uterus compressing the caval vein. In debilitated cats, anesthesia
of 5 cm HzO and 100% oxygen will help to avoid lung collapse and
time should be kept as short as possible and clipping of the surgical
hypoxemia in cats. If the lung tissue is very stiff (low compliance)
site can also be performed before anesthesia induction.
higher pressures might be necessary. Close cooperation of the surgeon
and the anesthetist is necessary to adapt lung inflation. Particularly
with a lateral approach, too much lung inflation can hinder the surgi-
cal procedure. Ventilators that are suitable for use in cats (human
THORACIC SURGERY
 pediatric, small animal ventilators) come in different designs depend-
ing on the cycling and controlling mechanism and the mechanism
 Despite the development of minimally invasive techniques (Chapter
producing the inspiratory phase (pressure or flow generator). For
42), which lower surgical morbidity, opening the thoracic cavity is
cats the ventilator should be able to deliver small tidal volumes
still necessary for a variety of procedures (Chapter 4l). The goals
(20-200 mL) at a safe working pressure (10-60 cm HzO) to avoid
for anesthesia of cats with specific thoracic conditions are listed in
barotrauma to the lungs. Ventilator settings (Table 2-5) have to be
Box 2-5.
adapted to the individual animal's needs to maintain eucapnia
(30-35mmHg).
Volatile anesthetics as well as TIVA techniques can be used for cats
undergoing thoracotomy. Nitrous oxide should be avoided because to
beuseful it has to be given at high percentage concentrations, making
high inspired oxygen fractions impossible. In addition, nitrous oxide
Box 2-5 Goals for anesthesia for cats with specific
thoracic conditions
spaces, increasing their volume.
Thoracic trauma and flail chest (Chapter 43)
Pre-oxygenate
Monitoring during thoracotomy
 Rapid induction to gain rapid airway control
Continuous monitoring should be done to assess for arrhythmias,
Monitor for pneumothorax 
ventilation, and oxygenation status of the animal. The ventilation and
Diaphragmatic rupture (Chapter 45)
lung inflation need to be adapted to the animal's needs. With an open
chest the information provided by capnography is not representative
Pre-oxygenate
of arterial CO, tensions. End-tidal CO is lower than the arterial values
 Fluid resuscitation
H asdeo sun on anp yeusu uoisnyad uonenun sueu
aas j! uoniso youdn, ue ui pi ieibans aut jo uoe sedad 
decreasing end-tidal CO is not necessarily an indication to reduce
 dyspnea is present
ventilation in these circumstances. Arterial or free-flow lingual samples
 Tilt table (cat) so that head and thorax are higher than abdomen 
 are necessary (which can be diffcult to obtain in cats) for information
 Rapid induction
on the adequacy of minute ventilation. Pulse oximetry will indicate
 Immediate controlled ventilation, but with low to moderate inflation
desaturation with severe alterations in ventilation perfusion matching
to avoid immediate re-expansion and reperfusion injury, ventilate
enough to prevent hypoxemia (SpOz <95%, Pa0z <60 mmHg)
and severe hypercapnia (PaCOz >60 mmHg)
NB: capnography will underestimate PacOz because of lung 
atelectasis und uneven lung emptying
Table 2-5 Suggested ventilator settings in cats
Pulmonary lesions
Ventilator
Settings
Pre-oxygenate
Tidal volume
15-20 mL/kg
 If major lung leak expected use a TIvA technique
Animals with pulmonary contusions should be ventilated very
Respiratoryrate
12-20/minute
carefully with low tidal volumes and high frequencies (i.e., 20
Minute volume
400-600 mL
breaths per minute, 7-10 mL/kg) to avoid stretching of affected
 blood vessels. If the procedure allows, maintain spontaneous 
Peak inspiratory pressure
20 cm HO
ventilation
Inspiratory to expiratory time ratio
1 :2 to 1: 3
22
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
2
or shunting. Information on less severe changes in gas exchange is
limited with pulse oximetry. Obstruction of the endotracheal tube can
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
occur with secretions from the respiratory tract for example pus from
a pulmonary abscess.
Cardiovascular disease comprises a variety of congenital and acquired
conditions. In general, uncontrolled cardiac failure is a contraindica-
tion for immediate general anesthesia and patients must be stabilized
Analgesia
(Box 2-7) and cardiac function improved pre-anesthesia if feasible. If
A thoracotomy is a painful procedure particularly when performed
cardiac failure is related to non-cardiac conditions like hyperthy-
through a sternotomy. It requires effective analgesia and close atten-
roidism (Chapter 53) then the primary condition should be treated.
 There is no 'gold standard’ anesthetic protocol for animals with
be well planned and should start before the operation (Box 2-6).
cardiovascular disease and the technique has to be adapted to the
intended procedure und underlying condition. The goals of a chosen
 protocol should be stressfree induction and analgesia to avoid cate-
Intercostal nerve block
cholamine release, minimal depression of myocardial contractility.
maintenance of blood pressure maintenance of adequate ventilation
The intercostal nerves lie adjacent to the caudal border of each rib.
and minimal interaction with the effects of the medical treatment of
Two or three nerves on either side of the incision site need to be
the heart condition. Catecholamines contribute to arrhythmia forma-
blocked. The needle is inserted distal to the angle of the rib close to
tion in combination with certain anesthetics (i.e, thiopentone,
the epaxial muscles and is directed dorsally along the caudal border
halothane), so these should be avoided in cats with cardiovascular
of the rib. It is common for the surgeon to perform this block once
disease.
the pleural cavity has been entered to allow direct visualization of the
 In the following section principles of anesthesia management for
nerve and minimize the risk of hemorrhage, which can occur to a
the most commonly encountered cardiac diseases in the cat are
catastrophic degree when done blind. Additionally, the pleural cavity
described.
is punctured very easily and the cat has to be watched closely for signs
of pneumothorax if the procedure is not followed by thoracotomy. If
multiple nerves are infiltrated care has to be taken not to reach toxic
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HcM)
 doses of the local anesthetic.
 In cats, HCM is a common disease that can occur in young to middle
aged animals. Any breed can be affected but the Maine Coon is
Interpleural anesthesia
predisposed.
The main pathology is muscular hypertrophy with restricted ven-
Interpleural infusion of bupivacaine or lidocaine diluted in 5 mL
tricular volume. One special form of HCM involves systolic anterior
saline infused into the interpleural space via a chest tube every eight
motion of the septal mitral valve leaflet (SAM), which momentarily
to 12 hours provides anesthesia of intercostal nerves and analgesia
restricts ventricular outflow and induces mitral regurgitation. On
after thoracotomy. A wound diffusion catheter placed after a sternot-
physical examination and auscultation it cannot be distinguished
omy could also be considered, as it provides an effective route for
from dynamic right ventricular outflow tract obstruction (DR VOTO).
delivering local anesthesia and for longer than the duration that the
thoracic drain may stay in place.
is necessary for a definitive diagnosis. Outflow tract obstruction is
exacerbated by tachycardia, increased myocardial contractility and
increased afterload.
 Cats with pulmonary edema and heart failure should be stabilized
before elective surgery. Acute therapy includes cage rest, oxygen
 Box 2-6 Analgesia considerations for thoracic surgery
therapy, vasodilators (i.e., benazepril, enalapril), and furosemide.
 Heart rate and contractility can be reduced with atenolol (βl-blocker)
 Systemic analgesia with an opioid, ideally with a constant rate
and diltiazem (calcium-channel blocker).
 infusion or a multimodal approach with a combination of an
 Stress before anesthesia should be avoided and effective analgesia
opioid and ketamine with or without lidocaine. NB: cats can 
should be used, including an opioid to reduce heart rate and the use
 develop hypotension with lidocaine
 of regional anesthesia techniques, dependent on the planned proce-
An epidural with a local anesthetic and morphine at a total volume
dure The aims during anesthesia are listed in Box 2-8. Ketamine
of 1 mL/3.5 kg can provide analgesia for thoracotomy. An
as an induction agent or for maintenance of anesthesia should
 epidural catheter can be used for repeated injections and
be avoided because it increases myocardial contractility, myocardial
postoperative treatment
 An intercostal nerve block rostral and caudal to the incision site can
be used. When performed before thoracic surgery analgesia is
 Box 2-7 Stabilization procedures for cats in cardiac failure
often not complete; specific local injection, after opening the 
thorax, close to the vertebrae will improve the results
Reduction of retained fluids (diuretics, thoracocentesis,
 An interpleural block is given with the aim that the anesthetic
pericardiocentesis)
diffuses through the thoracic wall to the intercostal nerves. The 
anesthetic can be injected through a chest drain with the animal
Reduction of cardiac work by afterload reduction (i.e., angiotensin-
in a sternal or a standing position after sternotomy and in a
converting enzyme inhibitors, nitroprusside, hydralazine, prazosin)
lateral position (lying on the affected side) after lateral
cage rest, oxygen therapy and anxiolytic drugs
thoracotomy. The first infusion should be performed after the 
Improvement of cardiac contractility, where indicated, with
thorax is closed and the animal is still anesthetized. The infusion
 pimobendan, dobutamine, digoxin 
can then be repeated every eight to 12 hours
Control of arrhythmias
23
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Box 2-8 Goals for anesthesia of the cat with hypertrophic
 Box 2-9 Analgesia considerations for aural surgery
cardiomyopathy
The aural area is very well innervated and surgical procedures in this
 Avoid heart rate increases
region are often very painful and irritating for the animal 
 Lower contractility
 Start gabapentin treatment before surgery 10 mg/kg two to three
 Maintain or mildly increase afterload (systemic vascular resistance)
times a day
 Maintain filling pressures
Aabns buunp uosnu! auueiayypioido lo poido
Wound catheter placement and intermittent bupivacaine (0.5%)
Continue opioid/ketamine infusion post-surgery
Use non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to reduce wound swelling
work and myocardial oxygen consumption. The author prefers a fen-
tanyl, midazolam, etomidate protocol. Etomidate is known for
minimal cardiovascular effects and maintenance of vascular tone. If
the vagotonic effect of the opioid (i.e, fentanyl, morphine) is insuf-
 Box 2-10 Analgesia considerations for mandibulectomy
ficient to control heart rate, a short-acting beta-blocker like esmolol
or maxillectomy
can be added. Supported by an echocardiographic study, the alpha-2
agonist medetomidine has been used as part of an anesthetic protocol
ayt ot om by6w Ol Aabans anjag suawiean uuadegee thes 
in cats with HCM to successfully prevent mitral regurgitation. Medeto-
times a day
midine has been shown to be able to reduce SAM by its peripheral
Opioid or opioid/ketamine infusion during surgery
effects on vascular alpha-2 receptors and increases in afterload.!
Deep infraorbital (maxillary) block with bupivacaine 0.5%
a anai 'usi um peiosse si h l
Continue opioid/ketamine infusion post surgery in combination with
 roidism should be restored if possible (Chapter 58) and special atten-
a NSAID over three days, re-evaluate pain and possibly change to
tion should be paid to the occurrence of ventricular arrhythmias.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs only
Traumatic myocarditis
(myocardial contusion)
vascular resistance is prevented by using low inflation pressures for
Blunt thoracic trauma with contusion of the myocardium can result
ventilation.
in ventricular arrhythmias 24 to 48 hours after the event In combina-
tion with pain, anxiety, electrolyte disturbances and hypovolemia the
risk of the development of life-threatening arrhythmias is increased.
Every animal with thoracic trauma should have an ECG examination
HEAD AND NECK SURGERY
before surgery. After correction of hypovolemia and electrolyte distur-
bances, anxiolysis and pain control are important to prevent further
When operating in the region of the head and neck, and in particular
catecholamine release In the absence of hypovolemia a low dose of
the larynx and pharynx, it is important to maintain a patent airway
acepromazine (0.0l-0.02 mg/kg) can be beneficial because of its
 and also to monitor the cat carefully following surgery for any upper
antiarrhythmogenic and anxiolytic effects. Treatment of ventricular
respiratory distress due to swelling. It is imperative to provide ade-
arrhythmias with lidocaine infusions' can be maintained throughout
eado uaum aiaaeadosod pue aiaaeiadoad yioq eisasleue aren
anesthesia with due consideration that in cats lidocaine can induce
ing around the cat's head. Aural surgery can be particularly painful
low blood pressure and cardiovascular depression.12
and consideration of how to provide appropriate analgesia is listed in
 Box 2-9. Postoperative pain may result in difficulty or reluctance to
Congenital cardiac diseases
eat, particularly after surgery of the mandible and maxillectomy (Box
 2-10). If the surgery or disease is likely to result in the animal being
In cases of congenital cardiac diseases like persistent ductus arteriosus
inappetent postoperatively then consideration should be made to
(PDA) and ventricular septal defect (VSD) undergoing surgical correc-
 place a feeding tube (Chapter 12). Local anesthetics provide good
tion, the animals are often quite young and the thoracic cavity has to
specific local analgesia and are relatively easy to administer for surgery
be opened. All anesthetic principles for these conditions have to be
of the head
followed, including consideration of the cat's age and therefore its
ability to metabolize dnugs and maintain normothermia and the sur-
Local anesthetics and nerve blocks
(I iaidey) Aiooi e se yns 'yeodde 
A common feature of several congenital disorders is an abnormal
Local anesthetics are useful adjuncts for providing analgesia during
blood flow between the left, systemic circulation, and the right, pul-
surgery; their usage enables reduced doses of anesthesia to be used
' o yal  shunus pooa au se su s 'uon Auou
and the analgesia provided by the block is often continued postopera-
oxygenation of the blood is not a problem. Oxygenated blood
tively. Nerve blocks that are of specific use for procedures of the head
re-circulates through the lung. Cyanosis develops with right to left
include the infraorbital nerve block, the mental nerve block and the
shunts, when deoxygenated blood enters the systemic circulation.
mandibular nerve block.
by maintaining cardiac output, avoiding a massive decrease in sys-
temic vascular resistance (extreme vasodilation) and avoiding an
Infraorbital nerve block
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance. Cardiac output is main-
The nerves of the head can be desensitized by infiltrating 0.1-0.3 mL
tained by fluids and dobutamine, avoiding high doses of volatiles.
of 1-2% lidocaine or mepivacaine, 0.5% ropivacaine or 0.25-0.5%
 Acepromazine will reduce vasodilation and an increase in pulmonary
bupivacaine.
24
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
?
?
Figure 2-5 Infraorbital nerve block. (A) The infraorbital canal is just cranial to the palpable ridge (arrow). (B) Intraoral approach. (c) Cutaneous
approach.
A
Figure 2-6 The middle mental foramen on a cat's mandible (arrow), site
of the mental nerve block.
The infraorbital canal starts at the rostral floor of the orbit and
opens rostral to the zygomatic arch at the infraorbital foramen. In the
cat the canal is very short and the infraorbital foramen is recessed and
cannot be palpated directly but the ridge is obvious above the premo-
lars. The canal contains the infraorbital nerve as well as the infraor-
bital artery and vein. The needle is inserted into the opening of the
canal by either an oral or transcutaneous access (Fig. 2-5). Anesthesia
will affect the ipsilateral premolar, canine and incisor teeth as well as
the bone and soft tissue buccal to the teeth. If the needle is inserted
about 0.5 cm into the 'canal and pressure is placed over the foramen
the agent will flow distally and block the caudal maxillary alveolar
nerve which anesthetizes the maxillary molars, the roof of the nasal
?
cavity, the upper lip and muzzle and the soft and hard palate.
Figure 2-7 Mandibular nerve block. (A) The foramen is situated on the
Mental nerve block
medial aspect of the mandible (arrow). (B) The nerve can be blocked by
a cutaneous approach or intraoral.
In cats, the middle mental foramen is located midway between the
mandibular canine tooth and the third premolar tooth (cats have no
first or second mandibular premolar teeth) at the dorsoventral mid-
 body of the mandible The site at which the nerve is accessible is just
point of the mandible. From an intraoral approach, the needle enters 
before it enters the inferior alveolar foramen on the medial side of
the mucosa rostral to the mandibular frenulum and is advanced into
the ramus of the mandible This block may be achieved with either
the opening of the foramen (Fig. 2-6). This block anesthetizes the
an intraoral or an extraoral approach (Fig. 2-7). In cats, the foramen
buccal mucosa and lip rostral to the foramen. If the needle is advanced
lies ventral to the midpoint of the zygomatic arch. The author prefers
deeper into the mandibular canal, the canine and incisor teeth will
the intraoral approach to the inferior alveolar foramen. The needle is
also be anesthetized. However, due to the small opening in cats and
inserted through the oral mucosa just behind the last molar and then
the potential to cause trauma to the nerve and vessels, it is preferable
walked off the medial side of the mandible. With the tip of the needle
[elip kidde uaui pue uaweioy aul apisul isnl di aipaau aul aeid o
 pointing in the direction of the angular process it is advanced halfway
 pressure to force the agent deeper into the canal.
between the last molar and the angular process. The ipsilateral man-
dibular teeth and bone as well as all of the soft tissue lingual to the
mandible are blocked. Care has to be taken to keep the needle close
Mandibular nerve block
to the mandible and foramen to avoid also blocking the lingual nerve,
The inferior alveolar nerve is located within the mandibular canal;
which might paralyze the tongue and risk the cat biting its tongue on
therefore, to block this nerve it must be accessed before it enters the
recovery.
25
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
BRAIN SURGERY
Box 2-11
 General measures to reduce intracranial
pressure
The primary goal in anesthesia for cats undergoing brain surgery is to
Position of the head slightly elevated 
maintain cerebral blood flow (CBF), which depends on cerebral per-
 Avoid increase in central venous pressure
fusion pressure (CPP) and cerebral vascular resistance (CVR). Cerebral
 perfusion pressure results from mean arterial pressure (MAP) opposed
Avoid jugular compression or occlusion with tight bandages or
by intracranial pressure [ICP). This shows that perfusion is directly
venous catheters - use peripherally inserted central venous lines 
related to MAP and maintenance of cardiac output and MAP above a
Avoid coughing during intubation
certain level is crucial for animals with intracranial lesions; CPP
Avoid high inspiratory pressures with IPPV
should be maintained above 70 mmHg. which translates to a MAP of
Mannitol 0.5 g/kg IV over 20 minutes can be repeated as a bolus; a
70-80 mmHg.
constant rate infusion is less effective
 In the healthy brain, blood flow is autoregulated and remains con-
Furosemide 1 mg/kg IV followed by constant rate infusion with 1 mgy
stant over a wide range of CPP (50-150 mmHg): outside this range
kg/hour (loop diuretics reduce CSF production and brain fluid)
it depends on MAP. The CBF is also matched to the metabolic require-
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation to maintain eucapnia or mild 
ments of the brain. Brain injury or certain anesthetics can interfere
hyp erventilation
with the metabolic coupling. Ventilation and oxygenation also play
Systemic lidocaine reduces intracranial pressure
an important role in the regulation of cerebral vascular tone Hyper-
capnia or hypoxia result in cerebral vasodilation; hypocapnia leads to
increasing vasoconstriction in a linear manner with decreasing PaCO2.
Therefore hypoxemia as well as hypoventilation or extreme hyperven-
Box 2-12 Premedication considerations for craniotomy
tilation has to be prevented in animals with brain injury.
Opioids have no direct effect on intracranial pressure, but high doses
Intracranial pressure
cause hypoventilation
Morphine may induce vomiting
Management of ICP (Box 2-1l) is a major issue in head trauma
 patients as well as patients with space-occupying intracranial lesions
Ketamine might increase intracranial pressure at the high end of the 
dose range because of muscle rigidity. However, it can be used in
that undergo craniotomy.
the low dose range (3-5 mg/kg IM) in combination with 
Signs of raised ICP are depression, pupillary changes (from miosis
benzodiazepines for uncooperative cats. Avoid in seizuring animals
to anisocoria and bilateral mydriasis) and changes in respiratory
or those with a history of seizures
pattern. In severely increased ICP, the Cushing triad can occur with
Medetomidine can induce vomiting. but it is helpful for sedation of
hypertension, reflex bradycardia and respiratory alterations.
fractious animals at 1-5 μg/kg IM. It causes systemic
 There is a major difference in the indication for preoperative use
vasoconstriction and cardiovascular depression
 of steroids in head trauma patients and cats with intracranial tumors.
 In tumor patients, perioperative use of steroids reduces peritumor
n pa ul 'sis i a asis u  eaa
 patients that may require anesthesia, steroids are contraindicated as
A combination of an infusion of fentanyl, alfentanil or remifentanil
they induce hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia is part of the stress
is suitable to reduce the anesthetic requirements and avoid sudden
response after head injury. However, hyperglycemia increases brain
 changes in MAP. Fentanyl can cumulate after long infusions. Remifen-
damage when traumatic brain injury is complicated by secondary
tanil and alfentanil do not cumulate but require introduction of
ischemia.
another analgesic before the infusion is stopped (Table 2-1).
 For good surgical access the brain should be relaxed, which can be
 obtained by mannitol infusion at the rate given for ICP control before
Anesthesia
opening the cranium.
The choice of what premedication to use is dependent on the mental
The removal of meningiomas (Chapter 58) in cats can be associated
status and cooperation of the individual patient (Box 2-12).
with extensive bleeding, therefore cats should be blood typed before
 Anesthetic induction should be smooth and extensive coughing
surgery and preparations for potential blood transfusion made
during intubation prevented. Pre-oxygenation can help to minimize
(Chapter 5).
hypoxia during induction. Propofol and thiopental are suitable for
induction of anesthesia in patients with raised ICP Mechanical ven-
Postoperative anesthesia
tilation should be started immediately after intubation and normo-
capnia or mild hypocapnia maintained (30-35 mmHg).
 Craniotomy patients require intensive postoperative care (Chapters 4
For maintenance of anesthesia for neurosurgery a propofol TIVA is
and 58). In general a smooth rapid recovery is desirable to allow early
jo sa uoisnyul pasuoiond sien un 'aaamoh sueny ul pasn uao
neurologic assessment However in cases that had intraoperative hem-
 propofol can lead to cumulation and prolonged recoveries due to the
orrhage or unstable patients it can be advantageous to maintain
cats'limited ability to metabolize phenolic compounds.13 When using
'soad pauonond rog uoeiuan pue uoepas daap ro eisauisae
volatile agents, sevoflurane is the best choice as it maintains blood
flow metabolism coupling, causes less vasodilation than isoflurane
Analgesia for brain surgery
and anesthetic depth is easily altered. Halothane should be avoided
as it disturbs flow-metabolism coupling. Nitrous oxide should be
Analgesia is best given based on a multimodal approach. Adequate
avoided as it increases cerebral blood flow and oxygen demand and
increases the potential for air embolism.
excitement Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs should only be
26
Anesthesia and analgesia for general surgery
Chapter
2
used in cats without previous or concurrent steroid treatment. In
 treatment before surgery. If the patient is not on long-term anti
severely depressed patients care has to be taken not to overdose with
epileptic medication, phenobarbital or gabapentin given before
opioids; they should be titrated to effect. High doses of opioids can
surgery might help to reduce the risk of seizures and will give some
induce central excitation in cats, and opioids can alter pupil reactivity
 background’ sedation after surgery. The type of postoperative nutri-
in cats.
tional support needs to be planned (Chapter 6) and placement of a
 Seizure activity has to be controlled. Many brain tumor patients
 percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube should be consid-
present with seizures and they are often already on anti-epileptic
ered (Chapter 12).
 REFERENCES
1.
 Kastner S. Anesthesia. In: Montavon PM.
isoenzymes in the cat by the NSAID
10. Joyce A, Yates D. Help stop teenage
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ, editors. Feline
robenacoxib. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
pregnancy. Early-age neutering in cats.
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
2009;32:31-40.
J Fel Med Surg 2011:13:3-10.
disease. Elsevier Edinburgh; 2009.
6.
Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE,
11
Lamont LA, Bulmer Bl, Sisson DD, et al.
p. 177-98.
Wood JL. Risk factors for anaesthetic-
Doppler echocardiographic effects of
2.
.Kastner S. Analgesia. In: Montavon PM,
related death in cats: results from the
medetomidine on dynamic left ventricular
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ, editors. Feline
 confdential enquiry into perioperative
outflow tract obstruction in cat. I Am Vet
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
small animal fatalities (CEPSAF). Br ↓
Med Assoc 2002;221:1276-81.
 disease. Elsevier Edinburgh; 2009.
Anaesth 2007;99:617-23.
12.
.Pypendop B, Ilkiw J. Assessment of
p. 199-205.
7.
Brodbelt D. Feline anesthetic deaths
the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine
3. Pypendop BH, Siao KT, Ilkiw JE. Effects of
 in veterinary practice. Top Companion
administered IV in isoflurane anesthetized
 tramadol hydrochlonide on the thermal
Anim Med 2010;25:189-94. Review.
cats. Am I Vet Res 2005;66:661-8.
threshold in cats. Am J Vet Res 2009;70:
8.
German Al. The growing problem of
13.
.Pascoe Pl, llkiw JE, Frischmeyer KJ.
1465-70.
obesity in dogs and cats. The Journal
The effect of the duration of propofol 
4. Pelligand L, King IN, Toutain PL, et al. In 
of Nutrition 2006;136:1940S-6S.
administration on recovery from
vivo COX-2 selectivity of robenacoxib in a
Abelson AL, McCobb EC, Shaw S, et al.
anaesthesia in cats. Vet Anaesth Analg
feline tissue cage model of inflammation.
9
 Use of wound soaker catheters for the
2006;33:2-7.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2009;32[Suppl. 1):
administration of local anesthetic for
103-4.
 post-operative analgesia: 56 cases.
 5. Giraudel JM, Toutain PL, King IN, Lees P.
Vet Anaesth Analg 2009;36:
 Differential inhibition of cyclooxygenase
597-602.
27
3
pter
'ostoperative monitoring and management
of complications
J.A. Beatty, V.R. Barrs
The postoperative period from anesthetic recovery to discharge from
 Data collection
hospital is a crucial period for initial healing and return to function.
Success relies on an integrated, team approach to optimizing the
Observing the cat undisturbed in its cage allows assessment of its
demeanor and resting respiratory rate and effort, all of which may
patient environment, hydration status, electrolyte balance, nutritional 
change upon handling. Unless there are specifc indications otherwise.
and analgesic needs. Despite best efforts, complications can occur
during the postoperative period. Having routine monitoring proce-
physical examination is best completed on the examination table.
dures in place to identify complications at the earliest opportunity.
Physical examination has been described in Chapter 1. For patients
with reduced mobility or where handling causes discomfort, the
facilitating timely interventions, will achieve the best outcome. This
aul uoy aysuen suunp juaned aun yoddns oi pasn aq ue suppaq
chapter will cover general aspects of postoperative monitoring and
cage (Fig. 3-1). Cats should be weighed using scales that are accurate
management; specifc information will be included in the individual
for small patients, such as pediatric scales (Fig. 3-2). A fall in body
chapters on separate organs.
weight can accompany dehydration or catabolism, whereas a rapid
increase can signal occult effusion. Surgical wounds, drains and
feeding tube sites and intravenous (IV) catheter sites should be
inspected for discharge, rednes, swelling, or evidence of self-trauma.
DAILY INPATIENT MONITORING
Gentle palpation of surgical sites can assist with pain scoring.The cage
should be checked for evidence of urination (estimated volume,
A cornerstone of excellent patient care is careful, appropriate
color), defecation (amount, color, consistency, presence of mucus,
 monitoring. Staff should be aware of the importance of the procedures
blood), vomitus or hemorrhage Food and water intake should be
that they perform and the data that they record. For example, essential
recorded. For cats on IV fluids, the rate and type of fluid being admin-
information will be lost if the litter tray, bedding and cage are cleaned
istered should be confirmed. Patients receiving IV fluids typically have
without noting and recording urination. Where urine output is
hematocrit, total plasma protein (TP), electrolytes and, where avail-
able, blood gases monitored every 24 hours. Judicious sampling mini-
intervention to prevent acute renal failure (ARF). Minimum monitor-
mizes handling and restraint and avoids exacerbating anemia. Using
ing for the postoperative inpatient is a twice-daily examination.
an insulin syringe for venipuncture is well tolerated, minimally trau-
A useful approach to direct this examination and to record its fnd-
matic and provides suffcient sample for microhematocrit, TP, electro-
ings is the SOAP (subjective, objective, assessment plan) protocol
lytes, blood glucose and blood film preparation.
(Box 3-1).
Assessment
Subjective and objective data form the basis of the patient assessment.
Using the SoAP protocol
All problems identified should be ranked and assessed (Chapter 1)
and an overall assessment of the cat's status as stable, improving or
The SOAP protocol facilitates consistent comprehensive medical
deteriorating made. Consideration should be given to the pain score,
evaluation that can be clearly communicated in a standardized,
hydration/nutritional status, changes in body weight, new problems,
concise format The subjective and objective components involve data
 Or problems that cannot be accounted for.
collection and are followed by a succinct assessment and a plan. The
SOAP directs the frequency and the nature of additional individual
monitoring, avoiding excessive handling and sampling. For practical
Plan
um puodsaios iou saop paioalos st eiep uium ui iapio aul 'suosean
The plan schedules investigations, treatments and ongoing monitor-
the order in which it is recorded.
ing, including adjustments to fluid therapy, nutrition, the analgesia
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00003-2
29
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Box 3-1 SOAP protocol for recording clinical information
Subjective data
 Electrolytes 
Objective data
Fluids
Weight
Food intake
 Temperature 
 Urination 
Heart rate
Defecation
 Pulse rate 
Water consumption
 Pulse quality
 Additional notes
 Respiratory rate 
 Medications given
MM
 Procedures performed 
Capillary refill time 
Assessment
 Packed cell volume 
Plan
 Total plasma protein 
MIM, mucous membrane colour.
plan, other medications (type, dose, route and frequency) and care of
surgical drains, feeding tubes, venous access or closed urine collection
M   a e s s 'se a ss
au yo  ra u e io xq suaas e) ee  e i si
cage door) for timid cats undergoing less intensive monitoring. are
included.
FLUID THERAPY
The goals of fluid therapy are to maintain hydration and effective
circulating volume and to contribute to acid-base and electrolyte
balance. Evidence on which to base recommendations for fluid
therapy in the postoperative feline patient is limited, mainly compris-
ing extrapolation of data relating to other species and pathophysio-
logical justifcation. The volume, composition and rate of IV fluids
B
should be tailored to the individual based on serial monitoring of
 physical and laboratory parameters.
Route of fluid administration
A pump should be used to deliver IV fluids and a peripheral catheter
is suitable for most purposes. Where a fluid pump is not available, a
pediatric burette (Fig. 3-3) is preferable to a standard giving set to
avoid fluid overload. The required rate is converted to the number of
drips/minute for the giving set:
 required rate (mL/hour)x
drops/mL (check individual set)
Drops per minute =
60
Subcutaneous (SC) administration is not suitable for irritant solutions 
and an unpredictable rate of absorption can precipitate congestive
heart failure or hypokalemia. Administration via a feeding tube or the
 intraosseous route may be indicated.
Volume of fluid administration
Figure 3-1 Using the bedding to transport a weak, immobile or painful
The volume of fluid required for a 24 hour period is the sum of
patient.
current defcits, maintenance requirements, and ongoing losses (Box
3-2). Losses during surgery include hemorrhage, evaporation from
serous surfaces, transudation from traumatized tissues, and gastroin-
testinal sequestration. The maintenance requirement for an adult
30
Postoperative monitoring and management of complications
Chapter
3
Box 3-2 Example of a fluid replacement calculation
A 5 kg cat is estimated to be 5% dehydrated. The cat is vomiting
four times per day. approximately 10 ml per vomit
Maintenance requirement (60 mL/kg/day) for this cat is 60 × 5 =
300 mL in 24 hours, or 150 mL in 12 hours 
Fluids deficit (in mL) is body weight (kg) × % dehydration (as a
decimal) x 1000
This cat's fluid deficit is (5 × 0.05 x 1000) = 250 ml
The ongoing fosses are 40 mL in 24 hours, or 20 mL in 12 hours
So, if the fluid deficit is replaced over 12 hours, the total volume
of fluid to be delivered in 12 hours is 150 + 250 + 20 = 420 ml, or
(420/12) = 35 mL/hour
cat is approximately 60 mL/kg/day. Ongoing losses include those
 associated with vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, surgical drains, and tran-
 sudation into body cavities or externally. Hydration status is estimated
'eiep Aioieioqel pue saupuy iisayd Kioisiy sjuaed au uo paseq
and creatinine are particularly useful.
Figure 3-2 Pediatric scales for accurate weighing.
Rate of fluid administration
The rate at which fluid is administered depends on the severity and
clinical consequences of the deficit, taking into account pre-existing
conditions, which may predispose to fluid overload. Deficits are
usually replaced over six to 12 hours.
 The maximum rate of infusion for cats, 60 mL/kg/hour (90 mL/kg/
hour in the dog), is reserved for patients with non-cardiogenic shock,
aas] Aessanau se paieadan 'sasmioq ialleus se uanig st 'uaul uaaa pue
below, Management considerations for the septic cat). Care should be
taken to avoid interstitial fluid overload, the consequences of which
50
include pulmonary edema, pleural effusion and delayed healing due
to prolonged ileus, edema and poor tissue oxygenation. Compensated
cardiac and renal disease, chronic anemia, and colloid administration
all increase the risk of fluid overload. Urine output should be moni-
20
tored and maintained above 1-2 mL/kg/hour (or higher where there
is obligatory polyuria). Compensated cardiac disease is difficult to
detect without echocardiography. Detection of a murmur is neither
90
score, atrial size, and pulmonary vasculature on thoracic radiographs
E
70
can assist However, in contrast to dogs, hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
60
thies are common in cats and signifcant structural changes can
三
50
 produce minimal change in the cardiac silhouette. Where an increased
二
40
risk of fluid overload is identified, for example in a cat with advanced
山
hyperthyroidism where significant structural cardiac disease might be
20
predicted despite medical stabilization, conservative fluid rates and
additional monitoring should be instituted. Resting respiratory rate
手10
and effort can be recorded cage-side, hourly. Increased rate and effort 
from baseline should prompt assessment for jugular distension or
 pulsation, thorough auscultation for signs of pulmonary edema or
pleural effusion and, if necessary, thoracic radiographs. Serial central
venous pressure (CVP) monitoring is useful for avoiding volume over-
load (normal CVP 0-10 cmHzO).3 As maintenance needs are gradu-
ally met from other sources, such as enteral feeding or voluntary food
intake, fluid rates should be reduced and then ceased.
Fluid composition
 The exact composition of the fluid administered will depend on indi-
Figure 3-3 A pediatric burette prevents fluid overload when a fluid
vidual requirements. In humans and dogs, anesthesia and surgery are
pump is not available.
associated with a transient increase in antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
31
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
-uaan pimy sanouoid Hdv t'siep inoy ol auo uoy gusel uoanoas
tion and natriuresis. The administration of hypotonic, maintenance
solutions in the immediate postsurgical period has been associated
with dilutional hyponatremia and fuid overload, which can be
BD Plastip
severe.5 Assuming that the same is true in cats, then even in a well-
hydrated patient, a rehydration solution, such as 0.9% saline or Hart-
?
国
mann solution, is recommended in the initial postsurgical period.
Since high rates of potassium-free crystalloids are often administered
000
ym Arans ae spmu jo uoeuauaddns iduond Aiasins sunp
000
ELECTROLYTE ABNORMALITIES
Figure 3-4 A syringe driver can be used to deliver a supplementary
 potassium infusion.
 It is essential to monitor for postoperative electrolyte abnormalities.
Hypokalemia is common after surgery, particularly in cats that have
Box 3-3 Preparing a maximum-rate potassium infusion
 been inappetent preoperatively.
A 10 mL quantity of a 1 mmol/ml solution of potassium chloride
is added to 10 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride. The resulting 
Hypokalemia
0.5 mmol/mL solution is delivered using a syringe driver (Fig. 3-4) at 
1 mL/kg/hour for one hour only. Plasma potassium is re-measured.
Hypokalemia results from reduced intake, increased losses or redistri-
The infusion can be repeated until normokalemia is achieved, but this
bution in alkalosis. In the postsurgical patient, reduced food intake,
rate should not be exceeded.
inadequate supplementation of fluids, solute diuresis, diarrhea,
chronic vomiting and diuretic use (loop and thiazide diuretics) can
contribute. Other causes of hypokalemia, including primary hyperal-
dosteronism (Conn syndrome) (Chapter 35), a condition likely
equilibrates quickly and is less useful for diagnosing uroperitoneum).
underdiagnosed in the cat," and breed-associated hypokalemia of
Hyperkalemia in the face of normal renal function can accompany
Burmese cats, willbe identifed preoperatively Intracellular potassium
excessive supplementation, acidosis and drug administration (eg..
 spironolactone, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors). The most
extracellular levels and this potassium gradient contributes to the
significant clinical consequence of hyperkalemia is cardiotoxicity.
resting membrane potential of excitable cells. When IV fluids are
manifesting as bradycardia or arrhythmias, and specific treatment with
delivered at maintenance rates, supplementation with potassium
calcium gluconate may be indicated (see Chapter l for consequences
chloride at 20 mmol/L usually maintains normokalemia. The clinical
and treatment of hyperkalemia).
consequences of severe hypokalemia (<3 mmol/L) include general-
ized weakness, cervical ventroflexion and reduced gastrointestinal
Hyponatremia
motility. Where the potassium deficit is mild, oral or enteral supple-
mentation can be used (4-10 mmol of potassium gluconate/cat/day
Fluctuations in plasma sodium concentration affect the volume and
divided) or the concentration of potassium in the fluids can be
Osmolality of the extracellular and intracellular fluid compartments.
increased up to 40 mmol/L. Where potassium is added to a bag of
Where hyponatremia is identified, artefact due to hyperglobulinemia
fluids in use, the fluids must be turmed 'off to the patient while adding
-ne anos aq unos eusid jo uon io eiaidaday io
lation, such as glucose or mannitol, can be quickly ruled out.
solution is adequately mixed. The maximum rate of potassium
Hyponatremia with concurrent hypovolemia can occur with renal,
supplementation, 0.5 mmol/kg/hour, should not be exceeded or
 gastrointestinal and third space losses, severe burns, post-obstructive
life-threatening cardiotoxicity can result. If plasma potassium is
diuresis, hypotonic fluid administration, certain dnugs (e.g., barbitu-
<3.0 mmol/L, a maximum-rate potassium infusion can be delivered
rates) and severe hepatic, renal or cardiac failure. The clinical signif-
using a syringe driver (Fig. 3-4), or as a secondary infusion on a pump.
cance of hyponatremia depends on the magnitude and speed of
for one hour, after which electrolytes should be retested and the infu-
change; a rapid or severe fall in sodium concentration can cause cer-
sion repeated if necessary ( Box 3-3).
ebral edema manifesting as obtundation and seizures. Treatment
 should address the underlying cause Where this fails to resolve the
problem, or where hyponatremia is severe (<l25 mmol/L). specific
Hyperkalemia
therapy is indicated. Rapid reversal of cerebral edema can cause cer-
Hyperkalemia can occur with reduced renal excretion, translocation
ebral dehydration and hemorrhage if the deficit was acquired gradu-
in acidosis, over-supplementation of fluids and massive tissue necro-
ally. Volume deficits are replaced frst, using a rehydrating crystalloid
(e.g. 0.9% saline). The patient should be monitored every 1 to 2
ate assessment for ARF. Adequate urine output (1-2 mL/kg/hour)
hours to ensure that the maximum rate of sodium replacement,
should be confirmed without delay and renal parameters determined
0.5-0.7 mmol/L/hour, is not exceeded. Normovolemic hyponatremia
(plasma creatinine, urea and phosphate). If azotemia is confirmed the 
can be addressed by restricting fluid intake to less than urine output.
contribution of prerenal, renal and postrenal causes should be inves-
tigated. Where loss of integrity of the urinary tract is a possibility, eg..
Hypernatremia
after urinary tract surgery, abdominal ultrasonography is indicated. If
an abdominal effusion is identifed, simultaneous comparison of
Hypernatremia follows pure water or hypotonic fluid loss, or excess
creatinine concentration in the plasma and the effusion confirms
sodium administration. Clinical signs due to central nervous system
uroperitoneum, if the creatinine level is higher in the effusion (urea
(CNS) cellular dehydration and hemorrhage (e.g. vomiting, muscle
32
Postoperative monitoring and management of complications
Chapter
E
fasciculations, seizure and coma) are seen when the plasma sodium
indefinitely. Calcitriol treatment can be initiated at 20-30 ng/kg/day
concentration exceeds 170 mmol/L. Again, the speed and severity of
for three to four days then gradually reduced.10
the sodium elevation are important Patients tolerate gradual sodium
elevations better because of idiogenic osmole generation within CNS
Hypophosphatemia
such as gastrointestinal, third space and renal losses are the most likely
 Phosphate is the major intracellular anion and is required for energy
generation. Hypophosphatemia occurs with increased renal loss.
common and results from pure water loss, including loss from body
decreased intestinal absorption or transcellular shifts. Intravascular
cavities during surgery or reduced water intake. Sodium gain can
 hemolysis may occur when plasma phosphate falls below 0.5 mmol/L.
accompany primary hyperaldosteronism or administration of sodium
Ysl ie juaed aeiadoisod aui ui paionuou aq pinoys aneydsoud
bicarbonate and is associated with hypervolemia. The underlying
 of diabetic ketoacidosis or re-feeding syndrome Hypophosphatemia
cause should be addressed. The rate of sodium reduction should not
axiu os :os e yiim spimy Al jo uoeiuaualddns Aq paiea aq um
exceed 0.5-0.7 mmol/L/hour or cerebral edema can result. Any
of potassium chloride:potassium phosphate Alternatively, 0.01-
volume deficit should be replaced first using 0.9% saline because its 
0.03 mmol/kg potassium phosphate can be given IV in 0.9% saline
sodium concentration (154 mmol/L) is usually less than that of the
over six hours.
hypotonic crystalloids such as 0.45% saline over 2 to 4 days. Sodium 
gain can be treated with furosemide (1 mg/kg every 12 hours PO).
POSTOPERATIVE ANEMIA
Hypocalcemia
Anemia is readily identifed from daily hematocrit monitoring. Even
Total serum calcium comprises protein bound, complexed and ionized
where anemia is mild, consideration should be given to the cause/s
[iCa) fractions which represent 40%, 8% and 52% of the total, respec-
in the assessment and appropriate plans made Cats are relatively
tively, in the cat.? Serum iCa, the physiologically active fraction, has
predisposed to anemia compared with dogs because they have a lower
numerous roles and is essential for normal neurological, muscular
pue (sop ay u1 By/7u 06 01 pa1eduos Sy/Tu 99) aunion poo1q
and gastrointestinal function. Close monitoring of calcium is indi-
feline red blood cells have a shorter life span (approximately 70 days
cated in a subset of postoperative patients at risk from hypocalcemia.
compared to 120 days in the dog). Clinical consequences of anemia
include pale mucous membranes, weakness and, if severe a hemic
common cause of postoperative hypocalcemia. Less commonly.
 murmur. Anemia in the cat is often multifactorial. Major mechanisms
removal of a parathyroid hormone-related peptide-secreting tumor
in the surgical patient are hemorrhage and hemolysis and these
may reveal a parathyroid response blunted by chronic humoral hyper-
should be ruled out first In this acute setting, a reduced bone marrow
calcemia of malignancy (HHM). HHM is less common in the cat than 
response will not cause anemia, but can contribute to its degree and
the dog but has been reported with lymphoma, squamous cell carci-
duration. Examination of a blood flm can provide very useful infor.
noma, multiple myeloma, osteosarcoma, and thyroid and broncho-
mation (Fig. 3-5). The absence of features of regeneration on a blood
genic carcinoma.?
film (Fig. 3-6) should not be interpreted as necessarily indicating a
 Other patients at risk of hypocalcemia include those undergoing
non-regenerative cause as they take three to five days to appear.
-eay aed ynoe) (s adeu) Aoaiod
Anemia can be exacerbated by the dilutional effect of IV fluids.
roidism is rare in the cat), cesarian section, patients with urethral
Consideration should be given to potential causes and sites of
 obstruction or urinary tract rupture, or any cat that becomes acutely
 Occult hemorrhage. Disruption of tissue architecture with loss of vas-
ill. Following iatrogenic loss of parathyroid function, linical signs can
cular integrity (e.g., surgery-associated, ulceration, neoplasia, inflam-
develop within 12 hours. Early signs are subtle, such as pawing or
 matory disease) and coagulopathies should be considered. Inherited
rubbing of the face and behavioral change. Weakness, muscle fascicu-
coagulopathies are uncommon in the cat but postsurgical hemor-
lations, tetany and seizures can develop. A fall in total serum calcium 
rhage may be the first clinical manifestation of these disorders
below 1.5 mmol/L or iCa below 0.8 mmol/L can be associated with
(Chapter 1). Excessive blood sampling and internal and external para-
clinical signs. iCa should be monitored every six hours after surgery
sitism may also contribute. Major sites for occult hemorrhage are the
in patients at risk. If iCa measurement is not available, total senum 
calcium is used.
urinary tract. Black/brown vomit, resembling coffee grounds, or tarry
 Formulae to correct total calcium values for hypoalbuminemia have
feces suggest gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Pleural and peritoneal cavi-
 not been validated in the cat. Adherence to the appropriate sample
ties can be rapidly screened for free fluid using ultrasonography.
collection protocol, including anaerobic collection unless correction
although hemorrhage can be reabsorbed rapidly. Reduced plasma TP
for an aerobic sample is to be made is essential to avoid errors in iCa
increases suspicion of occult hemorrhage, especially where other
measurement. In cats with clinical signs, 1 mL/kg of 10% calcium
causes of reduced protein are unlikely, but a normal value does not
gluconate can be given IV over ten to 20 minutes with electrocardio-
rule out hemorrhage.
graphic monitoring or constant auscultation. The infusion should be
 The platelet count and morphology should be determined from a
stopped if arrhythmias occur, or repeated if clinical signs persist. SC
 blood film. A simple platelet estimate can be performed by counting
administration of 1 mL/kg l0% calcium gluconate, diluted 1: 1 with
0.9% saline, can be given after IV supplementation or when mild
field. This is repeated ten times and average number/high-power
hypocalcemia is detected in patients at risk with no clinical signs.
aqu a ai on o aa pau si ay s auo Pia
Calcium chloride is irritant and not suitable for SC use. Calcium salts
of platelets x lo?/L." Automated counts should not be relied on
 should not be mixed with bicarbonate-containing solutions (eg. Hart-
in the cat because of the large size of feline platelets and their
mann solution) as precipitation can occur. In patients that develop
propensity
y to clump (Fig. 3-7). Where true thrombocytopenia is
hypocalcemia, oral supplementation with calcium (e.g., calcium car-
identified,(
 consumption, destruction and sequestration should be
bonate 200 mg/cat/day divided and administered with food) and
considered. Reduced production of platelets in isolation is rare.
calcitriol, or a synthetic analog. is commenced and may be required
 Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in cats is usually secondary to
EE
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
A
B
Figure 3-6 Features of erythrocyte regeneration on a blood film. Note
 anisocytosis (cells of unequal size) and a normoblast (arrow). Diff Quik,
x 100, oil immersion.
Figure 3-5 Preparation of a blood film. (A) A tiny drop of freshly
collected EDTA blood is placed on a slide. (B) The angle of the second 
slide is adjusted so that the feathered edge of the film is well within the
limit of the bottom slide (C).
infection, neoplasia or dnug administration (e.g.. griseofulvin) and
can occur concurrently with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
(IMHA).12
 The absolute platelet count is useful to help determine if thrombo-
bleeding occurs with platelet counts less than 50 x l0?/L. A buccal
 mucosal bleeding time can assist in assessing for thrombocytopathies
(Chapter 1). If a disorder of secondary hemostasis is suspected, the
activated coagulation time (ACT) and activated partial thromboplas-
tin time (aPTT) are useful screening tests. Samples for coagulation
 testing are collected into citrate using atraumatic jugular venipuncture
to minimize tissue factor release, which can activate cloting factors
and/or platelets. If prolonged, a coagulation profle, including pro-
thrombin time, aPTT, thrombin time and fbrinogen can be submitted
to characterize the defect (Box 3-4).
Inherited factor deficiencies VIll (hemophilia A). IX (hemophilia
B), X, XI and fbrinogen, either alone or in combination, should be
Figure 3-7 Platelet clumping on a blood film (arrow).
their first manifestation is often excessive bleeding after surgical inter-
this breed prior to surgery. Acquired disorders of secondary hemosta-
vention. Factor Xll deficiency is associated with a prolonged aPTT but
sis result from reduced absorption of vitamin K (hepatobiliary disease,
 no bleeding tendency. Individual factor assays are required to diag-
 gastrointestinal disease), reduced factor synthesis (hepatic disease)
nose these problems. A hereditary, vitamin K-responsive coagulopathy
and loss or consumption of factors (hemorrhage, hypoproteinemia.
Occurs in Devon Rex cats and an ACT or aPTT should be evaluated in
 disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC]).35
34
Postoperative monitoring and management of complications
Chapter
3
Primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is less
common in the cat than the dog. In the cat, IMHA can occur secondary
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
to infection, neoplasia, inflammatory disease and certain drugs.
COAGULATION
including methimazole. Serology for FeLV and FIV PCR and PCR for
Occult Mycoplasma haemofelis may be indicated. A slide (in saline)
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) occurs when a predis-
agglutination test can be performed in-house (Fig. 3-8) and a direct
Coombs test (at 4°C and 37°C) should be requested.15
posing condition triggers widespread activation of the coagulation
and fbrinolytic systems concurrently. Inhibitors of these systems are
consumed and microthrombus formation causes end organ damage.
 Box 3-4 Coagulation testing
Hemorrhage is less common in DIC in cats [5-15% of cases) than in
dogs (26%). DIC in the cat has been associated with neoplasia, pan-
Activated coagulation time (ACT)
creatitis and infection, with or without sepsis, and it carries a poor
Useful for rapid in-house evaluation of the intrinsic and common
prognosis, with only 7% of cats surviving in one study (16). Diagnosis
pathways of coagulation. Reference ranges in cats vary depending on
requires three or more of the following coagulation abnormalities;
the type of activator used:
prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or aPTT, elevated fbrin degrada-
( ' s  )     
tion products (FDP), thrombocytopenia, low fibrinogen concentra-
contains inert siliceous earth to activate factor Xll from 2 mL
'uopuos suisodsipaid e jo uoesyua! pue uon
blood sample. Reference range 55 to 185 seconds.25
A better understanding of coagulation abnormalities in the cat
 MAX-ACT tube (Helena Laboratories, Beaumont, TX, USA) containing 
awaits the availability of robust assays validated for use in this species.
 celine, kaolin and glass beads to activate factor Xil from 0.5 mL 
Treatment of the underlying disease should be initiated. The efficacy
sample. Reference range 55 to 85 seconds.26
of heparin to reduce thrombus formation is controversial, even in
human medicine. Heparin should not be used in cats with evidence
Prothrombin time (PT)
udau iam eaou ml yo as aeie au auau go
Identifies abnormalities in the extrinsic pathway (factor Vill) and 
in the cat is unknown and its effect cannot be monitored because
common pathways (fibrinogen, Il, V and X). PT prolongation occurs in
anti-Xa activity assay is not routinely available Unfractionated heparin
congenital and acquired vitamin K deficiency. hepatobiliary disease,
at 200-250 IU/kg SC every six to eight hours, monitored with a daily
specific factor deficiencies and DIC. In acquired vitamin K deficiency.
aaum 'o pooq aoum z papuaonan uaaq sey 'jaued uoeingeo
the short half-life of factor Vll means that PT may be prolonged while
available, component therapy may be indicated where there is hemor-
APTT is normal in early stage deficiency.
rhage (Chapter 5).
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
Identifies abnormalities in the intrinsic (kininogen, prekallekrein, XIl.
X, IX and Vill) and common pathways (fibrinogen, Il, V and X). APTT
prolongation occurs in later-stage vitamin K deficiency, liver disease,
INFECTION
specific factor deficiencies and DIC.
 Note: mild prolongation of the PT or APTT can occur with
Factors which increase the risk for postoperative wound infection in
handling or analyzer error.
small animals include age >8 years, clipping of surgical sites before
Thrombin time (TT)
anesthetic induction, duration of anesthesia >60 minutes, duration of
surgery >90 minutes, use of the anesthetic agent propofol, intra-
uy e oi uaboua hauon on uiguoun aot painban ail aul s! 1
 operative bacterial contamination of the wound (>l0 organisms/g of
dot. TT is inversely proportional to the fibrinogen concentration.
tissue), local wound factors, and use of braided or multiflament
Fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP)
suture material. Selection of therapeutic antimicrobials should be
 Plasmin cleaves fibrin/fibrinogen to yield FDPs. D-Dimers are produced
based on antimicrobial culture and susceptibility testing results.
from fibrin breakdown and their presence demonstrates that
coagulation and fibrinolysis have been activated. Information on
ing the most likely genera of bacteria to be causing the infection in
assays validated for feline samples is limited.
light of the clinical history, known bacterial resistance patterns for the
suspected isolate ability of the antimicrobial agent to penetrate into
[B
xneanou (a) oi anp slla pan jo buidunp pidonsoe (v) aneiuaanp oi pasn ag uen Adosoiu uhn isat uoeuinibe (aues uli aplls s-e aune
formation (arrows) from (C) genuine agglutination.
35
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
ad aie sup iepaea s ap aue o Aiixot pue anssi iaeie a
relative; for example a heart rate of 160 beats/minute is inappropriate
ferred over bacteriostatic agents and only synergistic drug combina-
for a hypotensive hypoperfused animal. In contrast, in the dog tachy-
tions should be used.
cardia, fever and hyperemic mucous membranes are noted, at least in
the initial, hyperdynamic phase of sepsis. Other physical findings in
cats with sepsis include pale mucous membranes, weak pulses, hypo-
tension, hypothermia, diffuse abdominal pain unrelated to peritoni-
 SHOCK
tis) and tachypnea. When assessing perfusion, peripheral sites, such
as the metatarsus, are more useful than femoral pulses because the
Shock is a clinical syndrome that occurs when the circulatory system 
former are lost first Laboratory abnormalities in sepsis include
fails to meet tissue needs. It is characterized by poor perfusion, hypo-
hypoalbuminemia, hypoglycemia, icterus, anemia, thrombocytope-
tension and reduced tissue oxygenation. There are some major differ-
 nia, and neutrophilia with a left shift Infections most often associated
 sad 'd xo a   sias 
with dogs. Cats are often bradycardic and hypothermic, especially
(0l-e pue G-e salu] aseasip leunsauionse on Aiepuosas eiuaiaioeq
with septic shock, and balancing fluid resuscitation against the risk of
fluid overload can be challenging. The major categories of shock are
cardiogenic, hypovolemic and distributive (anaphylactic and septic)
shock. Where shock develops in the postoperative period, septic or
hypovolemic etiologies are most likely.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome,
sepsis and septic shock
Where infection, which is usually bacterial, is accompanied by a sys-
temic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), the patient is said to
be septic. SIRS is the clinical syndrome resulting from a systemic
inflammatory response to an infectious or non-infectious (eg., pan-
creatitis), process. It is distinct from, but can be accompanied by.
 bacteremia. Local inflammation at the site of infection can progress 
to become a systemic process where pro-inflammatory mediators,
such as TNF-α. and IL-6, predominate.1 NF-kB plays a central role in
the progression of inflammation in Gram negative sepsis. SIRS is
associated with cardiovascular dysfunction, increased vascular perme-
 ability, aberrant coagulation and dysfunction of other organs includ-
ing gastrointestinal, renal, hepatic, and respiratory systems. Severe
sepsis can progress to septic shock, characterized by cardiovascular
anss aenapeu a su aaaa panpan 'asu
oxygenation, and organ dysfunction. Even in human medicine, con-
sensus is evolving regarding the exact defnitions of these terms which
reflect, parly, that the pathogenesis of these syndromes is incom-
pletely understood. Since far less is understood about SIRS and septic
Figure 3-9 Dorsoventral thoracic radiograph from a cat with aspiration
e ueun jueod ssal si suouya uy sudae 'sie ui yous
broad grasp of the concepts required to recognize the unique clinical
pneumonia. Changes include loss of aeration of the right middle and left
cranial lung lobes and an air bronchogram (arrow). An absence of
signs of sepsis in the cat and to institute appropriate treatment.
radiographic changes does not rule our pneumonia.
Clinical features of siRs and sepsis in cats
Based on a study of 29 cats with sepsis, confirmed at necropsy, it has
been proposed that a clinical diagnosis of SIRS can be made when
cats fulfill three of the four objective criteria listed in Box 3-5.20 Con-
current evidence of infection is required to make a diagnosis of sepsis.
The cat is unusual in that bradycardia, a response that seems detri
mental in a poorly perfused animal, is common in SIRS and septic
shock. Bradycardia occurs independently of hypothermia and may be
Box 3-5 Objective criteria for SIRS
Abnormal values are indicative of SIRs if cats have at least three
abnormal par ameters:19
(o001> 10 5801<) 08 /8> 10 68< :a1n1eyadwan 1e12a8
Heart rate: >225 bpm or <140 bpm
Figure 3-10 In-house cytology of a bacterial peritoneal effusion showing
 Respiratory rate: >40 breaths/minute
intracellular bacteria (arrows). Cytology is often diagnostic for septic
White cell count: >19.5 × 109 /L, or <5 × 109 /L, or bands >5%
effusions and should be performed while fluid analysis and culture are
pending.
9E
Postoperative monitoring and management of complications
Chapter
3
 Physical abnormalities in cats with peritonitis can be subtle; pain is
 often not a feature and an abdominal fluid wave can be difficult to
appreciate in cats. Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasonogra-
phy are indicated where sepsis is suspected. Bacterial infection should
be confirmed by culture of appropriate samples, such as blood, urine,
pleural, peritoneal, or bronchoalveolar fluid.
Management considerations for
the septic cat
Management can be considered in two parts: treating the infection
and hemodynamic stabilization. Broad-spectrum, parenteral, prefer-
ably IV, bactericidal antibiotics should be used until the results of
sensitivity testing are available to guide the choice of a reduced spec-
trum agent. Escherichia coli was the most common bacterial isolate in
12 septic cats, with beta-hemolytic Streptococcus spp and Pseudomonas
spp also being detected.20 However, in feline pyothorax specifcally, E.
coli is an uncommon isolate. Empirical therapy using penicillin G or
an aminopenicillin, either alone, or in combination with metronida-
zole, or monotherapy with a potentiated penicillin, eg., amoxicillin-
clavulanic acid or ticarcillin-clavulanic acid, is recommended for
dement, may be indicated.
Fluid resuscitation should be initiated to address hypotension and
poor perfusion. A bolus of 10-20 mL/kg of warmed, isotonic crystal-
loid can be given IV over ten to 20 minutes. This dose can be repeated,
with the total dose not exceeding 50-60 mL/kg. Crystalloids distrib-
ute to all fluid compartments rapidly. Pulmonary edema and pleural
effusion can result from relative fluid excess in the face of cardiovas-
cular compromise, increased vascular permeability, and reduced
plasma oncotic pressure. If perfusion does not improve after one to
Figure 3-11 Active warming using a forced air temperature
three crystalloid boluses, then one or two boluses of 2-3 mL/kg of
management unit (Bair Hugger)
colloid, e.g., hetastarch (hydroxyethyl starch, HES), can be given IV
over 15-20 minutes. Warming can be initiated after the first bolus of
fluids. Active warming without fluid replacement can cause peripheral
vasodilation, further reducing effective circulating volume and making
 perfusion worse. Options include forced air temperature management
units (Fig. 3-1l), and circulating water blankets. Microwaveable heat
pads and hot water bottles should be avoided as they can cause burns
(Fig. 3-12). Also hot water bottles can promote cooling, as their tem-
perature drops below that of the patient.
Monitoring of an individual's response guides ongoing treatment.
Improved tissue oxygenation and cardiovascular function can be
detected by serial monitoring of peripheral pulse quality, SBP, heart
rate, rectal temperature, capillary refill time mentation, and CVP
where available. A continuous rectal temperature probe causes
minimal disturbance to the patient. Serial lactate readings will fall as
perfusion improves. Urine output should be closely monitored in a
closed collection system or by weighing absorbent pads. Where SBP
remains below 90 mmHg despite fluid resuscitation,inotropic support
can be provided with a constant rate infusion (CRl) of dobutamine
(1-5 μg/kg/minute). Cats being treated with dobutamine for more
than 24 hours can develop seizures that cease on withdrawal of the
Figure 3-12 Thermal burns resulting from use of a microwave heat pad
 medication. A dopamine CRI, (5 μg/kg/minute) has positive inotropic
in a recumbent cat with poor mobility.
and chronotropic effects. At >10 μg/kg/minute, dopamine promotes
vasoconstriction which may be counterproductive. Other vasopressors
solution). If there is marked, sustained hyperglycemia, soluble insulin
can be tried sequentially (noradrenaline CRI 0.1-3 μg/kg/minute;
should be considered. Nutritional needs can be met with enteral or
adrenaline 0.1-2 μg/kg/minute; vasopressin 0.5-2 mU/kg/minute).2
total parenteral nutritional support. Combined with gastrointestinal
Other treatments include supplemental oxygen delivered by nasal
-ueu day lm su auipouey pue alozeidauo se yons 'suepaioid
catheter to improve tissue oxygenation. Hypoalbuminemia can affect
tain gastrointestinal integrity, preventing bacterial translocation.
 plasma oncotic pressure, coagulation parameters, and wound healing.
Analgesia requirements should be considered, although monitoring
Plasma therapy, or colloid support, may be required. Hypoglycemia
 analgesic effectiveness in a critical patient can be diffcult. In anemic
should be treated with an IV glucose bolus (l mL/kg of a 20%
 patients or those with abnormal coagulation parameters, whole blood
LE
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
transfusion may be indicated (Chapter 5). The plan should address
Treatment involves restoring circulating volume and improving per-
management of wounds, urine and feces elimination, turning every
fusion, as above. Where hemorrhage is the cause, then rapid infusion
two hours if sternal positioning cannot be maintained and intermit-
of whole blood is ideal.
tent positive stimulation, such as grooming, while maximizing oppor-
Cardiogenic shock occurs when the cardiac output is not main-
tunities for rest. Low-dose corticosteroid therapy for the management
tained because of systolic or diastolic dysfunction or obstruction (e.g.-
of critical illness-related corticosteroid insuffciency is controversial.23
 aortic thromboembolism). The spectrum of cardiac diseases affecting
Where other treatments have failed, 0.5 mg/kg prednisolone sodium
cats is different to that seen in dogs. In cats, systolic dysfunction is less
ae saeiau oas ou ieay paipisu aq u al euns
common and pericardial effusion is rare and does not typically cause
 pt'suouo si siopau Aoeuuyut io suixonopua Su
tamponade In addition to poor perfusion, there may be clinical signs
referable to a cardiac problem such as an arrhythmia, murmur, gallop
Other types of shock
Or pulse deficits, and/or to congestive heart failure (e.g., pulmonary
edema, pleural effusion). It can sometimes be diffcult to know
Hypovolemic shock follows major hemorrhage. gastrointestinal
e si ie pasnyiad Aod e u (enpieie io) epiepeq iauaum 
losses, or third space losses. Clinical signs are referable to poor per-
cause or consequence of shock. Echocardiography is the most useful
fusion and tachycardia or bradycardia may be present. The diagnosis
diagnostic tool here Treatment will depend on the underlying
an usually be made on the basis of history and clinical fndings.
 problem, but fluids are contraindicated in cardiogenic shock.
REFERENCES
1. Wellman M, Dibartola S, Kohn C. Applied
10.
Chew Dl, Nagode LA: Treatment of 
19.
 DeClue AE, Williams Kl, Sharp C, et al.
physiology of body fluid in dogs and cats.
hypoparathyroidism. In: Bonagura JD,
Systemic response to low-dose endotoxin
In: Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base
editor Kirk's current veterinary therapy:
infusion in cats. Vet Immunol
disorders in small animal practice. 3rd ed.
 Small animal practice Xlll. Philadelphia:
Immunopathol 2009;132:167-74.
 St. Louis, Mo: Saunders Elsevier; 2006.
WB Saunders Co; 2000. p. 340-5.
20.
 Brady CA, Otto CM, Van Winkle TJ.
p. 3-26.
11.
 Severine T, Cripps Pl, Mackin AJ.
King LG. Severe sepsis in cats: 29 cases
2.
Paige CF, Abbott JA, Elvinger F, Pyle RL.
Estimation of platelet counts on feline
(1986-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Prevalence of cardiomyopathy in
blood smears, Vet Clin Pathol 1999;28:
2000;217:531-5.
apparently healthy cats. J Am Vet Med
42-5.
21.
 Barrs VR, Beatty JA. Feline pyothorax
Assoc 2009;234:1398-403.
12.
Wondratschek C, Weingart C, Kohn B.
- new insights into an old problem:
3.
Kudnig ST, Mama K. Guidelines for
Primary immune-mediated
Part ll. Treatment recommendations 
perioperative fluid therapy. Compend
thrombocytopenia in cats. J Am Anim
and prophylaxis. The Vet J 2009;179:
Contin Educ Vet 2003;25:102-11.
Hosp Assoc 2010;46:12-19.
171-8.
Ishihara H, Ishida K, Oyama T, et al.
13.
 Baldwin C), Cowell RL. Inherited
22.
Costello M. Shock. In: Drobatz KJ.
Effects of general anaesthesia and surgery
coagulopathies. In: August JR, editor.
Costello M, editors. Feline emergency and
on renal function and plasma ADH levels.
Consultations in feline internal medicine.
citical care medicine. 2010. p. 23-9.
Can Anaesth Soc J 1978;25:312-18.
vol. 3. 1997. p. 488-98.
23.
Marik PE, Pastores SM, Annane D, et al.
 5. Kruegener GH, Kerin MJ, MacFie J.
14. Gookin JL, Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL,
Recommendations for the diagnosis
Post-operative fluid therapy-put not thy
et al. Factor X deficiency in a cat. J Am Vet
 and management of corticosteroid
faith in dextrose saline: discussion paper.
Med Assoc 1997;211:576-9.
insufficiency in critically ill adult
IR Soc Med 1991;84:611-12.
15.
Tasker S, Murray JK, Knowles TG, Day MJ.
patients: consensus statements from an
6. Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S. Primary
Coombs', haemoplasma and retrovirus
international task force by the American
hyperaldosteronism in the cat: a series
testing in feline anemia. J Small Anim
College of Critical Care Medicine. Crit
of 13 cases. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:
Pract 2010;51:192-9.
Care Med 2008;36:1937-49.
173-82.
16.
 Estrin MA, Wehausen CE, Jessen CR,
24.
Sharp CR, DeClue AE, Haak CE, et al.
7.
Martin LG, Veatch AE. Electrolyte
Lee JA. Disseminated intravascular 
Evaluation of the anti-endotoxin effects
disorders. In: Drobatz K], Costello M,
coagulation in cats. J Vet Intern Med
 of polymyxin B in a feline model of 
editors. Feline emergency and critical care
endotoxemia. I Feline Med Surg
2006;20:1334-9.
medicine. 2010. p. 439-65.
17.
 Estrin MA, Spangler EA. Disseminated
2010;12:278-85.
 Schenck P, Chew D, Behrend E. Updates 
intravascular coagulation. In: August JR,
25.
 Bay ID, Scott MA, Hans JE. Reference 
on hypercalcemic disorders. In: August IR,
editor. Consultations in feline internal
values for activated coagulation time in
editor Consultations in feline internal
medicine. Chapter 62, Volume G. Elsevier
cats. Am I Vet Res 2000;G1:750-3.
medicine, vol. 5. St Louis: Saunders; 2006.
Saunders; 2010. p. 639-51.
26.
 See AM, Swindells KL Sharman Ml, et al.
p. 157-68.
18.
 Boothe DM. Principles of antimicrobial
Activated coagulation times in normal
9.
Savary KC, Price GS, Vaden SL.
therapy Vet Clin Small Anim 2006;36:
cats and dogs using MAX-ACTTM tubes.
Hypercalcemia in cats: A retrospective
1003-47.
Aust Vet J 2009;87:292-5.
study of 71 cases [1991-1997). J Vet 
Intern Med 2000;14:184-9.
8E
napter
Postoperative nursing care
S. Rudd, J.L. Demetriou, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Nursing care is defined by the American Association of Feline
Emergency anesthesia equipment
Medicine [AAFM) and the International Society of Feline Medicine
(ISFM) as any interaction between the cat and the veterinary team
It may be necessary or advisable to continue to administer oxygen to
the postoperative cat and re-intubation is occasionally required in a
linic, or between the cat and its owner at home, that promotes well-
cat that is having severe breathing diffculties or in onethat undergoes
ness or recovery from illness or injury and addresses the patient's
cardiac arrest and requires resuscitation. It is therefore essential that
physical and emotional well-being.' Nursing care also helps the sick 
there is easy access to anesthetic equipment in the recovery area.
or convalescing cat engage in activities that it would be unable to
 An anesthetic machine with an Ayres T-piece should be readily
perform without help. To provide optimal support to a sick, injured
accessible. A range of different-sized face masks should also be avail-
Or recovering cat, the art of nursing care is as important as the medical
able. Clear Perspex masks are usually tolerated better by cats than
science.
opaque ones such as black nubber ones. Many cats, however, will not
 The postoperative care of a cat should not be neglected; attention 
tolerate a mask and an oxygen tent may be preferred. Oxygen tents
are available commercially or they can be made by covering the front
to this aspect of the cat's treatment can make a big difference to the
nature of the recovery and well-being of the patient. In some cases
of a kennel with a polymethyl methacrylate sheet (e.g., Perspex) or
the provision and quality of postoperative care can mean the differ-
 plastic such as food wrap.
ence between a successful and unsuccessful outcome This chapter
 In the event of the cat requiring re-intubation, laryngoscope blades
will focus on the provision of nursing care for the postoperative
 of a suitable small size and a range of endotracheal tubes (both cuffed
period up until and including discharge of the recovering cat to
and uncuffed) are required. A cuffed endotracheal tube is essential for
the owner (for other aspects of postoperative management and moni-
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPpV). Even when intubat-
toring see Chapter 3). Short sections are included on the pertinent
Ol padde aq ls pinous sausaue leool uagiaa ue ul ie e bu
points on provision of nursing care of cats, which have undergone
the larynx to avoid laryngospasm. In anticipation of a difficult intuba-
skin and adnexal surgery, abdominal surgery, thoracic surgery, and
tion, a 6FG dog urinary catheter should be included in the emergency
head surgery.
box. This can either be used as a guide for insertion of the endotra-
cheal tube or used alone to intubate the cat if it is not possible to
insert anything larger in diameter. A 3.5 mm blue Portex tube connec-
tor can be placed on the end to allow connection to an anesthetic
circuit so oxygen can be given as a temporary measure until the airway
RECOVERY FROM ANESTHESIA
is established further. For resuscitation, when oxygen and an Ayres
T-piece are not available, an Ambu bag can be used. Pediatric or
The recovery period can be the most critical stage of anesthesia for
neonatal Ambu bags (small sizes suitable for cats) can be connected
      sa   
to oxygen and as they are self-flling and have no valve to turn, they
895 anesthetics) of healthy cats die of an anesthetic-related death,
may even be more advantageous than an Ayres T-piece in an
paodan kuaan uaaq seu se puanay se aiml ueu arou si uiu
emergency.
in dogs (0.05% or 1 in 1849). Most of these deaths occur in the post-
Obstruction of the airway due to fluid or mucus is a common cause
operative period.2 Greater attention to patient monitoring during
of acute hypoxia during the recovery phase. If obstruction is suspected
and after anesthesia could reduce perioperative complications in
the airway should be carefully aspirated. A suction device is an essen-
cats;2 the recovery area should be appropriately equipped and have
tial piece of equipment for the ICU. In cases where an airway cannot
trained personnel monitoring recovery of patients after anesthesia
be established, due to an obstruction for example, an emergency
and surgery.
a (it de) pad aq on pau u An
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00004-4
6E
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
a large gauge needle can be inserted directly into the trachea to allow
 immediate oxygenation until a tracheotomy can be performed.
Table 4-1 Essential recommended items for a feline
emergency box
Emergency box
Cat crash kit stock contents
A fully stocked emergency box should be kept in the recovery area.
This should be checked weekly and replenished after every use. It is
s6na
10 × Adrenaline 1: 1000 vials (2 × 1 mL drawn up
important to ensure all members of staff know where the emergency
ready for use)
10 ×Atropine vials (2 × 1 mL drawn up ready for use)
box is kept and that it is kept within easy acces. The contents of the
box should be set out clearly and the box should not be overcrowded 
 5 × Terbutaline vials
with drugs and equipment, so that anyone using it can locate what
3 × Lidocaine 2% vials
they need quickly and effciently. To avoid overloading the general
3 × Lidocaine 1% vials
emergency box, it can be helpful to have smaller kits for specific pro-
2 × Potassium chloride 1.5 g in 10 mL vials
1 × bottle Dopram
cedures made up ready for use, for example for thoracocentesis
1 × bottle Propofol
(Chapter 41) or tracheotomy (Chapter 46). To minimize preparation
time, commonly used emergency drugs eg., adrenaline (epinephrine)
1 × bottle local anesthetic spray
and atropine, can be kept drawn up in syringes ready for immediate
Consumables
10 × 1 mL, 2 mL, 5 mL, 10 mL and 20 mL syringes
use. However, this is not appropriate for all emergency drugs, as not
10 × 25G, 23G and 21G × %" needles
all drugs contain preservatives and so will lose effectiveness once the
4 × 21G × 1.5" needles
vial is opened. It is therefore important that expiry dates are checked 
5 × 22G and 24G IV catheters
and adhered to. Having some syringes with suitable sized needles
Tape - Durapore (3M)
already attached in the emergency box can save time when drawing
4 × T-Ports
up drugs. An easy-to-follow emergency 'drugs and dosage' chart is also
4 × bungs
invaluable to ensure there is minimal delay in administering the
2 × 3-way taps
 correct drug and dose in an emergency situation.
1 × 500 mL Hartmanns
1 × extension set
 Essential recommended items for a feline emergency box are listed
1 × giving set
(Table 4-1).
1 × white open weave (Wow) bandage
1 × Soffban (Smith and Nephew)
Personnel
1 × Co-flex (Andover Healthcare Group)
Gauze swabs
 As well as ensuring all emergency equipment is available, it is equally
 Surgical spirit 
important to make sure that all the staff involved in postoperative care
2 × size 11 scalpel blades
are aware of what action to take in an emergency situation. Regular
1 × 6FG dog urinary catheter
staff refreshment training should be scheduled to ensure a smooth,
fast and effective operation for times of real emergency.
Other
Laryngoscope
Endotracheal tubes - size 3, 3.5. 4, 4.5. 5. 5.5
 cuffed and uncuffed 
1 × cuff inflator
PRINCIPLES OF POSTOPERATIVE
1 × 3.5 mm endotracheal tube connector
NURSING CARE
Stethoscope
Ambu bag
 Quick reference drug dosage chart
 Thorough and attentive patient assessment and monitoring with effec-
tive communication of the findings can facilitate excellent patient care
 and an optimal recovery (Fig. 4-1). After any surgery the cat should 
Box 4-1 Basic parameters to measure or monitor
be assessed for certain signs, parameters, behavior and functions
postoperatively in the feline surgical patient
(Box 4-1), the relevance and importance of each being dependent on
the surgery performed.
Vital signs: temperature, pulse, respiration and mucous membranes
Pain
Basic parameters
Appetite and hydration
Weight
'asnd 'aeiauan sie a aeiis aeiadoisod aeiai aun ul
 Urination/defecation 
mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, and respiration should
 be monitored at least hourly, reducing down gradually to every four
Infection 
hours and then twice daily if the patient is stable Patients with abnor-
Movement/well-being
mal parameters or unstable patients will need to be monitored more
frequently or constantly when critically ill or after extensive surgery.
A cat's vital signs should be interpreted in conjunction with envi-
it is important that the cat's environment should be evaluated to
ronmental factors and the temperament of the individual cat. The
determine, for example, whether the proximity of a dog or another
presence of pain can result in elevations in pulse and temperature.
cat is causing these elevations.
 The significance of a high pulse count and respiratory rate should be
Once the cat has recovered from anesthesia, the frequency of moni-
evaluated along with the cat's other parameters (temperature, pulse
toring and which vital signs are important to monitor will depend on
quality, mucous membrane color, capillary refll time, respiratory
the surgery that has been performed, how well the cat recovered from
 pattern etc.), as well as assessing ifthe cat is stressed or fearful (Chapter
the procedure, how it is progressing clinically and how tolerant the
7). Stress and fear will give falsely high pulse and respiration rates so
 patient is (Chapter 7).
40
 Postoperative nursing care
Chapter
4
Box 4-2 Behavioral and physical signs that may be
exhibited in painful and fearful cats
 Quiet and withdrawn
Tense and hunched posture - body low to the ground, limbs tightly
kept towards the body. often pressed up against the back of the
kennel or in their litter tray
An unwillingness to interact with people 
 Eyelids pointing down (like the cat is frowning)
 Dilated pupils
 Ear position starting to turn then flatten
Whiskers flattening then coming forward immediately before 
aggression
 Trembling
Tachypnea 
 Hypersalivation
Hissing
Vocalizing
Aggression
Tachycardia
Anorexia
Reduced urine and fecal output
 Reduced/no self-grooming
Cats that have undergone colonic, rectal, perineal, or urethral
surgery should not have their rectal temperature recorded in the first
B
stages of postoperative recovery unless absolutely necessary. Skin and
ear thermometers and identichips with thermal indicators have been
Figure 4-1 Heat loss should be minimized during anesthesia. (A) The cat 
shown to be variable in their accuracy, but these methods may still be
is on a heat pad in the operating theatre. (B) This cat is being kept warm
useful in cats who do not need such accurate temperature recording
in the radiology room by use of bubble wrap and a towel.
 Or where rectal thermometers are not advised or not tolerated.
Temperature
Pain recognition
A low body temperature may both increase the chance of postopera-
The assessment of pain is an essential skill that should be acquired
tive infection through immune function suppression and delay recov-
 by all personnel involved with the postoperative recovery of cats.
ery from anesthesia. Most postoperative cats will be hypothermic to
Recognition of pain in cats is challenging as the signs are often more
a degree and therefore it is of utmost importance to monitor the
subtle than in dogs. Cats show mainly postural signs, without
temperature during the recovery phase and quickly implement
vocalization.
methods of restoring normothermia before further temperature reduc-
 To make things even more diffcult, many of the signs of pain that
tions occur. To prevent or minimize postoperative hypothermia in the
cats show are also displayed when they are fearful and so it can be
recovery room provision should be made first to keep cats warm while
very challenging to differentiate between the two (Box 4-2). An initial
under anesthesia (Fig. 4-1). Cats in the recovery area can then be
-sip e uony ases sl! ui ie au guaasqo Aq ugaq Pinous suaussasse
warmed by warm air blankets (Bair Hugers), a warming mat, bubble
pue aisuodsan hale aq lm ay uied pue Addey ane ieu se a
wrap, blankets, warm gloves, warm bean or rice bags.
move freely around the cage with no signs of distres. Cats that are in
While being warmed the cat's temperature should be monitored
 pain will be quiet and withdrawn and may well be hunched up at the
regularly to avoid hyperthermia. In addition to excessive warming.
back of their cage They willnot usually move around freely or respond
when called or spoken to. The environment should also be taken into
opioid administration, including hydromorphone, morphine, butor-
consideration; if the cat is in a ward with barking dogs or if the cat
has a nervous disposition it may display similar signs to that of a cat
J tsuu-as pue ([.7'toi] . I'ot>) aeaou oi Piu Aens
in pain. After the initial assessment of observing the patient from a
the cat is hyperthermic due to overheating, infection or opioid admin-
distance has been completed, the cage door can then be opened. The
istration and this is of concern, the cat should be judiciously cooled
cat can be talked to and gently stroked. Pain-free cats tend to respond
by removing all warming aids in the frst instance If hyperthermia still
well to this interaction. Some cats will get up and approach the asses-
sor and even nervous cats will sometimes raise their hind quarters
such as the use of fans, or the application of surgical spirit to the foot
when being tickled at the base of their tail. Very fearful cats may growl
pads in combination with continued temperature monitoring.
 or show aggression and not allow any physical contact, but this behav-
Reversal of the opioid can be achieved by administering naloxone, but
ior is not necessarily related to pain. The area peripheral to but in
this will also remove the analgesic effect of the drug, so alternative
close vicinity to the surgical site, should then be gently palpated. In
pain therapy will be required.
 any assessment of pain mere observation is insuffcient and interactive
41
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
means such as palpation must also be used.7 Changes in wound sen-
 Simple descriptive (SDS) and numerical rating scales (NRS) and
sitivity have correlated well with visual analog pain scores in cats.
visual analog scales (VAS) have all been used in cats to quantify
suggesting that palpation, which is a simple clinically applicabletech-
Uid ssasse oi mou yim pauauo uaaq seu ypieasau juaad or'uied
nique, is a valuable tool and should be incorporated into an overall
more accurately in cats, including assessing posture and facial expres-
assessment protocol.? A painful cat will become tense, look uncom-
sions (Fig. 4-3). Colorado State University has a feline acute pain
fortable and may flinch or vocalize during palpation. Some cats will
scale for use in cats which encompasses psychological and behavioral
ed uus ae suisasl ud c asis uaee o
elements, response to wound palpation and body tension and this
tion should be stopped immediately until more analgesia has been
can be downloaded (Fig. 4-4).1
administered.
Addey suaq sies yiim paieosse semie aq oi zunou si sund
Movement and well-being
but in some circumstances cats that are really sick will still purr. Most
 commonly, however, cats that are in pain will not purr and if stroked
As son as it is safeto do so after surgery the cat should be encouraged
 they may squint or finch.
syauaq ieuanod aul pue paieipui uayo si adeiaunoisaud 'aou cn
 Isolated physiological measures such as heart rate, respiratory rate,
include an increase in blood flow to the surgical site and an improve.
aeiadosod jo sioiepui iood Alliauas aie aimeiadual leai pue
ment of muscle tone, which in turn should enable and encourage
mq paiouat aq iou pinous siaaueied asaun aaamoh t's'sieo ui uid
movement In cases of nerve damage, physiotherapy is very useful in
[yuied aos ui asnenaq suoss uied yiim uouniuo u paoiuo
nerve stimulation, encouraging neural regeneration and the return of
cats the respiratory rate, pulse and temperature may increase; meas-
sensation
urements should be made every four to 12 hours, the frequency being
The benefit and need for physiotherapy will depend on the type of
dependent on the patient's temperament type of surgery, recovery and
surgery the cat has undergone and whether it has any pre-existing con-
progress.
ditions such as osteoarthritis which may slow down recovery. for
 Reducing fear in hospitalized cats will help to eliminate fear behav-
example after amputation. A full description of rehabilitation of the
ior and therefore make pain assessment more accurate as both share
 cat and the modalities that can be used is given in Chapter 2l of Feline
common features. There should be an understanding of the signs of
fear behavior (Box 4-2). Additionally, there should be a general expec-
manipulation should be initially performed over a short time period
Aioisty s,ie aul uo gupuadap paneiue uied jo aaiap aul uo uoe
with a gradual increase in duration over time, depending partly on how
and on what surgical procedure has been performed. It should be
well the cat is tolerating the treatment and the response to the therapy.
assumed, however, that all cats that have undergone any type of
 It is vital that the cat has sufficient analgesia when starting physiother-
surgery need some form of analgesia so it is important that this aspect
apy because initially manipulation can be painful and inadequate
is not overlooked, particularly in fearful cats. If it is uncertain whether
 analgesia could cause the cat to develop aversion to future treatments.
a cat is painful it is better to provide some analgesia and then reassess
Cats that are hospitalized will not be able to carry out normal feline
the patient once that has had a chance to take effect rather than
behavior. An important aspect that is often overlooked is that they
potentially leave a painful cat with no or inappropriate analgesia.
will be unable to move around freely as they would do at home, which
Excitement can occur after opioid administration in some cats and it
could cause adverse physical effects such as muscle atrophy, gut stasis
is important to appreciate the signs of this, which include dilated
and also may result in a depressed mental state. In particular, a cat
 pupils (Fig. 4-2)and dysphoria, so this is not misinterpreted as pain.
that has to wear a rigid Elizabethan collar will be unable to groom
and sometimes have difficulty in eating and drinking. All cats should
be given a 'time out' period each day, whether this is by removing the
Elizabethan collar to allow grooming, letting the cat out of the cage
so it can stretch (Fig. 4-5) or taking it out in a carrier to allow the cat
to get some fresh air. This will not only provide great stimulation but
may aid in a quicker recovery. All time out periods should be observed,
especially when a surgical site is being left without protection of an
Elizabethan collar Soft Elizabethan collars are better suited for cats as
they can adopt normal sleeping positions and reach their food and
water bowls more easily (Fig. 4-6). However, these collars are not
suitable for all cats as some may be able to reach around the collar to
the surgical site.
NURSING CARE AFTER SKIN AND
ADNEXAL SURGERY
Cats that have had large tumor excisions, wound closure, and skin
grafts will often be painful after surgery. This should be anticipated
 early so the cat is given pre-emptive analgesial3 and a plan should be
in place, with drug doses and frequency of administration, in case
there is additional unexpected pain and excitement on recovery.
Recovery excitement could result in premature bandage removal or
wound breakdown if this is not anticipated and dealt with. Analgesic
Figure 4-2 This cat has widely dilated pupils as a side effect of opioid
considerations would generally be multimodal and include local
administration. Methadone was stopped and the cat given the partial
blocks, constant rate infusions, and wound infusion catheters (see
agonist buprenorphine and the side effects abated.
Chapters 2 and 11).
42
Postoperative nursing care
Chapter
4
B
C
D
E
Figure 4-3 Cats exhibiting different degrees of pain, scored according to the Colorado State University Acute Pain Score.11 (A) This cat is comfortable
and interested in its surroundings and was not bothered by wound palpation (pain score =O). (B) This cat is slightly unsettled in the hospital and less
saa pue ui paapnt liet 'dn pauno shel 'iainb s! ien sul () (l = aons ured) uoisiu! jo uoedled on uoean ou yo pu 'shuipunouns sii ui paisaiaul
e sul (a) (z = aos ured) abe s punoe aow oi suenjan s! ieun ien aul leau uaas ag uen poot paupnoun - aladde paseainap pasop Aeed
S! len sul (a) (e = ahons uled) aa pasoidoud st! punoue uojieded oi papuodsan pue anow on juepnjan Auaa sem ll papuaneun uaum bulmoA sem
(t = ahons uied) dn asuat oi sem uoedied oi asuodsa, s,en aul shupunouns st! jo aaisuodsaun pue juaguna,
Bandages and dressings
If the wound is infected it will be painful, swollen, hot and it may
Cats can be very adept and determined to remove even the most
ayl woy uayel aq Pinoys aidues e pue uaas aieqosip Aue jo las
carefully placed bandage. It is therefore important that the cat is
wound (after flushing with sterile isotonic saline solution), which can
aqeoyuo sueuan li sunsua Aaaoai uo pasaiadns Aaenbape
then be sent for Gram stain and culture to identify the organism(s)
(Fig. 4-7) and relaxed and that the cat is not given the opportunity to
responsible and determine the appropriate antibiotic sensitivity (see
interfere with external coaptation. Bandages should be regularly mon-
Chapter 18).
itored to ensure that they are not too tight and that they remain dry.
If there is strike through of wound discharge or the dressing becomes
soiled or wet, then the dressing should be removed and replaced as
Drains
necessary. If the cat seems unduly distressed, is biting or scratching at
 Open and closed suction drains may be placed after tumor resections,
the bandage and seems determined to remove it then the necessity for 
wound or abscess debridement or in other instances of skin and
the bandage should be reassessed as there may be a better option than
adnexal surgery where the surgeon anticipates the formation of excess
bandaging that is equally effective and more comfortable for the cat.
fluid postoperatively. The management of these drains is discussed in
It is important to differentiate between a cat that is in pain and a cat
that is determined to remove its bandage. Bandages alone cause stress.
Chapter ll.
a 200% increase in urine cortisol was recorded in a study on onchyec-
aepueq aul uaui pios io uams ieadde shaip auil pt'sies ui Auon
should be removed immediately and replaced as necessary (Fig. 4-8).
NURSING CARE AFTER THORACIC SURGERY
It is not an uncommon occurrence for a bandage that is too tight
to rapidly lead to ischemia of the distal limb (which effectively acts
Cats that have undergone thoracic surgery (see Chapters 41 to 48) will
aassuaiui gueissanau pue saios annssaid gusnes (ianiunnn e se
need very close monitoring during the recovery and in the early post-
and often prolonged wound management (Fig. 4-9) or in the worst
Operative stage. Basic parameters (temperature pulse, respiration)
instance if the damage is severe, amputation.15
should be monitored regularly initially, with particular attention to
the cat's respiratory rate, pattern, SpO2 levels and pain. After extuba-
tion the cat should be placed in an oxygen enriched environmentsuch
Incisions and wounds
as an oxygen tent, or in an incubator with piped oxygen if the cat is
Wounds and incisions should be inspected twice a day unless covered
also hypothermic The cat will initially need constant monitoring after
with a dressing or bandage. The wound should be assessed firstly
thoracic surgery. The basic considerations for postoperative nursing
visually and then, if appropriate, gently palpated with gloved hands.
care of cats after thoracic surgery are listed in Box 4-3.
43
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
tate
Liniversity
 Colorado State University
Veterinary Medical Center
Feline Acute Pain Scale
Pain
Score
Example
Psychological & Behavioral
Response to Palpation
Body Tension
No
Score
 Animal is sleeping and cannot be evaluated
  Content and quiet when unattended 
J Not bothered by palpation of 
 Comfortable when resting
 Minimal 
wound or surgery site, or to 
 O Interested in or curious about surroundings
 palpation elsewhere 
 Signs are often subtle and not easily detected
 in the hospital setting; more likely to be 
detected by the owner(s) at home
 Earliest signs at home may be withdrawal from
 May or may not react to 
surroundings or change in normal routine
 palpation of wound or surgery 
Mild 
 In the hospital, may be content or slightly 
site
unsettled
 Less interested in surroundings but willok 
around to see what is going on
U Decreased responsiveness, seeks solitude 
O Quiet, loss of brightness in eyes
 Lays curled up or sits tucked up (allfour feet
 Responds aggressively or 
under body, shoulders hunched, head held
tries to escape if painful area is
Mild to Moderate
slightly lower than shoulders, tail curled tightly
palpated or approached 
around body with eyes partially or mostly closed
  Tolerates attention, may even 
Reassess
 Hair coat appears rough or fluffed up
perk up when petted as long as 
analgesic plan
Jo inyuied s! feut eaje ue woojb Aanisuanui AeN 0
 painful area is avoided 
irritating
  Decreased appetite, not interested in food 
 Growls or hisses at non-
painful palpation (may be
 Constantly yowling, growling, or hissing when 
experiencing allodynia, wind-up,
Moderate
unattendéd 
or fearful that pain could be
3
 May bite or chew at wound, but unlikely to move
made worse)
Reassess
if left aloné
 Reacts aggressively to
analgesic plan
palpation, adamantly pulls
away to avoid any contact
Moderate to
 Prostrate
Séveré
 Potentially unresponsive to or unaware of
 May not respond to palpation
May be rigid to
 surroundings, dificult to distract from pain 
 May be rigid to avoid painful
 avoid painful
 Receptive to care (éeven mean or wild cats will be
movement 
 movement 
more tolerant of contacty
Reassess
analgesic plan
O Tender to palpation
RIGHT
XWarm
Ténsé
Comments
@2006/PW Hellyer, SR Uhrig, NG Robinson 
44
 Postoperative nursing care
Chapter
4
Management of the thoracic drain
thoracic surgical incision, to reduce the chance of iatrogenic infection.
If either wound begins to look inflamed or is producing any purulent
 Chest drains are managed by placing a small dry adhesive dressing at
discharge the site should be swabbed and sent for culture and the cat
-au a ais uasul a aid on xe a o ais Aua a
 monitored carefully for development of sepsis (see Chapter 2). For
tion and to absorb any serous discharge which may be produced in
information on wounds and dressing materials see Chapter 18. After
the first 24-48 hours (Fig. 4-10). To prevent patient interference and
drain removal the stoma is covered with a small sterile dressing and
to support the weight of the chest drain an elasticated string vest
the site is left to heal by secondary intention.
(Surgifix, FRA Production S.p.A) can be used. These dressings are very
useful to cover any thoracic or abdominal tubes; however, a large
enough size (size 6) should be used to ensure that the elastic does not
compress the thorax or abdomen. Holes need to be made in the vest
NURSING CARE AFTER
to place the limbs through and these holes should be large enough
ABDOMINAL SURGERY
so that the elastic does not cut into the axillary area of the limbs. The
use of a soft Elizabethan collar is also advisable to ensure the patient
 Nursing care after abdominal surgery will consist of regular monitor-
does not lick at the site or bite the tube. The tube insertion site should 
ing of basic parameters including pulse, temperature, respiration,
be undressed, checked and cleansed with a dilute chlorohexidine
 pain, and urine and fecal production (Fig. 4-12). Monitoring periph-
solution and redressed every 12-24 hours. Gloves must be worn when
au pue up an uoy yq suom aue suu pue uu
larly temperature is essential in detecting the frst signs of any
postoperative complications such as hemorrhage, shock or peritonitis
(see Chapter 26). The basic considerations for postoperative nursing
care of cats after abdominal surgery are listed in Box 4-4. Cats with
Box 4-3 Postoperative nursing care considerations after
thoracic surgery
Oxygen: All patients having thoracic surgery will benefit from oxygen
supplementation in recovery
Monitoring: Cardiovascular parameters should be closely monitored
via respiratory rate and effort, capnography. pulse oximetry and 
electrocardiography
 Anatgesia: A multimodal approach using systemic opioids, intrapleural
 block with local anesthetic agents, non-steroidal anti-
inflammatories (unless contraindicated). The cat should be regularly
reassessed for the presence of pain and analgesia continued for as 
long a period as necessary (see Chapters 2 and 41)
tube drainage should be put in place (see Chapter 41). The drain
 should be protected from patient interference by use of 
bandaging and a buster collar
Nutrition: Cats should be encouraged to eat once recovered from
Figure 4-5 A period of time outside the cage for exercise and play can
anesthesia and there is no risk of aspiration (see Chapter 6)
be very beneficial to the cat's recovery and demeanour.
A
C
Figure 4-6 (A) A cat with a soft Elizabethan collar to prevent interference with its drain, catheters and surgical site. An elasticated string vest has
been fitted to hold the drain against the cat's body and to minimize the risk of being inadvertently pulled out. (B) A large and rigid Elizabethan collar
placed on a cat after enucleation, to prevent self-trauma to the surgical site. This can cause stress to the cat; a softer collar would have been
functional in this cat. (c) A rigid Elizabethan collar has been shortened and modified in this young kitten that had urethral surgery: a less rigid collar
was not feasible in this situation as it did not prevent interference with the surgical site.
45
Section
1
The Perioperative Period
Figure 4-7 A cat with a spica splint protecting a surgical repair of a
ruptured tendon. Many cats would not tolerate this type of 
immobilization.
Figure 4-9 A bandage that was placed on this cat has resulted in a
severe pressure sore on the caudal aspect of the distal pelvic limb and
hock. The wound is shown after ten days of treatment, granulation 
tissue is well established but the tip of the calcaneus is still visible.
Figure 4-8 Close inspection of the toes of this cat shows swelling and
divergence of the toes and protrusion of the toe nails. The bandage may
have been applied too tightly and it should be removed and the foot
inspected before a less restrictive bandage is reapplied, or if the bandage
is not essential then consideration should be given to leaving it off.
Figure 4-10 A cat with two thoracic drains. The drain insertion sites are
Covered by self-adherent dressings.
abdominal pain adopt a hunched sternal posture with their head
hung lower than their body, elbows drawn back, stifles forward and
-neig pue iaip mau aue anpou Aimois ot jueodui si l anueisisse
abdominal muscles tensed.16
ally increase the volume of food fed to avoid overflling the stomach
and potentially risk inducing vomiting or regurgitation.
 Feeding tubes are managed as described for a thoracic drain
Postoperative nutrition
although due to the length of the external portion of tube, it may be
Before any surgery it is important to plan ahead and anticipate the
necessary to use additional conforming bandage and a carefully
 patient's expected requirements after surgery (see Chapter 6). Postop-
placed layer of cohesive bandage around the tube in addition to the
 erative nutrition is essential and ifthe cat has been anorexic or is likely
vest, ensuring the bandage is not placed too tight around the cat's
to be anorexic after surgery, then a plan for assisted feeding should be
abdomen.
made. The type of feeding tube (see Chapter 12) to be placed will
depend on the patient's requirements, the estimated time that assisted
 Monitoring urination
feeding will be needed and the cat's general preoperative condition
and disease Enteral feeding or total or partial parenteral nutrition
The cat's ability to urinate and the frequency of urination should be
(TPN or PPN) are also options for consideration. Forward planning
recorded as part of the general postoperative monitoring. Some cats
is essential as a catheter for TPN or PPN and esophagostomy, gas-
will be reluctant to urinate while hospitalized due to a number of
trotomy and jejunostomy tubes will need to be placed at the time of
factors, including stress, unwillingness to use a litter tray and unfamil-
surgery. It is advisable when feeding through gastrotomy or jejunos-
iar cat litter. Bladder palpation to check on size and fullness may be
tomy tubes that this should not begin until the cat is fully recovered
necessary and gentle palpation of the bladder can initiate urination
and able to maintain a sternal position with an elevated head without
in some cats (Fig. 4-ll). Surgery involving the urinary tract may
46
Postoperative nursing care
Chapter
4
 Box 4-4 Postoperative nursing care considerations after
abdominal surgery
 Monitoring: Basic parameters such as pulse respiration and
temperature should be regularly monitored for changes associated
with signs of shock, hemorrhage and peritonitis 
 Excretion: Urine and fecal production and intestinal movement by 
 auscultation should be monitored and recorded
Anargesia: A multimodal approach is generally used using systemic
opioids, local analgesic agents and non-steroidal anti-
 inflammatories. If a wound infusion catheter has been placed,
 then local anesthetics can be infused down this intermittently or
aun lot passassean Aeinban ag pinous ien aul Aisnonuiuon
se pojad e buol se loy panuiquos eisabjeue pue uied jo anuasad
necessary (see Chapter 2)
Abdominar drains: Fluid production is regularly monitored and drains
emptied aseptically and volume / characteristics of fluid produced 
recorded. Patient interference with the drain is prevented by the 
use of bandaging and Elizabethan collar
Figure 4-12 A cat recovering from abdominal surgery in an incubator in
 Nutrition: If feeding tubes have been placed then a plan should be
the well-equipped intensive care unit and recovery room.
'sheaw jo uanbany pue awnloa ym buipaay ers oi uaum ape
Encouragement to eat is usually indicated in cats after abdominal 
surgery
Figure 4-13 A closed suction drain has been placed in a cat with
replaced if strike through occurs due to discharge. If the incision stays 
dry then the dressing can be removed after 24 hours. An 'arterial' label,
denoting that an arterial catheter has been placed in the left metatarsal
Figure 4-11 A cat having its bladder palpated for size and fullness. In a
artery, is a useful way of imparting this information to other members of 
cat that is unable to urinate, for example due to neurological disease, it 
may be necessary to express the bladder.
drugs to the cat.
require a cat to have a long-stay silicone urinary catheter placed, or a
 Abdominal drain management
cystotomy tube. In these circumstances urine production will need to
Abdominal drains are usually well tolerated in cats. Continuous
producing urine effectively and that there are no obstructions in the
suction drains attached to a reservoir bulb (Fig. 4-13) should be
catheter or tube; often a closed collection system will be used for
checked every two hours initially to establish how much fluid is being
accurate monitoring. Urine production should be measured every four
drained and then emptied twice a day or more often if necessary.
hours and calculated to ensure the cat is producing at least 1 mL/kg/
 Dressings for these tubes are managed in a similar manner as for a
hour. Urine color and turbidity should also be monitored and
thoracic drain using a small, dry adhesive dressing and a string vest
aenhapeul aieoipul uaiu indno aun ul uonpai y papios
in combination with an Elizabethan collar.
hydration, decreased urine production due to acute renal failure or a
blocked catheter. Increased urine production may be due to over
Incisional dressings
hydration or inability to concentrate urine due to renal failure. Urine
 Depending on the type of surgery performed abdominal wounds can
the presence of a lower urinary tract infection and if there is any sus-
be dressed with a small dry adhesive dressing, or for wounds where
aq pinous jasi iaauie au iuasaid si uoraju ue yons ieun uoii
more postoperative fluid is expected surgical pads can be applied and
submitted for bacterial culture and sensitivity.
held in place by a string vest (Fig. 4-7). Dressings should be closely
47
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
monitored for the amount and color of the exudate Gloves should
always be worn when checking and replacing dressings. Dressings with
little exudate should be changed daily and more often with increasing
exudate Inflammation or punulent discharge should be investigated
and managed as described for thoracic wounds.
NURSING CARE AFTER HEAD AND
NECK SURGERY
Upper airway surgery
If a cat has had surgery of the upper airway, such as the larynx or
signs of respiratory distress or dyspnea. Mucous membranes should
be assessed for normal color and respiratory rate and effort recorded.
Equipment such as oxygen, a suction machine, small endotracheal
tubes, a laryngoscope, local anesthetic spray and anesthetic dnugs
panhai s uoqnu Auaiaua as u aqeae Apai aq pinous
(Table 4-1). In the cat that has had laryngeal surgery emergency tra-
Figure 4-14 An esophagostomy tube has been placed in this cat with
cheostomy surgery may occasionally be required and anticipation of
head trauma in anticipation that it would be reluctant to eat voluntarily
this possibility should also be prepared for (see Chapter 46).
on recovery from anesthesia.
Brain surgery
injury if seizuring does occur. The appetite may be reduced due to
Careful monitoring of cats after brain surgery (see Chapter 58) is
central nervous system effects and possibly loss of the sense of smell.
essential. Detailed aspects for intensive care postoperatively are dis-
Encouraging eating by offering strong smelling food can be tried but
cussed in Chapters 2 and 3. The particular emphasis on nursing care
if unsuccessful then a feeding tube may need to be placed (see Chapter
 of cats after brain surgery relates to their general monitoring, seizure
12). If it is anticipated that the cat may be reluctant to eat postopera-
watch, and comfort.
tively after head surgery then placerment of a pre-emptive feeding tube
Recovery after brain surgery may be slow and oxygen may be
is recommended (Fig. 4-14). Central effects after brain surgery may
required until respiratory drive has returned. Cats are at risk of seizures
also result in paraplegic animals that will require assistance with uri-
after brain surgery so usually constant monitoring is required in the
nation and defecation. They may require regular bathing if soiled and
grooming to increase comfort levels. Physiotherapy of the limbs, to
drugs and their indications and dosages should be readily available
maintain muscle tone and joint mobility, will also be highly benefi-
to give if required. The recovery cage should be well padded to prevent
cial, as would coupage of the thorax in the recumbent cat.
REFERENCES
1. Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee-Tomasso D,
7.
Grint Nl, Murison Pl, Coe R), et al.
http://www.vetclick.com/downloads/
et al. AAFP and ISFM feline friendly
Assessment of the influence of surgical
Cat%20pain%20Chart_v5.pdf.
nursing care guidelines. J of Fel Med Surg
technique on post-operative pain and
12.
Hudson S. Rehabilitation of the cat. In:
2012;14:337-49
wound tenderness in cats following
Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ.
2.
Brodbelt D. Feline anesthetic deaths in
owariohysterectomy. I Fel Med Surg
editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
veterinary practice. Top Companion Anim
2006;8:15-21.
musculoskeletal disease. Elsevier; 2009.
Med 2010;25:189-94.
8.
 Slingsby LS, Jones A, Waterman-Pearson
p. 221-35.
3. Wegner K, Pablo L. Anesthesia case of the
AE, et al. Use of a new fnger-mounted
13.
Kastner S. Analgesia. In: Montavon PM.
month. Pulmonary abscess formation.
device to compare mechanical
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:850-3.
nocioceptive thresholds in cats given
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
4.
Posner LP. Effects of opioids and 
pethidine or no medication after
disease. Elsevier; 2009. p. 199-206.
anesthetic drugs on body temperature
castration. Res Vet Sci 2001;70:243-6.
14. Levy I, Lapham B, Hardie E, et al.
in cats. Vet Anaes & Analg 2010;37:
9. Smith JD, Allen SW, Quandt JE, et al.
Evaluation of laser onychectomy in the
35-43.
Changes in cortisol concentration in
cat. In: 19th Annual Meeting of the
5
 Cambridge Al, Tobias KM, Newberry
response to stress and post-operative pain
American Society of Laser Medicine and
RC, et al. Subjective and objective 
in client-owned cats and correlation with
Surgery; 1999; Lake Buena Vista, FL;
measurements of post-operative pain in
objective clinical variables. Am J Vet Res
1999.
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;217:
1999:60:432-6.
15.
Anderson DM. White RAS. Ischemic
685-90.
10.
Holton Ll, Scott EM, Nolan AM, et al.
bandage injuries: a case series and review
6.
 Sanford J, and working party of the
Comparison of three methods used for
 of the literature. Vet Surg 2000;29:
Association of Veterinary Teachers and
assessments of pain in dogs. J Am Vet 
488-98.
Research Workers. Guidelines for the
Med Assoc 1998;212:61-6.
16.
 Robertson SA. Assessment and
recognition and assessment of pain in
11.
http://csuanimalcancercenter.org/assets/
management of acute pain in cats.
animals. Vet Rec 1986;118:334-8.
fles/csu_acute_pain_scale_feline.pdf
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2005;15:261-72.
48
tel
Blood transfusions in cats
C. Knottenbeit, M.W. Jackson, M. O'Brien
 Blood or blood products are commonly required in surgical patients
Unexpected blood loss during surgery
and a well-timed transfusion can be life-saving.1-3 The presurgical and
pre-anesthetic workup should identify those patients that would
Whole blood, colloids and crystalloids are used to restore blood
benefit (see Chapter l). Pre-existing anemia, anticipated extensive
volume Transfusion is only required if bleeding is severe enough to
blood loss during surgery and known coagulation disorders are the
result in anemia. Healthy conscious cats can lose up to 20% of their
most common indications for transfusing fresh whole blood or blood
blood volume (13 mL/kg) without adverse effects provided that cir-
products. However, cats must NEVER receive any blood or blood
paziaqaue ue ul 'spiolleisio io spiolos uim paoddns st uoei
products unless they have been blood typed, and preferably cross-
patient, blood loss of greater than 10% (equivalent to 7 mL/kg)
matched, with the donor. The risk of fatal transfusion reactions is too
should be considered potentially life-threatening.? Assessment of
great, even in frst transfusions, if these steps are not taken.4 Feline
peripheral oxygenation is an insensitive way of assessing if blood
blood groups are becoming increasingly complex and it is therefore
loss is significant, as most anemic patients will have an SpO2 of
impossible to safely 'guess the blood type'. Typing is technically easy
100%.? Similarly, during a bleeding episode the PCV may not reflect
to perform and commercial kits are available allowing desk-top typing
paiansupe suaq osie aie spimg al ssaun ssol pooia jo aaisap a
in the veterinary practice. For routine surgical patients, blood typing
A change in total protein can also be used to estimate blood loss.
 The best method of determining the need for blood is monitoring
and cross-matching can be done at admission. However, for surgical
Buunp io uonsnpul ie auop aq Pinos suidk pooiq saiuagiaua
blood pressure and perfusion parameters (heart, respiration and pulse
surgery if blood or blood products are required. By follwing the
rates, pulse quality, body temperature CRT, mentation, lactate con-
guidelines below and using standard operating procedures, cats will
centration).? The administration of whole blood provides circulatory
receive the benefts of a safe blood product supply. This will enhance
volume support and coagulation factors which may be beneficial in
the quality of life for feline surgical patients requiring transfusion
 patients with bleeding disorders. Fresh whole blood also provides
while minimizing the risks to both donor and recipient cats.
diseases.
ASSESSING THE NEED FOR A TRANSFUSION
Expected blood loss during surgery
Where surgery is likely to result in significant blood loss presurgical
Transfusion should be considered in any feline patient with a packed
assessment and preparation for transfusion of the patient are essential.
cell volume (PCV) of less than 20% that is due to undergo surgery or
Cats can have significant anemia and show minimal clinical signs
where it is indicated by the clinical condition of the patient. Reasons
ladde Aeuu Kaun suoeidepe aisal yanoiu Kiiuo sil oi anp
for considering an emergency transfusion are shown in Box 5-1.
normal to the owners despite an extremely low PCV. Although this
 Although many surgical cases would benefit from blood component
chronic anemia is well tolerated, an acute blood loss can result in
therapy (eg, platelet rich plasma, fresh plasma for cloting factors),6.7
 sudden deterioration in the patient's ability to cope with the anemia.
this is rarely available for feline patients. In general, patients with
 Prior to the surgical procedure the cat's PCV and perfusion parameters
hypovolemic anemia or those expected to have substantial blood loss
(pulse quality, mucous membrane color and capillary refill time)
during surgery should receive fresh whole blood. Patients with coagu-
 must be assessed. Where anemia is moderate to severe (PCV <20%)
lopathies, especially secondary to hepatic disorders, and/or those that
it should be corrected with transfusion prior to anesthesia. In cats
are normovolemic can be given component therapy where possible.6
with mild-moderate anemia (PCV >20%), arrangements should
Always collect any blood required for tests, such as typing. FeLV/FIV.
be made to have blood available if blood loss during surgery is
Coomb test etc, BEFORE giving the patient a transfusion.
predicted.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00005-6
49
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
Therefore, when a cat with naturally formed alloantibodies encounters
 Box 5-1 Emergency transfusion is required in surgical
foreign' type red blood cells a transfusion reaction ensues. All type B
patients when
cats have high levels of naturally occurring anti-A antibodies. Many
-ue a-ue suso Allmeu jo slaal mol aey (oz<) sies  ad
The patient is exhibiting significant clinical signs of anemia 
bodies but this varies geographically.23 Type AB cats do not have natu-
(weakness, tachycardia, tachypnea, ataxia)
rally occurring alloantibodies.13.23
The packed cel volume is less than 10% or has fallen rapidly to less
 The Mik red cell antigen was recently reported. Cats whose red cells 
than 15%
nn   u    a ssa  o
alloantibodies against the Mik antigen (approximately 4% of cats in
the study).24
Stabilizing an anemic patient prior
Blood typing and cross-matching
to surgery
techniques
First, the cause of the anemia must be determined. Patients with
unoyuais io umo iiaul se adi aes aut jo pooiq aianai isn sie
chronic blood loss or those with non-regenerative anemia may gain
-eai asaul gz'ss isso ues suoeai uoisnysuen ieiey aluaiod pue
significant long-term benefit from transfusion. Transfusion can stabi-
tions may be either immediate hemolysis or delayed (up to five days
lize the patient for two to three months as transfused red blood cells
juaidipai pue iouop j paaueieng aq Aquo ue Aqneduo (1aie
can have a near normal life span (70 days). Prior to anesthesia a PCV
-ssoip "qpieu-sson aneau e aney pue ad pooiq aue au ane
of at least 20% should be achieved.
matching alone does not always ensure that donor and recipient are
Cats with hemolytic anemia receive transient benefts from a trans-
 the same blood type.
fusion and should have their hemolytic disease stabilized and under
A variety of desktop blood typing kits are available In-house
aqissod aaauaum Aragins cl 1od lo1uos uan-guo
systems use very small volumes of blood and positive results are seen
Note that clotting factors, platelets and the anti-inflammatory/
as an agglutination reaction (Rapid Vet-H), or a test line (Quick Test
immunoregulatory properties of fresh whole blood last only two
A+B) (Fig. 5-1). Many diagnostic laboratories will also perform these
weeks in human blood units and it is likely that this is much shorter
typing tests. However, bloodtyping will not identify incompatibilities
in cats.?
associated with previous transfusions, which may not be AB associ-
ated. Therefore blood typing AND cross-matching (Fig. 5-2) should
Disorders of secondary hemostasis
ideally be performed at the first transfusion and must be performed
before subsequent transfusions.27 How to perform a cross-match is
The most common cause of clotting problems is vitamin K deficiency.
summarized in Box 5-2.
which can be caused by anorexia or hepatic disease involving the
biliary tract. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin with a relatively short
half-life that requires bile acids for its uptake Cats can rapidly become
deficient in the vitamin leading to coagulation disturbances similar to
SELECTING A DONOR
those seen in coumarin toxicity 10.1l All cats with significant anorexia
aq Pinous aseasip Ae iuesyiuais suaeu yo paiadsns asoue pue
given vitamin K by injection 24 hours prior to surgery. Oral vitamin
The ease of blood collection from the donor cat plays a large role in
K will not aid those patients with compromised vitamin K uptake. In
the success of any transfusion. Box 5-3 lists factors to consider when
cats with disseminated intravascular coagulation, whole blood will
selecting a donor. Commercial suppliers also provide whole blood
provide clotting factors and antithrombin. However, if the patient
and/or blood products; however, not all commercial suppliers have
is not anemic then fresh frozen plasma, if available, will suffce..7
ready access to rare types so a list of alternative sources is useful.
 Further discussion on coagulopathies in cats is given in Chapter 1.
Collection of donor blood
 Healthy cats can donate l0% of their total blood volume (every four
FELINE BLOOD GROUPS
to six weeks) without adverse effects. Collection of 20% of blood
volume can produce short-term hypovolemia requiring therapeutic
 Two major blood group systems have now been identified in cats. The
intervention. Collection of > 20% of blood volume can produce severe
most important is the AB system which has three types (A, B and
life-threatening hypovolemia and should not be performed.
Aea suoodoid gad seaaum 'uouun isou au si vad sirzt (a
To avoid making the donor anemic the PCV should be checked
i ae s a a t  y e  yo
before collection and be at least 35%.28.22 Most feline donors will be
aaad au (oz) sie g a ym saaq ui punoy kuo pue aiei
donating 20% of their blood volume (40-60 mL) and should receive
of type B can be very high (approaching 50%) in some pedigree breeds.
crystalloids to provide circulatory support. Crystalloids should be
especially the British shorthair, ragdoll, Birman, and Rex breeds. Type
 given over 45-60 minutes with a total volume of two to three times
B cats are also commonly encountered amongst Persians, Somalis.
the volume of blood collected.
Abyssinians, Himalayans, and Scottish folds. However, notable geo-
The most effective anticoagulants are found in human blood col-
graphic and individual variation in blood type can occur within these
lection bags (CPD-A). The amount of anticoagulant should be pro-
breeds.14-20It appears that feline blood types are well conserved as
portional to the volume being collected (6 mL of anticoagulant for
wild felids have the same blood groups as domesticated cats.2
50 mL of blood, or 7 mL anticoagulant for 60 mL blood). If human
 In addition, cats have naturally occurring alloantibodies against
 blood bags are not available then the collection syringe can be pre-
the blood type antigen that they do not possess.2.2 These alloantibod-
ies result from exposure to antigenic epitopes commonly found in
flushing it out. Note that if heparin is used as an anticoagulant blood
 nature that are similar or identical to 'non-self blood group antigens.
must be used immediately.
50
Blood transfusions in cats
Chapter
5
(Feline A, B, AB)
Dateljo
Auto-
Agglutination
Saline Screen
Type A
Patient
Type B
Test
ories,inc
Date：66
ngton, NJ 08822
Lot: ALVF-03Exp:01/2012 Avedia
A
B
Figure 5-1 Feline blood typing systems. (A) Feline blood typing card that uses agglutination to indicate a positive result. (B) Feline blood typing gel
 tube which uses a test line
Box 5-3 Selecting a blood donor
Healthy, easy to handle and friendly
 Normal physical examination
 Large, non-obese >4.0 kg lean body weight, ideally
 non-brachycephalic
Young (>1 year) to middle aged (up to 10-12 years)
 Non-pregnant, not in estrus 
Packed cell volume >35 %
Vaccinated and de-wormed
Figure 5-2 A positive cross-match.
 Negative for retroviruses, Mycoplasma haemofelis, Bartonelfa
henselae and other infectious diseases based on geographical
location (e.g. ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, etc.)3s
Box 5-2 Performing a cross-match
 Free from external parasites, ideally without a history of foreign travel
 or contact with traveled pets
1.
 Collect EDTA and heparin samples from both donor and recipient
Known blood group
2.9
 Spin down all four samples (3000 rpm for ten minutes)
 Normotensive (120-180 mmHg systolic): occult heart disease and
 EDTA sample provides the cells. These need to be washed to 
 other conditions can be associated with lov blood pressure that is
3.
remove all antibodies (re-suspend in saline, re-spin and remove 
exacerbated by sedation and/or blood donation
supernatant)
 4. Make 3-5% cell solution by adding saline
5.
 Plasma from heparin sample provides the antibodies 
6. Two drops of donor cell suspension are mixed with two drops of 
Most feline donors require sedation for donation. Midazolam
recipient plasma (and vice versa) either on a slide or preferably in
(0.3 mg/kg) and ketamine [2 mg/kg) given in combination intrave-
test tubes or well plates
nously, provide the required sedation without affecting blood pres-
 7. The cell/plasma mixture is assessed for hemolysis (diffuse
sure.° Blood is collected from the jugular veins with the cat in dorsal
reddening of solution which fails to settle out) or agglutination
recumbency with support under the cat's neck (Fig. 5-3). Occlusion 
(granular appearance)
 of both jugular veins can increase blood flow rates. Feline blood can
 Mixing cell solution with plasma from the same animal acts as a
be stored for up to 28 days in a pharmacy standard refrigerator:
 negative control
however, refrigeration will cause a complete loss of platelet viability
after several hours.?
51
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
Figure 5-4 Blood administered through in-line filter.
esp ui paneid silen aul ien e woi pooa jo uoiallo e- ane
recumbency with support under the neck.
Box 5-4 Equation used to calculate blood volume
to transfuse
66 × weight of recipient in kg
 × (target PCV - patient's PCV)
Volume required = 
PCV of donor
Permanent or semi-permanent vascular access ports (VAPs) can be
employed as a more humane, labour-efficient means of repeated col-
lections from the same donor. These devices avoid the necessity of
repeated sedation, decrease the risk of infections and transfusion reac-
tions, and allow faster, more efficient collection because only two
 people are required. Although these are perceived as better for feline
health and welfare? and can be maintained for the effective'donating'
life of the donor cat they do require initial surgical placement The
benefits would only be realized in a busy hospital where multiple
transfusions occur and regular donors are used.
Figure 5-5 A cat receiving donor blood. This is direct from a syringe
Estimating the volume of blood needed
 an s wss si  aului ue e  as e buin
of contamination of the blood when transferring it to a blood bag.
aig ot paau noA %oi Aianexidde Aq Ad siuaed aui asiei Q
20 mL/kg of whole blood or 10 mL/kg of packed red blood cells.
The precise volume of blood to be transfused can be calculated
using an equation*2 (Box 5-4).
used to heat the blood slowly. Microwave ovens should never be used
Atarget PCV of 20% is usual although a higher PCV may be required
 as overheating the blood will result in hemolysis and coagulation of
if anemia is acute It is not always possible to reach the target without
 proteins.
giving more than one unit of blood. However, even small increases in
 Blood can be administered via an intravenous catheter (Fig. 5-5) or
PCV can significantly improve clinical signs and, given donor limita-
intraosseous needle/catheter as uptake into the bone marrow is very
tions, the recipient would usually get one 'unit' of blood provided by
s(dund uoisnyui ue ym anuu iad dop I <) zuaye
the donor (40-60 mL of whole blood depending on donor weight).
Whole blood should be given at 5-10 mL/kg/hour (over two to four
hours) in most patients. However, in hypovolemic patients the rate
How to transfuse: practical aspects
can be increased to 20 mL/kg/hour provided there is constant moni-
toring and reductions in rate as required. In patients with cardiovas-
Whole blood and packed red blood cells (PRBC) can be administered 
cular disease the rate should be reduced to 2 mL/kg/hour; however,
using a blood giving set that contains a filter or straight from the
the transfusion should not take longer than four hours in total as
anticoagulated collection syringeusing an in-line filter (eg., Hemonate 
after this time there is a risk of bacterial contamination. Where PRBC
filter, Utah Medical Products) (Fig. 5-4). PRBC should be adminis-
are being used rates should be reduced by 50% to avoid volume
tered at body temperature to improve flow. Warm water should be
overload.
52
Blood transfusions in cats
Chapter
5
Storage of blood products
Storage of blood results in damage to the red blood cells (known as
storage lesions) and other blood components. The longer that the
blood is stored the greater the risk of significant transfusion reactions
typing mismatch). In addition to the risk of storage lesions, the
Oxygen-carrying capacity of stored red cells declines over time.?
However, this can be partially restored within hours of transfusion.?
Current recommendations are that blood should be collected and
used as soon as possible and preferably within three weeks.?
HEMOGLOBIN-BASED OXYGEN CARRIERS
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) are colloid solutions
containing a bovine hemoglobin glutamer (polymer) in Ringer's
lactate, licensed for use in dogs. It has been used off-label in cats. It
 must be given at slower rates and its use and risks should be discussed
with the owner as its use in cats is outside the veterinary medicine
directorate (VMD) cascade.34.35 It has a higher affinity for oxygen (both
in binding and offoading) than RBCs and therefore increases the
patient's oxygen-carrying potential. It is therefore used when whole
blood is not available or a compatible donor cannot be found. The
beneft from a single administration is short lived (half-life of 30-40
Figure 5-6 Cat showing signs of vocalization, which is a common sign
hours in dogs), compared to a blood transfusion. Oxyglobin must not
 of a mild or early transfusion reaction.
as ieuai suno io ay ae ym said cn u a
ssansip Aioieidsai jasuo aine yim paneoosse aq Aeu ll sie auos ul
if given too quickly. The rate should not exceed 0.5-1.0 mL/kg/hour
with a maximum total dose of 5-7.5 mL/kg. The primary complica-
Box 5-5 Clinical signs associated with transfusion reactions
tion in cats is volume overload leading to pulmonary edema, pleural
effusion, and cardiac impairment.34.35
Mild reaction
 Oxyglobin (OPK Biotech) causes a yellow-orange discoloration of
Pyrexia
tissues, notably skin, mucous membranes and sclera; red-green dis-
Vomiting
coloration of feces and port wine discoloration of urine. Oxyglobin
Vocalization
will affect refractometer readings of total solids and colorimetric
Urticaria
measurements for some serum chemistries. Therefore, pretreatment
 Erythema or pruritus
samples MUST be taken prior to Oxyglobin administration. At the
time of this writing the product is no longer available in the UK;
 Severe reaction
hopefully this is not a permanent situation.
Depression
Dyspnea, tachypnea or coughing
Tachycardia or bradycardia
 Tremors or convulsions
TRANSFUSION REACTIONS
 Cardiopulmonary arrest
 Mismatched transfusions can cause a fatal reaction in some cats. Acute
Anorexia (delayed)
reactions which are commonly associated with the administration of
type A or AB blood to a type B cat are very severe. Delayed reactions
Jaundice (delayed)
which are commonly seen with type B or AB blood given to a type A
cat tend to be less severe but will result in a significant loss of red
saep jo iaeu e ul Aod uoisnysuenand on umau e pue slas pooq
after transfusion. The speed and severity of transfusion reaction
When a transfusion reaction is suspected, the transfusion must be
depends on the alloantibody titer and not the volume of mismatched
 stopped while the cause ofthe reaction is investigated. The bag should
blood given; fatal reactions to as little as l mL have been reported.25
be checked for signs of hemolysis or bacterial contamination and
Mismatched transfusions will also cause the induction of antibody
the blood typing and cross-matching results confirmed. Some patients
production, making subsequent reactions severe if a second mis-
matched transfusion is given in the future.
of antihistamines is not recommended as it may mask the early
 All cats receiving a transfusion should be monitored closely for the 
 stages of a more severe reaction. In most cases the transfusion can
frst 15 minutes and then monitored regularly for the signs of a trans-
be restarted at a slower rate once symptoms have resolved. In more
fusion reaction (Box 5-5). Mild transfusion reactions such as pyrexia
severe, potentially life-threatening reactions the patients may also
and vomiting (Fig. 5-6) can usually be corrected by slowing the rate
(spiiaisosnos pue spimy snouaaenu) yous iog juauean aimban
of blood administration.36
and close monitoring for hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria.
53
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
REFERENCES
1. Klaser DA, Reine Nl, Hohenhaus AE. Red
14. Knottenbelt CM. The feline AB blood
 27. Tocci L), Ewing Pl. Increasing patient
blood cell transfusions in cats: 126 cases
 group system and its importance in
safety in veterinary transfusion medicine:
(1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226(6):
transfusion medicine: a review. ↓ Feline
 an overview of pretransfusion testing.
920-3.
Med Surg 2002;4:69-76.
JVet Emerg Crit Care 2009;19[1):
2.
Roux FA, Deschamps JY, Blais MC, et al.
15. Knottenbelt CM, Addie DD, Day MJ,
66-73.
Multiple red cell transfusions in 27 cats
 Mackin Al. Determination of the
28.
Wardrop KJ, Reine N, Birkenheuer A, et al.
[2003-2006): indications, complications
 prevalence of feline blood types in the
 Canine and feline blood donor screening
and outcomes. J Feline Med Surg
UK. J Small Anim Prac 1999;40:115-18.
for infectious disease. J Vet Intern Med
2008;(3):213-18.
16.
 Griot-Wenk M, Giger Ul. Feline transfusion
2005;19:135-42.
3.
Weingart C, Giger U, Kohn B. Whole
medicine. Blood types and their clinical 
29.
lazbik MC, Gomez Ochoa P, Westendorf
blood transfusions in 91 cats: a clinical
importance. Vet Clin N Am: Small Anim
N, et al. Effects of blood collection for
evaluation. J Feline Med Surg 2004;6[3):
Prac 1995;25:1305-22.
 transfusion on arterial blood pressure.
139-48.
17.
 Forcada Y, Guitian J, Gibson G.
heart rate, and PCV in cats. J Vet Intern
 4. Auer L, Bell K. Transfusion reactions 
Frequencies of feline blood types at a
Med 2007;21:1181-4.
in cats due to AB blood group
referral hospital in the south east of
30.
Helm JR, Knottenbelt CM Blood
 incompatibility. Res Vet Sci 1983;35:
England. J Small Anim Prac 2007;48[10):
transfusions in the Dog and Cat -
145-52.
570-3.
Practicalities of giving and receiving
 5. Prittie JE. Triggers for use, optimal dosing.
18. Malik R, Griffn DL, White JD, et al. The
blood. In Practice 2010;32:231-7.
and problems associated with red cell
prevalence of feline A/B blood types in
31.
Morrison JA, Lauer SK, Baldwin Cl, et al.
transfusions. Vet Clin North Am Small
the Sydney region. Aust Vet J 2005;
Evaluation of the use of subcutaneous 
Anim Pract 2003;33(6):1261-75.
83[1-2):38-44.
implantable vascular access ports in feline
6. Castellanos I, Couto CG, Gray TL. Clinical
19. Medeiros MA, Soares AM, Alviano DS.
blood donors. J Am Vet Med Assoc
use of blood products in cats: a
et al. Frequencies of feline blood types in
2007;230[6):855-61.
retrospective study (1997-2000). J Vet
 the Rio de Janeiro area of Brazil. Vet Clin
32.
Pichler, ME, Turnwald GH. Blood 
Intern Med 2004;18:529-32.
Pathol 2008;37(3):272-6.
transfusion in dogs and cats Part I.
7. Helm JR, Knottenbelt CM. Blood
20. Arikan S, Gurkan M, Ozaytekin E, et al.
Physiology, collection, storage and 
transfusions in the Dog and Cat - Part
Frequencies of blood type A, B and AB
 indications for whole blood therapy.
one - Indications for blood product 
in non-pedigree domestic cats in Turkey.
Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 1985;7:
transfusions. In Practice 2010;32:184-9.
J Small Anim Prac 2006;47[1):10-13.
64-71.
8. Gaynor JS, Dunlop Cl, Wagner AE, et al.
21. Griot-Wenk M, Giger Ul. The AB blood
33.
Otto C, Crowe D. Intraosseous
 Complications and mortality associated
group system in wild felids. Anim Genet 
resuscitation techniques and applications.
with anesthesia in dogs and cats. J Am 
1999;30:144-7.
In: Kirk Rw, Bonagura JD, editors.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:13-17.
 Bucheler J, Giger U. Alloantibodies
Kirk's current veterinary therapy Xl.
22.
 9. Pritie JE. Controversies related to red 
 against A and B blood types in cats. Vet
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co; 1992.
blood cell transfusion in critically ill
Immun Immunopath 1993;38:283-95.
p. 107-12.
patients. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2010;20:
23.
 Knottenbelt CM, Day Ml, Cripps PJ.
34.
Gibson GR, Callan MB, Hoffman V.
167-76.
 Mackin AJ. Measurement of titres of
Giger U. Use of a hemoglobin-based
10. Lisciandro SC, Hohenhaus A, Brooks M.
naturally occuming alloantibodies against 
oxygen-carrying solution in cats: 72 cases
Coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats with
feline blood group antigens in the UK.
(1998-2000). jAm Vet Med Assoc
naturally occurring liver disease. J Vet
J Small Anim Prac 1999;40:365-70.
2002;221:96-102.
Intern Med 1998;12:71-5.
 35. Weingart C, Kohn B. Clinical use ofa
24. Weinstein NM, Blais MC, Harris K, et al.
11. Center SA, Crawford MA, Guida L, et al.
A newly recognized blood group in
hemoglobin-based oxygen carrying
A retrospective study of 77 cats with
 domestic shorthair cats: the Mik red cell
solution (Oxyglobin) in 48 cats 
[2002-2006). I Feline Med Surg
severe hepatic lipidosis: 1975-1990. J Vet
antigen. J Vet Int Med 2007;21:287-92.
Intern Med 1993;7:349-59.
25. Auer L, Bell K. Transfusion reactions
2008;10(5):431-8.
12. Auer L, Bell K. The AB blood group
in cats due to AB blood group
36. Turnwald GH, Pichler ME. Blood
system of cats. An Bld Grp, Biochem Gen
incompatibility. Res Vet Sci 1983;35:
transfusion in dogs and cats Part Il.
1981;12:287-97
145-52.
Administration, adverse effects and
component therapy. Comp Cont Ed
13. Griot-Wenk M, Giger U. Cats with type
26. Giger U, Bucheler J. Transfusion of type-A
 and type-B blood to cats. J Am Vet Med
1985;7(2):115-22.
AB blood in the United States. J Vet Intern
Med 1991;5:139 only.
Assoc 1991;198:411-18.
54
oter
Nutrition for the surgical patient
M. Chandler
Appropriate nutrition is critical for optimal preparation for and recov-
ery from surgery, as morbidity and mortality are affected by nutritional
 Box 6-1 Indications for supplemental nutritional support
 status. Nutritional assessment and calculation of nutritional require-
Acute weight loss of ≥5%
ments of the cat provides guidance as to the appropriate feeding
10 enanua teio Aq pa aq Au sie pazndsou le Alenu jocnoid
Chronic weight loss of ≥10%
parenteral nutritional supplementation.
Poor body condition (see Table 6.1: <5/9)
Anorexia or poor food intake
Malassimilation of food
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT
Increased loss of nutrients (e.g. protein losing disorders, diabetes
mellitus)
 Non-healing wounds
Preoperative nutritional status in people predicts the occurrence of
postoperative complications and the severity of the inflammatory
Buiipun suaed u smeis euonu jo uoneoaaa t asuonsa
major surgery is associated with poor wound healing and decreased
 medications. If present, the duration of anorexia or decreased appetite
immune function.4 Other consequences of malnutrition include
should be noted. People give unreliable estimates of their own food
fatigue, decreased thermoregulation, respiratory, pancreatic, gastroin-
pooy s,jad iaut yo juaussasse s iaumo ue jo Aqean aut inq el 'ayeiu!
testinal, mental, endocrine and cardiovascular functions, and impaired
 intake is unknown. Any history of weight loss or gain should be noted,
muscle strength.5 Morbidity and mortality rates are increased in mal-
though assessing weight change can be diffcult if the animal's previ-
 nourished patients. The postoperative mortality rate in human cancer
 Ous weight is unknown. Ascites may make weight loss more difficult
u %t Auo st inq pausunouieu aun ioy ez saeoidde suad
to assess.
those in better nutritional condition, unrelated to differences in
Impairment of organ function occurs with starvation before signifi-
disease or procedure. Nutritional support in elderly patients reduces
cant physical changes are observed, and mutritional deprivation is
the mortality rate from 18.6% to 8.6% at six months.7 Similarly, ema-
especially likely to be overlooked in the obese hospitalized patient.
ciated cats are significantly more likely to die within a year than those
 Initiation of nutritional support is indicated in patients meeting any
of optimal body condition.8
of these criteria: acute weight loss of >5%, chronic weight loss of
Conversely, obesity has been cited as increasing the potential anes-
thetic and surgical risks in people and dogs,210 though this is less
decreased protein intake or malabsorption, weaknes, or non-healing
well documented in cats. Obesity influences the dosing of pre-
wounds (Box 6-1).
anesthetic and anesthetic medications, as dosing for actual weight
rather than for lean body weight may result in over-dosing. With
Body assessment
repeated dosing of some intravenous drugs there is saturation of lean 
-ond ul insa1 Aeu ypiym 7ey ol uonnqusip snup pue anssi Apoq
xapun sseu Apoq aun asn sueuny ioy slooonond juassasse Auen
longed recovery times." Further, obesity can make monitoring by
(BMI), which is weight (kg)/height(m). and anthropometric meas-
auscultation during anesthesia more diffcult due to the muffling of
urements such as midarm muscle circumference.° A feline version of
 heart and lung sounds.12
 BMI has been developed and validated by dual energy X-ray absorp-
 Nutritional management starts with assessment of the nutritional
 a e   uamaq sm se eay o (xaa) Aa
status, including dietary history. Dietary history should include the
The feline BMI uses the rib cage circumference in cm and the leg
cat's appetite, the food brand name, flavor and type amount fed,
index measurement (LIM), which is the hind leg length in cm from
number of meals, and any treats, snacks, or foods given to administer
the middle of the patella to the dorsal tip of the calcaneal process.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00006-8
55
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Box 6-2 Equation for estimation of body fat
Percentage body fat 
 [rib cage/0.762 -leg index measurement]
0.9156
 The amount of body fat is estimated using the equation in Box 6-2.
This calculation has not been validated in ill cats, and feline BMI is
not widely used in clinical practice.
 Body condition scores (BCS) provide a semi-quantitative method
suaisis Buos slst'sasuaad anss apoq uea pueieysueneaa ioy
lamol ym suiod G io'g 's ot I jo suass uisn padoaaap uaqay
numbers representing thinner cats and higher numbers indicating
Figure 6-1 Daily weighing for the hospitalized cat.
fatter animals. A feline BCS system using a 9-point scale has shown
Aq pauuaap se iey apoq jo aseuaiad yim (ia'o) uoeaos poo
DEXA.1 This BCS system, using pictures and descriptions, shows good
repeatability within and between observers. A score of five out of nine
 Daily monitoring of the cat's nutritional status while hospitalized
is optimal (Table 6-1).
will help to ensure adequate intake Cats should be weighed daily
The BCS systems do not take into account muscle wasting. and
(Fig. 6-1), although day-to-day weight fluctuations are influenced by
many ill cats have muscle loss disproportionate to fat loss due to the
fluid balance.
metabolic changes of stress. Consequently, a 4-point feline muscle
mass scoring (MSS) system has been developed based on palpation
of muscles over the skull, scapulae, spine, and pelvis'? (Table 6-2).
Animals with no muscle wasting are scored as a 3, mild wasting is 2.
HOW LONG tO STARVE BEFORE SURGERY?
moderate wasting is 1, and a 0 score represents severe wasting. There
was a fair correlation between the feline MMS system and cats' lean
Adult cats
body mass as determined by DEXA.17
 Multi-frequency bioelectrical impedance has been used experimen-
Fasting has been recommended prior to general anesthesia to mini-
Ul pasn iou si inq s'sie Auieay ul uoisoduos Apoq ssasse on Ale
mize gastric content volume and thereby decrease the risk of regurgita-
the clinical setting. Disturbances of water and electrolyte metabolism
tion and aspiration. Gastroesophageal reflux during general anesthesia
 in the ill patient limit the usefulness of this technique in the hospital.
is considered to be a common cause of esophagitis, and can cause
In research settings, DEXA is used for determination of body composi-
 esophageal strictures. The incidence of gastroesophageal reflux during
tion. It has good accuracy but requires anesthesia and is not practical
anesthesia in dogs has been reported as 16.3%.23 In another canine
for most patients.1?
study, the rate of esophageal stricture caused by gastroesophageal
jo suauanseau papnu seu suuny ui suausssse euonn
tz'pap sases asau yo %oe pue '%eio sem eisaunsaue Suunp xnyat
senum albumin and other proteins, including acute phase reactants.
Studies in cats are not available.
These parameters are affected by factors other than nutrition, includ-
The traditional practice in veterinary medicine has been to starve
ing metabolic changes of illness, hydration, and vascular permeability.
patients overnight or for at least six to 12 hours prior to anesthesia.
Serum albumin does not correlate well with other nutritional assess-
However, canine studies have shown that prolonged fasting neither
E 01 panupe se ul qanoule ozg'aldoad u uoeains ym io suau
referral practice there was a positive corelation of serum albumin
duration of fasting is actually associated with an increased incidence
with body condition score.21 This was likely due to decreases in serum
of reflux in dogs. None of 30 dogs fasted for two to four hours refluxed
albumin and BCS both reflecting the underlying disease.20.21 Serum
during anesthesia, while 13.3% of the ones fasted for 12 to 18 hours
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I concentrations are reduced by short-
had an episode of reflux.23 In another study, none of 31 dogs fasted
term dietary restriction and restored by re-feeding in cats,22 but this
snoy ual ioy paisey asou jo e'g1 aum paxmuau sinoy aaiyl ioy
 parameter is not widely available for daily use in practice.
had an episode. Dogs fasted for three hours after a canned food meal
While there appear to be no reliable, widely available laboratory
did not have a significantly increased gastric volume compared to
 markers for assessment of nutritional status, the identification of spe-
those dogs fasted for 20 hours. Further, gastric acidity was reduced in
cifc nutrient deficiencies, such as folate, cobalamin, and iron can be
the dogs with a three hour fast compared to those with a 20 hour
useful. The most practical preoperative nutritional assessment in prac-
fast.2 Morphine also decreases the lower esophageal pressure; its
tice combines the history of acute or chronic weight loss, dietary
use in combination with acetylpromazine (acepromazine) prior to
 intake, body condition score, and muscle mass score.
anesthesia increased the incidence of gastroesophageal reflux in dogs
pue spmy [eio Bupiaoid sueunq ut 'ayuind za %og oi %zz uoy
carbohydrates up to two hours before surgery attenuates postoperative
Obesity concerns
insulin resistance. As dietary fat slows the rate of gastric emptying.
Due to the potential for obese cats to have higher risks of complica-
feeding a small, low fat meal may be the best option.28 Recent recom-
auodisod on uapnud aq Aeu l iains pue eisausaue yim suon
mendations for otherwise healthy dogs undergoing elective proce-
elective procedures until the cat loses weight. For more urgent proce-
e pue 'uoonpul o ioud sinoy oml oi dn iaiem molle ol aie sainp
dures, the fat cat should be provided with adequate nutritional
light meal three to four hours before induction.2? While no feline
support to decrease the loss of lean body tissue and the risk of hepatic
studies are available to provide specific protocols, similar recommen-
lipidosis.
dations are reasonable.
56
Nutrition for the surgical patient
Chapter
6
Table 6-1 Body condition scores in cats
BODY CONDITION SYSTEM
Ribs visible on shorthaired cats; no palpable fat:
severe abdominal tuck: lumbar vertebrae and wings
of ilia casily palpated.
Ribs easily visible on shorthaired cats; lumbar vertebrae
UHI
obvious with minimal muscle mass; pronounced abdominal
tuck; no palpable fat.
001
Ribs easily palpable with minimal fat covering; lumbar
vertebrae obvious; obvious waist behind ribs; minimal
abdominal fat.
 Ribs palpable with minimal fat covering: noticeable
waist behind ribs; slight abdominal tuck; abdominal
fat pad absent.
EA
Well-proportioned; observe waist behind ribs;
ribs palpable with slight fat covering; abdominal
D
fat pad minimal.
 Ribs palpable with slight excess fat covering: waist and
abdominal fat pad distinguishable but not obvious;
abdominal tuck absent.
Ribs not casily palpated with moderate fat covering:
waist poorly disccrnible; obvious rounding of abdomen;
HEA
modcrate abdominal fat pad.
Ribs not palpable with excess fat covering: waist absent;
0
 obvious rounding of abdomen with prominent abdominal
fat pad; fat deposits present over lumbar area.
 Ribs not palpable under heavy fat cover; heavy fat
deposits over lumbar area, face and limbs; distention of
 abdomen with no waist; extensive abdominal fat deposits.
TnODYCONmN SYSEM ws deveaI sle Pr Pet C Ctr ad 
en validated a corume ted r the tlleing puelcaries.
"1 1eun se doy wshs ag uonp Apeg 0 po uepih pe uswdopaa dC aury
Fetee Procice 193/, 26.13-17
lume D, Hme . H:arrison J. Evaluation of Zoometric Measures as an Assessment of Bod
Compsition of Dogs and Cats Corijxnoim 200i; 23(Supot 34,-56
 Body Condition Scores in cats. Image and intellectual property items are produced with the kind permission of Societe des Produits Nestle S.A.
57
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
 Table 6-2 Muscle condition score
No muscle wasting
Moderate muscle
 Normal muscle mass
wasting
Marked muscle
wasting
Mild muscle wasting
Kittens
Table 6-3 Adjusting dextrose and insulin doses prior
No studies provide good evidence for the most appropriate preopera-
to anesthesia
tive fasting times for kittens. Similar to current recommendation for
adult animals, many clinicians provide a small morning feed three to
Morning blood
2.5-3% dextrose
Insulin
four hours prior to anesthesia to decrease the risk of hypoglycemia.30
glucose (mmol/L)
infusion
(percentage of
 Checking blood glucose concentration at induction and intermittently
(before insulin)
normal dose)
during a procedure and treating as needed may be recommended for
very young kittens, especially for longer procedures.
5.5
Yes
None
 5.5-11
Yes
25%
Diabetic cats
11
Not until glucose is 
50%
Where possible, surgery should be delayed until the cat's diabetic state
≤8 mmol/L
is stable and reasonably wellcontrolled with insulin. While surgery
itself is not a greater risk for a well-controlled diabetic patient than
and anesthetize in the aftermoon. Otherwise, insulin should be admin-
for a healthy animal, the preoperative fast and the anesthetic drugs
istered in the morning. but if the cat will not be fed, the insulin dose 
may cause problems, as can stresses which cause release of counter-
should be adjusted?l as recommended in Table 6-3.
regulatory (diabetogenic) hormones promoting insulin resistance and
 During anesthesia the cat's blood glucose concentrations should be
ueiq asnes Aeu saposida suaigoday uous uana is'sisauasoia
monitored every 30 to 60 minutes and dextrose administered to main-
damage and hyperglycemia can cause an osmotic diuresis.l
tain a blood glucose concentration between 8.5 and 14 mmol/L. If
Various different options are available for diabetic cats (Chapter 2):
the cat's blood glucose remains persistently above 17 mmol/L, regular
ultimately, careful monitoring of blood glucose is essential in all cases.
Crystalline insulin may be administered at 20% of the cat's normal
One option is to provide food and insulin in the morning as normal
dose. The following day, the usual schedule can be maintained unless
58
Nutrition for the surgical patient
Chapter
6
the cat is not eating. If that occurs, it may be necessary to use intrave-
outcome for feline critical care patients.* Hyperglycemia thatis caused
nous dextrose and subcutaneous regular crystalline insulin (every six
or exacerbated by PN may be controlled by using lower rates or
to eight hours) until the cat is eating regularly.
amounts of infusion (e.g. partial parenteral nutrition) or with
spie Aey 9-u uo paseq aie Nd u! pasn Allensn spidil aul ot'unsu!
such as soybean oil. Excessive amounts of n-6 fatty acids may have a
negative effect on the immune system, and replacing part of the lipid
ASSESSING THE NEED FOR
with n-3 fatty acids, monoglycerides (eg., olive oil) or medium chain
 NUTRITION POSTOPERATIVELY
triglycerides has shown some benefits in human patients.41
Nutritional support is essential for recovery of postoperative patients.
Enteral nutrition support
aadoisod i ysu aui saseaui adoad u uoaap renn
When feasible, enteral nutrition is preferred to parenteral nutrition.
complications? and is associated with reduced systemic immunity.
For patients not severely malnourished and not requiring PN, with-
Exaggerated stress response, poor wound healing, and delayed recov-
aid uaaq sey sep ieiaas ioy unu ei io jeiaua jo supiou
 ously recommended; however, numerous studies in people and dogs
tion occur, including increased insulin resistance and reduced muscle
have shown that early enteral nutrition, within 24 hours postopera-
tively, is beneficial for enhanced immunocompetence, reduced post-
wound healing, muscle function, insulin resistance and reduces the
operative infections, maintenance of gut structure and function,
risk of sepsis.
shorter length of hospital stay, and decreased mortality rates.42-46
When healthy animals or humans are starved (simple starvation).
 Early enteral nutrition can potentially attenuate the catabolic stress
they primarily use fat as an energy source after glycogen stores are
responses after surgery.45 Also, withholding nutritional support, espe-
utilized. When ill or injured individuals are starved (stressed starva-
cially in overweight cats, increases the risk of hepatic lipidosis.3 The
tion), they catabolize more protein due to alterations in cytokines and 
 main complication with early postoperative feeding is an increased
hormones.?4 In cats, which have continuous gluconeogenesis, the
incidence of vomiting, likely due to gastroparesis causing ileus.3
mobilization of amino acids from muscles is more pronounced than
Using enteral nutrition in cycles, e.g., for 6 to 12 hours, rather than
in other species. Without nutritional support and adequate dietary
 continuously, has been found to improve gastric function after pan-
protein, muscle catabolism is used to provide the liver with amino
Creatoduodenectomy in humans.4 In this study, plasma cholecystoki-
acids for gluconeogenesis and the acute phase protein response.35
 nin (CCK) concentrations stayed high in patients fed continuously.
Cats are unable to adapt their urea cycle enzymes or amino transferase
which was thought to delay the time to normal diet intake Continu-
enzymes to reduced protein intake, so are less able to conserve
 Ous feeding, via CCK and possibly other neurohormonal feedback
protein than omnivorous species. These factors combine to cause
mechanisms, impaired gastric emptying prolonged postoperative gas-
rapid protein malnutrition and a negative protein balance in anorexic
aq u uouny aunu yo aedui 'ses Aeay ul ggsie
troparesis and possibly suppressed appetite The use of systemic
opioids for analgesia also contributes to delayed gastric emptying.
demonstrated by the fourth day of starvation; this would likely occur
 Immunomodulation of enteral nutritional supplementation has
sooner in postoperative cats due to stress.37
 been used to influence the metabolic response postoperatively. Studies
in pharmaconutrition, the use of nutrients as drugs, include the use
What and when to feed postoperatively
 of anti-oxidants, glutamine, n-3 fatty acids, and arginine.47-52 Major
surgery induces production of reactive oxygen species, and levels of
The timing of feeding patients postoperatively has been controversial.
anti-oxidants such as glutathione, vitamin C, vitamin E, β-carotene,
especially after gastrointestinal surgery. Concerns about postoperative
 zinc, and selenium are reduced while the pro-inflammatory mediators
gastric ileus, vomiting, and intestinal incisional breakdown have 
C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor receptor
meant oral feeding has been previously withheld in humans until the 
 55 are increased.4 In patients given enteral nutrition enriched with
 aul ui saay io smey jo aessed aut se pauyap 'uoouny lamoqgo uma
glutamine and anti-oxidants (vitamins C and E, β-carotene, zinc, and
absence of vomiting or abdominal distension.38 For most cats, offering
selenium) the immunoinflammatory response was modifed.4? Post-
food within 24 hours would be a reasonable recommendation even
after most gastrointestinal surgeries. If the cat does not eat within two
entenoic acid, improved maintenance of lean body mass and
days, supplemental nutrition (e.g., feeding tube) may be advisable.
-oid uaaq sey aujuen zs'sueunq u asuodsai ssans aul paenuane
posed to improve the tropism of enterocytes and colonocytes, enhance
Parenteral nutrition
the immune barrier, act as a substrate for glutathione (which has anti-
oxidant actions), and decrease intestinal bacterial translocation.
 Because of the concerns about early enteral feeding, parenteral nutri-
Supplementation of arginine, a conditionally essential amino acid,
tion (PN) has been used postoperatively in people This resulted in a
has been demonstrated to improve wound healing in people, and
high rate of septic complications and infections possibly related to
-uny ll sp'suaed aaeiadonsod u asuodsai aoydul saueuua
bacterial translocation across the intestinal tract, especially of Gram
tions in the urea cycle and improves nitrogen retention. While promis-
negative coliforms. Increased bacterial translocation occurs during
ing, the benefits of immunomodulation have not been documented
starvation or parenteral nutrition. In humans, postoperative PN has
in cats, and the safety, effcacy, and dosages need to be determined
before their use is recommended.
less severe malnutrition, results of PN use postoperatively have been
Though no studies have been done in cats to determine the optimal
mixed and sometimes associated with a worse outcome. Another
postoperative feeding protocol, early feeding with small amounts of
potential complication with PN is hyperglycemia. Stressed or ill cats
easily digested foods within the first day after surgery and feeding
are at risk for hyperglycemia due to increased gluconeogenesis.
 meals rather than continuously appears to be a reasonable approach.
depressed glycogenesis, glucose intolerance, and peripheral insulin
If vomiting or nausea is present then medical treatment is recom-
 e r oss  s e e si
 mended, and this may also improve gastric emptying.
59
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
HOW TO CALCULATE NUTRITIONAL
tion prior to feeding. and the ninth, an obese cat, had a history of
ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
anorexia. In another case of feline re-feeding syndrome, the senum
phosphorus, potassium, magnesium were all deficient and the cat
showed concurrent cardiac abnormalities,5° similar to human
Monitoring of the patient's food intake is important, as often medical
records only note that'the patient ate', and do not describe the quan-
re-feeding syndrome signs.7 Serum concentrations of phosphonus and
Aiaua a s! (aaa) uaanai Aiaua jesea pooy jo adh io Aan
potassium should be monitored at least daily for the first week of
needed for a healthy resting animal in a postabsorptive (unfed) state
nutritional support in malnourished animals. As thiamine plays a role
in a thermoneutral environment. Resting energy requirement (RER)
in carbohydrate metabolism and may be depleted during starvation,
psa sil pojo uoese i papaau aiaua au snd yaa s
aipuas supaay-an jo isu aul s papuauuonan uaaq sey uo
to be about l0% greater than BER, but this difference is unlikely to
'oddns jeuonu ly jo uoeu mois jo aeid aui sodns
have any clinical significance The RER is the same as resting energy
expenditure (REE). The most widely used and recommended allom-
monitoring of electrolytes and glucose, and addition of vitamins
etric formula for RER in cats is shown in Box 6-3.
(especially thiamine) to the nutritional formula.
 paa aa a s ) aa a ue
 an animal with a moderately active life. It is usually estimated as a
multipleof RER, eg. 1.2-1.4 xRER for cats. It does not include energy
OPTIMAL ROUTES FOR FEEDING
needed for growth, gestation, or lactation. It has been shown that the
aq a suaaai aua a ie ia aro a 'si ie e iaaea
Supplemental nutritional support may be provided orally, enterally
overestimated. An alternative equation for estimation of MER for lean
via feeding tubes such as nasoesophageal/gastric, esophageal, gastros-
cats (BCS 5/9 or less) is 100 kcal x BW0.67, and for overweight cats
tomy or jejunostomy tubes (Fig. 6-2), or parenterally via either a
with a BCS of 6/9 or more, the alternative formula is 130 × BW0.4.54
As there is considerable individual variation among cats, using any of
central or peripheral vein. In patients that are not initially a good
anesthetic risk, nasoesophageal/nasogastric (Fig. 6-3) support can be
the formulae initially and adjusting to maintain body weight and
aqn Auoisosee io ieaeydosa ue jo juauaneld on roud papiaoid
condition is appropriate.
(see Chapter 12). Whenever possible, enteral is preferred over
 For hospitalized patients, some clinicians previously multiplied the
 parenteral feeding as it stimulates the gut-associated immune system
RER by 1.2 to 2.0 for an illness energy requirement to increase the
and provides nutrients such as glutamate to the intestinal mucosa.58
calories thought to be necessary for the hypermetabolism of illness or
injury. However, when caloric requirements were determined using
Enteral nutrition is generally safer and more economical than PN. A
decision tree for choosing the route for nutritional support is provided
indirect calorimetry in hospitalized dogs and people, most had energy
in Figure 6-4. Enteral nutrition can be combined with PN if insuff-
requirements near RER. Similar studies have not been done in hospi-
talized cats, but this is a reasonable and safe approach. Human
cient amounts cannot be tolerated enterally (Fig. 6-5).
trauma and severe burns. Cats with untreated hyperthyroidism would
likely also have elevated energy requirements.
TEMPTING CATS TO EAT
 In a cat that has not been eating for several days, neither enteral nor
parenteral supplementation should be started at full RER. It is recom-
Where possible and appropriate, persuading a cat to eat is preferred
mended to provide one-quarter to one-third of the calories the frst
 Over other feeding methods. The type of food and the amount eaten
day, divided into several small meals or tube-fed boluses, or as a
must be monitored, as often the cat will be recorded as having eaten
parenteral infusion. If this is well tolerated, the amount is gradually
when the calories and protein consumed are still inadequate.
increased to full RER over several days.
 Starting at full feeding is not recommended due to the risk of the
're-feeding syndrome' in cats that have been anorexic, unable to eat,
Or malnourished. It is characterized by weakness, cardiac disorders,
hemolytic anemia, and potentially death due to respiratory or cardiac
failure In the re-feeding of a malnourished or anorexic cat, a meta-
bolic shift from endogenous to exogenous energy sources, particularly
carbohydrates, causes reductions in senum concentrations of phos-
phate, magnesium and potassium, which move intracellularly under
the influence of insulin. The re-feeding syndrome may be seen with
either parenteral or enteral nutrition. Hypophosphatemia resulting in
hemolytic anemia has been described in cats during the provision of
 Box 6-3 Resting energy requirement calculation for cats
 For any cat this first formula may be used:
RER (kcal) = 70 x (current body weight in kg)p.7s
OR
For cats weighing over 2 kg. an alternative linear formula may be
used:
RER (kcals) = (30 × current body weight in kg) + 70
Figure 6-2 A cat eating with an esophagostomy tube still in place.
(Courtesy of SaraAnn Dickson.)
60
Nutrition for the surgical patient
Chapter
6
Figure 6-5 A cat with a jejunostomy tube plus peripheral parenteral
(aoo-vun
Figure 6-3 A cat with a nasoesophagostomy feeding tube.
Nutritional Support Indicated
Functional Gl Tract
Non-functional GI Tract
Enteral Feeding
Parenteral Nutrition
No vomiting/Gastric function ok
Central catheter feasible?
率
No
Yes
Debilitated
Yes
No
 patient long-
Jejunostomy tube
term support
 Appetite Stimulants Helpful
Figure 6-6 Tempting a cat to eat by hand feeding.
No
Yes
Central TPN
 diet history should include the cat's preference. Warming the food to
just below body temperature (eg. the temperature of a freshly killed
htake inadequate
Short-term support (days)
mouse) may help encourage intake. If this is not successful, colder
foods may be tried, as cats show variation in their preferences. Some
cats will eat while being petted or offered food by hand (Fig. 6-6).
PPN
Long term
Placing a small amount of wet food gently in the cat's mouth or on
Short term
his paws may initiate feeding. A variety of foods may be offered, but
wet food should be removed if not eaten. Some cats will only eat at
Gastrostomy
 Nasoesophageal tube
night when the wards are quiet. Tempting cats to eat often involves
tube or Esophagostomy tube
experimenting with a variety of foods and feeding patterns. Use
Figure 6-4 Algorithm for deciding on the method of nutritional support
caution with processed human foods (e.g., baby food) as some contain
dried onion, which is toxic to cats.5?
 Providing a safe environment for cats is important as many will not
eat when stressed. The cats should be able to hide e.g., in cardboard
DRUGS TO STIMULATE APPETITE
boxes in the kennel, and should not be exposed to barking dogs.
Ideally a ward housing only cats should be used, and the cats should
 not be easily able to see other cats. The use of feline pheromones may
 Anti-emetics can be useful in cats which will not eat, as nausea may
help calm some cats.
be present without vomiting. Metoclopramide promotes gastric emp-
Feeding frequent small meals, a normal eating pattern for cats, is
asaiap oi auz ia riaaiau an uo aia sie pue u
sog   'y u s a aa s ia
vomiting and nausea, although the effects are less potent in cats
with acidic pH and strong aromas. Some cats prefer dry food and the
than in dogs. Ondansetron and dolasetron mesylate also act on the
61
Section
1
 The Perioperative Period
chemoreceptor trigger zone. While at the time of writing, maropitant
Several drugs have been used to stimulate appetite in cats. Cypro-
has not been approved for use in cats, it has been used as a feline
heptadine, an antiserotoninergic, stimulates appetite in many cats.
 anti-emetic, and safety and pharmacokinetic studies for the preven-
though it can cause excitability, aggression and vomiting. Benzodi-
tion of emesis and motion sickness in cats have been performed.60
azepamine derivatives such as diazepam and oxazepam have been
Maropitant binds the neurokinin (NK) type I receptors so they cannot
used, but their effect is short lived, and diazepam has been associated
bind substance P This blocks stimuli to the final common pathway
with hepatic necrosis in cats."l Generally, while the cat is hospitalized,
 in the emetic center, suppressing both central and peripheral causes 
enteral or parenteral nutritional support is better than appetite stimu-
of emesis.
lants, which may be more useful once the cat is recovering at home.
REFERENCES
1.
Hassen TA, Pearson S, Cowled PA, Fitridge
14. Hawthorne AJ, Butterwick RF. The feline
general anesthesia. Procedings of the g"h
RA. Preoperative nutritional status
body mass index - a simple measure of
world congress of veterinary anaesthesia.
predicts the severity of the systemic
body fat content in cats. waltham Focus
Knoxville, Tennessee USA. 2003.
inflammatory response syndrome
2000;10:32-3.
p. 184.
(SIRS) following major vascular surgery.
15. Burkholder J. Use of body condition
25.
 Raptopoulos D, Savvas I. Preoperative 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2007;33:
scores in clinical assessment of the
fasting: 'Nil per os after midnight' - time
696-702.
provision of optimal nutrition. J Am Vet
to change? Proceedings of the world small
2.
D'Alegria B, Cohen C, Medeiros F, Portari
Med 2000;217:650-4.
animal veterinary association world
 Filho PE. Nutritional diagnosis obtained
16.
 LaFlamme D. Development and
congress. 6-9 October 2004. Rhodes,
by subjective global assessment in 
validation of a body condition score
Greece.
 surgical patients and occurrence of
 system for cats: a clinical tool. J Feline
26. Savvas I, Rallis T, Raptopoulos D, et al.
post-operative complications. Nutr Hosp
Pract 1997;25:13-18.
 The effect of pre-anesthetic fasting time
2008;23:619-29
17.
 Michel K, Anderson W, Cupp C.
and type of food on gastric content
3.
Smith RC, Ledgard JP, Doig G, et al.
Laflamme DP. Correlation of a feline
volume and acidity in dogs. Vet 
An effective automated nutrition screen 
muscle mass score with body composition
Anesthesia and Analgesia 2009;36:
for hospitalized patients. Nutrition 
determined by DEXA. Abstract.
539-46.
2009;25:309-15.
Cambridge, U.K.: The Waltham
27. Wilson DV, Evans AT, Miller R, et al.
4.
 McClave SA, Snider HL, Spain DA.
 International Nutritional Sciences 
Effects of preanesthetic administration of
Preoperative issues in clinical nutrition.
Symposium; September 16-18, 2010.
morphine of gastro esophageal reflux and
Chest 1999;115:64S-70S.
18.
Elliott DA, Backus RC, Van Loan MD,
regurgitation during anesthesia in dogs.
 5. Allison SP. Malnutrition, disease,
Rogers QR. Evaluation of multifrequency
Am I Vet Res 2005;66:386-90.
and outcome. Nutrition 2000;16:
bioelectrical analysis for the assessment
28. Fearon KCH, Luff R. The nutritional
590-3.
of extracellular and total body water in
management of surgical patients:
6.
 Pennington C. Malnutrition in
healthy cats. J Nutr 2002;132:1757S-9S.
 enhanced recovery after surgery.
hospitalised patients. In: Payne-James J.
19. Toll Pw, Gross KL, Berryhill SA, Jewell 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society
Grimble G, Silk D, editors: Artificial
 DE. Ulsefulness of dual energy x-ray
2003;62:807-11
 nutrition support in clinical practice.
absorptiometry for body composition
29.
 Raptopoulos D. To starve or not to starve?
London: Greenwich Medical Media Ltd;
measurement in adult dogs. J Nutr 
That is the question. Proceedings of the
2001. p. 150-64.
1994;124:2601S-3S.
association of veterinary anesthiologists
7.
Delmi M, Rapin CH, Bengoa JM, et al.
20.
 Covinsky KE, Covinsky MH, Palmer RM,
spring conference. Cambridge, U.K.:
Dietary supplementation in elderly
Sehgal AR. Serum albumin concentration
Queens College; March 30-1, 2010.
patients with fractured neck of femur.
and clinical assessment of nutritional
30.
Root Kustritz MV. Early spay-neuter:
Lancet 1990;335:1013-16.
status in hospitalized older people:
dinical considerations. Clin Tech Small 
8.
 Doria-rose VP, Scarlett IM. Mortality rates
different sides of different coins? J Am
Anim Pract 2002;17(3):124-8.
and causes of death among emaciated
Geriatr Soc 2002;50:631-7.
31.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine diabetes
cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:
21.
Chandler ML, Gunn-Moore DA.
mellitus. In: Canine and feline
347-51.
Nutritional status of canine and feline
endocrinology and reproduction. 3rd ed.
9.
Healy LA, Ryan AM, Sutton E, et al.
patients admitted to a referral veterinary
St Louis Missouri: Saunders; 2004.
Impact of obesity on surgical and
internal medicine service. Nutr
p. 486-539.
oncological outcomes in the management
2004;134[85):2050S-25.
32.
Ward N. Nutrition support for patients
of colorectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis
22.
Maxwell A, Butterwick R, Batt RM.
umdergoing gastrointestinal surgery. Nutr |
2010;25:1293-9.
Camacho-Hubner C. Serum insulin-like
2003:1:2-18.
10.
. Amundson DE, Djurkovic S, Matwiyoff 
 growth factor (IGF]-l concentrations
33.
Lewis Sl, Andersen HK, Thomas S. Early 
 GN. The obesity paradox. Crit Care Clin
 are reduced by short-term dietary
enteral nutrition within 24 h of intestinal
Oct 2010;26:583-96.
restriction and restored by refeeding in
 surgery versus later commencement
11.
 Clutton RE. The medical implications 
domestic cats (Felis catus). I Nutr
of feeding: a systematic review and
 of canine obesity and their relevance to
1999;129(10):1879-84.
 meta-analysis. J Gastrointest Surg
anaesthesia. Br Vet J 1988;144:21-8.
23.
Galatos AD, Rapatopoulos D. Gastro-
2009;13:569-75.
12. Self, I. Personal communication, 2011.
oesophageal reflux during anaesthesia in
34.
Elia M. Metabolic response to starvation.
13.
Maurer l, Taren DL, Teixeria Pl, et al.
the dog: the effect of age positioning and
injury and sepsis. In: Payne-James J.
The psychosocial and behavioural
type of surgical procedure. Vet Rec 
Grimble G, Silk D, editors: Artificial
characteristic related to energy
1995:137:479-516.
nutrition support in clinical practice.
misreporting. Nutr Rev 2006;62
24. Kushner Ll, Shofer FS. Incidence of
London: Greenwich Medical Media Ltd;
[2 Pt 1):53-66.
 esophageal strictures and esophagitis after
2001. p. 1-34.
62
Nutrition for the surgical patient
Chapter
6
 35. Zoran DL. The carnivore connection to
undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy.
52.
Ryan AM, Reynolds JV, Healy L, et al.
nutrition in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
J Parent Enteral Nutr 2006;7(1):5-13.
Enteral nutrition enriched with
2002;221(11 ):1559-67.
44.
Kawasaki N, Suzuki Y, Nakayoshi T, et al.
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) preserves 
 36. Center S. Pathophysiology of liver disease:
 Early postoperative enteral nutrition is
lean body mass following esophageal
normal and abnormal function. In:
useful for recovering gastrointestinal
cancer surgery: results of a double-blinded
Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR,
motility and maintaining the nutritional
randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg
Williams DA, Meyer Dl, editors:
 status. Surg Today 2009;39:255-30.
2009;249:364-5.
 Stombeck's small animal gastroenterology.
45.
 Nagata S, Fukuzawa K, Iwashita Y, et al.
53.
 Saker KE. Nutrition and immune
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders 
 Comparison of enteral nutrition with 
function. Vet Clinics North Am Small
Co: 1996. p. 553-631.
 combined enteral and parenteral nutrition
Anim Pract 2006;36:1199-224.
37. Freitag KA, Saker KE, Thomas E, Kalnitsky
in post-pancreaticoduodenectomy
 54. National Research Council. Chapter 3.
J. Acute starvation and subsequent
 patients: a pilot study. Nutrition Journal
Energy In: Nutrient requirements of dogs
refeeding affect lymphocyte subsets
2009;8:24-6.
 and cats. Washington DC: The National
and proliferation in cats. J Nutr 
46. van Berge Henegouwen Ml, Akkermans 
Academies Press; 2006. p. 28-48.
2000;130:2444-9.
LM, van Gulik TM, et al. Prospective.
55.
.Justin RB, Hohenhaus AE.
38. Pearl ML, Valea FA, Fischer M, et al. A
randomized trial on the effect of cyclic
Hypophosphatemia associated with
randomized controlled trial of early
versus continuous enteral nutrition on
 enteral alimentation in cats. J Vet Intern
postoperative feeding in gynecologic
 postoperative gastric function after
Med 1995;9:228-33.
oncology patients undergoing intra-
 pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenec-
56. Armitage-Chan EA, OToole T, Chan DL.
abdominal surgery. Obstet Gynecol
tomy. Ann Surg 1997;226:685-7.
 Management of prolonged food
1998;92:94-7.
47. Hulsewe O'Toole T, Chan DL. Nutrition
deprivation, hypothermia, and refeeding
39. Chan DL, Freeman LM, Rozanski EA,
 support for the surgical patient. In:
syndrome in a cat. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 
et al. Alterations in carbohydrate
Payne-James J, Grimble G, Silk D, editors:
2006;16:S34-41.
metabolism in critically ill cats.
Artifcial nutrition support in clinical
57.
 Solomon SN, Kirby DS. The refeeding 
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2006;16:
 practice. London: Greenwich Medical
syndrome: a review. J Parent Enter Nutr 
S7-S17.
Media Ltd; 2001. p. 605-16.
1990;14:90-5.
 40. Thorell A, Nordenstrom J. Metabolic
48. Garcia-de-Lorenzo A, Zarazaga A,
58. Saker KE, Remillard RL. Critical care
complications of parenteral nutrition. In:
 Garcia-Luna PP, et al. Clinical evidence
 nutrition and enteral assisted feeding. In:
Payne-James J, Grimble G, Silk D, editors:
for enteral nutritional support with
Small animal clinical nutrition. 5th ed.
 Artifcial nutrition support in clinical
glutamine: a systematic review. Nutrition
Topeka, Kansas, USA: Mark Morris
 practice. London: Greenwich Medical 
2003;19:805-11.
Institute; 2010. p. 446-76.
Media Ltd; 2001. p. 445-59.
49. van Stijn MF, Boelens PG, Richir MC,
59.
1.Robertson JE, Christopher MM, Rogers
41. Calder PC. Symposium 4: hot topics in
 et al. Antioxidant-enriched enteral
QR. Heinz body formation in cats fed
parenteral nutrition - rationale for using
nutrition and immuno-inflammatory
baby food containing onion powder. I Am
new lipid emulsions in parenteral
 response after major gastrointestinal
Med Vet Assoc 1998;212:1260-6.
nutrition and a review of the trials
 surgery. Br J Nutr 2010;103:314-28.
G0.
Hickman MA, Cox SR, Mahabir S, et al.
performed in adults. Proceedings 
50.
Bengmark S. Econutrition and health
Safety, pharmacokinetics and the use
of the Nutrition Society 2009;68:
 maintenance - a new concept to prevent
 of the novel NK-1 Receptor antagonist 
252-60.
Gl inflammation, ulceration and sepsis.
maropitant (Cerenia) for the prevention
42. Donabedian H. Nutritional therapy and
Clin Nutr 1996;16:24-8.
of emesis and motion sickness in
infectious diseases: a two-edged sword.
51.
 McClave SA, Chang WK, Dhaliwal R,
cats. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 2008;31:
Nutrition Jourmal 2006;5:21-30.
Heyland DK. Nutrition support in acute
220-9.
43.
Goonetilleke KS, Siniwardena AK.
pancreatitis: a systemic review of the
61.
 Chan DL. Nutritional support of critically
Systematic review of perioperative
literature. J Parenter Enteral Nutr
ill patients. Waltham Focus 2006;
nutritional supplementation in patients
2006;30:143-56.
16(3):9-15.
9
Section
2
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, J.F Ladlow, J.L. Demetriou
Diagnostics, equipment and implants
There are many modifications that can be madeto the practice, waiting
ultrasound or more advanced imaging such as computed tomography
room and cat ward that can ensure the cat is treated in an optimum
or magnetic resonance imaging. The more advanced imaging tech-
environment and that may also minimize stress and fear that a visit
 niques may be particularly useful for obtaining information on metas-
to the vet may initiate Advice and training for both owners and staff
tasis and invasiveness of tumors, which can be very helpful in deciding
in aspects of feline behavior will help with both transporting the cat
whether surgery is indicated or planning for large surgical resections.
to the practice and improving owner satisfaction. Cats can be fastidi-
 Endoscopy is increasingly used to investigate conditions of the respira-
ous eaters, thus stress and pain following surgery can contribute to a
tory, gastrointestinal, and urinary tracts. The specific equipment
reluctance to eat In anticipation of postoperative anorexia, it can be
required for this procedure, including the appropriate sizes to use in
sensible to place a feeding tube and thetypes of tube to use and where
the cat, is described in a separate chapter.
and how to place the tube are described in a chapter on feeding tubes.
The remaining chapters in Part 2 cover the indications and practical
Investigating feline diseases both preoperatively and postopera-
use of sutures, implants, instruments, and surgical drains that could
tively will often require diagnostic imaging. including radiology and
be valuable in feline general surgery.
Chapter
Cats in the practice
S. Rudd, J.L. Demetriou, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
 auaadxa inyssans e aq ue aoeid Aieuaan e ot asia e 'se iod 
attitudes and poor handling techniques of a cat with fear and fear
that begins as soon as there is a small alteration in the cat's routine.
aggression will only heighten the problem. Conversely, empathy. a
Changes such as fasting the cat in the morning, or the cat finding the
calm approach and careful consideration as to how to make the envi-
cat flap locked can cause anxiety. Anything unfamiliar or threatening
ronment less stressful for cats will have an extremely positive impact,
that the cat then sees, hears, smells, or experiences such as the sight
 possibly leading to all cats receiving better treatment and more accu-
of the cat basket, or being placed into it, followed by a journey to the
rate and thorough monitoring. There is also the added benefit that
leay ou aeesa uau aeu sans siul inyssans Auanba s! 'su
there will be a reduction in stress for the staff as well as the cat. Stress
and a cat's natural response to fear is to run away and hide, ie, the
can have a signifcant impact on a cat's appetite and immune system
flight response. However, due to the physical restrictions of being in
and so a reduction in stress will aid a better and more rapid recovery.
the cat basket and then the inevitable physical handling that occurs
which may then allow earlier discharge home.
within the veterinary practice, cats are often unable to utilize the flight
 Ideally, stress reduction should start at home and so providing
response and so they are only left with one option, which is to fight.
accurate and concise advice to clients about getting their cat to the
This chapter, therefore, will cover all aspects of a cat's visit to the vet
au o aau a i  au   si u
from home and on to the cat ward, with information provided on
practice (Box 7-1).5
how to make the visit as stress free as possible.
 sie rg ss ann da o aeid un sa ud
the practice does not mean a complete renovation of the premises.
Many things can be improved, even within a small practice, to make
it more cat friendly. To do this, it is necessary to'think cat' and imagine
REDUCING FELINE STRESS IN THE PRACTICE
how a cat would feel entering the clinic in its current set up. Cats have
incredibly strong senses and they are very instinctive animals, so it is
Stress recognition
important to think about what a cat may see, hear, smell or experience
at the practice.
Fear and anxiety in cats may first manifest as changes in ear position,
eyes and facial expression, body position, sweating from the paw pads,
and tail movement (Figure 7-1).' Fearful cats may attempt escape, and
vocalization such as hissing can indicate an escalation in stress. Overt
WAITING ROOM
aggressive behavior can include scratching and biting Some fearful
cats will freeze. It can sometimes be difficult to distinguish between
 In the reception area or waiting room one of the most typical causes
stressed and fearful cats with those in pain. The cat-friendly practice
of stress is the sight, smell and sound of dogs. So one of the main
a uu sau uu auau pe sund
aims is to keep these two species separate. Stress can be significantly
information about recognition of fear and anxiety in cats.2-4
reduced by having a separate waiting room for cats; however, this may
not be possible for many mixed practices, so some alternative options
are available (Table 7-1 and Fig. 7-2). If a cat-only waiting room is not
Management of stress
possible then moving the cat out of the waiting room into the exami-
Fear aggression is commonly seen in all veterinary practices and yet it
 nation room as quickly as possible can be helpful, particularly if there
is still widely unrecognized and often misinterpreted as dominance
are barking dogs in the waiting room. Wide shelves on the wall or
behavior, or it is casually disregarded as a negative character trait. How
 benches, and a ledge near reception for placing the carrier on prevent
a cat's behavior is interpreted will have a significant influence on how 
the need to place the cat at ground level, which is also dog level and
it is approached, handled, treated, and understood. Negative feelings.
 can be intimidating and fearful for the cat.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00007-X
67
Section
2
Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
A
B
C
Figure 7-1 (A) A very scared feral cat with flattened ears and narowed eyes. This cat is recovering after surgery for a hip fracture and hip dislocation
and cesarean. (B) A cat showing mild signs of fear, seated at the rear of the cage, with dilated pupils and pricked ears. (C) A fearful cat with the 
 classic ‘bottlebrush' tail and arched back indicating fear escalating to aggression.
 Box 7-1 Advice for owners on getting their cat to the veterinary clinic?
Behavior
Consider use of feline pheromone spray (Feliway) inside the carrier
Cats like familiar things - the cat carrier, car and veterinary clinic are
 thirty minutes prior to transport 
unfamiliar and can cause stress
The return
Stay calm - cats will sense changes in emotions
In multi-cat households a returning cat will smell differently, which
 Reward positive behavior such as the cat sitting calmly near
may cause aggression from other cats. Minimize this by:
the carrier
Leave returnee in the carrier for a few minutes to assess the other
 Fammiliarize the cat with being examined, e.g. handling ears, feet,
cats' reaction
mouth, etc.
If all cats appear calm and peaceful the cat can be released 
Accustomization
au daay uaul paanno seu luon snoaad io 'suasaad s! uosuat H
cat separate for 24 hours
Leave the cat carrier in a room where the cat spends time
If there is still stress after this time, contact your veterinarian
 Put familiar used bedding inside it with the cat's scent on it
 Synthetic pheromones (e.g. Feliway) can help provide sense of
 Place treats, toys, catnip inside the carrier
familiarity
 Be patient - accustomization may take time
 If the cat still dislikes the carrier - assess the carrier itself
The carrier
 Carriers that open from the top and front are ideal
Getting the cat into the carrier
Some cats can remain in the bottom of a top opening carrier and be
 If accustomization has not been successful or has had insufficient time
examined in the base where it feels secure
to work then:
Avoid carriers where the cat has to be pulled out
 Place the carrier in a small room with no hiding places
Choose sturdy strong carriers (cardboard ones can be fought out of 
 Stay calm and encourage the cat into carrier with treats / toys
by a determined fearful cat)
For top opening carriers lift reluctant cats in, cradling them gently
Consider covering the carrier with a blanket - some cats feel less 
Use familiar bedding inside the carrier
anxious if they cannot see out
The consulting room should be suitable and secure so that the cat
THE CONSULTATION
carrier can be placed on the ground and the door opened. It will be
 much less stressful for the cat if it is allowed to come out of the carrier
The consulting room
on its own accord rather than have a pair of unfamiliarhands dragging
it out Cats that will not leave the carrier should be lifted out by
aq oi paau ieun ssas yo sanos isy a 'uoi sunnsuo aun um
removing the top of the carrier, if this is possible; it is much less con-
considered will come from the general environment and in particu-
frontational to lift the cat from above than to pull the cat out from
larly the smell, sounds and lighting. Many of the ideas suggested in 
the front opening (Fig. 7-3). Top opening baskets are therefore recom-
Table 7-1 can also be incorporated into the consulting room and again
mended for cats.
it is essential to try and 'see' the consulting room from a cat's point
 Once out of their basket, cats frequently want to wander around the
of view. The other source of stress will be the structure of the consulta-
consulting room to assess their environment and therefore they
tion and the approach of the attending clinician or nurse to the cat.
should be given this opportunity while the history is being taken. It
68
Cats in the practice
Chapter
7
Table 7-1 Ways to reduce stress for the cat in the practice
Ways to reduce stress/fear
Senses it will help
Sight
Hearing
Smell
Have cat-only appointment/surgery times
√
 Section off part of the waiting room for cats only and ensure cats do not have to pass dogs to get there
√
√
 Have ledges for people to rest their cat carriers on so that the cat is elevated from the ground
Have seat dividers between groups/pairs of seats (Hg. 7-2)
 Section one end of the reception desk for cats only so owners can register and pay with no dogs around
√
 Offer an option of the cat staying in the car until the consultation room is ready (if it is not too hot)
√
saen laui ui sien ypeoudde pou saop bop laui ansua ot sua buse saniou Aeidsia
√
 Use pheromone plug in/sprays
 Have calming music playing. e.g. classical or rainforest sounds
Figure 7-3 Cat basket with a top opening lid provides easy access for
gently removing the cat from the basket.
is important to ensure that there are no small corners or gaps between
 or under the consulting room furniture that a cat may decide to hide
in, which could cause a confrontational struggle to get the cat out of.
Confronting a stressed cat in this way will only cause fear, which may
well result in fear aggression. A cat that is stressed before the clinical
 examination has been conducted will inevitably be a less than ideal
 patient and the resulting difficulty in handling will only lead to further
 stress and possibly aggression.
Having a litter tray in the consulting room may be welcomed by
B
some cats who have been kept indoors leading up to the trip to the
ed a o aun lyssas e eaau u pe ains Aeuaia
Figure 7-2 Options for feline-friendly waiting rooms. (A) A feline-only
Examining a cat with a full bladder may be stressful for the cat and
waiting room; the bench has been specially designed for cat carriers to
they may be reluctant to sit still, and become agitated. Litter trays must
be placed on them, and partitions provide the option of not placing cats
be completely changed after every use as the smell of another cat's
adjacent to each other. (B) A section of this mixed cat and dog waiting
waste could be very threatening to the cat, as well as a potential source
shop pue sien loy seae areedas apoud oi uaains e Aa papip s! woo
 of infection. A set of weighing scales in the consulting room will not
([A} Courtesy of Cambridge Cat Cinic.)
only be a reminder to weigh the cat at each visit but also make it a
69
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
possible. For a full description of a clinical examination of the cat see
Box 7-2 Tips for the cat owner in the clinic
Chapter 1.
The tone of voice used can make a huge difference to how a cat will
 Avoid behavior that may increase the cat's anxiety:
respond. Nervous, fearful and especially fear aggressive cats respond
Clutching the cat, talking or staring in its face 
to gentle calm tones of voice, with physical contact being minimal
Invading its personal space
 and slow. Certain words should be avoided, particularly those which
Making sounds intending to soothe such as 'shhh', which may
may sound like a hiss such as'shh..' or more blunt sounding words
 mimic another cat hissing
such as 'stop it!: Calm reassuring words such as 'it's alright ..' phrased
Avoid correcting bad behavior by loud reprimands or tapping
in a sighed breath will be much more effective and also help you to
the cat's head as this could provoke the fight-or-flight 
keep calm if you are feeling nervous by keeping your breathing slow.
reaction
steady and deep. Sometimes if the cat is getting stressed, simply stop-
 The cat dictates when it wants to be handled and the owner should
ping the examination for a short period of time can be enough to
not remove the cat until asked to do so by a member of the
allow the cat to relax again.
veterinary team
Reinforce positive behavior by petting. rubbing around ear or
Feline facial pheromones
 stroking: ignore negative behavior
 The use of pheromones is an increasing phenomenon in veterinary
practice, with the aim of reducing stress in the patient They can be
used in many environmental situations including in the waiting room,
consultation room and ward as well as being directly applied to the
clinician's hands while handling or examining the cat Hospitalized
 aul ou yeq ie au aei oi buaau iou Aq auaaxa yssas sa
cats that had synthetic feline facial pheromone (FFP) applied to a
waiting room or ward to be weighed.
towel in their cages significantly increased both their grooming behav-
 Offering guidance to owners as to how they should behave around
iors and food intake. Exposing cats to synthetic FFP during pre-
medication also made cats calmer during venous catheterization.? A
its stress levels can also help (Box 7-2), but care should be taken to
diffuser is best for housing areas, and a spray for application to towels.
 present this in an empathetic manner.
cages and tables.
The clinical examination
CAT WARD
 Some cats may find it less threatening to have the clinical examination
performed at their own level, on the floor. If this is not practical or
 possible then liftingthe cat onto thetable should be done with a calm,
A feline-only ward is certainly the most preferable choice when hos-
'siy spuey inon yus on uau surmoe 'yoeoudde yoous pue mois
pitalizing cats (Fig. 7-4). It is also important that a ward, whether
then after a few strokes, scooping them up underneath their caudal
se upns ainpasoid auy isai jo aneid e se pasn st paxiu io Auo-aua
'uoissaigae ieay liqiuxa Aeuu i uaut passains Aian st ieo aul jl xeioq
taking a blood sample or measuring blood pressure should be done
so lifting in the same way but with one hand placed gently over the
-d ainpaoi aun sua zuaed a ieu os piem aun uoy Aeme
back of the neck will block the cat's view of the other hand approach-
formed is not seen or heard by the other patients. It is also preferable
ing and also give more control if the cat attempts to bite If the con-
for the patient itself that procedures are performed elsewhere, so that
sulting room has a window, then it is well worth placing the
they associate the ward with being a place of calm and not with
examination table next to it so the cat can look outside while perform-
anxiety and stress.
ing the clinical examination, as this can be a great distraction tech-
 Cats should be hospitalized in quiet wards with minimal traffic and
nique. Non-slip matting (e.g., a rubber mat, yoga mat or plastic table
away from dogs. If this is not possible, then kennels should be selected
top cover) is essential for table-tops when examining cats; in addition,
to minimize the stress, eg., kennels furthest away from dogs, kennels
having a non-slip blanket on top for the cat to sit on can help them
that are quieter and free from traffc and kennels that are of suitable
feel more at ease.
height to ensure minimal confrontation from people and dogs. It is
Consideration should be given to the uniform the examiner is
also important to choose kennels that give consideration to the
wearing as examining a cat while wearing a scrub top rather than a
[aay sie day al 'ae au yo ino pue uiie e sul jo Aiayes pue asea
white coat may be less stressful for some cats, especially if they have
even more secure, the kennels can be pre-treated with a feline phe-
had a previous bad or frightening experience at a veterinary practice.
romone spray.
 During the examination it is important to have the cat facing away
 The ideal cat ward should be fairly small in size [housing up to 12
from the person conducting the examination as this is less confron-
cats) as too many cats in the ward can be stressful. Cats are not socia-
Aian uaas ues ll ie Buns io uo-asey ie e Buuoeoidde jeuoe
ble with each other unless within their own social group, and so if a
threatening to them. When examining the cat's head where eye contact
cat can smell, hear or see any other cats this will cause stress. The cages
will be necesary, slow blinking in front of the cat conveys friendliness
should be positioned so they are on one wall and do not face other
and trust. Some components of the examination will be more stress-
cages, or so that they are at a 90° angle to each other (Fig. 7-4). It is
ful than others, e.g. taking the temperature, so these parts should be
useful to have cages of different sizes to accommodate the patients'
left until the end. Tickling the cat around the back of the ears and
specific needs, eg. larger kennels for larger cats and those who have
along the sides of the face will also often relax some cats while trans-
no exercise restriction, or for use for patients who are to be hospital-
Jo punoe on 'spuey inon ouo auomoaqd umo sieo aul suay
ized forlonger periods of time. Some cages with shelving incorporated
pheromones, however, will replace a good, calm handling technique.
in the cage will be more desirable for cats, as sitting on an elevated
Scruffing is a very dominant and aggressive way to hold a cat, resulting
shelf will help them feel more secure. If a cat is having a surgical
in confrontation and excessive power over a cat that will lead to
further stress and fear and so this technique should be avoided if
operatively but it is important to ensure that the cat has enough room
70
Cats in the practice
Chapter
7
Figure 7-4 A feline-only ward with kennels facing the wall. A small
ward housing no more than 12 cats is ideal. Two different-sized kennels 
 are available for different-sized patients and differing length stays.
 Figure 7-6 Non-stainless steel cages are warmer, less reflective and less
noisy and are preferable for cats. A pheromone is shown plugged in on
the far wall and cats are provided with cardboard box houses to hide or
Sleep in.
sapis aui ot padet iaays aouauuosul io iadedsmau jo araid e 'pasn aie
 of the cage may be useful to prevent this from happening.
The design of the front of the cage is also important. Perspex fronted
cages have the advantage of helping to prevent aerosol-borne disease
and helping in noise reduction, but they can also become quite hot
and some cats do not tolerate being so enclosed. These cages are,
however, useful as oxygen tents or for the nebulization of a patient.
aq o paapisuo aeau agaaul are sa pa-uado ria
preferable and even better if they have noise reducers to lessen the
sound when opening and closing the cage doors.
Bedding
 Ensuring that all feline inpatients feel warm, safe and secure within
their kennel is obviously essential. Putting a lining material into the
ale Aaui se sselgiaqy jo apeu sase ioy painbai aq lou Aeu jauuay
 not as cold as cages made from stainless steel and are easily cleaned.
Figure 7-5 This custom designed cage has an inbuilt shelf for cats to sit
 However, if a lining is used then it is better to use incontinence sheets
On. (Courtesy of Cambrioge Cat Clinic.)
sau sssiaqy uiis lm iadedsmau aui se ladedsmau ueu nauiei
when wet and contaminate the cat with ink on contact. On top of the
lining material, Vet Bedding is the most appropriate bedding material 
for cat kennels as its soft and insulating nature makes it ideal for cats,
 Table 7-2 Minimal suggested cage sizes for cat kennels in
ay oi suidiay tuaed a  ame yniui sed u aun alum
veterinary practices
them dry and reducing the risk of urine scalding.
 For recumbent cats or for cats with orthopedic trauma, a mattress
Height (cm)
Width (cm)
Depth (cm)
can be useful to give cushioning and comfort as well as helping to
 prevent pressure sores. Any mattress should be soft but firm and can
 Day patient
60
60
75
 actually provide an additional benefit for cats that are not fully ambu-
 Overnight patient
60
70/80
75
latory if it is the same depth as the litter tray, meaning that the cat
does not have to climb into it (Fig. 7-7). The mattress should be fully
 Longer stay
70
100
75 (or more)
 covered with a waterproof layer to prevent contamination of the foam
and thus becoming a fomite for infection.
Aeu ie Apeansun ue asne ieu saniul io saseas ym sie
benefit from having a non-slip surface to help them move around the
le au ieu pue slmoq ianem pue pooy Ken iai 'eaie sudaais e ioy
kennel. Carpet tiles or a non-slip bath mat are ideal for the bottom
is still able to stretch out and move around easily (Fig. 7-5). The
 of cages and also for when performing physiotherapy.
minimum ideal dimension for a kennel is a width of 80 cm, depth of
Hospitalization is stressful for cats and so providing them with
75 cm and height of 56 cm (Table 7-2). Kennels made from fiberglass 
somewhere to hide will greatly help their feeling of security. It will
Or plastic are preferable to stainless steel as they are warmer, less noisy
anpai oi diay os pue asuodsan iuai ieimeu iaue yiy on wuaui moe
and are not reflective, as some cats may find it frightening if they see
the chance of fear aggression. Hiding beds such as igloos, sacks and
a reflection of themselves (Fig. 7-6). However, if stainless steel cages
doughnut beds are ideal in this regard (Fig. 7-8). Each cat should be
71
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Figure 7-7 A cat recovering from surgery to its right hind limb. The cat
has been provided with a mattress and vet bedding. which give a soft.
三
comfortable and water repellent surface for resting and sleeping on.
Figure 7-9 A cardboard box can provide a safe haven for a cat, and the
cat can be lifted out of the cage in its box.
Bowls
Anorexia is common in hospitalized cats and so bowls for food and
water should be of the correct type and size to encourage the cat to
eat and drink. Most commonly, bowls are made from stainless steel,
plastic or ceramic. Stainless steel autoclavable bowls are better for
infection control purposes, but some cats may prefer less reflective,
plastic or ceramic bowls. Ceramic bowls are good for active cats that
may knock lighter bowls over and are useful for cats with limb dress-
ings who keep knocking their water over due to poor spatial awareness
and maneuverability. A clip-on bowl on the cage front is also useful
for cats at risk of getting their dressing wet. Ceramic and plastic bowls
are also more suitable than stainless steel for cats with magnetic
collars, ensuring that the bowl does not stick to the collar. If a cat has
a collar with a bell or disk on it the noise from it colliding with a
stainless steel bowl as it is eating may alarm some cats and discourage
them from eating. Plastic bowls are less noisy and less cold and both
plastic and ceramic bowls can be easily disinfected. It is essential,
tion and that the bowls are thoroughly rinsed and dried before use.
 Figure 7-8 A tepee style igloo type bed provides a comfortable and 
Bowls for food should be shallow enough to allow a cat to eat without
safe haven for a cat while it is hospitalized for treatment. (Courresy of
its whiskers touching the sides as this sensation can be off-putting for
Cambridge Cat Clinic.)
cats. The cat's muzzle size and shape should also be considered. For
example, a Persian should not be given a deep bowl as they will find
it diffcult to reach the food. Owners may wish to bring in their own
bowls to minimize the stress of unfamiliar objects but again, they
assessed to see what type of bedding is most suitable. For example, a
must be correctly cleaned and disinfected to prevent them acting as
cat who wants to hide underneath a vet bed may prefer a hiding sack
fomites.
 as e s 'i as aan e u ia o q o
confident cat may prefer a doughnut bed. The cat's temperament
Cat litter
should also be assessed before selecting a hiding place A bed that is
diffcult to get the cat out of, e.g. an igloo, will be very stressful for a
When admitting a cat into the hospital it is important to find out the
fear aggressive cat. A cardboard box would be more suitable as a place
cat's toileting preferences. Many cats will only toilet outside and so
to hide as it will not only provide security for the cat but make it a
E jl aadsiad suai e ua jyssans Aan aq ue uoneznidsou
lot easier and less stressful for the cat as it will be simpler to remove
cat eliminates outside, putting soil or sand in a litter tray may be
the box (and cat) out of the cage and then lift the cat out of the top
 preferable to using a wood or paper based litter. However, even
of the box (Fig. 7-9). It is important to avoid changing unsoiled
cats that are used to using litter trays may have a litter type preference
bedding and cleaning marked parts of the cage as the cat will mark
and so it can be very helpful to check with the cat's owner on
its territory by rubbing pheromones on parts of their cage.
admission.
72
Cats in the practice
Chapter
7
Some cats may only eliminate in privacy so hooded litter trays may
be helpful or, for smaller kennels, screens can be made from card-
board. The size of the litter tray should also be considered. Litter trays
should be of decent size to allow the cat to get in and maneuver
around comfortably (minimal size 2l cm x 3l cm). The depth of the
tray is also important Senior cats and any cat with ambulatory diff-
culties should have a shallow litter tray for ease of access or the access 
se yidap aues aul jauuay aul ui ssaeu e gusn Aq ls iaisea apeuu
the tray. Litter trays should be cleaned out after every use as some cats
will not use the litter tray again until the waste along with any traces
sh li uoeunua ieou aenoua ol panoua uaq sey laus io
generally considered preferable to dispose of all of the litter and offer
a fresh litter tray after every use so no trace is left This is also a fail-
safe approach to ensure no cross contamination between cats via their
litter trays, which may occur if the trays are simply 'scoop cleaned;"
without diligent disinfection of the scoop.
PERSONNEL
 Owners will be able to detect which members of the veterinary team
truly connect and offer empathy with their cats. Veterinary team
members who apply both the art and science of veterinary nursing
by rubbing around its head, for example, can be time well spent,
care will not only deliver optimal healthcare to the cat but earn the
reducing stress for the cat and thereby making the cat more ammenable
confidence and appreciation of the practice clients.! Each member
for essential procedures to be performed such as venous catheterization
 and venipuncture.
of the veterinary team has a role in the cat's experience in the clinic,
from the receptionist admitting the cat, to the veterinarian examining
it, the veterinary nurse or technician, and ward assistants looking
after the cat and nursing it when hospitalized. A team approach is
Box 7-3 Nurse/technician communication with owners
therefore required to make the cat's (and owner's) visit as stress free
and smooth as possible. Responsibility extends from giving advice
Daily communication with owners while the cat is hospitalized
about transporting the cat, to using feline-friendly examination tech-
 Discuss and explain discharge instructions with owners
niques and recognizing feline behavior patterns.1
Instruct and show owners how to give medication to their cats 
Petting. giving treats or stroking the cat can help
Nurses and technicians
Using a bathroom sink lined with a soft towel or fleece provides 
 an enclosed safe place for administering medication
 The veterinary nurse or technician plays an important role in the
 practice in both caring for the cat and communicating with the owner
Talk about stress reduction in the home
and other members of the team. Involving the nurse can help improve
Discuss ways of encouraging eating in inappetent or anorexic animals
-a u pa as aay ui a pe 
Demonstrate tube feeding 
enced nurse should understand the basic needs of the cat, normal
Show how to check bandages
feline behavior, feline disease processes and subtle clinical signs that
Owners might overlook.' The nurse who is caring for the cat in the cat
ward should try and develop and establish a rapport with the cat (Fig.
7-10); this will be beneficial for both the cat and the ease of nursing
special requests, such as keeping the cage covered, daily exercise,
the cat and performing tasks such as venipuncture, catheterization.
grooming, etc.
physiotherapy, dressing changes, etc A less anxious cat will be easier
to treat, making performing tasks and giving treatments easier and
Owner communication
faster, thus saving time, and giving job satisfaction to the veterinary
team, with a contented cat and tasks accomplished without agression
Buununn aun puads o aqe suaq aneaidde siaumo Aun
from the cat Some aspects of nursing care of cats are unique: for
with a member of the veterinary team about their cat A significant
example, cats are fastidious groomers and if unable to complete this
 part of this role can be delegated to the veterinary nurse or technician,
task themselves they may need assistance. Removal of blood, tape
particularly when the veterinarian's time may be limited; this has the
from catheters, and antiseptic solutions by washing can decrease the
benefit of increasing job satisfaction and often improving owner com-
amount of cleaning for the cat to do!
munication and satisfaction. There are many areas of the veterinary
Time should be set aside for transfer of case responsibility to other
care and treatment on which a competent veterinary nurse or techni-
nurses on duty, or the night staff. In addition to discussing the cat's
cian can communicate and demonstrate to owners very adequately
medical problems, medication and nursing needs it is important to
(Box 7-3). Communication with the owner while the cat is hospital-
also discuss the cat's temperament, likes and dislikes. This informa-
ized can appease the anxious owner. If an empathetic technician or
tion can be transferred verbally between staff or written instructions
nurse is talking to them on the telephone and communicating to the
included on a sheet on the kennel, or in the animal's notes or com-
owner about the cat's appetite and general well-being, then that will
puter record. Pertinent information would include diet, choice of food
often be more important to the owner than the veterinarian's tele-
bowls, choice of bedding, and hiding place, litter tray, and any other
 phone call about their cat's recovery from its illness or trauma. Often
73
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
the two will go hand in hand. The nurse willalso have the opportunity.
It is widely held that patients remember only 80% of what they
to ask the owner about the cat's lifestyle and preferences at home. If
-nsuos aul aeal Aaun au aul Aq ioiop iiaul Aq piot uaaq isnl aaey
the cat is not urinating in the litter tray in the hospital, knowing that
ing room, and around 50% by the time they leave the building.* We
aui u los auos surund iduoid juau auoy le apisno saos sAemie 1!
should expect that pet owners would have similar powers of recall
cat's litter tray - this can often have an almost instantaneous result
concerning their pets' health. Verbal communication with owners
and prompt urination in a cat. Favourite foods, types of food bowls
when discharging patients should be aided and supplemented by
 and bedding can also be enquired about and subsequent changes to
written instructions, with illustrations where appropriate, and dem-
mirror the routine at home can result in a happier and less stressed
onstrations such as showing how to hold a cat for giving a tablet either
cat that is more inclined to eat while hospitalized.
on a model, their own cat, or with multimedia resources.
REFERENCES
1. Carney HC, Little S, Brownlee-Tomasso D,
4.
Harvey, A. Cat friendly practice 2. Tisbury.
7.
Griffth CA, Steigerwald ES, Buffngton
et al. AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly
UK: Feline Advisory Bureau; 2006. p. 1-32.
CA. Effects of a synthetic facial
nursing care guidelines. J of Fel Med Surg
5. AAFP and ISFM. Getting your cat to
pheromone on behavior of cats. J Am Vet
2012;14:337-49
the veterinarian. www.fabcats.org/
Med Assoc 2000;217:1154-6.
2.
Rodan I, Sundahl E, Carney H, et al.
publications/2011_FelineFriendlyClient_
8.
Kronen Pw, Ludders IW, Erb HN, et al.
AAFP and ISFM feline-friendly handling
Handout.pdf.
A synthetic fraction of feline facial
guidelines. J Fel Med Surg 2011;13:
6. Natoli E, Baggio A, Pontier D. Male
pheromones calms but does not reduce
364-75.
and female agonistic and affliative
 struggling in cats before venous
3. Riccomini F, Harvey A, Rudd S. Creating a
relationships in a social group of farm
Gatheterization. Vet Anaesth Analg
cat friendly practice. Tisbury, UK: Feline 
cats (Felis catus L.) Behav Processes
2006;33:258-65.
Advisory Bureau; 2005. p. 1-41.
2001;53:137-43.
74
chapter
Diagnostic imaging
S. Ohlerth, P. Kircher, B. Posch
Diagnostic imaging forms an essential part of the investigation for
 particular, the abdomen. US is rarely specific, but it is very sensitive
many general and oncological diseases in cats. Radiology and ultra-
in depicting soft tissue disease. The size, extent, architecture, relation-
sound remains the mainstay for initial investigations for many condi-
ship to neighboring tissue and involvement of lymph nodes may be
tions, but with the advent of easier accessibility to advanced imaging
determined. For a final diagnosis, US may be used to guide fine needle
such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging
aspirates or true cut biopsies.
(MRI) these modalities are becoming used more frequently. The indi-
cations for each imaging modality for investigation of thoracic and
Computed tomography
abdominal disease and for imaging the brain will be covered in this
section. For further general information on diagnostic imaging and
Due to an increasing availability and the advantages of multi-slice CT
specifically radiography of bone diseases, the reader is referred to
'ssi as uui aeiaans yoeue aaiel ym uoe ise)
other specialized texts' and the imaging chapter in Feline Orthopedic
increased spatial resolution), this technology has also become a
Surgery and Musculosheletal Disease.
highly valuable tool in veterinary medicine. As a cross-sectional
imaging technique, CT avoids superimposition of adjacent structures
by imaging a transverse slice. Consequently, soft tissue structures
u 'sueo silad io 'uieiq ian lesu aul sa sauoq Aq padoaua
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING MODALITIES
be imaged well with CT whereas a radiographic image of these regions
is of limited value. CT has also been increasingly used for imaging the
The present chapter focuses on the species-specifc radiographic dif-
lung, mediastinum and various abdominal organs. CT angiography is
ferences in the feline thorax, abdomen and neurocranium. The use of
easy to perform with a peripheral intravenous injection of contrast
advanced imaging modalities for these areas will be briefly discussed,
medium (Fig. 8-1). With multi-slice CT, an arterial and venous phase,
giving some indications where they may give additional information
and for the liver a portal phase, can be imaged. In oncological dis-
 Bugeu ioy ln jo asn aul auened Kqdeioipei Aq papiaond iou
eases, CT angiography may indirectly help to identify and describe a
the brain.
 neoplastic lesion on the basis of its relationship to adjacent arteries
or veins (mass effect, compression and invasiveness), or the lesion
Radiology
itself may be outlined on the basis of its individual perfusion/contrast
enhancement pattern.
aul ioy Pie psougeip leluaepuny isou aul siuasaidan Asoioiped
investigation of thoracic and abdominal soft tissue structures. It is
 Magnetic resonance imaging
used in conjunction with an accurate history, physical examination
and other diagnostic tests. Results of the clinical, laboratory and radio-
MRI has long been the imaging modality of choice for neurologists
graphic examination may indicate the need for further diagnostic
and it is now also becoming a more important imaging modality for
imaging. Radiographic contrast studies are routinely used to evaluate
 other clinical specialties. MRI has great potential for increasing use in
the urinary tract, the gastrointestinal tract or vascular abnormalities
 other disease complexes, especially if soft tissue components need to
such as portosystemic shunts.
euanod aul sey gugeui yn paylenh pue payuenh passasse aq
to have a great impact in oncological and endocrinological disease
Ultrasound
(Fig. 8-2).
au aoy pasn Aapim si (sn) Ayderouosenn 'auia Areuaaa u
aun sasn ll peaisul sei-x jo asn aue snouim saseui saneiaua i
evaluation of soft tissues in the neck, the mediastinum and, in
 magnetic properties of protons distributed in the patient's body. Two
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00008-1
75
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
MRI systems are currently in standard use in veterinary medicine,
namely low-field systems (low magnetic feld strength) using open
au spiay suseu iasuans uim suasis anoq-paso pue siauuis
a au a suae a o ssae ia iao sss uao
fields give better local resolution with slightly shorter scanning times.
The higher the magnetic feld, the more artefacts are possible. The
Ac
dn) maia yo play asiel e apiaond Allensn (eisal I<) siauueos piay-qay
to 50 cm) giving the possibility of performing whole-body imaging.
which is excellent for tumor staging. Sequences used for staging
include the fast turbo short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging.
which is widely used in human medicine nowadays.
PV
 Different sequences can be used during MRI. The recorded signal is
PV
analyzed by a computer using a complicated calculation method and
Depending on the form, duration and intensity of the high-frequency
aul (aouanbas asind,) isaianul jo uoigai aul oiul pannua sasndu!
tissue contrast in the image can be determined primarily through dif
ferent Tl- or T2-relaxation times, but also through the proton density
alone In this context, we refer to Tl-, T2- or proton density (PD)-
weighted sequences. Depending on these weightings, a tissue may be
visualized with different signal intensities. For example, pure water
shows low signal intensity in Tl-weighted sequences, and high signal
RA
high signal intensity in both weightings, whereas muscle shows
 medium signal intensity in Tl-weighted images, but low signal inten-
sity in the T2-weighted ones (Fig. 8-3). The tissue contrast can be
aul st alduexa uy 'sanuanas ieiads guisn iauny uaaa paieindueu
STIR sequence allowing selective suppression of the fat signal with
high signal visualization of fuids in basically a T2-weighted sequence.
The same can be done to extract the signal of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
in T2-weighted images of the central nervous system. This is done with
FLAIR-sequences (fluid attenuation inversion recovery) (Fig. 8-3)
Like CT and ultrasound scanning, MRI is a tomographic (slice)
method for producing a two-dimensional image. For CT the two-
dimensional images are formed by reconstructing the sagittal and
dorsal planes from the acquired transverse slices. MRl, in contrast, is
a true three-dimensional modality, which can acquire each plane by
itself without the need for post-scan reconstruction.5.6
B
The high tissue contrast in MRI is a major advantage compared with
X-ray techniques (radiography, computed tomography). Also, tissues
Figure 8-1 CT-angiography. (A) transverse plane and (B) left sagittal
can be distinguished by the different intensities created by using dif-
plane of a 9-year-old cat with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and
ferent sequences, allowing far better assessment of soft tissue disorders
sudden onset of dyspnea and right heart failure. The pulmonary veins
(Table 8-1). MRI is a very sensitive modality, which still lacks specifi-
(PV) and the aorta (Ao) show homogeneous contrast filling: a large filling
defect is seen in the right and left caudal pulmonary arteries (white
city. However, the combination of different sequences, with and
arrows) consistent with thrombosis. Caudal to the thrombus, the arteries
are again filled with contrast medium (black arrow). Secondary lung
and description of the extent of a lesion. This modality is useful for
changes also occurred (*). P out, pulmonary outflow tract; LV, left
 optimal surgery planning
ventricle.
B
C
jo uoe nsuupe-sod (a) pue -ad (v) sabewi panuia-ll lesaoa ien e ui jeues jeuids aui oui buipeaui eoudun leuidseed z-a ane
gadodiamide (gadolinium) and (C) dorsal STIR. In the T1-weighted image the space-occupying lesion is barely visible, whereas in the contrast enhanced
image the extent of the lesion is much clearer (asterisk). Note the absence of fat signal in the STIR (x).
76
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
A
 Figure 8-4 Incompletely mineralized costal cartilages in older cats can be
confused with rib fractures.
Technique
D
 A good radiographic technique is essential to maximize the usefulness
Figure 8-3 Comparison of (A) T1. (B) T2, (C) PD and (D) fluid
of thoracic radiographs. The air-filled lungs provide a high inherent
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) of the feline brain. Note the
contrast. High kVp/low mAs exposure factors (long-scale contrast
absence of fluid signal in the T1 and the FLAIR images, whereas in the
technique) will reduce this natural contrast and provide better lung
T2 image the fluid is bright in signal. In the fluid-sensitive sequences
(T2, FLAIR), the gray matter shows lower signal intensity than the fluid,
detail. The exposure should be made at full inspiration to maximize
whereas it is the opposite in T1 images. The PD, which displays the
lung contrast. The use of a fast-flm screen combination reduces the
density distribution of protons, shows perfect anatomical contrast.
exposure time and therefore motion blur. The use of a grid is not
necessary in a cat. The forelimbs should be pulled forward to avoid
superimposition and the head and neck are slightly extended. Rota-
Table 8-1 Representative tissue types with their signal
tion of the thorax should be avoided. If digital radiographic technique
behavior in T1 and T2 images
is used, then an appropriate algorithm should be chosen and exposure
factors may need to be adapted.
T1 image
T2 image
Tissue
Hypointense
Hyperintense
 CSF, fluid collections, edema
Standard radiographic views
(dark)
(bright)
A minimum of two orthogonal views should be used for a standard
Hyperintense
Hypointense
Fat, some protein solutions, calcium
thoracic examination. Right lateral and dorsoventral views are often
deposits, transient blood flow
 preferred in the investigation of cardiac disease. Both lateral views
Hyperintense
Hyperintense
 Par ammagnetic solutions, extracellular
(and a dorsoventral [DV] or ventrodorsal [VD]) are commonly used
methemoglobin, proteins
to screen for pulmonary metastases. Consistency and an understand-
 ing of the effect of different positioning on the radiographic appear-
Hypointense
Hypointense 
Dense calcium deposits, bone, air,
ance are important.
rapid flow in vessels, hemosiderin,
Atelectasis commonly occurs in the dependent lung in lateral
metallic artefacts
recumbency, which can mimic or mask lung pathologies. The DV view
should therefore be taken prior to lateral views. Anesthesia-induced
atelectasis can be minimized by placing the patient in sternal recum-
THORAX
bency as soon as possible after induction.7-
High-quality survey radiographs can provide a lot of information on
Interpretive principles and normal anatomy
thoracic disease but there are some limitations. The use of other
A systematic radiographic approach is important to identify patholo-
imaging modalities, particularly ultrasound and CT, can provide addi-
gies and to recognize possible life-threatening conditions. The thorax
tional information, for example on heart structure and function, and
 can be divided into four basic anatomic regions: extra-thoracic region,
earlier evidence of pulmonary metastases, respectively.
 pleural space, lung parenchyma, and mediastinum.
The extra-thoracic region includes the thoracic skeleton and the soft
Radiology
tissue of the thoracic wall and diaphragm. These structures should be
included in a thorough evaluation of thoracic radiographs, in particu-
Thoracic radiographs play an important role in the investigation of
lar following trauma. Each individual rib, vertebral body and any of
respiratory, cardiovascular and oncological diseases and in the trauma
the included forelimbs should be scrutinized to identify skeletal
lesions. Incompletely and densely mineralized costal cartilages might
overview. However, radiographic findings are often non-specific and
mimic fractures in older cats (Fig. 8-4). The thoracic surface of the
interpretation might be challenging, particularly of pulmonary lesions.
diaphragm is visualized as it projects against the air-filled lung:
LL
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Figure 8-5 Radiograph showing the intrathoracic psoas muscles in a cat
(arrow).
caudally it silhouettes with the liver. In most cats, the ventral portion
 of the diaphragm is seen on a lateral view as a thin, soft tissue
structure, outlined by mediastinal fat cranially and falciform fat
caudally.
R
 The pleural space contains only a very small quantity of fluid that
Figure 8-6 Thoracic radiograph of a 14-year-old female cat. The heart is
 is not usually visible radiographically. Space-occupying abnormalities
 e s ee bs al  un e a
can distend the pleural space, e.g., fluid or air accumulation, pleural
aui ysaise ue aa pateipui uaas ag uen abing pioe eot e pue asano
masses and herniated abdominal content In cats, unilateral pleural
radiopaque linear metal density object is an overlying identity chip in the 
diseases are more common than in the dog. In contrast to dogs, the
cat's subcutaneous tissues.
caudodorsal lung felds are separated by a triangular-shaped soft tissue
opacity from the spine on a lateral view. This represents the intratho-
racic psoas muscles and should not be misinterpreted as pleural effu-
Box 8-1 Some potential indications for thoracic CT in cats
sion (Fig. 8-5).
 Pulmonary vasculature, bronchi up to their secondary divisions and
Peural space
some interstitial markings, are usually visualized radiographically in
a normal lung. Interpretation of lung parenchyma is challenging.
Recurrent pneumothorax
mainly due to the wide range in appearance of normal lungs and the
Effusion - distinguishing fluid from masses 
Overlap of radiographic features between diseases of different etiology.
Mediastinal disease
An initial practical approach is to identify any increase or decrease in
lung opacity and to determine the distribution, location and severity
of the detected abnormalities. The type of pulmonary pattern (bron-
Lymphoma
chial, vascular, alveolar, and interstitial) and determination of the
Thrombosis
Bunl Aissl iauuny o pasn Aquouuos aie uaed ueuuopaind
Heart-based tumors
abnormalities. It is useful to assess whether the airways (alveolar,
Airways and lungs
bronchi) are involved to determine if additional investigations are
Tracheal rupture
required (e.g. bronchoalveolar lavage). The presence of a mediastinal
shift on the DV/VD planes is a valuable indicator of changes in volume
Tracheal or bronchial foreign bodies
seen in hemithorax (lung collapse pulmonary mass).
 Mediastinal structures normally seen radiographically include the
heart, trachea, aorta, caudal vena cava, sometimes the esophagus, and
in young animals the thymus. The normal feline heart is more consist-
identifying pulmonary metastases that are not visible on thoracic
radiographs (Box 8-1).
maximum width of the cardiac silhouette should not exceed 2-2.5
intercostal spaces on a lateral view. The apex of the heart is usually
closer to the midline on a DV/VD view. In cats, the left atrium has a
Magnetic resonance imaging
more cranial position, which makes it more diffcult to identify on a
Imaging the thorax with MRI has been problematic due to respiratory
lateral view. In older cats, the heart commonly becomes more hori-
and cardiac movement leading to distracting artefacts. With newer
zontal in position and a focal aortic bulge might be noted (Fig. 8-6).
 In obese animals, large deposits of pericardial and mediastinal fat may
sequence techniques cardiac and respiratory gating is available, mini-
mizing these artefacts and leading to useful images. Modern equip-
mimic an enlarged cardiac silhouette The cranial mediastinum should
ment is able to gate heart rates up to 220 beats per minute Therefore
normally not exceed the width of the superimposed thoracic spine on
mediastinal lesions can be imaged with all the advantages MRI pro-
a DV/VD view. Sternal and tracheobronchial lymph nodes are not
vides. Also, space-occupying lesions of the pulmonary system can be
visualized unless enlarged.7-12
examined, although CT is still a superior modality for this system.
Computed tomography
Specific thoracic conditions
Computed tomography may be useful in cats with thoracic disease
where other diagnostic modalities such as radiography and ultra-
Cardiomyopathy
sonography have failed to identify the cause or extent of the disease
A variety of cardiac diseases can affect the cat, but myocardial diseases
(Fig. 8-7). CT has potential for providing additional information on
are most commonly encountered. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
a variety of thoracic conditions in cats, particularly the possibility of
(HCM) is the most common form of myocardial disease affecting cats.
78
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
A
B
right lung
liver
heart
rea:1.593cm2
Mean:-90.974SDe
C
Mn:-145.000Max:
caudal
Figure 8-7 An opaque structure of fat to soft tissue density (arrows) was diagnosed radiographically in the cardiophrenic angle and on the right in a
three-year-old cat with respiratory distress. The diaphragmatic contour was clearly seen in the (A) laterolateral view but not completely visualized on 
the (B) ventrodorsal view. It was unclear if the changes were consistent with lung pathology or a diaphragmatic hernia. With CT, a large defect was
seen in the diaphragm on the right (c) dorsal plane and (D) ventrally (sagittal plane). The cardiophrenic angle was filled with fat (*. mean of -91
Hounsfield units). Findings were confirmed surgically.
Many cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are clinically asympto-
congestive heart failure, such as pulmonary venous distension and
matic. Detection of a heart murmur and gallop rhythm should there-
 pulmonary edema. In cats, pulmonary edema has a variable appear-
fore warrant further investigation, even in an apparently healthy cat.
ance and distribution (Fig. 8-8), rather than being located in the
-Beip ot Apou sugeu asuas isou au s! Aydeisopienoua
perihilar region as with dogs.13 Pleural effusion is often present sec-
nose and to classify cardiomyopathy. Echocardiographic changes are
ondary to left-sided heart failure The concentric hypertrophy of the
characterized by focal or generalized increased thickness of the left
ventricular wall is often not recognized on radiographs and only an
ventricular free wall and interventricular septum. Left atrial enlarge-
abnormal lung pattern might be noted. Advanced left atrial enlarge-
ment can usually be recognized in symptomatic patients. Thoracic
ment is particularly obvious on the DV view, seen as a 'valentine'
radiographs, however, are indicated and superior to identify signs of
shaped heart.
79
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Thoracic trauma
 Diaphragmatic rupture is a common consequence of blunt extermal
trauma. Identification of abdominal viscera in the thoracic cavity and
Patients who have suffered thoracic trauma must be stabilized prior
loss of the diaphragmatic outline are conclusive signs for diaphrag-
 to radiography. In dyspneic patients a DV view should be taken to
avoid further respiratory compromise. Lesions that might be recog-
matic rupture. However, pleural effusion may be present and obscure
these structures. Cranial displacement and loss of abdominal organs
nized radiographically include pulmonary contusion, pneumothorax,
on an abdominal radiograph are useful, indirect signs to identify a
and rib fractures (Fig. 8-9).
diaphragmatic rupture In cats, only falciform fat and omentum may
 Pulmonary contusion may be evident radiographically as complete
herniate, which may be recognized by the loss of the diaphragmatic
-u lesiaun/eloaaie jo seae Aymed se io uoepiosuos aqol sun
a au cn leuan ped iey lews Aiaeai au Aq pue Aeua al
trates, commonly ipsilateral to the impact site. Radiographs taken
(Fig. 8-10).15 Positive-contrast gastrointestinal studies may aid the
immediately following trauma may not reveal these changes, which
 pl'eunen-isod sinoy ZI-omi suanedde auosaq Alensn 
diagnosis.
 Post-traumatic rib fractures should be differentiated from older,
 aq u aois ym ' q uou ia
Pulmonary metastases
in cats with chronic lower airway disease.
 Thoracic radiography is the screening tool most commonly used for
detection of pulmonary metastases in cats. However, pulmonary
nodules have to be at least 3-5 mm to be radiographically visible. A
 combination of lef lateral and right lateral ±VD radiographs is recom-
mended. Careful radiographic technique is necessary to provide high-
quality films to raise the identification rate of lung nodules. Manually
inflated lungs are often preferred for screening: however, anesthetic-
induced atelectasis may occur. Soft tissue opacity nodules are the most
common radiographic presentation of pulmonary metastatic disease
(Fig. 8-ll ). In cats, pulmonary metastases are often poorly marginated
and irregularly shaped (Fig. 8-12), in contrast to dogs. Metastasis of
 mammary gland tumors in cats manifests often as il-defined nodules
Buieewl pauayaid ayl s! IO s'uaed Aieuound asnyjip e se 10
modality for detecting pulmonary metastases in humans as smaller
nodules (1-2 mm) can be detected.17
ABDOMEN
Figure 8-8 Increased opacity of the caudodorsal lung fields in an 
High-quality survey radiographs can provide a lot of information on
silhouette is enlarged, compatible with cardiomyopathy.
abdominal disease but there are some limitations. The use of other
A
R
R
Figure 8-9 Right lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs of a male neutered 5-year-old cat that presented with dyspnea after a road traffic accident.
There is pneumothorax, with elevation of the heart, lung lobe consolidation and several rib fractures.
80
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT, or MRI can provide addi-
tional information, for example on organ structure and function and
invasiveness of neoplasia.
Radiology
Technique
Abdominal radiography is best done without a grid (table top) and
and 40 kVp should be used for an adult cat. For computed or digital
radiography, exposures may be somewhat lower, depending on the
manufacturer's recommendations. Likewise contrast should be
moderate to allow evaluation of abdominal detail and adjacent soft
tissues, eg., the abdominal wall, mammary gland or perianal region.
 A lateral and a ventrodorsal image should be taken during expiration
 and with the pelvic limbs at a 90° angle to the spine to maximize the
space for the abdominal organs. Extension of the legs should be
Figure 8-10 A 2-year-old female neutered obese cat presented with a
avoided. Cats should be fasted for 12 hours prior to radiography.
pelvic fracture. Thoracic radiographs show loss of continuity of the
 Enemas might also be useful in some situations, such as for imaging
diaphragm ventrally with elevation of the heart by a structure of fat
os e ose si aaul (ie woiey pateiuau ag ot paadsns) Asua
the urinary tract, to avoid superimposition of the fecal material on the
tissue density structure lying ventral to the sternum, which was found to 
ureters and bladder.
be a loop of intestine protruding through an abdominal wall rupture that 
was present in addition to the diaphragm rupture.
 Interpretative principles and normal anatomy
There are some important radiographic characteristics of the normal
cat's abdomen. In general, due to the different radiopacities of fat, soft
tissue and gas, the abdominal organs eg. the liver, spleen, stomach,
duodenum, jejunum, colon, kidneys, and urinary bladder, are well
depicted in the cat The average normal adult 'well-fed' cat has a
certain amount of subcutaneous, falciform and retroperitoneal fat,
which outlines the kidneys, urinary bladder and ventral border of the
liver and small intestinal loops; but fat may also cause crowding of
the organs in the central abdomen with a mildly reduced focal detail.
In kittens and emaciated cats, the normal abdominal detail is usually
reduced due to the lack of fat. In the thin or young cat, abdominal
effusion may be difficult to diagnose and can sometimes only be
assumed based on the fact that the abdomen appears rather large. The
normal liver lobes are pointed with smooth contours; a normal size
liver only just extends beyond the rib cage in the laterolateral view. A
distinctive feature in the cat is the gallbladder that may protrude
beyond the ventrocaudal border of the liver and this should not be
misinterpreted as a liver mass. The position of the cat's stomach is
normal on the lateral view if its axis is parallel with the ribs (upper
limit) or perpendicular to the spine (lower limit). In contrast to the
Figure 8-11 A 14-year-old male cat with multiple nodular pulmonary
dog, the cat's stomach on the ventrodorsal view is more angled and
metasta ses.
U-shaped, with the pylonus located at or just to the right of the
midline. Consequently, the duodenum does not run along the right
abdominal wall but is located just right of the midline. An intramural
radiolucent band (fat) in the stomach wall can be seen in some cats
without concurrent clinical gastrointestinal signs. Only the head of
the spleen is visible as a triangular structure just caudodorsal (lateral
view) and caudolateral on the left (ventrodorsal view) of the fundus
of the stomach. The spleen's tail is not normally visualized. The
adrenal glands in the cat may be mineralized and, therefore, depicted
Craniomedial to the kidneys. This is considered an incidental finding
without clinical relevance in the older cat The normal kidneys are
bean-shaped with smooth rounded contours and they are 4.0-4.5 cm
long on the ventrodorsal view. The bladder neck and urethra are rather
elongated. In some male cats, a very small os penis may be visible In
spayed cats, the gonadectomy sutures may mineralize and therefore
become visible caudal to both kidneys and dorsal to the bladder or
its neck. They may be mistaken as urinary calculi. In normal cats, the
pancreas, ureters, uterus, ovaries, and abdominal lymph nodes are
Figure 8-12 A cat with multiple ill-defined pulmonary metastases.
not visible.
81
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
 Box 8-2 Potential indications for abdominal CT in cats
wnauotadounaud bupaiap iot Auepou buibew! xouadns e s! 
Neoplasia
Intrapelvic or spinal neoplasia inaccessible to ultrasound
 CT contrast - provides information on invasiveness vs space-
occupying entities
Interventional radiology
Guide surgical intervention or radiotherapy
Computed tomography
CT has increasingly been used for imaging various abdominal organs
Figure 8-13 Laterolateral view of an operative mesenteric portography
(Box 8-2). The cross-sectional nature of this imaging process allows
(4) in a cat: a large single extrahepatic anastomosis (2) is seen between
greater characterization of disease processes in the abdomen In onco-
the portal vein (3) and caudal vena cava (1).
logical diseases, CT angiography may indirectly help to identify and
describe a neoplastic lesion on the basis of its relationship to adjacent
arteries or veins (mass effect, compression and invasiveness), or the
With cranial mesenteric arterial portography, a splenic vein shunt may
lesion itself may be outlined on the basis of its individual perfusion/
not be detected and splenoportography will miss mesenteric shunts.
contrast enhancement pattern.
 Ultrasound is an excellent modality for investigation of all potential
hepatic, vascular and urinary lesions. However, thorough knowledge
of the vascular abdominal vasculature is crucial and accuracy depends
Magnetic resonance imaging
largely on the operator's experience With B-mode, organ size can be
MRI is increasingly being used for investigation of abdominal disor-
estimated; a subjectively decreased liver volume, enlarged kidneys
ders. The main focus is on liver, kidney, and adrenal disease in dogs
[uauos ui punoy aq Aeu siseuon anen pue (yua  s't<)
but there is obvious potential in cats. Modern sequences use angiog-
apnu suuy aqissad 'sunus pane m sunus sruassoon
raphy for evaluation of portosystemic shunts. This technique is even
hepatic disease, portal vein thrombosis, or compression of the portal
less invasive than CT angiography, as it can be performed without the
u aae aq a ooyou jassaa seday 'any ssu e Aq uia
use of contrast media. For several years, diffusion weighted imaging
portosystemic shunts, eg. subjectively there may be a reduced size
(DWT) has been used in human medicine to better characterize tissues.
of the portal vein, low number of portal vessels, and an abnormal
Auaan ui paieahsaui suiaq si asn sil s Adosoads yn ym 'sa
intra- or extrahepatic vessel or multiple extrahepatic vessels may be
medicine, with the potential for the differentiation of benign and
depicted.21 The various tributaries of the portal vein which, in particu-
malignant diseases.
lar, are rather small in the cat, may be diffcult to identify because of
a lack of acoustic windows due to a small liver or intestinal gas. The
drainage of an intra- or extrahepatic shunt into a hepatic vein or the
Specific abdominal conditions
caudal vena cava may be easier to look for. In a portoazygos shunt,
the shunt vessel runs directly to the diaphragm without communicat-
Portosystemic shunts
ing with the caudal vena cava. Doppler ultrasonography may aid in
Diagnostic imaging plays a crucial role in the diagnosis, classification
the diagnosis of portosystemic shunts. In the caudal vena cava, at the
and surgical planning of portosystemic shunts. The goal is to identify
site of drainage, local turbulent flow may be seen. Portal blood flow
an abnormal vessel or multiple vessels, determine the origin and
velocity (10-12 cm/second in healthy unsedated cats) measured with
orifice, classify a congenital intrahepatic shunt as left, central or right
Doppler ultrasonography, may be increased or variable in cats with
divisional, and assess portal hypertension.
congenital portosystemic shunting, and reduced or sometimes pulsa-
 Survey radiographs aid in assessing liver size (if the liver is small
tile and hepatofugal with acquired shunts. In cats with arterioportal
the axis of the stomach is cranial to a line perpendicular to the spine
fistulas, multiple, large, tortuous hepatic vessels with a pulsatile fow
on the laterolateral view) and to search for causes of portal hyperten-
are found.21
paseaiout 'ssop oi isenuos ul sunus siuasisouod panbse ui uois
CT also represents a very sensitive tool for the diagnosis of porto-
renal size is not a common finding in cats but it still can occur.
systemic shunts and complete studies of the portal venous system and
 Selective angiography has been considered the method of choice
 potential drainage vessels are obtained.22 With multi-slice CT, dual-
for imaging the hepatic and portal vasculature. The techniques have
phase CTangiography may be performed. This technique images the
 been described in detail. 1.20 In general, with a portosystemic shunt,
liver immediately after peripheral intravenous contrast medium injec-
only a small or no intrahepatic portal system is outlined after the
tion (arterial phase) and a subsequent repeat examination (portal
injection of iodinated contrast medium. Instead, a portosystemic
 phase) during short periods of apnea after hyperventilation. Likewise,
anastomosis is seen (Fig. 8-13). If a shunting vessel is located cranial
the aorta, hepatic artery and its branches, caudal vena cava, hepatic
to the 13th thoracic vertebra, it is likely to be intrahepatic, and if it is
veins, portal vein and its tributaries (eg., cranial and caudal mesenteric
caudal to this vertebra, it may be considered extrahepatic.1? However.
veins, splenic vein, gastroduodenal vein), intrahepatic portal branches
the various methods do not outline the entire portal tributary system
and shunt vessels are well visualized. Three-dimensional images may
id su aao m is ae e u e
be reconstructed from the original data (Fig. 8-14). The anatomical
contrast medium is injected into a jejunal vein, and the best and most
information of CT angiography is of high quality and very helpful to
complete studies of the portal venous system are usually obtained.
the surgeons. It decreases surgical time and degree of dissection.
82
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
role in their diagnosis. Radiodense uroliths or calculi can be seen in
the renal pelvis and recesses, ureters, center (deepest point) of the
urinary bladder or in the urethra, e.g., the penile urethra. If radiolu-
cent calculiare present in theurinary bladder, survey radiographs may
paunn ail e anun sasurs ieidai anq aniea paul jo a
urinary bladder with focal loss of detail around the bladder neck due
to urethral obstruction. Radiographically, the ureters cannot be seen,
even if there are ureteral calculi present that are causing obstruction.
Urinary tract trauma is common in the cat. Shortly after the trauma,
only little or no radiographic changes are seen. Pelvic fractures and
focal bleeding/soft tissue swelling in the sublumbar or bladder neck
region may be suggestive of problems. Later, retroperitoneal effusion
(with renal or ureteral damage) or abdominal effusion (with urinary
bladder, cranial urethral rupture or leakage from the ureters at the
ureterovesical junction) may be found on the survey radiographs.
Mid- or caudal-urethral rupture may lead to urinary leakage into the
inguinal, perianal, and femoral sof tissues with resultant swelling.
Unilateral or bilateral regular renal enlargement may be a conse-
quence of hydronephrosis secondary to ureteral obstruction due to
calculi, pyelonephritis, ectopic ureter, ureterocele, ureteral stricture,
adjacent masses or neoplasia. Other differentials relevant fora surgeon
include subcapsular bleeding or perirenal pseudocyst. Irregular con-
tours and/or focal masses may result from a hematoma, absces, cyst,
primary or metastatic neoplasia, or infarcts.
 Diagnostic ultrasound represents an excellent tool to evaluate the
urogenital tract. Size and content of the renal pelvis, ureters, urinary
bladder and abdominal urethra may be easily examined. Normal
urine is anechoic, and therefore, cellular components increase its
echogenicity, and calculi show a hyperechoic surface with distal acous-
tic shadowing. Whereas obstructive disease may be confidently diag-
nosed, rupture of any segment can only be assumed. For example, a
thickened and atonic urinary bladder and abdominal effusion may
suggest bladder wall rupture; the leakage itself may not be detected.
Ultrasound is very sensitive in detecting free fluid in the abdomen or
retroperitoneal space The abdominal or retroperitoneal fat may
appear hyperechoic with inflammation. Although masses in the
kidneys, retroperitoneal space and urinary bladder may be easily
B
caudal
 detected, ultrasound is not specifc in their differentiation. Cystic
changes of the kidneys may be easily diagnosed based on their an-
Figure 8-14 Dual CT-angiography. (A) Transverse image at the shunting
echoic content and thin regular hyperechoic wall. Ultrasound is also
level and (B) 3D-reconstruction image from the left in a cat with a single
highly valuable for the diagnosis of uterine disorders, pregnancy and
extrahepatic anastomosis (3) between the portal vein (4) and caudal vena
complications, and cryptorchidism.
cava (2), located in the left division (1, aorta).
 Excretory urography is performed mainly to diagnose diseases of
the kidneys and ureters. Food should be withheld for 24 hours, a
 Per-rectal portal scintigraphy is a reasonably sensitive, non-invasive
 cleansing enema performed and patients should be normally hydrated
method of detecting a portosystemic shunt. Radiolabeled technetium
and in a stable condition for sedation or anesthesia. However, in
 pertechnetate is administered by enema, and its distribution is moni-
 au y paad aq ua e apaand au 'suai ein
tored with a gamma-camera. In a normal animal, the radiopharma-
Adua isy ot snoasenueape st ll sase aala Auieau ul snosuo
ceutical is absorbed into the portal ciraulation and subsequently
and then refill the urinary bladder with 0.5-1.0 mL iodinated contrast
enters the liver before reaching the systemic circulation In the case of
senuos aaiesau nuaiam Apoq sy/u oi-s Kuanbasqns pue wumipau
a portosystemic shunt, the majority of the radiopharmaceutical enters 
medium, e.g. room air (double-contrast cystography). After abdomi-
the systemic circulation and radioactivity appears in the heart before
nal survey radiographs, a bolus injection of ionic or non-ionic (in
it appears in the liver. However, per-rectal scintigraphy provides poor
anatomic shunt detail and the diagnostic quality of the studies may
(dose: 800 mg iodine/kg body weight). Ventrodorsal radiographs are
be poor due to inadequate rectal absorption. With trans-splenic portal
taken immediately. After five minutes, ventrodorsal, laterolateral, and,
 scintigraphy using pertechnetate, a more consistent visualization of
 to investigate the ureterovesical junction, oblique views are taken. If
the portal venous system and characterization of the shunt's anatomy
fluoroscopy is not available, repeat radiographs may be needed to
is achieved with a lower radionuclide dosage and improved image
image the ureters because of the contraction waves. Late views [20.
quality.23
30, and 40 minutes) are obtained to image the urinary bladder or slow
leakage (extravasation) of contrast medium (Fig. 8-15). Radiolucent
Urogenital imaging
calculi present as filling defects within the contrast-filled structures.
 If urethral or bladder rupture or radiolucent calculi are suspected,
Diseases of the urinary tract (urolithiasis, trauma) that may require
 positive-contrast urethrography combined with cystography is simple
surgery are common in the cat, and diagnostic imaging plays a crucial
and most effcient. The iodine contrast medium should be diluted
83
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
kidney
kidney
北
A
bladder
C
B
Figure 8-15 A traumatized cat with coxofemoral joint luxation. (A) Loss of retroperitoneal and caudal abdominal detail was found on the laterolateral
radiograph; the urinary bladder was not well defined and urinary tract injury was suspected. (B, C) The right ureter (black arrows) appears normal
during excretory urography. The left ureter cannot be depicted after five minutes. Instead, marked extravasation (*) is seen near the hilus of the left
BRAIN
MRI is the modality of choice for imaging disorders of both the brain
and spine The main advantage of MR imaging is the high sensitivity
in detection of lesions and the potential to characterize the type of
lesions.24 MRI is considered superior to CT for target delineation in
aun ul aiouo jo aepow aul sl ll aogaaun pue sio uiiq
instances.
CT imaging continues to be widely used for radiation treatment
bladder
planning because it provides necessary electron density information
for accurate dosimetric calculations.25
Figure 8-16 Urethral rupture at the level of the pelvic outlet: a 
laterolateral view of a positive contrast urethrogram shows an intact
Magnetic resonance imaging
penile urethra (black arrow) and some contrast medium entering the
Imaging the brain usually starts with T2-weighted and Tl-weighted
urinary bladder (white arrow). Nevertheless, marked extravasation of
images pre-contrast and post-contrast. PD-weighted images are also
contrast medium is seen within the pelvis (*).
often performed. In order to better assess the T2-weighted image a
FLAIR should be performed that suppresses CSF signal. In general, one
can say that an MRI study without at least one inversion recovery
with sterile water or saline to approximately 15% of its original con-
ue sanbai-auanbas uaraa ps aaidusui ue st auanas
centration. Negative contrast agents should not be substituted. The
-e1ed jo asn aut pue adAt uoisal inoqe uoneuioyui uiea ot pasn aq
urinary catheter tip is positioned in the penile urethra. Laterolateral
magneticcontrast media such as Gadolinium (Gadodiamide) increases
views are usually adequate and should be taken during the injection
the possibility of differentiation of lesion type,2 although its main
of the last 2-3 mL of the approximately 10 mL used for imaging the
value is in the increase in sensitivity in detecting lesions. Cherubini
urethra (Fig. 8-16). To avoid a misdiagnosis of either an intact or
et al24 found that signal characteristics were not useful in differentiat-
ruptured bladder, it is important to inject the entire calculated amount
ing neoplastic from inflammatory disease, nor was the presence of
(5- 10 mL/kg body weight) into the empty urinary bladder.
 perilesional edema. Imaging signs, such as mass effect or dural contact
84
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
A
D
C
D
Figure 8-18 Glioma in a cat. Transverse (A) T1, (B) T2, (C) T1 post-
Figure 8-17 Meningioma in a cat. Transverse (A) T1. (B) T2, (C) T1
buidnoo-aneds aul zl lennibes (a) pue uojieysujwupe apiweipopeb
lesion is visible in the left hemisphere, being of low intensity in the
post-gadodiamide administration and (D) FLAIR images. Note the
thickened calvarium under which a broad-based space-occupying lesion is
T1-weighted image and inhomogeneously hyperintense in the
seen, mildly hypointense in T1 and inhomogeneously hyperintense in T2 
T2-weighted image. The surrounding white matter is hypointense in
aa  sn    a e 
the T1 and hyperintense in the T2-weighted images, indicating that 
oiua og yads jou si ubis siul lien eanp palien-os aut y
peritumoral edema is contributing to the marked midline shift of the
sagittal view the mass protrudes under the tentorium and displaces
(dural tail sign), however, were very indicative for neoplasia, in this
the cerebellum caudally. leading to a partial hernia of the vermis through
case meningioma. The frst step in evaluating lesions in the CNS is to
the foramen magnum.
decide whether a lesion is extra- or intra-axial.
Specific brain conditions
images and hypointense on Tl-weighted images. In one study gliomas
all showed ring-enhancement, with mild to moderate peritumoral
Meningioma
edema noted in some cases?7 (Fig. 8-18).
The most common extra-axial lesion in cats is meningioma (Fig.
 8-17). The tumors usually have well circumscribed distinct margins.
Pituitary neoplasia
Most of them show significant contrast enhancement, which can be
homogeneous or inhomogeneous. In T2-weighted images they usually
 Another important intracranial neoplasm in cats is pituitary neoplasia
present as hyperintense compared to the surrounding tissue, whereas
ae '  an  a aa 'so u s (  as)
they can be completely isointense in Tl-weighted sequences. Peritu-
usually well circumscribed and are hypointense and heterogeneous
moral edema, which appears hyperintense in both the T2-weighted
LIO
 T2-weighted images and isointense and heterogeneous on
and FLAIR, hypointense in Tl-weighted images, is usually mild, and
T1-weighted images. Contrast enhancement is usually marked. Small 
very inconsistent with meningioma. The dural tail sign can be identi-
micro-adenomas may be missed with MRI, whereas CT can depict
fed in most of the cases and involvement of the calvarium, if present,
them in arterial phase contrast enhanced scans with a missing Or
is very indicative for this tumor type. This involvement is characterized
 displaced pituitary flush.
by a thickening (sclerosis) of the overlying calvarium.
Lymphoma
SCINTIGRAPHY
Lymphoma may be classified as either an extra- or intra-axial lesion.
The shape of the tumor varies from round to amorphous, usually
The physiological function of an organ or organ system is associated
being hyperintense on T2-weighted images with heterogeneous lesion
with its biochemical processes. These biochemical processes can be
pattern. They are iso- to hypointense in Tl-weighted images and they
shown by the tracer principle, first described by George Hevesy, a
generally show marked contrast enhancement.
Hungarian radiochemist (awarded the Nobel prize for chemistry in
1943). After the application of a radioactive tracer its distribution in
the body can be measured from the outside. Depending on the tracer.
Glioma
different physiological processes can be studied. Nuclear medicine
 Gliomas are characterized by intra-axial origin. The tumors can be
 provides a non-invasive way of showing morphology, and physiologi-
round or lobulated. They are usually hyperintense on T2-weighted
cal function of a targeted organ system.
85
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Slice width: 1
Re-Calculate)
Delete Profiles
 Box 8-3 Indications for scintigraphy for thyroid disease in
Scale Factor. 1.0
Display:YesNo
目
Sho ...)
the cat28
Evaluation of the functional status of the thyroid gland 
Determination of a cervical mass of thyroid or non-thyroid origin 
Detection and localization of ectopic thyroid tissue
Detection of functional metastatic tissue
Differentiation of malignant and benign thyroid disease
Determination of thyroid gland size for radiation therapy calculations
Evaluation of eficacy of therapy
 Evaluation of residual tissue after thyroidectomy
√
A
Current ROl: 6
Show ...)
Re-Calculate
ROI Delete
Histogram cells:0
ROI Clipboard
Table 8-2 The radionuclides used in thyroid nuclear medicine,
Display ROl:YesNoRoi Move:CurrentA11
their physical properties and their use 
Roi Move
Radionuclide
Emission
Half-life
Purpose
ROI Cells
Total
184
17
1
9mTechnetium (Tc)
6.01 hours
Morphology
172
72
172
113
113
113
113
123lodine (l)
13.3 hours
Morphology
and function
131lodine ()
d
8.02 days
Treatment
Figure 8-1g smTc scan of a normal cat. Both thyroid glands accumulate
iodine, being taken up and concentrated by thyroid gland tissue. As
the same amount of activity and the salivary :thyroid (ST-ratio) is lower
 Opposed to iodineit is not processed into thyroid hormone. Therefore
than 1. (A} The activity is plotted over a slice line showing the same peak
it can locate thyroid tissue but it does not give direct information
height over both thyroids. (B) The region of interest has been drawn
about the hormonal activity. It has to be noted that Tc-pertechnetate
manually over the thyroid glands (4, 2) and over one zygomatic salivary
gland (5). With this, the ST-ratio can be calculated. (Courresy of johann
is also concentrated within salivary gland tissue, gastric mucosa, in the
choroid plexus, andtheweat glands As opposedt T, idine3
Lang. Vetsuisse-Faculty Bern)
is trapped and processed in thyroid tissue. Iodine is continuously
concentrated into the thyroid tissue over a period of 24 hours. There-
Equipment
fore it can be used to quantify the hormonal activity. Nevertheless, it
is only used in selected cases as its half-life is longer and it is more
The equipment consists of a gamma-camera (scintillation camera),
expensive than "mTc.
which detects the gamma-radiation emitted from a radionuclide
To summarize, "mTc is suitable for the detection and localization 
applied to the patient The information collected is processed and the
 of thyroid gland tissue; I-123 is used to detect, localize and quantify:
displayed image contains two-dimensional distribution information
and I-131 is used for therapy as itis a beta-particle emitter (Table 8-2;
(equivalent to the anatomy) but also intensity per pixel (picture
see Chapter 15).
element). This intensity can be used to quantify the collected informa-
tion. Several software solutions exist to analyze the image. Regions of
 interest (ROl) are drawn around the selected organ to plot the amount
Procedure for thyroid scintigraphy
of accumulated radionuclide (Fig. 8-19).
 The imaging protocol is well described in veterinary medicine. The
This equipment is mainly limited to academic institutions, although
o uoeas o eia-e a uo s unan on sey iuaid
some units exist in private clinics. The equipment is expensive and,
 general anesthesia is required.
moreover, the regulations by national nuclear regulatory commissions
 are very strict, making its use complicated. The most commonly used
Technetium pertechnetate
ideal properties for nuclear imaging as it has a short physical half-life
A low dose of the radioisotope [1-4 mCi/37-148 MBq for mTcO)
of 6.01 hours and it does not create beta-emission but gamma-
is administered intravenously. Twenty to 40 minutes after administra-
emission with a relatively low energy (140 keV) that can be measured
tion, orthogonal lateral and ventral views of the cervical and thoracic
by scintillation cameras. Another advantage is that it is readily avail-
 region are obtained.
able and relatively inexpensive.
lodine-123
 Indications for scintigraphy in the cat
A dose of 200-400 μCi/7.4-14.8 MBq is administered intravenously.
Scintigraphy is an excellent tool for diagnostic imaging of hyperthy.
Eight hours after administration the same views are obtained for trap-
roid cats (Box 8-3).28 Tc-pertechnetate acts in a similar manner to
ping and 24 hours after administration for organification.
86
Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
Feline thyroid disease and nuclear imaging
 In thyroid scintigraphy hyperactive thyroid tissue exhibits increased
uptake of the radionuclide. In unilateral cases the contralateral lobe
The normal feline thyroid glands appear as elongated regions of radio-
and the surrounding thyroid tissue are classically completely sup-
pharmaceutical uptake either side of the trachea (see Fig. 8-19). The
p Aeind a ynaui susuuau yeaay aeau aq passad
intensity of the thyroid glands can be measured and compared to the
in cases where the lesion is hormonally active. Therefore the normal
intensity of the zygomatic salivary glands. Therefore regions of interest
tissue does not show any uptake (Fig. 8-22).
are drawn over the thyroid glands and the salivary glands. A ratio is
 This implies that if both lobes are visible after scintigraphy, bilateral
calculated (thyroid : salivary ratio). Normal cats have a ratio of 0.87: 1
affliction has to be considered. As thyroidectomy is one treatment
(range: 0.6-1.03 : 1). Other techniques of quantification exist but their
 possibility, bilateral excision will result in hypothyroidism, although
accuracy has not been thoroughly tested yet and therefore they are
this does not appear to be a clinical problem in cats. If affected ectopic
not routinely used.
tissue is present, which can readily be detected with nuclear scintigra-
 i s an a si sin u i
 phy, surgical resection of the thyroid glands alone will not be success-
the most common endocrinologic disease in cats (see Chapter 53).
aq Pinous Adeiau uoneipei usipioiyuadiy aui suean ul jny
Among the common etiologies for hyperthyroidism in cats is feline
 considered in cases with ectopic thyroid tissue.
thyroid hyperplasia (adenomatous hyperplasia) affecting both thyroid 
 The use of radiation for treatment of hyperthyroidism is discussed
glands in about 70% of the cats. Another etiology is feline thyroid
in Chapter 15.
adenoma, which can arise in one or both glands and can spread as
ectopic thyroid tissue from the region of the tongue to the precardial
region in the cranial mediastinum (Fig. 8-20). They may present as
cystic and/or multifocal lesions. Adenocarcinoma of the thyroid gland 
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
is rather rare and its prevalence has been reported to be approximately
2-5%. It is to be noted that scintigraphy cannot reliably differentiate
malignant from benign lesions, but certain patterns are associated
 Interventional radiology involves the use of imaging techniques such
 on n s s go d  e 
as fluoroscopy and ultrasound and specialized equipment such as
larger, more inhomogeneous and irregularly marginated (Fig. 8-21).
catheters, guide-wires, and stents for treatment of disease or trauma
(Fig. 8-23). There are many applications for its use in veterinary medi-
involvement.
cine, although it is not yet in widespread use due to the necessity for
12
100017
50021
1130:1130
256/16
VENTRAL256/16
LEFT LAT
256/16
VENTRAL256/16
LEFT LAT
Figure 8-20 Ventral and lateral scan of a hyperthyroid cat diagnosed
Figure 8-22 Ventral and lateral scan of a hyperthyroid cat diagnosed
with a feline thyroid adenoma. Note the complete suppression of the
with a feline thyroid adenoma. A unifocal increased uptake of mTc in
right thyroid gland and a focus of ectopic thyroid tissue along the
the right thyroid gland is noted, with complete suppression of the
trachea at the level of the thoracic inlet. (Courtesy of lohann Lang.
contralateral gland. No ectopic tissue is detectable. (Couresy of johann 
Vetsuisse-Facufty Bern.
Lang. Vetsuisse-Facuflty Bern.)
0010
256/16
VENTRAL256/16
CERVICAL LEFT 256/16
CERVICAL RIGHT
og eidki paiapisuon s! sul eane sun um shods pou aldtnu ym snoauabowouu! 'seinhaii Aubiy sieadde yium iluss po aeidn paseaou!
adenocarcinoma. Note the additional uptake in the stomach mucosa, which is considered normal. No ectopic tissue or metastasis can be detected in
this case. (Courtesy of Johann Lang. Vetsuisse-Facufty Bern.)
8
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
y
B
C
Figure 8-23 Interventional radiology was used in this cat that has had a ureteric stent placed to relieve a ureteral obstruction. (A) Contrast is injected 
into the renal pelvis under fluoroscopic guidance. (B) The ureteric stent is placed under fluoroscopic guidance. (C) A lateral radiograph confirms correct
placement of the stent with the pigtails in the renal pelvis and bladder. (Courtesy of Simon Tappin.)
the specialized equipment and training required to become compe-
Open surgery Some techniques such as stenting for malignant obstruc-
tent in its use.30
tions are palliative treatment options for conditions that may not be
amenable to conventional treatment.32
The main disadvantage is associated with the costs and mainte-
Indications
nance of the imaging equipment and the inventory of catheters, coils
 Interventional radiology techniques have been widely described in
and stents that needs to be maintained. In addition, advanced training
dogs and horses; their use in cats is less common but there are several
is required to perform these techniques.
reports in the literature of successful usage. Rheolytic thrombectomy
was reported in six cats with distal aortic thromboembolism.3l The
Equipment and technique
use of the rheolytic thrombectomy system resulted in successful
thrombus dissolution in five of six cats. Three of six cats survived to
 The procedures are usually minimally invasive so do not need to be
discharge.3 There are several reports of stent placement in cats for a
 performed in the operating theatre; the necessity for imaging usually
variety of reasons including nasopharyngeal stenosis, intrahepatic
requires that the procedures are performed in the imaging area.
 portosystemic shunts, ureteral obstruction and stricture and tracheal
Despite the minimally invasive nature of the techniques a high level 
 obstruction.32-36 Other instances of usage of interventional radiology
of asepsis should still be aimed for.
for cats include
2 treatment of hyperthyroidism and idiopathic
A traditional fluoroscopy unit will suffice but a C-arm unit is prefer-
chylothorax.37-33
able as it allows imaging of the patient in multiple planes without
having to move the animal. Digital subtraction angiography and road
Advantages and disadvantages
mapping are specialized computer software imaging techniques
that allow high resolution images to be gained in conjunction with
Patients treated by interventional radiology generally only require
 minimal administration of contrast agents. This is important, particu-
[u ynoi peid siuais se yns siueidn in suoisiu le
' se rns saads les uo sanaoid suad uaum Ae
orifices. There is therefore low morbidity associated with the proce-
Endoscopy can be used in combination with fluoroscopy for various
dures, with the potential advantages of shorter hospitalization times,
 minimally invasive procedures and this modality is termed interven-
decreased pain, and in some cases lower cost when compared with
tional endoscopy.
REFERENCES
1.
 Farrow CS, Green R, Shively M. Radiology
 Bushberg IT, Seibert JA, Leidholdt EM.
8.
Dennis R, Kirberger, RM, Barr F, Wrigley.
of the cat. 1st ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994.
Boone JM. Magnetic resonance imaging 
RH. Lower respiratory tract. In: Handbook
2.
Ohlerth S. Diagnostic imaging. In:
 MRl. In: The essential physics of medical
of small animal radiology and ultrasound.
Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ.
imaging. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
2nd ed. Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
Lippincott williams and wilkins; 2008.
p. 145-74.
musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
p. 415-46.
9.
 Schwarz T, Johnson V. BSAVA manual of
Elsevier; 2009. p. 21-32.
6.
Huda W. Review of radiologic physics.
canine and feline thoracic imaging.
3.
Mazumdar A, Siegel Ml, Narra V.
textbook. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot
Goucester: British Small Animal
Luchtman-Jones L. whole-body fast
Williams and wilkins; 2003.
Veterinary Association; 2008.
inversion recovery MR imaging of small
Berry CR, Graham JP, Thrall DE.
10.
 Dennis R. Radiological assessment of
cell neoplasms in pediatric patients: a
Interpretation paradigms for the small
lung disease in small animals 1. Bronchial
pilot study. AJR 2002;17:1261-6.
animal thorax. In: Thrall DE, editor.
and vascular patterns. In Practice
4.
 Konar M, Geissbihler Ul. e.hoof.
Textbook of veterinary diagnostic
2008;30:182-9.
eLiterature, Switzerland: Vetsuisse Faculty
adiology. 5th ed. Saunders Elsevier; 2007.
11.
 Dennis R. Radiological assessment of lung
Zirich; 2004.
p. 462-85.
disease in small animals. 2. Alveolar.
88
 Diagnostic imaging
Chapter
8
 interstitial and mixed lung patterns.
22. Zwingenberger AL, Schwarz T. Dual-phase
31.
Reimer SB, Kittleson MD, Kyles AE. Use of
In Practice 2008;30:262-70.
CT angiography of the normal canine
rheolytic thrombectomy in the treatment
12. Thrall DE, Robertson ID. Atlas of normal
 portal and hepatic vasculature. Vet Radiol
of feline distal aortic thromboembolism.
radiographic anatomy and anatomic
Ultrasound 2004;2:117-24.
J Vet Intern Med 2006;20:290-6.
variants in the dog and cat. Saunders
23.
 Daniel GB, Berry CR. Scintigraphic
32.
.Culp WT, Weisse C, Cole SG, Solomon JA.
Elsevier; 2011.
detection of portosystemic shunts. In:
Intraluminal tracheal stenting for
13. Benigni L Morgan N, Lamb CR.
Daniel GB, Berry CR, editors. Textbook
treatment of tracheal narrowing in three
 Radiographic appearance of cardiogenic
of veterinary nuclear medicine. 2nd ed.
cats. Vet Surg 2007;36:107-13.
 pulmonary oedema in 23 cats. J Small
University of Tennessee; 2006. p. 231-55.
33. Berent A, Weisse C. Balloon expandable
Anim Prac 2009;50:9-14.
24. Cherubini GB, Mantis P, Martinez TA,
 metallic stent placement for benign 
14. Parry A, Lamb C. Radiology of thoracic
 et al. Utility of magnetic resonance 
 nasopharyngeal stenosis in dogs and
trauma in the dog and cat. In Practice
imaging for distinguishing neoplastic
cats. I Am Anim Med Assoc 2008;233:
2010;32:238-46.
 from non-neoplastic brain lesions in dogs 
1432-40.
15. Lamb CR. Radiology corner: loss of
 and cats. Vet Rad Ultrasound 2005;46:
34. Weisse C, Schwartz K, Stronger R, et al.
diaphragmatic line as a sign of ruptured
384-7.
Transjugular coil embolization of an
 diaphragm. Veterinary Radiology and
25.
Prabhakar R, Julka PK, Ganesh T, et al.
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in a cat.
Ultrasound 2004;45:305-6.
Feasibility of using MRI alone for 3D
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2002;221:1287-91.
. Forrest Ll, Graybush CA. Radiographic
 radiation treatment planning in brain
16.
1266-7.
 patterns of pulmonary metastasis in 25
tumors. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2007;37:
35. Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al.
cats. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound 
405-11.
 Management and outcome of cats with
1998;39:4-8.
26. Singh JB, Oevermann A, Lang J. et al.
ureteral calculi 153 cases [1984-2002].
17.
.Mai W, O'Brien R, Scrivani P, et al. The
Contrast media enhancement of
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:
lung parenchyma. In: Schwarz T, Johnson
 intracranial lesions in magnetic resonance
937-44.
V, editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
 imaging does not reflect histopathologic
36.
 Zaid MS, Berent AC, Weisse C, Caceres A.
feline thoracic imaging. Gloucester:
fndings consistently. Vet Rad &
Feline ureteral strictures: 10 cases
 British Small Animal Veterinary
Ultrasound 2011;52:619-26.
(2007-2009). J Vet Intern Med 2011;25:
Association; 2008;242-320.
27. Troxel MT, Vite CH, Massicotte C, et al.
222-9.
18. Mullins ME. MR spectroscopy. Truly
 Magnetic resonance imaging features of
37.
Lafond E, Weirich WE, Salisbury SK.
molecular imaging; past, present and
 feline intracranial neoplasia: retrospective
Omentalization of the thorax for
future. Neuroimaging Clin N Am
 analysis of 46 cats. J Vet Intern Med 
 treatment of idiopathic chylothorax
2006;16:605-18.
2004;18:176-89.
with constrictive pleuritis in a cat.
19.
. Center SA. Hepatic vascular diseases. In:
28.
 Daniel GB, Brawner DR. In: Daniel GB.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2002;38:
Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR,
 Berry CR, editors. The handbook of 
74-8.
et al, editors. Strombeck's small animal 
veterinary nuclear medicine. Raleigh.
38.
. Wells AL, Long CD, Hornof Wl, et al. Use 
gastroenterology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
North Carolina: North Carolina State
of percutaneous ethanol injection for
WB Saunders: 1996. p. 802-46.
University, College of Veterinary Medicine;
treatment of bilateral hyperplastic thyroid
Wallack ST. Mesenteric angiography. In:
2006. p. 181-98.
20.
nodules in cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
Wallack ST, editor. The handbook of
29. Harvey AM. Scintigraphic findings in 120
2001;218:1293-7.
veterinary contrast radiography. San
hyperthyroid cats. J Feline Med Surg
39.
Mallery KF, Pollard RE, Nelson RW, et al.
Diego: Veterinary Imaging Inc.; 2003.
2009;11:96-106.
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided
p. 37-41.
30.
Weisse CW, Berent AC, Todd KL, Solomon
radiofrequency heat ablation for
21.
 Lamb CR. Ultrasonography of
JA. Potential applications of interventional
 treatment of hyperthyroidism in cats.
 portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats.
 radiology in veterinary medicine. J Am
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2003;223:
Vet Clin North Am 1998;28:725-53.
Anim Med Assoc 2008;233:1564-74.
1602-7.
68
hapter
Endoscopy
A.Harvey
Endoscopy can form a very useful part of the investigation of many
Flexible endoscopes
disorders. An initial thorough assessment of any patient presenting
Flexible endoscopy is required for the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), and
for any form of endoscopy is of the utmost importance; the risks
and benefits of endoscopy should always be carefully weighed up
jo sasaid xalduo aie sadospua aqirad ien aroeisai aui
 aul jo quaussasse ioy pasn s! Adosopua zuaned jenpiaipui al ioy
equipment with channels for suction and irrigation and passage of
aul pue 'en Aioeidsan aun 'ein ieusanuions iamol pue iaddn
instruments as well as light guide fibers and optical image fibers, and
lower urinary tract. This chapter will cover diagnostic endoscopy for
guide-wires for the angulation of the tip. They are composed of the
surgical diseases in cats.
insertion tube (the part that enters the patient), the hand piece [con-
taining deflection control knobs, suction valve, air/water valve and
instrument channel port) and the umbilical cord (connects hand
piece to the light source and also contains the video cable connection,
suction pump connection and irrigation bottle connection).
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
 Flexible endoscopes are either fiber optic or video. Fiber optic endo-
scopes are cheaper, and can be smaller in size, but the image produced
A thorough history and physical examination is required frst, and, in
is pixelated and of poorer quality than that of a videoscope. Addition-
most instances, endoscopy should be preceded by other investigations
Aienh aseu aut pageuuep j! pue algey Araa aie siaqy sselg aut e
to assess the cat for systemic disease, and to ensure that endoscopy is
is further reduced. Video endoscopes overcome the problem of poor
the most appropriate next stage in the investigation. For the majority
image quality; however, due to the size of the distal chip sensors
of cases, this assessment should include hematological and biochemi-
required, video endoscopes are not widely available under 5-6 mm
cal analysis of blood, other appropriate laboratory investigations
diameter. Therefore, many endoscopes used in feline medicine, par-
depending on presenting signs (e.g. total T4, fecal analysis, FeLV/FIV
ticularly bronchoscopes, are still fiberscopes.
testing, urinalysis), blood pressure assessment, and diagnostic imaging
(eg., radiographs, ultrasound, computed tomography). The patient
Rigid endoscopes
should be stable for anesthesia, and any concurrent diseases or com-
plications (eg., dehydration) should be addressed. The endoscopic
A rigid endoscope can potentially be used for tracheoscopy and ante.
examination should always be fully documented, either by complet-
riograde rhinoscopy. The small size of the nose in cats makes rhinos-
ing a report or through the use of recording equipment.
copy challenging but often an important part of the investigation of
 Endoscopes are expensive and delicate pieces of equipment It is
cats with chronic nasal discharge, in combination with advanced
therefore essential that the surgeon is familiar with how to handle the
imaging and biopsy. Rigid endoscopes consist of a fber optic rigid
endoscopes, and how to set up and appropriately use them, in order
telescope and a fiber optic light cable that connects to a light source
to avoid damaging the equipment as well as avoiding risk to the
al aq e saiaid uux uaaou io uouax aq ue uom
aieme aq oi iueodl osie si l asn anedoiddeun yanoul juaed
source and is also suitable for use with flexible video endoscopes and
of the cleaning, storage and maintenance required for endoscopes to
fiberscopes.
ensure that they are kept in good working order. The reader should
A 2.7 mm 18 cm long rigid telescope with a 14.5Fr 17 cm length
have basic training and be familiar with the basic technique of endos-
operating sheath is useful for larger cats (Hopkins II Stortz). The
copy, particularly how to hold the flexible endoscope and use the
1.9 mm 19 cm endoscope (cystoscope) is more suitable for most cats.
controls correctly.
The use of a 10Fr sheath with the smaller (1.9 mm) endoscope
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00009-3
91
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
 protects the delicate scope from damage and enables flushing. Both
cush artefact, and the oval cups tend to collect more tissue. Central
the 2.7 mm and 1.9 mm endoscopes have a 30 degree viewing angle.
spikes can damage the biopsy tissue The type of edge used depends
pue] Adoono Kdosonso ioy alqelins osle aie sadorsopua asaul
on the toughness of the tissue being sampled. The author tends to
arthroscopy).
 mainly use smooth edged cups, but if the tissue is tough, these can
asiape si sno paa paneas on sunriims ase uium ui 'o ds
When taking biopsy samples of the intestine, swing jaw forceps help
turn the cups into the intestinal wall, but they are much more expen-
GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY
sive forceps.
 Prior to anesthetizing the patient, ancillary equipment should be
Gastrointestinal endoscopy can be used for assessment of the stomach,
 prepared (Box 9-1) and endoscopy equipment checked that it is fully
upper small intestine, and the rectum and colon in the cat. l2
functional (including air pump. suction unit and valve, air/water
Bupioan 'sdasioy Asdoiq aeui anos iuai uonsauap d 'sniea
Equipment
equipment).
 For gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy, a flexible endoscope is required 
Uses and indications
auo u oi< xaoa oi are puel uonap dn aim-oy y
plane), and the mechanical functions of insufflation, irrigation and
ae si u Adoosopua l iaddn suoad roy suosean uoo
suction. These functions should always be checked prior to anesthetis-
listed in Box 9-2.
ing the cat A single gastroscope can generally be used in all sized cats
Unless a specifc esophageal disorder, e.g. a stricture that may make
Adossouoioo pue Adoosouaponponses Kdorsogeydosa 1oy
advancing beyond this point unnecessary, is diagnosed, fullesophago-
 The ability to collect endoscopic biopsies is one of the major advan-
 gastro-duodenoscopy should always be performed.
tages and aims of performing gastroendoscopy.* The larger the biopsy
Colonoscopy is indicated for investigation of large intestinal
channel, the larger the biopsies that can be collected and therefore the 
diarrhea, hematochezia, tenesmus, dyschezia, constipation and inves-
more likely they are to be of diagnostic quality. The compromise is
Adossopua 1o iaddn ainpus io sseu lesai aqedied e jo uoesn
that the larger the distal tip size, the more diffcult pyloric intubation
should always be performed whenever colonoscopy is being per-
will be The instrument channel should be at least 2 mm in order to
formed, since lesions are rarely confined to the colon even when
be able to obtain diagnostic biopsy samples. There are several scopes
on the market that can be considered (Table 9-1).
 Gl endoscopy has the advantage of allwing examination of the
Most of these endoscopes have a 2 mm instrument channel, with
mucosal surface of the GIT. It is a much less invasive way of obtaining
the largest instrument channel being 2.8 mm. A larger instrument
gut biopsies compared to open surgery: the patient can be discharged
saseiueapesip osie aie aaun inq saseueape ueyiuais sey lauueo
the same day as the procedure, there is no convalescence or time delay
to consider with the larger size of endoscope. An experienced endo-
due to wound healing, and immediate corticosteroid treatment can
scopist will be able to intubate the pylorus of most cats with a distal
be started if indicated.
tip approaching 8mm in diameter, but an inexperienced endoscopist
may struggle, and it may not be possible in smaller cats. A 1.4 m
length insertion tube is quite long for cats, which can make maneuver-
ing more challenging as the insertion tube outside the patient tends
to loop.
 The main forceps required for feline gastrointestinal endoscopy are
Box 9-1 Ancillary equipment required for
gastrointestinal endoscopy
 biopsy forceps. Grasping forceps and basket forceps are also useful for
 s   e s   
Protective clothing
encountered in cats than dogs. Basket forceps are also required for
Mouth gag
placing percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes. There are
many different types of biopsy forceps, varying in shape (oval, round).
Biopsy forceps
edge (smooth, serrated), fenestrated or unfenestrated, those with a
Formalin pots 
central spike, and swing jaw forceps. The author prefers oval fenes-
Sterile saline 
trated forceps without a central spike The fenestrated cups reduce
Table 9-1 Examples of endoscopes suitable for gastrointestinal use in cats 
Manufacturer
Type
Distal tip
Instrument channel
Working length
Olympus
Lucera video-gastroscope GIF-XP260
5 mm
2 mm
1.1 m
 Olympus
Video-gastroscope EvisExera Il GIF-XP180N
5.5 mm
2 mm
1.1 m
Olympus
Video-gastroscope SlimSIGHT GIF-XP160
5.9 mm
2 mm
1 m
Olympus
Video-gastroscope VET-XP20
7.9 mm
2 mm
1.4 m
ZJ015
Video-gastroscope 60714PKS
7.8 mm
2.8 mm
1.4 m
ZI015
Video-gastroscope 13820PKS
5.9 mm
2 mm
1.1 m
92
Endoscopy
Chapter
9
Box 9-2 Common reasons for performing upper Gl
endoscopy in cats
 Assessment of esophageal disease (first exclude mega-esophagus on
radiographs), in cases of:
 Regurgitation
1
Dysphagia
 Painful swallowing
 Excessive salivation
 Dilation of esophageal strictures
 Assessment of gastric and small intestinal disease in cases of:
 Chronic vomiting
Unexplained weight loss
Unexplained anorexia
 Hematemesis or melena
Chronic diarrhea
 Ultrasonographically detectable thickening or loss of layering of
 gastric and/or intestinal wall
Figure 9-1 Patient positioning for upper Gl endoscopy. Note that the cat 
 Per endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement and removal
is in left lateral recumbency, the ET tube is secured in place, and a gag
and pulse oximeter are being used. (Courtesy of Great Western Referrals.)
Limitations and contraindications
intubation easier, and it may reduce the risk of vagally induced brady-
cardia during the procedure. An intravenous catheter should be in
There are relatively few contraindications for gastrointestinal endos-
place and fluids administered throughout the procedure. Induction
copy. The main one that is essential to consider is where systemic
 of anesthesia is routine. Nitrous oxide should not be used since insuf-
causes of clinical signs have not been excluded and there have been
flation of the stomach permits diffusion of nitrous oxide into it and
inadequate investigations performed prior to considering endoscopy.
causes gastric overdistension. Intravenous midazolam or diazepam
Other contraindications include patients that are a poor anesthetic
can be useful if there is difficulty intubating the pylorus, or if the cat
risk, the presence of a bleeding disorder, any patient that has had
 becomes uncomfortable (eg., tachypneic) during this procedure, or if
a i 'ia uaq iu su oy aam ue s i ia
the GIT is particularly inflamed. For further information on anesthesia 
stomach has been found to be full on imaging.
see Chapter 2.'
While being a very valuable way of assessing the GIT, there are limi-
An endotracheal (ET) tube should be placed. Cuffed ET tubes are
tations of endoscopy. Firstly, it does require appropriate and fully
usually advised to prevent the risk of reflux, but caution needs to be
functioning equipment together with a competent endoscopist, with
used with cuffed ET tubes in cats.
good biopsy technique, to allow adequate evaluation of the GIT and
Red rubber tubes with inflated cuffs should not be used, as
collection of diagnostic quality biopsies. It is also not possible to
Mo a uo isisau ieaen ai u s anssad y asa
assess functional and motility disorders, hypersecretory disorders, the
 pressure, high volume cuffed PVC tubes should be used. Presence
whole GIT, submucosal lesions, or intraperitoneal lesions. When
of a cuff can, however, limit the diameter of the ET tube that can
endoscopic biopsies have failed to produce a diagnosis, where non-
be passed and narrower tubes are more likely to become obstructed.
mucosal disease is suspected, or disease is known to be beyond the
The author prefers to use the largest possible uncuffed tube—in
reach of an endoscope or where there is evidence of intraperitoneal
most average sized cats, a size 5 uncuffed ET tube can be passed.
disease (e.g, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, asites, hepatic/pancreatic
The tube should be secured in place, and a mouth gag must
abnormalities), then surgical biopsies are indicated.
always be inserted to prevent damage to the endoscope. Pulse oxime-
try monitoring should be used, and appropriate warming equipment
Patient preparation
to ensure the cat does not become hypothermic during the
procedure.
For upper Gl endoscopy, patient preparation simply requires with-
The cat should be positioned in left lateral recumbency for
 drawal of food for at least 12 hours prior to the procedure, to ensure
routine Gl endoscopy (upper and lower), so that the gastric antrum
that the stomach is empty. If any barium contrast studies have been
is uppermost, allowing air to fill it and make the pylorus more visible,
performed, then GI endoscopy should not be performed for at least
and that the descending colon lies ventrally, which aids intubation
24 hours. For colonoscopy, withdrawal of food for 24 hours is
 of the transverse and ascending colon (Fig. 9-1). For esophagoscopy
ae aiau auiui ar an pusa, mn uoe un 'paa
where conditions such as mega-esophagus, esophageal strictures or
various different laxative protocols, but the author's preference is to
esophageal foreign bodies are suspected, the cat should be kept in
administer 10-15 mL/kg of polyethylene glycol laxative (Klean-Prep).
sternal recumbency with the head elevated in order to reduce the
via a nasoesophageal tube (just placed for each administration and
risk of aspiration. For PEG tube placement, the cat is positioned in
a u sin a r  u  ui Pn 
right lateral recumbency. The endoscopist should be positioned in
 period approximately four to 20 hours prior to colonoscopy, and then
mq 'onuou oapia a yo mana poo e aey Aaun ieun Aem e yns
to administer a sodium citrate rectal enema (Micralax) two to four
also in a way that the insertion tube outside of the patient is kept in
hours prior to the procedure.
as straight a line as possible to prevent diffculty steering and advanc-
Pre-medication prior to induction of anesthesia is routine. Atropine
ing, which occurs if there is looping of the insertion tube outside the
is not used routinely, although some advocate that it can make pyloric
patient.
6
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
it easy to over inflate the GIT and thus this needs to be monitored
ENDOSCOPIC BIOPSY TECHNIQUE
carefully. Using a low setting on the air pump and ensuring the airhole
is not inadvertently covered leading to continuous insuflation will
An assistant is required to operate the biopsy forceps and it is impor-
help avoid over inflation. The anesthetist should also observe and
 Bus anoq uan aeao oi mou ym iey aie Aau  su
palpate the abdomen regularly to ensure over inflation is not occur-
Instruments must always be passed through the biopsy channel in a
ring. This is extremely important, as over inflation not only makes the
closed position and never forced against resistance. Squeezing tO0
endoscopy more diffcult, particularly pyloric intubation and biopsy
hard to close the cups can break the wire of the forceps so must be
collection, but more importantly will lead to impairment of venous
avoided. Care must be taken when passing instruments through the
return, and can quickly result in severe cardiovascular and respiratory
deflected tip of the endoscope, as forceful passage can easily damage
compromise, in addition to risking perforation of a viscus. Inability to
the inner lining of the instrument channel. The instrument channel
sufficienty insufflate can be the result of a faulty air pump, leaking
also serves as a suction channel, so suction will be much reduced
seal, air escaping from the viscus, or may indicate significant GI
when an instrument is within the channel, especially if the instrument 
pathology.
channel cap is open. When the scope has passed several intestinal
 Steering is achieved through a combination of insertion and retrac-
flexures, the forceps can be diffcult to open as the wire may be bent,
tion of the insertion tube, longitudinal rotation of the insertion tube
and straightening the endoscope will help with this.
(torquing), up/down and left/right tip deflection, and passive move-
 The quality of the biopsies obtained is determined mainly by the
ment as the endoscope follows the wall of a viscus. Attention should
size of the forceps [dependent on the size of the scope), and the pres-
be paid to keeping the insertion tube as straight as possible to assist
sure exerted on the tissue by the operator This is a big limitation in
in more accurate steering.
feline endoscopy as the patient size limits the size of endoscope, and
The lens will often become obscured by blood, mucus and GI con-
therefore the size of biopsy forceps that can be used. Therefore, in
tents, and this requires flushing by depressing the air/water button.
order to obtain diagnostic quality biopsies, there is no room for poor
au auixa on guuons sanban sosia e un guood pimy huy
operator technique. Exerting maximal pressure can be achieved by
underlying mucosa. Air should always be suctioned from the viscus
positioning the biopsy cups perpendicular to the tissue being sampled
before withdrawing the endoscope.
(Fig. 9-2). Being able to do this effectively and knowing how much
 pressure can safely be applied comes with experience. Deflating the
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
viscus before biopsy also helps increase the size of the sample by
reducing stretching of the mucosa.
Delay in intubating the pylorus, combined with insufflation of air.
 Once the biopsy has been collected the forceps are removed from
makes pyloric intubation more diffcult Therefore it is usual to only
the biopsy channel, the cups opened and immersed in 10% formalin,
 quickly visually inspect the esophagus and stomach on the way down,
releasing the tissue. The forceps must be rinsed in water before reintro-
leaving more complete evaluation to the end of the procedure (except
ducing into the endoscope. Alternatively, tissue samples can be laid
au (anpaoid aui go asodind ueu al st Adoosoeqdosa aiaum
 on card or tissue cassettes prior to being placed in formalin.
endoscope is inserted through the upper esophageal sphincter by
applying only gentle pressure and insufflating small amounts of air.
Once through the sphincter the tip should be adjusted so that the
esophageal lumen is in the center of the view, and the endoscope
GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY
gently advanced to the lower esophageal sphincter. A quick inspection
TECHNIQUE
of the mucosa on the way down ensures that any pathological lesions
can be distinguished from iatrogenic damage when closer inspection
is performed on withdrawal. In cats, the distal esophagus has distinct
General technique
circular folds and the lower esophageal sphincter may be seen as a
As the endoscope is inserted into a viscus, air is instilled to obtain a
 star or slit-like opening (Fig. 9-3).
clear view. The rate of air insufflation needs to be adjusted to ensure
adequate inflation without over inflation. The small size of cats makes
COMMENT:
Figure 9-2 Duodenum from a cat with inflammatory bowel disease,
01 seinoipuadlad sdns Asdoig au buuotsod 'anbiuupat Asdoig bue usnl!
Figure 9-3 The endoscopic appearance of the normal feline esophagus.
the mucosa. (Courtesy of the University of Brstof.)
(Courtesy of the University of Brstof.)
94
Endoscopy
Chapter
9
SCV
17
A
BAL0ON 6
COMMENT:
Figure 9-5 The normal endoscopic appearance of the area at the 
junction of the body/fundus of the stomach on the greater curvature.
Note that the parallel rugal folds are running towards the pyloric antrum
beneath the angularis incisura. (Courtesy of the University of Bristo.)
SCV
COMMENT:
 Figure 9-6 Image shows the gastroscope being retroflexed to examine
the cardia. Note the small red area of hemorrhage where a biopsy has
Figure 9-4 Esophageal stricture. (A) The endoscopic biopsy forceps (oval
just been taken. Thisis a normal post-biopsy appearance (Courtesy of the
fenestrated forceps without a central spike) give an indication of the 
diameter of the strictured area. (B) A balloon catheter is being advanced 
University of Bristof.)
through the lumen of the oesophageal stricture to allow balloon dilation.
(Courtesy of the University of Bristof.)
pyloric antrum (Fig. 9-5). This provides an important landmark in
locating the pylonus. The other most important landmark is the angu-
The most common pathologies observed in the feline esophagus
laris incisura (angle of the lesser curvature) with the cardia above, and
 are esophagitis, esophageal ulceration, and esophageal strictures ( Fig.
the pyloric antrum below, and this can be located by retroflexing the
9-4A). Biopsies are not routinely taken from the esophagus as the
 endoscope tip fully to frst locate the cardia (Fig. 9-6) and then slightly
mucosa is very tough. Masses should be biopsied, but these are rare.
reducing the retroflexion to bring the lesser curvature into view. Some
With esophageal strictures, endoscopy can be used to guide balloon
 insufflation is required to visualize these landmarks, but over inflation 
dilation, by passing a balloon catheter alongside the endoscope (Fig.
will make pyloric intubation diffcult, and this is the most common
9-4B). When the stricture is very narrow it can be difficult to insert
 mistake made. In cats, the angle of the lesser curvature is quite acute,
the balloon into the stricture and great care needs to be taken when
and a slide-by technique can be useful for passing the endoscope into
laqany asnes jou saop d aul ieul ansua oi uoonleq au guai
the antrum. This involves gently advancing the endoscope along the
esophageal trauma or esophageal perforation. See Chapter 27 for
mucosal surface of the greater curvature; the endoscope tip will be
more information on esophageal disease.
impinging on the gastric mucosa and so red-out will occur, but pro-
Once at the lower esophageal sphincter, the endoscope tip should
vided this is moving and the endoscope is not advanced against any
be angled towards it with continued insufflation and gently advanced
resistance, it can continue to be advanced along the greater curvature
through into the stomach. As the endoscope enters the stomach the
until the pyloric antrum comes into view. Ensuring that the pylorus is
junction of the fundus and body of the stomach can be seen, with
in the center of the screen, and suctioning as the insertion tube is
parallel rugal folds on the greater curvature running towards the
advanced towards it assists with pyloric intubation.
95
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
 percentage of cats in one study of the utility of endoscopic biopsies
in cats.s
Complications and aftercare
Serious complications associated with GI endoscopy are rare The
most common problem is gastric overinflation, which as well as
 making endoscopy more diffcult, particularly pyloric intubation and
biopsy collction, also leads to impairment of venous return, and can
quickly result in severe cardiovascular and respiratory compromise. It
is important to avoid overdistension, and to remember to remove air
with suction prior to withdrawing the endoscope at the end of the
 procedure. Other potential complications include bradycardia, which
may occur as a vagovagal reflex, usually in cats with severe GI disease,
and is usually resolved with atropine, and gastrointestinal perforation,
which when it occurs is usually the result of severe GI disease, accom-
panied by forceful use of the endoscope without adequate visualiza-
Figure 9-7 Endoscopic view of the stomach of a cat with gastric
tion, or poor biopsy technique. Occasionally with severe GI disease,
lymphoma. Note the very pale and lumpy' appearance. (Courtesy of the
perforation can occur with over inflation alone. Emergency laparot-
University of Bristof.)
omy is required if perforation is evident or pneumoperitoneum devel-
ops. Significant mucosal hemorrhage associated with biopsy is rare,
Once through the pylorus the insertion tube is advanced past the
and it is not necessary to routinely prescribe gastrointestinal protect-
cranial duodenal flexure, where red-out is likely to occur, and then
ants following endoscopy. Most cases of routine endoscopy require
with intermittent insufflation of air, and deflection of the tip. the
no specific aftercare.
lumen of the duodenum should come into view. The endoscope can
then be genty pushed along the duodenal mucosa as far as required.
aq uaa Aeu ununlal leuixoid a adossopua yaual u I e ym
-ossou ieadde on esonu a ioy uouon st l 'seo ui paueat
RESPIRATORY TRACT ENDOSCOPY
cally normal even when significant microscopic disease is present.
Multiple biopsies (approximately six to ten) should therefore always
Equipment
be taken from different regions of the small intestine.4 The most
common small intestinal disorders in cats are inflammatory bowel
iu (suo u gi) uu 2'7 e io uu 6'I e 1aua Adosouu piu 1o
disease and intestinal lymphoma.
endoscope can be used, although the latter is only suitable for use in
 Once the duodenum has been assessed and biopsies taken, all the
 a  aoe e  sa a g s 
 air should be suctioned out as the endoscope is withdrawn. The proxi-
endoscopes are also suitable for cystoscopy, otoscopy (and arthros-
mal duodenal flexure should be evaluated on the way out for lesions
copy) (Table 9-2). Examination of the nasopharynx is also possible
(e.g., ulcers) before withdrawing the endoscope back into the stomach
with the 1.9 mm nigid endoscope, which alleviates the need for flex-
for more complete evaluation. Retroflexion and rotation of the endo-
ible retrograde rhinoscopy.
scope along its long axis allow full inspection of the cardia and the
The 2.7 mm telescope has a 14.5 Fr sheath containing a 5 Fr
fundus. Multiple biopsies (total approximately six to ten) should be
working channel and two Luer stopcocks for irrigation and suction. A
taken from all areas of the stomach, in addition to any macroscopic
range of 5 Fr fexible biopsy instruments are available which pass
lesions. In cats, the most frequent macroscopic lesions identified are
though the working channel. These include cup biopsy forceps and
neoplastic disorders, most commonly gastric lymphoma. The mucosa
grasping forceps. The 1.9 mm 19 cm endoscope (cystoscope) is a suit-
is often pale, lumpy and friable; however, this is very variable and
able size for most cats. The use of a lo Fr sheath with the smaller
there is no pathognomonic appearance (Fig. 9-7).
(1.9 mm) endoscope protects the delicate scope from damage and
enables flushing. Use of the scope without the sheath facilitates exami-
nation of the more caudal nasal passages but risks damage to the
Colonoscopy
scope. Rigid biopsy forceps are available to be used parallel to
Colonoscopy is more straightforward to perform than upper GI
[  u yi ( oi aui se yns) as e j asan a
endoscopy provided that the patient has been adequately prepared.
is used.
 The insertion tube should be lubricated with gel, and an assistant is
 For endoscopy of the respiratory tract in cats, a flexible endoscope
required to gently pinch the anus around the insertion tube to prevent
is most useful. Due to the size of the distal tip sensors required for
air from escaping. Once inserted into the rectum, air should be insuf-
video endoscopy, video endoscopes are not widely available under
flated until the mucosa of the descending colon is in view, before
 5-6 mm diameter, so the endoscopes used for feline bronchoscopy
-sunl pue guuasap aul uaamiaq suount aul laqny suuee
verse colon, and transverse and ascending colon can be readily
quality of image compared to video endoscopes, but are less expensive
detected as obvious bends, prior to reaching the ileocecocolic junc-
to purchase. Bronchoscopes are simpler to use than gastroscopes, in
uond aun pue unan aul oiui guuado aul Aq payuap! 'uon
that they just have two-way tip deflection and suction. There is no air/
raised appearance of the ileocolic sphincter. It is possible to pass
water channel as there is no requirement for insufflation and irriga-
biopsy forceps through the sphincter to biopsy the ileal mucosa.
tion with respiratory tract endoscopy. The suction function is impor-
Approximately six to ten biopsies should be taken from all parts of
tant for being able to suction any airway secretions, in addition to
the colon, prior to suctioning the air out and withdrawing the endo-
performing bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and this function should
scope and examining the rectum on the way out. Ileal biopsies were
always be checked prior to anesthetising the cat. Small suction tips
found to be useful in the diagnosis of small cell lymphoma in a small
should also be readily available.
96
Endoscopy
Chapter
6
Table 9-2 Some suitable bronchoscopes for cats
Manufa cturer
Type
Distal tip diameter
Instrument channel
Working length
 Olympus OES bronchoscopes
BF 3C40
3.3 mm
1.2 mm
 55 cm
 Olympus OES bronchoscopes
BF-XP60
2.8 mm
1.2 mm
60 cm
Karl Storz bronchoscopes
60002 VL1
3.7 mm
1.5 mm
54 cm
Karl Storz bronchoscopes
60003 VB1
3 mm
1.2 mm
1 m
A 3-3.7 mm diameter bronchoscope should be suitable for all cats.
Box 9-3 Ancillary equipment required for feline
 Box 9-4 Indications for rhinoscopy
bronchoscopy
 Acute onset sneezing and facial discomfort
 Protective clothing
 Chronic nasal discharge
Mouth gag
 Stertorous breathing
Topical 1% lignocaine, 0.2 mL
Sneezing
Aspiration catheters
 Epistaxis 
 EDTA and plain collection pots for BAL fluid
Gagging/retching 
Two to four 5 mL syringes containing 0.9% sterile saline for
 Facial distortion or swelling 
performing BALs
 Biopsy of nasopharyngeal masses
Biopsy forceps
 Retrieval of nasopharyngeal foreign bodies
Grasping forceps for foreign body retrieval
 Swabs/sponges for packing the pharynx in case of nasopharyngeal
hemorrhage following biopsy
jo uoonpui si aia j pasuoioid si Adossoopuoiq j! Auend
Equipment for thoracocentesis in case of pneumothorax
 bronchospasm, or mucus plugging of airways. Close monitoring of
pulse oximetry is therefore required, and the procedure should be
 performed as quickly as possible while still being thorough. Contrain-
One size of bronchoscope can be used in any domestic cat for both
dications to bronchoscopy include severe pre-existing hypoxemia,
bronchoscopy and retrograde rhinoscopy (Table 9-2).
cardiac failure, severe dyspnea (except where likely to be resolved by
The author prefers to collect BAL samples directly through the bron-
the procedure eg., foreign body retrieval), presence of a bleeding
choscope, by attaching a collection tube between the bronchoscope
disorder, and in any patient where inadequate investigations have
and the suction tubing, but aspiration catheters can also be used for
been performed prior to considering bronchoscopy. The limitation of
fluid collection, either inserted through or adjacent to the broncho-
bronchoscopy is that it only allows assessment of the larger airways
'as ol ioid paziais st adossououoiq aul ieu ieuassa st ll adoss
so is not useful for evaluating interstitial pulmonary disease or the
and that scope flushes are performed for bacterial culture, to ensure 
small bronchi so can miss focal disorders and foreign bodies that have
there is no scope contamination. Cytology brushes, aspiration needles
migrated into distal bronchi. Sample collection is limited to samples
and small biopsy forceps can also be used for obtaining samples.
for cytological assessment (BALs and cytology brushes) and extremely
 Prior to anesthetising the patient, ancillary equipment should also
small biopsy samples.
be ready prepared (Box 9-3) and the bronchoscopy equipment should 
There are few contraindications for retrograde rhinoscopy. The main
pue sun uonons sunun] sunuouny Ainy si a eun payoayo aq
 contraindications are inadequate investigations being performed prior
valve, tip deflection, light source image recording equipment).
to anesthesia and patients that are a poor anesthetic risk. The limita-
tions of retrograde rhinoscopy are that it only allows for assessment
Uses and indications
of the pharynx caudal to the choanae, and most often if any lesions
are biopsied the resultant hemorrhage precludes further evaluation
The most common reason for performing bronchoscopy in cats is in
 Or additional biopsies to be taken. Furthermore, endoscopic biopsies
the assessment of chronic lower airway disease as indicated by chronic
are extremely small in size, and therefore often of limited diagnostic
cough and/or episodic tachypnea/dyspnea (with consistent radio-
value.
graphic abnormalities); lung masses and focal or diffuse bronchial/
 Contraindications to rigid rhinoscopy are coagulation abnormali-
bronchointerstitial/bronchoalveolar lung patterns identifed on tho-
ties, which could result in excessive hemorrhage, and if advanced
racic radiographs; acute cough/dyspnea, particularly for retrieval of
imaging studies have revealed compromise of the cribriform plate that
tracheal or bronchial foreign bodies and for the collection of bron-
 could allow excessive damage to occur on flushing of the nasal cavity.
choalveolar lavage samples. The indications for rhinoscopy are listed
in Box 9-4; investigation of chronic nasal discharge in cats is one of 
the commonest indications.*
Patient preparation
Depending on the reason for performing endoscopy of the respiratory
Limitations and contraindications
tract, and the clinical status of the cat, pre-oxygenation is usually
advisable Pre-medication prior to induction of anesthesia is depend-
The main risk of bronchoscopy is development of hypoxemia. This
ent on clinical status. For cats undergoing bronchoscopy administra-
can easily result in cats, given the narrowness of their airways.
tion of terbutaline prior to the procedure reduces the risk of inducing
97
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
The ET tube or catheter tubing should be secured in place, and a
mouth gag used. For retrograde rhinoscopy, consideration needs to be
and/or hemorrhage. A cuffed ET tube can be used, and is often recom-
mended; however, care does need to be taken not to traumatize the
trachea with cufed tubes in cats. The author prefers to use as large a
diameter ET tube as possible (most cats can accommodate a size 5 ET
tube) uncuffed, and to pack the pharynx with swabs/sponges as
required. Packing the pharynx interferes with being able to introduce
the endoscope over the edge of the soft palate, so the author starts off
the procedure without packs but has packs and suction to hand, which
are used as soon as the endoscope is withdrawn.
Aeisan le iae pue sunp ajaq suuu anauixn asnd 
endoscopy is vital. ECG and end-tidal capnography monitoring are
also recommended. If problems are encountered the procedure should
A
-ns suoaas Aemie pue 'paneuaa paneqnu ieo a 'padois aq
tioned if required.
RESPIRATORY ENDOSCOPY TECHNIQUE
General technique
As anesthesia is being induced, the larynx should always be fully
evaluated priorto intubation for evidenceof edema, hyperemia,ireg
-onai pue Adoosououoiq yioq aiaum siskieied pue 'sasseu uen
grade rhinoscopy are being performed, bronchoscopy should be
performed first to avoid scope contamination. The general technique
for respiratory tract endoscopy is more straightforward than for GI
endoscopy, with steering being the main requirement, achieved by up/
down tip deflection and longitudinal rotation of the insertion tube
procedure, and the endoscopist needs to be skilled not to cause any
-ioo andues pue uoeniaa ymh inq ynoiou e ansua on 'eunn
lection. Close communication should be maintained with the anes-
thetist at all times, so that any concerns arising can be rapidly
B
addressed.
Figure 9-8 (A) Patient positioning for bronchoscopy, illustrating a 
(B} swivel tip T-adaptor to allow passage of the bronchoscope through 
Bronchoscopy
 the ET tube while allowing continuation of inhalational anesthesia.
Once the patient is adequately prepared, the bronchoscope is gently
advanced down the trachea, observing for abnormalities such as ery-
bronchospasm. An intravenous catheter should be in place. The cat
thema and irregularity of the mucosa, foreign material, and excessive
should be positioned in sternal recumbency with the head slightly
airway secretions. Given the wide and straight nature of the trachea,
elevated and the neck extended (Fig. 9-8A). Ideally, an ET tube is
it is usually straightforward to obtain a good image to the level of the
placed, and the bronchoscope passed through the lumen of the ET
carina (Fig. 9-9). Beyond this, the small size of the feline airways can
tube A swivel tip T-adaptor is attached between the ET tube and the
make obtaining a good image quite challenging. However, it is impor-
T-piece (Fig. 9-8B). This contains a rubber valve at the port allowing
tant that the airway lumen is visualized adequately as the broncho-
anesthetic gases and oxygen to be delivered while the bronchoscope
scope is advanced, to avoid iatrogenic airway trauma. Steering is used
is passed through the ET tube. After intravenous induction of anesthe-
to direct the bronchoscope into the left or right main stem bronchi.
sia (e.g, with propofol) the cat is preferably maintained on inhala-
The right main stem bronchus will be seen on the left side of the
tional anesthesia, which is possible if the endoscope can fit easily
image. A standard method of systemic evaluation should be used for
through the ET tube leaving enough space for movement of gases at
evaluating the airways on each side, with a map of the airways [Fig.
the same time.
9-10) always borne in mind.z? The airways should be evaluated for
When the lumen of the ET tube is too narrow to accommodate the
collapse, masses, compression, excessive mucus, punulent secretions,
bronchoscope, narrow bore tubing such as a dog urinary catheter can
hemorrhage, mucosal erythema and irregularity, and foreign material.
be inserted into the trachea and used for intermittent oxygen propul-
Both sides of the airways should be evaluated before collecting
sion, by connecting an ET tube connector, and a T-piece with the
samples.
reservoir bag removed, to enable theanesthetist to jet propulse oxygen
 BAL samples should be routinely collected from left and right sides
down the tube by intermittently covering the end of the tube with a
for cytology and culture. Once the lung lobe to be sampled has been
thumb. In this situation, anesthesia needs to be maintained with total
selected, the bronchoscope should be advanced into smaller and
intravenous anesthesia,' such as small increments of propofol, as
smaller airways until it is seated in the airway and cannot be advanced
required.
any further. Sterile 0.9% saline 5 mL is then flushed either directly
86
Endoscopy
Chapter
6
down the endoscope channel or through an aspiration catheter, an
limitations in the size of the instrument channel mean that retrieval
assistant coupages the chest and then suction is applied with either
devices generally need to be inserted alongside the endoscope, which
a syringe or using the endoscope suction system. A further 5 mL bolus
makes directing the retrieval device into the required airway challeng-
may be required if inadequate fluid is retrieved. The sample should
ing even for a skilled endoscopist.
 be placed in an EDTA and plain collection pot The procedure is then
repeated in a lung lobe on the opposite side.
Rhinoscopy
 Brush cytology can be useful, particularly of any mass type lesions,
but the author does not routinely perform this. The author rarely
 If anteriograde rhinoscopy with a rigid endoscope and/or biopsies or
 performs airway biopsies, since the small size of samples possible with
nasal flushes are also going to be performed, then retrograde rhinos-
a feline bronchoscope is often of limited diagnostic value, and the
copy should be performed first, as otherwise fluid/blood/discharge
risks of hemorrhage and pneumothorax are signifcant. The author
may obscure visualization of the nasopharynx. Retrograde rhinoscopy
usually reserves biopsies for airway masses, for which biopsy is useful.
is performed by retroflexing the flexible endoscope over the edge of
but risk of hemorrhage still needs to be considered.
the sof palate to look forwards towards the choanae The endoscope
The most common airway pathology in cats is chronic airway
can either be inserted straight into the oropharynx and then retro-
inflammation of varying degrees, and less commonly bronchial
 flexed when the tip is beyond the edge of the soft palate, or retroflexed
foreign bodies, usually associated with secondary localized broncho-
 into a 'I shape prior to insertion. The insertion tube is then pulled
pneumonia. Retrieval of bronchial foreign bodies can be difficult. The
rostrally, advancing the tip towards the choanae The view on the
monitor is upside down and reversed. It is normal to stimulate a
 strong gag reflex during this procedure, which can make it very chal-
lenging. Use of topical lidocaine spray on the soft palate can help to
blunt this reflex. The nasopharynx should be evaluated for presence
of discharge, hyperemic/irregular/nodular tissue, masses, polyps,
nasopharyngeal stenosis and foreign bodies (eg. a blade of grass).
The most common pathology in the nasopharynx of cats is inflam-
matory disease. Changes seen include mild to severe erythema and
mucosal irregularity; excessive secretions may obscure adequate visu-
alization of the area. Raised nodules of benign lymphoid hyperplasia
are quite commonly seen with chronic inflammatory disorders (Fig.
9-11), which may be isolated to the pharynx, or associated with
inflammatory nasal disease. Other common abnormalities observed
in cats are foreign bodies, polyps, and neoplastic masses, most com-
monly lymphoma (Fig. 9-12).
 Foreign bodies such as blades of grass may be removed with endo-
scopic forceps. However, with the limitation in size of forceps that
can be used endoscopically. it is often easier once a foreign body
a iapun sdanioy suqei ym li anouai on payuapi uaaq seu
Figure 9-9 Endoscopic view of the carina showing the entrance to the
visualization by placing the cat in dorsal recumbency and using a
left and right main stem bronchi. (Courtesy of the University of Bristo.)
piemoy aeied yos au ind oi sdasiy anss sv io yooy Aeds
ACCESSORY
LOBE
RB4D1a RB4D1b
LB2D2b
RB3D1
RB4V1b
LB2D2a
LB2V1b
RB4V1a.
RIGHT
RB3V1
LB2V1a
LEFT
CAUDAL
-LB2D3
RB4V2
LB2V2
CAUDAL
LOBE
LOBE
RB4D2
LB2D2
RB4V1
LB2V1
RB4D1-
RIGHT
RB2C1
LB2D1
MIDDLE
LOBE
LB1V1
RB1D1
LEFT
RIGHT
CRANIAL
CRANIAL
RB1D2
LOBE
LOBE
TRACHEA
Figure 9-10 Dorsal view of the feline bronchial tree. (Reprinteo from Caccamo R. Enooscopic bronchial anatomy in the cat. / Feline Med 5urg 2007;9:140-149.
with permission from 5age Publications.)
99
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
external nares, the rhinoscope is measured from the external nares to
the medial canthus of the eye and a tape marker placed at this level
 to prevent damage to the cribriform plate.
If discharge obscures the view once the rhinoscope has been placed
into the nares, flushing gently with saline or a balanced electrolyte
solution either via the rhinoscope sheath or the nares can improve
visualization and decrease iatrogenic damage. Both nasal cavities
should be explored before taking biopsies, starting with the side least
likely to be affected. Biopsies can be taken blind, through the sheath
 aie ie ay  p ei i 'ay Aso aiy 
alongside the rhinoscope so that the jaws are visible. Multiple biopsies
are taken; this is particularly important if a mass is visualized. If
any foreign bodies are found, alligator forceps passed parallel to
the endoscope are suitable for removal in most cases. For further
information on nasal disease and investigation the reader is referred
to Chapter 54.
Figure 9-11 Endoscopic view of the nasopharynx by retrograde
Complications and aftercare
rhinoscopy. Note the multiple small raised nodules, typical of a cat with
 pharyngitis. (Courtesy of the University of Bristof.)
The main potential complications associated with bronchoscopy are
hypoxemia, hypercarbia, bronchospasm, trauma and hemorrhage and
pneumothorax. Most of these complications are easily avoidable
through good bronchoscopy technique and careful anesthesia and
though this is usually controllable with ice packs and flushing with
cold saline Occasionally cotton buds are placed via the nares to
obstruct blood flow and encourage clotting. These are removed after
recovery from anesthesia, which should be gradual and controlled.
The pharynx should be inspected prior to extubation and any blood
gently removed. Patients are usually monitored overnight after rigid
rhinoscopy to ensure sneezing does not cause significant hemorrhage
and to protect owners' homes, as mild sneezing of hemorrhagic dis-
 m aa si s os   s
but it is common after pharyngeal examination for excessive mucus
to be secreted, and when biopsies have been taken there can be sig-
 nificant hemorrhage. Care needs to be taken to prevent aspiration by
use of swabs to pack the pharynx and suction to ensure clear airways.
 Following all respiratory endoscopy, the cat should remain intu-
bated and allowed to breathe l00% oxygen. Any excessive secretions
Figure 9-12 Endoscopic view of the nasopharynx by retrograde
should be suctioned, both from within the ET tube and the back of
rhinoscopy of a cat with nasopharyngeal lymphoma. (Courtesy of the
the pharynx. If nasopharyngeal biopsies have been taken, the pharynx
University of Bristof.)
should be carefully assessed for remaining hemorrhage and any
blood swabbed or suctioned to ensure a clear airway at the point that
the cat is ready to be extubated. In cases of suspected bronchospasm
Endoscopic guided biopsies can be useful for taking biopsy samples
following bronchoscopy terbutaline administration can be continued
of masses; however, often one biopsy alone will cause signifcant
following the procedure It is essential that cats are closely monitored
pue 'adossosuaiel 'saqni ia ruaudinba uonsns yam Aianonan u
further endoscopic guided biopsies will not be possible When taking
Oxygen, as it is not uncommon for airway obstruction to occur during
endoscopic biopsies, to avoid damaging the biopsy channel, it is vital
recovery, most commonly as a result of airway secretions.
that the biopsy forceps are passed through to the distal tip prior to
retroflexing the tip. Depending on the reason for performing retro-
grade rhinoscopy, and the abnormalities identifed, most cases will
also require a combination of rigid rhinoscopy and/or nasal flushes
URETHROCYSTOSCOPY
and/or blindly collected anteriograde nasal biopsies to complete the
investigation.
 Prior to rigid rhinoscopy a coagulation profle is advisable as even
P Lhermette
minor trauma to the nasal mucosa may cause dramatic hemorrhage.
aul oi anp Adoosouuu piau ioy pambau si eisausaue jo aueid daap y
-soua A pnsa aap aq ue sie u eruan pue iae au
sensitivity of the nasal mucosa. Local anesthetic blocks such as the
copy. The procedure is known as cystoscopy when the bladder is
 infraorbital nerve block are recommended (Chapter 2) and the use of
au u papnu s! eiyan au uaum Audeissuan io paunuea
a topical lidocaine spray via the external nares is helpful to numb the
examination. Urethrocystoscopy can beused for examining the whole
mucosa. The cat is placed in ventral recumbency with the head angled 
of the urinary tract from the vestibule to the urinary bladder. This is
slightly down, with the nose over the end of the table to facilitate
 a relatively easy technique in the female but the narrow urethra of the
a o aoss a uau aa asau an a a
 male presents more of a challenge. One of the commonest indications
100
Endoscopy
Chapter
6
Table 9-3 Some suitable urethrocystoscopes for cats
Manufacturer
Type
Outer diameter
Viewing angle
Working length
Comments
Endoscopes for urethrocystography in females
Karl Storz
67030 BA 9 Fr (3.16 mm)
30°
14 cm
3 Fr (1 mm) instrument channel. Integral sheath
therefore sturdier in construction
2.7 mm
30°
18 cm
1.9 mm
30°
19 cm
Care, fragile - need protective sheath
Endoscopes for urethrocystography in males
 Karl Storz 
62512
1-1.2 mm
 0.3 mm infusion channel
1 mm
20 cm
Can be used without a sheath
 Endoscopes need to be at least 14 cm in length to reach the bladder.
Investigation of FLUTD will usually include diagnostic imaging. Both
lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD).
ultrasound and radiography are commonly used to image the urinary
tract but limitations with these techniques include relative insensitiv.
ity and the presence of the bony pelvis. They do, however, enable the
Equipment
clinician to visualize structures outside the urinary tract or within the
bladder wall which may not be visible from within the lumen. CT and
Female
MRI may also be used but are relatively expensive and rarely available
 The standard equipment for urethrocystoscopy is a rigid endoscope
in a frst opinion setting.
in a cystoscope sheath with a working channel and two additional
Other indications for urethrocystoscopy include cases of urinary
Luer ports for flushing and irrigation. This is always used with a
tract incontinence and urinary tract trauma. The most common causes
camera system, a monitor, and an apropriate light source, preferably
for incontinence in the cat are ectopic ureters or congenital urethral
a xenon 150-300w. A variety of different endoscope systems may be
sphincter mechanism incompetence These conditions can easily be
used for urethrocystoscopy (Table 9-3). In adult females the urethra
diagnosed using urethrocystoscopy. The presence of urinary tract
is easily traumatized and urethral diameter varies considerably
trauma following pelvic fracture is common. Urethrocystoscopy has
between individuals so it may be necessary to use a smaller diameter
been found to be a more sensitive technique for assessing bladder and
sheath such as a high flow arthroscope sheath or even a smaller endo-
 wrethral trauma in comparison to radiography.12,13
scope and sheath. Where a smaller endoscope is used it is important
to ensure it has adequate length, at least 14 cm in order to reach the
bladder. Great care must be taken with the smaller scopes to avoid
torsion or flexion as small endoscopes are extremely fragile. For this
URETHROCYSTOSCOPY TECHNIQUE
reason they are never used without a protective sheath of some kind.
IN THE FEMALE
 The 9 Fr operatingtelescope [Karl Storz 67030BA) comprises a 1.9 mm
telescope and cystoscope sheath permanently fused together and is
The technique for urethrocystoscopy in the queen is similar to that in
suitable for urethrocystoscopy in almost all queens.
the bitch.14 It is not necessary to clip the perineal area unless it is
heavily soiled. The perivulval/preputial area should be cleaned with
Male
a suitable antiseptic such as chlorhexidene The patient is positioned
 The urethra of the tom cat is extremely narrow and can only be exam-
in sternal recumbency on a tub table or over a gridded tray. The endo-
ined with a semi-flexible 1-1.2 mm cystourethroscope Most of these
ua pue eiaue e 'yieaus adosois suuie e ui pseid si adoss
endoscopes are too small to accommodate an instrument or infusion
guide cable are attached and the system is white balanced. A litre of
channel, which limits their effectiveness, andthey also lack directional
saline is attached to an infusion port on the cystoscope sheath via a
control. A cystourethroscope with a diameter of 1.2 mm and a 0.3 mm
 standard giving set. Normal (o.9%) or Hartmann's solution may be
infusion channel, that allows the infusion of saline or gas under pres-
used, but it should always be warmed to body temperature to avoid
sure, can improve visualization. A sharp 2.1 mm 17 cm sheath (Karl
hypothermia. The controls on the giving set are opened to allow
Storz 26120 IX) can be used with the 1 mm Karl Storz scope as an
adjustment of flow using the taps on the cystoscope The cystoscope
optical veress pneumoperitoneum needle and can therefore also be
sheath is lubricated with sterile water-soluble lubricant and the tip is
used for direct percutaneous entry into the bladder if necessary.
inserted into the vulva in a rostrodorsal direction to follow the lumen
 of the vestibule The vulva is compressed by pinching around the
Indications
cystoscope to form a seal and saline flow is initiated to inflate the
vestibule. The vaginal os and urethral orifice are visualized (Fig. 9-13)
auixaide ym 'sie un uou si aseasip ien Areun iamon
and the cystoscope is advanced and guided into the urethra. The ure-
60% of cases being idiopathic.0 In cats with recurrent episodes or in
thral lumen dilates with the saline irrigation and can be examined in
elderly cats it is sensible to rule out other causes of lower urinary tract
 detail for lesions or the presence of ectopic ureters as the cystoscope
is advanced. Care should be taken to ensure that the lumen of the
Tumors such as transitional cell carcinoma are rare but can present
urethra is centered at the bottom of the image on the monitor. The
with similar signs to those of feline lower urinary tract disease.
30° angle of the telescope is always directed opposite to the light
101
Section
[21
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Figure 9-13 Cystoscopic view of the feline vestibule showing vaginal os
above and urethral opening below.
Figure 9-16 Cystoscopic view of small struvite crystals in the bladder.
aeu adosis aui yonon uons  paoan a uen asau
Figure 9-14 Cystoscopic view of the female feline urethra with
prominent dorsal fold.
Figure 9-17 Biopsies of the bladder may be taken under direct
visualization with forceps placed through the instrument channel. The
bladder should be non-distended or flaccid in order to get a good
sample.
contain cellular debris and other particulate matter (Fig. 9-16), there-
fore following an initial examination urine is drained from the bladder
via the suction port on the cystoscope. If an arthroscope is being used
with only one port, the giving set is removed and urine is drained
using a 50 mL syringe The bladder is then filled with sterile saline to
improve visualization. Care should be taken not to over inflate the
bladder as this may cause damage to the mucosa and hemorrhage. It
 Figure 9-15 Prominent thickening of the dorsal fold of the female 
will also make taking biopsies diffcult. Occasionally several flushes
 proximal urethra near the trigone.
may be required, especially if there is any hemorrhage Insufflation
with air or, preferably, carbon dioxide may be necessary if hemorrhage
is severe enough to prevent adequate visualization.
 guide cable so that when the light guide cable is in a ventral position
 The ureteral openings are visualized at approximately l0 o'clock
the telescope's line of view will be directed up at the dorsal wall of
 and 2 o'clock on the dorsal wall of the trigone and these should be
 aul jo ian aun ul ual aui ueue c buday 'eian au
observed for normal function. Urine should be seen entering the
image will result in trauma to the ventral wall of the urethra. The
bladder periodically as a clear yellow stream. Rotating the telescope
urethra of the queen has a prominent dorsal fold (Fig. 9-14), which
around its long axis utilizes the 30° angle of view to visualize the
Bu snoao ue uaa s araut ue uq aui ui suad nou s!
whole of the trigone. For biopsy collection flexible biopsy forceps are
lappei aun guaiua aiojaq panoau aq ismu ieui auo aun ieau
introduced through the instrument channel (Fig. 9-17). If an arthro-
(Fig. 9-15).
SCope sheath is used then no instrument channel is available. In this
The bladder is examined for calculi, polyps or masses, and hemor-
case the endoscope is carefully removed, leaving the arthroscope
 rhage or other abnormalities. Urine often appears cloudy and may
sheath in the bladder. Biopsy forceps can then be placed through the
102
Endoscopy
Chapter
6
sheath and blind biopsies taken. Biopsy samples are smalland subjet
to artefactual damage so it is important that multiple samples are
taken. The endoscope is replaced and the bladder wall inspected to
ensure biopsies have been taken from a representative area. This blind
technique is best for generalized bladder wall lesions where the loca-
tion of the biopsy is not critical, although it is possible to get biopsies
of specifc lesions as long as they are not in an awkward site (eg. the
trigone) where maintaining the position of the sheath is diffcult. If
uroliths are present they may be grasped using forceps or a stone
basket and removed individually through the urethra. If they are to0
large or numerous, a laparoscopic assisted cystoscopy or open cystot-
( e  s as)  a   aq  
Following sample collection the bladder is drained through the cys-
toscope and the instrument is carefully removed.
B
Figure 9-18 Positioning of the male urethra for optimal catheter
URETHROCYSTOSCOPY TECHNIQUE
 placement (A) normal and (B) with the penis extended and dorsal
IN THE MALE
such a telescope down the urethra the axis of view is up and away
The small diameter endoscopes required for transurethral cystoscopy
from the light guide post, looking up at the wall of the urethra (if the
in the tom cat do not have an instrument channel and so biopsies of
light guide post is pointing down). Thus the lumen should appear at
 specific lesions must be collected by a laparoscopic assisted approach
the bottom of the image on the monitor. If the lumen is kept central
or open cystotomy. For generalized bladder wall lesions small 3.5 Fr 
thetip of the endoscope will traumatize the ventral wall ofthe urethra.
biopsy forceps can be passed blindly up the urethra to obtain samples
 Urethral rupture will prevent continuation of the procedure, but will
from the bladder wall. However, histological interpretation can be
usually heal following placement of a Foley catheter for three to five
difficult due to the very small sample size If a perineal urethrostomy
days (Chapter 38).
has been performed, rigid urethrocystoscopy may be performed as for
 Hemorrhage from lesions or polyps within the bladder can make
the queen. Alternatively, with the right equipment, the bladder can be
visualization very difficult and in some cases replacing the saline irrig-
 entered by direct percutaneous entry.
ant with carbon dioxide from a laparoscopic insufflator will enable a
The urethra in the tom cat has a distinct bend in it where it
clear view for biopsy or resection of polyps and tumors. Room air may
approaches the pelvic brim, which can impede the advancement of 
 also be considered but carries a higher risk of embolism.
the endoscope To avoid this diffculty the tip of the penis should be
 Failure to turn off the flow of irrigant when the cystoscope is in the
 gently grasped with a moistened swab and pulled caudally and slightly
bladder will lead to over distension and result in small fissures or
dorsally to straighten the urethra before attempting to pass the endo-
mucosal tears. Bleeding from these fissures will obscure visualization
scope (Fig. 9-18).
and a distended bladder makes biopsy very diffcult. In rare instances
severe over distension may result in rupture of the bladder, especially
where there is weakening of the bladder wall due to pathology. Surgi-
Complications and aftercare
cal repair will then be necessary (Chapter 37).
The urethra is delicate and easily traumatized. Great care must be
 Antibiotic cover is not usually required unless there is a pre-existing
infection. Analgesia is recommended for two to three days for which
used as allowance must be made for the angle of view. When passing
NSAIDs or opiates may be used, as indicated.
REFERENCES
1. Lhermette P, Sobel D, editors. BSAVA
and duodenal lesions in dogs and cats.
in 68 cats (2001-2006). J Vet Intern Med
manual of canine and feline endoscopy
JVet Intern Med 2008;22(5):
2007;21:219-25.
and endosurgery. 2008.
1084-9.
8.
 Demko IL, Cohn LA. Chronic nasal 
2. Hall E, Simpson J, William D, editors.
5.
 Scott KD, Zoran DL, Mansell J, et al.
discharge in cats: 75 cases (1993-2004].
BSAVA manual of canine and feline
 Utility of endoscopic biopsies of the
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:1032-7.
 gastroenterology. 2005.
duodenum and ileum for diagnosis of
9.
.Caccamo R, Twedt DC, Buracco P.
.Washabau RJ, Day MJ, Willard MD, et al
inflammatory bowel disease and small 
 McKiernan BC. Endoscopic bronchial
Endoscopic, biopsy, and histopathologic
cell lymphoma in cats. J Vet Intern Med
 anatomy in the cat. J Feline Med Surg
 guidelines for the evaluation of
2011;25:1253-7.
2007;9:140-9.
gastrointestinal inflammation in
6. Tenwolde AC, Johnson LR, Hunt GB,
10.
Gerber B, Boretti FS, Kley S, et al.
companion animals. WSAVA International
et al. The role of bronchoscopy in foreign
Evaluation of clinical signs and causes of
Gastrointestinal Standardization Group.
body removal in dogs and cats: 37 cases
lower urinary tract disease in European
J Vet Intern Med 2010;24:10-26.
(2000-2008). J Vet Intern Med
cats. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:571-7.
4. Willard MD, Mansell J, Fosgate GT, et al.
2010;24[5):1063-8.
11.
Wilson HM, Chun R, Larson Vs, et al.
Effect of sample quality on the sensitivity
7.
 Johnson LR, Drazenovich TL. Flexible
Clinical signs, treatments, and outcome
of endoscopic biopsy for detecting gastric
bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage
in cats with transitional cell carcinoma
103
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
of the urinary bladder: 20 cases 
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
14. McCarthy TC. Cystoscopy for urinary tract
(1990-2004). J Am Anim Med Assoc
feline endoscopy and endosurgery. BSAVA
assessment in dogs and cats with pelvic
2007;231:101 -6.
Publications; 2008. p. 142-57.
fractures. Proceedings of the Veterinary
12. Hotston-Moore A, England G. Rigid
13.
 Selcer BA. Urinary tract trauma associated
Orthopedic society 21st Annual
with pelvic trauma. J Am Anim Hosp
Conference, 1994. p. 29.
vaginoscopy. In: Lhermette P, Sobel D,
Assoc 1982;18:785-93.
104
10
lapter
Sutures and general surgical implants
S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Knowledge of the properties of the suture materials and implants
Selection of suture materials
available is essential to be able to make an informed decision about
what to use during surgery. Use of the wrong suture material, use of
Suture material of inadequate strength may result in wound break-
 an inappropriate suture pattern or placement of a loose ligature could
down, while suture material with high memory can lead to knots
cause dehiscence of a surgical incision or hemorrhage in the cat.
coming undone unless the surgeon is aware of this and adds addi-
requiring additional corrective surgery. In some situations where there
tional throws to the knot to counteract this property. Excessively large
is inadequate tissue for closure, for example after tumor resection,
diameter suture material results in a weaker knot, leading to knot
synthetic materials can be used to fll the defect. Surgical implants
insecurity and also more foreign material at the surgical site.
have been developed for specific purposes, for example ameroid con-
The smallest diameter suture material that will adequately hold the
strictors for portosystemic shunt closure. In contrast, some readily
healing tissue should be used. In cats, size 1.5-3 metric gauge (M)
available inexpensive materials (eg., cellophane) have also been used
will be suitable for most general use. For either very delicate work or
with success.
areas where a higher tensile strength is required, sutures outside this
 The general properties of suture materials and implants will be
size range may be needed. Size conversion for suture materials is
covered in this chapter, with specifics of their usage covered in the 
shown in Table 10-1.
organ-related chapters.
 Multiflament suture material is usually stronger than monofila-
ment and has better knot security due to the higher friction co-efficient.
Conversely, multiflament material, particularly if dry, can cause drag
which can damage delicate tissue and inadvertently cause the surgeon
SUTURE MATERIALS
to tug on the material, which can cause iatrogenic injury and suture
 pullout. Multiflament suture material also has a greater surface area
Suture materials are used to approximate tissues and hold them in
for bacterial penetration and contains crevices which can harbor
apposition while healing occurs. They may be placed to loosely
bacteria. These characteristics are reduced when the multiflament or
approximate tissue during healing in an area with a good blood
 braided suture is coated.
supply or low tension or as a tight ligature to seal a blood vessel while
Natural materials like silk, coton, ovine intestinal submucosa, 0r
a clot is forming. In avascular areas or where there is high tension
bovine serosa (catgut) can cause inflammatory reactions within the
stress across a wound, the suture needs to retain its strength for a
tissues and their absorption, by phagocytosis, may be variable depend-
period of time compatible with the healing period of the tissue. In
ing on implant site and patient status. Synthetic materials are usually
wounds where there is contamination or the risk of infection it may
 chemical polymers absorbed by hydrolysis, and thus they often have
be preferable for the suture to be completely absorbed once its func-
a more predictable rate of absorption independent of these factors
tion is complete.
(Table 10-2).
Suture materials are generally categorized as absorbable or non-
Modifcations to several of the generic suture materials include the
absorbable, monoflament or multiflament and natural or synthetic.
pue (asuei apidey, au) samns alqeqiosqe Aipidei jo uonsnponu!
A suture is classified as non-absorbable if its mechanical resistance is
sutures with improved resistance to bacterial penetration (the 'Plus"
constant for 60 days following implantation, even it is eventually
range). The 'Plus' range sutures, which include polyglactin 910, poly-
absorbed. Although the perfect suture does not exist, ideally a suture
dioxanone and poliglecaprone, are coated with triclosan, which is an
inhibitor of bacterial fatty acid synthesis with demonstrable antibacte-
predictable absorption, tie reliably, and be applicableto a wide variety
rial activity. The use of triclosan-coated sutures in humans has been
of uses.
associated with a decreased infection rate.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00010-X
105
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Table 10-1 Size conversions for suture materials
Actual
Metric
United States
Surgical
size (mm)
gauge (M)
Pharmacopeia (UsP)
gut (USP)
0.02
0.2
10-0
0.03
0.3
0-6
0.04
0.4
8-0
0.05
0.5
7-0
8-0
0.07
0.7
6-0
7-0
0.1
1
5-0
6-0
0.15
1.5
4-0
5-0
0.2
2
3-0
4-0
0.3
2-0
3-0
0.35
3.5
0
2-0
0.4
4
1
0.5
5
2
1
Table 10-2 Loss of strength and absorption times of
 suture materials
 Suture material
Loss of strength in
Absorption
composition
Weeks (percentage loss)
time in days
Intestinal
2-3 (100%)
14-80 approx
submucosa (catgut)
 Polyglytone
2-3 (100%)
56
Poliglecaprone
1-2 (50%)
119
 Polyglactin 910
2-3 (50%)
56-70
D
 Polyglycolic acid
2-3 (50%)
90
Glycomer 631
2-3 (50%)
90-110
Figure 10-1 Simple sutures: (A) simple interrupted; (B) cruciate 
mattress; (C) vertical mattress; and (D) horizontal mattress.
Lactomer
2 (20%)
56-70
 Polydioxanone
4-6 (50%)
180
'uisuan anss aun pue siea io (s)pua ino aui jo yaual moiun yoa
Suture placement and patterns
 The knot security of individual suture materials is influenced by the
memory, plasticity and pliability ofthe suture material. Braided mate-
Careful attention to proper suturing technique and use of the appro-
rial generally has good knot security but this is also influenced by
priate suture patterns for wound closure is important in ensuring
suture coating: some braided material is coated to decrease tissue drag
optimal closure and incisional healing. Careless handling of the
and bacterial penetration but this will tend to decrease knot security.
suture or the use of damaged instruments can weaken the suture and
General recommendations for simple interrupted suture placement
make it more prone to breakage Eversion of skin edges or excessively
would be to place four throws, ensuring that the throws are tightened
tight skin sutures can encourage self-trauma by the patient increasing
after the third (or second if suturing skin) and subsequent throw. For
the risk of suture line infection or premature suture removal by the
simple continuous patterns the recommendation is for five to six
cat. Excess tension on sutures in wound closure can lead to cutting
throws at the start ofthe suture line with one or two additional throws
 out' of sutures or to ischemia of tissue adjacent to the sutures. In areas
at the end of the suture pattern, as the suture material becomes
of tension, the surgeon should consider other techniques such as
damaged during use and the end knots are generally less secure.
the use of subcutaneous walking sutures, undermining of the skin,
Suture patterns commonly used in feline general surgery are shown
tension-relieving sutures, and then surgical procedures, including
in Figures 10-1 and 10-2. There are several different suture materials
'(al iandeu aas] sde uys io 'sanpasoid Aiseid 'suoisiu suxeian
 On the market (Table 10-3) with a variety of different properties, indi-
Placing an adequate number of throws is important to minimize
 cations and contraindications. The materials available in practice will
the risk of the sutures undoing. Although some manufacturers give
vary according to surgeon preference and procedures commonly per-
 guidelines, strict recommendations are not made for individual suture
formed. The indications and contraindications for the different suture
jo ssaua se yns sioie Aueu uo japuadap si siun se 'sieae
materials are listed in Tables 10-4 and 10-5.
106
Sutures and general surgical implants
Chapter
10
Table 10-3 Suture materials and some
 commercial manufacturers
 Suture material
 Manufacturer
Catgut
 Polyglactin 910
Vicryl: Ethicon, Polysorb: USS/DG
 Poliglecaprone
 Monocryl: Ethicon
 Polyglycolic acid 
 Dexon Il: USS/DG, Safil: Braun
Polyglycomers
Maxon: UsS/DG, Monosyn: Braun
Polydioxanone
PDS: Ethicon
Glycomer 631
 Biosyn: USS/DG
 Polyglytone 6211
Caprosyn: USS/DG
 Nylon, polyamide 
Monosof: Covidien, Ethilon, Nurolon: Ethicon,
Dafilon: Braun, Supramid: Braun, Dermalon:
USS/DG, Monosof: USS: DG, Surgilon: USS/DG
B
Caprolactum
Vetafil
 Polypropylene
Prolene: Ethicon, Surgiproll: USS/DG,
Premilene: Braun
 Polyester
Surgidac: USS/DG, Ti.Cron: USS/DG, Mersilene:
Ethicon, Ethibond Excel: Ethicon, Miralene:
 Braun, Dagrofil: Braun, Synthofil: Braun,
PremiCron: Braun
Polybutester
Novafil: USS/DG, Vascufil: USS/DG
Silk
 Perma-hand: Ethicon, Sofsilk: USS/DG, Silkam:
Braun
Stainless steel
 Steel: USS/DG, Flexon: USS/DG, Surgical
Stainless Steel Suture: Ethicon, Steelex: Braun 
significant foreign body reaction when implanted in tissues. Absorp-
tion is unpredictable, occurring faster in patients with cancer, anemia,
D
and malnutrition or when used in gastric surgery, an infected wound,
 Or highly vascularized tissue. It is also absorbed faster when used in
the mouth and in other mucous membranes, e.g., vagina, due to the
presence of microorganisms. In one study of 12 cats where suture
 material was implanted into the oral cavity it completely disappeared
between days 3 and 7.3
Chromic catgut suture is a variant treated with chromic acid salts.
This treatment produces roughly twice the suture-holding time of
plain catgut, but greater tissue inflammation occurs. Full tensile
paieai-ieay st aimns imaies isey 'saep i-gi ot papuaixa st yrguans
to give even more rapid absorption in the body.
Catgut is banned in Europe and Japan because of concern over
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), although the herds from
which gut is harvested are certified BSE-free Catgut has largely been
replaced by synthetic absorbable polymers such as polyglactin, poly-
Figure 10-2 Continuous suture patterns: (A) Cushing: (B) Connell;:
(C) Ford Interlocking: and (D) Lembert.
glytone and poliglecaprone.
Poliglecaprone 25
ABSORBABLE SUTURE MATERIALS
Poliglecaprone 25 is a monoflament absorbable suture material made
 of glycolide and epsilon caprolactone copolymer (PGCL). It is pliable,
Catgut
with low tissue drag giving it smooth tissue passage Knot security is
not reliable, hence the ears should not be cut too short and additional
Catgut is made of collagen obtained from bovine intestines. It is natu-
throws placed if used for a continuous pattern. It loses its strength
rally degraded by the body's own proteolytic enzymes. It can cause a
relatively quickly, with the tensile strength capability reduced to about
107
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Table 10-4 Some indications and contraindications for use of suture materials in cats
Indications
Contraindications
Absorbable suture material
Polyglytone
 Soft tissue approximation, subcutaneous, subdermal, intestinal
Areas where there is high tension combined with
surgery
prolonged healing 
Poliglecaprone
Soft tissue approximation, subcutaneous, subdermal, intestinal
Areas where there is high tension combined with
surgery
prolonged healing
 Polyglactin 910 
 Soft tissue approximation and ligation
Should not be used where extended approximation of
tissue is required
 Polyglycolic acid 
 Subcutaneous and dermal sutures, abdominal and thoracic surgery
 Elderly anemic and malnourished patients, urinary tract 
Glycomer 631
 For abdominal closure and soft tissue repair requiring a strong but
Should not be used where extended approximation of
absorbable material
tissue is required
Polyglyconates
Internal tissues where a long-lasting absorbable suture is preferable
Should not be used where extended approximation of
(linea alba, hernias). Used for intestinal surgery
tissue is required or for fixation of permanent 
cardiovascular prostheses or synthetic grafts
Polydioxanone
Internal tissues where a long-lasting absorbable suture is preferable 
 Areas of rapid healing where prolonged suture retention
(linea alba, hernias). Used for intestinal surgery
not required 
 Non-absorbable suture material
Polyamide
Skin closure
Internally in infected or contaminated areas where
 Skin closure and general soft tissue approximation and ligation,
non-absorbable material would be ill-advised 
 Polypropylene
agegosge-uou se anss bueau Aipiden ui Aessanau ion
 tendon and ligament repair
60% within a week, 20-30% at two weeks and all strength is lost
Table 10-5 Suture recommendation for various tissue types
within three weeks. It undergoes reliable absorbtion by hydrolysis.
It was used in a prospective study for all ligatures and closure of the
Tissue types
Suture recommendation and
linea alba in routine ovariohysterectomies in 24 cats. Dehiscence did
contraindications
not occur in any of the cats; however, the author has seen dehiscence
of the linea alba after celiotomy closure and would recommend alter-
Skin
Monofilament non-absorbable, e.g.. polyamide
native suture material such as polydioxanone or glycomer 63l be used
or polypropylene
in this situation. Poliglecaprone is commonly used for subcutaneous
Subcutaneous
Absorbable, e.g. poliglecaprone, polyglactin
 and subdermal tissue closure. Careful technique ensuring an adequate
910, polyglytone
number of throws, good knot security and suffcient purchase of tissue
with each bite should be taken when placing in areas of high tension.
Tendon
Strong non-absorbable or slowly absorbable,
It causes a relatively short-lived inflammatory response.
e.g.. polydioxanone, polypropylene, polyamide
 Abdominal closure
 Strong. with good knot security (use extra
linea alba
throws), e.g.. polydioxanone, glycomer 631
Polyglactin 910
 Muscle 
Absorbable, e.g. polyglactin 910, polyglycolic
 Polylactin 910 is an absorbable, braided suture material made of poly-
acid, glycomer 631
noy oi aanun ioy yuans alsuan si sioy ains aul pe ok
weeks in tissue, retaining 75% of strength after two weeks, 50% after
 Parenchymal
Absorbable monofilament, e.g.. poliglecaprone,
three weeks and 25% after four weeks and it is completely absorbed
 organs
glycomer 631
by hydrolysis within 70 days. The suture material, being braided, has
Hollow viscus
Absorbable, e.g. poliglecaprone, polyglactin
some tissue drag. particularly if it dries out, but it has good knot secu-
910, glycomer 631
rity and is good for ligation. The sutures are coated with a copolymer
Avoid polyglycolic acid in the bladder as it 
of calcium stearate to allow less drag and better water repellency. The
rapidly dissolves in urine
suture material can also be treated to enable more rapid breakdown
Infected or
Absorbable g. polyglactin, poliglecaprone.
for its use in rapidly healing tissues such as mucous membranes.
contaminated
Avoid braided non-absorbable sutures which
wounds
can fistulate or catgut which rapidly absorbs
Polyglycolic acid
Vessels and
Ligatures - absorbable suture material
Polyglycolic acid (PGA) suture is classified as a synthetic, absorbable,
vascular
Vascular anastomoses - non-absorbable
braided multifilament. It is coated with N-laurin and L-lysine, which
anastomoses
monofilament, e.g.. polypropylene and with a
needle-to-suture ratio of 1 : 1
render the thread extremely smooth, soft, and safe for knotting. It
is also coated with magnesium stearate and finally sterilized with
108
Sutures and general surgical implants
Chapter
10
ethylene oxide gas. It is naturally degraded in the body by hydrolysis 
and has approximately 60% strength let at 14 days; absorption is
NON-ABSORBABLE SUTURE MATERIALS
completed between 60 and 90 days. It has the advantages of high
 supueu asea anssn yanau aessed yoous yuans asuan ie!
Stainless steel
excellent knotting ability, and secure knot tying (better when wet). It
is commonly used for subcutaneous sutures, intradermal closure,
An alloy made from natural materials, stainless steel is available as
abdominal and thoracic surgeries. Elderly, anemic and malnourished
a monoflament or braided multiflament suture material. Steel has
patients may absorb the suture more quickly. Absorption is faster in
the highest strength of any other suture material.5 It is biologically
urine, and so it is not recommended for urinary tract surgery.
inert and can easily be sterilized by autoclaving. It incites little tissue
reaction other than mechanical irritation from the ends. It has excel-
lent knot security, although the knots can sometimes be diffcult to
Polydioxanone
place. Pieces of stainless steel can migrate if loose and it willbreak if
Polydioxanone (PDS) or poly-p-dioxanone is a slowly absorbable
paanins yanoiul ieal io ino Alisea ues 1l gupuaq paieadau ol palqns
monofilament suture composed of the polyester, poly (p-dioxanone).
tissues if tightened too much. Given its difficult handling properties.
youou u yuans iai ym suagouu e si su
it is not commonly used in practice as a suture material, but has a
-Bnynu au ueu seip anssi ssa ym pue auaadoidaiod pue uou
wide range of applications in clips and staples. One area, however.
ment materials. It has good strength retention, with only 20% loss
where steel suture is still commonly used is closure of sternotomy
over two weeks and 60% loss after eight weeks. It can sometimes be
wounds, as in dogs it gives increased stability compared to PDS II
difficult to handle due to its memory and tendency to coil or 'pig-tail:
or prolene.
Knot security can be relatively poor, and seven throws are advisable
at the end of a continuous suture line. Complete absorption occurs
silk
by hydrolysis and takes around 200 days.
Polydioxanone was still intact at day 28 in the oral cavity of cats,
Silk has a long history of use as a suture material. It is obtained as a
and it is recommended for procedures in which longer healing time
fiber spun from the cocoon of the silk worm, and is available either
is anticipated’ such as hernia repair or pexy procedures.
twisted or as a braided multifilament. Silk has excellent handling
Despite the less than ideal knot security, the strength and pre-
characteristics, and is cheap. It has a variety of disadvantages, includ-
dictable rate of absorption make this an ideal suture material for
ing tissue reaction, marginal knot security, and poor tensile strength.
closure of the linea alba and it has become a very popular material
Many surgeons prefer the feel of silk, and it is still often used to ligate
for this use.
large vessels, although clinical use is limited. It can be moistened in
sterile saline before use to improve knot security and reduce tissue
Polyglyconates
drag, although this can slightly decrease its tensile strength. Silk is not
recommended in hollow viscera or in infected wounds, as it can
These suture materials are polymers of glyconates (Monosyn:
 potentiate infection by trapping bacteria in its braiding. As with other
Braun) or combinations such as glycolic acid and trimethylene car-
 multiflament materials, use in gall bladder and urinary tract surgery
bonate (Maxon: USS/DG). The tensile strength and absorption is
is discouraged, as it can be calculogenic.?
dependent on the composition. Maxon can be used for linea alba
closure; Monosyn has quicker absorption and loses 50% of its tensile
strength by two weeks so would be more suitable for subcuticular
Polyamide
closure.
Polyamide nylon is a generic designation for a family of synthetic
polymers known generically as polyamides. Nylon can be found in
Glycomer 631
both braided and monoflament forms. As a material, nylon is rela-
tively inert and has no capillary action as a monofilament. Only
This monoflament is a copolymer of glycolide, dioxanone, and tri-
about 20% of monoflament nylon's initial strength is gone at one
methylene carbonate. It is advertised as the strongest monoflament
 year, although in some cases all the tensile strength in a multifilament
suture material available, second only to steel. A quarter of the strength
strand can be gone at six months. Although monoflament nylon has
is gone by day 14, and only 40% remains at three weeks. Full absorp-
a reputation for relatively poor handling and knot security,7 it is com-
tion takes 90 to ll0 days. It has fair handling characteristics with low
monly used in a variety of applications including skin, cormea, fascia.
tissue drag and slightly better knot security than polydioxanone.
and ligatures, e.g.. pedicle ligatures for ovariohysterectomy. Due to its
which is a comparable though longer-lasting monoflament. It has
stiffmess, it is not recommended within hollow viscera, as the cut ends
slightly less memory compared to polydioxanone This material is
 promoted as suitable for abdominal closure and soft tissue repair
always recommended.
requiring a strong but absorbable material.
In the same family of materials is polymerized caprolactam, a
twisted and coated multifilament material with superior initial tensile
Polyglytone 6211
strength compared to nylon. It has more tissue reactivity than nylon,
however. It has been known to cause sinuses when implanted in
A synthetic, absorbable polyester material indicated for very short-
tissues, so is best suited for skin. It is generally supplied in bulk rolls,
term wound support. Approximately half of its initial tensile strength
but should not be considered sterile unless processed by ethylene
is gone at day 5, and only 25% remains at day 10. This suture material
oxide or heat sterilization. Autoclaving can make it more difficult to
is completely absorbed by day 56. Interestingly, the absorption rate
handle. In general, this family of materials is best suited for skin
for this material is the closest of any synthetic material to catgut, and
sutures. Although in general multiflament nylon materials may be
the handling of the suture material is similar. This suture is suitable
easier to handle, the monoflament nylon materials would be pre-
for ligature placement, subcutaneous closure, intradermal sutures and
ferred for use in the skin because they are less likely to wick outside
use in the oral cavity.
contaminant bacteria into the deeper tissues of the wound bed.
109
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Polypropylene
Table 10-6 Needle characteristics
 Polypropylene is a widely used synthetic monoflament suture mate-
nial that is composed of polymerized polypropylene It is non-
Needle type Description
Indications
thrombogenic, and is often used in cardiovascular surgery in human
 patients. It is available as a mesh material for implantation. Polypro-
Taper
Needle body is round and 
Generally used in easily
 pylene is very plastic, meaning that the material will assume a new
tapers smoothly to a sharp
 penetrated tissues such
shape when subject to tension, which contributes greatly to its good
point that pierces and 
as the intestine,
spreads tissue without
knot security if the sutures are tightened appropriately. Some surgeons
subcutaneous tissue or
find this material diffcult to handle because of its memory and ten-
cutting it
loose fascia; or blood 
dency to break if handled roughly. There is no appreciable loss of
vessels
tensile strength after implantation. Polypropylene was still intact at
Cutting
 Needle body is triangular
Recommended in
day 28 post-implantation in the feline oral cavity? and visual inspec-
and has a sharpened 
tough tissue such as
 tion showed polypropylene to have the least tissue reaction of all the 
cutting edge on the inside
 skin, fascia, tendons
 suture materials tested.
(towards the wound)
 and ligaments
 The clinical indications for use of polypropylene are varied and
Reverse
 Needle body is triangular
include cardiovascular and microvascular surgery, tracheobronchial
cutting
and has a sharpened
surgery (e.g. tracheostomies and closure of bronchial stump after
cutting edge on the
lobectomy), hernias and ruptures (e.g, perineal hernia repair), geni-
outside (away from
tourinary (e.g. perineal urethrostomy), routine skin closure, and as a
wound)
stay suture material.
Taper cut
Has a combination of a
Generally used for 
reverse cutting point and
suturing tough dense 
Polyester
taper point body
tissue such as a
tendon or for vascular
A synthetic non-absorbable multiflament or monoflament suture
grafts
material that is usually coated; the suture material has been reported
to have some tissue reactivity if the coating is lost This material has
Blunt point
 Has a rounded blunt point 
 For suturing soft 
that can dissect through 
parenchyma such as
a very high and prolonged tensile strength, although knot security is
 friable tissue without
liver or kidney
 only fair. Infection in an area where braided polyester suture has been
cutting
used almost always necessitates removal. Polyester is very strong and
has been used most commonly for prosthetic implant placement and
Side cutting or
 Hat on top and bottom 
For eye surgery
large vessel ligation. Given that suture contamination and sinus tract
spatula points 
with a cutting edge along
formation with polyester materials can be problematic, other suture
the front to one side
materials will provide sufficient strength without this risk.
spaces than the straight or half-curved needle, and the arc can be
Polybutester
chosen to maximize tissue bite depth and width. 3/8 and 1/2 needles
are most commonly used in veterinary medicine, but the 5/8 is slightly
 A special type of polyester material composed of polyglycol tereph.
easier to manipulate in deep or inaccessible locations.
thalate and polybutylene terephthalate This makes the material
A needle pierces the tissues by use of a cutting edge or a sharp point
retain many advantages of both polypropylene and polyester. It is
(taper) (Table 10-6 and Fig. 10-3) though a blunt-ended round body
delivered as a monoflament, and is commonly used in cardiovascular
needle is available for use in friable viscera such as the liver or spleen.
and ophthalmic procedures. The material is known to have better
Which type of needle to use depends on many factors including the
knot security than polyester alone with good tensile strength and
composition of the tissue that it is to be passed through, the thickness
flexibility.
of tissue, and its depth in the body. As a general needle the taper point 
round bodied needle is suitable for most tissues, with the reverse
cutting used for tougher tissues such as skin and fascia.
NEEDLES
Modern sutures feature swaged atraumatic needles where the suture
SUTURE REACTIONS IN CATS
to be spent threading the suture on the needle and, more importantly.
Cats appear to be prone to incisional swelling following celiotomy
the suture end of a swaged needle is smaller than the needle body
closure? independent of the type of suture material used. The associ-
pasems asn ol ieiuassa si ll anssi aul yanoiul Asea sassed il os
ated inflammation and fbrous tissue proliferation usually resolves
needles for atraumatic surgery in cats, particularly when suturing deli-
without treatment over a number of weeks, although complications
cate tissues such as viscera.
such as failure ofthe skin sutures, failure ofthe skin and subcutaneous
saipaau iuaieins a'sadeus aipaau jo sadi aaiul Alleiuassa aie aiau
sutures, wound dehiscence, and seroma or abscess formation may be
are used in accessible superfcial places where the needle can be
associated with severe incisional swelling.? Sweling and inflamma-
manipulated directly with fingers, e.g., skin, purse-string suture in the
tion along the incision line was observed after elective ovariohyster-
anus. Half-curved needles are straight in their shaft, but have a curved,
ectomy in 22 of 66 cats in a retrospective study. In a prospective study
cutting tip to them. These are not commonly used but are suitable for
of 99 feline abdominal incisions closed with surgical gut, polyglactin
skin or ophthalmic surgery. Curved needles are manipulated with
910, or polydioxanone, with and without subcutaneous closure the
needle holders. They are formed in an arc of 1/4, 3/8. 1/2. or 5/8
least inflammation occurred when the linea alba was sutured with
circles. This allows the surgeon access with the needle to smaller
 polyglactin 910 and the subcutaneous tissues were not sutured. The
110
Sutures and general surgical implants
Chapter
10
come into contact with moisture in the skin. The products may contain
dye to allow the user to easily see where the product has been applied.
Tapercut
asn aldjnu io saoq io sansdeo asn aluis u papiaoid aie Aau
Kuanbany pasn ssaiun yooiq oi Aouapuat e aaey iael aui inq 'siei
Cyanoacrylates form a bond across apposed wound edges allowing
normal healing to occur below. They should be applied correctly to
△
avoid complications; skin edges need to be accurately apposed and the
Cutting
glue applied over the top to form a bridge It should not be allowed
to enter the incision, where it may cause a foreign body reaction and
local inflammation.l A spray formulation is also available that forms
a thin topical bandage The adhesive polymerizes on contact with
exudates from the wound, forming an occlusive dressing.
Reverse
Indications
cutting
Their use saves time during wound repair, provides a flexible water
resistant protective coating, is less traumatic and eliminates the need
for suture removal. 12 They can be used on large wounds concurrently
with subautaneous or subcuticular sutures. They are marketed to
replace sutures of size l M or smaller or for use on superficial wounds
e ene ioy pasn uaaq a aau 'uoisuan ou ym saie 
tions, abrasions, suture/staple line sealing, skin closure after spaying/
Tapercut
neutering and dewclaw removal. N-butyl-cyanoacrylate tissue adhe-
sive was evaluated as a skin closure material in a population control
 program.13 The time required for closure of the surgical site with the
adhesive was shorter than with nylon, saving approximately one
minute per animal. As the adhesive eliminates the need for suture
removal and decreases surgery time without additional risk to the cat,
it may be indicated for surgical population control programs.13
Blunt
Cyanoacrylate has also been used successfully for embolization of an
arteriovenous fistula in a cat.14
Contraindications
They should not be used for closure of mucous membranes or in areas
of tension as they do not provide as strong a closure as a properly
Spatula
sutured incision. Cyanoacrylate was compared with the use of sutures
in a study on enteroplication in cats.13 The inflammation associated
Figure 10-3 Needle point types.
with the adhesive persisted for the four weeks of the experiment, and
it was concluded that cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive cannot be recom-
mended for this clinical procedure.13
Aue ot paejai Aleoyiads aq ol ieadde jou pip uoeai Aioneuueyu
particular suture material as reactions were seen with all of them.?
Histologically, reactions in the linea alba of 12 other cats progressed
IMPLANTS FOR PORTOSYSTEMIC
from purulent to fibromononuclear to fbrous within 14 days after
closure with gut, polyglactin 9l0, and polydioxanone. Microscopic
SHUNT CLOSURE
evidence of seroma formation was found in nine of 12 animals in
which the subcutaneous tissue was not sutured, suggesting that surgi-
Ameroid constrictor
cal closure of subcutaneous dead space was indicated. Another study
found conflicting results, with subcutaneous closure of celiotomy
 An ameroid constrictor is a device for gradual occlusion of blood flow.
incisions causing increased tissue swelling compared to wounds
It is composed of a ring of casein, inside a ring of stainless steel (Fig.
 ns as sui jo snsat ah a'samns snoauenans inouim pas
10-4).Casein is a hygroscopicsubstancethat swells as itslowly absorbs
aul aq iou aeuu sieo ui saimins shoauenoqns jo juaaneid ieui paisae
 body fluid. The stainless steel sheath forces the casein to swell inwardly.
preferred technique in relation to postoperative inflammation. The
eventually closing the ring and obliterating the shunt. In cats, ameroid
authors would recommend a subcutaneous layer as it provides addi-
constrictors are most commonly used for gradual constriction of por-
tional incisional security and provides an extra barrier to dehiscence,
tosystemic shunts, though a higher incidence of multiple acquired
particularly if the cat removes the skin sutures.
shunts has been associated with their use (see Chapter 32). They are
gas sterilized and therefore should not be used until 12 to 24 hours
after sterilization to allow residual ethylene oxide to be released from
TISSUE GLUE
the casein.
 Before constrictor placement, the “key', a small column of casein
that completes the constrictor ring, is removed from the ameroid
Topical adhesives are made from medical grade cyanoacrylates, a
 constrictor and set aside in a dry cup. The choice of ameroid constric-
group of rapidly polymerizing adhesives, which polymerize when they
tor size for portosystemic shunt occlusion is based on shunt diameter;
111
Section
2
Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
A
Figure 10-4 An ameroid constrictor.
therefore the surgeon should have a selection of sizes available at each
surgery. Ameroid constrictors come in various sizes, with internal
diameters ranging from 3.5-9 mm; constrictors with 3.5, 5 and
6.5 mm internal diameters are most frequently used for PSs ligation
in cats.15 To avoid postoperative portal hypertension, a constrictor is
selected that does not compress the shunt immediately. After place-
ment around the vessel to be closed, the key is replaced to complete
the circle of casein. Ameroid constrictors were thought to gradually
close over four to five weeks, but generally thrombus formation in the
enclosed vessel will occur earlier, often by ten days to two weeks.16
Time to occlusion of the vessel is dependent on the size of the vessel
and constrictor and the rigidity ofthe outer ring. Closure is most rapid
during the frst three to 14 days after implantation; the rate of closure
B
declines thereafter. For further information on the use of ameroid
Figure 10-5 Porcine small intestinal submucosa used for reconstruction
constrictors see Chapter 32.
of a diaphragmatic defect in a kitten. (From Andreoni AA, Voss K.
Reconstruction of a large dliaphragmatic defect in a kitten using smallintestinal
Cellophane
Submucosa (515). / Fe/ Meo 5urg 2009; 11: 1019-1022, with permssion from E/sevier.)
Gas sterilized strips of cellophane have been used to provide partial
sizes, including large sheets, tubes, cylinders, and cones. This makes
occlusion of shunts' (see Chapter 32). Cellophane can be obtained
from a florist, and is sterilized in ethylene oxide or hydrogen
it suitable for many surgical applications. SIS comes in multiple sizes
 peroxide gas plasma. Strips are cut to size (triple folded 10 mm long
[2 cm x 3 cm to 7 cm x 20 cm) and is activated by immersion in
by 4 mm wide). After placement around the shunt the strips are
sterile water for five to ten minutes. Surgisis Gold is a thicker eight-ply
mesh with reinforced suture zones to prevent the suture cutting
secured together with surgical clips or staples. Inflammation caused
by the cellophane results in complete occlusion of most shunts in four
through the mesh. This thicker mesh has good handling properties
and avoids the need for two layers of Surgisis four-ply.1 SIS has been
to six weeks.
used successfully in the reconstruction of a large diaphragmatic defect
in a kitten (Fig. 10-5)1" and in feline corneal disease. An advantage
of SIS grafts is that are they are absorbed over time, so they should
SHEETS AND MESHES
not restrict growth in immature animals.
 Porcine small intestinal submucosa
Surgical meshes
Small intestinal submucosa (SIS) is a naturally derived biomaterial
Meshes commonly used for surgical reconstruction include polyglac-
isolated from the small intestine of pigs. After removal of the mucosal.
tin, polypropylene and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). Polyglactin is
serosal, and muscular layers of the intestine, a strong, collagenous
 an absorbable mesh and is preferred in contaminated wounds. Poly-
matrix remains. Following treatment for disinfection, cell removal,
 propylene meshes are non-absorbable and pervious to air and fluid.
and sterilization, SIS is biologically safe, easy to handle, has suffcient
spiny pue je ot snojaadul pue uonsaju oljueisisai guons st adld
tensile strength, is infection resistant, and allows remodeling of
but it is very expensive Polypropylene mesh is most commonly used
replaced tissue In addition, SIS can be formed into many shapes and
for reconstruction in small animal surgery.
112
Sutures and general surgical implants
Chapter
10
 Polypropylene mesh
 Skin stapling
Polypropylene monoflaments are knitted into an elastic, durable.
Skin stapling devices have become an attractive and affordable alterna-
large pore mesh. This construction permits the mesh to be cut into a
tive to traditional skin closure in small animals. Skin staplers for
 desired shape or size without unravelling. Meshes vary in pore size
veterinary use are usually fxed head, disposable and available with
and elasticity. Polypropylene mesh facilitates the reconstruction of
varying numbers and sizes of stainless steel staples. Although labeled
large tissue defects and is most commonly used for hernia repair or
as for single-patient use, some practices will re-sterilize and reuse
for reconstruction of the chest or abdominal wall (see Chapter 43).21
them.23 Staples should be removed with staple extractors. The ideal
If neoplasms are removed with 1-3 cm margins and a deep margin
skin stapler is comfortable to handle, makes a palpable and audible
of at least one fascial plane, then the resulting defect may benefit from
click to signal staple formation is complete has an open staple view
closure with mesh.21 The main complication seen in cats is seroma
a sapiaaid pue aape au ui uieai sadeis aueu moq aas oi
formation; long-term complications are rarely reported.
less staple alignment. Staples should be consistently formed, secure,
and they should not rotate in the skin. Depth of staple penetration
should be easy to control and the staples should be easy to remove
 at the right time. Also, the ideal stapler would be readily re-sterilized
SURGICAL STAPLERS
for reuse.
aul aum uosodde u saapa uys pioq on pasn aie sasiny qunu
 The use of surgical stapling devices in the cat is less widespread than 
stapler is aligned with the incision, there usually being an arrow to
in the dog, due in part to diffculty in placing large stapling units into
the chest, but also because resection of organs and tissues using
staple is fred. It is preferable to start at the proximal end of the inci-
sutures is easier in cats due to their smaller size.
sion and work distally so the formed staples are visible, to enable
Stapling devices are available for superfcial wound closure and
even spacing
intra-abdominal and thoracic resections and anastomoses (Table
10-7). The advantage of surgical staplers is that their use can save
Lung stapling
time over more conventional or traditional surgical techniques such
as suturing. For example, a thoracoabdominal (TA) stapler can be
 Lung stapling devices are now routinely used due to the ease and
used for pulmonary lobectomy, as it is not necessary to independently
speed of application, safety and effcacy Lung stapling devices have
isolate or ligate the hilar vessels.22 The staples are usualy composed
 been used in cats to perform lobectomies for neoplasia and lung
of stainless steel or titanium and they are therefore minimally
ap sudiis a tsies pue so u as ieiu e ul 'suoa
rea ctive.
was easy to apply accurately and the design generally allowed it to be
Selecting the correct size of stapler and staples to create the correct
placed without interference by the lesion. Dissection and ligation of
length of staple line is critical. It is important that all the tissue to be
ligated lies comfortably within the staple line It is better to use a
the study believed that these factors made the application of staples
stapler that is too long and collect the extra staples on a sponge or
faster than traditional surgical techniques.22
swab than to use one that is too short that results in leakage from
The stapling equipment used most commonly in the cat is the TA30
non-stapled tissue. Experience in the use of the equipment is essential.
 or TA55/60 (Fig. 10-6). The TA designation stands for thoracoabdomi-
asaul asn ol 1ou 1o asn ol uaum ol se juauapn! leoigins poog sl se
nal and the 30 or 55 designation is for length of the staple line in
techniques.22
 millimeters. The TA apparatus usually places two lines of B-shaped
Table 10-7 Surgical staplers for use in cats
 Type of surgical stapler
Abbreviation
Indication or usage
Size for cats
Skin stapler
Wound apposition
4.8 mm × 3.5 mm
 Thoracoabdominal -
TA
 Partial pulmonary lobectomy
30-3.5 mm
Double staggered rows of staples
Complete lobectomy 
55-3.5 mm or 4.8 mm
Triple staggered row for TA 30-V3
60-3.5 mm or 4.8 mm
Endoscopic version
 End-to-end anastomosis - places a circular double row of
EEA
Transrectal colocolostomy
21 mm
pe sisseue buai ael ol e saean ieun sadens
a circular blade within the cartridge simultaneously cuts 
redundant tissue from each end
Gastrointestinal -
GIA
Few indications due to small
3.5 mm
Endoscopic version
 Linear Proximate Cutter
size of feline intestine 
 Ligating dividing stapler
LDS
Splenectomy
One size, secures
Mesenteric vessels
vessels up to 7 mm
Ovariohysterectomy
 Ligating clip appliers
Splenectomy, limb 
Small
Ligaclip (Ethicon)
amputation, vessel sealing
Medium 
Surgiclip (Covidien)
113
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Figure 10-6 A thoracoabdominal stapler; the TA-30 is the size that is
most suitable for use in the cat.
staples. The 30 mm staples are available in 3.5 mm heights and the
55 mm staples in 3.5 and 4.8 mm heights. These staples compress to
1.5 mm and 2 mm, respectively. A white vascular cartridge is available 
Figure 10-7 Testicular implants for use in cats. (Courtesy of Neuticdes, with
for the TA 30, the V3, which fires three lines of 2.5 mm staples, which
permission.)
compress to 1.5 mm. Selection of the height of the 55 mm staples is
dependent on the compressed thickness of the tissue. Normal tissues
 generally have 3.5 mm staples applied, whereas 4.8 mm are generally
used on thickened parenchyma. The vascular white cartridge for the
experimental study in cats of caudal rectal resection from a dorsal
TA30 (TA 30-V3) is advised for hilar lung and liver lobectomies. Before
approach, even this small size of EEA was diffcult to insert into the
cutting the specimen from the staple line, large hemostats are used to
feline anus and its use resulted in anal sphincter impairment postop-
clamp the tissue distal to the staples. This avoids spillage of neoplastic
eratively.26 The EEA has, however, been used successfully to perform
or infected cells into the pleural cavity. Any discharged staples that are
transrectal colocolostomy in a series of cats that had undergone sub-
free on either end of the suture line are removed. The staple line is
total colectomy for acquired megacolon27 where the colon is dilated
then inspected. There is usually no indication to routinely oversew
 and therefore the size is not such a problem. Regular skin staples have
au ae au s a e ua uum saul a
not been successful when used to perform large intestinal anastomosis
the chance of air leakage. If point areas of leakage or hemorrhage do
in cats.
Occur, these can be independently occluded either with sutures or
 The LDS stapler places two titanium vascular clips and then cuts
individual vascular clips.
between them (ligate-divide stapler). It contains 30 staples and thus
[eed Kuoioaqol on paialqns aiam sies pue saop uaaas-Au
can be fired 15 times to secure vessels up to 7 mm in diameter. It
lobectomy, or pneumonectomy, using stapling equipment The most
decreases surgical time in procedures such as splenectomy and can be
common indication was neoplasia. No operative, perioperative, or
used to ligate jejunal vessels when performing intestinal resection and
long-term deaths could be attributed to the use of staples; complica-
anastomosis.
tions were minimal. Staple resection was thus believed to be safe,
Hemostatic vascular clips, usually of titanium, are available in a
fast, and efficient for removal of various segments of canine and
variety of different sizes. When applying a clip, the vessel should be
feline lung.24
isolated and dissected clear of tissue. The diameter of the vessel needs
to be between one-third and two-thirds of the length of the clip and
Abdominal stapling
the clip should be placed a couple of millimeters from the end of the
vessel. Absorbable polymer locking clips are available that do not
 The use of stapling instruments (TA or GIA/ Proximate Linear Cutter
interfere with MRI signals.
stapler) to perform gastric surgery in small animal patients provides
alternate techniques that are often more reliable and are usually per-
formed more quickly than conventional techniques with manual
IMPLANTS
sutures. In addition to reducing anesthetic and operating times, the
risk of contamination of the abdominal cavity may be decreased
significantly.25
a u pu r pasn ru iou a si a
 The GIA (Covidien) or Proximate Linear Cutter (Ethicon) stapler
 surgery but they are available if owners request their implantation.
deploys two staggered rows of staples and sections between them.
There are silicone prostheses for implantation in cats after castration
They are available in a variety of lengths between 50 and 100 mm,
(Neuticles: CTI Neuticles). They are similar in size, shape and weight
with a choice of two different staple sizes. A functional end-to-end
to the natural testicle. Implants available for use in cats are made of
intestinal anastomosis can be performed using the GIA stapler (gas-
rigid polypropylene. There are two sizes (small and extra small) avail-
trointestinal stapler) placed into the two intestinal ends to be anasto-
able for use in cats (Fig. 10-7).
mosed and then closing the end of anastomosis with a TA stapler. This
 Silicone implants are available for implantation after enucleation
technique, though rapid and effective in dogs, is less applicable to
in cats. The eyelids can be sutured closed over the prosthetic and its
most cats due to the size of the arms of the GIA stapler. The linear
function is to prevent the sunken-in appearance. Alternatively, eyelids
staplers designed for endoscopic surgery have smallr arms and are
can be retained and the gray prosthesis is seen in the socket. An orbital
more suitable for use in this manner in the cat.
 prosthesis would not be recommended in cats with an infected eye
Surgery of the colon and rectum has also been performed in cats
socket, and cats with extremely flat faces and very shallow eye sockets
using the end-to-end anastomosis (EEA) 2l circular stapler. In an
such as Persians.
114
Sutures and general surgical implants
Chapter
10
made of polyurethane The feline ureteral stent is 2.5 Fr tapered to a
STENTS
0.018 inch wire and is available in three lengths (12, 14 and 16 cm).
The multiple fenestrations allow drainage at several sites. The double
A stent is a tube that is used to maintain the patency of different
 pigtails are designed to sit in the bladder and renal pelvis.
conduits in the body, including the bile ducts, ureters, trachea, and
Urethral stents are self-expanding mesh tubes made of a nickel-
bronchi. There are several different kinds of stents; those used in
titanium alloy (nitinol) (DexStent-UN: Dextronix).2? The stent mesh
veterinary medicine are usually made of polyurethane or expandable
is designed for maximum flexibility and minimal shortening. Markers
metal or plastic mesh-like material.
at the proximal and distal ends ensure excellent stent visibility for
accurate placement It can be supplied in two different working
lengths: 80 cm or 120 cm. Urethral stents have been used successfully
Urinary stent
for malignant urethral obstruction and obstructive feline lower urinary
There are stents specifically designed for placement in the feline ureter
tract disease in cats.30-33
(DexStent-PU: Dextronix; Vet Stent-Ureter: Infniti Medical)28,23 (Fig.
10-8). They have double-pigtail ends, multiple fenestrations and are
Respiratory tract
Stents used in the respiratory tract are self-expanding braided systems
composed of a highly flexible nickel-titanium alloy (Nitinol) stent
with radiopaque markers to assess positioning during fluoroscopy
(eg, DexStent-TN: Dextronix) (Fig. 10-9).2 Stents are designed to be
flexibile yet keep their shape even when the neck is moved. Atraumatic
stent endings reduce mucosal trauma/injury and potential inflamma-
tion. They have been used for relief of tracheal obstruction? and
collapsing trachea in the cat.
A
B
B
Figure 10-8 A 2.5 Fr double-pigtail, multiple fenestrated, polyurethane
Figure 10-9 The DexStent-TN is a self-expanding braided tracheal stent 
stent for use in cats. (A} The whole stent showing the double pigtail
system composed of a highly flexible Nickel-Titanium Alloy (Nitinol) stent
ends. (B) Enlarged view of one of the fenestrated ends. (A) couresy of
mounted on a coaxial delivery system. (A) Stent in delivery system with 
Infiniti Medical, LLC, Menlo Park, CA USA, with permission; [B} courtesy of
tip just visible. (B} Stent shown after further protrusion from delivery
Dextronix, with permission.)
system as it starts to expand. (Courtesy of Dextronix, with permission.)
115
Section
2
Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
REFERENCES
1. Galal I, El-Hindawy K. Impact of using
12. Faria MC, de Almeida FM, Serrao ML,
of 18 Cases [1998-2003). JAm Anim
triclosan-antibacterial sutures on
et al. Use of cyanoacrylate in skin closure
Hosp Assoc 2005;41:110-16.
incidence of surgical site infection. Am ↓
for ovariohysterectomy in a population
22.1
Walshaw R. Stapling techniques in
Surg 2011;202:133-8.
control programme. J Feline Med Surg
pulmonary surgery. Vet Clin North
2.
Bellenger CR. Sutures part I. The purpose
2005;7:71-5.
Am Small Anim Pract 1994;24[2):
of sutures and available suture materials.
13. Nash IM, Bellenger CR. Enteroplication
335-66.
Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 1982a;4:
in cats, using suture of N-butyl
23.
 Smeak DD, Crocker C. Fixed-head skin
507-14.
cyanoacrylate adhesive. Res Vet Sci
 staplers: features and performance.
3.
 DeNardo GA, Brown NO, Trenka-Benthin
1998;65:253-8.
Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 1997;19:
 S, Marretta SM. Comparison of seven
14.
Tobias KM, Cambridge A, Gavin P.
1358-68.
different suture materials in the feline
 Cyanoacrylate occlusion and resection of
24.
LaRue SM, Withrow Sl, Wykes PM. Lung
oral cavity. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
an arteriovenous fistula in a cat. J Am Vet
resection using surgical staples in dogs
1996,32:164-72.
Med Assoc 2001;219:785-8.
and cats. Vet Surg 1987;16:238-40.
4. Runk A, Allen SW, Mahaffey EA. Tissue
15.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Mehl M, Gregory
25.
Clark GN. Gastric surgery with surgical
reactivity to poliglecaprone 25 in the 
CR. Evaluation of ameroid ring
stapling instruments. Vet Clin North Am
feline linea alba. Vet Surg 1999;28:
constrictors for the management of single
Small Anim Pract 1994;24:279-303.
466-71.
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in cats:
Fucci V, Newton JC, Hedlund CS, et al.
 5. Schiller TD. In vitro loss of tensile
23 cases [1996-2001). J Am Vet Med
Rectal surgery in the cat: comparison of
strength and elasticity of fve absorbable
Assoc 2002;220:1341-7.
suture versus staple technique through a
suture materials in sterile and infected
16.
 Besancon MF, Kyles AE, Griffey SM.
dorsal approach. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
cnine urine. Vet Surg 1993;22:208-12.
Gregory CR. Evaluation of the
1992;28:519-26.
6. Stashak TS, Yturraspe Dl. Considerations
 characteristics of venous occlusion after
27.
Kudisch M, Pavletic MM. Subtotal
 for selection of suture materials. Vet Surg
placement of an ameroid constrictor in
colectomy with surgical stapling 
1978;7:48-52.
dogs. Vet Surg 2004;33:597-605.
 instruments via a trans-cecal approach for
7.
Pelsue DH, Monnet E, Gaynor JS, et al.
17.
 Butler LM, Fossum TW, Boothe HW.
treatment of acquired megacolon in the
Closure of median sternotomy in dogs:
Surgical management of extrahepatic
cat. Vet Surg 1993;22:457-63.
suture versus wire. I Am Anim Hosp AssoC
 portosystemic shunts in the dog and
28.
http://www.infinitimedical.com/
2002;38:569-76.
cat. Semin Vet Med Surg-Small Anim
p_stents_ureter.html.
Bellenger CR. Sutures part lIl. The use
1990;5:127-33.
8.
29.
http://www.dextronix.com/
of sutures and alternative methods for
18. Murphy F, Corbally MT. The novel use of
stentscatsanddogs.
 closure. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet
small intestinal submucosal matrix for
30.
 Choi R, Lee S, Hyun C. Urethral stenting
1982b;4:587 -600.
 chest wall reconstruction following
in a cat with refractory obstructive feline
 Freeman Ll, Pettit GD, Robinette ID, et al.
 Ewings's tumour resection. Pediat Surg Int
9.
Jower urinary tract disease. J Vet Med Sci
Tissue reaction to suture material in
2007;23:353-6.
2009;71:1255-9.
the feline linea alba. A retrospective.
19. Andreoni AA, Voss K. Reconstruction of
31.
Christensen Nl, Culvenor I, Langova V.
 prospective, and histologic study. Vet Surg
a large diaphragmatic defect in a kitten
Fuoroscopic stent placement for the relief
1987:16:440-5.
using small intestinal submucosa (SIS).
of malignant urethral obstruction in a cat.
10. Muir P, Goldsmid SE, Simpson DJ.
J Fel Med Surg 2009;11:1019-22.
Aust Vet J 2010;88[12):478-82.
Bellenger CR. Incisional swelling
20.
Featherstone HJ, Sansom J, Heinrich CL
32.
Newman RG, Mehler Sl, Kitchell BE,
following celiotomy in cats. Vet Rec
The use of porcine small intestinal
Beal MW. Use of a balloon-expandable
1993;132:189-90.
submucosa in ten cases of feline corneal
 metallic stent to relieve malignant
 11. Schmiedt CW. Suture material, tissue
disease. Vet Ophthalmol 2001;4:
urethral obstruction in a cat. J Am Vet
 staples, ligation devices and closure 
147-53.
Med Assoc 2009;234:236-9.
methods. In: Tobias KM, Johnston SA,
21. McAbee KP, Ludwig LL, Bergman Pl.
33.
Culp WT, Weisse C, Cole SG, Solomon JA.
editors. Veterinary surgery small animal.
Newman Sl. Feline Cutaneous
Intraluminal tracheal stent placement in
Missouri: Elsevier; 2012; p. 187-200.
Hemangiosarcoma: A Retrospective Study
three cats. Vet Surg 2007;36:107-13.
116
Chapter
Surgical drains
L.J. Owen
Surgical drains can be valuable adjuncts to patient management, both
 of transudates, modified transudates or blood is rarely of benefit to
 in superficial locations and within body cavities; however, their use is
the patient.
not without risks or complications. Used correctly, surgical drains
 The most common indication for the prophylactic placement of a
promote wound healing, reduce infection rates, and decrease patient
 surgical drain is in combination with reconstructive surgery and the
morbidity, but used inappropriately these potential benefits can be 
use of cutaneous and myocutaneous flaps. There is evidence within
reversed. In particular, drains should not be used as an alternative to 
the veterinary literature that seroma formation is a common sequel
to these procedures and that drain placement reduces the prevalence
wound closure. Surgeons should consider carefully the pros and cons
 of this and subsequently of wound dehiscence and flap failure.2-4
of drain use before placement. A thorough understanding of the types
Whether or not prophylactic drain placement is benefcial following
of drain available their advantages and disadvantages and correct
other surgical procedures, however, remains controversial. In human
ue ui pasn aie Aau ieun ainsua diay lm 'uauaeid jo poqa
medicine, Cochrane Systematic Reviews investigating the prophylactic
optimal fashion.
use of surgical drains in orthopedic surgery thyroid surgery, and inci-
sional hernia repairs have failed to show any benefits in drain place-
ment, but have shown some clear disadvantages, e.g.. prolongation of
INDICATIONS
-qnd jo yoel ounsi e si aiaun 'auiiau areuaa ul as eis ieidsou
lished data on this subject, eliminating the use of an evidence based
approach; thus surgeons are reliant upon anecdotal evidence and their
Surgical drains perform three main functions:
 Obliteration of dead space
individual case.
Removal of pre-existing fluid or air from a wound/body cavity
 Experimental studies have documented prolonged tissue healing
Preventing anticipated fluid or air accumulation within a
paieduos ies aul ul spunom snoaueno on Alddns pooiq pasnpan pue
wound/body cavity.
(s u u s n asd  m p a m
Whilst the first two therapeutic functions are widely accepted, the
latter prophylactic use of surgical drains can be a controversial area.
 In addition, cat owners may be poorly compliant at restricting exer-
The use of a surgical drain to obliterate dead space is most com-
cise, allowing behavior such as jumping, which may contribute to
monly employed following en-bloc resection of neoplastic masses or
problems with wound healing and seroma formation.
chronic, contaminated and infected wounds. The definitive loss of
tissue in these situations means that closure of individual wound
layers is impractical and placement of a wound drain functions to
ALTERNATIVES TO SURGICAL DRAINS
appose tissue layers and promote healing.
The use of surgical drains to remove pre-existing fluid or air is
most commonly from a fluid-flled peripheral swelling, e.g. salivary
 In some patients or for certain surgical procedures, it may be more
mucocele or abscess, or from a body cavity. The removal of fluid from 
 appropriate to consider alternatives to the use of a surgical drain, such
a surgical site is desirable due to the negative effects of the fluid on
 as incomplete wound closure, omental pedicle flaps or bandaging.
the host's resistance to infection. This occurs via several mechanisms
(Box ll-1). Drains are placed routinely during thoracic surgical pro-
Incomplete wound closure
cedures to evacuate postoperative pneumothorax and to remove either
The most distal portion of a surgical wound can be left open to
mise In the abdomen, drains are used predominantly for the purposes
 provide drainage, and is a simple, cheap and usually effective method
of removing septic exudate, eg., in cases of septic peritonitis. Removal
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00011-1
117
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Figure 11-1 Omentum tunneled from a paracostal abdominal exit point
for placement into a chronic axillary collar wound. Small arrow, 
paracostal incision; arrowhead, axillary wound with omentum in place.
Figure 11-2 Penrose drains: 1 inch and 0.25 inch.
poorly tolerant of dressings and their presence may reduce feeding
 Box 11-1 The negative effects of fluid accumulation at
surgical sites
 Reduced ability to opsonize bacteria for phagocytosis
TYPES OF DRAINS
 Reduced access of phagocytes into the wound
 Ability of the fluid to act as a substrate to promote bacterial
growth
 Drains are generally categorized according to function, i.e., whether
 Reduced vascular supply to tissues
they act as a passive route for passage of fluids or if they have a more
 Reduced penetration of systemically administered antibacterial
active role in drainage.
agents into the surgical site
Passive drains
Passive drains provide an exit point for fluid from a surgical site post-
operatively, but do not actively reduce dead space within a wound and
This technique can also be applicable to body cavities, particularly in
do not provide optimal drainage of air. Several types of passive drain
aul 'ateuiep ieauoad uado Aq siuoiad odas jo juaua a
exist, including Penrose drains, tube drains, sump drains, and cornu-
 main disadvantages of this technique are the increased risk of wound
gated drains; however, only the former are commonly in use in com-
infection, reduced wound healing, and requirement for bandaging to
panion animal medicine and thus the others will not be considered
collect the fluid.
further here.
Omentum
Penrose drains
Omentum can be used as an autogenous wound drain (Fig. ll-1). Its
Penrose drains are composed of soft latex and are a flattened tube of
beneficial properties include promotion of angiogenesis, improved
variable diameter (0.25-1 inch) (Fig. 1l-2). They are readily available.
-ns pasn uaaq sey l! pue aseuieip pmy anss pue 'uouny aunuu
easy to use and cheap, making them a popular choice This type of
cessfully to promote healing of a variety of wound types in cats.
drain relies on gravitational forces, capillary action and overflow for
particularly axillary collar wounds (see Chapter 18) and indolent
wound drainage and therefore is limited to use in locations where
auno Aq iean on subuanun yoq aie yium 'spunom hayood
 peau a u paseid s ad a aq u sag asa
-aee si Aq pau iaamoy 's! umuau jo asnaulslzt'spouau
dorsum, or exiting from the lateral or dorsal aspects of a surgical site
ity and the location of the wound: complications such as necrosis of
are unlikely to function and will instead contribute to complications
the omental fat and incisional herniation through the omental exit
of wound healing. The gravitational and capillary action of fluid drain-
 point from the abdominal cavity have been reported.12 For informa-
age is related to the surface area of the drain and thus fenestration of
tion on how to create an omental flap see Chapter 19.
these drains is contraindicated. In addition to reducing the effciency
of the drain, fenestration will also predispose to breakage of the drain
Pressure bandage
Teoua suunp
Penrose drains are indicated for use in superficial wounds where
The use of a bandage to maintain apposition of tissue planes is a
there is pre-existing or anticipated fluid production and should have
suitable alternative to a surgical drain in some locations, eg. distal
a single ventral exit point. Allowing the drain to have a second exit
tion of a bandage is diffcult or where it may compromise normal
the risk of wound infection and air transmission through the wound,
function, e.g., cervical and thoracic regions. In addition, cats are often
without conferring any advantages to the patient The main use of the
118
Surgical drains
Chapter
11
Box 11-2 Penrose drain placement
 The drain insertion and surgical site is clipped and aseptically prepared 
according to standard techniques.
The distal portion of the drain is placed to exit through a stab
incision in the most dependent area of the surgical site (Fig. 11-3A)
This stab incision must always be separate from the main surgical
wound and the size of the drain exit hole should be minimized to
reduce the risk of herniation of fat/other organs, although it should not
restrict fluid flow. The proximal aspect of the drain is secured to the
skin at the dorsal limit of the wound with a single non-absorbable 
left longer than the standard skin sutures to allow the drain suture to 
be identified at time of drain removal. The distal portion of the drain is 
Cut to leave approximately 2-3 cm of drain visible from the exit site 
and the drain is secured at this site with a second single non-
absorbable skin suture, to prevent retraction of the drain into the
subcutaneous space (Fg. 11-3C). The total length of the drain is 
A
B
recorded at time of insertion so that this can be verified at time of 
drain removal
Figure 11-3 Penrose drain placement. (A) A stab incision is made away
The skin surrounding the drain is protected from fluid scalding with
from the main suture line of a surgical wound and a Penrose drain is 
petroleum jelly or similar. A sterile and absorbent bandage is applied 
drawn through this incision into the wound. (B) The proximal part of 
over the drain wherever possible to reduce contamination 
the Penrose drain is secured to the skin by a simple interrupted suture.
postoper atively.
(C} Following closure of the main surgical wound, only a small portion 
of the distal Penrose drain is visible exiting from a single point in the 
Penrose drain removal
dependent part of the surgical site and secured by a simple interrupted
To remove the drain, the two non-absorbable sutures (proximal and
suture.
distal) are cut and the drain is gently pulled through its original exit 
site. The exit site is left to close by secondary intention healing.
Consider culture of the drain tubing after removal if there are any
 concerns about infection.
double exit technique has traditionally been to prevent subcutaneous
emphysema developing in areas of high motion, e.g. the axilla or
inguinal region, where air may be sucked into the wound by a single
exit point; however, this is not usually considered to be a significant
clinical problem.16
After placement, where location permits, the drain should be
covered by a sterile absorbent contact layer and bandage This is for
collection ofthe fluid produced, and to reduce the risk of introduction
of hospital or environmentally acquired pathogens. The dressing
should be changed according to the rate of fluid production from the
wound. In locations where bandaging is not possible or would likely
result in additional complications, petroleum jelly or similar is
applied liberally to the clipped area ventral to the drain to prevent
fluid from scalding the skin and to allow easy cleaning of the area.
 The problems of feline intolerance to dressings and requirements for
sedation for dressing changes, thus increasing morbidity and cost,
technique of drain placement and removal is described in Box 1ll-2.
Tube drain
A simple plastic or rubber tube drain can also be used to provide
 passive drainage. The advantage over a Penrose drain is that the tube
pue pidei aiou aq Aeuu pimy jo aseuieip snql pue asdellos jou saop
air can more readily be removed from a wound (Fig. 1ll-4): however.
they are likely to cause increased patient discomfort due to their rigid-
Figure 11-4 Placement of a passive tube drain to allow exit of air
ity and they may become occluded during use. Tube drains may also
following a dorsal rhinotomy in a cat. (@ Aorian Wallace.)
be placed to allow instillation of local anesthetic agents into a surgical
site postoperatively, rather than to provide drainage from the wound.
The same drain should not be used for both purposes due to the risk
of introducing pathogenic organisms.
119
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Active drains
pressure and in a more consistent manner compared to rigid drains;
thus minimizing the effect of the drain itself on fluid production
Active drainage is created by application of a vacuum to a wound
within the wound.17 Application of suction to these drains results in
drain. These drains are generally easier to manage in comparison to
a negative pressure of approximately -80 to -120 mmHg within the
 passive drains and have reduced risk of ascending infection.
wound, which is sufficient to obliterate dead space without excessively
ayl pay sauosaq jioaiasat ayi sy slzt'sanssn yos ayt suzeunen
Closed suction drains
negative pressure generated reduces and the drain becomes less eff-
cient although the Jackson Pratt and Mini Red-O-Pack drains have
0l 'sanis [esjgins lepyiadns ui pasn Auouuoo sl uieip jo adA siu
 been shown to maintain suction at a lower level throughout filling of
obliterate dead space, to remove pre-existing fluid and air, or to
the reservoir.17
 prevent formation of fluid within the site postoperatively.
 Homemade closed suction drains can be particularly useful in cats
Several commercial suction drains are available, which consist of a
due to their reduced weight, size, and cost Two main variations are
nigid, non-collapsible tube drain attached to a collection chamber
reported. For both types, the portion of the drain that is to be placed
(compressible or pre-applied vacuum); however, their size and weight
pey sey yium 'aae Ayanq Dai e uoy apeu si punom aul u!
need to be considered before their application to cats. The smaller.
multiple fenestrations made into the tubing. These fenestrations
aie pue sase isou ui aiedoidde aie suieip adi apeuae/eunauo
should not exceed 30% of the tube diameter, to reduce the risk of the
often very effective (e.g., Mini Red-O-Pack drains or Jackson Pratt
tube kinking or breakage of the tubing on removal.1 The needle from
drains) (Figs ll-5 and 1l-6). As well as being a suitable size, in experi-
the butterfly catheter can then be placed into a standard blood collec-
mental studies these drains have been shown to operate at a lower
tion vacutainer (ideally made of plastic rather than glass) to provide
suction (Fig. 11-7). Alternatively, the butterfly catheter tubing can be
 connected to a syringe The syringe plunger is withdrawn to apply
0t ase aus aui ssoie paseid si aipaau siuapody e pue uons
maintain this suction. Both drains are then secured to the trunk with
additional sutures or a mesh stockinette These drains are usually only
suitable for use in wounds where minimal fluid production is expected,
due to the limited capacity of the collection device.
 Continuous suction devices are considered optimal for wound care,
but more simple constructions utilizing intermittent suction may have
some suitable applications.
 Closed suction drains have several advantages over passive drains
(Box ll-3). The disadvantages are increased cost (which may be offset
Box 11-3 Advantages of closed suction drains
No bandaging required
 Reduced risk of nosocomial infections
 Figure 11-5 Mini Red-O-Pack closed suction drain. (With permission from 
Work independent of gravity
Vygon Vet.)
 Fluid production can readily be quantified
 Fluid can easily be sampled for repeat cytological examination
 Fluid and air are more efficiently removed
 Reduced risk of tube occlusion when continuous suction is used.
Figure 11-6 Reconstruction of a large soft tissue deficit, following 
en-bloc resection of a fibrosarcoma from the left flank, using a caudal
has been placed, in addition to a tube drain for instillation of local
Figure 11-7 Application of a homemade butterfly catheter closed
anesthetic agents. (With permssion from Vygon Vet.)
120
Surgical drains
Chapter
11
Box 11-4 Closed suction drain placement
The drain insertion and surgical site is clipped and aseptically
 prepared according to standard techniques.
 The drain tubing is placed within the wound so that all
fenestrations lie subcutaneously, thus allowing an airtight seal to
form. An exit point for this tubing is made away from the main 
surgical wound via a stab incision or by using the needle attached 
pasop loy shy leplauuon auos u! papoud s! reui buignt aui o1
suction drains, the exit point of the drain does not need to be at a
dependent point and therefore can be placed so as to make drain 
management easier and its position more comfortable for the 
 patient. At the exit point, the drain is secured to the skin using a
Roman sandal suture (Hg. 11-8).
 A sterile adhesive dressing is applied around the exit point of the
drain to keep this area as clean as possible. The drain tubing is
connected to the collection chamber, which is activated immediately
if an airtight seal has been achieved using wound closure alone, or 
 after 6-8 hours once a fibrin seal has formed. The collection chamber
is secured to the patient using further sutures or a stockinette
dressing or both.
Cosed suction drain removal
Removal of the drain is accomplished by cutting all of the securing
uh punom aut woy buignt aut jo jemepuim Aa pamolot saunins
exit site is left to close by second intention healing. Consider culture 
of the drain tubing after removal if there are any concerns about
infection.
B
Figure 11-9 (A) 14G wire-guided thoracic drain. (B) Close up of the tip
 showing the fenestrations (with permission from MILA International, Inc.
www.milaint.com).
thus may be preferable in many situations. Both of these drain types
Figure 11-8. A Roman sandal friction suture is used to secure drain
require sedation, or more commonly general anesthesia, for place-
 tubing to the skin.
ment in a cat, and can be placed under direct observation during
 surgery, or as an extra-thoracic technique. Placement of these drains
requires considerable force to pass them through the intercostal mus-
juauageueu ioy painbai uoepas au pue sguissaip a jo isos aui Aq
 such as cats, with high thoracic wall compliance, is the risk of iatro-
of a passive drain) and potential occlusion of the drain or reflux of
 genic damage to the heart/lungs/vessels in the thorax during
fluid back into the wound.
placement.
 The technique for insertion of active drains is described in Box 1l -4.
 The Seldinger-type thoracic drains are relatively new in veterinary
 medicine and are more expensive, but have some significant advan-
tages over the wide-bore drains. The most commonly used drain is
14G in size (Fig. ll-9) and the atraumatic technique with which it is
THORACIC DRAINS
placed means that local anesthesia or mild sedation is often suffcient,
avoiding the need for, risks associated with, and cost of general
Three main types of thoracic drain are available for use in small
 anesthesia. A potential disadvantage often cited is the risk of occlusion
'sep ad-asia pue 'sueip reon-uou 'suiep ieon sieue
of the narrow bore tube with thicker efusions. e.g pyothorax;
All three are suitable for use in cats; however, the Seldinger-type is
however, in a recent veterinary study this was not found to be a signifi-
increasing in popularity for use in this species due to the small diam-
cant problem.20 The small size of these drains results in a significant
eter of the drain, which is associated with a significant reduction in
patient discomfort and morbidity.
relative smaller chest size and therefore the author considers these
Trocar and non-trocar drains are available in a range of sizes;
thoracic drains to be optimal for use in the majority of feline patients.
10-16Fr are most commonly used in cats.18 Traditionally, the size of
The technique of placement of thoracic drains is covered in
drain selected should approximate the diameter of the mainstem
Chapter 41.
121
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
confers no additional advantage, but increases the risk of infection
due to increased drain handling. Dressing changes should be per-
formed as aseptically as possible and the drain exit site should be
examined at least once daily for the presence of erythema, discharge
or swelling.
WHEN TO REMOVE
and as such will result in soft tissue irritation and inflammation. This
inflammatory response will elicit some fluid production independent
 of the surgical disease and thus fluid production from the drain is
rarely expected to reduce to zero after placement. As a general guide,
Figure 11-10 Jackson Pratt abdominal drain placed for postoperative
approximately 2-4 mL/kg/24 hours is deemed to be acceptable and
management of septic peritonitis in a cat.
likely to be solely due to drain presence; thus when fluid production
m  i a r r ae ia sr c 
this level is not reached, but the quantity of fluid drained remains
static over two to three days, the drain should also be removed. In
order to use these guidelines, it is important that fluid production is
accurately quantifed when drains are emptied, and recorded so that
the 24 hour rate of fluid production can be calculated.
ABDOMINAL DRAINS
 Because of the diffculty of quantifying fluid production from
 Penrose drains, these drains are usually removed when fluid produc-
The Jackson Pratt closed suction drain (Fig. 11-10) is the most common
tion has become serosanguinous/transudate in nature and the amount
type used for drainage of the abdominal cavity. This is a wide, flat sili-
of fluid is subjectively considered to be decreasing or is unchanged
cone drain, with multiple fenestrations, which reduces the occurrence
Over a number of days. This commonly occurs by day 3 to 5 postop-
of drain occlusion during use The flat portion of the drain merges
eratively. Delay in removal of the drain beyond this point is generally
into tubing, which exits the body wall and attaches to a grenade type
not recommended, as the advantages of continued drain placement
collection chamber Usually, the drain is positioned to lie along the
reduce, and the risks of infection and costs of bandaging and hospi-
ventral midline of the abdominal cavity, where the majority of fluid
talization increase.
will collect due to gravitational forces. Drain use within the abdomi-
nal cavity is restricted to situations where ongoing fluid production is
expected, e.g., in cases of septic peritonitis where the cause remains
unresolved. The advantage of placing a drain is that it allows monitor-
COMPLICATIONS
ing of the nature ofthe fluid produced within the abdomen and repeat
 cytological analysis to assess for improvement or deterioration of the
Infection
patient's condition. The main disadvantages are occlusion of the drain
by omentum and fibrin, the increased risk of wound dehiscence if the
Removal of fluid from a surgical site is known to be beneficial in
drain is placed too close to an intestinal or other organ incision, and
reducing infection, because the presence of fluid interferes with
the additional expense of these drains.
opsonization of bacteria, phagocytosis and antibacterial agent pene-
 More details on indications and placerment of this type of drain will
tration. In contrast however, the presence of the drain within the
be covered in Chapter 26.
wound may decrease the host's innate resistance to infection and
handling of the drain in the postoperative period, often by multiple
nursing personnel, carries an inherent risk of introducing nosocomial
Organisms into the wound. These latter infections may involve organ-
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
isms with increased pathogenicity compared to original wound con-
taminants and thus infection with these organisms can greatly increase
An Elizabethan collar is mandatory for all patients with a surgical
morbidity or result in patient mortality in the worst case scenario. This
'ueip aul ci aeep io leaouai aimeaid juaaid o 'aeid ul uie
means that when drains are used optimally and are active in removing
In some cats and depending upon the location of the drain, it may be
fluid from a wound/resolving dead space, they are likely to be advan-
 possible to use a soft collar to allow them to feed more easily and to
tageous in fighting infection. If drains are, however, used in a prophy-
avoid problems with postoperative anorexia. Ifa rigid collar is deemed
lactic setting only, or are poorly managed postoperatively the overall
necessary. it may need to be removed under close observation at
effect may be more detrimental than beneficial to the individual.
feeding times.
 Drains are likely to add to patient discomfort in the postoperative
Wound dehiscence
 period and appropriate analgesia should be supplied while they are
in place.
Nosocomial infections are a significant risk of drain placement and
increased wound dehiscence and therefore they are always placed to
can lead to multi-resistant wound infections and costly complications.
exit at a separate and distant site. Placement of drains within the
 Gloves should ALWAYS be worn when handling the drain or the surgi-
abdomen adjacent to sites of intestinal anastomosis or incisions into
cal site. In addition, closed suction drains should only be emptied
other organs has been shown to increase the risk of wound dehiscence
 Once they become full, or if suction is lost. More frequent emptying
'e u a aq cn kia si as aun pue saq uy u!
122
Surgical drains
Chapter
11
Occlusion
from occurring. Premature drain removal may result in unwanted fluid
build-up within the surgical site or the need for repeat placement of
This is a problem of tube drains, which are prone to becoming
the drain under a second anesthetic or sedation.
Occluded during use Occlusion generally occurs by one of three mech-
anisms: the fluid exiting the drain is too viscous for the size of the
 Drain retention or breakage
drain tubing: fluid production has significantly reduced and thus
consolidation of material is allowed to occur within the tubing: or the
Retraction of the drain back into the wound bed or breakage of the
drain holes within the wound/body cavity have become occluded by
drain during removal can occur. Recording the length of drain initially
fibrous tissue or omentum. Once a drain has become occluded, the
placed within the wound, using only radio-opaque drains and ade-
clinician must decide upon the next course of action. If fluid produc-
quately securing drains at the exit site should limit these complica-
tion has significantly reduced, removal of the drain would be the most
tions or allow a problem to be more easily recognized.
appropriate action. If, however, the function of the drain is still
required, the clinician can attempt to aspirate the clot from the tube
Conclusion
Or a new drain may need to be placed.
Premature drain removal
significant benefit to the clinician and patient and can optimize
wound healing. When used incorrectly, however, at best they are an
Cats are fastidious groomers by nature and will show a keen interest
unnecessary expense and at worst could result in a fatal complication
or dislike to foreign objects and sutures attached to their body. If the
(such as a multi-resistant infection causing septicemia or serious
drain is accessible to them, it is likely to be removed by the patient
damage to a thoracic drain that could result in pneumothorax, lung
and thus an Elizabethan collar is necessary in all cases to prevent this
collapse, and death).
 REFERENCES
 1. Hampel NL, Johnson RG. Principles of
after orthopaedic surgery. Cochrane
wounds in 10 cats. J Small Anim Pract
surgical drains and drainage. I Am Anim
Database Syst Rev 2007;( Issue 3). Art.
1998;39:475-80.
Hosp Assoc 1985;21:21-8.
No.: CD001825.
14. Langley-Hobbs Sl, Keller M, Voss K.
2. Hunt GB, Tisdall PLC, Liptak JM, et al.
 Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
External coaptation. In: Montavon PM,
 Skin-fold advancement flaps for closing
 et al. Cutaneous wound healing in the 
Langley-Hobbs Sl, Voss K, editors. Feline
 large proximal limb and trunk defects 
cat: a macroscopic description and
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:
comparison with cutaneous wound
disease. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2009.
440-8.
healing in the dog. Vet Surg 2004;33:
p. 239-48.
3. Lidbetter DA, Williams FA, Krahwinkel
579-87.
15. Dernell wS. Initial wound management.
Dl, et al. Radical lateral body-wall
9.
 Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
resection for fbrosarcoma with
et al. Comparison of the role of the
2006;36:732-4.
 reconstruction using polypropylene
subcutaneous tissues in cutaneous wound
16.
Ladlow IL. Surgical drains in wound
mesh and a caudal superficial epigastric
healing in the dog and cat. Vet Surg
axial pattern flap: A prospective clinical
2006;35:3-14
In: BSAVA manual of canine and feline
study of the technique and results 
10.
 Freeman L), Pettit GD, Robinette JD, et al.
wound management and reconstruction.
in 6 cats. Vet Surg 2002;31:
Tissue reaction to suture material in
Gloucester UK: BSAVA; 2009. p. 54-68.
57-64.
 the feline linea alba. A retrospective,
17. Halfacree ZJ, Wilson AM, Baines SJ.
4. Remedios AM, Bauer MS, Bowen CV.
 prospective and histologic study. Vet Surg
 Evaluation of in vitro performance of
Thoracodorsal and caudal superficial
1987:16:440-5.
suction drains. Am J Vet Res 2009;70:
epigastric axial pattern skin flaps in cats.
11.
 Runk A, Allen SW, Mahaffey EA. Tissue
283-9.
Vet Surg 1989:18:380-5.
reactivity to poliglecaprone 25 in the
18. Lee AH, Swaim SF, Henderson RA.
 5. Gurusamy KS, Samraj K. Wound drains
feline linea alba. Vet Surg 1999;28:
 Surgical drainage. Comp Cont Educ Pract
affter incisional hernia repair Cochrane
466-71.
Vet 1986;8:94-103.
Database Syst Rev 2007:(Issue 1). Art.
12.
Brockman Dl, Pardo AD, Conzemius MG,
19.
Monnet E. Pleura and pleural space. In:
No.: CD005570.
et al. Omentum-enhanced reconstruction
Slatter D, editor. Textbook of small
6. Samraj K, Gurusamy KS. Wound drains
 of chronic nonhealing wounds in cats:
 animal surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders;
 following thyroid surgery. Cochrane
techniques and clinical use. Vet Surg
2003. p. 387-405.
Database Syst Rev 2007:( Issue 4). Art.
1996;25:99-104.
20.
Valtolina C, Adamantos S. Evaluation of
No.: CD006099.
13.
Lascelles BDX, Davison L, Dunning M,
small-bore wire guided chest drains for
7. Parker MJ, Livingstone V, Clifton R, et al
et al. Use of omental pedicle grafts in the
 management of pleural space disease.
 Closed suction surgical wound drainage
 management of non-healing axillary
J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:290-7.
123
hapter
Feeding tubes
A. Sparkes
pazeisoy aum yoq sea pnoqe Assny Aisnoiou aq u sie
being more physiological, safer, less expensive, and preserving the
and postoperatively, and the importance of maintaining their nutri-
structure and function of the gastrointestinal tract.2 There are occa-
tional status cannot be overemphasized. Adequate nutrition has many
sional situations where parenteral or partial parenteral nutrition is the
 Bunzuo sua-lam suaed a suidu sunui sauan
 only realistic option available, but for the vast majority of patients
healing and preventing re-feeding syndrome (see Chapter 6). This
some form of enteral nutritional support can be used. However.
chapter aims to cover the indications and type of feeding tubes that 
the technique used may be dictated, at least to some extent, by the
are available for use in cats and the techniques of tube insertion.
 patient's condition. The presence of orofacial or esophageal disease
 may, for example, preclude the use of certain tube feeding techniques
such as nasoesophageal or esophagostomy tubes.
 Although force-feeding. eg., syringe feeding. is sometimes advo-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
cated for the short-term nutritional support of dogs and cats, this is
not a technique that can be recommended, especially for cats. Force-
There are many reasons why a surgical patient may become inappe-
feeding is inevitably a highly stressful procedure, and as such one that
tent, anorexic, or have inadequate nutritional intake (Box 12-1).
anosan dau uu iaei auau iauy ad ot Aal s
 It is important that a full assessment is made of both the reasons
the situation. Additionally, it is very diffcult to meet nutritional
for inadequate nutritional intake and the options available for over-
requirements by force-feeding and there is a significant risk of induc-
coming these. Due to their unique nutritional requirements, cats
ing aspiration of food with this technique.
should not be allowed to remain signifcantly inappetent or anorexic
Given the wide availability of other much more suitable forms of
for longer than three days.,' and particular care should be taken of
nutritional support (tempting of voluntary food intake, pharmaco-
 logical stimulation of appetite, or tube feeding) there is no rationale
demands may be appreciably higher and inadequate nutritional
for the use of force-feeding with the feline patient. Similarly, orogastric
pue Apqiou aoa iy sanuanbasuo snas aau aeuu oddns
tube feeding is too stressful for the feline patient.
even mortality.
It is well recognized that providing enteral nutritional support,
wherever possible, is far superior to attempting parenteral support.
Tube feeding
 Tube feeding is an important consideration in inappetent cats. Not
every inappetent or anorexic cat will require nutritional support via
 Box 12-1 Reasons for postoperative inappetence in cats
tube feeding, but many will. Tube feeding should be instituted at an
 early stage for those cats that do not respond adequately to addressing
Medical or surgical conditions directly affecting the alimentary
aul yim sdeuad rauaan 'auaadeui aui ja sasne suapun a
tract
use of appetite stimulants when deemed appropriate; or for those
where more conservative measures are considered inappropriate,
 Presence of uncontrolled pain
 Presence of uncontrolled nausea 
 In addition, tube feeding may be valuable to avoid inducing food
aversion in some cats. Aversion to foods can develop when they are
 The stress of hospitalization
offered to patients when they are experiencing significant pain (espe-
 Offering unf amiliar or unsuitable foods
cially gastrointestinal pain) or nausea. The cat may subsequently asso-
 Development or induction of food aversion, e.g. by offering the
ciate those feelings with the food that was offered and therefore refuse
cat food while it is feeling painful or nauseous 
the food, even when the pain or discomfort has resolved. Where it is
 Side effects of medications being used, e.g. opioids 
anticipated that pain or nausea may be difficult to fully control, tube
Presence of inflammatory cytokines
Bunpu! pione o Agaens andua-aid queuodu ue aq Aeu suipaa
food aversion.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00012-3
125
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Table 12-1 Overview of the three major forms of tube feeding in cats
Nasoesophageal tubes
Esophageal tubes
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes
Advantages
Simple to place 
Simple to place
Very well tolerated
Inexpensive
Inexpensive
Wide choice of foods
 Generally well tolerated but usually
Very well tolerated
Suitable for long-term use
require an Elizabethan collar
Wide choice of foods
Can be used in patients with esophageal disease and in some
No general anesthetic
 Suitable for long-term use
 patients with vomiting (does not cause tube displacement)
Size range
3-6Fr tubes
10-16 Fr tubes
12-20Fr tubes
Disadvantages
Restricted to specific liquid diets
 Requires anesthesia
Technically more demanding
Not suitable with esophageal 
 Not suitable with
 Requires anesthesia
dysfunction
esophageal dysfunction or 
Have to wait 24 hours to start feeding
Only short-term use (<7-10 days)
in vomiting patients
 Peritonitis is potential complication
Can cause rhinitis 
Must wait 14 days before removing
Not suitable with esophageal 
dysfunction or in vomiting patients
 Box 12-2 Selection factors for feeding tubes in cats
Box 12-3 Indications and placement for feeding cats via a
duodenostomy or jejunostomy tube
 The anticipated duration of tube feeding. Nasoesophageal tubes 
are much less suitable for longer-term support, i.e., longer than
Indications
one or two weeks
 Where there is persistent vomiting and/or gastric outflow
 The type of food available. Choices for nasoesophageal and
obstruction
jejunostomy feeding are much more restricted due to the narrow
 Where there is severe disease of the proximal intestinal tract
diameter of the tubes used 
 In the face of severe pancreatitis (to reduced neuro-hormonal
● The condition or disease being treated 
stimulation of the pancreas)
 The presence or absence of diseases affecting the nose, mouth,
Where altered (reduced) levels of consciousness may lead to high
pharynx, esophagus, or stomach
risk of aspiration if vomiting was to occur
 The need for general anesthesia in the placement of any tube
 other than nasoesophageal tubes
Placement
 Owner concerns and abilities, especially if continuation of tube
 Surgically via the flank into the jejunum
 feeding in the home environment is anticipated
Transpyloric placement via a nasojejunal tube
Transpyloric via a gastrojejunal tube, i.e., via a gastrostomy tube
The three most common forms of tube feeding in cats are
nasoesophageal tube feeding, esophagostomy tube feeding, and gas-
trostomy tube feeding (Table 12-1). In occasional patients, feeding via
Nasoesophageal intubation
a duodenostomy or jejunostomy tube may be indicated. In the past,
 pharyngostomy tubes have also been advocated for tube feeding of
Nasoesophageal tubes are very well tolerated by the majority of cats
 and have the important advantage of being inexpensive, easy to place
dogs and cats, but these are now not recommended due to complica-
tions such as airway obstruction.2
and requiring no anesthesia (and usually no sedation) for their place-
ment ( Box 12-4). Theuse of nasoesophageal tubes is particularly valu-
able in providing short-term nutritional support, but esophagostomy
Or gastrostomy tubes should generally be considered if tube feeding
FEEDING TUBES
will need to be provided for longer than around seven days. Addition-
ally, other techniques must be used in cases where nasoesophageal
tubes are contraindicated, such as esophageal or gastric dysfunction
The selection of feeding tube for any individual patient will depend
Or persistent vomiting. or perhaps where more aggressive nutritional
on a variety of factors as listed in Box 12-2.
support is required (due to the wider range of feeds that can be used
in wider bore tubes).
Duodenostomy and jejunostomy tubes
An additional concern with nasoesophageal tubes is the irritation
to the nasal mucosa that can occur or simply the discomfort of having
Orogastric feeding is preferable over feedingthat bypasses the stomach.
the tube in place In cats with pre-existing nasal disease and/or with
so duodenostomy and jejunostomy tubes are rarely used in cats. There
partial nasal obstruction, the use of nasoesophageal tubes can cause
are limited indications for their placement (Box 12-3). Direct surgical
further rhinitis as well as physically occluding one nostril, potentially
placement via the flank is the most common method used,3 and has
leading to further respiratory problems.
been reported to have a low complication rate. A modified jejunopexy
technique may reduce the risk of leakage around the site of tube entry
into the jejunum.4 The reader is referred to Heuter (2004)* and Daye
Tube selection
 et al (1999)4 for further details, but this chapter will focus on the three
A 3-6Fr (1.0-2.0 mm diameter) veterinary or human pediatric
 most commonly used techniques of tube feeding.
nasogastric tube is used for most cats, with a 6Fr generally being
126
Feeding tubes
Chapter
12
 Box 12-4 Technique of nasoesophageal tube placement
The length of the tube to be inserted should be pre-measured and
 Before the tube is secured in place, it is important to confirm it is 
marked, by measuring the distance from the tip of the nose to the
in the esophagus and has not inadvertently entered the respiratory 
seventh or eighth intercostal space. This will ensure that the tip of the
tree (or, for example, lodged in the oropharynx). To do this the
tube lies in the distal esophagus and not in the stomach itself, which
 following can be performed:
helps to reduce the risk of reflux of gastric juice, vomiting and 
Try to aspirate through the tube - if it is in the esophagus, the
esophagitis
esophageal wall will collapse around the tube and usually nothing
 Before passing the tube the nasal mucosa should be anesthetized
can be aspirated
by applying a few drops of a non-iritating local anesthetic, e.g. 0.5%
Inject a small volume of sterile water or saline through the
 proparacaine/proxymetacaine or 0.5-1% amethocaine. If necessary, the
tube (3-5 mL) - if the tube is in the trachea, this should elicit 
 cat may also be sedated lightly to facilitate the procedure.
a cough
 The tube should be lubricated with a water-soluble gel (a plain gel
or 5% lignocaine gel may be used). The head should be held firmly in
 Inject some air through the tube (10-15 mL) and auscultate for
one hand and the nose tilted up a little, and the tube is then inserted 
borborygmi over the left flank 
into the anesthetized nose using the other hand in a ventromedial
If in doubt, radiography can be used to confirm the position
direction, aiming towards the base of the ear on the opposite side of
The tube can then be secured in place (Fg. 12-1C). This is usually
the head (Fig. 12-1A). This should ensure the tube passes along the 
facilitated by placing small *butterfly wings' of zinc oxide tape (or
ventral nasal meatus and into the nasopharynx. If the tube lodges in 
similar material) that are then secured to the bridge of the nose and 
 the dorsal or middle nasal meatus it should be withdrawn and 
the top of the head with tissue glue or sutures. The tube is taken
redirected ventrally. Passing the first 1-2 cm is often the most difficult
up over the top of the nose and head to avoid interference with
as the skin around the external nare will not be anesthetized.
the whiskers, and can then be attached to a collar or neck
To help prevent tracheal intubation, as the tube approaches the
bandage. Most cats tolerate nasoesophageal tubes well, but an
pharynx the head should be tilted back down and held in a normal
 Eliabethan collar is usually required to prevent tube removal by
position (Fg. 12-1B). The tube is gently advanced until the pre-marked 
the patient.
length has been inserted.
A
B
C
Figure 12-1 (A) Initial placement of a nasoesophageal tube in a cat (sedated with ketamine). (B) Checking correct placement of the
nasoesophageal tube prior to securing the tube by injecting sterile saline and air. (c) Nasoesophageal tube correctly secured in a cat over the
bridge of the nose and the head.
suitable for adult cats. Most feeding tubes are made of polyvinyl
the wide choice of blenderized feeds that can be used have all meant
chloride (PVC), silicone, or polyurethane. Comparative studies evalu-
that O tubes have become the method of choice for tube feeding in
ating these different materials in cats have not been published;
many situations where there is a functional esophagus and gastroin-
however, based on knowledge of the physical properties of these
testinal tract.
materials and studies in the human literature several conclusions can
Esophagostomy tubes are generally made of latex, PVC, poly-
be made (Box 12-5).5-8 For several reasons, polyurethane tubes are
urethane, or silicone. The soft, minimally irritant polyurethane and
regarded as the material of choice by many clinicians.
silicone tubes are likely to be better tolerated, and will not become
brittle over time, which can be a problem with latex and PVC tubes.
A 12-16 Fr tube (4.0-5.3 mm diameter) is usually suitable.
Esophagostomy intubation
Esophagostomy intubation (O tubes) can be used where nasoesopha-
Alternative placement techniques
geal tubes are not tolerated or cannot be used, and it is suitable
for either short-term or longer-term nutritional support, e.g, several
As an alternative to the use of Carmalt forceps and cutting down into
xoal paasui aiisea aie saqn Auoisoseudosg suo uaa ia sraam
the esophagus, special metal introducers are available that are put into
12.6), inexpensive and have proved to be remarkably valuable in
the esophagus and allow the percutaneous placement of a needle with
nutritional support with very few complications reported.
Their
a peel off sheath directly into the esophageal lumen. The needle is
ease of placement and use, the fact that they are well tolerated and
withdrawn and then an esophagostomy tube is inserted through the
127
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Box 12-5 Comparison of polyvinyl chloride (PvC), silicone and polyurethane tubes
+
PVC tubes are relatively inflexible and uncomfortable, and the
· Polyurethane tubes are stronger and less prone to kinking 
leaching of plasticizers increases their stiffness and discomfort over
 Polyurethane or silicone tubes can be left in situ for several weeks,
time
whereas it is recommended that PVC tubes are replaced every
●Silicone and polyurethane tubes are considerably softer and more 
seven to ten days
 comfortable, silicone being somewhat better than polyurethane in 
 Polyurethane tubes have significantly thinner walls than either
this respect
silicone or PVC, meaning they have a larger internal diameter
● Attempts to aspirate material through a silicone tube may be
'saen moly lauby 'siaip pinbil jo uoeisuiwpe aisea aun buimole
hampered by a tendency for the walls of the tube to collapse
and are less likely to become blocked 
 Box 12-6 Technique of esophagostomy intubation
Intubation requires a short general anesthetic. The cat should be placed
forceps and pulled out through the oral cavity (Fig. 12-2B). The tip of
in right lateral recumbency, and the left mid-cervical region clipped and
the tube is then repositioned in the forceps and passed back aborally 
 prepared for surgery (from the angle of the mandible to the thoracic
into the esophagus, past the ostomy site, and the pre-measured 
inlet). Curved Carmalt forceps are passed into the esophagus, turned 
length of the tube is fed into the esophagus.
outwards to identify the esophagus in the left mid-cervical region
The tube is then secured to the cervical skin using a suitable
(Fig. 12-2A). While pressure is maintained to keep the tip of the 
friction suture (Fig. 12-2C). Alternatively, a 'butterfly wing' tape can 
forceps tenting the cervical esophagus laterally. a small incision is 
be applied to the tube at the appropriate site and sutured to the skin
made through the skin with a scalpel blade directly over the tip of
to secure the tube in place. A dressing is applied to the ostomy site 
the forceps, ensuring that the jugular vein is avoided. This is carefully 
 and then a light neck bandage is placed so that the tube exits dorsally
deepened until the wall of the esophagus is perforated and the tip of
behind the cat's head. The tube should be clamped and/or capped 
the forceps can be pushed through the skin incision, and the forceps
between feeds (Hg. 12-2D)
opened.
When the tube is removed (sutures are cut and the tube pulled
 The length of tube to be inserted is calculated as for
 out), the ostomy site will heal within two weeks, and problems such
nasoesophageal tubes, but measuring the length from the incision site 
as esophageal stricture formation have not been reported. The tube
to the seventh or eighth intercostal space, as with nasoesophageal
can be removed at any time after it has been placed, even the 
tubes, to ensure the tip of the tube is not too distal in the esophagus.
following day.
aul jo sapeig uado ayl ytm paggeb uayi s! agni aut jo dil aul
C
A
3
hh
B
D）
Figure 12-2 (A) Esophagostomy tube placement - Carmalt forceps are placed in the esophagus and rotated so that the tip can be incised down
 on to. (B) The incision through to the esophageal lumen has been made and the tip of the esophagostomy tube has been grasped and pulled 
through to the mouth. (c) The tip of the tube has been placed distally in the esophagus and the tube is secured with a friction suture. (D) The
 esophagostomy tube is secured and protected with a light bandage.
128
Feeding tubes
Chapter
12
four or more meals daily). Volumes of 15-20 mL/kg may be tolerated
sets, Smiths Medical PM, Inc, Veterinary, Wisconsin, USA). Tubes of
by cats, but should be given slowly.
up to 14 Fr can be inserted in this way. The procedure time is slightly
 Ideally, only liquid medications should be administered via tubes.
reduced with this technique, but it has little other advantage in cats
 Crushed tablets are a common cause of tube blockage, especially with
(but can be valuable in larger dogs).
smaller diameter tubes.
Alternatively a small, e.g., 4Fr tube can be inserted through a con-
 Every tube should be marked with indelible ink where it exits the
ventional 14G‘over-the-needle' catheter inserted through the open
[edosaseu ym uapi on Asa si ueu aqn iu os apon
blades of Carmalt forceps placed in the esophagus."0 This technique
and esophagostomy tubes, care should be taken if the cat vomits to
'pidei s! pue juaudinba leiads Aue aseuound oi Aissanau au spioae
ensure that the tube is still correctly positioned and not kinked.
but has the drawback of only placing a narrow diameter tube through
 Owner experience with both gastrostomy and esophagostomy tubes
which only special liquid diets can be used.
has been reported to be positive, with few complications reported,
most owners managing tube feeding well, and with no appreciable
differences between the two techniques.17.18
Gastrostomy feeding tubes
 Large diameter gastrostomy tubes can be placed in the stomach, with
most cats tolerating tubes up to 20Fr (a 12-20Fr can be used). Gas-
trostomy tubes are technically more diffcult and more time-consuming
COMPLICATIONS OF TUBE FEEDING
to place, which is why esophagostomy tubes have become much more
popular in many patients unless esophageal disease prevents their
Complications of tube feeding are generally mild, such as contact
use. However, for long-term feeding (over many weeks or months).
dermatitis around the stoma. However, tube dislodgement or prema-
gastrostomy tubes may have advantages in some cats and be better
ture removal could result in peritonitis or aspiration pneumonia and
tolerated by some.
therefore potentially be fatal.
Generally, mushroom tip Pezzar-type catheters are used as gastros-
tomy tubes, although other designs are also available Latex, silicone
Complications of nasoesophageal tubes
and polyurethane tubes are available, and again silicone and poly-
urethane are better choices for long-term use, and there is some evi-
 The two major disadvantages of nasoesophageal tubes are frstly their
yanouie zill'auos ueue iaaq aie saqe auuaiod ieun aua
for the length of time these are used in most veterinary patients this 
foods can be used (other foods will invariably cause blockage of the
is not likely to be a major consideration.
tube), and secondly local nasal irritation resulting in rhinitis.
Gastrostomy tubes can be placed at surgical laparotomy, but are
Generally complications of nasoesophageal feeding are rare, and are
more commonly placed by percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
usually easily overcome. Occasionally, individual cats will not tolerate
(PEG) intubation (Box 12-7), although this may have a higher rate
the tubes and another method of feeding must be chosen, e.g..
-aed ioy anbiupan aul s'luauaeid uado ueu suoduos jo
esophagostomy or gastrostomy. Adequate flushing of the tube with
ment of a gastrostomy tube by open surgery is described in Chapter
water before and after each feed, followed by temporary plugging of
28. As with esophagostomy tube placement, anesthesia is required
the tube end to prevent the inside drying out, is important to help
for gastrostomy tube placement whether endoscopically or by open
 prevent blockage ofthe tube Diarrhea (and less commonly vomiting)
surgery.
(s indeu aas) sa jo uid e ui s
If desired, for long-term feeding, the conventional PEG tube can be
removed after the first two to four weeks and replaced with a special
low-profile gastrostomy tube These can be placed through the original
Complications of esophagostomy tubes
ostomy site once the original tube has been removed and have
the advantage of being easier to maintain and better tolerated on a
esophagstomy tube, a much wider range of diets is available for
'saqnt Auoisnsea ayoid-mol paugisap-asodind t'siseq uan-suo
use, and gastrointestinal disturbances are less common than with
although more expensive can also be used for the initial PEG tube
nasoesophageal tubes. The only major complication that has been
placement.15
reported with esophagostomy tubes has been infection at the ostomy
 Non-endoscopic placement devices are also available for gastros-
site. Careful daily cleaning of the site is thus essential and together
tomy tubes, but their use has been associated with problems, particu-
with the use of antiseptic creams/gels will help prevent infection.
 Although less prone to blockage than the smaller bore nasoesopha-
 great care should be taken if these are employed.
geal tubes, it is stillimportant to fush the tube with water before and
after each feed. The placement of the tube should also be checked if
the cat vomits while it is in place.
POST-PLACEMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Complications of PEG tubes
With any type of tube feeding, if the cat has been significantly inap-
Complications of gastrostomy tubes include infection at the ostomy
petent or anorexic over a period of time it is important to slowly
site, wound breakdown, pneumoperitoneum, peritonitis, and vomit.
increase the food administered over several days, eg. three to four
ing. As with other techniques, the tube should be flushed with water
days, until their full, calculated caloric requirements are being met.
before and after administration of food, and as with esophagostomy
By/ oi-s ueu ao ou) les ym jis on iaaq si il Xe
tubes, the larger diameter of gastrostomy tubes means a variety of
total volume) frequent meals initially, and then gradually increase the
commercial foods can be blenderized and administered through
volume of each meal and decrease the frequency (but maintaining
the tube.
129
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Box 12-7 Technique of gastrostomy tube placement endoscopically (PEG)
The cat is placed in right lateral recumbency and the left abdominal
is secured to the skin with a suitable friction suture, and a flange is
wall (over the area of the stomach) clipped and prepared for surgery.
then made by cutting off a 2 cm length of the tube at the distal end.
A gastroscope is advanced into the stomach, which is then insufflated 
A small horizontal incision is made in the center that allows it to be
with air, and the endoscope is directed so that the light can be seen
slid over the catheter and lie at the abdominal wall. This is secured 
illuminating the skin overlying the stomach (Fig. 12-3A). A 16-gauge 
in place with tape or a finger trap suture (Fg. 12-3E) and helps to 
'over-the-needle' intravenous catheter is placed through the skin and
ensure the gastric wall remains snug against the abdominal wall. It 
into the stomach at this site - the stylet is removed and nylon/polyester
is important that this is neither too tight (so it could cause pressure
 suture material is threaded through the catheter into the stomach.
necrosis) nor too loose (so that gastric contents could leak into the 
The suture material is grasped with biopsy forceps fed through the
 pand dil wooysnw aul yiw jeut papuawwonan s! ll (uawopqe
endoscope's channel (Fig. 12-3B), and the endoscope together with the
e Alatewixoudde aq pinous alaui 'liem ypewois aul isulebe bnus
suture material is then withdrawn via the oropharynx.
'llim leuuopge aul pue abuel leuaxa aui uaamaa den wws
The suture material is then secured to the open end of the
Some clinicians, as a precaution, prefer to also put a flange on 
gastrostomy feeding tube, with another over-the-needle IV catheter
the gastric side, putting the flange in place before the tube is fed
usually being threaded over the suture material first to provide
'shop labiel ui aneudodde ahow ag Aew sul ypewois aut ou!
a tapering point when it is pulled through the stomach wall 
rather than cats, where there may be a greater risk of peritoneal 
e-asodand ang aisuadxa anou 'aeuane ue sy (oe-zl b)
leakage.
gastrostomy tube kits can be purchased that incorporate a
The tube is clamped and/or capped, and then secured against 
tapered end to facilitate the procedure (e.g. MILA PEG kit, Mila 
the body wall and protected with a light bandage. Ideally, 24 hours
International, Kentucky, USA). The suture material is then pulled 
should be left before feeding is commenced to allow a fibrin seal 
back through the left flank resulting in the feeding tube being 
to develop. but water can be administered within six to 12 hours.
drawn down into the stomach. Gentle traction is applied to pull 
It is recommended that the PEG tube be left in place for a minimum
the tip of the intravenous catheter through the abdominal wall
of 14 days before it is removed, to ensure good adhesion between
(Fig. 12-3D), and as gentle traction is continually applied a scalpel is
the stomach and the abdominal wall. After this time, the tube can 
used to make a small cut-down incision onto the hub of the catheter
be removed - if there is no inner flange, a rigid stylet can be 
to allow passage of the catheter and the feeding tube through the 
inserted into the tube and pushed so that the mushroom tip is
incision.
stretched and thus flattened allowing the tube to be pulled 
 The mushroom tip or bumper is then drawn up snug to keep
through the ostomy site. Alternatively, the tube can be cut and 
the stomach wall in close apposition to the wall of the abdomen (to
the mushroom tip (± inner flange) retrieved endoscopically. After
allow subsequent adhesion of the parietal and visceral peritoneum).
removal the ostomy site should heal rapidly and usually seals over
and the position of the tube is checked with the endoscope. The tube
within 24 hours.
(A)
B
D
Figure 12-3 (A) Preparation for PEG intubation - the left lateral flank is clipped and surgically prepared. A gastroscope is passed, the stomach is
insufflated, and transillumination is used to identify the fundus where the needle can be inserted. (B) An over-the-needle catheter is inserted into
the stomach lumen and monofilament nylon is passed into the stomach and grasped with the endoscope. (c) A silicone mushroom-tipped catheter
is used as the PEG tube. An over-the-needle catheter has been threaded over the nylon, and the nylon has been tied to a cut and tapered end of
auen apaau-aui-ao aul yewis aul oui aauie aui lnd oi llem jeuiuopge aun yanoun ye paind uaag sey uou aul ai laauen aul
exits through the flank - a small incision is made to facilitate the passage of the hub of the catheter and body of the PEG tube through the flank.
(E) The PEG tube has been secured with a friction suture. A flange (made from part of the tube) is placed and then secured with tape to ensure 
 the stomach wall remains apposed to the abdominal wall
130
Feeding tubes
Chapter
12
REFERENCES
1. Chan D. The inappetent hospitalised cat:
 8. Rees RG, Attrill H, Quinn D, Silk DB.
52 cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42:
clinical approach to maximising.
 Improved design of nasogastric feeding
51-6.
 nutritional support. J Feline Med Surg
tubes. Clin Nutr 1986;5:203-7.
14. Yoshimoto SK, Marks SL, Struble AL, Riel
2009;11:925-33.
 9. Balkany TJ, Baker BB, Bloustein PA, Jafek
 DL. Owner experiences and complications
 2. Prittie J, Barton L. Route of nutrient
 BWW. Cervical esophagostomy in dogs:
with home use of a replacement low
delivery. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
mdoscopic, radiographic, and
 profle gastrostomy device for long-term
2004;19:6-8.
histopathologic evaluation of esophagitis
enteral feeding in dogs. Can Vet J
3. Heuter K. Placement of jejunal feeding
induced by feeding tubes. Ann Otol
2006;47:144-50.
tubes for post-gastric feeding. Clin Tech
Rhinol Laryngol 1977;86:588-93.
15. Campbell SJ, Marks SL, Yoshimoto SK,
 Formaggini L. Normograde, minimally
Small Anim Pract 2004;19:32-42.
et al. Complications and outcomes of
invasive technique for oesophagostomy in
one-step low-profle gastrostomy devices
4. Daye RM, Huber ML, Henderson RA.
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:481-6.
for long-term enteral feeding in dogs and
Interlocking box jejunostomy: a new
11.
 Blacka J., Donoghue J, Sutherland M, et al.
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42:
technique for enteral feeding. I Am Anim
 Dwell time and functional failure in
197-206.
Hosp Assoc 1999;35:129.
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
16. Glaus TM, Cornelius LM, Bartges JIW.
5. Minard G, Lysen LK. Enteral access 
 tubes: a prospective randomized-
Reusch C. Complications with non-
devices. In: Gottschlich MM, Fuhrman
 controlled comparison between silicon
endoscopic percutaneous gastrostomy in 
MP, Hammond KA, et al, editors. The 
 polymer and polyurethane percutaneous 
 31 cats and 10 dogs: a retrospective study.
Science and Practice of Nutrition Support:
emdoscopic gastrostomy tubes. Aliment
J Small Anim Pract 1998;39:218-22.
A Case-Based Core Curniculum. USA:
Pharmacol Ther 2004;20:875-82.
17. lreland LM, Hohenhaus AE, Broussard JD,
ASPEN; 2001. p. 167-88.
 Sartori S, Trevisani L, Nielsen I, et al.
Weissman BL. A comparison of owner
6. Metheny N, Eisenberg P, McSweeney M.
Longevity of silicone and polyurethane
management and complications in
Effect of feeding tube properties and three
Gtheters in long-term enteral feeding via
 67 cats with esophagostomy and
irrigants on clogging rates. Nurs Res
 percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
 percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
1988;37:165-9.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2003;17:
feeding tubes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 7. Mensforth A, Nightingale JMD. Insertion 
853-6.
2003;39:241-6.
and care of enteral feeding tubes. In:
13.
 Salinardi Bl, Harkin KR, Bulmer BJ, Roush 
18. Seaman R, Legendre A. Owner experiences
Nightingale JMD, editor. Intestinal Failure.
 JK. Comparison of complications of
with home use of a gastrostomy tube in
London: Greenwich Medical Media Ltd;
 percutaneous endoscopic versus surgically
their dog or cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
2001. p. 281-304.
 placed gastrostomy tubes in 42 dogs and
1998;212:1576-8.
131
|13]
Chapter
Instruments
J. Lapish, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
As the patient size or area of surgery becomes smaller in relation to
Soft tissue biopsy instruments
the surgeon's hand, the tissues must be manipulated, increasingly.
through the medium of surgical instrumentation. An extreme
Selection of the appropriate soft tissue biopsy devices will be detailed
example is ophthalmic surgery where the surgeon rarely touches
in the relevant organ specific chapters and more generally in Chapter
the tissues. Appropriately scaled instruments must be selected to
14. Several types are available. The TruCut type consists of a slim
minimize de-vitalization of tissues. Feline soft tissue surgery will
 needle which may be inserted relatively atraumatically into an area of
therefore require a greater use of instruments than the surgery of larger
 parenchymatous tissue typically within an organ (Fig. 13-4). A spring
loaded cutter is fired within the needle, which excises and traps a
patients.
sample Where the sample is to be obtained from the surface of a
friable tissue clamshell type biopsy forceps with cutting jaws enclose
and remove the sample (Fig. 13-5). Skin biopsies may be obtained
GENERAL SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS
using a punch biopsy, available in a variety of sizes. Although available
 as a reusable instrument it is normally used as a disposable device.
General surgical instruments including scalpels, dissecting forceps,
scissors, artery forceps, retractors, and needleholders are described in
Vessel sealing devices
the chapter on Instrumentation in Feline Orthopedic Surgery and Muscu-
loskeletal Disease (Chapter 23).' An example of the instruments that
Accurate hemostasis is of utmost importance to a patient's survival
could be included in a general surgical kit is listed in Box 13-1 and
and there are a wide variety of hemostatic tools currently available, all 
with their inherent advantages and limitations. Considerations should
shown in Figure 13-1.
include time taken to achieve hemostasis, reliability in vessel sealing.
collateral damage, and expense Temporary application of pressure
Suction
with sponges or hemostats may be sufficient for capillary or very small
vessels, as clotting should occur. For larger vessels, ligation or the use
Suction will contribute to a clear operating field. Many tips are avail-
 of diathermy or electrosurgical devices will be required. Diathermy
able but the most useful focal tips are the Adson (4 mm diameter) or
 and electrosurgical devices have the advantage of sealing vessels in a
Frazier (2.6 mm diameter) types, both of which offer fingertip control
shorter period of time than that required to place a ligature, and this
of suction by an assistant. For suction of larger volumes of fluid from
might be useful in a situation where time is of the essence In other
body cavities when performing abdominal or thoracic surgery the
E jo Aqea pue Anas au iajaid Aeu uoasins au suens
Poole is preferred (Fig. 13-2).
suture, for example for ligation of the femoral artery if performing
amputation.
Magnification and light
 The following were compared for their efficacy and security in
achieving vessel ligation: braided suture in a surgeon's knot; a mono-
Use of binocular loupes, which magnify while maintaining a normal
filament suture in a granny knot; a metallic clip (Ligaclip. Johnson
working distance, will significantly improve visualization of the opera-
and Johnson; Fig. 13-6A): a bipolar diathermy system (Ligasure,
tive site. A magnification of 2.5x is suffcient for most procedures. The 
ValleyLab; Fig. 13-6B); and an ultrasonically activated scalpel
focal distance should be selected to maintain a normal working dis-
(Harmonic Scalpel, Johnson and Johnson).2 Secure hemostasis was
tance, usually 380 mm or 430 mm. The addition of a loupe light,
obtained with all the techniques in all vessels below 5 mm in diam-
either fiber optic or the more economic LED type, will automatically
eter. In vessels over 5 mm, secure hemostasis was obtained with all
provide surgery light where it is needed (Fig. 13-3).
modalities except the harmonic scalpel. With the harmonic scalpel.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00013-5
EEL
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
leaks occurred in vessels greater than 5-6 mm, confrming that the
Box 13-1 Surgical tray
manufacturer's claims for each of the hemostatic methods were accu-
rate The use of hemostatic tools such as the harmonic scalpel and
A typical surgical tray might include the following:
Ligasure has increased with the use of laparoscopic surgery where it
Number 3 scalpel handle 
is not easy to place traditional surgical knots.
Gallipot for warmed flushing solution
 Sponges with radio dense marker
Vessel sealers
Backhouse towel clips 9 cm x 10
Mayo scissors straight 14 cm × 1
These devices, such as the Ligasure system (EBVS; ValleyLab...) are
 Metzenbaum scissor straight 14.5 cm × 1
computer-based, temperature controlled bipolar electrocoagulation
 Metzenbaum scissor curved 14.5 cm × 1
systems (otherwise known as electrothermal bipolar vessel sealers).
The vessel sealers claim to seal vessels up to 7 mm in diameter by
 Suture scissors straight 
denaturing collagen and elastin within the vessel wall and surround-
Brown-Adson dissecting forceps 12.5 cm × 2
Susuas Aq pauuaiap si gueas anssi aenbapy anss anoauuos gu!
Straight De Bakey forceps 15 cm × 1
Adson Debakey forceps 12.5 cm x 1
Halstead mosquito artery forceps straight 12.5 cm × 5
 Halstead mosquito forceps curved 12.5 cm × 5
 Alis tissue forceps 4/5 teeth 15 cm × 2
Mayo-Hegar (T.C.) needleholder 15 cm × 1
Langenbeck or Senn hand held retractor 
 Figure 13-3 Loupes with light
Figure 13-1 Surgical tray. a, Backhouse towel clips 9 om: b, number 3
5
scalpel handle; c, Mayo scissors straight 14 om; d, Metzenbaum scissors
straight 14.5 cmm; e, Metzenbaum scissors curved 14.5 om; f, Adson
Brown dissecting forceps: g. Adson Debakey dissecting forceps;
h, Halstead mosquito artery forceps straight 12.5 cmm: i, Halstead
mosquito artery forceps curved 12.5 cm: j. Allis tissue forceps 4/5 teeth
15 om: k, Mayo-Hegar (T.C.) needleholder 15 om: I, gallipot; m, sponges 
Figure 13-4 TruCut type biopsy needle.
with radio dense marker.
Figure 13-2 Suction tips: a, Poole; b, Adson; c, Frazier.
Figure 13-5 Clamshell biopsy forceps.
134
Instruments
Chapter
13
A
Figure 13-7 Atraumatic “baby' Doyen with Debakey style jaws.
B
ansebn (a) soienidde pue sdp bueas jassan dlipebn (v) g-el aune!
vessel sealer. (A, Courtesy of Ethicon Lto.)
the resistive index of the tissue The device notifies the surgeon
Figure 13-8 Abdominal retractors. (A) Gosset; (B) 'baby' Balfour
when the tissue is safe to be cut and the surgeon controls the knife
qut of the tissue.
very large for cats. A pediatric atraumatic version is available and is
preferred.
 Harmonic scalpel
p au ui sisi ruiaa-ozaid anxa on aos aaa ue in
Gosset retractor
The Gosset retractor is a self-retaining retractor suitable for exposure
and amplified to very high frequency such that at the tip of the blade
 of abdominal viscera (Fig. 13-8A). Two blades are mounted on a bar,
siu puosas/saoi os'ss saupeai Auanbay uonou ieupniauol
the blades are moved apart to open the incision. The blades are a
rapid movement creates temperatures that denature proteins, creating
 standard P shape with a curved loop to provide retention.
an area of coagulation and allowing concurrent cutting. This cutting
and coagulation occurs without causing a signifcant rise in tempera-
ture at the tissue level, with low smoke formation, no muscular stimu-
Balfour retractor
lation and without the transmission of energy through the patient Its
The Balfour retractor (Fig. 13-8B) consists of three individually oper-
safety has been tested extensively in animal experiments and there is
able, outward-looking curved loops or blades mounted on a bar. By
now ample evidence to suggest that it produces less thermal damage
out aut le uau supeaids pue uoisou ue oui sapelq aui suguasu!
in vitro than electrosurgery and lasers. Using multifunctional hand
 sion is opened to give maximum access to tissues below. Pediatric sizes
pieces and adjusting power levels means that diferent balances
 are suitable for use in the cat's abdomen.
between coagulation and cutting effects are possible. The manufactur-
ers claim effcient and safe hemostasis in vessels < 3 mm using current
hand pieces.
Ring and hook retractor
A novel type of retractor for abdominal wall retraction is of a ring type.
a se aud an pe sis go e ue yo aa q ym
ABDOMINAL SURGERY
-uon e ui sanss ioenau on sroou paneseia aldnnu asn oi uoagins
trollable fashion at multiple levels of the approach (Fig. 13-9). These
are small and lightweight retractors and therefore suitable for use
 In addition to the general kit (Box 13-1, Fig. 13-1) the following
in cats.
instruments 
may
be useful for certain2
 abdominal  surgical
procedures.
Galiban forceps
Bowel clamps
It is occasionally necessary to apply sutures under tension. In order
to maintain tension it can be useful for an assistant to hold the frst
Doyen bowel clamps (Fig. 13-7)are non-crushing intestinal occluding
throw of the knot using Galiban suture holding forceps. These are
forceps with longitudinal serrations. They are used to temporarily
designed to atraumatically hold the knot during the tying process. The
Occlude the lumen of bowel. Standard human bowel clamps are
jaws are angled to allow maximum view of the knot (Fig. 13-10).
135
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
Box 13-2 Special thoracic instruments
Gelpi retractor × 2
Small Finochietto retractor 
Beckman retractor
Sterile solution
 Poole suction tip + suction
Monopolar or bipolar cautery
Periosteal elevator
Bone cutting forceps (Liston)
 Satinsky Forceps
Figure 13-9 Ring and hook retractor. (Courtesy of Alasdair Hotson-Moore.)
Figure 13-10 Galiban suture forceps.
Figure 13-11 Special thoracic instruments: a, Gelpi retractors;
b,Finochietto retractor; c, Beckman retractor; d, periosteal elevator;
Liver biopsy
Liver can be sampled using clamshellbiopsy forceps (Fig. 13-5) or a
skin punch. A 6 mm biopsy instrument is preferred in animals with
microvascular disease since the 4 mm instruments are less likely to
 provide sufficient triads for analysis.?
SURGERY OF THE THORAX
 In addition to the instruments listed in the general kit the following
 Figure 13-12 Grasping forceps.
may be useful for thoracic surgical procedures (Box l3-2 and Fig.
13-1l). Thoracic staplers are described in Chapter 10.
Retraction
Grasping forceps
Retraction of the operative site, whether sternal or intercostal between
Although strictly not a surgical instrument, long grasping forceps
ribs, can be maintained by multiple Gelpi type retractors (Fig. 13-11 ).
with a shaft diameter of around 2.5 mm and shaft length 22 cm are
which have the advantage of relatively small atraumatic tips but the
useful for removal of foreign bodies in both trachea and esophagus
disadvantage that the handles and ratchets sit some distance from the
(Fig. 13-12).
u ym sioean ueun apoisi oi aiai aro aie Aaun pue suaid
tiple prongs. West or Weitlaner are useful self-retaining retractors
Bone cutting
which have several prongs, making them more secure as intercostal
retractors.
Should access to the chest be made via a sternal osteotomy, instnu-
ments for both opening and closing will be required. Liston bone
Finochietto
 cutters straight 15 cm and wire twister and cutter 16.5cm are suitable
for the cat (Fig. l3-ll).' Alternatively, an oscillating saw could
 The Finochietto is a retractor specifically designed to separate ribs in
be used.'
136
Instruments
Chapter
13
 Finochietto, it has fenestrated blades and a hand-cranked lever to both
tips. They are useful for manipulation of deep intrathoracic structures
separate the parallel arms in a staged fashion and lock them in place
(Fig. 13-13B).
at each stop. The small Finochietto with a 9.5 cm spread is suitable
for use in cats (Fig. 13-11).
Debakey forceps
 These are a type of atraumatic tissue forceps used for grasping soft
Beckman retractors
tissue, bowel or blood vessels to avoid tissue damage during manipu-
lation of these structures (Fig. 13-14). They have a distinct, coarsely-
These retractors come in a variety of types, e.g., Beckman Weitlaner.
Mueller Beckman and Beckman Eaton. They are generally multi-
ribbed grip panel with two rows of microscopic teeth that interfit
pronged retractors with a varying number of teeth, that are sharp or
along slender jaws and they end with blunt tips. These forceps are very
blunt and with hinged arms (Fig. 13-1l). They are useful for retracting
useful instruments that should be included in the general surgical kit
ribs for intercostal thoracotomy.
for all soft tisue surgery (Box 13-1).
Forceps
Diaphragmatic hernia repair
 Repair of diaphagmatic hernias will require rather longer dissecting
Satinsky clamps
forceps and needleholders than described in the general section.
These atraumatic elongated C-shaped clamps with fine longitudinal
U 5'91 'L 1eBaH-oe Pue 1 51 sdaioy Paqooi-ie1 Se Yns
grooves, were designed by the surgeon Victor P. Satinsky. They are
or 18 cm.
in widespread use for temporary vessel closure in cardiovascular
surgery. The 15 cm length baby Satinsky clamps are suitable for cats
(Fig. 13-13A).
 Box 13-3 An example of an ophthalmic surgical kit
 Halstead mosquito forceps straight 12.5 cm
Mixter
Halstead mosquito forceps curved 12.5 cm
 These are also known as right-angle forceps. They are small lightweight
Beaver type blade handle plus 65 and 67 blades
ratchet-handled hemostats with a sharp angle to the blades near the
Castroviejo needleholder T.C. with catch 15 cm
Stevens tenotomy scissors straight 11 cm
Castroviejo scissors straight 11.5 cm
Colibri forceps 10.5 cm
Graefe fixation forceps 10.5 cm 
Roberts tying forceps 10.5 cm 
apeig ww 5 adeb, ww sz wninoads plaka yanbeueg llews
Lachrymal cannula straight
Castroviejo needleholders OR
Ryder or Derf needleholders 12 cm (standard action)
 Fosters TC miniature (Gillie type action)
 Enucleation scissors 14.5 cm
Figure 13-13 (A) Satinsky clamp. (B) Mixter clamp
Figure 13-15 Ophthalmic surgical kit: a, Beaver type scalpel blade
holder: b, Castroviejo scissors straight 11.5 cm; c, Stevens tenotomy
onbsou peaiseh 'b :uninoads pilaaa lanbeuea s :un 5'ol sdaniot
artery forceps straight 12.5 cm: h, Halstead mosquito artery forceps
curved 12.5 cm: i iachrymal cannula straight: j. Roberts tying forceps
Figure 13-14 Debakey dissection forceps.
10.5 cm.
137
Section
2
 Diagnostics, Equipment and Implants
and Fig. 13-15). Some surgeons are not comfortable with the cross
SURGERY OF THE HEAD AND NECK
action-type Castroviejo needleholders used by some ophthalmolo-
gists, so these surgeons might prefer the 12 cm Ryder or Derf needle-
The general kit described (Box 13-1 and Fig. 13-1) is sufficient for
holder, which has the standard action. For surgeons favoring the
most procedures around the head and neck with the addition of small
Gillie-type action, the miniature Fosters T.C. is the best option. If
dissecting scissors such as strabismus or iris scissors and two pairs of
 enucleation is necessary, very curved enucleation scissors 14.5 cm are
small self-retaining retractors such as Gelpi retractors.
useful in the cat.
A ventral bulla osteotomy (VBO) will require a Steinman pin,
 Jacobs chuck and a small curette. Mandibulectomy or maxillectomy
 procedures will be aided by an oscillating saw. A freer elevator is useful
Operating microscope
for retracting nerves or soft tissues in addition to elevating muscle and
The use of operating microscopes is becoming increasingly common
periosteum.
in veterinary surgery, primarily for ophthalmic procedures but also as
Sun jens ieniaui anaum eae ue si aasis seio
u nid aans anss ys aa u anosa aqenia e
and choice is often exercised to a large degree. The range of ophthal-
mic instrumentation available is enormous. A kit suitable for most
involved. While extremely expensive if purchased new, operating
eyelid and periorbital surgery might include the following (Box 13-3
 microscopes are increasing affordable from the pre-owned market.
REFERENCES
1.
 Lapish JP. Orthopedic instrumentation.
2.
Rajbabu K, Barber Nl, Choi W, Muir GH.
3
 Tobias KM. Liver Biopsy. In: Manual of
In: Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs
To knot or not to knot? Sutureless 
small animal sof tissue surgery. Blackwell 
Sl, editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
haemostasis compared to the surgeons
Publishing: 2010. p. 125-34.
musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
kmot. Ann R Coll Surg Eng
Elsevier; 2009. p. 249-58.
2007;89:359-62.
138
3
Section
J.L. Demetriou, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Oncological surgery and adjunctive therapy
With the increasing longevity of cats, neoplastic conditions are
of resection with different tumor types. Multimodal or neoad-
-ueuu aul uao si aaing aeid u Auanay anou payuapi mou
juvant treatment can be advantageous for some tumors, and the
stay of treatment for many feline tumors and the frst chapter
following two chapters on radiotherapy and chemotherapy aim to
-pu ouo ens jo saud au yni apea aui sapi
 give information on which tumors may be responsive to these types
ing the necessity for staging, and discussion on guidelines of margins
oftherapy.
14
lapter
Oncological surgery
J.L.Demetriou
Cancer is known to be an important disease entity in the cat, affecting
are commonly encountered and identifying the presence of abnor-
all age groups. Although a current incidence rate of neoplasia in this
malities such as anemia, disseminated intravascular coagulation or
 species is not available, past data from a US tumor registry report
thrombocytopenia will influence treatment planning and basic deci-
suggests an overall occurrence of 0.5%. Although malignant tumor
sions such as suitability of the patient for anesthesia. Serum biochemi-
incidence rates were similar to dogs, the incidence of benign tumors
cal abnormalities will assist in documenting concurrent disease (e.g.
in cats was ten times less than that of dogs. A more recent animal
-u lenuue paneunsa ue papiaoid Aieil ui seaie omi uony Ansigan
dence rate of 0.77% for cats. Furthermore, cats had a 4.6-fold higher
ainu pue eoqd 'suu sunun sio yo aa
incidence of malignant than benign tumors, and purebred cats had
myeloma.
an almost 2-fold higher incidence of malignant tumors than mixed
s'suoendod ie aul ui aee yim paseaui auapiun rounh 'spaana
 pue uoezeioads Areuaan e se Aonosuo jo anuaiaa aui ym
Imaging
increased public interest in pet cancer it is unsurprising that treatment
juaussasse ayn ui yed jeonu e uoy sanbiuqpat sugeut ssougei
of feline cancer patients is now commonplace in both the general
 of the cancer patient. It is important to recognize the rapid growth of
 practice setting and specialist centres.
more sophisticated modalities such as computed tomography (CT).
This chapter aims to cover the evaluation of the cancer patient,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and nuclear imaging (e.g., scin-
tumor staging, and biopsy techniques. The various methods of surgery
tigraphy)andthe reader is referred to Chapter 8 for more information.
that can be utilized in the feline cancer patient will be discussed along 
Conventional radiography is still commonly used, partly due to finan-
with the best practice principles to use when performing surgery.
cial reasons, particularly for the assessment of pulmonary metastasis.
Ultrasonography is a useful complementary tool and can provide
important information regarding tumor location, character and
EVALUATION OF THE CANCER PATIENT
local invasion. CT provides excellent evaluation of bony lesions and
is the gold standard for the evaluation of pulmonary metastasis.
Three-dimensional reconstruction greatly facilitates surgical planning.
When evaluating the feline cancer patient it is important to focus on
and integration of CT scans with radiotherapy allows much more
the patient as a whole rather than the tumor in isolation to avoid
making inappropriate surgical decisions, e.g., mammary tumor exci-
 precise and targeted delivery of radiation to the patient (Chapter 15).
MRI offers excellent soft tissue contrast and is ideal for evaluation of
on an anemic cancer patient without recognition ofthe hematological
the brain. Availability and fnances are often the two main reasons
abnormalities. A suitable diagnostic workup should be planned for
that limit the routine use of these imaging modalities in general
each individual patient based primarily on clinical presentation and
practice.
Im aideu su sassanaid asasp ua seoaed ail
-a auyo ezuo ue uy ie sanuan asoqau uo soy
surgical diagnosis. However, other aspects of the diagnostic workup
Minimally invasive techniques
are likely to include at least one of the assessments discussed below.
Buissase ioy Adosoiss 'sioum leseu Suziensi ioy Adossoud
bladder neoplasia and thoracoscopy for examining pulmonary or
Laboratory assessment
mediastinal masses are examples of minimally invasive techniques
that can combine both presurgical tumor assessment and biopsy pro-
Cancer patients often have other concurrent medical problems in
curement in one procedure Details of these techniques are discussed
addition to paraneoplastic syndromes. Hematological abnormalities
in Chapters 8 and 24.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00014-7
141
Section
3
 Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
Table 14-1 World Health Organization classification for feline
 Box 14-1 Requirements for fine needle aspiration
tumors of epidermal origin
21-23 gauge needles
Stage
Feature
3-10 mL syringes
Glass microscope slides
T = tumor
Cytological stains
TO
No evidence of tumor
A good microscope with oil immersion 
Tis
Tumor in situ
T1
Tumor < 2 cm in diameter
T2
Tumor 2-5 cm in diameter or minimally invasive
Or within body cavities. Enlarged, accessible lymph nodes are easily
T3
Tumor > 5 cm in diameter or with invasion of subcutis
aspirated and a major advantage of using this method over the histo-
Variable diameter; tumor invading fascia, muscle or bone
logical methods of biopsy is that the sample can be examined
T4
 in-house' after appropriate staining. The equipment that is required
N = node
is listed in Box 14-1.
The best cytological stains to use in clinical practice are the
NO
Absence of lymph node metastasis
Romanowsky stains (eg. Wright stain, Giemsa stain and May-
N1
 Presence of lymph node metastasis
Grinwald-Giemsa stain), as these provide clear detail of both the
 nuclear and cytoplasmic structures. They are relatively quick to prepare
 M = metastasis
 and these stains will also stain bacteria if they are present The 'rapid'
MO
 Absence of distant metastasis
stain kits such as 'Diff-Quik' are very useful and convenient, but one
limitation is that they may not consistently stain the granules within
M1
 Presence of distant metastasis
 mast cells clearly, which could lead to misdiagnosis, particularly in
swoa ui sowni jo uoeisse n uao wo uoisad y pao)
the case of poorly differentiated mast cell tumors in which the granu-
 Animals. WHO. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1980/PH_CMO_80.20_eng.pdf) 
larity can be low. In this instance Toludine blue stain will identify
mast cell granules.
Staging
 Aspiration can be performed using either the needle attached to the
syringe or the 'capillary' method, which involves inserting just the
Before treatment can be considered it is important to define the
needle without the exertion of negative pressure. The act of briskly
 precise extent of the tumor burden of each patient, by means of clini-
redirecting the needle hub backwards and forwards within the mass
cal and histological staging. This provides valuable information not
is enough for cells to become detached and move up the core of the
 only for treatment planning, but also helps evaluate response to treat-
needle This is the author's preferred technique as it is less likely to
ment and disease progression. Staging is based on the World Health
result in excessive fluid being aspirated that would effectively dilute
Organization Program on Comparative Oncology TNM (tumor, node,
the cellular component to the sample. Box 14-2 illustrates the steps
metastasis) system, with several adaptations for a variety of tumors of
involved in FNA using both the methods described.
domestic animals. An example of such an adaptation is illustrated in
There have been several studies evaluating the accuracy of FNA
Table 14-1 for feline tumors of epidermal origin (carcinomas). Not
involving cats. One study found that in ultrasound-guided samples of
all tumors lend themselves to staging easily, and in some tumors, with
splenic masses, cytologic diagnoses (by FNA) corresponded with his-
feline mammary tumors being a prime example, it has been shown
tologic diagnoses in 61% of cases. In another study involving only
that the tumor histological grade is significantly linked to prognosis
four cats in which liver aspirates were taken, false results were obtained
and can be used as an independent prognostic factor.34
in all cases when compared with surgical biopsy samples. In these
cases hepatic lipidosis was diagnosed by aspiration of samples that
were later confrmed as inflammatory or neoplastic. However, in
another study of canine and feline patients results suggested that FNA
BIOPSY TECHNIQUES
may be a sensitive and specific method of evaluating the regional
-ros snsai asnesaq 'sioume pos yiim sie pue saop ui sapou ydu
Obtaining a diagnosis is one of the most important steps in the man-
related well with results of histologic examination of the entire lymph
agement of the cancer patient. Obtaining a biopsy before the surgical
node. In conclusion, these results suggest that the accuracy of FNA
sse jo ai au u aeid e saq si paad si anaa
 may vary considerably and this may be partly dependent on the tissue
 as it provides a pre-treatment diagnosis, helps the clinician plan the
u aq oi seae use apou ydul euay pades u
surgery, and can provide the owner with a more accurate prognosis.
specifc and sensitive. CT-guided aspiration of bone and lung tissue
There are a number of methods for obtaining samples from the tumor
has also been reported in cats and studies suggest that it may be a safe
and the choice is based on a number of factors including tumor loca-
and accurate procedure.&?
tion, suspected tumor type safety of the procedure, the patient's clini-
cal status, cost, equipment availability, and surgeon's preference. With
Needle core biopsy
the exception of diagnostic cytology. all other techniques listed in
Table 14-2 involve tissue sampling and histological interpretation.
 Needle core biopsy provides a quick and easy way of obtaining a tissue
sample It can be used on externally or internally (usually in combina-
Fine needle aspiration
tion with ultrasound guidance) located masses and can be performed
using local anesthetic and sedation, providing a cost effective and less
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is a cost-effective, simple frst-line option
invasive option to clients compared with incisional biopsy. As the
to obtain a diagnosis from a wide variety of masses, either on the skin
initial incision and tract made by the instrument is small, there is little
142
Oncological surgery
Chapter
14
Table 14-2 Comparison of different biopsy techniques
Biopsy technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Indications/examples
Cytology
Inexpensive
 Non-diagnostic specimens
Bone marrow
Simple, rapid procedure
 Tissue architecture not evaluated 
Lymph nodes
 Minimal equipment 
 Cutaneous/subcutaneous masses
 Immediate results
Body cavity fluids
Minimal restraint
Impression smears
 Needle core 
 Minimally invasive
 Needle core instruments required 
 Any externally located mass
 Rapid procedure 
 Smaller tissue sample compared 
Any internal lesions (kidney, liver.
Well-preserved tissue sample
with incisional technique
prostate) with the aid of ultrasound
High diagnostic yield 
guidance or during open surgery
 Can be done under sedation/local anesthetic
Inexpensive
Easy procedure
 Punch
Larger tissue sample
 Sample obtained limited by depth 
 Superficial cutaneous lesions
Easy procedure
of punch
Parenchymatous organ (liver spleen)
 Superficial lesions only
biopsy during open surgery
Invasive procedure
 General anesthetic often required
Incisional 
 Larger tissue mass
Invasive procedure
When other biopsy methods have
Useful when needle core or punch methods 
General anesthetic mostly required
been non-diagnostic
 prove non-diagnostic
More expensive
Ulcerated and necrotic lesions (e.g..
Biopsy tract may compromise
oral masses)
future surgery
Excisional
 Can be both diagnostic and therapeutic
In most cases may compromise
Reserve for 'benign' skin lesions and 
May be cost effective
future treatment options and
 tumor excision where treatment is
Diagnosis always obtained
prognosis
not dependent on tumor type
Can evaluate completeness of excision
(mammary masses, single splenic
mass, single pulmonary mass)
(Reprinted from Demetriou JL, Foale RD. Small Animal Oncology. London: Saunders Elsevier; 2010, with permission from Elsevier.)
Box 14-2 Fine needle aspiration
The mass is stabilized using two fingers if it is unstable, and basic
using the air within the syringe. A preparation is made of the sample,
preparation of the surface is performed. Clipping of the fur will
which is rapidly dried and then stained.
improve the visualization of the mass and a spirit swab is used to clean
Another method is using the needle alone without the syringe
the surface of the skin.
(Hg. 14-1B). The needle is used to obtain a core of cells from the 
 A 21-23G needle attached to a 5 mL syringe is inserted into the
mass by redirecting the needle several times before attaching it to
center of the mass and negative suction applied (Fg. 14-1A). The 
a syringe filled with air.
needle is redirected into the mass several times. Negative suction is 
stopped if fluid appears within the hub of the needle. Negative 
pressure is released and the needle is withdrawn. The needle is
detached from the syringe and the syringe is filled with air. The needle
is re-attached and the aspirated material is forced out onto a slide
A
B
Figure 14-1 Fine needle aspiration can be performed by (A) use of a 5 mL syringe attached to the needle or (B) using a needle alone.
143
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
Box 14-3 Needle core biopsy technique
 An example of a commercially available needle biopsy instrument 
featuring a 10-20 mm notch size to allow for variable biopsy sample
 sizes is illustrated in Figure 14-2A. After clipping and aseptic 
 preparation of the biopsy site a number 11 blade is used to make a
stab incision (Fig. 14-2B). Sedation in combination with local anesthesia 
yeaus pue alpaau aul aanpanod siul lot suanied iso ui pasn a ue 
 is pushed through the skin incision and the subcutaneous tissues and 
into the mass to be biopsied. The main part of the needle biopsy
instrument is held in the left hand and steadied whilst the sheath is
withdrawn from the mass using the right hand (Hg. 14-2C). The sheath 
 is then passed over the needle using the right hand, until a 'click' is
heard (Fig. 14-2D). Then the needle and sheath are withdrawn
together out from the tumor and skin incision. The sheath is once
again withdrawn to reveal the biopsy specimen within the notch and 
Ahojouiedois!y e ou! alpaau (5sz) auy e buisn yo pasea s! aldues ay 
see tuaia ui paeadan ag uen sdais aul (zl b) rod uaads
 of the tumor if required.
(A)
B
instrument is inserted into the tissue to be biopsied and the sheath withdrawn. (D) The sheath is reinserted to cut off the biopsy sample.
(E} After removal of the needle core instrument the sheath is again withdrawn to reveal the biopsy.
E
risk of disruption of the tumor and subsequent tumor seeding.
biopsy performed before surgical excision of masses can facilitate
although removal of the biopsy tract is recommended at the definitive
'sanpaoid iesns snaaunu iog paau au anpai pue guuued
surgery. Although designed as disposable instruments, they can be
reused after sterilization with ethylene oxide and performing the skin
Punch biopsy
incision with a scalpel blade before insertion of the needle will help
delay blunting of the tip and extend the life span of the instrument.
A punch biopsy is more commonly used for skin or superficial skin
 In core biopsy the typical needle size is 18-14G and comprises an
masses as the depth of the sample obtained is limited by the length
inner notched stylet with an outer cannula (eg., Tru-cut). Box 14-3
of the punch. The common diameter punch samples obtained range
illustrates the steps involved in obtaining a needle core biopsy sample.
from 2-6 mm, but it would be preferable to aim for the larger size if
In one study there was 96% agreement with presurgical Tru-cut results
the location and area of tumor permits. Another indication for the
sandes io osoui gt uaum snsan asdoia iinsisod pu
use of punch biopsies is for sampling lesions on the surface of the
from dogs and cats were evaluated. 0 The results indicated that needle
spleen or liver during exploratory laparotomy. The sample is shorter
core biopsy can accurately predict surgical biopsy. Thus, needle core
and wider than a needle core, and hemorrhage from the remaining
144
Oncological surgery
Chapter
14
Box 14-4 Punch biopsy technique
After local anesthesia (in the conscious patient) a 2-6 mm punch
The biopsy is then removed from the rest of the skin. Care must
biopsy instrument is applied over the area to be sampled and is twisted
be taken to avoid damaging the sample so fine forceps are used to
until the blade has penetrated the epidermis of the skin (Fig. 14-3A).
hold the sample and pullit up to reveal the deep margin and 
After the blade has penetrated the skin sufficientlyit is withdrawn.
. The
au wouy aay aldwes aut ino oi pasn ane siosss wneguazian
lo) us aul ane auad ot pasn Ajuo s! suawnsu! Asdoig ypund us
underlying tissues (Fig. 14-3C).
other similar biopsy site) and not to remove the biopsy (Fig. 14-3B)
A)
B
Figure 14-3 (A) A Punch biopsy instrument is pressed and rotated in the skin to be biopsied. (B) The sample is very carefully held with fine forceps
and (c) the base cut with Metzenbaum scissors.
defcit can be controlled using a hemostatic agent such as commer-
aspirate of this mass could induce unacceptable complications such
cially available collagen or gelatin. Box 14-4 illustrates the use of a
as hemorrhage or pneumothorax so an excisional biopsy is preferred,
punch biopsy instrument.
either by thoracoscopy or exploratory thoracotomy. Other examples
of tumors that lend themselves to excisional biopsy are listed in
Surgical incisional biopsy
Table 14-2.
Indications for incisional biopsy are when less invasive biopsy
Advanced biopsy techniques
methods yield a non-diagnosis or misdiagnosis, or when the sample
to be biopsied is associated with a high proportion of ulceration,
sopua Kdossoong 'ln io 'punosenin) saniuyoat paping aseul
necrosis and inflammation that can penetrate deep beyond the surface.
aiouo yo ainpaoid aul uao aie (Adossoriou pue Adossoiedel Kdo
An example of such a mass is an oral neoplasm such as a basal cell
for specifc tumor types (e.g. gastric mucosal, nasal masses, intermal
carcinoma or fbrosarcoma. Often these masses are denervated and
 Organs). General benefits include improved accuracy and reduced
a general anesthetic for the incisional biopsy procedure is not
morbidity with minimally invasive techniques. More details of the use
necessary.
of these techniques on certain tumors are described in other indi-
The procedure is simply carried out with a scalpel blade, under
vidual chapters of this book.
aseptic conditions. If performed in the skin it is preferable to include
a portion of normal tissue in addition to the mass that is being
sampled. The subsequent deficit can be sutured or left to heal by
SURGERY FOR CANCER
secondary intention after hemorrhage has been controlled. An impor-
 tant aspect of performing an incisional biopsy is to ensure that future 
surgery is not compromised by contaminating unaffected tissues or
Despite the increased use and accessibility of chemotherapy and
performing the biopsy in a plane that would later make further resec-
au sunean jo sueau jualeaaid isou aui ls si Aiagins Kdeiauopei
tion and closure diffcult.
majority of feline cancers. Surgery can be used in a number of different
areas of cancer management, ranging from diagnosis and effecting a
Excisional biopsy
cure, to palliating or preventing cancer.
In the majority of cancer cases a presurgical biopsy is preferable to an
Surgery to diagnose cancer
excisional biopsy: however, in some specifc situations performing an
excisional biopsy is acceptable if the ultimate treatment plan would
Surgery for diagnosis (eg., incisional or excisional biopsy) is discussed
not be altered without knowledge of the tumor type beforehand. An
above, but it is important to emphasize that obtaining a preoperative
 Example of this would be a solitary lung mass. Indeed, performing an
diagnosis is desirable in most cases. Once information regarding
145
Section
3
 Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
aware of all risks relating to the surgery and the ultimate prognosis.
Box 14-5 Questions to consider prior to
The final decision in these cases must be left to the owners, who
oncological surgery
ultimately must give informed consent to the treatment, based on
there being some benefit to the patient in terms of improvement of
1. Is surgery indicated?
clinical signs and quality of life and/or temporary restoration of func-
2. Would a cure be likely?
tion.!l It is important to note that debulking of a tumor (i.e, partial
3.1
What surgical margins are required?
removal) without any clear, perceived benefits or follow-up treatment
4. What surgical planning is indicated for any reconstruction?
is not a recommended palliative procedure as tumor growth following
 5. Is adjunctive treatment either before or after surgery an option?
surgery can sometimes be accelerated.
6. Is surgery feasible, in terms of surgeon capability or facilities 
available?
Surgery to prevent or reduce the risk
of cancer
Surgery can be used to prevent certain cancers. Although rarely
Box 14-6 Halsted's principles of surgery
reported in cats, testicular tumor development can be prevented by
castration and the risk of uterine tumors is prevented by ovariohyster-
 Gentle tissue handling
ectomy, although a report of an incomplete ovariohysterectomy with
 Strict aseptic technique during preparation and surgery
subsequent uterine adenocarcinoma development in a cat has been
 Sharp anatomic dissection of tissues 
described.12 Additionally, ovariohysterectomy/ovariectomy has a pro-
 Careful hemostasis
phylactic effect on mammary neoplasia in cats. Cats spayed before 1l
year of age have a significantly decreased risk of developing mammary
Obliteration of dead space
carcinoma, with cats spayed before 6 months of age having only
Avoidance of tension 
9% the risk of mammary carcinoma compared with intact cats. Cats
spayed between 6 and 12 months had 14% the risk compared with
Buaey sie ui paodai uaaq aaey seuouiie taamoh et'she ioeiu
tumor type and perhaps grade is obtained and further clinical staging
ovariohysterectomies before l year of age so neutering does not com-
is completed it is worth considering the following questions prior to
pletely eliminate the risk. 14
surgery (Box 14-5).
Whatever the mode of use of surgery, a key element for success is
 dependent on the surgeon adhering to good basic principles of tech-
SURGICAL PRINCIPLES
nique, based on those developed by Halsted in the 1890s (Box 14-6).
The biopsy procedure should be performed in such a manner that
future surgery is not compromised.For example, an incisional biopsy
Surgical margins
incision should be planned and orientated in a plane that would make
 It is clear from the literature that there are a number of feline tumors
excision of the scar at the definitive surgery simple. Another example
where survival is correlated with attainment of clean margins. A study
is ensuring that the needle core biopsy instrument is inserted in a way
investigating prognosis for injection site sarcomas in cats showed that
that would minimize seeding or contamination of tumor cells through
tumors with histologically infltrative margins recurred ten times more
normal tissue planes.
evaluating colonic malignancies in cats showed that obtaining clean
Surgery to treat cancer
u' ans pd m pea sm as y sui
However, when reviewing the literature in cats there is a paucity of
aui auuaap ieut siopey suuanyu ileu omi aq ot eadde aiau
evidence recommending specific margin measurements for individual
success of surgery as a defnitive treatment for cancer: performing
tumor types and most data is extrapolated from canine or human
appropriate surgery at the frst attempt and obtaining'clean' margins.
studies. One study reviewing injection site sarcomas in cats advocated
ie, removing margins of normal tissue in adition to the main tumor
lateral margins of 5 cm to reduce local recurrence rates.17 However,
mass. Performing surgery based on a diagnosis ensures that there is a
this amount would be excessive for tumors such as squamous cell
higher probability of complete excision at the frst surgery and there-
carcinoma ofe.g. the pinna or nasal planum, which are often success-
fore a higher probability of a potential cure.Furthermore, performing
fully excised using margins of approximately 1 cm. Recommendations
surgery on an undisrupted tumor improves the surgeon's ability to
regarding deep margins are also generic across species. Ofen tumors
assess the gross margins and reduces the risk of tumor extension into
lie over naturally resistant anatomical barriers such as fascia, ligaments
normal tissue planes.
and tendons that are resistant to tumor spread and therefore if a fascial
 plane is included in the deep margin this would normally be consid.
ered suffcient as an adequate surgical margin.
Surgery to palliate cancer
 There are four basic types of tumor resection depending upon the
When performing cancer surgery consideration must be given as to
location of the surgical margin: intracapsular, marginal, wide, and
whether the procedure is of long-term benefit to the patient or whether
radical (Table 14-3. Fig. 14-4).
the risks of the procedure or postoperative complications outweight
these potential benefits. This debate is even more significant when.
Surgical techniques
from the outset it is known that cure or long-lasting benefits are not
 possible In these cases surgery would be performed for short-term
Good basic surgical principles should befollowed in oncologic surgery
palliation of clinical signs (e.g., in cases where metastatic disease is
(Box 14-6). The skin around the tumor should be clipped widely to
 present). Each case must be considered on its own merit with careful
ensure adequate skin for reconstruction and the skin overlying the
tumor prepared gently to avoid excessive handling of the tumor. It is
146
Oncological surgery
Chapter
14
Table 14-3 Categories of surgical tumor/mass resection
 Box 14-7 Principles of oncological surgery
Type of
Description
Examples of suitable
● Use stay sutures on the tumor to avoid unnecessary contact with
resection
tumors
 surgeon's hand or instruments. Stay sutures can also be applied to
normal surrounding tissue to provide retraction without contact of
Intracapsular
 Removal of the mass
Benign conditions, 
 potentially contaminated instruments or gloves
or tumor from within 
recurrence unlikely, e.g..
Pack off the tumor with laparotomy sponges or sterile adhesive
the capsule
abscess, cyst
drapes. The tumor can actually be wrapped in the sponges or
Marginal 
Removal of the tumor
Benign masses, e.g..
paaape s! buuey jewiuwu jeut os sadeap
through the reactive
lipoma, benign cutaneous 
 Change gloves and instruments after tumor resection before
 zone including capsule 
 mast cell tumors, thyroid 
closing the wound. This is particularly necessary with highly
/ pseudocapsule
adenoma
exfoliative tumors such as those derived from epithelial cells 
 Avoid excessive hemorrhage by judicious use of electrocautery and
Wide
 Removal of the tumor
Malignant tumors, e.g..
ensuring the vascular supply to the tumor is interrupted as quickly
with the
mammary gland carcinoma.
 as possible during the resection process. Ligating the arterial 
pseudocapsule,
colonic adenocarcinoma
supply of the tumor is recommended before the vascular supply is
including the reactive
interrupted to allow collapse of the venous supply within the 
 zone and a margin of
normal tissue
 ligation of arteries and veins should be avoided 
Radical
Removal of the tumor
 Malignant tumors that
Use sharp rather than blunt dissection to minimize surrounding
en bloc with the tissue
have traversed through
 trauma. There has been some evidence suggesting that tissue that
compartment within
multiple tissue planes, e.g..
which it lies
mandibulectomy for
lossis oi algeaaad ane suoisu! adiens sllan lount paueidu
squamous cell carcinoma,
incisions as they result in the least amount of trauma and 
body wall resection for
 surrounding necrosis
fibrosarcoma
 Avoid entry into the tumor capsule/pseudocapsule. Grasping the 
tumor with traumatic forceps can cause bleeding and exfoliation
of tumor cells so should be avoided 
 Perform 'clean' ('non-tumor') surgeries before excision of the
tumor to avoid cross contamination of tumor cells, e.g. perform
ovariectomy prior to mammary gland carcinoma excision 
which may include fne needle aspirate, needle core aspirate Or
ba
incisional/excisional biopsy. It has been shown that FNA of lymph
nodes shows excellent correlation with histologic findings, with a
sensitivity and specifcity of 100% and 96%, respectively.7 Therefore
if lymph nodes associated with the tumor are examined for staging
 purposes only then a fine needle aspirate should suffice in the major-
ity of cases.
 The question that is more controversial is whether routine removal
Figure 14-4 Diagram illustrating a feline soft tissue sarcoma and the 
of lymph nodes associated with tumor is required in all cases. The
different types of metastases that can occur. T, tumor; R, reactive zone;
exact role of local, draining lymph nodes in preventing further spread
P pseudocapsule; S, skip metastases; Sa, satellite metastases.
of micro-metastasis is not clear, and their routine removal in onco-
n ym suau aq iuuap aq e u Au Aans 
[eiins aul tuseaun pue Aaaeiadoisod uoouny sioounm
-ndjueu pue eunen pioae oi Aagins ianues u jueoduui Aueinojued
morbidity. There is no strong evidence therefore to suggest that exci-
lation of the tumor, which could lead to dissemination of tumor cells
sion of regional lymph nodes in oncologic surgery should be per-
locally and systemically. The surgeon should consider the principles
formed in every case, particularly if the lymph nodes are not enlarged.
of cancer surgery to be similar to those of contaminated surgery and
However, if the regional lymph nodes are enlarged, accessible and able
precautions should be taken to avoid contact of the tumor, instru-
 ments or gloves with surrounding normal tissue The following prin-
morbidity, then removal may be beneficial in terms of staging and
ciples apply frstly to reduce manipulation of the tumor and secondly
reduction of total tumor burden, particularly if postoperative adjunc-
anss supunons jeou woy oun au jo uoniedas ueueu o
tive treatment is considered and the lymph nodes are in close approxi-
(Box 14-7).
nodes are routinely removed 'en bloc' (ie, in combination with the
Surgery and regional lymph nodes
-piesai uoeoju [ela supiaoid '(seqdual suuiep pue noum
ing prognosis for that patient. Other examples include excisional
biopsy of mesenteric lymph nodes in cases of unconfrmed intestinal
lymph nodes for the purpose of removing metastatic disease is con-
neoplasia, tracheobronchial lymph node excision in cases of pulmo-
troversial in both human and veterinary medicine. All accessible
nary neoplasia, popliteal lymph nodes removal in digital tumor
 regional lymph nodes should be investigated with malignant tumors.
excision.
147
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
SURGICAL PATHOLOGY SUBMISSION FORM
Extcrnal()
Internal (X)
Hospital number: _H11/4975
 Species Feline
Breed
Domestie Short hair
Name
Molly.
Age
5yr
Gender: F(x)
M()
Entire () Neutered (x) Unknown ()
Clinician:
I Demetrou
Address:
Cat clinie
Phone number:
 E -mail addrcss:
Owner:
Smith
Address:
Phone number:
E-mail addrcss:
OR STICK LABEL HERE
Specimen submitted : Subcutaneous mas
Date and time taken: _27" July 2011
Fresh tissue ( x) Fixcd tissue ( ) Fixative
Anatomical site of lesion: lateral thorax_
Completely removed (x)
 Incompletely removed ()
Relevant clinical history (clinical signs, significant haematology and biochemistry, radiology, therapy, duration. Lesion
or tissue descriplion: size, shapc, colour, appcarance and distribulion):
Three month listory ofaslow growing 2 m massin the subeuaneus tisues verlying the right hracic cavity. Appears to he moveable and non painful on palpatin.
All thelinical parat arewitinormallmits revis eneee aspirat uggesting ofMast CelTumour Rmved with latal mgins and fasiall
deep.
Suture tags placed on cranial and ventral tumour margins.
Deep margins inked
Special concerns (Rcqucsts, rulc ou1s, proccdures):
Lrgent ( ) Routine (x)
 Please check the tagged lateral and inked deep margins
Submitting Clinician (Print name and signature): J. Demetriou_
Date: 27" July 2012
Figure 14-5 An example of a fully completed histopathology form, providing the pathologist with as much detail as possible
148
Oncological surgery
Chapter
14
Surgery in combination with chemotherapy
Handling of the excised tumor
 and/or radiotherapy
All excised masses should be submitted for histologic examination.
Over the past few years in veterinary oncology there has been a drive
Ideally the entire sample is submitted to allow assessment of margins
to treat cancer patients using a multidisciplinary approach. This
and to ensure representative sections are examined. If the entire
(yiq io) iauiia Aq papanaid io pamoioy Aiasins Buisn sapnou!
sample cannot be submitted then representative samples are submit-
chemotherapy radiotherapy or immunotherapy. The advantage of this
ted, but the remaining tissue should be stored in-house in case further
ano ieains e uause uo paseld si siseydua ssal ieu s! upeoidde
samples are needed for re-submission at a later date. Representative
in tumors that have an innate sensitivity to chemotherapy and radio-
sections selected from a large sample should include portions from
therapy, thereby potentially reducing the extent of surgery and as a
the periphery and the centre of the mass, including portions of
result morbidity and complication rates. The aim of postoperative
normal tissue in the peripheral samples. The most commonly used
treatment is to target microscopic disease after the bulk of the tumor
fixative agent is 10% neutral buffered formalin. Sections should be
has been removed. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy are thought 
not be thicker than l cm, otherwise the fixative agent will not pene-
to be effective postoperatively, once the tumor burden has been
trate adequately. The volume of tissue to fixative should ideally be
excised, because the remaining rapidly dividing cells may be more
1: 10. When margins are to be assessed, suture tags or India ink
sensitive compared with the slowly dividing cells in the gross tumor
suisn uam uau jo sui a ap io y on pasn aq u
m sadi roum uehan jo puauea 'siauan iseiads Aue u 'ss
tissue dye the margins are allowed to stand for several minutes so
cytoreductive surgery followed by radiotherapy is routine and has
 excessive moisture is removed (altermatively, the edges are gently
resulted in good long-term clinical outcomes with minimal morbidity.
 blotted with a swab) and the ink is applied to the cut surface using a
For example, soft tissue sarcomas arising on the limb are excised
 swab or cotton buds. The sample is then dried before being fixed in
conservatively, with the aim being to remove gross tumor with a
formalin.18
tension-free closure and radiotherapy is commenced once the wound
oy ppiaoid si aqissod se uoeoul ynu se ieun leha si 1 
 has healed within two to three weeks of surgery. Preoperatively, radio-
the histopathologist and margin assessment and tumor grade
therapy or chemotherapy can be administered to reduce the tumor to
requested routinely when appropriate A detailed history, clinical
a size that is more amenable to complete surgical excision, and preop-
findings and any other relevant information should be given to allow
erative radiotherapy has been used with succes in cases of large injec-
the pathologist to provide as accurate and detailed information as
 possible. If possible the tumor and any associated surrounding struc-
tures can be drawn on the form, indicating areas of concern and
dependent. Further details on adjunctive treatment in multimodal
orientation. An example of a histopathology form is provided in
cancer treatment are discussed in Chapters 15 and 16.
Figure 14-5.
 REFERENCES
1.
.MacVean Dw, Monlux AW, Anderson PS
infiltrative hepatic disease. I Fel Med Surg
metastasis in an ovariohysterectomised
Jr, et al. Frequency of canine and feline 
1999:1:215-20.
cat. J Fel Med Surg 2011;13:44-7.
tumors in a defned population. Vet Path
Langenbach A, McManus PM, Hendrick
13.
Overley B, Shofer FS, Goldschmidt
1978;15:700-15.
 MJ. Sensitivity and specificity of methods
MH, et al. Association between
2. Vascellari M, Baioni E, Ru G, et al. Animal 
 of assessing the regional lymph nodes for
owariohysterectomy and feline mammary
tumour registry of two provinces in
evidence of metastasis in dogs and cats
arcinoma. J Vet Int Med 2005;19:
 northern Italy: incidence of spontaneous
with solid tumors. J Am Vet Med Assoc
560-63.
tumours in dogs and cats. Biomedcentral
2001;218:1424-8.
14.
.Hayes AA, Mooney S. Feline mammary
Veterinary Research 2009;5:39. http://
8. Vignoli M, Ohlerth S, Rossi F, et al.
tumors. Vet Clin of N Amer: Sm Anim
www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/
 Computed tomography-guided fine-
Pract 1985;15:513-20.
5/39.
needle aspiration and tissue-core biopsy
15. Giudice C, Stefanello D, Sala M, et al.
3. Gimenez F, Hecht S, Craig LE, Legendre
of bone lesions in small animals. Vet Rad
 Feline injection-site sarcoma: recurrence.
AM. Early detection, aggressive therapy.
Ultrasound 2004;45:125-30.
umor grading and surgical margin status
Optimizing the management of feline
9. Zekas Ll, Crawford JT, O'Brien RT.
evaluated using the three-dimensional
mammary masses. I Fel Med Surg
 Computed tomography-guided fne-
histological technique. Vet J 2010;186:
2010;12:214-24.
 needle aspirate and tissue-core biopsy of
84-8.
4. Seixas F Palmeira C, Pires MA, et al.
intrathoracic lesions in thirty dogs and cats.
16. Slawienski MJ, Mauldin GE, Mauldin GN,
 Grade is an independent prognostic factor
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:200-4.
Patnaik AK. Malignant colonic neoplasia
 for feline mammary carcinomas: A
10. Aitken ML, Patnaik AK. 2000 Comparison
in cats: 46 cases [1990-1996). I Am Vet
clinicopathological and survival analysis.
 of needle-core (Trucut) biopsy and
Med Assoc 1997;211:878-81.
Vet J 2011;187:65-71.
surgical biopsy for the diagnosis of
17.
Phelps HA, Kuntz CA, Milner RJ, et al.
5.
.Ballegeer EA, Forrest L), Dickinson RM,
cutaneous and subcutaneous masses: a
Radical excision with five-centimeter
et al. Correlation of ultrasonographic
 prospective study of 51 cases [November
 margins for treatment of feline injection-
appearance of lesions and cytologic and
1997-August 1998). J Am Anim Hosp
site sarcomas: 91 cases [1998-2002). 1 Am
histologic diagnoses in splenic aspirates 
Assoc 2000;36:153-7.
Vet Med Assoc 2011;239:97-106.
from dogs and cats: 32 cases [2002-2005].
11.
 Moore As. Managing cats with cancer. An
18.
 Ehrhart EJ, Powers BE. The Pathology of
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:690-6.
 Examination of ethical perspectives. J Fel
Neoplasisa, In: Withrow Sl, Vail DM.
6.
.Willard MD, Weeks BR, Johnson M.
Med Surg 2011;13:661-71.
 editors. Small Animal Clinical Oncology.
 Fine-needle aspirate cytology suggesting
12.
Anderson C, Pratschke K. Uterine
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007.
hepatic lipidosis in four cats with
adenocarcinoma with abdominal
p. 54-67.
149
te
Radiation therapy
J.M. Dobson
 The treatment of cancer must always be tailored to suit the individual
Radiation biology
case, taking into consideration the biology, histology, grade and extent
of the tumor, and the general condition and health concerns of the
The response of living cels and tissues to radiation depends upon the
patient. The decision to treat an animal with cancer must be made
dose of radiation, how this is applied, and the radiosensitivity of the
jointly by the veterinarian and the owner. Owners must be counseled
cell population. Radiosensitivity varies according to a number of
in the nature of the disease, the prognosis, the options for treatment
-jey ymoig, ay suaq jueodi isou ayljo auo fi-51 xog) sioey
0l au uaig aq pinous pue 'quanean ypns jo suonepadxa aul pue
tion' of the cell population. Small, rapidly growing tumors tend to
consider the options and reach a decision.
Bumoia Amos aiel ueu uoei on Aiqenoaey anou puodsai
For most solid tumors the two main therapeutic considerations are
tumors. Radiation treatment is unlikely to achieve more than a partial
how best to achieve local (and regional) control and what is the risk
and temporary remission in the latter.
of metastasis. Local disease treatment options generally include
surgery or radiation or both, whereas adjuvant chemotherapy must be
it is not selective and can be equally damaging to normal tissues;
considered for systemic or multifocal disease or if the risk of metas-
than many tumors. In order to be of therapeutic beneft, radiation
tasis is high.
 Radiotherapy (RT) is widely used in the treatment of human cancer
must be employed in such a way as to minimize normal tissue injury
patients and although costly, radiotherapy facilities are becoming
whilst achieving maximum tumor cell kill. Various methods may be
increasingly available to treat animals. Most veterinarians in general
 employed to localize the radiation to the tumor, as outlined later in
practice will not have direct access to radiotherapy facilities; however.
this chapter.
it is important to have some knowledge of the principles and practice
 One way to reduce normal tissue injury is to 'fractionate' the treat-
of radiation therapy in order that suitable cases might be identifed
 ment Following exposure to a single dose of radiation a number of
and referred at an appropriate stage.
paai uaa are ieue 'uoendod an pasoa au un sna satu
to as the four 'R's' of radiation (Box 15-2).
As normal tissues are able to repair and repopulate better than
pue (aoh lan aul punoie) uonqsan se pue siou iso
THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF RADIATION
PHYSICS AND BIOLOGY
in multiple small doses (fractions) over a long period of time rather
than as one large dose, normal tissue injury is reduced and tumor cell
The mode of action of radiation
kill increased.
 The biological effect of radiation depends on the amount of radia-
When absorbed by living tissues, ionizing radiation causes excitation
tion applied and length of time over which it is applied, hence the
and ionization of component atoms or molecules in the path of the
term biological radiation dose: The same total dose given in a short
beam. Subsequent chemical reactions result in breaking of molecular
time or fewer fractions has greater effect than the same dose given
bonds and can result in apoptotic cell death if molecules critical for 
asuodsau ioun qioq ol saldde) suoey Aueu ul aun ianuol e 1aao
cell viability are disrupted. The 'critical target' is generally regarded as
and toxicity). Fraction size is an important determinant of normal
being nuclear DNA, but other molecules in other parts of the cell (eg.
tissue damage. Small fractions minimize normal tissue effects, large
proteins and lipids) may also be damaged and contribute to radiation-
fractions increase risk of late tissue effects. Overall treatment time is
induced cellular injury. The damage to DNA prevents normal cell 
important in achieving tumor control. Thus by using multiple small
replication but does not lead to immediate cell death; the radiation
fractions of radiation delivered over a long period of time tumor cell
damage is manifest when the damaged cells attempt to divide. Hence
 kill may be increased whilst normal tissue damage can be limited to
radiation tumor response and toxicity appear delayed.
some extent.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00015-9
151
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
 Box 15-1 Factors that cause variation in radiosensitivity
SOURCES OF RADIATION USED
FOR THERAPY
 Dividing cells are generally more sensitive to radiation than non-
 dividing. differentiated cells
Tissues with a high proportion of dividing cells, e.g.. bone marrow
 A variety of ionizing radiations may be used for therapeutic purposes
including
 and gastrointestinal epithelium, are more radiosensitive than 
non-proliferating tissues, e.g. fibrous tissue and skeletal muscle
X-rays
Tumors with a high growth fraction tend to be more sensitive to
gmma-rays
radiation than those with low growth fractions 
electrons.
 Individual cells vary in their radiosensitivity as they pass through the
 There are essentially two techniques for the application of radiation
phases of the cell cycle. Cells in the M (mitotic) phase of the cycle
to tumors:
being most radiosensitive and those in the S (DNA synthesis)
 Teletherapy: radiation is applied in the form of an external
phase being most resistant. The resting (Go) cells are also
 beam of X-rays, gamma-rays or electrons that are directed into 
radioresistant (Fg. 15-1)
the tumor
Oxygenation is also thought to be significant in determining
radiosensitivity. Tumor cells that exist at a low oxygen tension, i.e.
 Brachytherapy radioactive substances, which emit gamma or
hypoxic cells, may be 2.5-3 times less sensitive to radiation than
beta rays, may be applied to the surface of a tumor, implanted
normally oxygenated cells
within the tumor or administered systemically to the patient.
 Each technique has advantages and disadvantages. Whilst extermal
Radio-resistant
s ia an 'ao au o aes aaan si au 
expensive to purchase and maintain and multiple doses of radiation
are required over a four to six week course of treatment. Brachytherapy
 often offers better localization of the radiation and permits the deliv.
DNA synthesis
ery of high doses of radiation to the tumor with minimal normal
tissue toxicity. However, the implant and the implanted patient
S
present a radiation hazard for the operator and any staff caring for the
G2
patient. Radioactive isotopes can only be used on licensed premises
and strict local rules for handling the isotope and patient must be
M Mitosis
 Radio-sensitive
applied. Both techniques require careful planning in consultation
with medical physicists to ensure the required dose of radiation is
delivered to the tumor.
G1
Radio-resistant
[Go)
External beam methods
Resting phase
Various devices exist for generating and delivering radiation to tissues
(Box 15-3).
 Figure 15-1 The cell cycle and relative radiosensitivity.
With external beam radiation, the beam can be collimated to the
area of the tumor and several treatment ports employed in order to
reduce the amount of entry and exit beam radiation affecting the sur-
rounding normal tissues. The prescription and planning of such treat-
Box 15-2 The 4 'R's' of radiation
ment is facilitated by three-dimensional computerized treatment
planning programs (Fig. 15-3). Multi-leaf collimators allow complex
·Repair
planning and shaping of the radiation feld to the defined target
 Redistribution
volume Intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) allows multiple
 Repopulation 
+
Re-oxygenation
 Box 15-3 External radiation generators
Linear accelerators produce high energy (megavoltage), deeply
 At the present time most radical (i.e., definitive, with intent to cure)
penetrating radiation that spares the skin and superficial tissues.
Photon beam energies range from 4-20 MV. Some linear 
daily treatments over a period of four to six weeks. In animals, where
accelerators produce electron beams, which have a defined range
 general anesthesia is required for restraint of the patient during treat-
in tissue with a sharp cut-off point at which they deliver their
ment and where radiation facilities are less widely available, larger
uo suoisal anssi los buieai oi paiins aiou waun buyeu xbiaua
weekly or biweekly fractions may be used in a more palliative
chest and abdominal walls and on limbs. Linear accelerators are
approach. However, many centers do use definitive schedules, eg..
the mainstay of radiotherapy services in most human hospitals 
Monday-Wednesday-Friday protocols or daily fractions over several
(Fig. 15-2)
weeks.
Orthovoltage units produce lower energy (kilovoltage), softer
 In brachytherapy. where implants are placed within the tumor
volume, fractionation is not required. Instead the total dose is deliv-
for treatment of superficial tumors 
 pue sueidul oy saep inoy oi aanun alensn 'sauunl jo pouad e iao paia
Cobalt units, housing a radioactive source (Cobalt-60) have been
up to two to three weeks for systemically administered isotopes, eg..
replaced by linear accelerators
radioactive iodine (13'1) for thyroid tumors in cats.
152
Radiation therapy
Chapter
15
DV
L.lat
Rllat
tumor
<Spinal cord 
Figure 15-2 Linear accelerator. This unit, installed in the Cancer Therapy
Unit at Cambridge Veterinary School, produces a 6 MV photon beam
of an intranasal tumor.
differently shaped photon beams to be effectively 'painted' onto the
tumor, allowing higher doses of radiation to be delivered to the tumor
with no increase in the dose delivered to normal tissue. More recent
developments in radiotherapy include tomotherapy, which is a form
 of IMRT that uses a helical delivery system. Stereotactic radiosurgery
describes a technique where multiple, highly targeted beams of radia-
DY
D auo Alensnj siuauean lamay ui sasop aiel u paanap aie uon
five). Radiosurgery may be delivered by a 'gamma-knife' which uses
technology similar to IMRT, or a free standing 'Cyberknife: Tomo-
u Aiapim pasn uaaq iou aaey aainsiei oneioaans pue Adeia
veterinary medicine to date, although there are some reports of radio-
11
C1
surgery in the treatment of brain tumors.
Spinal cord 
INDICATIONS FOR AND USE OF RADIATION
 IN FELINE TUMORS
 The main indication for radiation in the treatment of feline tumors is
for malignant tumors that, by virtue of their size or site, cannot be
controlled by surgery alone. Radiation is most effective and least toxic
when used as a local treatment for superficial tumors or those on the
B
extremities of the body. Because of the difficulties in localization and
the risk of toxicity, tumors sited in the chest, abdomen or pelvis are
Figure 15-3 Computer generated treatment plan for preoperative
 uaa an l si u uin r a a n
radiotherapy of an intrascapular feline injection site sarcoma (FIss). The
use of three perpendicular beams (green lines) allows the radiation to be
thymoma and thymic lymphoma). It is desirable that local and/or
'focused' into the tumor volume (red line), whilst sparing the surrounding
distant metastases are not present, although local lymph nodes can
 be included in the treatment felds. Benign tumors are often not very
normal tissues to a degree. The white lines are the isodose levels
predicted by the computer program. The blue line is the tissue equivalent
radiosensitive, and, because radiation is potentially carcinogenic,
bolus used to ensure that superficial tumor receives the required dose of
 other means of treatment should always be sought to manage such
nowe aul anpan on pasn ,sabpam, ae sabuen uan aul uoeie
tumors.
of radiation dorsally, where the tumor is narrower. The orange line 
 Tumor volume is one of the most important factors in determining
represents the whole cross-section of the cat.
loy leiauag pue (aaoqe pauieldxa se) uoneipei ci asuodsai ioun
most solid tumors, surgery is the best approach. Radiation may be
used as a single means of therapy for tumors that are not amenable
153
Section
3
 Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
adenocarcinoma or pituitary macroadenoma. However, radiation is
probably most effective when used as an adjunct to surgery for local-
ized, microscopic disease.
Radiation may be combined with surgery in the management of
selected tumors that cannot be treated adequately by surgery alone,
eg. soft tissue sarcomas on distal limbs. Radiation can be used prior
to, during. or following surgery. Postoperative radiation is the most
common method of combining these two modalities. Intentional
cytoreductive surgery reduces the tumor burden to microscopic levels
leaving small numbers of well oxygenated and rapidly proliferating
cells that, in theory, should be sensitive to radiation. Radiation will,
however, delay the healing of the surgical wound and must either be
commenced immediately following surgery or once the wound has
healed. It is important that radiation and surgery should be combined
 Figure 15-4 Superficial squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum.
as a carefully planned therapeutic strategy and that the radiation
oncologist should be consulted in the management of the case from
the outset. The use of radiation as an after-thought to salvage inade-
canine intranasal carcinoma to radiation therapy, there are very few
quate surgery is fraught with diffculties in planning and application
reports on treatment and survival of cats with nasal carcinoma. Eight
and this practice is strongly discouraged.
cats, the majority with nasal adenocarcinoma, were treated with
 Recently preoperative radiation therapy has been shown to be valu-
coarsely fractionated radiotherapy (four times weekly fractionsto total
able in the management of feline injection site sarcoma (FISS)
of 36 Gy) and achieved a median survival time of 382 days, with a
(Chapter 22).
 one year survival rate of 63%. A similar response was seen in 16 cats
treated with a four week Monday-Wednesday-Friday protocol to a
minimum of 48 Gy which achieved a one year survival rate of 44%.4
RESPONSE OF SPECIFIC FELINE TUMORS
Nasal planum squamous cell cardnoma
TO RADIOTHERAPY
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the nasal planum (Fig. 15-4) is a
Lymphoma
cially in sunny climates, and this may be managed in a number of
Lymphoma is the most common tumor to affect cats, and whilst many
different ways depending on the stage or extent of the tumor. Early
Tis (carcinoma in situ) or T1 (non-invasive) tumors are amenable to
forms of this disease are systemic or multicentric and thus more ame-
nable to treatment with chemotherapy, lymphoma is highly radiosen-
sitive. Thus radiotherapy should be considered as a treatment option
photodynamic therapy, or topical application of an immunomodula-
for solitary extranodal forms of lymphoma, e.g. nasal and thymic
tory agent (Aldara - Imiquimod).5 Although superficial radiation may
be effective in the management of such tumors, a prolonged fraction-
lymphoma. There are very few published studies in the veterinary
literature that document the response of extranodal lymphoma
ated course of extermal beam therapy using either orthovoltage radia-
tion or electrons seems unnecessarily complex and expensive, when
therapy (radiation and chemotherapy). so it is difficult to advise
other quicker and simpler treatments areequally effective Strontium-90
which option confers greatest survival benefit. A recent study that
 plesiotherapy can be used to deliver total radiation doses up to 50 Gy
in fewer fractions and has been reported to achieve an 85% complete
-0oud ,'sio z aes pey yoium jo 11 ' 51 u ae1 asuodsa
alone (various protocols), chemotherapy alone, or radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, failed to show any significant difference in survival
dynamic therapy (PDT), using a topical application of the photo-
between the three treatment groups, with a median survival time
sensitizer 5-amino-levulinic acid (5ALA) followed by 30 minutes'
g ue p ose  an a uu e y u!
regardless of therapy of 536 days. There was a suggestion that higher
doses of radiation lead to better local tumor control, hence in theory
 complete response rate in 55 cats with Tis-T2 tumors. As PDT causes
increasing chance of survival. Similar survival times (median survival
no local tissue injury and is repeatable, this method is the author's
749 days) were reported in 49 cats in the UK with nasal lymphoma
preferred first choice for treatment of cats with non-invasive nasal
planum SCC (Fig. 15-5). Once tumors become invasive, they are
 of feline nasal lymphoma remains a point of debate amongst veteri-
refractory to superfcial treatments and surgical resection is the only
nary oncologists.
effective treatment (see Chapter 54).
 Radiotherapy can be used to produce a rapid response in cats with
thymic lymphoma and may also be used in combination with surgery
Oral squamous cell carcinoma
in treatment of thymoma (see Chapter 44), although most cats with
thymoma do well with surgery alone.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common tumor of the feline
 oral cavity, representing up to 80% of alltumors arising in the mouth
 of cats. Tumors may arise in the mandibular or maxillary gingiva or
Nasal tumors
at the base of the tongue (Fig. 15-6). Mandibular and maxillary
tumors tend to be very invasive and destructive of the underlying
Nasal adenocardnoma
bone, and on occasion can stimulate a significant bony reaction (Fig.
Nasal carcinoma commonly affects the nasal cavity of the cat; usually
15-7). Lingual tumors frequently invade into the tissue of the tongue
adenocarcinoma. This is distinct from the sunlight-induced squamous
and cause significant morbidity (Fig. 15-8). Although SCC per se is a
cell carcinoma of the nasal planum, which will also be discussed. In
reasonably radiosensitive tumor, the extent of the tumor and the
jo asuodsai uoeipei gunuaunop sodan shoiaunu aul oi iseiuo
associated normal tissue invasion/destruction that is often present at
154
Radiation therapy
Chapter
15
Figure 15-5 Early T1 squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum,
Figure 15-8 Squamous cell carcinoma at base of tongue.
which is suitable for treatment by topical photodynamic treatment.
Figure 15-6 Maxillary squamous cell carcinoma.
Figure 15-9 Gross appearance of interscapular feline injection site
 sar coma.
the time of diagnosis preclude successful treatment of such lesions.
 There are reports describing the use of orthovoltage or megavoltage
radiation in the treatment of feline oral SCC with or without chemo-
therapy or surgery but response rates are low and survival times short,
median 60-86 days.&9
Feline injection site sarcoma
 In veterinary medicine the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma by a com-
bination of surgical resection (Chapter 22) followed by local adjuvant
radiation has become accepted as an effective method for manage-
ment of those tumors arising at sites where wide surgical resection is
ahs uoaln aua, au ies an ul sql iis "e'a 'aaisay iu
sarcoma (FISS) or 'vaccine-associated' sarcoma (VAS), which most
commonly arises in the dorsal neck/interscapular region, is recog-
nized to be a particularly aggressive, invasive form of soft tissue
sarcoma, with a high risk of local recurrence following surgery alone
(Figs 15-9 and 15-10). Various combinations of surgery and radiation
Figure 15-7 Bony reaction associated with squamous cell carcinoma of
(and chemotherapy) have been reported in the management of such
the mandible.
tumors and there is evidence that the addition of radiation reduces
155
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
therapy is arguably the treatment of choice in most cases, subject to
availability and the owner's ability to pay. 13'I is preferentially concen-
trated in the adenomatous areas of the thyroid (Chapter 8); the
normal thyroid tissue takes up very little due to normal feedback sup-
pression, making this a highly selective and effective treatment that is
not associated with significant side effects. The β (beta) particle
oey siul u oot Aquo jo aueisip aeiaae ue siaaenl lis Aq panua
guarantees local destruction and spares the surrounding normal
tissue. This is particularly relevant to the sparing effect of the parathy-
roid glands. During the whole duration of treatment the cats have to
be hospitalized for radiation protection reasons and handling of cats
during treatment has to be restricted to trained personnel. The usual
time for elimination of the radionuclide to a level that is considered
safe takes about eight to ten days. These levels are dependent on the
radiation protection regulations of the country where this treatment
is done. A single dose of 131 will return more than 95% of cats with
hyperthyroidism to persistent euthyroidism, and no ongoing thyroid
medication is required following therapy.
Figure 15-10 Magnetic resonance image of tumor shown in Fig. 15.9
These images were used to generate the treatment plan shown in
 In cats with suspected thyroid carcinoma, thyroidectomy would
be the initial treatment of choice because the diagnosis must be
Fg. 15.3
confrmed by histopathology and because complete excision can be
curative Treatment with high dose 131 is indicated in cats with non-
resectable thyroid carcinoma, evidence of metastasis, or recurrence
local recurrence rate and increases survival time. In a group of 27 cats
O1 pauinbai ane (u oe-il) lie yo sasop iauaih Kuoioapioiaul iae
with macroscopic disease or dirty margins, coarse fractionated radio-
successfully treat cats with thyroid carcinoma than are required to treat
therapy achieved a median survival of 24 months and median progres-
cats with thyroid adenoma.
sion free interval of ten months overall, and those with no macroscopic
disease (n = 17) had a median survival of 30 months.10 There is also
evidence that preoperative radiation can be particularly beneficial in
loml yidossaieu jo anuasaid al i'sioum asaul yo juauean au
TUMOR RESPONSE AND NORMAL
facilitates radiation planning and delivery (Fig. 15-3) and this is cur-
TISSUE TOXICITY
 rently the author's preferred approach.
Whilst the chemical events leading to radiation-induced damage occur
Pituitary macroadenoma
almost instantaneously, the biological expression of this injury may
take days, weeks or even years to become apparent. Radiation there-
Tumors of the brain are not common in cats. Meningiomas are one
fore appears to have delayed actions in terms of both tumor response
 of the commoner tumor types and these are usually amenable to
and normal tissue toxicity. Radiation response is therefore assessed at
surgical excision (Chapter 58), which is usually curative There are
the end of treatment and then at set time periods after this. Response
is categorized according to set criteria (Box 15-4).
indicate that radiation is effective in controlling the neurological signs
associated with a pituitary mass and can improve the clinical signs
Normal tissue toxicity
neurologic abnormalities.1213 In one study of 14 cats with insulin-
Radiation has a reputation for causing serious toxicity to the patient;
resistant diabetes melltus secondary to acromegaly treated with mega-
however, radiation sickness and severe morbidity only arise when
 sie 5i  2e jo ii e 0n yam e sa a ui a
large areas of the body or vital organs are exposed to high doses of
improved glycemic control following treatment, which was sustained
radiation. In order to avoid such side effects, radiation is rarely used
for up to 60 months.14
in this manner in the treatment of animals. Tumors most suitable for
irradiation tend to be superficial or those sited on the extremities of
Radio-iodine for hyperthyroidism
the body. The skin, superfcial connective tissues, mucous membranes
(oral tumors), and bone are therefore the tissues most commonly
Radiation in the form of brachytherapy using radioactive iodine (131)
included in the treatment feld and some radiation-induced changes
has been used extensively for the treatment of feline hyperthyroidism.
will occur in these tissues.
The majority of cases of feline hyperthyroidism are due to benign
Radiation toxicity is usually described in terms of 'acute' reactions
adenoma or adenomatous hyperplasia, and only a small 1-2% of cats
occurring during and shortly after the radiation treatment and 'late'
have malignant thyroid carcinoma. Feline hyperthyroidism may be
reactions that are not observed for weeks or even months following
managed medically (with carbimazole or methimazole) or surgically
treatment This division is not absolute Standard guidelines for the
by removal of the enlarged thyroid gland(s) (Chapter 53). However,
neither of these options is ideal. Medical management requires life-
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group and are shown in Tables 15-1
long daily medication and there can be a rapid return to the hyper-
and 15.2.15
thyroid state if medication is stopped. The majority of cats with
hyperthyroidism have bilateral thyroid involvement; surgical removal
 of both lobes of the thyroid gland can be very successful therapy but
Acute toxicity
a number of postoperative complications exist including hypopar-
Acute toxicity results from the death of actively dividing cell popula-
athyroidism and hypothyroidism (very rare). For these reasons, 131]
tions, eg. epithelium of the skin and mucous membranes. Changes
156
Radiation therapy
Chapter
15
Table 15-1 Veterinary Radiation Therapy Oncology Group acute radiation morbidity scoring scheme
Organ/tissue
D
2
3
 Skin/hair
No change
 Erythema, dry desquamation,
Patchy moist desquamation
Confluent moist desquamation
 over baseline
alopecia/epilation
without edema
with edema and/or ulceration,
necrosis, hemorrhage
Mucous
No change
Injection without mucositis
Patchy mucositis with patient
Confluent fibrinous mucositis 
membrane/oral
over baseline
seemingly pain free 
necessitating analgesia.
cavity
ulceration, hemorrhage, necrosis
Eye
No change
 Mild conjunctivitis and/or scleral
KCS requiring artificial tears,
Severe keratitis with corneal
over baseline
injection
moderate conjunctivitis or iritis
ulceration and/or loss of vision,
necessitating therapy
glaucoma
Ear
No change
 Mild external otitis with erythema,
 Moderate external otitis requiring
Severe external otitis with
over baseline
pruritis secondary to dry
topical medication
discharge and moist
desquamation not requiring therapy
desquamation
Lower 
No change
Change in quality of bowel habits
 Diarrhea requiring
Diarrhea requiring parenteral
gastrointestinal
 over baseline
not requiring medication, rectal 
parasympatholytic medication,
support, bloody discharge
tract
discomfort
rectal discomfort requiring
necessitating medical attention,
analgesia
fistula, perforation
Genito/urinary
No change
Change in frequency of urination,
 Change in frequency of urination
Gross hematuria or bladder
 over baseline
not requiring medication
necessitating medication
obstruction
Central 
No change
Minor neurologic findings not
Neurologic findings necessitating 
Serious neurologic impairment 
nervous system
 over baseline
necessitating more than
more than prednisolone therapy 
such as paralysis, coma,
prednisolone therapy
obtunded 
Lung
No change
Alveolar infiltrate, cough requiring
Dense alveolar infiltrate, cough
Dyspnea 
 over baseline
no treatment
requiring treatment
(Reproduced from Bregazzi VS, LaRue SM, Powers BE, et al. Response of feline oral squamous cell carcinoma to pallative radiation therapy. Veterinary Radiology and
Ultrasound 2001;42(1):77-9, with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)
Box 15-4 Response to radiation
Complete response (CR): complete disappearance of the tumor
 Partial response (PR): >50% reduction in the tumor mass
 No response/static disease (SD): <50% reduction in tumor mass
 Progressive disease (PD): increase in tumor mass 
range from a mild reddening or erythema of the skin/mucosa to
vesiculation, desquamation and severe exfoliative dermatitis/ necrosis
(the latter is rare). The signs usually resolve spontaneously as the
normal cell population regenerates.
Localized hair loss is a common result of irradiation of the skin in
e aa ae iu a n a  snn st s
the time of treatment but the resulting alopecia does not usually occur
until the existing hair is shed and not replaced (Figs 15-1l and 15-12).
Ultimately some hair usually regrows but this may be patchy and lack
pigmentation.
Late toxicity
 Figure 15-11 Early radiation-induced alopecia, seen at the end of a four
week course of postoperative radiotherapy following cytoreductive
This is less predictable and more serious than acute toxicity. It tends
 surgery for a spindle cell tumor, lateral antebrachium.
to occur in slowly proliferating tissues, e.g., connective tissues and
bone Changes are often progressive and irreversible Examples of late
radiation toxicity are listed in Box 15-5.
157
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
Table 15.2 Veterinary Radiation Therapy Oncology Group late radiation morbidity scoring scheme
Organ/tissue
D
2
3
 Skin/hair
None
 Alopecia, hyperpigmentation,
Asymptomatic induration (fibrosis)
 Severe induration causing physical 
leukotrichia
impairment, necrosis 
Central nervous
None
Mild neurologic signs not
 Neurologic signs necessitating more than
Seizures, paralysis, coma
system
necessitating more than
prednisolone therapy
prednisolone therapy
Eye
None
Asymptomatic cataracts, KCS
Symptomatic cataracts, keratitis, corneal
Panophthalmitis, blindness, severe
ulceration, minor retinopathy. mild to moderate 
 glaucoma, retinal detachment
glaucoma
Bone
None 
Pain on palpation
Radiographic changes
 Necrosis
Lung
None
 Patchy radiographic infiltrates
Dense radiographic infiltrates 
Symptomatic fibrosis, pneumonitis
Heart
None
ECG changes
 Pericardial effusion
 Pericardial tamponade, congestive
heart failure
Joint
None 
 Stiffness 
Decreased range of motion
Complete fixation
 Bladder
None
 Microscopic hematuria
 Pollakiuria, dysuria, hematuria
Contracted bladder
(Reproduced from Bregazzi VS, LaRue SM, Powers BE, et al. Response of feline oral squamous cell carcinoma to palliative radiation therapy. Veterinary Radiology and
Ultrasound 2001;42(1):77-9, with permission of John Wiley & Sons.)
 Box 15-5 Examples of late radiation toxicity in various
organs in cats
Skin: In the skin radiation induces fibrosis in the dermal connective 
 tissues resulting in a thickened, rubbery texture and subsequently
contraction of the skin and subcutis can occur. As a result of the
fibrosis and vascular changes, irradiated skin and soft tissues can
be very slow to heal and even the most minor surgical procedure
 can result in a non-healing. necrotic wound
Bone: Osteonecrosis leading to bone pain and pathological fracture
 is a major concern in fields containing bone, particularly in cases
where the bone is already compromised by tumor invasion 
Nervous tissue: Late reactions in nervous tissues can also be a
problem; brain and spinal cord necrosis can have serious
 consequences, irradiation of the spine should be avoided if at all
 possible as it can result in paralysis 
 Figure 15-12 Radiation-induced alopecia, eight weeks following
radiation of a fibrosarcoma of the left upper lip.
REFERENCES
Haney SM, Beaver L, Turrel J, et al.
3. Mellanby Rl, Herrtage ME, Dobson JM.
sinuses in 16 cats. I Aam Vet Med Assoc
Survival analysis of 97 cats with nasal
Long-term outcome of eight cats
1994;204(1 ):78-83.
lymphoma: a multi-institutional
with non-lymphoproliferative nasal
5.
Gill VL, Bergman PJ, Baer KE, et al. Use of
retrospective study (1986-2006). J Vet Int
tumors treated by megavoltage
5% cream (Aldara) in cats with
Med 2009;23:287-94.
radiotherapy. I Fel Med & Surg 2002;4:
multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in
2.
Taylor Ss, Goodfellow MR, Browne WJ.
77-81.
situ: 12 cases (2002-2005). Vet Comp
 et al. Feline extranodal lymphoma:
 Theon AP, Peaston AE, Madewell BR.
Oncol 2008;6:55-6.
response to chemotherapy and survival
 Dungworth DL. Iradiation of
Goodfellow M, Hayes A, Murphy S.
in 110 cats. J Small Anim Practice
nonlymphoproliferative neoplasms
Brearley M. A retrospective study of (90)
2009;50(11):584-92.
of the nasal cavity and paranasal
Strontium plesiotherapy for feline
158
Radiation therapy
Chapter
15
squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
for feline squamous cell carcinoma.
13. Brearley Ml, Polton GA, Littler RM,
planum. I Fel Med & Surg 2006;88:
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2007;48:482-5.
Niessen Sl. Coarse fractionated radiation
169-76.
10. Eckstein C, Guscetti F, Roos M, et al.
therapy for pituitary tumours in cats: a
7. Bexfeld NH, Stell Al, Gear RN, Dobson
A retrospective analysis of radiation
retrospective study of 12 cases. Vet Comp
JM.Photodynamic therapy of superf cial
 therapy for the treatment of feline
Oncol 2006;4:209-17.
 nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas
vaccine-associated sarcoma. Vet Comp
14. Dunning MD, Lowrie CS, Bexfield NH,
in cats: 55 cases. J Vet Int Med, 2008;22:
Oncol 2009;7:54-68.
et al. Exogenous insulin treatment after
1385-9.
11.
Kobayashi T, Hauck ML, Dodge R, et al.
hypofractionated radiotherapy in cats
8. Bregazzi Vs, LaRue SM, Powers BE, et al.
Preoperative radiotherapy for vaccine
with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly.
 Response of feline oral squamous cell
 associated sarcoma in 92 cats. Vet Radiol
J Vet Int Med 2009;23:243-9.
 carcinoma to palliative radiation therapy.
Ulltrasound 2002;43:473-9.
15. LaDue T, Klein MK. Toxicity criteria
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2001;42:77-9.
12.
 Mayer MN, Greco DS, LaRue SM.
 of the radiation therapy oncology
9. Fidel JL, Sellon RK., Houston RK, et al. A
 Outcomes of pituitary tumor irradiation
 group. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2001;42:
 nine-day accelerated radiation protocol 
in cats. J Vet Int Med 2006;20:1151-4.
475-6.
159
16
pter
Chemotherapy
M.J.Brearley
Although not used frequently in cats, chemotherapy can be an impor-
preventing their proliferation (cytostatic). To date there are few anti-
tant primary or adjunctive therapy in the treatment of feline cancers.
cancer drugs that are truly specific against cancer cells and therefore
However, whilst there are anecdotal comments and single case reports
their activity against normal cells also gives rise to potential toxicity.
advocating the use of anti-cancer dnugs against many cancers in cats.
 Toxicity to normal tissues is not unique to anti-cancer drugs; very few
there are only a few tumors for which efficacy has been described with
 chemicals are totally free of side effects. However, unlike anti-bacterial
any evidence base These are the lymphoid malignancies, mammary
agents, for example, that utilize the very different biology of bacterial
cancer, vaccine-associated feline sarcoma and, by intralesional admin-
versus eukaryotic cells, anti-cancer dnugs are aimed at a cell population
istration, squamous cell carcinoma of the mouth and face It is worth 
that is basically host cells doing something wrong. By a variety of
reflecting that even in human oncology there are only a few tumors
 mechanisms the therapeutic gain is the result of either more damage
that are regularly cured by chemotherapy (for example childhood
 and/or less recovery from damage, in the cancer population compared
leukemia and testicular cancer) and indeed the number of patients
with the normal host tissues. The therapeutic index, which is the ratio
with other cancers that truly benefit from cytotoxic drugs overall is
of benefit to toxicity, for most of the current anti-cancer drugs is
modest at best. The greatest progress in the treatment of cancer in
narrow and indeed the fatal dose is rarely more than double that used
humans has been by early diagnosis, effective surgical techniques and
therapeutically, thereby highlighting the need to use these medica-
radiotherapy: it is almost a certainty that this will be true in veterinary
tions with care.
 oncology also.
Hippocrates is purported to have said, 'First do no harm' and to
How anti-cancer drugs work
that end the speculative use of any treatment that can have serious
side effects on the chance that it might do some good is not to be
Most of the 'conventional' anti-cancer dnugs are cytotoxic and work
encouraged. Just as a radical chest wall resection to treat a cancer that 
by killing dividing cells (both normal and cancerous) either via
has already metastasized would never be considered, the use of a dug
 damage to DNA synthesis or to a specifc mechanism of cell division.
that kills cells, and possibly also the patient, with little to no chance
The newer so-called targeted therapies, such as the tyrosine kinase
of controlling the disease should not be entertained. The use of a
inhibitors, act at specific cell surface receptors that promote cell pro-
treatment that has potentially devastating side effects has to be based
liferation, hence their cytostatic effect.
on evidence of efficacy and then with an understanding of all the
'anamoh 'sanup sixono ot ansuasu Ain aie sadt ioum mad
potential ramifications.
the cancers arising from cell types whose function is to detoxify or
Having given this stark introduction, chemotherapy can help
excrete toxic chemicals are relatively resistant; this includes hepatic,
control certain cancers and thereby benefit those individuals with an
renal, and colon cancers. The majority of other cell types are innately
improved quality of life. This chapter therefore aims to give an insight
 sensitive to cytotoxic drugs, but may develop resistance to them either
into some of the drugs that are used, their potential side effects and 
by acquiring mutations as they multiply (because cancer cells are
the management of such problems, and the situations where cytotoxic
paieadai oi asuosai ui sauag uo guupms Aq io (aiqeisun aleauae
dnugs have been shown to have effcacy in cats. For further informa-
exposureto cytotoxic drugs (i.e, an adaptiveresponse) These acquired
tion the reader is referred to specialist oncology textbooks.1-4
 Or activated genes tend to confer resistance to a range of drugs
aney Aaui ypum ot juase ynnadeiaynouaup au on isn! iou pue
been exposed. Such multi-drug resistance is the most frequent reason
for relapse of a tumor that had apparently achieved complete
CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY
remission.
Another property of tissues that influences effcacy of cytotoxic
Cancer chemotherapy is the use of dnugs that by some means control 
 drugs is the growth rate (Box 16-1). The rate of clinical tumor growth
the growth of cancer cells either by killing them (cytotoxic) or by
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00016-0
161
Section
3
 Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
Box 16-1 Growth rate of cells
 Box 16-4 Equation for determining body surface area
in cats
Growth rate is a function of:
● The number of cells in the population that are actively cycling 
Body surface area (m) = k x weight (kg)z/3/100
(dividing). the so-called 'growth fraction'
● The cell cycle time (rate of division)
k = 10.0 (for cats)
● The number of cells being lost by cell death
Table 16-1 Weight to surface area conversion chart
information about the tissue growth rate. In theory, tumors with a
high growth fraction and short cell cycle time are the most sensitive
Weight (kg)
BSA (m")
Weight (kg)
BSA (m')
to cytotoxic agents. Lymphoblastic lymphoma is an example of a
2.0
0.159
4.2
0.260
sensitive cell type of this nature, as the cells often exhibit a high
 mitotic rate and hence this form of tumor in cats frequently responds
2.2
0.169
4.4
0.269
to chemotherapy.
2.4
0.179
4.6
0.277
 A high growth rate is also seen with small or microscopic tumors,
which have a high growth fraction and fast cell cycle time. Conversely.
2.6
0.189
4.8
0.285
large bulky tumors tend to have a low growth fraction, slow cell cycle
2.8
0.199
5.0
0.292
and increased cell loss. Chemotherapy is therefore more likely to be
effective against early microscopic metastases or minimal residual
3.0
0.208
5.2
0.300
disease following surgery, which is why the adjuvant use of chemo-
3.2
0.217
5.4
0.308
therapy should be actively considered for certain tumor types.
3.4
0.226
5.6
0.315
When chemotherapy is indicated
3.6
0.235
5.8
0.323
3.8
0.244
6.0
0.330
Cytotoxic drugs are used in several scenarios [Box 16-2). In practice,
the probability of curing most cancer in dogs or cats with cytotoxic
4.0
0.252
dnugs is low because the actual range of tumors that respond to
BSA, body surface area.
 chemotherapy is quite limited, a fact especially true in cats.
dose escalation as part of phase I and Il studies has been performed
Drug dosing issues
for some of the cytotoxic drugs used in veterinary oncology. However.
There are several principles that should be followed when selecting
 pp uaq si aed reu u as a ana i
drugs for chemotherapy (Box 16-3).
clinical experience andtheprotocols using a single agent ora combina-
 The vast majority of anti-cancer agents used in dogs and cats are
tion of drugs have often been developed in a rather empirical manner.
human drugs; it is only recently that drugs have been developed spe-
As already stated, the therapeutic index of anti-cancer drugs is
cifically for veterinary use Some dnug doses have been derived from
-s   i h u si m m
toxicology data from the pharmaceutical development of human
Aue siaa apis au aziuu oi uoo iea ue aaey suoae
drugs, but this data is more readily available for dogs than cats as the
treatment may generate. In the main, most drugs are metabolized in
latter are rarely used in the development of human drugs. In addition,
a manner proportional to the metabolic rate of the animal. A major
function of the basal metabolic rate (BMR) is to maintain the body
temperature of the mammal. As heat loss from an object is propor-
Box 16-2 Cytotoxic drugs are used for the
tional to its surface area rather than its volume the BMR is related to
following reasons
the surface area rather than the volume (or weight) of the individual.
Larger individuals have a lower surface area to volume ratio, hence a
 Primary therapy with curative intent or for long remission
lower BMR and a lower rate of drug elimination. Dosing on a weight
 Part of multi-modality treatment as either:
basis tends to over-dose larger individuals and under-dose small
· adjuvant therapy following surgery that has reduced the tumor
patients. Using a dose per surface area in theory smoothes this differ-
ence, but unfortunately for patients less than 10 kg this may not hold
burden to minimal residual disease or
true. There is also species variation, so it is important that the dose
● neoadjuvant therapy prior to another potentially curative modality
for cats should not be simply extrapolated from that for small dogs.
 Palliative to achieve short-term control for improved quality of life
 The surface area is derived from the weight by equation in Box 16-4
(see also Table 16. 1).The dose interval depends on which drug is being
used, the dose given and the recovery time from adverse effects. For
most cytotoxic dnugs given as a 'high dose' bolus the average time to
 Box 16-3 Principles of drug selection for chemotherapy
complete recovery is day 2l following the neutropenic nadir at day 5
to 7, and therefore a dose interval of three weeks is appropriate.
Use drugs that have shown efficacy against the tumor in question
However, some drugs (eg., lomustine and, to a lesser extent, carbopla-
Use drugs at the highest acceptable dose intensity (a function of
tin)5 have a second weaker nadir around day 20 and may warrant a
dose and dose interval)
four week cycle, so it is important to be aware of these individual drug
Use drugs in combination that have different modes of action,
variations when designing a therapeutic plan for individual patients.
resistance and toxicity when possible
Drugs may also be given at a lower dose more frequently to give a
chronic exposure.
162
Chemotherapy
Chapter
16
When discussing the potential side effects with owners it is impor-
ANTI-CANCER DRUGS
tant to concentrate on those that are common (however minor) and
those that are serious or potentially life-threatening (however rare!).
There is a long list of dnugs that have anti-cancer effects. Although a
The aim of this counseling is not to frighten the owner but to give a
dose for many of the drugs suitable for cats can be found in the litera-
 balanced view and to ensure they know what is important and when
ture, actual documented evidence of efficacy is either non-existent or
to seek veterinary attention. At the doses used in clinical practice less
at best limited to anecdotal single case reports so this chapter will
than 20% of cats will have moderate or severe reactions; however,
focus only on the agents which have a reasonably good evidence base
anorexia and increasing intolerance to intravenous injections can be
for their recommended use. Table 16-2 summarizes the pharmaceuti-
E pue uat sue au jo yed juejodui ue aie siaumo seualqond
cal aspects and dosing issues; Table 16-3 lists the toxicity and indica-
written list of potential side effects and the action required is prefer-
tions of the drugs that are used with some frequency in cats.
able to hoping they will remember all that has been discussed.
Fatal and contraindicated
SIDE EFFECTS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
Two dnugs are absolutely contraindicated in cats:
5-fluorouracil - will cause a fatal neuropathy
Before starting any treatment it is beholden on the attending clinician
to be aware of the potential side effects, to discuss these with the
pulmonary edema.?
Owner and to know how to manage them if they ocur. However.
 Some preparations eg., oil suspension or in collagen matrix if stable
because the therapeutic index of chemotherapeutic agents is narrow
Bu aaes aie aau inq pan uq aay (aseaai mos Ain pue
this is particularly important when using anti-cancer drugs.
issues and these preparations can still not be recommended.
Table 16-2 Summary of anti-cancer drugs: dosing aspects
Drug
Mode of
Ph armaceutical
Route of admin
Dose
Dose frequency
a ction
preparations
Vincristine sulphate
Spindle binding
 Solution: 1 mg/mL
 IV only
0.5-0.7 mg/m²
 Not less than q7 days
Cyclophosphamide
 Alkylating agent
Powder for reconstitution
IV
250-300 mg/m² IV;
High dose: q21 days
 50 mg tablet 
PO
150 mg/m² PO
Low dose: divided weekly
equivalent
Chlorambucil
Alkylating agent
2 mg tablet
PO
20 mg/m² or
High dose: q14-28 days
4-6 mg/m²
Low dose: eod equivalent
Doxorubicin
Topo-isomerase
 Solution: 2 mg/mL
IV only by slow 
25 mg/m² or
 q21 days: cumulative dose
Il inhibitor
Powder for reconstitution 
infusion
1 mg/kg
limit 180 mg/m2
Cisplatin 
Alkylating agent
 Powder for reconstitution 
 Intralesional emulsion
 FATAL if IV 
Refer to Table 16-3
Carboplatin
 Alkylating agent
Solution: 10 mg/ml
 Slow IV only
200-240 mg/m²
q21  days
Lomustine (CCNU)
 Alkylating agent
40 mg capsules?
PO
40-50 mg/m2a
q21-28 days
Specialist re-formulation to 10 mg capsules is necessary for clinical use.
IV, intravenous; PO, per os; eod, every other day.
Table 16-3 Summary of anti-cancer drugs - toxicity and indications
Drug
Indications
Comment
Vincristine sulphate
BM, A, V Sl ileus
Lymphoblastic “large cell' lymphoma
With cyclophosphamide and prednisolone as 'COP'
protocol
Cyclophosphamide
BM, A, V, whisker loss 
Lymphoblastic “large cell lymphoma 
With vincristine and prednisolone as 'COP' protocol
Chlor ambucil
BM (mild)
Lymphocytic 'small cell' lymphoma
Especially low grade small cell alimentary lymphoma 
Doxorubicin
BM, A, V, whisker loss,
High grade sarcoma
Limited efficacy against lymphoma
Cumulative renal damage
 Mammary carcinoma
Cisplatin
FATAL if IV
Carcinoma
Emulsion MUST be stable otherwise potentially fatal!
Specialist centres only
Carboplatin
BM, A, V, (renal damage)
 Head and neck cancer
 Possible radio-sensitizer
Lomustine (CCNU)
BM. A, V
Lymphoma
A, anorexia; BM, bone marrow suppression; Sl, smallintestine; V, vomiting.
163
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
Issues associated with extravasation
Box 16-5 Protocol for extravasation of
Certain anti-cancer drugs will cause severe irreversible tissue injury
chemotherapeutic agents
after extravasation. The main culprits are doxonubicin and the others
 in the 'antibiotic' group (epinubicin, mitoxantrone, and actinomycin
 STOP giving the drug
D) and the vinca alkaloids including vincristine and vinblastine; these
 Do not remove the catheter but do remove additional tubing such
drugs are described as having a class l extravasation risk. The damage
as giving sets, remembering that these are also contaminated with
siau aissaid on siard ue eaa reo  ai a
the cytotoxic agent used
and sloughing of tissue The latter is particularly true for doxorubicin
 Use syringe suction on the catheter to withdraw as much drug as
and similar drugs. The damage is dose dependent, i.e., related to how
possible from the site. A temporary tourniquet may help by 
much dnug leaked and how far it spread.
 creating local bleeding into the site to help with this. Again, it 
To avoid complications after extravasation of chemotherapeutic
 must be remembered that any aspirated fluid should be
 agents it is essential to administer these drugs through an intravenous
Aaeladoudde paipuey pue aisem pxooo se panapisuon
●If doxorubicin (or simila), apply cold (ice-) pack to limit local
use of a small gauge catheter is recommended in cats. The use of but-
abeanosua ot yed jou Aidde (eluis io) ausuou l peaids 
terfly needles is controversial; although some authorities recommend
vasodilatation and absorption 
them for small volume bolus injections, in general the use of intrave-
1
 The use of DMsO and local infiltration with hydrocortisone is 
nous catheters should always be considered the preferable option.
controversial, so their use cannot be advocated at the present 
Sedation or even anesthesia may also be warranted to adequately
time
restrain some feline patients to reduce the risks of complications for
●TELL THE OWNER - it is better to be honest at this stage than 
both the animal and the attending clinician and staf. The patency of
 when amputation is necessary 
any catheter should be checked before and during administration of 
the cytotoxic drug and the area around the catheter site visually moni-
A specific 'antidote to doxorubicin free-radical damage is available
tored for any blowing: Some of the agents are very caustic and will
(dexrazoxane, Zinecard) that can be used to dramatically reduce the local tissue
damage. Dexrazoxane must be given within tvo to three hours (the sooner the
elicit a marked pain reaction if extravasation occurs, but the absence
better) intravenously at ten times the dose of doxorubicin administered. It is.
of pain does not mean that extravasation has not occurred, so careful
however, very expensive with a limited shelflife.
vigilance is essential. At the end of the infusion the catheter should
be flushed with normal saline before removal to prevent the creation
 of a cytotoxic 'catheter tract:
The result of extravasation may take several days to show. Erythema
yanois pue sisoiau ot ssaaaid ue inq susis Auea aie suams pue
tip. Following a cytotoxic event, villus atrophy occurs and recovery
over the following three to four weeks. The vinca alkaloids tend to
may take a further five to seven days. During the period of villus
cause earlier reactions whilst doxonubicin tends to cause later reac-
recovery the increased permeability to outward water transit may
tions. The sloughing and necrotic lesions that can occur will require
cause diarrhea. If the villus atrophy is severe, capillary hemorrhage
extensive debridement and reconstructive surgery to corret and even
may result in hemorrhagic diarrhea. During this time the intestinal
amputation of the affected limb may be warranted in the case of
mucosa will be more permeable to invasion by enteric bacteria. Sup-
doxorubicin extravasation, such is the damage this drug can cause.
portive fluid therapy orally or intravenously may be necessary and the
Immediate response to an extravasation is essential rather than
use of microenteral feeding techniques can be beneficial and is to be
waiting for the full effects to show, so at the frst suspicion of an
 encouraged. Antibiotics are usually advisable for hemorrhagic diarrhea
extravasation follow the steps in Box 16-5.
relatively resistant to cytotoxic-induced diarrhea and it is a problem
Centrally mediated anorexia and vomiting
less frequently encountered in this species compared to dogs given
cytotoxic agents.
Anti-cancer dnugs are toxic chemicals that can be recognized by the
Vincistine can cause ileus due to peripheral neurotoxicity. This can
chemoreceptor trigger zone in the brain. Centrally mediated vomiting
lead to abdominal cramps, vomiting and anorexia. This tends to occur
five to seven days following a vincristine injection and the effect is
the drugs. However, in the author's experience it is most common with
cumulative. A delay of a week and dose reduction of the next vincris-
intravenously administered vincristine cyclophosphamide and doxo-
tine injection may be necessary. This problem tends to be more
rubicin. Vomiting and anorexia usually occur within 12 to 24 hours
common at the 0.7 mg/m? dose than at 0.5 mg/m².
of drug administration but may persist for three to five days. Anorexia
tends to be more of a problem than acute vomiting. Tempting with
Bone marrow suppression
'eixaioue aosaao dlay Ae sumeid io ysy se yns spooy paem
Chemical stimulation of the appetite may be necessary, eg., cyprohep-
Hemopoetic tissues are continually undergoing cell division to replace
tidine (2-4 mg/kg PO q12-24 hours). Mirtazapine (0.5-1.0 mg/kg
the blood cells that have a limited life in the peripheral circulation.
PO/SQ q72 hours) can be an effective appetite stimulant and it has
These tissues are often dividing more quickly than most cancers and
central anti-emetic properties (for further information on appetite
therefore are potentially more susceptible to cytotoxic drugs. However.
stimulation see Chapter 6). Anti-emetic medications such as metoclo-
they also have great powers of recovery from this insult. The effect on
 pramide or maropitant (Cerenia) should be used in patients who are
the hemopoetic cells is dose dependent and the timing of the result
vomiting or who are considered to possibly be nauseous.
on peripheral cell counts is related to the half-life of the cell type fol-
Gastrointestinal toxicity
In cats it is about 70 days for erythrocytes, 10 days for platelets and
four to five days for neutrophils. Recovery of the hemopoetic cell lines
The epithelial lining of the intestines undergoes constant renewal.
from the toxic insult takes three to four days to start. The rapid fall in
with a cell transit time of about three days from the crypt to the villus
neutrophils and the delay in recovery results in neutropenia being
164
Chemotherapy
Chapter
16
more common and more serious than thrombocytopenia or anemia.
cumulative dose limit is higher [+75% in humans). However there
Following a bolus of cytotoxic drug. the nadir for neutrophils is about
are no large series reporting efficacy or toxicity profles of epirubicin
five to seven days, for platelets around ten to 14 days, but there is
in cats.
generally not an acute problem seen within the erythrocyte series.
 The nadir for the neutropenia coincides with the increased perme-
Vincristine
ability of the intestinal mucosa to enteric bacteria. Therefore, what
otherwise may have been a transient and insignificant bacteremia can
Vincristine may cause a peripheral neuropathy: in dogs (and humans);:
this tends to present as a dragging of the hind paw (foot). In cats
following the cytotoxic insult. Typically, the early signs of lethargy.
intestinal ileus can occur (see above).
anorexia, vomiting, and a withdrawn character will be obvious in a
previously apparently well individual. However, this can progress
Cyclophosphamide
rapidly over 12 to 24 hours to a state of septic collapse, so these
patients need to be monitored carefully. The routine use of prophy-
 Hemorrhagic cystitis secondary to cyclophosphamide therapy is rare
lactic antibiotics during the at-risk period is controversial as it may
 in cats (estimated as 3-4% of all cats receiving cyclophosphamide).
lead to antibiotic resistance so their routine use cannot be recom-
If it does ocur, discontinuation of cyclophosphamide at an early stage
mended, although in some susceptible individuals it may be helpful.
is important as the damage is cumulative and may become irreversi-
Left untreated neutropenic sepsis can be fatal, so owners and attend-
 ble There is no effective treatment other than symptomatic pain relief
ing veterinary staff should be aware that early treatment of this acute
 and the administration of anti-inflammatory medication.
problem is essential. Supportive fluid therapy, intravenous broad spec-
trum antibiotics, appropriate nutritional management and hospitali-
zation will usually produce a rapid recovery within 48-72 hours.
CHEMOTHERAPY FOR SPECIFIC
Antibiotic therapy is usually given for fve to seven days and during
TUMOR TYPES
this time the neutrophil count is likely to have risen well within
normal range.
 Prior to each round of chemotherapy a complete blood count
 As previously stated, there are many single case reports that mention
should always be performed. Neutropenia of less than 1.0 x 10?/L is
 or claim effcacy of a drug against a tumor type; these cannot be taken
considered serious, but a neutrophil count of less than 2.5 x 10°/L
as a good evidence base for speculative use of anti-cancer agents.
should be considered as too low for treatment to be given. Following
ul sioum auos aie aaq gop pue uuny woy sueiodea
a septic neutropenic event the next dose of cytotoxic drugs adminis-
almost certainly will not be treatable in cats with the conventional
tered should be reduced by 10-25%.
anti-cancer drugs: for example, adenocarcinomas arising from liver.
kidney, gastrointestinal structures and pancreas, and melanomas.
Drug-specific complications
Again extrapolating from humans and dog there is another list where
efficacy at best is likely to be minimal: these include transitional cell
Hair loss
carcinoma (TCC) of the bladder, brain, lung, and oral cavity. An
auag aaa rg aeaoa jo zyauaq au uo uoissnosp ydap-ui
A major concern of most owners before starting their pet on chemo-
tumor type is beyond the scope of this book so the reader is directed
therapy is hair loss, together with vomiting and anorexia (see previ-
 to the specific medical oncology literature for an in-depth discussion;
'ss ui uadde iou sap ss  nuis u aun ul (isno
 Or they should seek specialist advice.
However, loss of guard hairs and especially of whiskers is common.
These usually regrow once the course of treatment has been completed
but the whiskers can sometimes regrow kinked and twisted.
Lymphoid malignancies
A variety of chemotherapeutic regimes have been used for treatment
Carboplatin
of lymphoma in cats.8-1The intermediateto high grade lymphoblastic
aul ui uowooun si siun inq aeuep [euai asnes ues ueidoqien
lymphomas seen in cats are in the main responsive to the anti-
normal individual. However, patients with reduced renal function are
cancer protocols combining cyclophosphamide vincristine and
more susceptible and caution should be used in these cases.7 In
 prednisolone; the so-called 'COP protocol (Table 16-4). There is no
humans, dosing is calculated based on glomerular filtration rate, but
 evidence of benefit in the addition of doxonubicin to a COP protocol
this is rarely performed in veterinary practice If there is evidence of
in cats.11
reduced renal function (raised serum urea and/or creatinine) then
Low grade, small T-cell lymphoma of the intestine responds poorly
carboplatin should be used with great care or not at all.
to the COP or single-agent doxonubicin therapy, but by using a met-
ronomic chemotherapeutic approach with chlorambucil and pred.
nisolone, many cats can achieve good, albeit partial remissions that
Doxorubicin
can be durable (more than two years) with minimal risk of side
Cardiomyopathy associated with doxorubicin, as seen with cumula-
effects.5
tive dosing in humans and dogs, is rare in cats. This may be due to a
so asneraq io saiads aul u aiixot iipieou oi aueisiai an
Feline mammary adenocarcinoma
protocols limit the dosing to less than 180 mg/m? cumulative dose.
Doxorubicin can, however, cause renal damage as a cumulative
Ym osle pue Aesol yoq anissaiae si sie ui iasues Aen
dose effect. To that end it should be used to a cumulative dose limit
regards to metastatic spread. By the time that mammary tumors are
of 180 mg/m? and with care in cats with concurrent renal failure.
 detected multiple glands are often involved. Radical mastectomy as a
In addition, biochemical renal parameter assessment on a regular
full mammary strip unilaterally or as a staged bilateral procedure is
basis is a sensible recommendation when doxorubicin is administered
recommended (Chapter 2l). The use of doxonubicin as adjuvant
to cats. The related drug, epinubicin, may be used in preference to
therapy or as palliative sole therapy has been described but the overall
doxorubicin as its effcacy (and dose) is similar in dogs but its
benefit is unfortunately low.12.13
165
Section
3
Oncological Surgery and Adjunctive Therapy
 practice and absolutely must be performed in a safety cabinet for the
Table 16-4 *COP' protocols
 protection of personnel. It is considered a specialist procedure and its
use in general practice cannot be recommended.
Dose
Comments
Other chemotherapy agents and protocols
Loww dose
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m² IV
Weekly for four to eight
 The tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the first of an exciting new
weeks, then monthly
targeted' approach. In addition to the human drug imatinib there are
150 mg/m² PO
As 50 mg tablets POa
two rTKIs, masitinib and toceranib, which have veterinary licenses for
Cyclophosphamide
(see below)
use in dogs with mast cell tumors. Clinical trials of these drugs in
total weekly dosea
various cancers in cats are underway, but until these studies are com-
 Prednisolone
20 mg/m² PO
 Daily for seven days then
pleted and published it remains to be seen whether tyrosine kinase
eod
inhibitors will play a significant role in feline oncology.
High dose
Vincristine
0.75 mg/m² IV
Weekly for four weeks,
then every three weeks
SAFE HANDLING OF CYTOTOXIC AGENTS
Cyclophosphamide
250-300 mg/m² IV
Every three weeks
Anti-cancer dnugs are toxic and have potentially serious implications
Prednisolone
40 mg/m² reducing
Daily for seven days,
for human health. Some of the drugs work by damaging DNA; such
to 20 mg/m² PO
then reduce dose and
damage is mutagenic and therefore potentially teratogenic or even
frequency
carcinogenic. Other dnugs can cause infertility, tissue damage, and
Cyclophosphamide tablets only routinely available as 50 mg and MUST NOT be
cancer. Accordingly, all veterinary staff owners, and carers must be
broken, crushed or divided. To achieve correct oral dosing adjust the interval
aware of the need for safe handling of anti-cancer drugs (Box l6-6).
accordingly to achieve 150 mg/m? total weekly dose. For example:
Although there is no known safe limit for exposure, the low doses
Cat weighs 3.0 kg. B5A = 0.208 m? × 150 mg/m? = 31 mg required per week
used in cats mean the potential risk to veterinary staff, carers, and
= 50 mg every ten days
owners is low. However, this is not a reason for complacency.
Cat weighs 5.5 kg. B5A = 0.310 m? × 150 mg/m? = 46 mg required per week
= 50 mg every seven days
gloves, over-clothes, eye protection, and mask are the minimum when
IV, intravenous; PO, per os; eod, every other day.
handling the drugs. The reader should refer to their health and safety
advisor for specific guidance. The guidelines produced by ECVIM-CA
give an overview of recommended safe handling of cytotoxic drugs!7
but referral to a centre experienced in veterinary oncology and dnug
handling may be the preferred option.
Vaccine-associated feline sarcoma
Vaccine-associated feline sarcomas (or feline injection site sarcomas)
 are very aggressive locally and should be treated at an early stage with
aggressive surgery. Beyond this the successof surgery and other modal-
Box 16-6 Exposure routes for cytotoxic drugs
aqasaiuou iog pa uaq sey Adeiaoau paul si sa!
Exposure to cytotoxic drugs can occur by:
lesions with some increase in survival times associated with partial
 Inhalation of powder or aerosol
aul ul paqisap uaaq sey (uiqnida io) uqnoxoa e'uoissia
neoadjuvant seting to reduce the size of the sarcoma prior to wide
saaebp lo pooy pateuiuenuon uo bnp jo uoisabul 
excision and then as an adjuvant postsurgery to reduce local recur-
Absorption through skin or ocular membranes
'sases yons ul paiapisuos aq pinous siut pue gl-t saiei anual
Accidental inoculation (needlestick)
Exposure may be a result of:
 Transfer of drug between containers using an unguarded needle
Intralesional cisplatin emulsion for
 and by stab injury
squamous cell carcinoma
 Breaking open glass ampoules
Cisplatin as an emulsion in sesame seed oil has been used intralesion-
 Aerosol from pressurized drug vials when withdrawing needle
ally for some advanced carcinomas of the head in cats (also in dogs
 Expulsion of air bubbles from drug-filled syringe
and horses). Tumor control has been demonstrated and there may be
Accidental spillage or breakage of drug vials
additional benefit combining this technique with external beam radia-
 Exposure to excreta and body fluids (including saliva on hair coat)
tion. However, the production of a stable emulsion is essential other-
from treated patient 
wise rapid release of cisplatin into the extracellular fluid and beyond
Crushing or breakage of tablets or capsules
will have a high risk of fatality. Producing this stable emulsion requires
REFERENCES
1.
 Ogilvie GK, Moore AS. Feline Oncology.
Withrow Sl, Vail DM. Small Animal
3.
 Dobson IM, Lascelles BDX. Manual of
New Jersey, USA: Veterinary Learning
Clinical Oncology. 4th ed. St Louis,
Canine and Feline Oncology. 3rd ed.
Systems; 2001.
Missouri: Saunders Elsevier; 2007.
Gloucester: BSAVA; 2011.
166
Chemotherapy
Chapter
16
4. Argyle Dl, Brearley Ml, Turek MM.
(1994-1997). J Vet Int Med 2001;15:
14. Barber LG, Sorenmo KU, Cronin KL,
 Decision Making in Small Animal
125-30.
Shofer FS. Combined doxorubicin and
Oncology. lowa: Wiley-Blackwell;
10. Simon D, Eberle N, Laacke-Singer L,
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for
2008.
 Nolte I. Combination chemotherapy in 
nonresectable feline fbrosarcoma.
5.
.Kisseberth WC, Vail DM, Yaissle I, et al.
 feline lymphoma: treatment outcome.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:
 Phase 1 clinical evaluation of carboplatin
tolerability, and duration in 23 cats. J Vet 
416-21.
in tumor-bearing cats: a Veterinary
Int Med 2008;22:394-400.
15.
.Bregazzi Vs, LaRue SM, McNiel E, et al.
Cooperative Oncology Group study. J Vet
11.
 Teske E, van Straten G, van Noort R.
Treatment with a combination of
Int Med 2008;22:83-8.
Rutteman GR. Chemotherapy with
doxorubicin, surgery and radiation versus
6. Fan TM, Kitchell BE, Dhaliwal RS, et al.
 Cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and
surgery and radiation alone for cats with
Hematological toxicity and therapeutic
prednisolone (COP) in cats with
vaccine-associated sarcomas: 25 cases
 efficacy of lomustine in 20 tumor-bearing
 malignant lymphoma: new results with
(1995-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
cats: critical assessment of a practical
 an old protocol. J Vet Int Med
2001;218:547-50.
 dosing regimen. J Am Anim Hosp AssoC
2002;16:179-86.
16. Martano M, Morello E, Ughetto M,
2002;38:357-63.
12. Novosad CA, Bergman PJ, O'Brien MG,
 et al. Surgery alone versus surgery
7. Knapp DW, Richardson RC, DeNicola DB,
et al. Retrospective evaluation of
and doxorubicin for the treatment
et al. Cisplatin toxicity in cats. J Vet Int 
 adjunctive doxorubicin for the
 of feline injection-site sarcomas:
Med 1987;1:29-35.
 treatment of feline mammary gland
 a report on 69 cases. Vet J 2005;170:
 8. Ettinger SN. Principles of treatment for 
adenocarcinoma: 67 cases. J Am Anim 
84-90.
feline lymphoma. Clin Tech Small Anim
Hosp Assoc 2006;42:110-20.
17. ECVIM-CA Guidelines: Preventing
Pract 2003;18:98-102.
13. McNeill CJ, Sorenmo KU, Shofer FS, et al.
 occupational and environmental exposure
9. Kristal O, Lana SE, Ogilvie GK, et al.
 Evaluation of adjuvant doxorubicin-based
 to cytotoxic drugs in veterinary medicine.
Single agent chemotherapy with
chemotherapy for the treatment of feline
http://www.ecvim-ca.org/index.php?
doxorubicin for feline lymphoma:
 mammary carcinoma. J Vet Int Med
 option=com_content&view=article&id=72
a retrospective study of 19 cases 
2009;23:123-9
&ltemid=70
167
Section
4
J.L. Demetriou, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Skin and adnexa
Cats have abundant loose skin over their body, which aids reconstruc-
 In the following three chapters, conditions affecting the feline skin 
tive surgery. but there are some anatomic differences and healing
 and adnexal structures are covered in detail. There are separate chap-
 properties that are unique to the cat. The clinical relevance of these is
ters on skin tumors, mammary glands, and a fnal chapter on injection
 described in the frst chapter on wound healing. Cats are prone to
site sarcomas, which can be a particularly problematic condition to
trauma, from road traffc accidents to cat bite abscesses and axillary
 manage. This final chapter provides a thorough review of all the litera-
injuries from collars. Management of these wounds, including some
ture on this unusual feline problem and comparisons of treatment
unusual cryptic and chronic infections that are peculiar to the cat are
regimes including surgical resection and adjunctive chemotherapy
described in the subsequent chapter. Some wounds in cats benefit
and radiation.
from surgical treatment with flaps or grafts and these are well described
with surgical boxes for each procedure.
iapter
Wound healing
M.W. Bohling
There are some fundamental differences in wound healing in cats
interspecies variations in feline cutaneous anatomy and histology may
compared to other species. This chapter will summarize the biology
have significant effects on wound healing and other surgical consid-
of wound healing, the results of the studies on wound healing in cats,
erations in regard to felines. As with all haired mammals, the epider-
 and discuss its clinical relevance.
mis of the cat is much thinner than that of humans, and is slightly
jo o a sas s a op a jo e u na
the thickness of the skin; it ranges from 0.4-2.0 mm thick in the cat,
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF
depending on body location. Like the epidermis, the feline dermis is
somewhat thinner than the canine dermis, which ranges from
WOUND HEALING
0.5-5.0 mm thick.3 The thickness of the subcutis varies greatly with
body area and body condition; however, in general the subcutis of the
Wound healing is the biological process whereby a discontinuity in
cat is also significantly thinner than the dog. Another feature of feline
the tissue is repaired so that function may be restored. With few excep-
skin is that the feline skin is very pliable and mobile over most of the
tions the repair takes the form of a scar, rather than regeneration of
body surface, even more so than in the dog, and certainly much more
the exact same as the damaged tissue Thus the fundamental difference 
so than for 'tight-skinned' species such as the pig and humans.
between wound healing (repair) and regeneration is the production
Cats also show significant differences from other mammals with
of scar tissue, and the study of wound healing is in fact the study of
 respect to their cutaneous vascular supply. In one comparative study.
the process of scar formation and remodeling.
the cutaneous angiosomes of seven mammalian species were evalu-
Very early in the study of wound healing it was observed that
ated with the purpose of validating the use of animal models for
wounds progress through stages: the initial phase of inflammation,
human wound healing research. Comparison of the cutaneous angio-
followed by the phase of active proliferation (repair), and finally after
somes of the cat with other mammals revealed that the cat has a rela-
the defect is closed, the phase of remodeling. Although once thought 
tively low density of tertiary and higher-order vessels, particularly on
to be temporally distinct, we now understand that the phases of
the trunk.4 This gross anatomic difference appears to translate to a
wound healing occur as a highly overlapping sequence of processes.
functional difference based on laser Doppler perfusion studies, in
We can recognize each of the phases in the healing of wounds in all 
which a significantly lower level of cutaneous perfusion was noted
vertebrates, and the phases follow the same chronological order,
in the trunk skin of normal anesthetized cats than in dogs.? The
leading to the assumption that wound healing is more or less homo-
am uaaq sey suneau punom pue uoisnad anssh uaamaq yu
 geneous across species lines, at least among mammals.
established.5.6
Clinical experience reveals that there are significant differences in
wound healing between mammalian species. Recently, significant dif-
ferences between cutaneous healing in the cat and the dog have been 
WOUND HEALING IN CATS
described.? These differences may cause us to reconsider the validity
 of long-accepted general small animal wound care recommendations
'saads aay au on padde ane kau uaum
Wound healing can be divided into first intention, i.e., the healing of
clean, sutured skin incisions, and second intention healing, i.e, the
healing of gaping wounds.
NORMAL CUTANEOUS ANATOMY
IN THE CAT
First intention cutaneous healing
 First intention cutaneous healing (the healing of clean, sutured skin
The normal cutaneous anatomy and histology of the cat follows the
wounds) has been measured in the cat as part of an overall compari-
son of cutaneous healing between cats and dogs. Healing of 3 cm
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00017-2
171
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Table 17-1 Measures of second intention healing in cats compared with dogs
Cats
Dogs
Day 7
Day 14
Day 21
Day 7
Day 14
Day 21
% Contraction
18.23
53.0
75.8
41.2
66.1
70.3
% Epithelialization
0.0
13.0*
34.4a
3.2
44.7
89.4
 % Total wound healing
18.3?
59.0*
83.9
43.1
76.1
97.6
Indicates a significant difference between cats and dogs for the indicated parameter on that day: (p ≤ 0.05, repeated measures ANOVA)
linear sutured wounds was evaluated via tensiometry at seven days
post-wounding. Results demonstrated that the wound breaking
 Table 17-2 Inflammatory cell changes in wound healing:
strength in healing cat skin is significantly inferior to that of dogs. The
cats compared to dogs
uaaas je se ui spunom paimns ioy yauans suyeaiq punom ueau
days post-wounding was only one half of the wound breaking strength
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Mast cells
for dogs.2 This difference should be taken into consideration when
deciding the right time for suture removal. Histologic evaluation of
Day 7
Cats
52
58.6
3.3
skin biopsies revealed that the observed difference in early first inten-
Dogs
14
24.8
0.9
tion healing correlated with significantly lower collagen production
in cat wounds compared to those in dogs.
Day 21
Cats
51a
35.3
5.13
Dogs
1.5
21.4
1.3
 Second intention cutaneous healing
 Overall;:
Cats
57.5a
47.73
4.0
Days
Significant qualitative and quantitative differences between cats and
Dogs
4.5
19.9
1.1
0-21
dogs have also been seen in second intention healing. Observable
differences begin in the early inflammatory phase of wound healing.
alndicates a significant difference between cats and dogs for the indicated
On the second day of healing, open wounds in cats have been observed
 parameter for the specified time; (o ≤ 0.05, repeated measures ANOVA)
to be relatively less swollen and edematous, and to have a lesser
amount of wound fluid produced when compared to similar wounds
in dogs.
 Interestingly, the grossly observed differences in apparent level of
 inflammation in open wounds do not correlate well with histopatho-
logic evidence. Based on extensive histologic evaluation of open
wound healing in cats and dogs, the picture that has emerged is one
of similar levels of inflammatory cell infltration in the first week of
wound healing. However, as healing progresses, the populations of
inflammatory cells, (particularly neutrophilic leukocytes and mast
cells) in cat wounds appear to remain elevated for a longer period of
time (Fig. 17-1 and Table 17-1) This observation supports other
experimental and clinical evidence that, in the feline, the inflamma-
-uo asinos iuoir aiou e moloy oi sieadde sueay yo aseud Aio
pared to other species. The chronicity of inflammation in cat wound
jasuo panejap ioy aqisuodsan Aed iseal ie aq um u Aeuu sueau
and slower progression of the proliferative phase of healing.
The production of granulation tissue in the wound is the frst gross
and histologic evidence of entry into the proliferative or repair phase
 of wound healing. The cat is notable for a slower rate of production
of granulation tissue in open wounds, when compared to other
Figure 17-1 Second intention healing in feline skin. Normal
mammals. On average the frst appearance of grossly visible granula-
uncomplicated healing at 21 days post-wounding. Note the mast cells
al ieiuis e ie surgaq soop pue sies ui spunom uado ui anssi uon
still present in the wound. (H&E stain, 400× magnification.)
although is usually about one day later in cats than in dogs. However.
 once the process of granulation begins, the rate of granulation tissue
 production is markedly slower in cats. In an experimental model of
originate at the cut edges of the skin, and then slowly fills in the
Iy ot sop se Suo[ se aimi ueul aiou yoot sies 'Bulleay punom uado
central part of the wound from the edges. In contrast, granulation
the wound cavity with granulation tissue: 19 days for cats vs 7.5 days
tissue develops from the entire surface of the exposed subcutis in the
for dogs (Table 17-2).
dog (Fig. 17-2)
 The visual character of the granulation tissue also differs between
 The aforementioned features of early gross wound appearance and
pai daap e suiaey ssop jo anssi uoneinueie au yim 'ssop pue sie
 granulation tissue formation in cats are of more than academic inter-
color and that of cats being much paler in comparison. Furthermore,
est; in fact they may help explain the slower overall healing rate for
even the original site of granulation tissue is different in the open
 open wounds in cats compared to wounds in dogs. The rates of con-
wounds of cats. Granulation tissue in open wounds of cats appears to
 traction, epithelialization, and total wound healing (overall reduction
172
Wound healing
Chapter
17
 Box 17-1 The role of the feline subcutis in wound healing 
Removal of the subcutis resulted in no change in the first appearance
of granulation tissue, which occurred at about five to six days
 post-wounding. However, a marked reduction in the rate of 
 production of granulation tissue (time to fill the wound cavity) was
noted when the subcutis was excised, and this effect was much
 greater in cats than in dogs.
 Creation of defects in the subcutis resulted in a decrease
in cutaneous perfusion that persisted at least until day 14 
2
post-wounding.
The rates of wound contraction and epithelialization were also
2
METRIC
ne
METRIC
au ym sy paaowan sem sinans aut uaum pannpan Aueiuais
Cat2 Day 14
B
Dog 4 Day 14
rate of granulation tissue production, the negative effect on 
shop u! ueul sien u! panunouoad aow Auenyubis sem uojesuon
Figure 17-2 Comparison of second intention healing between (A) cat 
sep tl ie umous ae spunom uado wn zx wn z au1 bop (a) pue
post-wounding. Note the relatively smaller amount and paler color of
cutaneous wound healing of cats. In the first of these studies, the role
granulation tissue in feline wound and absence of discernable 
 of the subcutis in healing was studied and compared between dogs
epithelialization at wound margins.
and cats. Wounds in which the subcutis was completely excised from
the wound bed were compared with wounds in which the subcutis
was left intact. The comparison of wound healing between treat-
in open wound area due to contraction and epithelialization com-
ments and between species has yielded the following observations
bined) are all significantly slower in cats than in dogs. The currently
regarding the role of the subcutis (Box 17-1).
accepted theory of wound contraction (i.e., the 'pull theory’) is that
The authors of the study concluded that the subcutis is an important
fibroblasts and myofbroblasts within granulation tissue provide the
source of precursor cells for granulation tissue and a major contribu-
motive power for wound contraction. Therefore, delayed onset and
es e yodns iou p nep au sueay uo puoas on io
slower rate of accumulation of granulation tissue would be expected
direct link between the subcutis and first intention healing, a fact that
to correlate with a slower rate of wound contraction, as seen in the
the authors attributed to a flaw in the study design.10
 open wounds of cats. Similarly, since granulation tissue provides the
A second study has also examined the role of the subcutis in second
substrate for keratinocyte migration during re-epithelialization, a
intention healing in cats. This work confirmed the findings of the
longer time for complete coverage of the wound by granulation tissue
earlier study, i.e., excision of the subcutaneous tissues has a negative
should translate into a slower rate of wound epithelialization.
impact on wound healing in cats. In the second study, one of three
surgical treatments (fascial abrasion, fasciotomy, or fasciectomy) was
 performed on the open wounds after subcutis removal. The treatments
PSEUDOHEALING AND INDOLENT POCKETS
were compared for their ability to ameliorate the negative effects on
second intention healing caused by removal of the subcutis. Fasciot-
 omy and fasciectomy increased the rate of granulation tissue forma-
On occasion, routinely managed wounds in cats can have unexpected
tion and were the most successful treatments for restoring wound
adverse outcomes. One such outcome is the phenomenon termed
 healing to normal after subcutis removal in cats.1
'pseudohealing. This condition is characterized by a sutured skin inci-
sion that initially appears to have healed normally at the time of skin
suture removal. However, after suture removal, when the cat places 
ordinary physiological stress on the closure (eg. jumping up on a
CLINICAL APPLICATION
chair), complete dehiscence occurs, usually with little or no bleeding.
Examination of these dehisced wounds reveals little if any adhesion
 The clinical applications of our knowledge of feline wound healing
 of the muscle fascia to the adjacent subcutis.
are limited, but by no means unimportant. The observation that the
The skin may heal suffciently to remain intact when stressed, but
seven-day sutured wound strength in cats is only half that in dogs has
if wound re-entry is required (as when a second surgical procedure is
important implications for feline wound closure and time to suture
e ieul punoy uayo sl ll '(useidoau juanoan e iasan oi painbai
removal. The mere fact that veterinarians have been closing surgical
chronic pocket has formed in the subcutis. The pocket is lined with
od v amsuon iou saop au suol e ioy se ui spunom leameu pue
mature, smooth collagen and typically contains a thin, serous, modi-
evidence that surgical outcomes would not benefit from special con-
Aeain aul ul panodan uaaq sey uouo si ahepnsuei pay
sideration of the feline as a surgical patient. Rather, it may be that
literature in which a granulation tissue-lined pocket forms that fails 
incisional dehiscence in cats has been an unrecognized problem that
to contract or fill.' The authors termed the condition 'indolent pocket 
has been incorrectly blamed on characteristics of the individual
wounds' and hypothesized that this phenomenon occurs when skin
 patient rather than on any inherent weakness or relative indolence in
has been closed over areas in which the underlying subautis has been
feline cutaneous healing. This may be particularly true in wounds in
damaged or extensively resected (eg., major tumor resection).
which a large volume of subcutis has been removed.
 Based on our current knowledge of feline cutaneous wound healing.
The role of the subcutis in
-no leibins aaondl ci apeu aq mou um suoepuaoau uia
cutaneous healing
comes and reduce the risk of wound healing complications in cats.
For small, uncomplicated wounds, routine apposition of subcutis and
The phenomena of pseudohealing and indolent pocket wounds have
skin appears to be suffcient In cases where complete apposition is
led to an interest in, and investigations of, the role of the subcutis in 
not possible, the use of 'tacking sutures (sutures placed between the
173
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
 Box 17-2 Possible reasons for the superior engraftment
 properties of feline skin
Thinner skin - shorter distance for diffusion of nutrients: graft
vability during the phase of plasmatic imbibition should be
enhanced
Thinner skin - may more rapidly revascularize: one of the primary
reasons why split thickness grafts experience a more rapid 
engraftment than full thickness grafts
 Weaker infammatory phase - less tissue edema and fewer
inflammatory infiltrates, which both tend to reduce the free flow
 of wound fluid during plasmatic imbibition and are primary 
reasons for graft failure
 A recipient site with less inflammation would be expected to have
improved viability
Figure 17-3 An example of an indolent pocket wound in a cat. This
chronic axillary wound was observed in a feral cat. Note the deeply
fibroblasts and/or fibroblast precursors. Perhaps even better would be
under-run wound with somewhat pale chronic granulation tissue lining
the pocket, and no adhesion of the walls to each other (hence the
myocutaneous transfer, due to the enhanced blood supply. Though
formation of an indolent pocket).
beyond the technical capabilities of most practices, microvascular free
tissue transfer provides another option to stimulate healing of chronic
'uisnyad eo u umaidu eia siuaed auy u spunm
Finally, it should also be noted that not all of the unique features
subcutis and underlying tissue) would seem a reasonable measure to
of feline wound healing are necessarily detrimental to the patient. In 
help ensure adequate skin-subcutis contact and prevent the formation
 particular, wounds and conditions that are characterized by an exten-
 of indolent pocket wounds.
When significant portions of subcutis have been resected, such as
rapidly and with fewer complications in feline patients. For example.
one would see with major oncologic resections, extra measures are
it has long been generally accepted among veterinary oncologists that
warranted. The surgical goal should be to ensure a strong and tension-
feline patients usually recover much more rapidly from thecutaneous
free closure that will provide an extended duration of mechanical
effects of radiation therapy than dogs do. The post-radiation therapy
support to the coapted wound edges. Specific examples of desirable
inflammatory reaction is usually quite intense when a full course of
techniques for these situations may include (but are not limited to)
therapy is administered; therefore it may well be that the overall less
the use of 'walking' sutures, various stenting techniques, multiple layer
Aial e si sieo ui uaas Bupunom oi asuodsan Aoneuuueu jueiaqnxa
closures, and slight eversion of the skin (to maximize the surface area
factor in their more favorable post-radiation treatment outcomes.
of dermal-to-dermal contact). Combinations of factors detrimental
 Another example of favorable healing in cats involves the process of
to healing can be expected to further increase the overall risk of unde-
engraftment or 'take' after skin graft placement. The general consensus
sirable outcomes such as pseudohealing or indolent pocket forma-
n si ssanrd zea au ir si suns ua 
tion. Such conditions exist when substantial resection of subcutis
more rapid and complete, with a lower likelihood of complications
is anticipated and the wound is located in an area of high motion
in feline patients compared to canine patients. The superior engraft-
such as the axilla or groin (Fig. 17-3) For these situations, postopera-
jo uun e o anp id ae us aua jo said 
tive closed suction drainage and wound immobilization may be
anatomical and physiologic features of feline skin (Box 17-2).
beneficial.
It was not that long ago when veterinarians began to fully appreciate
When dealing with any chronic wound, the establishment or main-
the feline species andto understand that in regard to the treatment of
tenance of perfusion and an adequate supply of wound healing pre-
 medical conditions'cats are not small dogs In the same way, optimum
cursor cells is essential to healing. Often the best success in treating
surgical care of cats requires knowledge ofthe unique features of feline
chronic wounds in cats has been achieved with compound flaps that
 cutaneous anatomy and wound healing physiology, and a willingness
include the subcutis. These flaps supply perfusion from the included
to allow this knowledge to influence the practice of surgery as applied
capillary subdermal plexus, and wound healing cells in the form of
to our feline patients.
REFERENCES
1. Fretz PB. Traumatic and incisional
3.
 Affolter VK, Moore PF. Histologic features
Hartmann M, Jonsson K, Zederfeldt B.
wounds: how they heal. In: Proc 18h
of normal canine and feline skin. Clin
Effect of tissue perfusion and oxygenation
 Annual Surgical Forum American College
Dermatol 1994;12:491-7.
on accumulation of collagen in 
of Veterinary Surgeons. Chicago; 1990.
 Taylor Gl, Minabe T. The angiosomes of
healing wounds. Eur I Surg 1992;158:
p. 25-7.
the mammals and other vertebrates. Plast 
521-6.
Bohling MWw, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
Recon Surg 1992;89:181-215.
Bohling Mw. Cutaneous wound healing
et al. Cutaneous wound healing in the
 Jonsson K, Jensen JA, Goodson WH 3rd,
in the cat: a macroscopic and histologic
cat: a macroscopic description and
et al. Tissue oxygenation, anemia, and 
description and comparison with
omparison with cutaneous wound
perfusion in relation to wound healing
 autaneous wound healing in the dog.
healing in the dog. Vet Surg 2004;33:
in surgical patients. Ann Surg 199l;214:
PhD dissertation. Auburn University;:
579-87.
605-13.
2007.
174
Wound healing
Chapter
17
8. Rudolph R, Vande Berg I, Ehrlich HP.
management of nonhealing axillary
11. Mitsui A, Mathews KG, Linder KE, et al.
 et al. Wound contraction and scar
wounds in 10 cats. J Small Anim Pract
 Effects of fascial abrasion, fasciotomy, and
contracture. In: Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF.
1998;39:475-80.
fascial excision on cutaneous wound
 Lindblad Wl, editors. Wound healing:
10.
 Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
healing in cats. Am J Vet Res
 Biochemical and clinical aspects.
 et al. Comparison of the role of the
2009;70:532-8.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992.
subcutaneous tissues in cutaneous
p. 96-114.
wound healing in the dog and cat.
9.
.Lascelles BD, Davison L, Dunning M,
Vet Surg 2006;35:1-12.
 et al. Use of omental pedicle grafts in the
175
18
lapter
Wounds and wound management
D.M. Anderson, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
spuesnoy ioy Play gudoanap e uaaq sey juawageueu punom
history can be extrapolated. The etiology of wound types and forma-
of years, with the earliest records dating from ancient Egypt citing
tion in cats is summarized in Table 18-1.
remedies of honey, resin, and grease for open wounds. However, it is
pue Bulleay punom isiou jo alou aun ieul sieak ot isel aul ul Aquo
the complex interactions of growth factors and vascular supply have
INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND
become accepted. Wound healing in the cat has unique characteristics
(Chapter 17) and this has implications for wound management. 1-3 In 
WOUND MANAGEMENT
ua isou e u ueau pei aiu jo aud a 'eaua
is now widely accepted for wound management protocols in all
A full clinical examination is always necessary: if there is little infor-
species.
mation as to how the cat has been injured, this is the best way to
The principles of wound management should revolve around a clear
determine the type of wound and thus ascertain the likely prognosis
understanding of wound healing in cats. The gross appearance of the
and appropriate treatment and also to identify further, more serious
dfferent stages of wound healing is important in decision making, as
co-morbidities. It is important not to be distracted by the wound itself
is the recognition of an inflamed wound, a chronic wound, or an
 but to complete a full physical examination.
infected wound. Direct comparison with wounds seen in other species
A minimum database would involve thoracic auscultation, abdomi-
is unhelpful as cats tend to have paler wounds, when compared with
 nal palpation, temperature, pulse, respiration, determination of shock,
dogs, for example, and the skin and granulation tissue layers are
dehydration and a base line packed cell volume/total protein, electro-
thinner and more fragile. Progression of the wound is slower and
lytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine. Cats frequently
u uaas ueu ysuq ssal aq Aeu sueinus sueau punom cn sasuodsa
 present some time after the original injury, so are often dehydrated
the dog (Chapter 17).
on presentation, making interpretation of blood results and assess-
 Other unique diffculties are found when trying to manage cats with
ment of blood loss or electrolyte disorders such as hypokalemia dif-
wound dressings. Cats may be distressed by or intolerant of heavy
ficult. A minimum hematology and serum biochemistry database is
dressings. They may be reluctant to use a litter tray and frequently soil
Aeue pue uoiuos jeiauan aul auuaap oi lapio ul iyday
the bandage. Hospitalized cats are often reluctant to eat and this
disorders that require treatment as well as the wound. Older cats may
causes problems when trying to maintain nutritional requirements in
have previously unrecognized diseases detected at this time, but this
the face of daily sedation or anesthesia for dressing changes.
should not necessarily preclude treatment of the wounds/injuries. For
example, elevated BUN/creatinine results should be interpreted with
caution until it is clear whether this is renal or pre-renal in origin.
 Neurologic examination is carried out if the cat is unable to stand or
HISTORY
 has deep injuries over or near the spinal column or major peripheral
Cats are usually very fastidious about grooming and cautious about
limbs willbe bandaged, as determination of neurologic defcits may
 ane se Bunon 'aaamoh 'eY asnes Pinos ieu spalqo Bueaiaau
be important to the prognosis, but diffcult to recognize once the cat
more likely to injure themselves in road traffc accidents, fall through
is bandaged. Furthermore as subsequent dressing changes may be
trees, or be attacked by dogs or other cats. Occasionally, malicious
carried out under anesthesia or sedation, an accurate determination
injury is seen when cats present with burns, elastic band induced
 of neurologic status may be diffcult at a later date. Thoracic radio-
necrosis of extremities, or ballistic injury. Owners rarely see the acci-
 graphs should also be taken to nule out diaphragmatic rupture, pul-
dent and the typical history is that the cat returned to the house with 
 monary contusion, or pleural hemorrhage. On admission, a record is
the injury, or was found near the house. Close examination of the cat 
 made of the location of the wound and associated injuries together
 may provide information as to the type of injury and from there the
with an accurate description of the condition of the wound. This
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00018-4
177
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Table 18-1 Wound types and etiologies
Type
Comment
Traumatic
 Shear 
 Skin loss with underlying tissue loss, often the extremities, which may indicate joint instability or bone loss. Usually heavily
contaminated
 Avulsion 
Skin loss with little underlying tissue loss or damage. Skin may lie back down onto the underlying tissues and initially appear
normal despite devascularization
 Degloving
Skin loss at the extremities resulting in a circumferential deficit. This is problematic as it cannot contract to heal by second
intention and fibrous strictures can result
Lacer ation
Skin wound with little lateral trauma from the wound. Variable depth, generally little associated tissue damage
Puncture wound
 Classic example is cat or dog bite wounds. In the cat, there is potential for deep seated infection and abscessation, or
introduction of sepsis into a body cavity causing pyothorax or peritonitis
 Ballistic 
pue pedu! uo alqwni, Aew sialng pasou yos alssiwu aul jo anuersip pue paads aul uo juapuadap s! pasnen abewep aul
Crush injury
There may be little damage on the skin surface, but underlying organ and muscle damage may be difficult to determine at 
initial examination. Severe muscle necrosis can have renal consequences
 Abrasion
Partial thickness injury with dermal retention, but contamination and denuding of epidermis. Injuries generally heal well, but 
may cause significant fluid loss if large areas affected. Can be extremely painful. Cats have thin, loosely attached skin and are 
less likely to suffer these injuries 
 Skin loss
 Heat/chemical
Heat pad burns, malicious injury,. extravasation of intravenous medication. The extent of the damage may not be apparent for
burns
several days until the skin necrosis is complete
Skin sloughing
Unusual acute onset skin loss may be associated with generalized immune mediated vasculitis, drug eruption, venomous bite 
secondary to 
(e.g.. snake/insect bite). The cat may be very depressed due to the systemic effects; skin slough caused by vasculitis may be
necrosis or
associated with systemic disorders such as coagulopathy. hypotension, pyrexia, etc. Skin loss depends on type of bite and 
vasculitis
mechanism of actions. Renal failure can occur secondary to immune complex deposition or secondary to the underlying cause
and should be treated aggressively
Chronic wounds
Fistul a/sinus/
foreign body
be more common in young cats that are more curious (e.g.. sewing needles). Cat bites into the perineal area can cause fistula
tracts
formation due to penetration of the rectum and heavy contamination of the puncture tract. Bony sequestra or bullet
fragments may result in non-healing sinus tracts
Physiologic
Pressure sore/
Cats are rarely heavy enough to suffer from pressure sores on recumbency, but skin loss and ulceration can occur secondary to
ulceration
skin thinning and poor repair secondary to hyperadrenocorticism
Frostbite/
Usually cats are good at protecting themselves against extreme weather, but where cats have been trapped out of doors, they
Sunburn
may suffer skin loss of extremities, especially the pinnae 
latrogenic
 Surgical wound 
Cats have thin skin and usually heal well after primary repair, although some data suggests they heal slower than dogs.
dehiscence
Wound dehiscence usually occurs secondary to tension, poor suture technique, infection, self-trauma or poor vascularization of
seae asaul juawanou ol anp anuansap oi auoud ag keu spunom Aellie pue jeuinbui se yons seae pioads sabpa us aun
may require special reconstruction techniques to be successfully healed. Abdominal wound dehiscence can be treated
successfully with prompt intervention4
Tourniquet
Malicious tourniquet injuries may be seen when elastic material is tied around extremities causing necrosis. Improper bandage
injuries 
application or management may also result in skin loss due to a tourniquet effect on the limb 
178
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
· Assess injuries
 Box 18-1 Minimal clinical information for wound record
· Cover wound and stabilize
Suspected (or known) etiology
 Precise location, dimensions of the wound (e.g. photographs)
 Depth of the wound and suspected involvement of subcutaneous
·Anesthetise or sedate
tissues
· Examine wound,lavage and debride
 Degree of contamination of the wound
ssess
·Re-examine wound
·Determine plan for closure
Figure 18-1 A flow diagram illustrating the plan for wound
management.
enables objective monitoring of wounds that may continue to progress
after treatment has started, due to poor vascular supply. A dated pho-
tographic record of the wound should be made in the case of sus-
pected malicious or ballistic wounds. Generally, wounds can be
assessed in three stages (Fig. 18-1). These stages may all occur within
a few hours, or within days, depending on the nature of the wounds
 Figure 18-2 This cat presented 24 hours after injury and the digital pads
were clearly cyanotic, indicating very poor peripheral perfusion. The foot 
and injuries.
was cold to touch but the cat was normothermic.
Initial treatment of the wounded cat
wound as well as contamination of the hospital environment with
All cases showing signs of shock that present with a traumatic injury
 bacteria from the cat. The fur should be carefully clipped away from
 should be treated appropriately (see Chapter 1). Supplemental oxygen
the edge of the wound, using sterile scissors at the wound edge and
should be provided during handing in the dyspneic patient until the
fine blade clippers in unaffected areas. It is important to clip a wide
 -iauiodkh 'sno pan uaaq sey Ainlui sieioun ateiosse jo Arissod
aas on aiqe aq ot pue Ap pue uea eaie aul suday aieey oi eaie
mia is a common fnding on initial presentation, parly due to shock,
skin changes around the wound as well as adjacent to it. The wound
but also if the cat has been collapsed outside for a period of time. This
 can be protected from loose hair by filling with sterile aqueous jelly
will need appropriate management and gradual warming by the use
that can be easily lavaged away.
 of heat pads, water beds, warming IV fluids, wheat bags, bubble wrap.
 The clinical records should list minimum information regarding the
space blankets, and so on (see Chapter 4).
wound at this stage ( Box 18-1). Photographs of the wound are a useful
Analgesics should be initiated
immediately on  admission,
addition to the clinical records. Some dressings come with paper
regardless of patient status. This improves patient handling and
templates with centimeter grading so an approximate drawing can be
 punom on iojd shemued uied aul jo dn puim, iayuny sjuaaand 
made of the wound shape and size. The presence of other injuries
management.
whether or not directly associated with the wound (eg.. a jaw fracture
which may affect the cat's ability to maintain nutrition during the
First aid treatment of the wound
period of treatment) should also be noted in the patient's record.
Sterile instruments areused to investigate the wound, lifing skin flaps
All wounds are potentially contaminated, either with environmental
or endogenous bacteria. However they are also susceptible to coloni-
diagnostic procedures such as radiography or ultrasound to determine
zation with nosocomial bacteria from the hospital environment or
the involvement of deeper structures. For example a penetrating
from the owner and staff handlingthe animal. Cats with open wounds
injury over the thoracic skin should be carefully assessed to ensure
should be handled with gloves and procedures to prevent cross-
that pleural contamination or injury is not missed.
contamination before and after handling should be in place. On
 Assessment of the vascular supply to peripheral injuries can be dif.
admission, wounds should be immediately covered with a waterproof
ficult; although angiography is the definitive way to determine the
soft dressing to prevent colonization of the wound with hospital.
viability of arterial supply to the distal limb, often animals with this
acquired bacteria prior to definitive treatment. A sterile non-adherent
level of injury are not suitable candidates for long procedures under
dressing covered with a bandage will suffice, or a waterproof sterile
 anesthesia, and intravenous contrast agents are contraindicated in cats
drape may be used for the first one to two hours after admission. The
where the systemic circulation is compromised in any way. Thus
cat is then stabilized prior to a definitive examination of the wound.
assessment of vascular supply often relies on clinical acumen and
non-invasive techniques: feeling the toes for warmth, palpating distal
Definitive wound assessment
pulses, using color flow ultrasound or Doppler detection of blood
flow. Visual assessment of the color of non-pigmented pads and
The wound is assessed more thoroughly once the cat is comfortable
needle pinpricks can also be used to assess bleeding (Fig. l8-2).
and can be safely sedated or anesthetized. At this stage, the frst aid
However, the clinician should be aware that extremities will appear
bandage is removed using gloves, with the surface of the examination
 cold and pale in cats with shock or hypothermia, and clinical exami-
table cleaned and covered with a disposable surface (e.g., incontinence
 nation should be repeated regularly as resuscitation proceeds. Needle
179
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
 Box 18-2 Initial wound management
1. All wounds should be lavaged during and after assessment.
The only suitable fluid for lavage, regardless of the degree of
contamination, is warm sterile isotonic fluid. The fluid should be 
sprayed gently into the wound using an 18G needle, ensuring 
that the pressure does not drive foreign material into the wound,
nor cause edema of healthy tissue (Fig. 18-3)
 2. Large pieces of foreign material or fascia contaminated with
foreign material may be removed or sharply dissected using sterile
instruments. Debridement continues at each dressing change
until all contaminated or non-viable tissue has been removed 
(Fig. 18-4A-C)
 3. Viable skin flaps may be retained at the first dressing change, but 
skin that is thin and avascular should be resected, even if this
means more open wound is uncovered (Fg. 18-4D)
4. Penetrating injuries should be surgically explored under sterile 
 conditions once the overlying contamination has been removed.
Care should be taken with wounds overlying the thorax and 
Figure 18-3 Lavage of a wound in a cat with sterile isotonic fluids, using
abdomen in case the injury enters a body cavity (for example, the
 anesthetist should be prepared to provide positive pressure
D8l ue ylm abuuAs e pue dei Aem-aaui e oi paupene ias buiib e
needle.
ventilation)
 5. After lavage a swab is taken for culture and sensitivity in order to 
 direct future decisions regarding antibiotic choice
it to slip and then it must be replaced in order to avoid risk of a
 6. The injury is then re-bandaged pending the next assessment of
bandage-related ischemic injury. Hospitalization of cats with wounds
the wound or definitive closure
ensures close monitoring. but soiling of the bandage due to use of the
litter tray or the confined space of the kennel may bring additional
challenges.
 Sedation or anesthesia for dressing changes is advisable both to
 pinpricks should also be interpreted with caution in these circum-
reduce the stress and pain for the cat, and also for staff safety. Daily
stances and bleeding due to venous stasis or coagulopathy may be
J eis pue ie yoq ioy iyssas Aiaaa aq ue sasueu sussa
misleading. Needle pinpricks can also introduce infection into
they are done without adequate analgesia. However, this requires
healthy tissue.
careful planning and review of the medications used; regular sedation
 Each type of wound involves different challenges in terms of assess-
u iea oi aueioniai e jo dot uo auaaddeui pue easneu u insai Aeu
ment, as the risks are inherently different depending on the nature of
the hospital. Analgesics such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
the injury. In simple lacerations, the tissue is often clearly viable but
(NSAIDs) should not be given on an empty stomach and this makes
it is not always easy to determine the degree of damage below the
management of the cat's analgesic protocol more diffcult. Nursing
surface and it is very important to assess the possibility of injuries to
staff must weigh the cat daily (taking the dressings into consideration)
the underlying tendons and joints in distal limb injuries. However.
to monitor any weight loss, and accurate recording of nutritional
burns, abrasions, avulsions or crush injuries may involve widespread
intake is essential. The aim of the daily management plan should be
damage to the skin that is delayed and not obvious on the initial
that the cat is sedated and the dressing changed as early as possible
presentation.
 so as to give nursing staff plenty of time during the day to provide the
cat with opportunities to eat or be encouraged to do so (see Chapter
6 and 7). Cats that require prolonged wound management may
Initial wound management
beneft from a feeding tube such as an esophagostomy tube (see
The initial plan of management (Box 18-2) allows time for the full
Chapter 12). Most of these cases will also benefit from maintenance
extent of the injury to be assessed prior to establishing a treatment
suuaand 'uauan laui jo uoemp au ioy spimy snouanenu
 ar  nu  o a ir a a ui
dehydration due to lack of water intake during this period.
 A simple mnemonic has been devised by the International Wound
Bed Advisory Board,7 which provides a practical working framework
DAILY WOUND MANAGEMENT
au aul on aueu suissaip auo wo Auaisisuo pasn aq ueo ie
even if there has been a change in staff. This mnemonic enables con-
sistent wound assessment and treatment plans to be recorded at each
Following frst aid and then the initial management, the wound is
dressing change (Box 18-3).
managed on a daily or as needed basis. Bandages and dressings are
often changed daily in the early stages of wound management and
then the frequency of changes is reduced according to the contamina-
THE BANDAGE
tion and progression of healing. The biggest challenge with open
wound management in cats is maintenance of the bandage. Cats toler-
ate bandages poorly and frequently shake the affected leg or chew at
The bandage is constructed of three layers. The primary layer is in
the dressing to try and remove it. Elizabethan, Buster or 'tube' collars
contact with the wound and is the layer that most influences the time
may be necessary to maintain the bandage (see Chapter 4), but care
frame of healing. The secondary and tertiary layers allow protection,
should be taken to monitor water and food intake with these collars
absorption, and support of the dressing and prevent any further
on. In addition, persistent attempts to remove the bandage may cause
damage by the animal or the environment In cats, it is important to
180
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
A
Figure 18-4 The series shows a degloving/avulsion injury at presentation on referral, 24 hours after
the injury (A, B). The foot has been incompletely clipped and cleaned and the wound surface is
relatively dry. (c) During cleaning it became apparent that the plantar skin was avulsed and this skin
was sharply debrided using surgical instruments. (D) The proximal skin above the hock was also
avulsed but as it had a more reliable blood supply, this skin was trimmed but left in situ. (E) The
wound was dressed with a wet-to-dry dressing and examined under anesthesia the following
morning. The proximal skin was found to be healthy and the wound bed showed early signs of
G
granulation. The wound was then dressed with hydrogel under a foam dressing. (F-G) Four days
later the wound has granulated well and is prepared for full thickness free skin graft.
keep these supportive layers as light as possible without compromis-
Box 18-3 wound assessment mnemonic used between
ing security of the bandage. The narrow diameter of cats' limbs, and
dressing changes (From the International wwound Bed
their thin skin, mean that the bandage must be applied very carefully
Advisory Board)?
to prevent ischemic injury.
TME (tissue; infection, inflammation; moisture; epithelialization)
assesses the wound with regard to:
Primary layer
T: The condition of the tissue. Necrotic tissue must be debrided, dry 
There are a huge number of primary layer dressings and this makes it
tissue must be rehydrated, avascular tissue must be revascularized
Adde oi mou mouy ot asinu io uoasins Aieuaa aui ioy suisnyuo
or debrided
 I: Infection or inflammation must be treated. Either treat specifically
the principles of wound management to the wound. Nearly all wound
with antibiotics or non-specifically with saline lavage, antibacterial
dressings have been developed for use in the human market and there
dressings
is very little objective data on how these dressings perform in cats.
 M: The level of moisture in the wound. If the tissues are dry.
Wound dressings can be defined by what they achieve on application
to the wound (Table 18-2).8 There is no perfect wound dressing and
then they may need water delivery in the form of gels or 
 many products are able to carry out more than one role Thus a hydro-
hydrocolloids to maintain tissue humidity. However, exuding 
wounds will need highly absorbent products to remove exudate,
 gel may achieve debridement by enabling autolytic separation of
inflammatory fluids from the wound surface, and reduce
necrotic tissue, but also trap exudate and inflammatory mediators.
 inflammatory responses as well as maceration of the wound and 
 drawing fluid out of the wound and reducing edema.
surrounding skin
 E: Ultimately epithelialization results in closure of the wound 
Debriding dressings
and healing. Dressings that allow epithelialization to proceed 
and protect the fragile epithelium from abrasion or 
The single most important step in early wound management is ade-
desiccation are important in the later stages of wound
quate debridement. Not only is this the most effective way to treat
management 
infected wounds, but it also prevents infection by removing foreign
material and purulent inflammatory exudate, thus preventing the
181
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Table 18-2 Summary of contact layer products for wound dressings
Product type
Examples (not comprehensive)
Action/indications
 Polyurethane membranes
Melolin (Smith and Nephew)
A sterile protective surface but does not maintain tissue hydration
Polyurethane foam
Allevyn (Smith and Nephew)
Absorption of fluid from wound surface and controlled evaporation
maintaining a humid environment
Hydrogels
Intrasite gel Flexigel (sheet form)
Rehydration of tissue, absorption of fluid and maintaining a moist
(Smith and Nephew)
environment. May be analgesic if applied cold and may be used combined
with other products on the wound surface, e.g. antibacterial drugs. alginates
Hydrocolloid
Granuflex (Convatec)
Water is trapped in the colloid and autolytic debridement is promoted. Debris
may be trapped in the colloid gel that is produced on interaction with exudate
Alginates
Kaltostat (Convatec) Tegaderm (3M)
Active stimulation of inflammatory processes in wounds. Must be in a moist
environment otherwise may be irritant 
Collagens
Biosist (Dechra Veterinary Products)
May improve healing by encouraging fluid flow through the wound and
providing a 'scaffold' for granulation tissue
Silver dressings
 Acticoat (Smith and Nephew)
Bactericidal and may also stimulate healing
Acemannan
Aloe Vera creams (various)
Stimmulation of healing and reduction of inflammatory responses?
Honey
Activon (Advancis Medical)
Bactericidal, stimulation of healing. draws fluid through the wound,
encourages autolysis
Figure 18-5 A wet-to-dry dressing debrides the wound by pulling 
Figure 18-6 A hydrogel in combination with a foam dressing allows
aeun buissap yea ie anens aul yo anss yoau pue aepnxa
gentle debridement, maintenance of a moist but not macerated wound
It will also damage healthy granulation tissue.
environment and traps exudate and debris in the foam.
 perpetuation of inflammatory responses in the wound and encourag-
ing the development of granulation tissue The most frequently used
tissue, as well as trap fluid within the gel structure allowing it to be
debriding dressing is the 'wet-to-dry' dressing, where a sterile gauze
removed from the surface of the wound and flushed away during
swab is moistened with sterile isotonic fluid (eg. Hartmann's solu-
lavage. Hydrogels are usually applied underneath another dressing
tion) and placed onto the wound for 12-24 hours. When the dressing
(e.g. foam backed with semi-permeable membrane; Fig. 18-6) in
is removed, it pulls away the surface necrotic material, together with
order to hold the gel in the wound and prevent desiccation. Cat
trapped exudate and inflammatory mediators (Fig. 18-5). This is a
wounds are rarely very productive and using products that keep the
wound moist is important.
wounds, but the swabs are painful to remove and few cats will tolerate
this dressing change without adequate sedation/analgesia or anesthe-
sia. Wet-to-dry dressings may also damage tissue that is already healthy
Absorbent dressings (Fig. 18-6)
'ass uoen a u an ap Aas  sii ul pue
In the management of wounds in human patients, exudation is
Hydrogels can also be used to debride wounds and may be a 'gentler
 copious and maintaining fluid balance is a challenge. In cats, however,
alternative (Fig. 18-4E). Gels can rehydrate dry necrotic material,
wounds tend to produce little fluid and although there are occasions
182
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
Figure 18-7 A moisture-retaining dressing may play an important
Figure 18-8 Sterile honey was used underneath a foam dressing
role in the cat in maintaining a moist wound environment. This is a
overnight to facilitate separation of the eschar (necrotic skin) in this cat
hydropolymer dressing showing expansion on contact with fluid. The
with a distal shear injury.
fluid is retained and maintains a humid environment at the wound
surface.
Honey (Fig. 18-8)
Honey has been used for 5000 years as an effective wound manage-
where absorption of fluid is necessary, the majority of wounds in cats
ment tool. Medical grade honey is pathogen free and is free from
are more likely to be fairly dry and the challenge is preventing desic-
clostridial spores. While honey has an osmotic effect in the wound,
cation, rather than maceration. Generally, the foam and absorbent
drawing fluid through the tissues and reducing bacterial growth, there
dressings developed for the human market are more than adequate
are also specific antibacterial and anti-inflammatory substances. Deb-
for absorption of the levels of fluid produced in cat wounds. However.
ridement of the wound occurs by autolysis and separation of necrotic
using an absorptive dressing with a semi-permeable membrane
tissue from viable tissue.12 In vitro data is available for honey dressing
backing enables the maintenance of a water vapor pressure over
 products, but there are no controlled prospective clinical trials in any
the wound environment and this will improve wound surface
species. There is no specific data to support honey of any particular
condition.
 origin over another.
Moisture-retaining dressings (Fig. 18-7)
Myiasis
Hydrocolloids, hydrogels, hydroactive are all terms used to describe
 Maggots may be used in a controlled way to debride necrotic or non-
dressings that have been developed for the human wound market to
viable tissue within a wound, using them to digest necrotic material
cope with the challenges associated with chronic distal limb wounds.
with the secretion of saliva containing a chymotrypsin-like serine
 protease. They also stimulate fluid production and auto-irrigation of
These products both deliver hydration to wounds and as trap and
a wound as well as secrete antibacterial substances. Sterile prepara-
absorb fluid from the wound, keeping inflammatory mediators off
the surface and allowing one-way movement of contaminated exudate
tions of larvae of the common bluebottle fly (Lucilia sericata) are
out of the wound, without allowing it to dry out. In the cat, moisture-
commercially available for use in wounds, with guidelines given as to
what quantity is required (www.zoobiotic co.uk). The larvae are about
ing a moist environment that is most conducive to the development
2-3 mm long on application, but are 8-10 mm in length two to four
of healthy granulation tissue as well as protecting the epithelialization
days later when they leave the wound seeking a dark dry place to
occurring along the edges of the wound. While it is important to
pupate Atthis stage the larvae are removed at the frst dressing change
maintain a moist or humid environment, allowing dressings to satu-
and depending on the condition of the wound a second treatment
rate will result in maceration of the normal surrounding skin as the 
may be used, or the wound may no longer need debridement and
keratinocytes absorb the excess fluids and slough.
other dressings are used (see above). The young larvae are very fragile
and must be kept moist for at least 24 hours, but thereafter are more
Jixonoi Aq paiae Aiasiaape aq Aeu siosaeu raamoh isnqoi
Other categories
drugs, and hydrogels appear to reduce larval survival in the wound.
There are many miscellaneous wound dressing products that are
so the wound should be thoroughly lavaged prior to each application.
thought to improve the rate of wound healing, or reducethe incidence
The larvae not only secrete enzymes and digest necrotic tissue, but will
of wound infection,--l ranging from nanocrystalline silver, honey.
also ingest and clear multi-drug resistant bacteria from the wound.
aloe vera, to sterile pathogen-free maggots. It is important to be aware
that there is no reported clinical evidence to support the effectiveness
Nanocrystalline siiver
of these products in any species, including the cat, and recommenda-
Silver sulfadiazine cream has long been used for prevention of infec-
tions are based on small series, individual case reports or anecdotal
tion associated with burns and radiation wounds and historically
evidence. The products presented here are just a small selection of
silver vessels were used to make drinking water safe. Modern silver
commercially available dressings that might be useful in the manage-
dressings use nanocrystalline silver, which is more labile in the wound
ment of wounds in cats.
and is released more slowly, thus achieving a longer effect.14 Some
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
studies suggest that there may be improved wound healing in infected
chronic wounds and that dressing changes can be reduced.15 However.
WOUND CLOSURE OPTIONS
while there is established evidence that silver has bactericidal effects,
recent data has found silver deposits in distant organs and high serum
Surgical closure of wounds results in a more cosmetic final result as
silver levels that may be toxic, particularly in very small patients such
well as a more rapid recovery and return to function. However, imme-
diate closure of a wound may be contraindicated and repeat assess-
acquisition of a sil gene.
ment of the wound enables decision making that allows closure of
the wound at an appropriate time (Fig. 18-10). There are four options
Vacuum-assisted wound closure (Fig. 18-9)
for wound closure (Box 18-4).
Controlled negative pressure can be applied to wounds to accelerate
the production of granulation tissue and increase exudate removal
from the wound surface. Granulation tissue formation is accelerated,
but wound contraction and epithelialization may be delayed. This
BITE WOUNDS
may be a useful approach for very large wounds in locations where it
is diffcult to maintain dressings, accelerating the formation of granu-
 The most common bite wound seen is that from other cats. The injury
lation tissue and preparing the wound for reconstruction. Vacuum-
is different to that seen with wild animal or dog bite wounds, as there
assisted closure has also been used for complete wound management
is usually very little bruising or crush injury, but a small penetrating
without reconstruction. In cats, who have loose skin that contracts
wound. Introduction of oral bacteria deep into the underlying tissues
well, it may be that this technique is more effective than in the distal
usually results in the formation of a painful abscess, the 'cat bite
limb of dogs.17.18
abscess'. Cats present with a history of one to three days of depression,
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 18-9 A two year old cat with a complete degloving injury of its right pelvic limb was treated with vacuum assisted wound closure, following
seven days of standard wound management (combination of surgical debridement and wet-dry dressings). (A) Non-adherent paraffin impregnated 
gauze (Jelonet, Smith & Nephew) is wrapped around the limb, covering the entire wound and preventing injury to exposed blood vessels, nerves and 
tendons. (B) Open-cell polyurethane foam (Smith & Nephew) is cut to fit the shape of the wound and skin staples are used to circumferentially
connect the pieces and cover the entire wound area. (C) Adhesive, transparent film (Smith & Nephew) is placed over the foam to seal the wound. This
is assisted by the application of colostomy tube paste around the proximal wound edge. (D) A 2 cm diameter hole is cut in the film and an adhesive 
suction port (Smith & Nephew) is applied, with the tubing exiting dorsally. (E) On recovery from sedation and following application of -80 mmHg
pressure, the cat is comfortable with the device, with no attempts at self-trauma. (Courtesy of Laura Owen.)
184
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
Figure 18-10. Decision making in
closure of wounds.
Clean viable
tssue
Primary closure 
Debride, lavage
 Delayed primary
Contaminated;
and assess 24
closure when
viable tissue
hours later
punon
cean
assessment
Closure when
 granulation
tissue established
Contaminated or
Debnde, lavage
epeated
infected or
and reassess 12-
dressing changes
non-viable tissue
 24 hours later
Until clean
Heal by second
intention
Box 18-4 Options for wound closure
1. Primary closure: Surgical wounds or simple clean lacerations can
is healthy by the development of granulation tissue throughout 
be closed primarily (Fig. 18-11). This form of closure is never 
the wound, it is then considered suitable for surgical closure. In 
suitable where there is underlying tissue damage, contamination 
the cat this is often difficult to determine (see Chapter 17). as 
Kundui uoisinae algissod e si aaut anaum lo jellaiew uhiaoy yi
granulation tissue may be sparse and slow to form, developing
Aeay lauila ane sien ui spunom Aue aunsop Aewud paaeiaa 7
from the edges, but being slow to establish in the center.
 contaminated, of unknown etiology. or are presented sometime
4. Healing by second intention: Some wounds, particularly partial 
after the trauma. The wound is managed open for two to four days 
thickness wounds, or small wounds, may heal quickly with simple,
to allow recovery of the skin, to establish that there is an intact 
careful wound management, and it rapidly becomes apparent that 
blood supply and to allow drainage of inflammatory fluid, exudate,
surgical intervention is not going to be necessary. However, in the 
and removal of foreign material prior to surgical closure of the 
cat some wounds heal very poorly and will always require surgical
wound.
closure (e.g. axillary and inguinal wounds and wounds with little 
 3. Secondary closure: Heavily contaminated, infected wounds, or
subcutaneous tissue). Open wound management is not a cheap
wounds with extensive tissue loss such as the shear injuries seen in
option and the pros and cons should be carefully established with 
the distal limb of cats in road traffic accidents, contaminated crush
the owner at the outset, so as not to compromise care of the 
injuries seen with dog bite wounds, or the deficits resulting from 
wound (for example, by trying to reduce the frequency of dressing 
ruptured abscesses, benefit from a prolonged period of open 
changes which is often counterproductive). Distal limb shear and 
(8'vzl-8l bh) aunsop buiduane ol loud juawabeuew punom
uen ing aw pue suawuwon snowoua ainban saunui uosinae
loj Auessarau s! se buol se lof uado pabeuew s! punom aul
be successfully treated provided the owner understands what is 
 infection to be controlled. when the wound shows evidence that it 
involved from the start.19
anorexia, and pyrexia and there is often a painful swelling associated
which would require specific treatment.2l Cats should be evaluated for
with the injury. The commonest bacteria isolated from these injuries
feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukemia virus status with
are Pasteurella multocida and obligate anaerobes. Ninety-five per cent
 serologic testing six months after the bite.
 of these abscesses will resolve with a short (seven to ten days) course
 Dog and wild animal bite wounds are more commonly associated
pue pateidse io panuel aa Pinous sasassqe aiel os'uiixoue go
with tissue loss and crush injury. Contaminating bacteria will include
lavaged with warm sterile isotonic saline to relieve the pain associated
 obligate anaerobes, but less commonly the Pasteurella species found
after cat bites. Generally, a broad-spectrum antibiotic with activity
improves recovery, achieving resolution of pyrexia, pain, and inflam-
against anaerobes would be appropriate; however, culture of an
mation associated with the abscess. Abscesses over vital structures
infected wound on admission can be useful. One report of a dog bite
such as joints should be explored carefully in case there is joint sepsis.
found a canine-specific Mycoplasma species, which allowed successful 
185
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
treatment of the infection with ciprofloxacin, which was not the first
Body wall defects should be repaired, but skin wounds may be better
choice of antibiotic on presentation.22 The crush injury associated
treated with delayed primary or secondary closure, to allow resolution
aos ioy sisoioau anssil panunuos asneo Aeuu spunom anq sop yim
of infection prior to closure.
days after the injury. Bruising and hematoma formation may be wide-
spread, providing a medium for the development of celulitis and
widespread sepsis (see Chapter 3), and avulsion injuries to cutaneous
BURN WOUNDS
vessels may result in cutaneous ischemia and further tissue loss or
infection. Crush injuries can also cause damage to lymphatic vessels
and long-term complications include lymphedema.
uaum 'stupinq suunq ul padden sies ui paodai uaaq aaey suing
 Cats with suspected bite wounds should be carefully assessed for
resting on warm car engines, or in malicious circumstances. However.
body cavity or spinal injury with thoracic and abdominal radio-
it is more common that they are injured when placed on heating pads
gaphs.2.24 Utrasound examination of the body wall may be useful
during anesthetic procedures or from prolonged exposure to operating
 to determine injuries to abdominal organs and body wall defects, and
lights or heat lamps. latrogenic injuries usually only result in skin
CT imaging may be used to accurately detect and characterize injuries
damage; however, other etiologies may have associated life-threatening
to the skull (Fig. 18-13). Injuries to the limbs should be evaluated for
complications such as smoke inhalation or orthopedic injuries.
peripheral nerve injury as well as more obvious orthopedic injury.
aul pue sunq ped ieaq oi asuodsau ul laistq on Ajaylun si uys ie
ueq ae sani a aua auap oi i aq a 
injury is often overlooked for a few days after the incident. The
Vascular injury may be assessed with Doppler examination of major
skin becomes white or hard to the touch and the hair epilates easily.
vessels, angiography, or bleeding from a toenail.
Eventually, as the eschar forms it separates from the underlying sub-
Initial treatment should include analgesics, intravenous broad-
cutaneous tissue and discharge may be noticed at the edges. In the
spectrum antibiotics and exploration and lavage of crush injuries.
absence of noting the injury acutely, the extent of damage should be
assessed at seven days: at this stage further skin loss is unlikely and
the eschar may be surgically removed. Partial thicknes eschars (scabs)
 may already show signs of epithelialization underneath and will heal
quickly provided the cat is prevented from self-excoriation. Eschars
can also be removed using hydrogels, honey, or other hydrating/
debriding dressing materials (see Fig. 18-8). Full-thickness injuries are
covered with silver sulfadiazine ointment or managed with moisture
controlling wound dressings and systemic antibiotics. All cases should
O paau m sanlui aaiel uim sie pue eisaaieue aienape uaig an
be hospitalized for intravenous fluid therapy.
BALLISTIC INJURIES
Ballistic injuries are generally rare in cats, but most likely to be related
to malicious intent The injury sustained depends on the type of pro-
jectile and the velocity (kinetic energy). The commonest ballistic
injury seen in cats in the UK is from air powered rifles. The projectile
is an hourglass shape and made of a soft metal. They should be low
Fgure 18-11 Wounds suitable for primary closure should be clean and
velocity. but adaptations to the pellet and/or the barrel of the air rifle
not contaminated or infected. Most traumatic wounds would not be 
may make them a higher velocity and thus much more harmful. Low
suitable for primary closure.
velocity injuries (considered to be <l000 ft/second) result in smaller
A
B
Figure 18-12 (A) A perineal cat bite resulted in a recto-cutaneous fistula. (B) Daily flushing allowed the wound to heal uneventfully by second
intention, although secondary closure could also have been used once the rectal surface had closed.
186
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
LOSSY（Q=95）
LOSSY（Q=95
Figure 18-13 This cat presented with dysphagia and Horner syndrome
Figure 18-14 A CT image of a cat presented with a medium velocity
after sustaining bite injuries to the ventral neck. The CT scan shows a
ballistic injury. The bullet fragments create radiodense artefacts showing
comminuted fracture of the left tympanic bulla.
the scatter of the fragments of the missile and the extent of tissue
involvement, including pulmonary contusion adjacent to the site of
impact.
injuries, with less fragmentation of projectile material on impact and
is a time-consuming process and the owner needs to reveal all aspects
bling trajectory it may not pass through the exit wound. All ballistic
of how the cat lives at home what happens with the dressing. how
injuries should be regarded as contaminated, with a vacuum effect
 a 's ie a a m r uaq su i a
on entry that sucks tissue skin, and fur into the wound. The
health of the cat, other injuries, and signs of stress (e.g. FLUTD). This
track of the projectile/fragments may be unpredictable and all entry
builds up a picture of issues (that may not be central to the wound
wounds should be carefully explored and lavaged. Radiographs or CT
management per se) that could be improved upon in order to achieve
help to identify fragments, as they are likely to be radiodense and will
the expected rate of wound healing.
identify potential risks such as abdominal or thoracic organ injury
(Fig. 18-14).
Further investigations
 Due to the contaminated nature of these injuries, they are ideally
treated with delayed primary or secondary closure, with removal of a
Hematology, biochemistry, and serology may identify other underly-
wide area of fur around the injury and cleaning and lavage/bandaging
ing diseases that are contributing to the etiology of delayed wound
at initial presentation. Photographic recording of injuries, together
healing. Diagnostic imaging may help to identify foreign body
with patient and date identifcation in the image may be important
involvement or sequestra (Fig. 18-15).
for prosecution of the perpetrator and projectile fragments should be
saved (in a plastic container, not a metal one) and handed to the
police (not to the owner).
Biopsy
 During surgical wound debridement all tissue that is removed or a
 biopsy should be submitted for histopathological analysis and culture
NON-HEALING WOUNDS
(Fig. 18-16). On occasion, an underlying tumor may be present or the
wound bed may transform to a neoplastic phenotype. Furthermore,
there may be organisms, foreign body reaction, or other pathological
Non-healing wounds can be very problematic to treat in cats. A list of
signs that may indicate a cause for non-healing. A complete clinical
possible causes of non-healing wounds is provided in Table 18-3. This
history is helpful for the pathologists in order to enable them to
is not a completely comprehensive list, but indicates suggestions for
 suggest appropriate immunostaining or other tests.
further diagnostic workup that may be helpful when carrying out
investigations.
Culture and sensitivity testing
History and signalment
Wound infection is a common cause of non-healing wounds so
culture and sensitivity testing should be considered. Wounds with
The signalment, history of presentation, management, and response
healthy granulation tissue, no odor and little exudate are unlikely to
to treatment are essential to understand a non-healing wound. This
be infected. Infected wounds often produce an inflammatory exudate
187
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Table 18-3 Causes of non-healing in chronic wounds
Source
Investigation
 Infection: Bacterial L
Tissue culture; PCR
forms, mycobacteria,
Take biopsies from the chronic part of the
fungal granuloma,
wound, deep in the granulation tissue or in
multi-resistant bacteria
the thickened skin around the wound
 Neoplasia: squamous 
Tissue biopsy
cell carcinoma or
sarcoma
Self-trauma
History taking. hospitalization, observation 
Poor wound
Review clinical history. Look for multiple
management 
veterinary surgeon involvement, infrequent 
bandage changes, poor home care
instructions/compli ance
A
Medical disease:
History and medical investigations,
cachexia, malnutrition,
hematology. biochemistry. abdominal
 protein losing disease,
ultrasound, radiography, fecal/urine analysis
endocrinopathy
Monitor weight loss during treatment,
calculate caloric intake
Viral disease: feline
 Serologic and tissue testing
leukemia virus, feline
immunodeficiency
virus, feline cowpox
Foreign body or
Ultrasound, CT, MRl, radiography
sequestra
In some cases, sino-endoscopy may be
helpful 
 Therapy for
Review treatments and ensure you are
other diseases:
aware of treatments that the cat may have
 immunosuppressants,
received from other veterinary surgeons
long-acting
corticosteroid
treatments, cytotoxic
B
drugs. radiotherapy
Figure 18-15 (A) This cat had a chronic wound on the ventral neck that
had been sutured four times. Clinical examination found a dense 
uoneuiuexa punosenn pue punom aui yieauag sanssil aut ui aanpnis
confirmed a dense linear foreign body. (B) A sewing needle and thread 
were removed and the wound healed uneventfully.
suunons us un au u asuodsan Aoeu ue sasn ie
the wound, which can be seen as erythema, pain, and swelling at the
wound edges. Enlarged regional lymph nodes are also suspicious for
infection (although not definitive) and this should be confirmed with
lymph node aspirates for cytology. A swab taken from the surface of
Extended culture requests
ou sey ieui aimns aaisod e arnpoid Aeu paq punom sunenueig e
clinical significance and indeed may not even warrant antibiotic
anssh uo anno papuaixa isanban o aessanau st ll Aleuoiseo
therapy. It is best to sample after sterile lavage to avoid culturing
 biopsies, particularly if the presence of organisms has been identified
surface contaminants. A swab rolled across the surface of the wound
 on histopathology or cytology (Fig. 18-17). Some organisms are very
may, however, produce a useful sample for cytological analysis, iden-
fastidious and diffcult to culture and polymerase chain reaction tech-
tifying filamentous organisms, for example.25 
eeqos ayuapi ayssans cn pasn uaaq aaey (od) saniu
 Culture of a tissue sample may be more accurate of the underlying
and leishmaniasis in tissue biopsies that had sterile culture results.26
infection and therefore more useful than culture of a superficial
While PCR results do not provide any information on sensitivity.
 swab sample of a chronic wound. A positive culture with an unusual
knowledge that a specific organism is involved can guide therapeutic
resistance pattern or a culture from an inflamed exudative wound is
more likely to be a significant finding. Nosocomial infections (hospi-
tal acquired) are more likely to have an unusual pattern of resistance.
Treatment
 but these infections should be prevented with good hospital protocols
for managing patients with open wounds. Some infections such as
sisoueip leuy e Aq pauuaap si spunom sueay-uou jo juameai
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) are most often
of the limitation on the normal healing processes. Wound healing in
a a u ym au j  aa a  n
cats, for the most part, is very effcient and the commonest cause of
industry.
delayed healing is poor wound management. Increasing the frequency
188
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
Figure 18-17 This interdigital wound failed to heal for some months
anino anss!l shuissap pue aunsop re siduane paieadan adsap
identified a Nocardia infection in the soft tissues of the foot.
Figure 18-16 This non-healing wound on the lip of a tabby cat was
biopsied and found to be a squamous cell carcinoma.
A
B
Figure 18-18 (A) A cat was referred after a multi-resistant Pseudomonas was cultured from the wound. Daily lavage, with wet-to-dry dressings
followed byhydrogel dressings and noother antibioticorantiseptic treatment resolved theinfection satisfactorilyB)The wound after five days of
management.
of dressing changes, monitoring nutrition and cat welfare, and ensur-
results and the laboratory should be notifed to use a suitable panel
ing appropriate dressings are used are the most effective ways of
 of antibiotics in the in vitro tests, i.e, antibiotics that are suitable for
managing chronic wounds. However, in some cases there will be a
 Oral administration in cats.
specific diagnosis and this would need to be addressed.
Wound infection is also a common cause of delayed healing and
often administration of antibiotics is ineffective as a single solution
AXILLARY WOUNDS
to what is essentially a multi-faceted problem. Wound debridement
and lavage followed by daily dressing changes is the single most effec-
tive way to manage wound infection (Fig. 18-18). Unless there is
5.J. Langley-Hobbs
treatment with oral or topical antibiotics/antiseptics is unlikely to be
quaioy e jo juaudenua Aq pasne Alensn aie sies ui spunom aexy
as effective. Sampling wounds for culture is important, particularly in
 in a neck collar or wire loop.2.2 The usual presentation is of an active
non-healing chronic wounds, and may be used as an objective measure
cat that has been missing for a period of time, often several weeks or
of the 'health' ofthe wound. Surface swabs or fluid samples are unreli-
even months.2? The cat may return home with the front leg still
able and may not represent the clinically significant infection, and
trapped in the collar; alternatively, the collar is missing but the cat
tissue biopsies are preferred to bacterial culture. Treatment of infected
wounds should be carried out based on specific culture and sensitivity
189
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
problem for complication-free healing despite aggressive and exten-
an ais e m sien aay u paaanre uaq se san spuo
sive medical and surgical treatment. Primary closure often results in
 nique where the wound was closed primarily and the elbow flap was
wound breakdown even if flaps are used and irrespective of surgeon
experience.2,30
four months' duration and had not had previous surgery. For chronic
wounds with previous unsuccessful attempts at repair, the combina-
Surgical anatomy
tion of omentalization and skin flaps has been successful. There is a
single case report on the use of the omocervical axial pattern flap (see
 The cat has loose and thin skin around the axilla, an essential prereq-
Chapter 19) in combination with an omental pedicle graft, this offers
uisite for climbing and jumping. The well-developed elbow skin fold
a useful alternative where the use of a thoracodorsal axial pattern flap
consists of two opposing layers of skin, triangular in shape, consisting
is not possible due to the extent of the lesion.34
-edas 'anel auul guey Aleipauu e pue lael iano guey Alleiaiel e jo
After anesthesia the wound should be packed with a water soluble
rated by loose connective tissue. Each fold has four attachments: the
jelly before a wide area is clipped and prepared for surgery. Hair
outer layer has a lateral attachment to the brachium and a dorsal
should be clipped from the forelimb distally to the carpus, proximally
attachment to the trunk; the inner layer has medial attachments to the
to the midline, cranially to the neck and caudally to the abdomen,
brachium and a ventral attachment to the trunk. The blood supply is
including the ventral abdomen if omentalization is planned. The cat
thought to derive from the lateral thoracic artery as well as from the
is usually positioned in lateral recumbancy with the affected axilla
subdermal plexus. Due to this abundance of loose skin between the
uppermost; if omentalization is planned the cat can be tilted slightly
forelimb and trunk, when the cat's front leg is fully flexed, the elbow
off lateral to improve access to the abdomen.
lies within a pocket formed by the two layers of skin fold: there is no
skin closely adhering to the caudal and medial brachium.2?
Reconstruction of elbow skin fold29
Hunt originally described the surgical unfolding and advancement of
Etiology
the elbow fold to reconstruct cranioventral skin deficits and axillary
wounds in cats.35,3G Restoring the elbow skin fold before closing the
Axillary wounds classically form a non-healing wound. At presenta-
wound may improve the chances of a successful reconstruction at the
tion the wounds are usually granulated and exudative. They com-
frst surgical intervention (Box 18-5).2?
monly extend from the cranial axilla towards the point of the elbow
and dorsally up to a point mid-way up the thorax, level with the
shoulder joint. In each case loss of the elbow skin fold28.22 and pucker-
Omental pedicle flap and primary closure
ing of skin adjacent to the medial brachium are noticeable.2 The
For chronic wounds with previous unsuccessful attempts at repair, the
surrounding skin is very thin and is under tension because of the
combination of omentalization and primary closure28 30 or a thoraco-
mobility around the axilla.
dorsal axial pattern flap?7 have been successful (Box 18-6).
 The delayed healing can be associated with under-running or pock-
eting.*l The formation of a pocket wound, in which epithelialization
fails due to separation of the skin edges from the underlying wound
Postoperative care, complications
bed, has been suggested as a reason for the chronic nature of axillary
and prognosis
lesions.31 Wound contraction is often impeded because of the tension
and shearing forces of movement as one side of the wound moves
Analgesia should be provided pre- and postoperatively with opioids
against the other as the cat walks.32 Another possible cause of chronic-
and NSAIDs. The wounds are usually dirty or infected so cats are
ity and wound breakdown might be excessive skin-to-wound, or skin-
usually given antibiotics pre- and postoperatively (eg., clavulanate
to-suture line contact within the axilla. In a study evaluating a free
amoxicillin for ten days) which can be changed dependent on culture
latissimus dorsi muscle flap in cats, the donor site consistently broke
results. It should not be necessary to place a drain after placement of
down only where the suture line entered the caudal aspect of the
an omental pedicle as the omentum acts as a natural drain.37 If the
omentum is not used then a closed suction drain or a Penrose drain
contact. Poor vascularity and excessive dead space may also contribute
placed in the dependent part of the right axilla can be used for 24-72
hours. Bandaging should not be necessary. A Velpeau-type bandage33
to the chronicity of these wounds.28
can be placed on the right thoracic limb for two weeks, but as cats
 do not tolerate bandages well this may result in a fraught and anxious
Preoperative investigations and
cat that could self-traumatize its surgical repair in its efforts to remove
preparation for surgery
its bandage.
Complications include seroma, partial or complete necrosis of skin
Chronic axillary wounds should be assessed as non-healing wounds
flaps, wound breakdown at the donor or recipient site (Fig. 18-2lA).
with appropriate preoperative investigations, including virus serology.
Possible complications after omental transposition include a visible
biopsy, and culture (see above). For heavily contaminated wounds.
subcutaneous swelling over the omentum as it passes from the
primary wound care should be instigated frst to reduce contamina-
laparotomy to the axilla (Fig. 18.2lB), seroma formation, hermiation
tion and hence the chance of postoperative infection (Box 18.2).
of abdominal contents through the omental exit hole, and flap
necrosis.
Surgical treatment
al o a hi e isn si  sm 
surgeon to achieve uncomplicated healing. Collars should not be used
ay uiu e sey sies ui sdey aexe jo iiedan Aied eois
in cats unless they are of the quick release type; collars with an elas-
rate230 and various techniques have been described for repair of these
 ticated portion in them will still cause injury.
190
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
Box 18-5 Reconstruction of the elbow skin fold
 Box 18-6 Omental pedicle flap combined with primary
closure or a thoracodorsal axial pattern flap
The surgery aims to restore the normal structure of the elbow skin
fold allowing the elbow to move freely in this pocket of skin. The 
The cat is positioned with the affected axilla uppermost, and slightly
skin edges and all the granulation tissue are excised en bloc by sharp
 tilted 'off lateral recumbency to provide access to the ventral
dissection. A sufficient margin of skin is removed to include all tissue 
midline and the area over the scapula and up to the dorsal midline
that appears scarred, unduly thin or poorly vascularized. Skin adhered 
to the caudal and medial brachium is undermined and separated 
This consists of resection of the entire wound bed, including all 
from the deeper tissues by blunt dissection. The skin of the lateral
grossly abnormal tissue and a margin of skin from the edge of 
thorax caudal to the brachium is undermined deep to the cutaneous
the wound. Instrumentation is changed before the omentalization
musculature in a similar manner. Blunt dissection to detach the
 procedure.
 adhered skin is continued until the elbow skin fold is reconstructable 
Omentalization
(Fg 18-19)
 A 6 mm Penrose drain is positioned in the dead space beneath
 A cranial midline celiotomy is performed and a vascularized omental 
the skin of the lateral thorax, exiting through a stab incision placed
pedicle created (see Chapter 19).
ventrally. The buried proximal end of the drain is anchored dorsally
 A paracostal incision is then made on the same side as the axillary
with an external skin suture. The distal end of the drain is trimmed
wound, by incising full thickness through the skin and body wall just 
to allow 2 cm to protrude ventrally and sutured with another skin
behind the costal arch, about two-thirds of the way up the body
ON 'sanins jo shakel omi buisn Aluewud pasop s! punom aul 'aunins
wall. The omental pedicle is passed out of the abdomen through this 
attempt is made to close dead space. A subdermal simple interrupted
incision. During handling of the omentum, great care is taken to 
pue auouexoipajod io uelbajod z jo uaned ainins snonuiuon o
prevent excessive handling or twisting of the pedicle. Desiccation is 
simple interrupted skin sutures of 2M polyamide are used for closure.
prevented by wrapping the omentum in saline-soaked swabs.
 After closure the forelimb should be fully flexed and extended to
 aiad au uidde um Aq papeey s unuauo aut jo abessed 
ensure that the elbow is able to move freely within the recreated skin
in a longitudinally split, saline lubricated, 1 inch Penrose drain (Fig
fold and beneath the lateral thoracic skin. The Penrose drains are
18-20C). A subcutaneous tunnel is created between the axillary
removed after three days.
wound and the paracostal incision using Roberts artery forceps,
l! mnd Ajruah pue uieap asouad ayl dseab ol pasn aq uen ypym
through (Fig 18-20D). Another Penrose drain can also be used to 
gather the two ends of the subcutaneous tunnel together to make
 the distance that the omental pedicle had to be pulled 
subcutaneously as short as possible. The free end of the omental 
 pedicle is used to fill the axillary deficit.
 Omentopexy is performed by means of synthetic absorbable 
sutures placed:
 1. Between the free edge of omentum and the body wall at the site 
 of the abdominal exit incision. These sutures are placed to prevent 
the omentum from returning to the abdominal cavity and in a
 manner that does not interfere with its vascular supply.
2.
. The omentum is spread out to cover the wound site and sutured 
to the surrounding subcutaneous tissue with fine synthetic
absorbable suture material (Fig. 18-20E).
The remainder of the laparotomy incision is closed routinely.
Primary closure
elbowfold
The local skin is undermined and mobilized and the wounds
closed over the omentum using subdermal sutures (2M Polyglactin 
910 or polyglycolic acid) and skin sutures of 2 or 1.5M monofilament
nylon.
Figure 18-19 Diagram illustrating the elbow skin fold in a cat. The
A thoracodorsal flap. which extends to the dorsal midline, is
 antebrachium moves freely in this fold of skin and re-establishing this 
aul (a-el by aas) syhewpuel pagisap Asnoaid busn paiean
normal anatomical feature in the cat can be part of a successful
thoracodorsal artery is visualized during the dissection (Fig. 18-20F).
means of repairing axillary wounds.
The axial pattern flap is rotated into the axillary region and sutured in
place with simple interrupted polyglactin 910 sutures (2M) in the
subcutaneous fascia, and simple interrupted monofilament polyamide
sutures (2M) in the skin. The donor site is closed routinely with 
interrupted polyglactin 910 sutures (2M) in the subcutaneous fascia
and simple interrupted monofilament polyamide sutures (2M) or
staples in the skin (Hg. 18-20G).
191
Section
4
Skin and Adnexa
A
D
G
H
Figure 18-20 Axillary wound management in a two-year-old female tortoiseshell cat. (A) The axillary wound has been prepared for surgery. (B) The
skin is sharply incised around the periphery of the chronic wound and the wound and skin edges are debrided. (c) The omentum is exteriorized 
wnuauo aul (a) punom Aellixe aui oi Asnoaueinogns passed s! ll (a) uieap asouad abiel e apisu! paneid pue Auooiedel jeisoneed lews e yonou
is sutured over the debrided axillary wound. (F) The thoracodorsal artery is clearly seen in the thoracodorsal axial pattern flap. (G) The thoracodorsal
axial pattern flap is sutured in place and the donor site closed. A Penrose drain is shown protruding caudally. The drain should not be necessary with
omentalization. (H) Three weeks after surgery at the time of suture removal there is good evidence of healing. (Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
192
Wounds and wound management
Chapter
18
(A)
B
Figure 18-21 (A) A small area of wound breakdown after omentalization and thoracodorsal flap performed in a cat with a chronic axillary wound
three weeks previously. This resolved without specific treatment. (B) There is a visible swelling where the omentum has been passed under the skin
from the paracostal laparotomy to the axilla.
REFERENCES
1. Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
mice. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
of a large skin wound in a cat. J Am Vet
et al. Cutaneous wound healing in the 
1995;32(4):1047-52.
Med Assoc 2007;230:1669-73.
cat; a macroscopic description and
9. Majno G. The Healing Hand. Man and
18. Owen L, Hotston-Moore A, Holt P.
comparison with cutaneous wound
Wound in the Ancient World. Cambridge.
Vacuum-assisted wound closure following
healing in the dog. Vet Surg 2004;33:
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press: 
urine induced skin and thigh muscle
579-87.
1975. p. 69-140.
necrosis in a cat. Vet Comp Orthop
2. Bohling Mw, Henderson RA. Differences
10.
 Krahwinkel Dl, Boothe Hw. Topical and
Traumatol 2009;22:417-21.
in cutaneous wound healing between
Systemic Medications for Wounds. Vet
19. Corr S. Intensive, extensive, expensive.
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
Cin Small Anim 2006:36:739-57.
 Management of distal limb shearing
Anim Pract 2006;36:687-92.
11.
 Thomas S. Formulary of wound 
injuries in cats. J Feline Med Surg
3. Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF.
 Management Products. 10th ed. Passfeld,
2009; 11(9):747-57.
et al. Comparison of the role of the
Hampshire: Euromed Communications
20.
Roy I, Messier S, Labrecque O, Cox WR.
subcutaneous tissues in cutaneous wound
Ltd; 2009. p. 1-195.
Clinical and in vitro efficacy of
 healing in the dog and cat. Vet Surg
12.
 Mathews KA, Binnington A. Wound
amoxicillin against bacteria associated
2006;35:3-14.
Management: using honey. Compend
with feline skin wounds and abscesses.
4. Gower SB, Weisse CW, Brown DC. Major
Contin Educ Pract Vet 2002;24:53-60.
Can Vet I 2007;48(6):607-11.
abdominal evisceration injuries in dogs
13.
Hendrix C.M. Facultative myiasis in dogs
21.
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl. Diseases
and cats: 12 cases. I Am Vet Med Assoc
and cats. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
of Joints. In: Montavon PM, Voss K.
2009;234(12):1566-72.
1991;13(1):86-94.
Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
5.
.Kaestner S. Analgesia. In: Montavon PM,
14.
 Fong l, Wood F. Nanocrystalline silver
Orthopedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
dressings in wound management: a
disease. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2009.
Orthopedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal
review. Int J Nanomedicine 2006;1[4]:
p. 63-74.
disease. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2009.
441-9.
22.
Walker RD, Walshaw R, Riggs CM, Mosser
p. 199-205.
15. Lo SF, Hayter M, Chang Cl, et al. A
T. Recovery of two mycoplasma species
6.
Anderson DM, White, RAS. Ischaemic
systematic review of silver-releasing
from abscesses in a cat following bite 
bandage injuries; a case series and review
dressings in the management of infected
wounds from a dog. I Vet Diagn Invest
of the literature. Vet Surg 2000;29:
chronic wounds. J Clin Nurse
1995;7(1):154-6.
488-98.
2008;17:1973-85.
23.0
Chai O, Johnston DE, Shamir MH.
7. Schuliz GS, Sibbald RG, Falanga V, et al.
16.
 Wang XQ, Kempf M, Mott J, et al. Silver 
Bite wounds involving the spine:
Wound bed preparation: systematic 
absorption on burns after the application
characteristics, therapy and outcome
approach to wound management. Wound
of Acticoat: data from pediatric patients
in seven cases. Vet J 2008;175:259-65.
Rep Reg 2003;11:1-28.
and a porcine bum model. J Burn Care 
24. Risselada M, de Rooster H, Taeymans O.
8. Roberts DB, Travis EL. Acemannan-
Res 2009;30:341-8.
 van Bree H. Penetrating injuries in dogs
 containing wound dressing gel reduces
17.
 Guille AE, Tseng LW, Orsher RJ. Use of
and cats: a study of 1G cases. Vet Comp
radiation induced skin reaction in C3H
vacuum assisted closure for management
Orthop Traumatol 2008;21:434-9.
193
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
25. Barfeld D, Rich S, Pegrum S, Malik R.
elbow skin fold. J Small Anim Pract
omocervical skin flap. J Small Anim Pract
What is your diagnosis? Nocardia
2007;48:111-15
2005;46:499-503.
infection. J Small Anim Pract 2007;48(6):
 30. Brockman Dl, Pardo AD, Conzemius MG,
 35. Hunt GB. Skin fold advancement flaps for
353-4.
et al. Omentum-enhanced reconstruction
dosing large sternal and inguinal wounds 
26. Santoro D, Prisco M, Ciaramella P.
of chronic nonhealing wounds in cats:
in cats and dogs. Vet Surg 1995;24:
 Cutaneous sterile granulomas/
 techniques and clinical use. Vet Surg
172-5.
 pyogranulomas, leishmaniasis and
1996;25:99-104.
36. Hunt GB, Tisdall PL, Liptak IM, et al.
mycobacterial infections. J Small Anim
31. Pavletic M.M. Common complications in
 Skin-fold advancement flaps for closing
Pract 2008;49(11):552-61.
wound healing. In: Pavletic MM, editor.
large proximal limb and trunk defects in 
27.
. Studdert VP, Hughes KL. Treatment 
Atlas of small animal wound management
dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:440-8.
of opportunistic mycobacterial
and reconstructive surgery. 3rd ed. lowa:
37.
Lascelles BDX, White RAS. Combined
infections with enrofloxacin in cats.
Wiley-Blackwell; 1994. p. 127-57.
omental pedicle grafts and thoracodorsal
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992;20(19):
32. Swaim SF Hinkle SH, Bradley DM. Wound
axial pattern flaps for the reconstruction
1388-90.
contraction: basic and clinical factors.
of chronic, nonhealing axillary wounds in
28 Lascelles BD, Davison L, Dunning M,
Compend Contin Educ 2001;23:20-33.
cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:380-5.
et al. Use of omental pedicle grafts in
33. Nicoll SA, Fowler ID, Remedios AM, et al.
38.
Langley-Hobbs Sl, Voss K, Montavon PM.
the management of non-healing axillary
Development of a free latissimus dorsi
External coaptation. In: Montavon PM,
wounds in 10 cats. J Small Anim Pract
muscle flap in cats. Vet Surg 1996;25:
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
1998;39:475-80.
40-8.
Orthopedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal
29 Brinkley CH. Successful closure of feline
34. Gray Ml. Chronic axillary wound repair in 
disease. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2009.
axillary wounds by reconstruction of the
 a cat with omentalisation and
p. 239-48.
194
|19]
Chapter
P. Nelissen, D. White
Ongoing advances in oncological and trauma surgery ensure that the
 The cutaneous vascular system divides further into three interconnect-
indications for advanced reconstructive surgery in the cat continue to
ing levels:
increase. Large skin wounds present the feline clinician with recon-
the deep, subdermal plexus
structive challenges and a range of further options can be considered
the middle, cutaneous plexus
where local skin tension or lack of adjacent skin preclude primary
·t
the superficial, subpapillary plexus.
au pue sueay uouau puoas suood apnun asau anso
 The subdermal plexus is the major route of arterial supply to the skin.
use of local skin flaps, distant skin flaps, axial pattern flaps, and free
skin grafts. Although second intention healing may be suitable for
many smaller wounds, its use in larger skin deficits is associated with
prolonged healing times, a fragile long-term result, and potentially
SKIN FLAPS
undesirable wound contraction that may impair function. Feline skin,
however, lends itself particularly well to the use of random and axial
A skin flap is a piece of skin that retains at least one source of vascular
 pattern flaps and both can be used early in wound reconstruction even
support from the donor site during its transfer. The terms 'skin flap'
with suboptimal wound beds. Free skin grafts have more fastidious
and ‘pedicle graft are synonymous. They are termed 'subdermal
needs; they require an optimal recipient bed and meticulous postop-
plexus' or 'random' where the integrity of the vascular supply is main-
 erative management to achieve a favourable outcome.
tained through an intact attachment of the deep or subdermal plexus.
The indications for muscle flaps are far fewer than the indications
Where a layer of cutaneous muscle is present, the subdermal plexus
au aq  aa uoasa ieoou a iae inq sg us io
lies both superficial and deep to this and it should be incorporated
requirement for both a muscle fap and a skin flap. For completeness.
another flap that is used for reconstructive surgery, amongst other 
from direct cutaneous arteries alone are termed 'axial, or 'island'
indications, is the omental pedicle and a description of this will be 
where no cutaneous attachment is maintained. Flaps are most com-
included.
monly moved immediately from donor to recipient site. They provide
 tissue to achieve coverage of open wounds while redistributing tension
away from wound margins. Ideal flap donor sites have ample skin
aul mole oi se os uoou pue uoisuan aaissaxa pnouiim aqeiieae
SURGICAL ANATOMY
secondary defect created by the transfer of the flap to be closed readily.
Careful planning and meticulous, atraumatic surgical technique to
Skin is composed of two layers, an outer epidermis consisting of strati
ensure that excessive tension, kinking and circulatory compromise do
fied squamous epithelium and an inner dermis of dense connective
 not develop are necessary for survival of the flap.
tissue The skin is loosely attached to the hypodermis composed of
loose connective tissue, which in turn connects to underlying muscles.'
When considering using skin for flaps or grafts it is essential to have
Random pattern or subdermal plexus flaps
 an understanding of the blood supply.
[euuat au uo joddns ienosea lau io juapuadap aie sdey uopuey
branches of the cutaneous circulation and may be developed any-
Cutaneous vascular supply (Fig. 19-1)
where in the skin. Although the vascular integrity of random flaps is
Direct cutaneous arteries travel through intermuscular fascial planes
reliable method of reconstruction. It may be beneficial to align the
and then run parallel with the overlying skin before connecting to the
base of random flaps when possible in the direction of any known
cutaneous circulation. Direct cutaneous arteries supply angiosomes
direct cutaneous vessels to take advantage of this additional vascular
composed of cutaneous musculature, subcutaneous tissue and skin.
support. Although it is sensible to avoid narrow or excessively long
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00019-6
195
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
E
D
PM
SP
Hypodermis
Skeletal muscle
AV
 Figure 19-1 Cutaneous vascular supply. Cross section of the skin and
the vascular supply. Direct cutaneous artery and vein supplying an
angiosome. AV, direct cutaneous artery and vein; D, dermis; E, epidermis;
PM, panniculus muscle; SP, subdermal plexus.
Figure 19-2 Single pedicle advancement flap. Elevation of a single
 Box 19-1 Classification of random flaps
pedicle flap to reconstruct the cutaneous surface of the upper lip after
resection of a large skin tumor.
 Relationship with the recipient site
Locar: Are used to reconstruct wounds in the immediate adjacent
au ol luanelpe Aatepawwi padoaap ale sdel leol u
recipient bed and represent one of the simplest and most efficient
methods of closing skin defects not amenable to primary closure.
 They are likely to maintain a simmilar pattern of local hair growth
and color
 Distant: Are used to reconstruct wounds at a remote site (e.g. flank 
donor to limb recipient site) and are lesslikely to provide a similar
 pattern of hair growth or color
Attachment at the donor site
 Single pedicte: Maintain one cutaneous donor site attachment
 Double or bipedicle grafts: Maintain two cutaneous attachments
Method of local flap transfer
base attachment
 attachment
Figure 19-3 Paired single advancement flaps resulting in an H-pattern to
close a large rectangular defect on the thorax of a cat.
pue sde oun yo yua au on il aeia ou si aiau 's
 predicted base width/flap length ratios are not relevant to flaps in the
Rotating/transposition flaps
cat. Random flaps may be classifed in a number of ways (Box 19-1).
 Rotation flaps are created by releasing the skin along an arc-shaped
Advancement flaps
incision before moving it along the same axis. They are of limited use
in feline reconstruction since relatively large areas of skin need to be
Single pedicle advancement flaps (Fig. 19-2) are probably the most
raised to achieve wound coverage. The transposition flap is a rectan-
gular pedicle graft, which instead of being moved along its long axis
 of their simplicity and the lack of a significant secondary defect requir-
is rotated up to 90 degrees of the wound axis (Fig. 19-5). This is the
ing closure. Advancement (or sliding) flaps are rectangular in shape
most common type of rotating flap and is by far the most useful
and are created parallel to lines of tension with an attachment at the
technique to close a variety of small sized problematic wounds. A
base opposite the edge covering the wound. Paired advancement flaps
modification of this flap is the front or hind limb fold flap.
resulting in an H-pattern of closure can also be employed although
they are more complex. They may have better viability than one large
Distant flaps
flap. otherwise there is little signifcant advantage (Fig. 19-3). The
 single relaxing or release incision is a bipedicle advancement flap by
Direct distant flaps are raised at a location remote from the skin defect
design (Fig. 19-4).
and ultimately transferred to the recipient bed by approximating
Advancement flaps provide wound coverage by stretching the flap
the wound with the donor site This technique is used almost exclu-
skin along its long axis over the defect, and as a result there is an
sively for reconstruction of wounds involving the middle or lower
 opposing elastic retraction in the surrounding skin.
extremities and provides durable full thickness skin coverage without
196
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
6
A
Figure 19-4 Bipedicle advancement flap. The releasing incision creates a
flap with vascular supply on both ends of the flap. The resulting defect is
left to heal by second intention.
ue yu a uo pasin au aie sed s's us io paau a
the affected limb brought alongside to allow the flap to be sutured
to the recipient bed. Flaps may be single pedicle (hinge; Fig. 19-6) or
bipedicle (pouch; Fig. 19-7) grafts. The limb must then be secured
against the flank over a ten to 14 day period while the flap attaches
to the wound. The pedicle(s) are divided, often in two stages, to com-
 plete the transfer. Cats are generally well suited to this technique and
tolerate the period of limb immobilization better than dogs because
of their size, flexible limbs, and the availability of ample loose elastic
skin. Distant flaps are multi-staged procedures and consequently are
time consuming and expensive The transplanted skin assumes the
same hair growth as its donor site despite its new location. Some
patients will not tolerate their limb being immobilized against their
flank and this is particularly evident if the limb is positioned in an
elevated position. Occasionally, moist dermatitis caused by skin-to-
skin contact and moisture accumulation is encountered; transient
muscle atrophy of the limb may be noticed in some cases.
B
Axial pattern flaps (Fig. 19-8)
Figure 19-5 (A) 90 degrees rotating flap. Two parallel skin incisions 
are made at an equal distance from the nipples. The length of the flap
An axial pattern flap is a pedicle graft based primarily or solely on the 
depends on the length of the defect that needs to be covered. (B) A 90
Jo 'sassa au s'uaa pue aae snaun paip e jo Aidns ensa
ae nuan oi psn ae se asau de uosdse aa
which terminal branches supply blood to the subdermal plexus,
rectangular defects involving adjacent sites.
extend the length of the flap. Therefore axial pattern flaps have better
perfusion compared to subdermal plexus flaps. Large axial pattern
wounds in cats. Axial pattern flaps sometimes require extensive dis-
flaps can be safely elevated and transferred in a single-stage procedure
section of the donor site for flap elevation; because of their relatively
for closure of major cutaneous defects. These flaps have excellent
large size axial pattern donor sites may require undermining and
survival rates and they can be used to reconstruct wounds associated
au 'dey pasiei au Aq paiea iaap aui asode on sains suiem
with less optimal conditions such as contamination, uneven surfaces,
cosmetic appearance of the recipient bed differs from the donor site
exposed bone, tendon, and cartilage Axial or island pattern flaps are
with regard to hair direction, color, length, glandular tissues, and
classifed according to the vascular territory supplied by the direct
amount of subcutaneous tissues.
cutaneous artery (angiosome). These vessels and territories including
the thoracodorsal artery, lateral thoracic artery, omocervical artery.
caudal superficial epigastric artery have been researched and mapped
FREE SKIN GRAFTS
for clinical use as axial pattern flaps in the cat. Although the location
and relative size of each angiosome are similar for both dogs and cats.
the extreme elasticity of feline skin and the relative increase in body
Free grafts are areas of skin that are completely detached from the
size to limb length often facilitates more distal coverage of limb
donor site and hence lose their original vascular supply before being
197
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
OCA
TDA
CSEA
LTA
Figure 19-6 Single pedicle direct distant flap (hinge). These flaps are
used to cover defects on the lower forelimb and hindlimb. The flap can
be dorsally or ventrally employed depending on the location of the skin
defect.
Figure 19-8 Axial pattern flaps. Identification of commonly used axial
Aaie snoaueinn pap aui po uoieol aui uo paseg sdey uaned
CSEA, caudal superficial epigastric artery: LTA, lateral thoracic artery:
OCA, omocervical artery: TDA, thoracodorsal artery.
those of the exposed graft plexus to re-establish circulation (inoscula-
tion). New capillaries later grow into the graft and the vascular chan-
nels remodel (revascularization). Free skin grafts therefore require a
vascularized recipient bed and preparation of the recipient bed is a
major determinant of successful skin grafting. Fresh active pink granu-
lation tissue is the ideal recipient bed and provides excellent vascular
oo oi sassanoid asau ioy Aiessanau sioey ymoe au pue poddns
Granulation tissue is not, however, essential for graft survival and any
well-vascularized tissue is theoretically capable of accepting and sup-
porting a skin graft. Grafts can therefore be applied over surgically
clean and fresh surgical wounds since periosteum, peritenon, and
muscle normally have sufficient vascular supply to support skin grafts
[Fig. 19-9]
 The accumulation of any material such as blood, senum, pus, or
foreign material between the graft and the recipient bed will interfere
Figure 19-7 Bipedicle direct distant flap (pouch). Two incisions equal to
-sn nd aianr a pue sissanid uu aea a u
the width of the skin deficit are made. The flap is undermined below the
cularization. It is essential, therefore, that all tissue debris, contamina-
 panniculus muscle. The limb is then secured beneath the flap and 
tion and superficial infection should be controlled before the graft is
sutured.
applied since the early fbrin seal that fixes the graft to the recipient
bed can be easily destroyed by the fibrinolytic activity of proliferating
bacteria in the wound. Immobilization of the graft is similarly impor-
transferred to resurface a recipient site. In feline surgery the use of free
tant, since this attachment can also be mechanically damaged by
skin grafts is confned almost exclusively to reconstruction of large
excessive motion in the graft site during the first week. Methods to
skin defects of the extremities where few alternate options are avail-
immobilize the surgical site include: Robert Jones bandages, splints,
able.7 Secondary healing of limb wounds can lead to unsightly scar
Or external skeletal fixation. Bandaging and splinting methods vary
tissue development and may also lead to impaired limb function if
with the type and location of the graft. Any areas of early epithelializa-
formed in the vicinity of joints. The use of random flaps is often
tion should be removed from the surface of the granulation tissue
restricted by the limited availability of adjacent skin. Direct flaps offer
because this can prove remarkably resistant to the establishment of
the fibrin seal. Grafts are applied with suffcient tension to ensure
 not always be conducive to this option.
good contact with the recipient surface; excessive tension may limit
 Free grafts lack vascular support in the period after transfer and
capillary circulation while inadequate surface-to-surface contact may
must survive for at least the following 48 hours by absorbing protein-
 prevent interdigitation and delay revascularization.
containing fluid from the recipient bed by capillary action, a process
Meshed or pie-crusted sheets have perforations through the entire
thickness of the skin. Perforated grafts have greater flexibility and
attached to the underlying tissue by the development of an interposed
conform better to an uneven surface than unmeshed skin while per-
fbrin seal that acts as a biological'glue' and provides a scaffold across
mitting the ongoing drainage of any sub-graft exudate. Unmeshed
which capillaries from the recipient bed begin to anastomose with
sheets have less flexibility and hence need to be pre-cut more
198
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
19
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
The etiology and type of wounds are important preoperative consid-
erations that influence the appropriate timing of closure Surgically
created or clean wounds can be immediately managed with local flaps.
axial pattern flaps, or skin grafts. Traumatic wounds are often contami-
juauageueu punom uado jo shep [eaaas ambau Allensn pue paneu
before surgical reconstruction can be attempted.
Adequate planning must be undertaken prior to surgical dissection
and reconstruction of large skin defects. It is essential to know which
technique or method is most appropriate given the size dimension,
and location of the wound. A second important factor to take into
 account is the proper preparation of the recipient bed.
 Preoperative measurements should be taken to ensure adequate
length, width and total size of the flap so it can reach and cover the
entire wound. Using sterile paper, coth, gauze, or foam rubber, a
template is made of the recipient bed, pressing the material in the
wound and outlining the defect The template is cut to the desired
shape and positioned on the selected donor site to represent the pro-
posed dimensions of the defect and additional skin required for the
flap to reach the recipient bed. The graft outline is drawn on the skin
Figure 19-9 Free skin graft. A meshed graft was applied over a fresh
with a felt-tipped marker pen to provide reference lines for the
surgical wound to cover a larger defect after a tumor had been resected
 proposed incision. As one becomes more familiar with certain recon-
(Courtesy of Georgio Romanelf.)
au u aai umi aq ui suasea a 'sauan uo
skin without resorting to templates.
Atraumatic technique and Halsted principles of surgery are essential
accurately to the outline of the defect. Additionally, they provide no
to the execution of successful reconstructive surgery. Because of the
route for drainage, necessitating temporary placement of active suction
limited blood supply, great care should be taken during the dissection 
 drains under larger grafts.
and transfer of flaps and grafts.
Healthy grafts may appear swollen and dark during the frst 48-72
hours due to the process of imbibition of hemoglobin degradation
products but become pinker and less edematous as a rudimentary
circulation becomes established. Non-viable grafts will, however.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
progress to become white or black and necrotic over a period of three
to five days. Occasionally, grafts lose their epidermal layer during the
Single pedicle advancement flap
frst week, giving rise to the appearance of an apparently complete
graft failure This can be disconcerting but usually an outline of the
(Fig. 19-10, Box 19.2)
dermal graft will appear within the next week and the graft will
Advancement, or sliding, single pedicle flaps are rectangular in shape
 progress satisfactorily to complete coverage of the defect.
and are created parallel with lines of tension, with an attachment at
In feline surgery, full thickness grafts are preferred for virtually all 
the base opposite the edge covering the wound. They commonly are
reconstructive procedures because they are more robust, durable and
used to close square or rectangular wounds when tissue for closure is
withstand considerable handing during graft elevation and position-
 only available on one side of the defect.
ing. Full thickness grafts contain all dermal structures and therefore
can provide a better cosmetic appearance. Although they have more
Direct distant single pedicle (hinge) flap
demanding nutritional requirements than split-thickness grafts, well-
 prepared fullthickness grafts can achieve survival rates comparable to
(Figs 19-11-19.13, B0x 19.3)
thinner grafts. Split-thickness grafts contain the epidermis and only a
 Distant flaps are used to reconstruct wounds at a remote site (e.g..
variable amount of dermal structures. They have a number of disad-
flank donor to limb recipient site) and with the single pedicle one
vantages and are rarely used since they are rather fragile require more
care during collection and transfer and grafted sites tend to have poor
cutaneous donor site attachment is maintained. The patient's ability
aeuo oi uapuan ianea e pue ya ie aies iqe
to tolerate immobilization of the affected limb against the flank
should be assessed preoperatively. This flap is used in preference to
due to the absence of dermal structures.
the bipedicle flap when the wound is confined to either the medial
Likewise, almost all grafts are applied as a sheet providing complete
wound coverage since this provides the most functional and cosmeti-
 or lateral aspect of the limb.
cally acceptable result. Partial coverage techniques (e.g., stamp, pinch.
strip. and mesh)are used only very infrequently and providea poorer
Direct distant bipedicle (pouch) flap
long-term result with significant contribution from epithelialization.
(Figs 19-14 and 19-15, Box 19.4)
Ideal donor sites for skin grafts have an abundance of easily mobi-
lized durable skin of suitable thickness with hair of a similar color.
qull ieisip iaaos ot pasn aie sdey (yonod) apipadiq iaip iueisi
length and thickness to that it replaces at the recipient site In practice,
o sde uaned jeixe Aq iaon on aqae iou ae yum spunm
the flank usually satisfies most of these criteria and offers the best
random flaps. The patient's ability to tolerate immobilization of the
opportunity to remove suffcient skin for the reconstruction while
affected limb against the flank should be assessed preoperatively. The
permitting simple closure of the donor site.
direct distant bipedicle flap is used in preference to the single pedicle
199
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Figure 19-10 Single pedicle advancement flap. A single pedicle 
advancement flap is created to close a defect on the dorsal nasal bridge.
Figure 19-11 Single pedicle direct distant flap. A single pedicle direct
There is plenty of skin that can be retrieved from the dorsal surface of 
distant flap is created to close a defect on the dorsal lateral aspect of the
the head.
foot of a cat after a road traffic accident.
 Box 19-2 Single pedicle advancement flap
 Flap width equals the width of the defect and flap length is dictated 
by the amount of skin required to stretch and advance into the 
defect.
 The skin is grasped to assess the direction of regional skin tension
Where possible, the long axis of the flap is oriented parallel with the 
 opposing wound edges equal to the width of the defect. The flap is
pabers e u! papuaxa ane suoispui aul pue pauiwapun Anjaien
fashion until the flap is sufficiently mobile to stretch over the defect.
The leading corners of the flap are anchored to the distal edge of the
wound defect. The surrounding skin is drawn back towards the flap 
 0l uolisod ou! paunins s! delf aul aseq aut ie paioupue pue aseg
complete the transfer. A simple continuous suture pattern using 2M 
absorbable suture material such as polyglecaprone or polyglyconate is
Jo sanins paidnuau! aldwis pue lakel snoauenngns aul iot pasn
monofilament Nylon 2M for dermal closure. Skin folds created at the 
 base of the flap will rapidly disappear without surgical interference.
flap when the wound is involving the entire circumference of the
extremity. Bipedicle flaps are often impossible to use for proximal
Figure 19-12 The pedicle is divided ten to 14 days after the initial
0l yanoua paxay aq aensn iouue suiol au asneaq sagap qu
transfer in stages. One-half to one-third is cut initially to avoid ischemia.
rotate the limb beneath the flap.
defects involving the shoulder, forelimb, elbow, axilla and thorax. In
Thoracodorsal (TD) flap
some cats it is even possible to use this flap for reconstructions that
extend to the level of the carpus.
(Figs 19-16 and 19.17, Box 19-5)
 This flap is based on the cutaneous branch of the thoracodorsal artery
Lateral thoracic (LT) flap
1e eseg reinsau a o aaa sss ai au ts'uaa pe
(Figs 19-18-19.20, B0x 19.6)
the caudal edge of the shoulder at the level of the acromion. The
moderately sized artery arborizes in a caudodorsal direction. The
The lateral thoracic artery is the second branch of the axillary artery.
cranial limit of the angiosome is defined by a line extending along
is caudally directed, and initially runs deep to the axillary lymph
the scapular spine. The caudal edge is parallel to the cranial edge and
pue asnu sdaon aui ot iepne iepyradns sauoraq Aiae aul o'apou
 originates at a point equidistant from the scapular spine to the caudal
continues in the subautaneous tissue to the level of the last rib. This
shoulder depression. The ventral limit is marked by a line from the
point can be palpated on careful examination and is defined as the
acromion to the axilla. The dorsal border is defined by the dorsal
centre of the flap in the dorsoventral direction. The ventral border of
midline. Thoracodorsal flaps are robust and can be used to reconstruct
the flap is defined as the ventral midline. The dorsal border is defined
200
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
19
Figure 19-14 Bipedicle advancement direct distant flap. This flap was
Created after this cat had sustained a car accident and had one hindlimb
amputated; one front leg had a comminuted fracture and the other front
Anui bunobap leuaaunn ag e py bal
Figure 19-13 The end result after the remaining part of the pedicle is
-llny isngon e sapaoud siul aneid u! paunins s! uys aut pue papip
thickness skin coverage.
Figure 19-15 The same patient after the direct distant flap had
completely healed. A good functional and cosmetic end result was 
achieved.
 Figure 19-16 Thoracodorsal axial pattern flap. The borders of the flap
 are incised. Dissection begins at the dorsal edge and proceeds ventrally.
Box 19-3 Direct distant single pedicle (hinge) flap
 Care should be taken at the vascular pedicle.
 The affected limb is positioned temporarily against the surface of the 
flank. For the forelimb this means drawing the limb caudally and for 
 the hind limb drawing the limb cranially. The flap width is determined 
by the length of the limb deficit. The flap length is determined from
 Box 19-4 Distant direct bipedicle (pouch) flap
the flap base to the most distal edge of the defect (circumferential 
 size of deficit). The flap is incised and elevated below the cutaneous 
 Bipedicle flaps are created by two parallel incisions at the level of the
 pajap aul jo sabpa aui ot painins s! dely aul apsnuu une
desired donor site. The skin of the flap is undermined below the 
subcutaneous and cutaneous sutures. The donor bed is partially
 cutaneous trunci muscle but remains attached at each base. The limb
 closed, especially the subcutaneous tissues. Padding is placed 
is positioned under the flap by passing it under the elevated tunnel 
 between the limb and the trunk to prevent moist dermatitis. Retaining 
 of skin. The flap is sutured to the proximal and distal borders of the 
sutures can be placed to help support and prevent movement of the 
defect.
extremity. Large loop simple interrupted sutures with 3.5M Nylon are 
A few additional mattress sutures can be placed to provide
 adet uojN api pue builoddns spaau jeut qull aut oi lesiop paneid 
 additional contact between skin of donor site and granulation tissue 
can be looped around the limb and tied to the suture.
 of recipient bed. The leg is immobilized as described above.
 The leg is bandaged in place; bandages are changed and the graft
shep xis oi anly buluuibag sabeis u! papip ale saseg dely yiog
 sabeis oml u! papnip s! dell aul jo aseg aul 'sanoy gt Aaaa passasse
 after surgery. One-half of the lower pedicle and one-half of the 
over the next ten to 14 days. Half of the flap is detached after five to
 upper pedicle at the opposite site are incised and sutured to the 
 aay aul 'shep uai Ag papip juawupene buuiewan aui pue shep xis
saaley puonas buuieuan aul Ag pamolloy lapuog punom buisoddo
 edges of the flap are sutured to the opposing wound border.
two to three days later.
201
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Figure 19-18 Lateral thoracic flap. The borders of the flap are incised.
(Courtesy of Laurent Finoj.)
 Figure 19-17 The thoracodorsal axial pattern flap was used in this cat to
 cover a chronic axillary wound.
 Figure 19-19 Lateral thoracic flap. A large tumor on the lateral aspect of
the antebrachium was resected and a bridging incision was made to
Figure 19-20 Lateral thoracic flap. The axial pattern flap was sutured in
allow the axial pattern flap to be fit in place. (Courtesy of Laurent Finoj.)
 place and the donor site was closed. (Courtesy of Laurent Finoji.)
 Box 19-5 Thoracodorsal axial pattern flap
 The patient is in lateral recumbency with the forelimb in relaxed
 Box 19-6 Lateral thoracic axial pattern flap
extension (normal standing position). The cranial limit is defined by a
line extending along the scapular spine. The caudal edge is parallel to
The lateral thoracic artery and vein enter the skin cranial and ventral
 the cranial edge and originates at a point equidistant from the 
 se pauno aie dell aul jo shapiog aul Alalie jesiopone loyt aul o1
 5! lapiog lesiop aul uoissaadap lapinous lepnen aut oi auids seindens
 5! dely aut jo lapuog leluan au1 '6l-6l pue gl-6l saanby ui umous
defined by the dorsal midline. The borders of the flap are marked 
defined as the ventral midline. The dorsal border is defined as a line 
paeala si dey aul pue pasui s us aul dayeu paddi-ay e yi 
parallel to the ventral border at a distance equal to the distance from
 below the level of the cutaneous trunci muscle beginning at the
the centre of the flap. which is an area just caudal to the triceps 
 dorsal end of the flap. Great care must be taken to avoid damaging 
muscle. The caudal border coincides with the last rib. Elevation of the 
the thoracodorsal artery and vein. The vascular pedicle does not need 
lateral thoracic axial pattern flap under the cutaneous muscle and 
to be completely isolated from the surrounding fat. This flap can then 
mammary tissue allows closure of defects within its arc of rotation. A
be pivoted into a variety of positions. A bridging incision can be made
small bridging incision can be made to facilitate flap placement onto 
to traverse the skin interposed between donor and recipient site. The 
the recipient bed. The flap is sutured in place with subcutaneous and 
flap is sutured in place with subcutaneous and skin sutures.
 skin sutures.
202
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
19
Figure 19-21 Omocervical axial pattern flap. The flap was used to close
Figure 19-22 Caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap. A CSE flap
a large defect in the cervical region of this patient after resection of a
was created for this cat to cover a large chronic non-healing wound on
large skin tumor.
the medial thigh after a cat bite.
Box 19-7 Omocervical axial pattern flap
Box 19-8 Caudal superficial epigastric axial pattern flap
 The cranial shoulder depression is identified and this point denotes
Two skin incisions are made, midline and a lateral parallel incision at
the emergence of the superficial branch of the omocervical
dell aul po juaxa leuen aul salddu aui woy anueisip lenba ue
artery. The caudal border is incised over the scapular spine. The
depends on the length required to incorporate the second mammary
cranial shoulder depression is palpated and the cranial incision is 
delt aul lap papuaui aul laaon ot painban yrbual aul pue pueib
made parallel to the caudal incision equal to the distance from 
is undermined below the supramammarius muscle and above the 
the cranial shoulder to the caudal incision line. The dorsal midline
aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle. The flap can 
S! dely aul 'uoisou! lepnen pue jelue n aul uaamiag spuaxa uoisou!
be rotated into a variety of positions, taking care to preserve the 
undermined below the level of the superficial cutaneous muscle.
vascular bundle from excessive kinking or twisting. A bridging
The flap is sutured into the recipient bed with subcutaneous and
se buol se alqissod aq Aew sdel lapiy Auessanau ag Aew uospu!
skin sutures. The donor site is closed in a routine fashion.
there is adequate skin left to close the donor bed.
as a line parallel to the ventral border at a distance equal to the dis-
 of the external pudendal artery. This vessel emerges from the inguinal
tance from the centre of the flap. The caudal border coincides with
ring and travels cranially along the mammary chain. The caudal
the last rib and the cranial border lies adjacent to the caudal border
border is defined by the inguinal ring. The cranial border extends to
of the triceps muscle. The proximity of the LT flap to the thoracic limb
the second mammary gland. The medial limit is delineated by the
facilitates reconstruction in this region. The area of the LT skin flap is
ventral midline and the lateral edge extents from a point twice the
one-third larger than the TD flap and this can be used to cover skin
distance from the nipple to the midline. This flap is a highly versatile
defects extending distally to the carpus.10
option for closure of major skin defects of the abdomen, fank,
inguinal area, perineum, thigh, and hind limbs.? Flap length and
width will vary according to the patient's body conformation, elastic-
Omocervical (0c) flap (Fig. 19-21 and Box 19.7)
ity of the skin and the size required to cover or to reach the defect.
The superfcial cervical branch of the omocervical artery originates at
The CSE flap can extend to, or even below, the level of the felinetarsus.
the prescapular lymph node and radiates craniodorsally. This flap is
Bilateral CSE flaps have been used to repair large defects of the hind-
robust and is very useful for head and neck reconstruction. The ventral
limb12 and perineal areal in the cat.
limit of this flap is defined by a line from the prescapular lymph node
to the acromion. The dorsal edge is formed by the dorsal midline. The
Sheet skin grafts
cranial edge is defined by a line equidistant to a point between the
cranial shoulder depression and the scapular spine. The caudal border
(Figs 19-23 and 19-24, Box 19.9)
is a line parallel to the scapular spine This flap is versatile and can be
The use of free skin grafts is confined almost exclusively to reconstruc-
used to cover defects of the face, head, axilla, and ear.
tion of large skin defects of the extremities. The use of random flaps
for these distal limb wounds is often restricted by the limited availabil-
Caudal superficial epigastric (CsE) flap
ity of adjacent skin. Direct flaps offer an altermnative solution although
(Fig. 19-22, Box 19.8)
siul on aainpuos aq semle iou Aeu sie aos jo juaeiauan au
option. The use of axial pattern flaps for distal limb wounds is limited
This flap includes the tissue of the second, third and fourth mammary
by the length of the vascular pedicle and the size of the flap, which is
glands and is based on the caudal superficial epigastric artery, a branch
often not long enough to cover distal wounds.
203
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Box 19-9 Free skin grafts
A template is made from the wound defect and then positioned over
the donor site to match the hair growth at the recipient site. Ideally.
the longest aspect of the template should be orientated along the 
tension lines of the donor site. An area of skin to include the area of
the template is incised; in possible, elliptical areas are removed since 
this provides for simplest reconstruction of the donor wound. In
general, skin incisions are made slightly larger than the template
pue siapodky builpun aul abeaaon punom aunsua oi aun
eah aui wouy siossis yi paaouan Anjanen s! anssil asodie asool
until the dermal layer is apparent. This can be most easily performed
by laying the skin over a roll of sterile Vetrap (Smith and Nephew)
to keep the skin flap under slight tension while performing this
dissection. Damage to the dermal layer itself should be avoided.
Depending on the type of graft, one or more stab incisions can be 
made in the graft. Grafts should be kept moist by rinsing them with
sterile saline. The graft is laid over the wound and anchored with 
sutures to one side of the wound. The opposite side of the graft is
now anchored with slight stretching of the graft to result in slight 
tension that ensures good contact with the wound surface and
eliminates dead space. Redundant areas of graft are excised. The
graft is carefully bandaged with a low adherent to non-adherent 
Figure 19-23 Free skin grafts. A free skin graft was applied for a 360°
contact layer such as a silicone dressing. These dressings are usually
defect of the distal extremmity of this patient. (Courtesy of Laurent Findj.)
comprised of an absorbent layer of cotton and acrylic fibre heat
bonded with a thin perforated polyester film. An example of such a
dressing is Mepitel (Molnlycke Health Care).
MUSCLE FLAPS
Pedicled muscle flaps have been used for a wide range of purposes in
small animal surgery including coverage after large oncological resec-
tions (see Chapter 43), perineal hernia repair (see Chapter 25), dia-
phragmatic hernia,14 bone coverage and for combating infections.
Free muscle flaps are not commonly performed in small animals due
to the need and expense of being able to perform microvascular trans-
aqeiapisuon aaeq sieuue leus sueuny on paneduos pue sl'laj
amounts of loose skin and a number of direct cutaneous arteries for
muscles in cats and dogs are expendable without compromising func-
tion and these muscles can be pivoted into an adjacent defect.l6
Muscles are capable of contributing additional circulation to ischemic
areas. Individual muscles have different vascular supplies and muscles
are classified according to their vascular anatomy. There are five major
vascular patterns. Preservation of muscle function and bulk will
depend upon preservation of the blood supply and the innervation.
A muscle flap involves elevating part or all of a muscle while preserv.
ing its vascular supply and transposing it into a recipient bed. The
most useful muscles are superficial and should be accessible through
a standard surgical approach (Box 19.10). The dissection of the
muscles should be easy and with minimal trauma to surrounding
structures. Examples of muscle flaps include: internal obturator trans-
position for ventrolateral augmentation of perineal hernia, cranial
sartorius flap to fill dead space, close over pressure sore, repair of
abdominal hernias or prepubic tendon avulsion, semitendinosus flap
 to augment complicated perineal hernias latissimus dorsi muscle flap
to reconstruct defects left after trauma or tumor resection of the tho-
Figure 19-24 Free skin grafts. Full graft take and healing of the skin
racic wall and cranial and caudal portions of the sternocephalic, ster-
graft with a complete functional and good cosmetic end result. (Courtesy
nothyroid, and sternohyoid muscles to repair wounds in the cervical
of Laurent Finoji.)
region or to patch defects in the trachea or esophagus.
204
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
19
 Omentum provides a permanent drain and improved ability to resist
Box 19-10 Muscle flaps
infection.18
Creation of an omental pedicle flap was first described in veterinary
An ideal muscle flap should have the following properties:
medicine by Ross & Pardo.1 The omentum can be transferred to all
Easily accessible
sites within the abdominal cavity and outer abdominal wall (Box
Expendable function 
19-1l ); however, lengthening procedures are required for transferring
Consistent vascular supply
the omentum to more distant sites such as the axillary or inguinal
 Single pedicle vascular supply
areas. The dorsal or ventral surfaces of the omentum can be unfolded
 Sufficiently far away from recipient bed
and divided to increase its length. Major limitations of using the
Reasonable size and bulk
anso ioy anss yina jo yel pue ae aaaeiau si aie uao
Available bilater ally
of large defects. Indications for omental flaps include axillary wounds
(see Chapter 18), non-healing wounds, drainage of pancreatic or pro-
static cysts, placement over intestinal incisions, and after thoracic wall
resection (see Chapter 43).
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Passive or active suction drains can be placed for two to four days after
-pueq papped yos oz uoeuoy euoias aseueui io juaaid o Aiasins
ages can protect the drains from contamination, decrease dead space.
help prevent fluid accumulation, and prevent mutilation by the
patient Buster (Elizabethan) collars are mandatory to prevent interfer-
ence with or mutilation of the surgical site (see Chapter 3).20
The role of microbial agents in wound management is based on the
disease process, contamination, microorganisms involved, and surgi-
cal procedures. Acute infections are usually due to one microorgan-
ism, but chronic wounds are often polymicrobial. Therefore the
choice whether to use antibiotics pre- and/or postoperatively is dic-
tated by the patient, disease, and surgical procedure.20
reconstructive surgery. Skin tension, swelling inflammation, and
infection can all contribute to increased pain. A multimodal approach
to pain management is therefore recommended. Pre-, intra- and post-
operative pain control using opioids, non-steroidal infammatory
drugs and local anesthetic protocols should be tailored to each indi-
Figure 19-25 Omental pedicle flaps. The greater omentum is a double 
vidual cat.
leaf of peritoneal mesothelial tissues. The omentum is composed of 
connective tissue and fat and has a rich vascular and lymphatic network.
 The postoperative care of skin grafts is extremely important. The
 survival of a skin graft largely depends on optimization of adherence
and nutrition of the graft. Few bandages require more exact applica-
tion than a bandage used to secure and immobilize an area after
application of a free graft Most free grafts are performed on extremi-
OMENTAL PEDICLE FLAP
ties and suitable dressings and bandages are critical during the period
of graft take.2 The different components of the bandage promote
aus iasa iaua anno u e si  a a
 good contact between graft and recipient bed, minimize graft move-
composed of connective tissue and streaks of fat that surround fne
ment, remove exudates from the wound bed, and prevent soiling.
arteries and a rich lymphatic network. This double sheet folds onto
contamination and patient interference.
itself in the caudal abdomen forming a ventral and dorsal leaf (Fig.
The dressing may be changed as early as 48 hours; however, it is
19-25). The omentum attaches ventrally to the greater curvature of the
Sh uonezueinseaai jo poad aui ainsse oi sep aanul iog liem oi ianes
stomach and dorsally to the greater curvature of the stomach and the
not disturbed. Care must be taken not to pull or lift the graf from the
pancreas and spleen. The blood supply derives from peripheral vessels
recipient bed during the dressing change. If the dressing is adhered to
of the right and left gastroepiploic arteries. The lesser omentum con-
the graft, the dressing can be softened with warm sterile saline.
nects the lesser curvature of the stomach and a part of the duodenum 
yei pue zuaned unim saea sasueup aepueq jo Auanbay aul
with the liver The greater omentum is used for pedicle flaps.
techniques used. Generally, bandage changes can be performed every
Omentum has been extensively used in surgical applications and 
three to four days after the initial change.
can be useful for closure of problematic defects by improving circula-
Viable grafts assume lavender to pink color depending on the state
of vascularization. Dead skin assumes a white or black color. Early
erates dead space, acts as a natural drain, and the rich vascular and
signs of graft necrosis are not always catastrophic, because hair folli-
lymphatic networks provide the cells and humoral factors required to
cles and cutaneous adnexa can survive in the dermal layers and may
control infection, promote adhesion, and stimulate angiogenesis. The
 serve as a source for wound epithelialization.
-saoau pidii aaum suoens u sueunq ui pim pasn si umua
 Experimental treatments to rescue a failing flap or graft using hyper-
qularization is needed, to enhance immune function and provide local
baric oxygen have shown some encouraging results, including
tissue support and lymphatic drainage, and to achieve hemostasis.17
improved color and decreased exudate production by the skin flap in
205
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Box 19-11 Omental pedicle flaps1
A midline laparotomy is performed (see Chapter 23): alternatively,. a
Further lengthening can be performed by creating an inverted L
 paracostal incision can be made. The omentum is lifted upward and 
incision beginning on the left side of the omentum caudal to
pasn aq uen wnuauo aul anejuns jessop aut asodxa ot Aleuen
the gastrosplenic ligament and crossing to half the width of the
 by creating a vascular pedicle involving either the right or left 
omental sheet (Fig. 19-26D,E). The encountered omental vessels
gastroepiploic artery or by releasing the omentum from the pancreas
have to be double ligated. The incision is continued caudally 
and then lengthening it with an inverted L-shaped incision.
parallel to the omental vessels along two-thirds of the length of 
Vascularized pedicle: The vascularized omental pedicle or flap is
the omentum.
created by ligation of the segmental gastric arteries as they leave the
Omentalization outside the body: An incision is made in the
 abdominal wall relevant to the region where the omentum is required
(Fig. 19-26A). Either the right or left gastroepiploic artery has to be
 and a subcutaneous tunnel can be created (Fg. 19-27). The omentum
ligated or additional attachments to the pancreas and spleen have to 
is packed into a large Penrose drain to facilitate its passage to the
be incised. A pedicle of the ventral omental sheet is created based on
desired area without damaging this friable tissue. The omentum is 
the right or left gastroepiploic artery, respectively.
sutured, using simple interrupted 3M absorbable suture material such 
Release from pancreas: An alternative technique involves traction of
Auonouedel aul pag punom suaidnan aul ou! 'auoudenabod se
the omental leaf cranially and release of the dorsal leaf from the
wound is closed and the exit wound for the omentum should be
woy buieunibo sjassan ('aaz-a. b) uoassip dieys Ag seanued
partially closed but left large enough so as not to cause vascular
the splenic artery are ligated and the omentum is unfolded caudally
compromise.
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 19-26 Omentalization. (A) The omentum can be mobilized from the abdomen by ligation of the right or left gastroepiploic artery.
depending on which side of the body the omentum is to be used. (B) Alternatively. the omentum can be unfolded by retracting the dorsal omental
leaf cranially by exteriorizing the spleen. (c) The omentum is separated from its attachments on the pancreas and spleen by ligating the vessels as 
they are encountered. (D, E) An inverted L-shaped incision can be performed to further lengthen the omentum. One-half to two-thirds of the 
Ae sh! ureuieu oi siassan busuieuan aul jo uosnpno juaaad oi aen yim paipuey aa pinous wnuawo aul in ag uen yim euau 
the early postoperative period but clinical data in small animals is
lacking.
COMPLICATIONS
The most common postoperative complications following local flaps
and axial pattern flaps are edema, seroma formation, and poor wound
drainage.20 The problems arise due to extensive sof tissue dissection
at the donor and recipient sites. Hematoma and seroma formation
can predispose to wound infection, may cause discomfort, and prevent
healing of tissues on to wound beds. Prevention of intraoperative
hemorrhage is more prudent than postoperative management of a
hematoma.
Creation of dead space through trauma or surgical dissection can
lead to accumulation of fluid within the subcutaneous space. Preven-
tion of seroma formation is achieved by gentle tissue handling and
 Figure 19-27 An incision is made at the region where the omentum is
elimination of dead space by using active suction drains, subcutane-
required and a Penrose drain can be useful to help guide the omentum
ous sutures and bandages.
through a subcutaneous tunnel. The omentum is then sutured in place in
Exudation of fluid into the interstitial space of the subcutaneous
the recipient bed.
tissue is associated with early wound healing processes. Traumatic
206
Flaps and grafts
Chapter
19
wounds generally exhibit more edema than surgical wounds. Depend-
 Infection is uncommon if aseptic techniques are adhered to. Pas-
ing on the dissection and the nature of the procedure, surgical
teurella is a common isolate from soft tissue infections in cats and
sAep inoy ol aaiul isiy aul ul snojeuapa ieadde osle ueo spunom
these are mostly related to cat bites. Two to three days after surgery
postoperatively.
clinical signs of infection become apparent. The affected area is warm,
Wound dehiscence may be the result of several factors including
 erythematous, edematous, and painful. The incision may be gaping
wound closure under excessive tension, sutures placed too close
with serosanguinous, mucoid or purulent discharge.
to the incision site improper suture material, closure of com-
promised skin, compromised cutaneous circulation, underlying
infection, necrosis, foreign material, neoplasia, lack of postopera-
Omentalization
tive protection and support, premature suture removal, delayed
 Possible complications after omental transposition include seroma
healing due to steroid use, or delay in healing due to metabolic
formation, herniation of abdominal contents through the omental
disorders.
exit hole, and flap necrosis.
REFERENCES
1. Bohling MW, Henderson RA, Swaim SF,
epigastric axial pattern skin flaps in cats.
15. Nicoll SA, Fowler ID, Remedios AM, et al.
et al. Comparison of the role of the
Vet Surg 1989;18:380-5.
Development of a free latissimus dorsi
subcutaneous tissues in cutaneous wound
 9. Lascelles BDX, White RAS. Combined
muscle flap in cats. Vet Surg 1996;25:
healing in the dog and cat. Vet Surg
Omental Pedicle Grafts and
40-8.
2006;35:3-14.
Thoracodorsal Axial Pattern Flaps for the
16. Gregory CR, Gourley IM, Snyder JR, Ikiw
 2. Pavletic MM. Vascular supply to the skin
 Reconstruction of Chronic, Nonhealing 
J. Experimental definition of the gracilis 
of the dog, a review. Vet Surg 1980;9:77.
Axillary Wounds in Cats. Vet Surg
musculocutaneous flap for distant transfer
3.
.Lemarie Rl, Hosgood G, Read RA, et al.
2001;30:380-5.
in cats. Am J Vet Res 1992;53:153-6.
Distant abdominal and thoracic pedicle
10.
 Benzioni H, Shahar R, Yudelevich S, et al.
17. Brockman DJ, Pardo AD, Conzemius MG,
skin flaps for treatment of distal limb skin
Lateral thoracic artery axial patterm flap in
et al. Omentum-enhanced reconstruction 
defects. J Small Anim Pract 1995;36:
cats. Vet Surg 2009;38:112-16.
of chronic nonhealing wounds in cats:
255-61.
11.
 Gray Ml. Chronic axillary wound repair
 techniques and clinical use. Vet Surg
4.
Yturraspe Dl, Creed JE, Schwach RP.
in a cat with omentalisation and
1996;25:99-104.
Thoracic pedicle skin flap for repair of
omocervical skin flap. J Small Anim Pract
18. Lascelles BDX, Davison L, Dunning M.
lower limb wounds in dogs and cats.
2005;46:499-503.
 Use of omental pedicle grafts in the
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1976;12:581.
12.
Woods S, de C Marques Al, Yool DA.
management of non-healing axillary
 5. Pavletic MM. Axial pattern flaps in small
Simultaneous bilateral caudal superficial
wounds in 10 cats. JSAP 1998;39:475-80.
animal practice. Vet Clin North Am
 epigastric flaps in a cat. Vet Rec 2009:164:
19.
 Ross WE, Pardo AD. Evaluation of an
1990;20:105.
434-5.
 omental pedicle extension technique in
6. Waldron DR. Feline axillary pattern skin
13.
Carke BS, Findji L. Bilateral caudal
the dog. Vet Surg 1993;22(1 ):37-43.
 flaps. NAVC Conference, 2008.
superficial epigastric skin flap and
 20. Amsellem P. Complications of 
7. Siegfried R, Schmokel H, Rytz Ul, et al.
 perineal urethrostomy for wound
reconstructive surgery in companion
Treatment of large distal extremity skin
reconstruction secondary to traumatic
animals. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
wounds with autogenous full thickness
urethral rupture in a cat. Vet Comp
Pract 2011;41:995-1006.
mesh skin grafts in five cats. Schweizer
Orthop Traumatol 2011;24:142-5.
21.
Kerwin SC, Hosgood G, Strain GM, et al.
Arch.Tierheilkunde 2004;146:277-83.
14.
 Fumeaux Rw, Hudson MD. Autogenous 
The effect of hyperbaric oxygen treatment
 8. Remedios AM, Bauer MS, Bowen CV.
muscle flap repair of a diaphragmatic
on a compromised axial pattern flap in 
Thoracodorsal and caudal superficial
hermia. Feline Pract 1985;6:20-4.
the cat. Vet Surg 1993;22:31-6.
207
[20]
chapter
Skin tumors
J.M. Dobson, J.L. Demetriou
The skin is the largest and most easily observed organ in the body and
loum ioy als uouuos e st uiys auieyt suisudns jou s ll aiojaiau
GENERAL CLINICAL APPROACH
diagnosis in the cat. According to one large study, skin tumors com-
prised 9.6% of feline necropsy or biopsy specimens. Due to its
Clinical examination
complex structure a large variety of tumors may arise in the skin and
it is also a possible site for the development of secondary, metastatic
A presumptive diagnosis of a solitary skin tumor may be made on the
tumors. This chapter will consider tumors arising from or within the
dlinical examination, including visual inspection and palpation. Skin
epidermis, dermis and related structures and soft tissue tumors, which
tumors that present as multifocal lesions may be harder to distinguish
may arise within dermal connective tissue; the reported incidence of
from other dermatological conditions. In both cases skin tumors must 
these tumors in the cat is summarized in Table 20-1.2
be differentiated from other skin lesions (Box 20-1).
A useful clinical approach to a lesion affecting the skin is to deter-
mine the location of the lesion, i.e, whether it is epidermal, dermal
or subautaneous, as this will give some indication of its origin and
PATHOGENESIS
thus its possible histogenesis. The distinction between solitary and
multiple lesions is also of clinical value. However, a definitive diagno-
Etiology
sis can only be made upon histopathological examination of repre-
 sentative tissue.
Several external agents and biologic factors are recognized to be
important in the development of certain tumors of the skin but for
the majority the etiology is unknown. Long-term exposure to ultra-
Blood analysis
violet light (especially UVB) is implicated in the development of
Routine hematological and biochemical analysis of blood is not gen-
pauaiduou pasaondun ui siou ln lesq pue snouenss
us auos yanouie 'sioun us jo sisouaeip au ul jydiay aaa aleia
and lightly haired skin. Papilloma viruses may, in some cats, give rise 
tumors may be associated with hematological or paraneoplastic com-
to viral plaques and these can progress to form 'Bowenoid' in situ
plications and these investigations would be indicated in the general
 snons aisai o ssaond u ul u ym u
evaluation of such tumors.
carcinoma (SCC).
Pathology
Imaging techniques
 The skin is a complex organ essentially comprising two layers:
Radiography of the primary tumor is not usually necessary unless the
lesion is invasive and sited close to bone (e.g., SCC of the digit).
?
The epidermis, a stratified squamous epithelium
Radiography of the thorax and ultrasound evaluation of abdominal
The dermis, of vascular dense connective tissue.
 Organs (liver, spleen, and kidneys) is important in the clinical staging
In addition, there are associated sebaceous and sweat glands and
of malignant tumors. Both techniques may be used to assess the
hair follicles, collectively termed the 'adnexae', plus melanocytes,
internal iliac and sub-lumbar lymph nodes for staging malignant skin
histiocytes, and dermal mast cells. Any of these tissues and cells
tumors sited on the hind limbs and perianal region.
may give rise to benign or malignant tumors. Squamous cell carci-
 aul ui uys au jo ioum jueueu juanbay iso a si euou
Biopsy and fine needle aspiration
Benign skin tumors, e.g., lipoma and adenoma, are less common
in the cat as compared with the dog, with the exception of basal
Cutaneous masses are easily accessible for fine needle aspiration and
cell tumors.
this is a quick, minimally invasive and useful technique for assessing
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00020-2
209
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Table 20-1 The reported incidence of skin tumors in the cat
Skin tumors and tumor-like lesions (n = 3260)
Mesenchymal skin tumors (n = 1550)
 Epithelial tumors
43% (60% benign, 40% malignant)
Fibrosarcoma
36%
Melanocytic tumors
1% (58% benign, 42% malignant)
Giant cell tumor of soft tissue
2%
Mesenchymal tumors
47% (20% benign, 80% malignant)
 Myxomatous tumors
2%
Tummor-like lesions
9%
Neural tumors
3%
Epithelial skin tumors (n = 1400)
Lipoma
12%
 Basal cell tumor
34 %
Liposarcoma
<1%
Basal cell carcinoma
3%
Hemangioma
4%
Basosquamous carcinoma
<1%
Hemangiosarcoma
6%
 Squamous cell carcinoma
23 %
Lymphangioma 
<1%
 Sebaceous adenoma
4%
Mast cell tumor
27%
Seb aceous carcinoma
2%
Lymphosarcoma
6%
Meibomian gland adenoma
<1%
Plasmacytoma
<1%
Apocrine gland adenoma
7%
Others
<1%
Apocrine ductal adenoma
5%
Non-neoplastic skin lesions (n = 280)
Apocrine gland carcinoma
6%
 Epidermal cyst
42%
Ceruminous gland adenoma
6%
Follicular cyst
10%
 Ceruminous gland carcinoma
7%
Apocrine cyst 
13%
Anal sac gland carcinoma
<1%
Ceruminous cyst / hyperplasia
20%
Trichoepithelioma
2%
 Sebaceous hyperplasia
11%
 Pilomatrixoma
<1%
Meibomian hyperplasia
<1%
 Adnexal nevus
1%
 Skin tag
3%
Reprinted from Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS, Skin Tumours of the Dog and Cat. zo08. Copyright @John Wiley and Sons, with permission.
papiesai aie aaui se 'siei asdoiq aulapniul pinous Aragins aiuyaa
 Box 20-1 Differential diagnoses for skin lesions
as contaminated. Excisional biopsy (i.e., local resection of the whole
mass) is not generally recommended, except as a diagnostic procedure
Tumor, benign or malignant 
in a case with multiple skin lesions. More details on biopsy techniques
Hyperplastic lesions
can be found in Chapter 14.
Granulomatous lesions
Inflammatory lesions
Staging
Immune-mediated lesions
Developmental lesions 
 Clinical staging of primary tumors of the skin is by clinical examina-
tion and imaging of body cavities where indicated by the nature of
the primary tumor. The primary tumor is assessed on the basis of its
size, infiltration of the subcutis, and involvement of other structures
such as fascia, musdle, and bone (Box 20-2). For more information
any mass within the skin. In some cases (eg., mast cell tumors, cutane-
 on tumor staging see Chapter 14.
ous lymphoma) cytology may provide a diagnosis, although histologi-
cal examination of the tumor may still be required to assess the grade
 of the lesion. Fine needle aspiration of local lymph nodes is also
useful to assess metastatic spread.
EPITHELIAL TUMORS
 Skin punch, needle, or incisional biopsies are required for a defini-
tive histological diagnosis. Collection of a representative sample of
Papilloma/cutaneous papillomatosis
tissue is important Areas of ulceration and necrosis should be avoided
and it is important to collect a deep enough sample of the tumor.
Cutaneous papillomatosis is a viral disease that is rare in dogs and
Careful planning of the biopsy procedure should be made so that
very rare in cats, but papilloma viruses may be implicated in the etiol-
seeding of tumor cells through normal tissue planes is avoided.
Ogy of some carcinomas of the feline skin.
210
Skin tumors
Chapter
20
Box 20-2 Clinical stages (TNM) of canine or feline tumors
of epidermal or dermal origin (excluding lymphoma and
mast cell tumors)
Primary tumor (T)a
Tis Pre-invasive carcinoma (carcinoma in situ)
TO No evidence of tumor
 T1 Tumor <2 cm maximum diameter, superficial or exophytic
T2 Tumor 2-5 cm maximum diameter, or with minimal invasion
irrespective of size
T3 Tumor >5 cm maximum diameter, or with invasion of the subcutis,
irrespective of size
T4 Tumor invading other structures such as fascia, muscle, bone or
 cartilage
Regional lymph nodes (N)b
Figure 20-1 A basal cell tumor at the base of the ear. (Courtesy of
NO No evidence of RLN involvement 
David Grant.)
N1 Movable ipsilateral nodes
N1a nodes not considered to contain growth
indicated that quantitative analysis of the nuclei of basal cell carci-
N1b nodes considered to contain growth
noma neoplastic cells (by nuclear morphometry) is able to predict
 N2 Movable contralateral or bilateral nodes
types in cats, which may be of practical value.5
N2a nodes not considered to contain growth
 N2b nodes considered to contain growth
N3 Fixed nodes
Tumors of the adnexae
Distant metastases (M)
 Benign adnexal tumors are relatively common in the dog but appear
to be less common in the cat and they include:
M0 No evidence of distant metastasis
 M1 Distant metastasis detected (specify sites)
·
 Tumors of hair follicles (trichoelipthelioma and pilomatricoma)
Glandular tumors (sebaceous, apocrine, meibomian,
Tumors occurring simultaneously should have the actual number recorded.
cenuminous).
 The tumor with the highest T category is selected and the number of tumors
 In one survey of feline follicular tumors in Italy trichoblastoma was
indicated in parenthesis. Successive tumors should be classified independently.
- saeo y  unuasaan 'ug u is a se paoa
(-) histologically negative, (+) histologically positive
licular tumors and tumor-like lesions together represented 8% of all
(From Owen LN. (1980) TNM Classification of Tumors in Domestic Animals.
 skin tumors in the cat. All these tumors are slow growing, non-
 invasive and benign in their behavior. Malignant tumors arising from
VPH_CMO_80.20_eng.pdf
the adnexal structures of the skin are extremely rare in the cat.
Basal cell tumor/carcinoma
Treatment and prognosis
 This tumor is relatively common in the cat and usually affects middle-
Treatment is surgical (if required) and the prognosis is good. Seba-
aged to older animals. It is reported to account for 14- 26% of feline
skin tumorsl2 or for 34% of feline epithelial tumors.3
Tumors are usually solitary, discrete frm, well-circumscribed
Squamous cell carcinoma
masses, sited in the dermis and subcutis of the head and neck (Fig.
20-1). The overlying skin may be ulcerated. Most tumors are small,
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant skin tumor
0.5-2.0 cm in diameter, although on occasion they may reach up to
Alensn 1l 'sseldoau uys ie jo %os-s1 ioy gununose 'es aul u!
10 cm in size. Some feline basal cell tumors contain abundant melanin
affects older animals and there is no known breed predisposition,
pigment and may therefore be confused on gross inspection with
although white-coated cats have a higher incidence. SCC is a locally
melanoma. Various subtypes have been described based on the histo-
invasive tumor that infltrates the underlying dermal and subcutane-
logical appearance, eg., solid, cystic, adenoid, and medusoid. Diag-
ous tissue Metastasis tends to be via the lymphatic route but the
nosis can be made on cytological examination; however, the occurrence 
incidence of metastasis is low.
of cells with characteristic basal cell-like appearance has been shown 
Feline cutaneous SCCmost frequently occurs on the head, affecting
to be an inconsistent finding in cats.4
particularly the pinnae, nasal planum, and eyelids (Figs 20-2 to 20-4).
The etiology in the majority of cases is related to long-term exposure
of unprotected skin (non-pigmented, hairless regions) to ultraviolet
Treatment and prognosis
light, with lesions initially of solar dermatitis progressing to actinic
These are usually slow-growing, non-invasive tumors that follow a
keratitis [actinic carcinoma in situ) to carcinoma in situ to invasive
benign course and rarely metastasize Occasionally, more invasive
SCC, often over quite a long course of time Utraviolet-related p53
tumors may be seen that are similar to the human 'rodent ulcer Local/
lesions have been identifed in feline SCC. Clinically these lesions are
wide local surgical excision is the treatment of choice and in most
crusty, scabby, ulcerated to plaque-like. Diagnosis is made by tissue
cases is curative so the prognosis is good. Local recurrence
can
biopsy and histology. Staging beyond local disease is not usually
Occur following incomplete surgical excision. Results from one study
necessary.
211
Section
4
Skin and Adnexa
pilaa aul uo (o) pue 'wnueid jeseu aui uo (a) 'ien anum e jo euuid aui uo (v) euoupien lian snowenbs z-oz aunh
Chapters 50 and 54). For early lesions, local control may be also
achieved by a number of other methods including cryosurgery and
strontium radiotherapy. Superficial lesions may also be treated
tage of excellent cosmetic results. One of the authors (IMD) has
experience of using a topical method of applying the photochemical.
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and excitation using a high intensity red
light An 85% complete response rate was seen in 55 cats with super-
ficial Tis-Tl tumors, treated with topical PDT, and at a median follow
up of l146 days 45% of cats were alive and disease free.7 There are
also reports in the literature of use of an immunomodulatory agent
imiquimod (Aldara) as a topical cream in cats with superfcial or
 Figure 20-3 Diffuse form of squamous cell carcinoma affecting the
multicentric SCC.* Electrochemotherapy, involving the administration
trunk.
of a chemotherapeutic agent alongside the delivery of appropriate
waveforms that induce and increase uptake of the drug by cancer cells,
aos yim 'sies un iuaeai iyssaons e se paqiosap uaaq osie seu
Sl [elul ale3s 1agiel e 'laaamoH t'sieaA aaiyl 01 dn ioy Buipuodsa1 s1e
required before this therapy can be recommended.
One study evaluating the prognosis of feline cutaneous SCC looked
at the role of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR). Results
indicated that 74% of tumors were positive for EGFR and this did
not correlate with tumor differentiation or mitotic activity. However.
patients with EGFR-positive tumors had a significantly worse outcome
with decreased disease free intervals (DFIs) and survival times. It was
postulated that using EGFR inhibitors in addition to conventional
 treatments may therefore improve outcomes for some cats with SCC.10
Multricentric SCc
A muticentric SCC in situ has been described in cats. Biologically, this
is a premalignant lesion that is histologically similar to Bowen disease
in humans (and hence sometimes referred to as Bowenoid carci-
noma). This tends to affect middle-aged to older mixed breed cats
Figure 20-4 A lip melanoma.
with lesions developing in haired, pigmented regions of the skin
including the trunk, limbs, feet, head, and neck. As with the human
Bowen's disease papilloma virus may be implicated in the etiology.
Treatment and prognosis
and the lesion can progress to invasive SCC.
These sunlight-induced lesions are generally slowly progressive, locally
invasive and very rarely metastasize. Wide local surgical excision is the
Other forms of scc
treatment of choice, and in cases where this can be achieved, the
 prognosis is favorable. Early diagnosis and prompt and effective treat-
Multiple digital carcinomas have been reported in cats. The digital
 ment are recommended for these lesions as, if left, over time they can
lesions appear to be secondary, metastatic tumors from a primary
become more invasive and less responsive to treatment Surgery is the
ani iauo i'aopuas iip-um, palles-os e 'euouies Areuound
only effective means of management of more extensive lesions (see
carcinomas that have been reported in cats include Merkel Cell
212
Skin tumors
Chapter
20
Carcinoma, a cutaneous neuroendocrine tumorl2 and an intraepider-
solitary cutaneous/dermal nodules (Fig. 20-5). The most common
mal adenocarcinoma in the perianal skin.13
sites of occurrence are on the head and trunk. These tumors are usually
histologically well differentiated and have a benign clinical course. On
Occasion a cat may be affected by multiple skin nodules (Fig. 20-6)
MELANOMA
 Or a solitary lesion may be invasive (Fig. 20-7). However, the majority
 of cutaneous mast cell tumors in the cat are benign and histological
 uous uaa ou s siou an iseu snaun auan jo suena
Melanocytic tumors are relatively uncommon tumors of the skin in
be clinically useful.
the cat, representing 1-2% of all feline skin tumors.23 Older cats are
affected, with a mean age of 8 years; there is no sex or breed predis-
position. Grossly, tumors may appear as flat, plaque-like to domed
 Treatment and prognosis
masses, up to 2 cm in diameter, sited within the dermis. They are
Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for feline cutaneous mast
usually dark brown to black and quite well defined. Malignant tumors,
cell tumors and the prognosis is usually good.14 Prognosis for the
which comprise 35-45% of cutaneous melanocytic tumors in cats.
cutaneous form of this disease is significantly better than the visceral/
may attain a larger size, contain less pigment and frequently ulcerate.
Cutaneous melanoma must be distinguished from the more common
 pigmented basal cell tumor.
Treatment and prognosis
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice for benign dermal
melanoma and the prognosis following complete surgical excision is
good. Tumors may recur locally if excision is incomplete, so regular
follow-up examinations are recommended. Surgical excision is also
indicated for local control of malignant tumors but the prognosis in
such cases is guarded to poor because of the high incidence of metas-
efcacy of radiation therapy and immunotherapy is unknown for this
tumor in cats.
MAST CELL TUMORS
Mast cell tumors are less common in the cat than in the dog and are
also less of a diagnostic problem. Two forms of mast cell tumor are
recognized in the cat cutaneous and visceral.
Cutaneous mast cell tumors
o asaano) sanpou aldnu se buuasaid onn lian ise g-oz ana
David Grant.)
Cutaneous mast cell tumors account for up to 2l% of all feline cutane-
ous tumors. The majority of feline cutaneous mast cell tumors are
Figure 20-7 An invasive mast cell tumor associated with edema and
Figure 20-5 A typical solitary mast cell tumor.
seroma.
213
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
systemic form. Furthermore, cats with single cutaneous tumors have
intracytoplasmic granules. Lymph node and hepatic metastasis was
 s 'si an im si yim pn saono ai
evident in 66% of cases and the majority of patients who were fol-
study also showed that there was a recurrence of mast cell neoplasia
lowed up either died or were euthanized within two months of
 in approximately one-third of cats that had complete excision of their
diagnosis.
tumors, which was about the same proportion of recurrence in cats
that had incomplete excisions. This supports previous studies showing
that incomplete excision is not associated with a higher rate of tumor
SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS
treated with surgery reported excellent local tumor control despite
(NON-INJECTION SITE)
incomplete margins in nearly half the cases. All cases were classified
as low-grade and metastatic disease involving peripheral lymph nodes
Soft tissue tumors arise from mesenchymal connective tissues and are
 or abdominal viscera was not detected in any cat.16
classified accordingly. Benign soft tissue tumors such as fibroma,
 In cats with multiple or unresectable tumors corticosteroids may
lipoma, etc are rare in the cat but their malignant counterparts, sar-
be of palliative value. The use of lomustine (CCNU) at a dose of
comas, account for 7-l0% of all feline tumors and fbrosarcoma is
 50 mg/m has been reported in cats with mast cell tumors. Twenty-six
the most common diagnosis (Figs 20-8 and 20-9). Cutaneous heman-
of 38 cases in one study were cutaneous, an overall response rate of
giosarcomas appear to be uncommon in the cat, accounting for
approximately 2% of all cutaneous neoplasms, with the majority
 Invasive or incompletely excised tumors may be treated with
located on the head. In a further study evaluating hemangiosarcomas
in 53 cats the majority of tumors were either cutaneous or subcutane-
mast cell tumors, providing local tumor control in 53/54 cases
ous rather than visceral.
(median follow up of 783 days). Adverse effects were infrequent
and mild.17
 A variant of feline mast cell tumor has been reported predominantly
Treatment and prognosis
affecting Siamese cats.1 This tumor, which may be multicentric, is
While there is established evidence to differentiate clinical and his-
characterized histologically by sheets of histiocyte-like mast cells with
topathological features between 'injection site' and spontaneous soft
scattered lymphoid aggregates and eosinophils. These tumors may
tissue sarcomas in cats, it is unknown whether outcomes following
 regress spontaneously without therapy.
Visceral and systemic mast cell tumors
Lymphoreticular mast cell tumors are occasionally seen in cats,
although this is the rarer form of mast cell disease seen in this species.
In this condition, also called systemic mastocytosis, the tumor prima-
asnie sis uasa te deu aas uaads ai sa a
vomiting and anorexia with common clinical fndings of mastocyto-
sis, marked splenomegaly and bone marrow infltration, the latter
often leading to anemia and other cytopenias. Occasionally, medias-
tinal involvement can lead to a pleural effusion and lymph nodes
elsewhere may also be involved. A diffuse cutaneous infiltration has
sometimes been reported with this form of the disease, and this has
been the cause of some confusion regarding the clinical behavior of
qutaneous mast cell tumors (most of which are benign). The diagnosis
may be confirmed by fine needle aspirates from the enlarged spleen.
Figure 20-8 A fibrosarcoma ('non-injection site' sarcoma) on the foot
Treatment and prognosis
Splenectomy is the treatment of choice (see Chapter 34). In one study
mast cell neoplasia was the most common reason for splenectomy in
cats (53%) and the only prognostic risk factor for survival was the
uaaq seu ieaiains ua-uon e'ssol lam aneiadoaid jo auasia
that the systemic response to splenectomy alone may be mediated by
the immune system, hence the use of postoperative corticosteroids in
these animals is controversial.
Intestinal mast cell tumor
Intestinal mast cell tumor in the cat is distinct from systemic masto-
cytosis (which does not involve the bowel). This form of feline
mast cell tumor is malignant, with widespread metastases and carries
a poor prognosis. Recently a variant of intestinal mast cell tumor,
feline intestinal sclerosing mast cell tumor, was reported in 50 cats.21
Histologically, the tumors were described as having a significant
stromal component. Neoplastic cells had poorly discernible
 Figure 20-9 A chondrosarcoma affecting the nose.
214
Skin tumors
Chapter
20
treatment (either radiation or surgery) differ between the two catego-
ries as studies often combine the groups or else focus solely on injec-
tion site sarcomas. One study involving a questionnaire to veterinary
surgeons who had submitted a fbrosarcoma from a cat for histopa-
thology attempted to compare results from cats with vaccine site (VS)
tumors and non-vaccine site (NvS) tumors.22 It was found that VS
tumors developed in younger cats and were larger than Nvs tumors.
Interestingly, although the VS tumors were biologically more aggres-
E pey siu Sn aun Kuana a m panan pue ais
ais uosau-uou ieun sains uoy ieadde pinom ll 'leaiains panan
diagnosis and treatment with early surgical excision, using wide or
radical surgery to obtain tumor-free margins is the treatment of choice.
One study that looked at a group of cats with soft tissue sarcoma
(including both injection site and non-injection site variants) treated
with preoperative or postoperative curative intent radiation therapy in
days following preoperative and 705 days following postoperative
ue sies asa un uu aq on punoy sm eau sa'(aeauin
was associated with decreased survival
Figure 20-10 Cutaneous lymphoma affecting the dorsum and flank.
 Surgical excision was the primary treatment in most cases and both
clean margins and increased survival were more likely in the cutane-
ous tumors compared with the subcutaneous tumors.24 Injection site
sarcomas are discussed in detail in Chapter 22.
chemotherapy, although use of lomustine has been reported in
one case.28
MULTIFOCAL/DIFFUSE CUTANEOUS
Epitheliotrophic lymphoma
NEOPLASIA
Tnue epitheliotrophic lymphoma appears very rare in cats and its
behavior is not well characterized in this species. A review article
As a result of the increasing use of skin biopsies in the investigation
including five cases of feline cutaneous epitheliotropic T-cell lym-
of skin disease, disseminated neoplastic infiltration of the skin is
log uoaand ou inq sie iapio iog uoaaid e paodan eoud
assuming increasing importance in the differential diagnosis of ulcera-
breed, sex, or location of lesions. Diagnosis is challenging and relies
tive, nodular, or crusting skin lesions. Although mast cell tumor and
upon good histopathological examination. Survival times appear to
 metastases from both carcinomas and sarcomas can present as multi-
be more variable in the cat compared with the dog.2?
ple, nodular skin lesions, lymphoproliferative diseases are those most
commonly associated with multifocal or diffuse skin lesions.
Feline cutaneous histiocytosis
Cutaneous lymphoproliferative disease
Various forms of dendritic cell, 'histiocytic' proliferations have been
documented in humans and dogs, but such conditions are not well
The cutaneous form of lymphoma is rare in the cat. In one study of
characterized in cats. Affolter & Moore described a series of 30 cats
l10 cats with extranodal lymphoma, only five cases of cutaneous
with both epitheliotrophic and non-epitheliotrophic histiocytic infl-
lymphoma were recorded, and most of these were solitary skin
trates of the superfcial and deep dermis with variable extension into
lesions.25 In the cat, cutaneous lymphoproliferative diseases may man-
the subcutis.* Animals presented with solitary or multiple non-
ifest in many different ways. Lesions may be benign or malignant and
 pruritic papules, nodules and plaques with a predilection for feet, legs.
may be epitheliotrophic or confined to the dermis; rarely is there
and face. There was no age or breed association but females were
association with leukemia (c.f., Sezary syndrome) Most occur in older
more often affected than males. Although in most cases the condition
 cats that are generally feline leukemia virus seronegative.
was progressive, lesions could be limited to the skin for prolonged
 Feline cutaneous lymphocytosis is an uncommon disease character-
 periods. Terminal dissemination to internal organs was documented
ized by slowly progressing single or multiple alopecic, erythematous.
in seven cases.
       s m
described as a benign condition that rarely progresses to systemic
Treatment and prognosis
involvement,2 but may be diffcult to distinguish from small cell
cutaneous lymphoma. Feline cutaneous lymphomas are malignant
 Treatment with chemotherapy, immunosuppressive or immunomod-
proliferations of T-lymphocytes, non-epitheliotrophic variants appear
aul os apns pauouauanoye au ul jyssaons iou sem sanup Aoien
more common than epitheliotrophic and are characterized by diffuse
authors called the condition feline progressive histiocytosis and sug-
Or nodular growths which are not usually associated with scaling or
gested it is best considered an initially indolent cutaneous neoplasm
pruritis (Fig. 20-10).27
which is mostly slowly progressive but may spread beyond the skin
in terminal stages. This is in contrast to malignant histiocytosis or
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, which has been described as a
Treatment and prognosis
multifocal systemic condition often associated with anemia due to
Feline cutaneous lymphoma lesions eventually progress to involve
erythrophagia, with similarities to the hemophagocytic form of
regional lymph nodes or viscera and are poorly responsive to
histiocytic sarcoma recognized in the dog.3
215
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
tumor types and the chemotherapy (see Chapter 16) and radiotherapy
CUTANEOUS PARANEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS
chapters (see Chapter 15). The other area of controversy is that of skin
'margins' (see Chapter 14). Clear and defined recommendations for
Tumors may cause metabolic disturbances through production of
margins of excision (lateral and deep) are not available for every
hormones or hormone-like substances that act on organs distant to
tumor type in this species. Furthermore, veterinary histopathologists 
the site of the tumor; the resulting conditions are termed paraneoplas-
would not usually examine more than four to eight sections of margins
tic syndromes. Whilst rare, several cutaneous paraneoplastic syn-
and therefore the accuracy of margin assessment of the entire tumor
dromes have been documented in the cat feline paraneoplastic
-uoat uoexy Aq paieoiduos iauiny st iuassasse siul 'uaiy iou st
alopecia and feline thymoma associated exfoliative dermatitis. Feline
niques, type of tissue planes examined (as not all normal tissues are
 paraneoplastic alopecia has mainly been described in association with
equal barriers to tumor invasion), and how the sample is presented
 pancreatic carcinoma, especially tumors that have metastasized to the
to the pathologist. However, it is known that the rate of recurrence of
liver and other distant sites,3233 although there is one report of a
tumors is reduced (but not eliminated) with reported histologically
similar syndrome associated with hepatocellular carcinoma in a cat.34
clear margins. Benign tumors are usually well defned and demarcated
This syndrome manifests as a non-pruritic, progressive alopecia
and the probability of complete removal with several millimeters of
involving the limbs, ventrum, and perineum. The alopecic skin has a
uaaa ieul iaquauan on quejodui s! ai Kienba poos s! suieu
shiny appearance and the hair in non-alopecic areas is easily epilated.
benign tumors can recur with 'dirty' margins. With malignant tumors,
the margins of excision are less well defined (see Chapter 14). However,
resection of the pancreatic mass.3 An exfoliative dermatitis with pru-
it is recommended that excisions are performed with a minimum of
nitis and erythroderma has been reported in cats in association with
1 cm (for epithelial skin tumors and benign mast cell tumors) to a
thymoma. This dermatopathy has also been shown to resolve follow.
-oes ais uoialu pue als uosau-uou iog) u s-e jo unu
ing resection of the thymoma.35-37 Symmetrical ischemic cutaneous
mas). For most malignant tumors that overlie a fascial plane then
necrosis of the skin of the hind feet of a 7-year-old domestic short
removal of this fascia would usually be considered adequate for the
haired cat with alimentary-hepatic lymphoma was considered a para-
neoplastic syndrome as has been seen in people with lymphoma or
would be best practice (see Chapter 22).
 other internal malignancies.38
General principles of oncological surgery should be applied when
performing the surgery (see Chapter 14), with consideration of skin
tension lines in the cat when specifically excising skin tumors.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
Surgical management of a skin tumor in a cat should only be consid-
GENERAL COIMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
ered following a cytological or histopathological diagnosis and once
staging has been completed, where appropriate. It is only once this
Complications of skin tumor excision depend on the location and
information has been obtained that correct decision making regarding
extent of the surgery but may include infection, seromas, wound
surgical technique and indeed whether surgery is the most appropriate
dehiscence, draining tracts, and tumor recurrence. Each complication
treatment can be made. If the tumor is deemed to be unresectable'
should be fully investigated and treated early as it may lead to the
then consideration should be given to other forms of management.
development of a non-healing wound which could potentially be
For example, a large sarcoma on the limb may respond well to a
more challenging to manage compared with any of the above early
combination ofa marginal resection surgery followed by radiotherapy.
complications. For more information on wound healing and manage-
Unfortunately, conclusive information on the use of adjunctive treat-
ment of the non-healing wound see Chapters 17 and 18.
ments in the cat is not as readily available as in the dog and for further
Prognosis is dependent on the tumor type and is discussed in the
information the reader is directed towards chapters on individual
relevant sections above.
REFERENCES
1. Miller MA, Nelson SL, Turk JR, et al.
basal cell carcinomas. Research in
9. Spugnini EP, Vincenzi B, Citro G, et al.
Cutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Path
Veterinary Science 2008;84:440-3.
Electrochemotherapy for the treatment
1991 ;28:389-95.
6. Abramo F, Pratesi F, Cantile C, et al.
of squamous cell carcinoma in cats: A
2.
Bostock DE. Neoplasms of the skin and
Survey of canine and feline follicular
preliminary report. Vet J 2009;179:
subcutaneous tissues in dogs and cats.
tumors and tumor-like lesions in central
117-20.
Brit Vet I 1986;142:1-18.
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:479-81.
10.
 Sabattini S, Marconato L, Zoff A, et al.
3.
Goldschmidt MH, Shofer FS. Skin tumors
7.
 Bexfield NH, Stell Al, Gear RN, Dobson 
Epidermal growth factor receptor
of the dog and cat. Pergamon Press; 1992.
JM. Photodynamic therapy of superficial
expression is predictive of poor prognosis
p. 2-3.
nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas
in feline cutaneous squamous cell
4.
Stockhaus C, Teske E, Rudolph R, Werner
in cats: 55 cases. J Vet Int Med 2008;22:
arcinoma. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12:
HG. Assessment of cytological criteria for
1385-9.
760-8.
diagnosing basal cell tumors in the dog
Gill VL, Bergman Pl, Baer KE, et al. Use 
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Elliot GS, Radoveky A,
and cat. J Small Anim Pract 2001;42:
of imiquimod 5% cream [Aldara) in
Blevins WE. Pulmonary squamous cell
582-6.
cats with multicentric squamous cell
carcinoma with multiple digital metastasis
 5. Simeonov R, Simeonova G.
arcinoma in situ: 12 cases [2002-2005].
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 1989;30:
Nucleomorphometric analysis of feline
Vet & Comp Onc 2008;6:55-64.
696-9.
216
Skin tumors
20
12. Ozaki K, Narama I. Merkel cell carcinoma 
tumour: 50 cases [1997-2008). Vet Comp
30. Affolter VF, Moore PF. Feline progressive
in a cat. J Vet Med Sci 2009;71:1093-6.
Onc 2010;8:72-9.
histiocytosis. Vet Pathol 2006;43:646-55.
13. Hargis AM, Baldessari AE, Walder EJ.
22.
Hendrick M), Shofer FS, Goldschmidt
31.
Friedrichs KR, Young KM. [2008)
Intraepidermal adenocarcinoma in the
MH, et al. Comparison of fbrosarcomas 
Histiocytic sarcoma of macrophage origin
perianal skin of two cats, a condition
 that developed at vaccination sites and at
in a cat: case report with a literature
resembling human extramammary Paget's
nonvaccination sites in cats: 239 cases
 review of feline histiocytic malignancies
disease. Vet Dermatol 2008;19(1):31-7.
(1991-2). J Am Vet Med Assoc 
 and comparison with canine
14. Molander-McCrary H, Henry CJ, Potter K,
1994;205:1425-9.
haemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma.
et al. Cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats:
23.
.Mayer MN, Treuil PL, LaRue SM.
Vet Clin Pathol 2008;37:121-8.
 32 cases [1991-1994). J Am Anim Hosp
Radiotherapy and surgery for feline soff
32.
.Brooks DG, Campbell KL, Dennis JS.
Assoc 1998;34:281-4.
tissue sarcoma. Vet Rad & Ulltra
et al. Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
15. Litster AL, Sorenmo KUl. Characterisation
2009;50:669-72.
 in three cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
of the signalment, clinical and survival 
24. Johannes CM, Henry Cl, Turnquist SE.
1994;30:557-63.
characteristics of 4l cats with mast cell
et al. Hemangiosarcoma in cats: 53 cases
33.
. Tasker S, Griffon Dl, Nuttall Tl, Hill PB.
neoplasia. J Feline Med Surg 2006;8:
[1992-2002). 1 Am Vet Med Assoc
Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia
177-83.
2007;231:1851-6.
following surgical removal of a pancreatic
16. Montgomery KW, van der Woerdt A.
25. Taylor SS, Goodfellow MR, Browne Wl.
crcinoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
Aquino SM, et al. Periocular cutaneous
et al. Feline extranodal lymphoma:
1999;40:16-9.
mast cell tumors in cats: evaluation
 response to chemotherapy and survival in 
34. Marconato L, Albanese F, Viacava P, et al.
of surgical excision (33 cases).
110 cats. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:
Paraneoplastoc alopecia associated with
Vet Ophthalmol 2010;13:26-30.
584-92.
hepatocellular carcinoma in a cat. Vet
17. Turrel JM, Farrelly J. Page RL, McEntee
26.
 Gilbert S, Affolter VK, Gross TL, et al.
Dermatol 2007:18:267-71.
MC. Evaluation of strontium 90
(2004) Clinical, morphological 
35.
.Forster-Van Hijfte MA, Curtis CF, White
irradiation in treatment of cutaneous
 and immunohistochemical
 RN. Resolution of exfoliative dermatitis
mast cell tumors in cats: 35 cases
characterization of cutaneous
and Malassezia pachydermatitis
[1992-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
lymphocytosis in 23 cats. Vet Derm
overgrowth in a cat after surgical
2006;228:898-901.
2004;15:3-12
thymoma resection. J Small Anim Pract
18. Wilcock BP, Yager JA, Zink MC. The
27.
 Day Ml. Immunophenotypic
1997;38:451-4.
morphology and behavior of feline
characterization of cutaneous lymphoid
36. Godfrey DR. Dermatosis and associated
 cutaneous mastocytomas. Vet Pathol
neoplasia in the dog and cat. J of Comp
 systemic signs in a cat with thymoma and
1986;23(3):320-4.
Path 1995:112:79-96.
recently treated with an imidacloprin
19.
Gordon SS, McClaran JK, Bergman PJ.
 Komori S, Nakamura S, Takahashi K.
preparation. J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:
Liu SM. Outcome following splenectomy
Tagawa M. Use of lomustine to treat
333-7.
in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12:256-61.
 ltaneous non-epitheliotropic lymphoma 
37.
 Singh A, Boston SE, Poma R. Thymoma-
20. Liska WD, MacEwen EG, Zaki FA,
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:
associated exfoliative dermatitis with
Garvey M. Feline systemic mastocytosis:
237-9.
 post-thymectomy myasthenia gravis in
A review and results of splenectomy in
29.
 Fontaine J, Heimann M, Day MJ.
a cat. Can Vet J 2010;51:757-60.
seven cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Qutaneous epitheliotropic T-cell
38. Ashley PF, Bowman LA. Symmetrical
1979;15:589-97.
 Jymphoma in the cat: a review of the
 cutaneous necrosis of the hind feet and
21. Halsey CH, Powers BE, Kamstock DA.
literature and fve new cases. Vet Derm
 multicentric follicular lymphoma in a cat.
Feline intestinal sclerosing mast cell
2011;22:454-61.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1999;214:211-14.
217
2
1
hapter
Mammary glands
P.Buracco
The high prevalence of neutered female cats ensures that mammary
hematogenously directly via the internal thoracic and/or intercostal
gland problems in cats are not common. However, in the un-neutered
queen the incidence and severity of mammary gland disease is rela-
supply is detailed in Table 21-1.
nant Benign conditions such as fbroepithelial hyperplasia can occur
Lymphatic drainage
'azis ieinoenads e uean ues spuea Aeuuu aun pue sies gunon ul
Other benign lesions are rare For malignant tumors [ie, adenocarci
au pue sou qdu Aeixe aul on uep spue Alxe au
noma) an early diagnosis and clinical staging are essential for plan-
a (-i ae) saou ydl [eumu an 0 spu jeu
 ning the best treatment in order to improve prognosis. At present the
exact lymphatic drainage pattern is still debatable and there is con-
mainstay of treatment of adenocarcinoma is aggressive surgery: the
troversy as to whether it is possible to have lymphatic spread
beneft of neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapeutic measures is still
of feline mammary malignancy from one mammary gland to
unknown.
other mammary glands. A summary of the conclusions relating to
lymphatic drainage and potential means of metastasis is shown in
Box 21-1.13.4,9-11
SURGICAL ANATOMY
Cats normally have eight mammary glands, four on each side: two
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
thoracic (T1, T2) and two abdominal (A1, A2; A2 also referred to as
the inguinal or the second abdominal mammary gland). When
Signalment, history and
comparing feline and canine mammary glands, the frst three pairs
physical examination
would be thoracic and the caudal pair abdominal or inguinal; num-
pue 7-i oouuat aul t- (iepnes on [eue) ynoy ot isiy paiaq
Clinical features of mammary gland disease include a change in shape.
Al-2 will be used in this chapter. The nipples have five to seven lac-
size appearance, or consistency of one or more mammary glands. The
tiferous pores with one to three openings on the top and the remain-
signalment of the cat and a full history should be taken from the
ing ones on the side.5 Queens may have additional rudimentary
owner. The cat's age neuter status, signs of estrus, mating history.
 mammary glands.3 One or two rudimentary mammary glands may be
whether it has had any hormonal therapy, and previous history of
found in male cats.5
surgery in the area are of particular relevance.
Knowledge of the blood and lymphatic supply of the feline
 A full physical examination should be performed including a thor
Ae on uoelan u aenid ueodu si sue Ae
 ough palpation of all mammary glands and regional lymph nodes.
 gland malignancy, staging, treatment, and prognosis.
The vulva should be inspected for evidence of enlargement or dis-
charge and abdominal palpation performed to manually evaluate the
Blood supply
uterus and the entire abdomen.
The epigastric arteries supply the mammary glands. There are two
Further investigations
arteries (cranial and caudal) that anastomose in the umbilical area.
with some branches crosing the midine. The venous drainage mirrors 
Fine needle aspiration of any mammary mass and especially of any
the arterial pattern, but veins cross the midline more frequently than
enlarged regional/sentinel lymph node(s) may give useful informa-
arteries. This makes extension of malignancy from one side to the
tion regarding the type of tumor and therefore be an aid to planning
other possible. l Malignant cells from Al and A2 may also be spread
further investigations and treatment.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00021-4
219
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
 Based on the initial cytological results, further investigations might
Table 21-1 The arterial blood supply of feline mammary
include thoracic radiographs (both right and left lateral and dorsov-
 glands1
entral views) to check for pulmonary metastasis; abdominal ultra-
lo aseasip auan 'sueuuai ueean Kueusaid ig yrau on punos
Region
Arteries
lymphatic splenic or hepatic metastasis. Computed tomography is
useful for detecting pulmonary metastatic disease and for staging the
T1-T2
Axial: perforating branches of the internal thoracic
arteries; cutaneous branches of the intercostal arteries
tumor more effectively (Table 2l-3). 12
from T7 caudally
Blood tests might include FIV/FeLV status, general hematological
 and biochemical evaluation in the older cat prior to anesthesia, and
Abaxial: Lateral thoracic arteries
if ovarian remnant syndrome is suspected then a progesterone assay
A1
 Cranial superficial epigastric artery
can be useful.
Cutaneous branches of the caudal intercostal arteries
Some cutaneous branches of phrenicoabdominal and
deep circumflex iliac arteries
SURGICAL DISEASES
A2
Caudal superficial epigastric artery (from external
pudendal artery)
Some cutaneous branches of phrenicoabdominal and
Feline mammary glands can be affected by benign non-neoplastic
deep circumflex iliac arteries
lesions (non-inflammatory and inflammatory) and tumors (benign
and malignant). The diseases affecting cats are listed in Table 21-4..14
An accurate diagnosis is critical for staging, treatment, and
prognosis.
Box 21-1 Lymphatic drainage of feline
 mammary glands1,34$11
Benign non-neoplastic lesions
Benign non-neoplastic non-inflammatory lesions in cats include cysts,
 The axillary and inguinal lymph nodes are the primary lymphatic
ductal ectasia or hyperplasia, focal fibrosis or fibroepithelial hyperpla-
nodes
sia (lobular hyperplasia).
 Axillary lymphatics drain T1. T2 and possibly A1
I ueap ose Aew ing zy uieap sjeyduk leuinbul
Fibroepithelial hyperplasia
 Neither an interglandular nor a right/eft connection has been 
definitively demonstrated
The most common benign non-neoplastic lesion in the cat is fibroepi-
Local spread (to one side to the other) is more likely to occur
thelial hyperplasia (also known as fibroadenomatous or lobular
through venous rather than lymphatic vessels 
hyperplasia) with or without ductal ectasia. There is a rapid and
Whether direct (primary) spread to sternal and medial iliac lymph
abnormal stromal and epithelial duct proliferation of one or more
nodes occurs is debatable. If the axillary and/or inguinal lymph
1e se aleuay ioeui Bunon sipae Allnsn ll st'spue[g Aieuueu
nodes are not involved, the probability that the sternal and medial
uuainasd s'ssa juals e iae sunnn saauns uaqnd
iliac (secondary lymph) nodes are involved is likely to be low and,
 and pregnant queens of any age can be affected due to the effects of
therefore, they should only be investigated as a potential
ovarian progesterone The condition has also been described in both
secondary lymphatic center. The purported order of drainage is
axillary-sternal and inguinal-medial iliac
The exaggeratedly enlarged mammary glands (Fig. 21-1) are non-
lactating, with a firm and elastic consistency. They may be edematous
Table 21-2 Axillary and inguinal lymphatic centers
Lymph nodes
Number of
Frequency
 Location
lymph nodes
in cats
Axillary lymph center
Axillaris proprius (proper axillary LN)
1
100%
Junction of v. thoracica lateralis with v. axillaris
Axillaris accessorius (accessory axillary LN)
2 (1-3)
97%
epe oun A pue e on juanelpe Nn Auellxe ladoud aui ot lepne)
later alis 
Axillaris primae costae (axillary first rib LN)
Variable
5%
 Adjacent to v. axillaris
 Inguinal lymph center
 Inguinalis superficialis (superficial inguinal LN)
1 (2-3)
100%
 Near the junction of v. epigastrica caudalis superficialis with v.
pudenda externa
 Epigastricis cranialis (cranial epigastric LN)
2 (1-3)
7%
 On the m. rectus abdominis adjacent to v. epigastrica cranialis
 superficialis 
 Epigastricis caudalis (caudal epigastric LN)
2 (1-3)
%86
Adjacent to v. epigastrica caudalis superficialis
a., artery; LN, lymph node; m., muscle; v., vein.
220
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
Table 21-3 dinical staging of feline mammary tumors
T: primary tumor
N: regional lymph
M: distant
nodes (RLN)
metastasis
T1
<2 cm of diameter
NO
 RLN not involved 
MONo
(cytology.
evidence
histology)
T2
2-3 cm of diameter
N1
 RLN involved
M1 Present
T3
>3 cm of diameter
Stages
T1 NO MO
T2 NO M0
T1 or T2 N1 MO
T3 NO or N1 MO
IV
Any T Any N1 MO
(Modified from Owen LNl. Clasification of tumors in domestic animals. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 1980. http:/whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/1980/PH_
CMO_80.20_eng-pdf
RLN, regional lymph node.
Table 21-4 Classification of feline neoplastic and
non-neoplastic mammary lesions
Lesion
Common
Less common / Rare
Mammary
 Non-infiltrating (in
Squamous cell carcinoma 
tumors:
situ) carcinoma
Mucinous carcinoma73
 malignant 
Tubulopapillary
Sarcoma and
carcinoma
carcinosarcoma?4
Solid carcinoma
Carcinoma or sarcoma in a
 Figure 21-1 Fibroepithelial hyperplasia in a 13-month old female cat.
Cribriform
benign tumor
(A) Gross and (B) radiographic appearance.
carcinoma
Inflammatory carcinoma7s
Lipid-rich carcinoma76
Lymphangiosarcoma7
Histiocytic sarcomas8
Box 21-2 Fibroepithelial hyperplasia
Mammary
Simple adenoma
 Benign mixed tumor
tumors: benign
sien ajewaj bunok Ajensn - juawjeubis juaed
Complex adenoma
Duct papilloma
Fibroadenoma
 History - previous administration of synthetic progesterone or mating
Ab dominal palpation and ultrasound:
Inflammatory
 Mastitis
Abscessation
- Exclude pregnancy
lesions 
- Exclude ovarian remnant syndrome (see Chapter 40)
 Benign lesions
Duct ectasia
Cyst
Lobular hyperplasia
Focal fibrosis (fibrosclerosis)
(fibroadenomatous
 Ductal hyperplasia
hyperplasia or
in Box 21-2. The treatment of fibroepithelial hyperplasia is summa-
fibroepithelial
rized in Box 21-3.
hyperplasia)
(Modified from Hampe JF, Misdorp W. Tumours and dysplasias of the mammary
Mammary tumors
gland. Bull World Health Organ 1974;50:111-33; and Misdorp W., Else RW.
bop aut po sowng Aewwew jo uoessep eiboois!h dl qwosd '3 uawllah
Feline mammary tumors are the third most common tumors after
and the cat. In Schulman FY, editor. World Health Organization International
lymphoproliferative and skin tumors in cats. They account for
Histological Classification of Tumors of the Domestic Animals, second series,
about 17% of neoplasia in the queen and 1-5% of all tumors in
vol. 7. Washington DC: Armed Forces Instistute of Pathology: 1999. p. 11-56.)
male cats.16,27-29
 Benign tumors
lameness), hot, painful and ulcerated, with areas of localized and
 Benign tumors (Table 21 -4) account for about 10-15% of all mammary
mastitis should be considered as a differential diagnosis; both condi-
lesions seen in cats. They occur in queens ranging in age from 1 to
tions can occur concurrently.22 A summary of the condition is listed
9.5 years.16 Once the benign nature of the lesion has been
221
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
ascertained, marginal surgical excision is the treatment of choice
affected queens is 10-12 years;1 males may be a little older.28 No
(simple mammectomy). Surgical resection is recommended as these
definitive predilection for any specific gland has been demonstrated.
lesions could undergo malignant transformation.15 Histology should
Adenocarcinoma may involve one (Fig. 2l-3) or more glands, with at
be performed on the excised specimen, including evaluation of exci-
ai a gi'aae pu ao uui an saey sie ae o y isa
sion margins.
of growth is usually rapid and cats are usually presented at an advanced
Malignant tumors
Malignancy is recognized histologically in 85-93% of all mammary
lesions and more than 80% are adenocarcinomas but other tumors
are occasionally seen (Table 21-4).16,30.31 A viral cause has been advo-
cated but not proven for adenocarcinomas.3233 Predisposition has
been advocated for domestic shorthaired and Siamese cats;27 in the
latter breed even younger cats may be affected.31 Mammary tumor
 incidence increases after six years of age:34.3 the reported mean age of
 Box 21-3 Treatment of fibroepithelial hyperplasia
 Treat ulceration and/or pain as appropriate 
 Drain abscesses and administer antibiotics in cases with
A
concurrent mastitiszz
ssauban Aew aseasip aul suaanb jueubaidopnasd lo jueubaad ul
spontaneously afer the end of pregnancy or luteolysis'5.2324
會
 Discontinue exogenous synthetic progestin administration. If 
disease does not regress, partial (Hg. 21-2) or total mastectomy 
has been recommended.15 If mammary glands are very enlarged.
stalqissod j! papioae aq pinous pue yjewalgoud aq Aew Alabuns
 Ovariectomy/ovariohysterectomy (OvH) by median celiotomy or
through the flank (when mammary glands are so enlarged as to
impede the midline approach).16 OvH is effective in most cases,
but regression may take up to 6 months.15 In cats treated with 
long-acting injectable progestins, regression may only be partial or
not at all, even after spaying2
remission is achieved in a variable time but with a mean of about 
four weeks.26 Before its use, pregnancy should be ruled out as 
these drugs will have an abortive effect.1s The protocol proposed
by Gorlinger et al (2002)}21 (aglepristone, 20 mg/kg once a week 
until remission) should be effective for cases induced by both 
B
long-acting progestins and endogenous progesterone. One
important advantage of using antiprogestins is preservation of
Figure 21-2 (A) The gross appearance of fibroepithelial hyperplasia
fertility, if this is a concern15 
affecting a single mammary gland in a one-year-old cat. (B) Introperative
view of a marginal excision. (Courtesy of Nick Bacon.)
P
Figure 21-3 Feline mammary adenocarcinoma affecting single mammary glands. Gross appearance in two different elderly female cats. Fine needle
aspiration should be performed in order to confirm the diagnosis. (8) Courresy of Lisa Mestrinho.)
222
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
Figure 21-4 Ulcerated cystic mammary adenocarcinoma affecting several
Figure 21-6 Lateral thoracic radiograph showing disseminated miliary
glands in a 12-year-old female entire cat.
metastasis and pleural effusion secondary to a mammary
adenocarcinoma
stage with lesions adherent to the skin and/or deep muscular fascia.
Ulceration develops in over 25% of cases, and even in small lesions
nipples may be swollen and exude fluid (Fig. 21-4).215.16 Pelvic limb
thromboembolism has been reported.15 Metastasis occurs in 50-90%
 of cats, most commonly to regional lymph nodes (Fig. 21-5), lungs.
pleura (Fig. 2l-6), liver and less commonly to the adrenal glands,
untreated, the reported mean survival of cats is about one year.15.36
Two studies have shown a significant decrease in the risk of develop-
ing a mammary tumor if ovariohysterectomy is performed before the
cat is 6 months of age4,37 and a slightly reduced risk, but stillsignif-
cant, if ovariohysterectomy is done when the cat is between 6 months
Piyaaiui e iseal ie si arau zs'(uonpai ysu 9s) ase jo 1e 1 pue
increased risk of mammary tumor development (and fbroepithelial
hyperplasia) in intact queens when progestagens or estrogen/
progesterone combinations havebeen administered,32.3 this has been
also documented in male cats2.3 and in zoo felids.40.41 The hormonal
's ar auy u aae rodaan e sa aunu
usually low for estrogen and moderate for progesterone recep-
tors.18.42-46 In undifferentiated tumors the receptors are absent or only
 present in low numbers. Feline mammary adenocarcinoma has been
 proposed as a model for human mammary disease.43.47
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
AND PLANNING
Mammary carcinoma should be staged according to the TNM clinical
-isa Jl at(e-i ae aas) ei landeu u paqsap se uass sues
ble, aggressive surgery is the treatment of choice, but unfortunately it
is rarely curative as mammary adenocarcinoma is often presented at
 too advanced stage Surgery may be combined with other therapeutic
options, especially in more advanced cases. A unilateral or preferably
a bilateral mastectomy should always be planned in cats. Bilateral
B
mastectomy may be performed in one single stage or four to eight
[eaeun e suuoiad Kuoaisu (eion paeis-om] mede syaam
Figure 21-5 (A) A single ulcerated adenocarcinoma that had
mastectomy each time).
metastatized to both the axillary lymph nodes: (B) clinical appearance of
Antibiotics are given
 intravenously at induction of anesthesia
the left axillary lymph node (arrow). (Courtesy of Julius Liptak.)
[20 mg/kg of cephazolin).
223
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
The inguinal lymph node should be removed together with A2
mastectomy or bilateral mastectomy. For small benign lesions a
mammary gland and both submitted for histopathological analysis.
simple elliptical excision of the lesion can be performed but it is
Through a supplemental and cranial incision (or cranial extension of
preferable to excise the entire mammary gland involved (mammec-
the mastectomy incision) the axillary node(s) are removed if enlarged
tomy) (see Fig. 2l-2). Even with a benign lesion, it is recommended
and submitted for histological analysis. If not enlarged, their prophy.
that a small amount of unaffected mammary tissue is removed with
lactic removal is controversial as it is unclear whether it results in any
the tumor.
clinical benefit.16.48.49
 Particular care must be paid to meticulous hemostasis of the cranial
 No real benefit has been demonstrated to performing concurrent
and caudal epigastric vessels in addition to the other minor vessels.
 ovariohysterectomy from an oncologic point of view.15,16.31
As a general rule, veins should be ligated before arteries to limit neo-
 Histologic evaluation of margins is important for prognosis so the
plastic spread. Excessive use of electrocautery may delay healing and
as asodind su ioy paedaid aq pinous uauads pasa aia
complicate both identification and histologic evaluation of the exci-
le anss aue pioae on pade aq pinous samns ssau ly
sion margins. Dead space should be eliminated by 'walking' sutures50
sliding: other sutures should be applied to orientate the pathologist
of 3/0 absorbable monofilament material applied in a continuous
(cranial vs. caudal); finally, the sample should be inked on its excision
pattern to close the subcutaneous tissues, with the sutures engaging
surface (particularly in areas where the surgeon believes the excision
peap Aue jo uoeiaiao pue siseisomay snoinoan 'eiseg da a
may have been more marginal).
space during closure should help prevent seroma formation. A drain
is not usually applied.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
Unilateral mastectomy
Simple lumpectomy and mammectomy should be reserved only for
The surgical options for mammary masses in cats include excision
a single confirmed benign nodule. A unilateral mastectomy (Box
of the lesion (simple lumpectomy or mammectomy), unilateral
2l-4), as part of a two-staged (four to eight week) bilateral
 Box 21-4 Unilateral mastectomy
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency with a wide area of the
abdominal hair clipped and aseptically prepared. If the plan is to also
remove the axillary lymph node(s) then the clip must extend cranially
 enough to incorporate this.
 Surgery starts with a skin incision encircling all four mammary
glands to be removed (Fig. 21-7). taking a minimum of a 2 cm margin 
all around the tumor(s) (Fg. 21-8A). Muscular fascia deep to the tumor
may be excised if the neoplasm appears to be fixed to it, again aiming 
to remove a minimum of 2 cm of macroscopically sound tissue from 
around the neoplasm. The tissue is undermined in a cranial to caudal
direction using Metzenbaum scissors (mammary stripping): if fascia is
to be included with the excision it is sharply incised with a scalpel.
 Excision of the tumor together with the underlying fascia is
recommended in an attempt to respect the oncological principle of
removal of 2cm of normal tissue from the periphery.
 Excision of the axillary lymph node is performed by extending the 
skin incision cranially when a palpable lymphatic tract is present. If 
the tract is not palpable then a single lymph node, without tract, is 
removed through a supplementary, more cranial incision. The inguinal
lymph node is removed together with the most caudal mammary gland.
ym buAup wouy papaioud s! anss!l pasodxa aut Kuabuns buung 
saline soaked sponges. The cranial epigastric vessels are ligated first,
followed by the caudal epigastric vessels. Careful hemostasis of all the 
minor vessels encountered is warranted. Excessive use of electrocautery
 should be avoided, as it may delay healing and complicate both 
identification and histologic evaluation of the excision margins. The
caudal epigastric vessels are encountered in the inguinal region, and 
are usually surrounded by fat; careful and delicate dissection with fine
Metzenbaum scissors is necessary to identify them. Once identified.
they are ligated (or double ligated if desired) with 3/0 monofilament 
absorbable material, forceps are applied distal to the ligature(s)
and the vessels transected between the forceps and ligature(s).
Inadvertent transection of these vessels before they are visualized is
 problematic as they can retract into the inguinal canal. Hemorrhage
may be significant so, if the latter occurs, it may be necessary to
perform a caudal celiotomy (see Chapter 23) to locate, grasp and 
Figure 21-7 The outline for the surgical incision for a unilateral
ligate these vessels.
mastectomy is shown on the diagram.
224
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
Box 21-4 Continued
Once mammary excision is completed, the surgical instruments 
partial continuous sutures. Skin closure should be absolutely tension
ym pabeael Alybnououi eale aul pue 'pabueup ale sanob pue
free and can be performed with intradermal (rarely applied by the 
warm saline.
author in these cases), simple interrupted, metal staples, horizontal 
To close the wound a 'walking suture' may be performed with a
(Fg. 21-&B) or vertical (preferable to horizontal as they interfere less 
3/0 monofilament absorbable suture material in order both to 
with vascularization) mattress sutures.
eliminate dead space and appose skin margins. This is done taking
Before submitting the excised specimen for histological evaluation
 alternate bites of the subcutaneous tissue close to the skin margins
the cranial and caudal borders of the sample should be tagged with
and then fascia up to the middle of the wound; this is performed on
 sutures.
 both sides of the wound so the skin margins are brought together.
 The lymph node(s) removed should be clearly identified.
These sutures can be placed in a continuous pattern or, if desired,
and the parts where the excision may have been marginal 
the continuous suture on each side may be divided into two or three
ideally inked.
ym (sjio aql aaoai ol Asea semle jou si l! pauueld uaq s5y
 a minimum of 2 cm margins as both reconstruction and tension may
be relevant concerns. For these reasons, it may be preferableto perform
bilateral mastectomy as two-staged unilateral mastectomies, four to
eight weeks apart (see Box 2l-4).
 Achieving adequate margins and tension
free closure
When performing a single stage total mastectomy reconstruction
 problems and tension during closure may arise as all the skin between 
the two mammary chains is removed.
For malignant tumors at least 2 cm of macroscopically healthy
tissue around the tumor should be excised independent of size and
adherence. It is often appropriate to include at least one fascial plane
deep to the tumor. It is the author's opinion that this may be easier
and therefore increase the probability of getting 'clean' margins, when
st rou au l paed s Auoasu leiae ieei aaes-om e
fixed to the underlying fascia, an en-bloc resection should be per-
formed, if necessary entering the abdominal cavity (full thickness wall
excision; Fig. 2l-12A). If the abdominal cavity is not breached and if
yal aq Aeu eosey jo penl e 'ainso ie juasaid st uoisual aaissaoxa
unsutured. If the abdominal cavity is breached and part of the entire
wall is excised, reconstruction may be performed exploiting the
A
B
abdominal wall's elasticity (Fig. 2l-12B) but if tension is excessive the
defect may be closed either with a muscular flap or a polypropylene
Figure 21-8 Unilateral mastectomy for a cat with a single
mesh (Fig. 2l-13). If mesh (or a muscle flap) is used omentalization
adenocarcinoma. (A) Intraoperative view of the incision encircling all the
of the area can be performed (Fig. 21-13B). A tract of the greater
mammary glands on one side. (B}) After the final skin closure with 
omentum is exteriorized through a 1-1.5 cm hole in the abdominal
e aot pauanian ag oi panpauos se jen aul saanins ssaew euoziou
wall (left unsutured) and spread over the external mesh surface The
 contralateral unilateral mammary strip four weeks later.
fascial or fascial/mesh borders are closed with a 3/0 slowly absorbable
'uaed pandnaiu ue ul padde ieaeuu juaeyouo
 Staged skin suture removal should be planned during the ten to 20
mastectomy, should be performed for single or multiple malignant
 postoperative days.
tumors that need to be removed with a minimum of 2 cm margins.
A unilateral mastectomy is still acceptable only for very small (stage
1) and single malignant tumors, identified early. The bilateral mastec-
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
tomy may be performed as a two-staged procedure (two unilateral
mastectomy's done four to eight weeks apart) in obese cats or those
with large lesions where there is concern regarding the ability to
 Postoperative antibiotics are usually not necessary unless preoperative
achieve tension free closure of the skin.
infection is present Analgesia should be administered until postop-
erative pain has resolved (see Chapter 2) and the cat continued on
Bilateral mastectomy
intravenous fluids, particularly after bilateral mastectomy. The cat
should be monitored for adequate renal function and for complica-
Bilateral mastectomy (Box 21-5) should be performed for single (over
tions such as disseminated intravascular coagulation (see Chapter 4).
2 cm diameter) or multiple malignant tumors that need to be removed
 In order to prevent self-trauma, the use of an Elizabethan collar is
with a minimum of 2 cm margins. If a one-stage bilateral mastectomy
imperative. Postoperative bandaging is optional; the bandage should
225
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
be changed every 24-48 hours, to check the wound, and the bandage
 Box 21-5 Bilateral mastectomy
maintained for a total of 3-5 days.
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency with a wide area of the 
Ancillary therapy
abdominal skin clipped of hair and aseptically prepared. If the plan is 
to also remove the axillary lymph node(s) then the clip must extend 
Chemotherapy
 cranially enough to incorpor ate this.
 The effcacy of chemotherapy is still debatable but there is some evi-
 skin in folds and evaluating its elasticity and potential for tension-free
 dence that the use of doxorubicin ± cyclophosphamide may prolong
closure.
survival in originally non-metastatic cats'l while there is limited
In the one-stage bilateral mastectomy, surgery starts with a skin
benefit when metastasis is already established.52-54 A retrospective
 incision encircling all eight mammary glands, taking a minimum of a 
study52 has shown that adjuvant doxorubicin prolonged survival in
1-2 cm margin all around the tumor(s). Preservation of one triangle
Apnis juanan ano e un 'aaamoh auoe ains yim uosido
 of skin between the two mammary lines, especially cranially but also
these results were not validated.ss Multidrug resistance-associated
caudally. may aid wound closure (Fg. 21-9). In an attempt to plan 
P-glycoprotein has been found in feline mammary tumors so a sig-
both the surgical removal and reconstruction, it can help to draw the 
nificant response to chemotherapy would not be expected.5° Doxonu-
area to be removed with a sterile surgical marker (Fig. 21-10). To
bicin is nephrotoxic and this may limit its regular use in elderly cats.
achieve adequate margins for malignant mammary gland tumors 
In a further study, the combination of chemotherapy, surgery, and
then deep excision may require excision of the body wall and the 
meloxicam, as a COX-2 inhibitor, did not improve survival.57 In a case
surgeon must be prepared as to how to close this, e.g. using a
muscle flap or mesh.
report, a cat with pleural effusion from a metastatic mammary histi-
 The remainder of the surgery is performed in a similar manner as 
ocitic sarcoma experienced a 13-month survival after both chemo-
for unilateral mastectomy, but more careful consideration should be 
therapy (doxorubicin) and thoracic omentalization.58
given to acheiving tension-free closure (Fig. 21-11).
Radiation therapy
At present there is no study demonstrating an increase in survival
using radiation. This is not surprising, as the reason for death of cats
with mammary tumors is usually distant metastasis rather than local
recurrence.
Other treatments
The few studies dealing with the use of biologic response modifiers
(levamisole, bacterial vaccines, L-MTP) following surgery have failed
leu Aiaxll st ll 6s's 'sisousoid ui juaaondul ieai e aiensuouap ol
future and alternate treatment options will be directed towards gene
l9o'salaens soounuut anou pue Adeia
COMPLICATIONS
Most of the problems after mammary gland surgery are related to
tension at wound closure.
Tension
This is mainly a concern when a bilateral mastectomy has been per-
formed, especially in obese cats. Tension can be a problem at both
the cranial and (less frequently) the caudal aspect of the excision area.
(6-I7 sly aas) osuys jo alBuen e Aasins Buunp uoisua azuuiu o
-s aeiaso aru ae Au usa paes aq u
fort, ventilatory impedance and pain. Tension may also result in limb
edema, partial or complete skin suture dehiscence, ulceration (espe-
cially at the incisional intersection), necrosis, seroma formation, and
inflammation.
 Figure 21-g The surgical incision for a bilateral mastectomy is shown.
Seroma
A small triangle of skin can be spared, both cranially and caudally. to
 facilitate wound closure.
If a seroma develops, NSAIDs and antibiotic administration are rec-
ommended as infection may potentially occur. If the seroma is small.
it should be left untreated as it may resolve spontaneously in a vari-
able period of time. Aseptic aspiration of the fluid by syringe may
result in infection and the seroma may reform as the dead space still
226
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
A
B
Figure 21-10 Bilateral mastectomy. (A) The area to be removed has been drawn with a surgical pen (in this case no skin will be spared) cranially.
caudally and between the two mammary lines. (B) Intraoperative view after all eight mammary glands have been excised; reconstruction is similar to
that described after a unilateral mastectomy. The 'walking suture' is performed from each side of the incision. (C) After the final skin closure. (Courtesy
of Jufius Liptak.)
Figure 21-11 (A, B) Two cats
following bilateral mastectomy
surgery. (B) the cranial incision has
been extended on each side for
excision of the metastatic axillary
lymph nodes (the same cat in Fig 
2 1-5). (Courtesy of Julius Liptak.)
due to failure of a vessel ligature The use of a postoperative bandage
removal, drainage and second intention healing, passive or active
 may partially control it; alternatively, surgical revision is warranted.
drain application, and a padded abdominal bandaging.
Other complications
PROGNOSIS
Dehiscence may result from tension and/or seroma. Wound revision
and resuturing are rarely necessary and second intention healing (pro-
The prognosis is excellent in cats with benign lesions while it is
tected with a tie-over bandage) is monitored until complete healing
guarded in cats with mammary gland adenocarcinoma because
has occurred. Hermiation may occur in cases with unsutured abdomi-
 animals are usually presented at an advanced stage and this tumor has
nal fascia, deep suture failure or through holes made for omentaliza-
a high metastatic rate and stromal invasivenes.1 The prognostic
factors to consider are listed below.
227
Section
4
Skin and Adnexa
A
B
Figure 21-12 (A) An example of a full thickness excision of the abdominal wall. (B) Closure is achieved by exploiting the elasticity of the cat's
abdominal wall. Sutures should engage the fascia rather than the muscular tissue.
A
B
Figure 21-13 Full thickness excision of mammary tumors involving the body wall. (A) Polypropylene mesh has been used to cover the defect in this
cat; it is sutured to fascia with interrupted sutures. (B) The full thickness defect has been filled with a transposed muscular flap and then omentalized.
(IA} Courtesy of Giorgio Romanel/fi.)
Tumor size
 Reported mean survival time for T1 (tumor <2 cm) and T2 (tumor of
ZI pue  uamiaq Pauei [eians sie Pages (u 2< roum] e
diagnosis and treatment.
Histologic grade
The classical distinction to well, moderately, and poorly differentiated 
adenocarcinoma may help in predicting survival at one year, ranging
from 100% in well-differentiated tumors to 0% for poorly differen-
tiated lesions; variable results are expected for the intermediate
forms.15.548.4,5264,65 Specific histologic phenotypes may carry different
Figure 21-14 A papillary mammary adenocarcinoma in a queen;: this cat
prognoses: that is, poor in cases of invasive micropapillary carci-
also had an adenocarcinoma affecting a different mammary gland (the
noma° (Fig. 2l-14) and more favorable in cases of complex (biphasic
same cat in Fig. 21-3B). (Courtesy of Lisa Mestrinho.)
228
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
Table 21-5 Molecular studies relating to feline mammary carcinoma as a comparative model of study
Target
Function
Result
References
HER2/neu (c-erbB-2)
 Proto-oncogene implicated in cell 
 Overexpressed in feline, associated with shorter survival time,
78-82
growth and differentiation
similar to women. More recently this conclusion was not validated
Cyclin A
Cycle regulating gene
Present in about 50% of carcinomas but not in benign lesions
83
VEGF
Vascular endothelial growth factor
Higher immunohistochemical staining correlated with poorer
84,85
implicated in tumor angiogenesis,
prognosis, both in women and queens
tumor growth and metastasis
E-cadherin
Cell adhesion
86
p53
Cycle regulating gene, tumor
Mutated in many human and animal tumors. Altered in some feline 
83.87-89
suppression
mammary carcinoma, less so in benign lesions
RON
Macrophage-stimulating protein 
Similar to humans, high level also in feline mammary carcinoma 
90,91
receptor, family of receptor tyrosine 
(20% of cases)
kinases. Exacerbation of invasive
properties of carcinoma cells
COX2
Conversion of arachidonic acid into 
92,93
prostaglandins
including feline mammary carcinoma (87% of cases). Usually
associated with more aggressive tumors
TopBP1
Topoisomerases are implicated in 
Increased expression in more malignant lesions 
94
DNA control, replication, etc.
PTEN (phosphatase
Tumor suppressor genes
Feline mammary carcinoma: loss of PTEN expression associated with
95
 and tensin)
lymphatic invasion
STAT3-p-tyr705
Cytoplasmic transcription factors
 Potential role in malignancy as reported in humans and for other
96
play a role in cell-cycle; induced by
sporadic tumors
cytokines and growth factors
Correlation between nuclear positivity and histologic grade, tubular
formation and mitotic activity
Often these studies identify prognostic factors useful to predict survival.
 s    ey (au pe ia
lymph node occurs through pre-existing and not new lymphatic
associated with reduced survival.65,68
vessels. Given the lack of evidence in favor of one technique over
another, the author would still recommend bilateral mastectomy.
Extent of surgery
Clinical stage
Based on one study, aggressive surgery alone may decrease the recur-
[ians leiao au aaoid Aessaau ou sao il ina saiei auan
The influence of metastases and their location on outcome may be
time.4? A further study5l indicated that survival length was associated
intuitive. One study? has shown that median survival of stage I II. III
with extent of surgery (917 days after radical bilateral mastectomy, 428
and IV mammary carcinoma was 29, 12.5, 9 and 1 months, respec-
after regional mastectomy and 348 after unilateral mastectomy);:
tively. Based on another retrospective case series, survival of cats devel-
however, in this retrospective study doxorubicin chemotherapy was
oping metastases after treatment depended on the location of
also given. More recently, another study 1 suggested that surgical resec-
 metastases: 331 days for animals with pulmonary metastasis and over
tion should be limited to neoplastic gland(s) and sentinel lymph
supuy ianel aul s'sisiseiau iepou sudoiaaap asoul ioy siep oosl
node[s) (see Box 21-1). The draining lymphatic vessels and the exact
was unexpected and it was attributed to the use of chemotherapy.
location of the sentinel lymph nodes relative to the neoplastic gland
 potentially able to influence the overall metastatic pattern. This also
should be demonstrated preoperatively by radiographic indirect lym-
occurs in women.72
phangiography and/or CT-indirect lymphangiography." It is argued
that the lymphatic pattern may be locally modifed by the tumoral
Molecular markers
(vascular endothelial growth factor)-mediated lymphangiogenesis in
Many molecular markers (Table 2l-5) in mammary gland tumors can
feline mammary cancer concluded that metastasis to the regional
 be used to try and determine prognosis.78-96
REFERENCES
1. Silver IA. The anatomy of the mammary
 Moore AS, Ogilvie GK. Mammary tumors.
3.F
 Raharison F, Sautet J. Lymph drainage
gland of the dog and cat. J Small Anim
Feline oncology. 1st ed. Trenton: Veterinary
of the mammary glands in female cats.
Pract 1966;7:689-96.
Learning System; 2001. p. 355-67.
I Morphol 2006;267(3):292-9.
229
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
4.
Raharison F, Sautet J. The topography of
hormonal aspects. Am J Vet Res
 sequences in canine and feline mammary
the lymph vessels of mammary glands in
1981;42:1 699-703.
tumors. J Clin Microbiol 2010;48[12):
female cats. Anat Histol Embryol
19. Hayden DW, Barnes DM, Johnson KH.
4354-62.
2007;36:442-52.
Morphologic changes in the mammary
34.
Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Schneider R, et al.
5.
 Bruni AC, Zimmerl Ul. Anatomia degli
gland of megestrol acetate-treated and
Survey of animal neoplasms in Alameda
 animali domestici. 1st ed. Milan:
untreated cats: a retrospective study. Vet
and Contra Costa Counties, California. Il.
Dr. Francesco Vallardi; 1974. Vol I.
Pathol 1989;26:104-13.
Cancer morbidity in dogs and cats from
p.182.
Loretti AP, llha MR, Ordas J., Martin de
Alameda County. I Natl Cancer Inst 
6. Hayden DW, Nielsen SW. Feline
las Mulas J. Clinical, pathological and 
1968;40:307 -18.
mammary tumors. ↓ Small Anim Pract
immunohistochemical study of feline
35.
Weijer K, Hart AA. Prognostic factors in
1971;12:687 -98.
mammary fibro epithelial hyperplasia
feline mammary carcinoma. J Natl Cancer
 Ogilvie GK. Feline mammary neoplasia.
following a single injection of depot 
Inst 1983;70:709-16.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
medroxyprogesterone acetate. J Feline 
36.
Hahn KA, Adams WH. Feline mammary
1983;5:384-91.
Med Surg 2005;7:43-52.
neoplasia: biological behavior, diagnosis,
 8. Merighi A. Anatomia applicata e
21. Gorlinger S, Kooistra HS, van den Broek
and treatment alternatives. Feline Pract
 topografia regionale veterinaria. 1st ed.
A, Okkens AC. Treatment of
1997;25:5-11
Padova: Piccin Nuova Libraria; 2005.
fbroadenomatous hyperplasia in cats 
37.
 Overley B, Shofer FS, Goldschmidt
p. 118.
with aglepristone. I Vet Intern Med
 MH, et al. Association between 
9.
Mailot JP, Lagneau F, Parodi AL, Andre F.
2002;16:710-13.
owarihysterectomy and feline mammary
Particularites des tumeurs mammaires de
22.
 Burstyn Ul. Management of mastitis
arcinoma. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:
 la chatte. Point Veterinaire 1980:11:107-8
and abscessation of mammary glands 
560-3.
10. Papadopoulou PL, Patsikas MN.
secondary to fbroadenomatous
38.
Keskin A, Yilmazbas G, Yilmaz R, et al.
Charitanti A, et al. The lymph drainage
hyperplasia in a primiparturient cat. J Am
Pathological abnormalities after long-term
pattern of the mammary glands in the cat:
Vet Med Ass0c 2010;236[3):326-9.
administration of medroxyprogesterone
 a lymphographic and computerized
23. Center SA, Randolph JF. Lactation
 acetate in a queen. J Feline Med Surg
tomography lymphographic study. Anat
and spontaneous remission of feline
2009;11(6):518-21.
Histol Embryol 2009;38[4):292-9.
mammary hyperplasia following
39.
 Spugnini EP, Mezzanotte F, Freri L, et al.
11. Patsikas MN, Papadopoulou PL,
pregnancy. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
Cyproterone acetate-induced mammary
Charitanti A, et al. Computed
1985;21:56-8.
arcinoma in two male cats. J Feline Med
tomography and radiographic indirect
24. Mandel M. Spontaneous remission of 
Surg 2010;12(6):515-16.
lymphography for visualization of
feline benign mammary hypertrophy. Vet 
40.
 McAloose D, Munson L, Naydan DK.
mammary lymphatic vessels and the
 Med Small Anim Clin 1975;70:846-7.
Histologic features of mammary
sentinel lymph node in normal cats. Vet
Wehrend A, Hospes R, Gruber AD.
arcinomas in zoo felids treated
Radiol Ultrasound 2010;51(3):299-304.
 Treatment of feline mammary
with melengestrol acetate (MGA)
2. Owen LN. Classification of tumours in
 fbroadenomatous hyperplasia with
12.
contraceptives. Vet Pathol 2007;44(3):
domestic animals. Geneva: World Health
 a progesterone antagonist. Vet Rec
320-6.
Organization; 1980.
2001;148:346-7.
41.
 Munson L, Moresco A. Comparative 
13.
Hampe JF, Misdorp W. Tumours and
26.
 Jurka P Max A. Treatment of
pathology of mammary gland cancers in
dysplasias of the mammary gland. Bull
fbroadenomatosis in 14 cats with
domestic and wild animals. Breast Dis
World Health Organ 1974;50:111-33.
aglepristone - changes in blood
2007;28:7-21.
14. Misdorp W, Else Rw, Hellmen E.
parameters and follow-up. Vet Rec
42.
Hamilton JM, Else Rw, Forshaw P.
2009;165(22):657-60.
Lipscomb TP. Histological classification of
Oestrogen receptors in feline mammary
mammary tumors of the dog and the cat.
27.
 Kessler M, Vonbomhard D. Mammary
arcinomas. Vet Rec 1976;99:477-9.
In: Schulman FY, editor. World Health
tumors in cats: epidemiologic and
43. Martin PM, Cotard M, Mialot JP, et al.
Organization International Histological
histologic features in 2,386 cases 
Animal models for hormone-dependent
Classification of Tumors of the domestic
[1990-5). Kleintierpraxis 1997;42:459.
human breast cancer. Relationship
animals, second series, vol. 7. Washington
28.
 Skorupski KA, Overley B, Shofer FS, et al.
between steroid receptor profiles in
DC: Armed Forces Instistute of Pathology:
Clinical characteristics of mammary
anine and feline mammary tumors
1999. p. 11-56.
arcinoma in male cats. J Vet Intern Med
and survival rate. Cancer Chemother
15. Gimenez F Hecht S, Craig LE, Legendre 
2005;19:52-5.
Pharmaco] 1984;12(1):13-17.
AM. Early detection, aggressive therapy:
 Jacobs TM, Hoppe BR, Poehlmann CE.
44.
 Rutteman GR, Blankenstein MA, Minke J.
optimizing the management of feline 
et al. Mammary adenocarcinomas
Misdorp W. Steroid receptors in
 mammary masses. J Feline Med Surg
in three male cats exposed to
mammary tumours of the cat. Acta
2010;12(3):214-24.
medroxyprogesterone acetate [1990-
Endocrinol 1991;125:32-7.
16.
.Lana SE, Rutteman, GR, Withrow, SJ.
2006). J Feline Med Surg 2010;12(2):
45. Millanta F Calandrella M, Vannozzi I,
Tumors of the mammary gland. In:
169-74.
 Poli A. Steroid hormone receptors in
Withrow Sl, Vail DM, editors. Withrow
30.
 Bostock DE. Canine and feline mammary
normal, dysplastic and neoplastic feline
& MacEwen's small animal clinical
neoplasms, Br Vet I 1986;142:506-15.
mammary tissues and their prognostic
oncology. 4th ed. Saunders Elsevier; 2007.
31.
Hayes HM Jr, Milne KL, Mandell CP.
signifcance. Vet Rec 2006;158:
p. 619-35.
Epidemiological features of feline 
821-4.
17.
. Hinton M, Gashell Cl. Non-neoplastic
mammary carcinomas. Vet Rec 1981;108:
46. Millanta F, Calandrella M, Bari G, et al.
mammary hypertrophy in the cat
476-9.
Comparison of steroid receptor expression
associated with either pregnancy or with
32.
 Misdorp W, Romijn A, Hart AA. Feline
in normal, dysplastic, and neoplastic
oral progestogen therapy. Vet Rec
mammary tumors: a case control study of
cnine and feline mammary tissues. Res
1977;100:277-80.
hormonal factors. Anticancer Res 1991;11:
Vet Sci 2005;79(3):225-32.
18. Hayden DW, Johnston SD, Kiang DT.
1793-7.
47.
 Burrai GP, Mohammed Sl, Miller MA.
et al. Feline mammary hypertrophy/
33.
Hsu WL, Lin HY, Chiou SS, et al. Mouse
et al. Spontaneous feline mammary
fbroadenoma complex: clinical and
mammary tumor virus-like nucleotide
intraepithelial lesions as a model for
230
Mammary glands
Chapter
21
human estrogen receptor- and
Immunol Immunopatho] 2010;134[1-2):
gand in a cat. I Vet Med Sci 2008;70(5);
progesterone receptor-negative breast
132-7.
479-81.
lesions. BMC Cancer 2010;10:156.
Penzo C, Ross M, Muirhead R, et al. Effect
75. Perez-Alenza MD, Jimenez A, Nieto Al,
48. MacEwen EG, Hayes AA, Harvey HJ, et al.
 of recombinant feline interferon-omega
Pena L. First description of feline
 Prognostic factors for feline mammary
alone and in combination with
inflammatory mammary carcinoma:
tumors. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;185:
chemotherapeutic agents on putative
dinicopathological and
201-4.
tumour-initiating cells and daughter
immunohistochemical characteristics
49. Hayes AA, Mooney S. Feline mammary 
cells derived from canine and feline
of three cases. Breast Cancer Res
tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
mammary tumours. Vet Comp Oncol 
2004;6:R300-7.
Pract 1985;15:513-20.
2009;7(4):222-9.
76.
.Kamstock DA, Fredrickson R, Ehrhart EJ.
 50. Pavletic MM. Atlas of small animal
62.
Waldrom DR, Zimmermam-Hope N.
Lipid-rich carcinoma of the mammary
wound management and reconstructive
Superficial skin wounds. In: Slatter B.
gland in a cat. Vet Pathol 2005;42[3):
 surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
editor. Textbook of small animal surgery.
360-2.
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010.
vol. 1. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
77.
 Sugiyama A, Takeuchi T, Morita T, et al.
Novosad CA, Bergman Pl, O'Brien MG.
Elsevier Science; 2003. p. 259-73.
51.
lymphangiosarcoma in a cat. J Comp
et al. Retrospective evaluation of
63.
Viste IR, Myers SL, Singh B, Simko E.
Pathol 2007;137:174-8.
adjunctive doxorubicin for the
 Feline mammary adenocarcinoma: tumor
78. Sahin AA. Biologic and clinical
treatment of feline mammary gland
size as a prognostic indicator. Can Vet J
significance of HER-2/neu (cerbB-2] in
adenocarcinoma: 67 cases. J Am Anim
2002:43:33-7
breast cancer. Adv Anat Pathol 2000;7:
Hosp Assoc 2006;42(2):110-20.
64.
 Seixas F, Palmeira C, Pires MA, et al.
158-66.
 Grade is an independent prognostic factor
52. Jeglum KA, deGuzman E, Young KM.
79.
Winston J, Craft DM, Scase TJ, Bergman
Chemotherapy of advanced mammary
 for feline mammary carcinomas: A
PJ. Immunohistochemical detection of
adenocarcinoma in 14 cats. J Am Vet Med
 dinicopathological and survival analysis.
HER-2/neu expression in spontaneous
Assoc 1985;187:157-60.
Vet J 2011;187:65-71.
 feline mammary tumours. Vet Comp
 Mauldin GN, Matus RE, Patnaik AK, et al.
65. Castagnaro M, Casalone C, Bozzetta E,
Oncol 2005;3(1):8-15.
Efficacy and toxicity of doxorubicin and
 et al. Tumour grading and the one-year
80.
De Maria R, Olivero M, lussich S, et al.
cyclophosphamide used in the treatment
post-surgical prognosis in feline
Spontaneous feline mammary carcinoma
 of selected malignant tumors in 23 cats.
mammary carcinomas. I Comp Pathol
 is a model of HER2 overexpressing poor
J Vet Intern Med 1988;23:60-5.
1998;119:263-75.
 prognosis human breast cancer. Cancer
 54. Stolwijk JA, Minke JM, Rutteman GR, et al
66. Seixas F, Palmeira C, Pires MA, Lopes C.
Res 2005;65:907-12.
 Feline mammary carcinomas as a model
 Mammary invasive micropapillary
81.
 Millanta F Calandrella M, Citi S, et al.
for human breast cancer.ll. Comparison
carcinoma in cats: clinicopathologic
Overexpression of HER-2 in feline
of in vivo and in vitro adriamycin
features and nuclear DNA content. Vet
invasive mammary carcinomas: an
sensitivity. Anticancer Res 1989;9:1045-8.
Pathol 2007;44:842-8.
immunohistochemical survey and
55. McNeill C), Sorenmo KU, Shofer FS, et al
67.
 Seixas F, Pires MA, Lopes CA. Complex
evaluation of its prognostic potential.
Evaluation of adjuvant doxorubicin-based
crcinomas of the mammary
Vet Pathol 2005;42:30-4.
chemotherapy for the treatment of feline
gland in cats: pathological and
82.
 Rasotto R, Caliari D, Castagnaro M, et al.
mammary carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med
immunohistochemical features. Vet J
An immunohistochemical study of HER-2
2009;23(1):123-9.
2008;176:210-15.
expression in feline mammary tumours.
 56. Van der Heyden S, Chiers K, Vercauteren
68.
Castagnaro M, De Maria R, Bozzetta E.
J Comp Pathol 2011;144(2-3):170-9.
G, et al. Expression of multidrug 
et al. Ki-67 index as indicator of the
83.
.Murakami Y, Tateyama S, Rungsipipat A,
 resistance-associated P-glycoprotein
post-surgical prognosis in feline
et al. Immunohistochemical analysis of
in feline tumours. J Comp Pathol
 mammary carcinomas. Res Vet Sci
cyclin A, cyclin D1 and p53 in mammary
2011;144(2-3):164-9.
1998;65:223-6.
umors, squamous cell carcinomas and
Borrego JF, Cartagena JC, Engel J.
69.
 Patsikas MN, Karayannopoulou M,
basal cell tumors in dogs and cats. J Vet
57.
Treatment of feline mammary tumours 
Kaldrymidoy E, et al. The lymph drainage
Med Sci 2000;62:743-50.
using chemotherapy, surgery and a
 of the neoplastic mammary glands in the
84.
 Gasparini G. Prognostic value of vascular
COX-2 inhibitor drug (meloxicam]: a
bitch: a lymphographic study. Anat Histol
endothelial growth factor in breast cancer.
 retrospective study of 23 cases [2002-
Embryol 2006;35:228-34.
Oncologist 2000;5(suppl 1):37-44.
2007)*. Vet Comp Oncol 2009;7[4):
70.
 Sarli G, Sassi F, Brunetti B, et al.
85.
. Millanta F, Lazzeri G, Vannozzi I, et al.
213-21.
Lymphatic vessels assessment in feline
Correlation of vascular endothelial growth
 58. Talavera J, Agut A, Fernandez Del Palacio
mammary tumours. BMC Cancer
factor expression to overall survival in
I, et al. Thoracic omentalization for
2007;7:7.
feline invasive mammary carcinomas. Vet
 long-term management of neoplastic
71.
Ito T, Kadosawa T, Mochizuki M, et al.
Pathol 2002;39:690-6.
 pleural effusion in a cat. J Am Vet Med
Prognosis of malignant mammary tumor
86.
.Pereira PD, Gartner F. Expression of
Assoc 2009;234[10):1299-302.
in 53 cats. J Vet Med Sci 1996;58:
 E-cadherin in normal, hyperplastic and
59. Fox LE, MacEwen EG, Kurzman ID, et al.
723-6.
neoplastic feline mammary tissue. Vet Rec 
Liposome-encapsulated muramyl
 DeVita VT Jr. Cancer of the breast. In:
2003;153:297-302.
 tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine
Devita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA.
87.
.Mayr B, Blauensteiner J, Edlinger A, et al.
for the treatment of feline mammary
editors. Cancer principles and practice of
 Presence of p53 mutations in feline
adenocarcinoma: a multicenter
oncology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
 neoplasms. Res Vet Sci 2000;G8:63-70.
 randomized double-blind study. Cancer 
Williams & wilkins; 1997. p. 1692-706.
88. Nasir L, Krasner H, Argyle Dl, williams A.
Biother 1995;10:125-30. Erratum in
73.
 Sarli G, Bruneti B, Benazzi C. Mammary
 Immunocytochemical analysis of the
Cancer Biother 1995;10(3):249.
mucinous carcinoma in the cat. Vet Pathol
tumour suppressor protein (p53) in
60. Vannucci L, Chiuppesi F, di Martino F.
2006;43(5):667-73.
feline neoplasia. Cancer Lett 2000;
 et al. Feline immunodeficiency virus 
74. Matsuda K, Kobayashi S, Yamashita M.,
155:1-7.
 vector as a tool for preventative strategies
 et al. Tubulopapillary carcinoma with
 89. Nakano M, Wu H, Taura Y, Inoue M.
against human breast cancer. Vet
spindle cell metaplasia of the mammary
 Immunohistochemical detection of
231
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Mdm2 and p53 in feline mammary
correlation with clinicopathological
ERalpha and p53. Vet I 2008;175:
gand tumors. I Vet Med Sci 2006;68:
features and prognostic molecular
218-26.
421-5.
markers. Breast Cancer Res Treat
95. Ressel L, Millanta F, Caleri E, et al.
90. Maggiora P Marchio S, Stella MC, et al.
2006;98(1):115-20.
Reduced PTEN protein expression and its
Overexpression of the RON gene in
93. Sayasith K, Sirois J, Dore M. Molecular
prognostic implications in canine and
human breast carcinoma. Oncogene
charactenization of feline COx-2 and
feline mammary tumors. Vet Pathol
1998:16:2927-33.
 expression in feline mammary 
2009;46(5):860-8.
De Maria R, Maggiora P, Biolatti B, et al.
arcinomas. Vet Pathol 2009;46:
96.
Petterino C, Ratto A, Podesta G, et al.
Feline STK gene expression in mammary
423-9.
 Immunohistochemical evaluation of
Grcinomas. Oncogene 2002;21:1785-90.
94. Morris IS, Nixon C, Bruck A, et al.
STAT3-p-tyr705 expression in feline 
92. Millanta F, Citi S, Della Santa D, et al.
Immunohistochemical expression of
 mammary gland tumours and correlation
COX-2 expression in canine and feline
TopBP1 in feline mammary neoplasia
with histologic grade. Res Vet Sci
 invasive mammary carcinomas:
in relation to histological grade, Ki67.
2007;82(2):218-24.
232
22
hapter
Injection site sarcomas
B. Seguin
Sarcomas developing at the injection sites of vaccines have been rec-
 of post-vaccination injection site sarcoma to be 0.63 sarcoma/10 000
aaisul Augy aq ue Aaul zt's06l Aea aui auis sie ui paziuao
cats vaccinated and 0.32 sarcoma/10 000 doses of all vaccines admin-
tumors with a tendency for local recurrence Early aggressive multi-
 istered.1 Therefore, the incidence is now believed to be 1 case/10 000
modality treatment after advanced imaging gives the best chance for
to 30 000 cats vaccinated.16
a cure.
 It appears thatthe reaction to vaccines is additive and that the likeli-
hood of sarcoma development increases with the number of vaccines
given simultaneously at the vaccine site.3 In a retrospective study.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
it was determined that the risk a cat would develop a sarcoma
 after administration of a single vaccine in the cervical-interscapular
region (a site not recommended any more by the Vaccine-Associated
 There is strong epidemiologic evidence that links the administration 
Feline Sarcoma Task Force and American Association of Feline
of inactivated feline vaccines and subsequent development of sarco-
Practitioners.17) was 50% higher than the risk a cat not receiving any
mas at the site of injection. Other causes have been implicated, includ-
vacines at this site would have. The risk for a cat given two vaccines
 at the same site was approximately 127% higher, and the risk for a
with features of a vaccine-associated tumor, developed at the site of a
loum 0t aul s1alauu %sl sem saua inoy 0i aaui uaaig 1e
deep non-absorbable suture in a cat.° It is now believed that vaccines
development in cats following vaccination has been reported to be
are not the only agents capable of causing the development of sarco-
isou ieu panensod uaaq seyl sl'siea uat pue syaam inoy uaamaq
mas at the injection site, but instead virtually anything that produces
types that have been reported at the sites of vaccination are fibrosar-
coma (most common), malignant fibrous histiocytoma, extraskeletal
leads to uncontrolled proliferation of fbroblasts and myofbroblasts
osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, myofibrosarcoma, undifferenti-
zones from inflammatory granuloma to sarcoma have been identified
 on histopathology as well as microscopic foci of sarcoma located in
areas of granulomatous inflammation, which again strongly supports
CLINICAL SIGNS AND TUMOR STAGING
the incidence is relatively low and vaccines are the compounds that
 ayeu o Aouanbany Aue yim uoeindod aui ui sie isou oi uaig aie
Feline injection site sarcomas are usually highly aggressive, poorly
circumscribed, not encapsulated, and more invasive locally than
causative agents and hence most of the research has focused on
vaccines.1
treat;20,21 they are also more likely to recur after surgical excision than
 Strong epidemiologic evidence has demonstrated an association
between the administration of inactivated feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
site sarcomas, injection site sarcomas have a higher inflammatory
and rabies vaccines and subsequent development of soft tissue sarco-
response, as characterized histologically by a predominately lym-
 phocytic infiltration, along with increased necrosis and mitotic rates
incidence of sarcoma development after vaccination is unknown.
sarcomas have a propensity for higher histologic grade than non-
 -supe sauna iad seoies jn auapiu ue jodan sanpns aos
incidence is estimated to be between 1/1000 and 1/10 000 vaccines 
comas (grade Ill) were the most common, accounting for 46% and
administered.78 One epidemiologic study determined the incidence
 59%, respectivelty 21,25
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00022-6
233
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
A biopsy-confirmed injection site sarcoma needs to be staged. Cats
use of CT resulted in the reclassifcation of 17/26 subcutaneous neo-
with suspected injection site sarcoma based on history and location
plasms in dogs to a more advanced clinical stage as compared to
of the tumor can have the staging process started (see Chapter 14)
-ins snoaaid e pey aaey ieui suaed uana ts'uoneuuexa leisyd
ajaq siemie inq pauad si ainpaoid Asdoiq aul iae io aiojan
cal excision can benefit from advanced imaging as it can provide
definitive treatment is initiated. Complete blood count, serum bio-
information regarding the extent of the previous surgical feld and
chemistry panel, urinalysis, along with FeLV and feline immunodef-
therefore the area that needs to be re-excised or included in the radia-
ciency virus (FIV) tests will determine the overall health status.
tion treatment field.?
Although no association is apparent between viral status (FeLV, FIV)
and tumor development, the course of the disease may be altered
because of compromise of the immune system.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Surgery is one of the most important components of the treatment
IMAGING
regime for these tumors. However, attempts at simple excision (i.e.,
debulking or marginal excision) are rarely curative and ultimately lead
The chest should be evaluated for evidence of metastasis, which occurs
to local recurrence with a more difficult second surgery.57 Therefore
in 5-24% of cases.319,24,26-28 Chest radiographs can be performed using
wide to radical excision is the recommended surgical approach.
three views or altermatively computed tomography (CT) can be per-
Multimodal treatment consists of a combination of surgery, radiation
formed to evaluate the chest and lungs. CT is more sensitive than
and/or chemotherapy, and a multimodal treatment to include irradia-
radiographs in detecting pulmonary metastatic lesions.2? Regional
tion is considered the standard of care to treat injection site sarcomas.
lymph nodes should be evaluated through palpation, radiographs, or
However, results of studies evaluating radical surgical excision alone
ultrasonography, and cytology where applicable. Metastasis occurs
question the necessity and the benefit of radiation therapy with this
primarily to the lungs but other sites such as regional lymph nodes,
type of surgery.
n ose aa siad pue us a iad useia
reported.7.12.30-32
Decision making
Advanced imaging techniques such as CT or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRl) are extremely helpful, and considered by many to be
As with any tumor, vaccine-associated sarcomas should be treated
Sup al ue uan ins e ued ui a
early when small. Unfortunately, thesetumors can be very fast growing
to perform radiation therapy in the neoadjuvant seting (Fig. 22-1).
and the cat is often presented when the tumor is relatively large (Fig.
In a study to evaluate the usefulness of CT imaging of vaccine-
22-2). Given that these tumors grow in the subcutaneous areas (where
associated sarcomas, the CT image revealed the tumor to be, on
natural barriers to tumor growth are absent), there are no definitive
average twice as large as determined by physical examination and
criteria that defne a resectable versus a non-resectable tumor. The
caliper measurement, and recommendations regarding the treatment
locally invasive nature of these tumors necessitates wide to radical
were often altered based on the CT results.7.3 In another study, the
excision to achieve the longest disease-free intervals (see surgical treat-
ment and prognosis sections). These tumors do not invade bone, but
the locally invasive injection site sarcomas can extend to the soft
tissue-bone interface necessitating removal of bone as a deep surgical
margin with radical excision (see Fig. 22-1).21 In one study, 57% of
Figure 22-1 CT image demonstrating the relationship of the tumor with
local anatomical structures. The tumor is seen extending to the soft
tissue-bone interface with the scapula and spinous process of the 
vertebra. For a curative-intent surgery, this will necessitate removal of 
Figure 22-2 A cat with a large tumor on the caudal aspect of the pelvic
those structures (osteotomy of the spinous process and partial
limb. Because of the proximal extension of the tumor, a mid to caudal
ubiew jenibans daa Alaienbape ue aaayne ot (wonaindens
hemipelvectomy was performed (see Hg. 22-5).
234
Injection site sarcomas
Chapter
22
 cats that had an injection site sarcoma removal required an ostectomy
of some sort.21
Box 22-1 Vaccine-associated tumor excision
Aggressive surgeries are generally welltolerated by cats.2,.24 With the
advancement of reconstructive surgical techniques and the availability
A wide area should be clipped and aseptically prepared for surgery.
After the cat has been draped, if the tumor is ulcerated, it is covered 
of polypropylene mesh, in conjunction with advancements made in
critical care, extensive body wall resections are posible. When per-
with a sterile surgical gauze or laparotomy sponge and care is taken 
not to touch the ulcerated area. A sterile marker pen is used to 
forming a thoracic wall resection as many as eight ribs can be success-
delineate the palpable borders of the tumor or landmarks to which
fully removed (Charles Kuntz, personal communication).
tumor extension was seen on advanced imaging. Another line (line of
Cats can survive massive resections, even following tumor removal
excision) is made 3 cm (for wide excision) to 5 cm (for radical
resulting in a wound of over 15 cm in diameter.21 Therefore relatively
aa uen uoisxa jo aull aul (e-iz bh) aul sy aui woy (uoisxa
large tumors can still be amenable to wide or radical surgical excision
made in an elliptical shape to help with closure if closure can be
and the size of the tumor is rarely a limiting factor in the decision to
performed without a skin reconstruction technique (see Chapter 19).
perform surgery.
The elipse should be in the appropriate orientation based on skin 
tension and availability. An incision is made in the skin along the line 
of excision with a scalpel blade. Subcutaneous tissue and muscles are 
incised. Sharp dissection is used preferentially over blunt dissection.
SURGICAL EXCISION
The incision will include one (for wide excision) or two muscles (for
radical excision) deep to the tumor as the deep margin. Depending
For the purpose of feline injection site sarcomas, wide excision is the
 on the anatomic location, there may not be one or two layers of 
removal of the tumor with 2-3 cm of normal tissue beyond the edges
muscle that are deep to and continuous under the entire surface of 
of the tumor and one fascial plane (one muscle) deep to the tumor
 the tumor. In those cases, as the incision in the muscles is performed
whereas radical excision is the removal of the tumor with 5 cm of
circumferentially around the tumor, other muscle planes are incised as
normal tissue beyond the edges of the tumor and two fascial planes
 oml lo auo jo dn apewu uibyew daap e alajduon se aploud ol liam 
(two muscles) deep to the tumor, including bones that are part of
muscle layers across the entire surface area under the tumor. Once
these margins.2l The rationale to remove muscles, which are covered
the muscles are excised, they are elevated from the underlying tissues
to remove the tumor out of the body. It may not be possible to first 
by fascia, deep to the tumor is that fascia is a collagen-rich, vascular-
incise the muscles completely circumferentially before working under 
poor tissue that has been shown to be a natural barrier against cancer
the deep margin. Often, a plane of the deep margin is determined in
and it is more difficult for tumors to grow across these collagen-rich,
one area of the surgical field (e.g.. cranially or dorsally to the tumor)
vascular-poor tissues.35 Sometimes it is possible to remove the fascial
and the dissection under the tumor is made concurrently with the
layer only without having to remove the muscle. This is possible when
circumferential incision in the muscles around the tumor. To achieve
the fascia peels easily away from the muscle it covers. But in most
wide or radical excision it may also be necessary to perform
instances, the fascia is too intimate to be peeled from the muscle and
osteotomies. Hemostasis during the surgery can be achieved with a
it is best to remove the entire muscle thickness.
 combination of cautery, hemostatic clips, and suture ligation.
Because of the variation in anatomic location and tumor size, the
technical details of the surgical excision will vary from cat to cat (Box
 22-1). Adherence to sound principles of surgical oncology is impor-
tant throughout the surgical procedure (see Chapter 14).
Box 22-2 Partial scapulectomy
Osteotomies
For a partial scapulectomy, most often the osteotomy is performed at
or dorsal to the neck of the scapula. Muscles that still have an
 If the tumor comes close to a bone such as a dorsal spinous process
attachment on the scapula after incising around the tumor are 
or scapula (see Fig. 22-1). these bony stnuctures are excised en bloc
transected. These include the trapezius and deltoid muscdles at the
with the tumor. Therefore osteotomies are performed as part of the
dorsolateral aspect of the scapula. Dorsomedially, the rhomboideus 
aul jo guaad Aq roum aul guaouai ci pasoddo se uoisioxa io
 and serratus ventralis muscles are transected. The teres major muscle,
soft tissues from the bone and then performing the osteotomies. Even
which is caudodorsal, is also transected. If an osteotomy is made
though a tumor might not be in contact with a bony structure, oste-
'sdaniui aui jo peay buol aut 'eindens aul uo Alle suan ahou
otomies may still be required to achieve appropriate and adequate
ad ol paau Aew sapsnw louju salat pue 'sneslaasue youo
deep margins. This is particularly applicable for tumors that cross the
transected as well. At the site of the proposed osteotomy on the
dorsal midline in areas where there are no single fascial/muscle
scapula, the muscle attachments are elevated with a periosteal 
[ an a o is si i 'si asan rg au 
elevator and the osteotomy is performed with an oscillating saw.
spinous processes of the vertebrae in the surgical feld of resection.
 After the tumor is removed en bloc with the partial scapulectomy.
remaining muscles at the site of the scapulectomy are used to cover
Osteotomies of the dorsal spinous processes can be performed with
the dorsal osteotomized border of the scapula. This will provide as 
Liston bone cuting forceps, power burr, power oscillating saw, or gigli
much support as possible to the scapula and help minimize the
wire saw; the latter option is not usually recommended. The best exci-
dorsal motion of the scapula that wil happen with weight-bearing
sion of any malignant tumor is one where entry into the tumor or its
 on the limb.
capsule is avoided. If the tumor, or its capsule, is visualized or entered
during the dissection there is the risk of contamination of the sur-
 geon's gloves and/or instruments with tumor cells resulting in poten-
tial seeding of these cells to other areas of the surgical wound bed.
E oad on isaq sl ll ressanau paap st aoioaindeos aaido
full forelimb amputation. The reason for this is not that cats cannot
do well with a complete scapulectomy, but rather because better
Scapulectomy
margins are achieved with a full amputation of the limb. Partial
Tumors growing in the interscapular area can require scapulectomy.
scapulectomy involves the excision of the dorsal aspect of the bone.
   x]  s s d e i
 As a general rule, the less bone removed, the better the limb function.
235
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
Box 22-3 Hemipelvectomy
In order to perform the proposed ostectomy, muscles are transected 
as part of the excision of the tumor down to the level of the pelvic 
bones. Muscle attachments are elevated from the bones and the 
different bones are osteotomized with an oscillating saw (Fig. 22-5).
Remaining muscle attachments are transected to free the tumor en 
bloc with the segment of pelvis. The reader is referred to more
complete descriptions of the surgical techniques involved with
hemipelvectomy and amputation.36.37
A
MED
B
A
B
Figure 22-3 A sterile marker pen was used to delineate the edges of
tumor 5 cm from the first line in preparation for a radical excision.
Ma eelos (a) a eelo ())
However, bone should not be preserved for the sake of function as
this may compromise the completeness of excision of the tumor.
Tumor excision with adequate margins is the priority.
Hemipelvectomy
 Excision of tumors located on the caudal aspect of the trunk, over the 
 l   x] ai aa  '
tomy is the removal of the limb and entire hemipelvis (os coxae)
C
including the ilium, acetabular bone, and pubis and ischium to
midline (Fig. 22-4A). A middle-to-caudal partial hemipelvectomy is
Figure 22-4 Categories of hemipelvectomy. (A) Total 
removal of the hemipelvis including the acetabulum with amputation
hemmipelvectomy: (B) mid-to-caudal partial hemipelvectomy:
of the hind limb and a portion of the ischium to the midline (Fig.
(C) mid-to-cranial hemipelvectomy: (D) caudal partial hemipelvectomy.
22-4B) A middle-to-cranial partial hemipelvectomy includes removal
(Redrawn from Kramer, A., Walsh, P. ano 5eguin, 8. 2008. Hemipelvectomy in
buns zan uondyosap pue suoneuen mauano anbjuyaz sieo pue shoo
of the hemipelvis from immediately caudal to the acetabulum to the
37:413-419, with permisson from John Wiley and Sons.)
sacroiliac joint combined with pelvic limb amputation (Fig. 22-4C).
Caudal partial hemipelvectomy is defined as removal of the ischium
with preservation of the acetabulum and limb (Fig. 22-4D). For
tumors that are located more cranially, removal of the wing of the
attach it to the most caudal rib left intact Cranial advancement of the
ilium alone may be sufficient, with a single osteotomy performed
diaphragm may require partial or complete removal of the caudal lung
cranial to the sacroiliac joint.
lobe. Otherwise it will be compressed and can lead to ventilation/
perfusion mismatch and the potential for pneumonia.
Body wall excision
 Large body wall defects, both thoracic and abdominal, can be recon-
structed with autogenous tissues (Fig 22-6B), synthetic materials such 
Some tumors will require a full-thickness body wall excision (Fig.
as polypropylene mesh, or a combination of both (Fig. 22-7). This
22-6A). Depending on the anatomic location this will either involve
author favors the use of autogenous muscle flaps to reconstruct
abdominal or thoracic wall or a combination of the two (for more
body wall defect in cats. In dogs it has been demonstrated that
information on surgery of these areas see Chapters 25 and 43). Tho-
reconstruction with synthetic material alone leads to a higher compli-
racic wall excision requires the removal of ribs. As previously men-
cation rate.38 However, because of the aggressive nature of the surgical
tioned, as many as eight ribs have been removed successfully in a cat
excision with injection site sarcomas, the potential muscle flaps avail-
(Charles Kuntz, personal communication). When the caudal ribs are
able locally might be sacrificed as part ofthe excision, which will leave
removed it may be possible to advance the diaphragm cranially and
few options to reconstruct body wall.
236
Injection site sarcomas
Chapter
22
A
Figure 22-5 Hemipelvectomy performed in the cat shown in Figure 22-2.
The osillating saw is used to perform the osteotomy of the pubis.
Amputation
Tumors located on a limb are treated with limb amputation. It is best
to perform a complete amputation, meaning removal of the scapula
for the thoracic limb and disarticulation of the coxofemoral joint for
lanaia aun ot qanoua asop aie ieu sioum iod zs'quil sialad au
trochanter, an en-bloc acetabulectomy with the pelvic limb amputa-
B
tion is indicated to allow better soft tissue margins. The acetabulec-
 s   i   e s a
osteotomies: one in the body of the ilium cranial to the acetabulum,
one in the ischium just caudal to the acetabulum, and one in the pubis
ventral to the acetabulum. The osteotomies in the ilium and pubis
need to end up in the obturator foramen. In some instances, even
though the tumor is mainly located on a limb, in order to achieve a
wide or radical excision it may be necessary to perform a body wall
excision en bloc with the amputation (Fig. 22-8).
Closure
C
After removing the tumor, the surgeons and the assistants need to
change gloves and use new instruments. If the drapes are soiled, new
Figure 22-6 (A) A radical excision has been performed to include the
drapes are used to cover the soiled ones. Hemoclips are placed in the
lateral body wall of the abdomen and fascia lata with part of the tensor
surgical bed created from having removed the tumor to delineate the
fascia lata muscle. (B) The abdominal wall has been closed by simply
surgical bed later on with radiographs (Fig. 22-6B). This will help
apposing the cut edge of the abdominal wall muscles to the muscles
surrounding the spine. Hemoclips have been placed to delineate the
planning of radiation therapy if necessary.* The surgical bed is lavaged
copiously throughout the closure. Closure is performed with mono-
eans au jo anueeadde eu au () (soe sea) pa ieibans
wound after closure of the skin. The skin was closed by apposing the cut
flament absorbable materials for the muscle layers and subcutaneous
edges. This is often possible in cats in spite of radical excision, due to the
tissues. Tumor cells adhere the most to multiflament suture materi-
copious surface area of skin present.
als.40 It is best to eliminate the dead space as much as possible to
reduce the risk or size of a postoperative seroma. However, given the
extensive nature of the excision and the volume of tissues that can be
aasj Ae5sau si de us e jl sie iso u u ea pue aso
removed with the excision of these tumors, it can be difficult to impos-
Chapter 19), new gloves and new instruments are to be used. The
sible to eliminate allthe dead space In spite of this, the use of drains 
instruments that are used for the closure, although different than
is generally discouraged and if one is used, it should be done judi-
those used for the excision, should not be used for the creation of the
ciously. It is best to use closed suctions drains and the skin exit site 
flap. If there are any tumor cells in the surgical bed and the instru-
of the drain should be planned carefully. The drain tract can become
ments come in contact with these cells, the instruments may seed the
O st adeiaun uoeiei anneadoisod j pue san roun yim paas
donor site of the skin flap with tumor cells and allow the formation
'piay uoeipei au ul papnu aq isnu pen ueip aut 'paoad an
of a new tumor at a different site.
Skin is closed routinely using non-absorbable suture material or
Before placing the tumor sample that has been removed in forma-
staples (Fig. 22-6C). When excessive tension exists on the suture line,
lin, the surgical margins (edges of the tissues that were incised to
a tension-relieving tie-in bandage can be placed over the incision in
allow removal of the tumor) are covered with ink (Fig. 22-10).41 This
the area of excess tension (Fig. 22-9). Skin flaps may be required to
allows a more accurate assessment of the surgical margins by the
close large defects although this is uncommon given the relatively
pathologist.
237
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
postoperative period. Loops of non-absorbable sutures are placed on 
either sideparallel tothesurgical incisionAlaparotomyspongeisrolled
and placed over the incision, between the two rows of suture loops. A
Figure 22-7 A combination of autogenous and synthetic mesh (arrow)
string of umbilical tape is used to connect the two rows of suture loops
was used to close the body wall defect. (Courtesy of Dr Milan Milovancev.)
in a shoe-lace fashion and the umbilical tape is tightened to take most of
the tension away from the incision line itself. The bandage is usually left
in place for seven to 14 days.
Figure 22-10 Tumor specimen turned upside down. The surgical margins
have been inked with different colors to help the pathologist evaluate
them for the presence of tumor cells.
Buster collars (see Chapter 3) should not be used as an alternative to
Figure 22-8 CT image showing a tumor that was located at the
 pain relief but can be used in conjunction with analgesia.
proximal aspect of the hind limb but on CT it can be seen that the tumor
extends over the abdominal wall (arrow). To achieve a radical excision,
Skin suture or staple removal is performed two to three weeks after 
Jl Kanedoidde paleaq sey uoisul lejgins au uaum Kiasins au
the body wall will need to be removed en bloc with the limb amputation
 radiation therapy was delivered before surgery, it is best to leave the
to achieve a radical excision. The wing of the ilium will also need to be 
excised en bloc.
sutures or staples longer (three to four weeks) as radiation delays
wound healing.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Radiation
 Once the wound has healed well, radiation therapy (see Chapter 15)
 Proper analgesia must be provided in the postoperative period.42 Pain
can be started (if not performed in the neoadjuvant setting), which is
relief is imperative following surgery, particularly following wide and
radical excisions. Cats are maintained on intravenous fluids until they
healing can delay the start of radiation therapy. The debate as to which
 can drink and eat well. Blood transfusions or component therapy (i.e.
is the better approach between preoperative and postoperative irradia-
 packed red blood cells or plasma) may be needed during or after the
tion remains open. No clinical study has evaluated this issue for feline
surgery if blood loss is significant (see Chapter 5). Bandaging is not
injection site sarcomas. There are advantages and disadvantages for
usually necessary: devices to prevent wound interference such as
each (Table 22-1).43
238
Injection site sarcomas
Chapter
22
Table 22-1 Advantages and disadvantages of postoperative and preoperative radiation therapy43
Preoperative xrt
Postoperative xrt
Delay in performing or delivering
 A: no delay in staring xrt from wound healing
A: no delay in performing Sx because of acute
therapy
problems
side effects from xrt
D: delay performing Sx if acute side effects of xrt 
D: delay start of xrt from wound healing
 persist 
complications (e.g. seroma). Allows more time
for tumor cell repopulation
Wound healing
D: impaired from xrt 
 A: not impaired from previous xrt
Size of radiation treatment field 
A: smmaller because no Sx has been performed 
D: larger because must include all tissues handled
at Sx, including entire incision line and draining
sites if present. The larger the field, the greater
the morbidity
 Circulating cancer cells released because
A: cancer cells entering circulation lesslikely to be
D: cancer cells released are more likely to be
of manipulation of tumor at surgery
viable because killed from xrt
viable. May increase risk of developing metastasis
 Blood supply to tumor, especially to
A: blood supply to cancer cells at periphery of
 D: surgery disrupts blood supply to tumor cells,
 cells at periphery
tummor is at its best. Therefore cells are most 
especially the ones at the periphery of the tumor
radiosensitive from the oxygenation standpoint
since these are the cells that are mostly targeted 
by xrt. Hypoxic cells are more radioresistant
 Size of tumor
A: tumor may regress in size from xrt and make it 
D: the tumor is as large as can be and may be
more amenable to surgical resection. However,
difficult to resect
making an inoperable tumor operable with xrt 
should not be the main goal of xrt
A, advantage; D, disadvantage; xrt, radiation therapy: Sx, surgery.
Preoperative radiation refers to radiation delivered before surgery.
then every three to six months thereafter. Additional diagnostic pro-
-laapaid auos te oion ui ioum au Buraouai sanoaul Aiains aul
 cedures should be performed as indicated by the clinical signs and
mined time rather than waiting to see if radiation was effective or not
findings on the physical exam.
in controlling the tumor locally. Typically, surgery is performed three
to four weeks after the end of the radiation treatments.43 Radiation
therapy alone is not considered an appropriate treatment for these
COMPLICATIONS
tumors. Irradiation alone should only be considered in the palliative
 Postoperative radiation therapy refers to the planned delivery of
Complications are varied and are, to some degree, dependent on the
0l ual paeis si uoeipei aul Keoial Aiagins suimooy uoeiei
type of surgery that was performed. Complications include dehis-
14 days after the surgery although itcan be started as early as 24 hours
cence, surgical site infection, seroma formation, development of
 postoperatively.43 For more information on radiation see Chapter 15.
chronic draining tracts following the use of mesh for reconstruction,
laryngeal paralysis [after resection of a tumor in the cervical area and
transection of the recurrent laryngeal nerve), pneumothorax following
Chemotherapy
thoracic wall resection, pneumonia, constipation following hemipel-
Chemotherapy alone should not be considered definitive therapy.45
vectomy or high tail amputation, hypovolemic shock, acute renal
but similar to radiation therapy chemotherapy alone can be consid.
failure, and death.21.50
In one study where wide or radical excision was performed, the
ered palliative therapy. In the adjuvant or neoadjuvant setting, chemo-
non-fatal complication rate was 15.7% and 4.6% of cats died in the
therapy may play an important role in the multimodal approach to
 perioperative period.50 In another study where radical excision was
 treatment The use of various chemotherapeutic protocols has resulted
performed, major complications occurred in ll% of cats.21 In both
in some partial and less frequently complete responses. Chemo-
studies, wound complications were the most common finding. Four
Aaaun azis ron anpan Ae suas aaeaoand au un aeia
facilitating surgical resection; or chemotherapy can also be used as a
 per cent had dehiscence of their surgical incision in the study where
wide or radical excisions were performed and 8% had dehiscence in
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, carboplatin, mitoxantrone, vincris-
the study where radical excisions were performed. In the study where
tine, and ifosfamide.7.27,46-4 Typically, when used in the adjuvant 
 only radical excisions were performed, all dehiscences had interscapu-
lar tumors. Size of tumor was not prognostic for developing a
setting, chemotherapy is started two weeks after surgery. For more
dehiscence.2
information on chemotherapy see Chapter 16.
Follow up
PROGNOSIS
Patients that have been treated for an injection site sarcoma should
be rechecked with a physical examination performed monthly for
Rates of local tumor recurrence for injection site sarcomas with
three months, then at least every three months for the first year, and
239
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
adjuvant therapies, including pre- or postoperative radiation and
cyclophosphamide in cats with tumors considered non-resectable,
uaanuaas st'uapinq ioumi ssois ui asaap ialeaig i ose peyey
 Complete surgical margins correlate with increased survival times
 per cent had resolution of all clinically detectable tumor. Unfortu-
pl ue suoisioxa iesped zssz-ss (laa) eaiaiui aay-aseasi pue (is)
nately, the responses were not durable with a median response dura-
to complete surgical margins in 95% to 97% of cases.21.24 In spite of
 tion of 125 days. Median survival for responders was 242 days versus
clean surgical margins, local recurrence is still possible.21.25
on) uiqnuoxop anaum Apms iaqouv st'siapuodsai-uou ioy siep sg
 In one study, the rate of local recurrence for tumors resected with
include liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin) was given to cats with
measurable disease, similar results were obtained. Fifteen percent of
resected with complete margins.25 In another study where tumors were
cats achieved a complete response and 24% achieved a partial response
resected with a radical excision, 97% of tumors had clean surgical
Pe sie jo jua iad auu-a 'a j aii asuon liaao ue iog
margins and the rate of local recurrence was 14%, demonstrating that
stable disease and 21% had progressive disease.28 The median time to
a number of tumors will recur in spite of clean margins.21
 progression was 84 days for cats that had a response
With surgery alone, median SThas been reported as >16 months,52
Two studies evaluated the use of doxorubicin following surgery.
isy ie uoisioxa apim yim s1e ia'saep 106 pue pe'sep t08 6t'sep 925
One study concluded that the administration of doxonubicin after
9g ssa se ait] uosa ieuie uu sid a ay idu
surgery did not affect median DFI or overall survival compared to
days)i and cats with complete excision have a longer tumor-free
surgery alone.48 Another study concluded that administering doxoru-
91<) a [ians pue (suo inoy snsan syuu gi<) [au
Aaans iage (uiqnoxop paensdeua-auosodil apnoui o) u
months versus nine months) than those with incomplete excision.52
 prolongs median DFI compared to historical control of surgery alone
Tumors located on a limb that are amenable to being treated by
s id s ul (ias 's 5a s sa 8)
amputation have a better prognosis. Median time to frst recurrence
cats with complete surgical margins had a longer DFI (median not
shouml ioy ieu ueun aneaig Auesyiuais sem siouml ienipuadde ioy
reached) compared to cats with an incomplete excision (median
uedey a uoid ot(skep 9g snsia sep 5ze) yum aun uo paneo
281 days).
Meier product limit method, it was estimated that approximately 45%
 Another study comparing surgery and radiation therapy with or
 of the cats with tumors located on the limbs treated by amputation
without doxorubicin found no signifcant difference between the
can be considered cured whereas less than l0% of cats with tumors
 group receiving adjuvant chemotherapy and the group that did not.47
on the trunk treated by wide or marginal excision can be considered
Another study had similar results where cats treated with surgery and
cured.1 Time to local tumor recurrence can range from a couple of
irradiation, with or without chemotherapy (doxorubicin and cyclo-
weeks to years.
phosphamide) did not have a significant difference in rate of local
 Both local tumor recurrence and metastasis are negative prognostic
recurrence, rate of metastasis, and survival time.? A different conclu-
factors for survival time.321,24,53 In one study of cats treated by radical
sion was reached in another study. When doxonubicin was given to
excision of the tumor, median survival time of cats with and without
ueiau aun Kdeiau uoeipei pue uoisixa eiains guoliapun sie
recurrence was 499 and 1,46l days, respectively, and median survival
DFI was significantly longer than when doxorubicin was not admin-
time of cats with and without metastasis was 388 and 1,528 days.
istered (15.4 months versus 5.7 months). However, survival time was
respectively.21
not significantly different between groups.4? Another study did not
 The prognostic value of tumor grade is not very well determined for
find an improvement in DFI and the administration of chemotherapy
injection site sarcomas in cats. Grading criteria can differ from one
loy Alenuanod ndasxa Aiaains pue Adeiay uoepei aaeiadoaid um
study to another, making comparisons diffcult.2,24,25 In one study.
carboplatin alone.27
grade was prognostic for metastasis,24 while other studies were not
able to correlate grade to recurrence or survival.2.25
 The type of surgery that has been reported with the best outcome
PREVENTION
for local control and survival is the radical excision where 5 cm
margins laterally all around the tumor and two fascial planes or bone
for the deep margin are achieved. The rate of local recurrence was 14%
alis uosaui jo sisauas a juaand day ot shem Auo au jo auo
and overall survival was 901 days; the survival time was 1528 days
'aea Aened 'suoalui Aessaauun ai iou on si sois
when no metastasis developed.21
Every injection intended to be administered should be carefully justi-
 Radiotherapy combined with surgery in the non-radical excision
fed based on risk versus benefit. Vaccination protocols should be
tailored to theindividualrsk of each cat.17.55 Adeterminationmust
setting appears to increase the tumor control rate.? Studies evaluating
 pre- or postoperativeradiation in addition to surgical excision reported
be made for every individual cat if the relative risk of disease excludes
median time to local recurrence to range between 5.7 months and 37
the cat from being vaccinated.5 The one exception might be vaccina-
tion against rabies where some public health authorities make vacci-
Conflicting results exist regarding the prognosis associated with
remains completely indoors), for public health reasons. Most other
-d si aeiar uoen uaum sue leins yn ssauaado
recommendations are to help treat the tumor with a better chance for
formed. In two studies, cats that had tumors removed with complete
success.
margins had a prolonged DFl. In one, the DFI for cats with incomplete 
a y se  sep o sa sep zi s sue i
Where to vaccinate
shep zaz snsia sep 9gg sem l au 1auio au ul sz'suieu ieins
for complete and incomplete margins, respectively.27 In the latter
Different vaccines should be injected in different anatomic locations
 a a n si as y 
to potentially reduce the level of inflammation and to be able to keep
 another study, the status of the surgical margins was not a prognostic
track of which vaccines might be a greater risk. Good record keeping
factor for local recurrence or survival time.*
is essential to be able to make these determinations later in time The
The role and benefit of chemotherapy in the treatment of injection
choice of distal limbs was also chosen to help achieve a cure with the
site sarcomas in cats remains ill-defned and controversial. In
excision by amputating the limb. The Vaccine-Associated Feline
one study evaluating the use of combination doxonubicin and
Sarcoma Task Force [a task force formed in November 1996 by the
240
Injection site sarcomas
Chapter
22
The client should not hesitate to seek veterinary assistance if there
Box 22-4 Recommended vaccination sites from the
is any doubt. After confirmation of one of those three scenarios by
Vaccine-Associated Feline Sarcoma Task Force1
the veterinarian, a biopsy should be performed to find out if it is a
granuloma/reactive mass or a sarcoma. A Trucut needle biopsy, punch
 Vaccines containing antigens limited to panleukopenia, feline
biopsy, or wedge biopsy are preferred. It is mandatory to follow sound
herpes virus type-1. and feline calicivirus (± chlamydia) are to be
 principles of performing a biopsy (see Chapter 14). Cytologic evalu-
administered on the right shoulder 
 ation of fine needle aspirates is considered unreliable for the diagnosis
 Rabies vaccine to be administered in the right hind limb, as
 of vaccine-associated sarcomas and is not recommended.&57
distally as possible
 Feline leukemia virus vaccine to be administered in the left hind 
limb, as distally as possible
Vaccination reactions or granulomas
If the mass is a vaccine reaction (granuloma), the course of action to
 be undertaken is controversial. Based on one study it appears safe to
leave the granuloma.1 In this study, the incidence of postvaccinal
Box 22-5 wwhen to seek veterinary assistance
 of the postvaccinal reactions resolved without medical intervention;
 A mass persists at the injection site for more than three months
 96% of these did so within three months of vaccination, and 100%
 after injection
did so within four months of vaccination. The size of the reactions
 A mass is present and is larger than 2 cm, regardless of time since
was reported to range from less than l cm and up to 6 cm in diam-
injection
eter.l In addition, the impact of excision of a vaccine reaction on
 A mass is still increasing in size at one month after injection
subsequent tumor development at the site has not been elucidated.
 Fibrosarcomas have allegedly occurred in areas that had been previ-
ais uoalui aq on onoueoisiy uo pauaap pue pasixa Aisno
reactions, raising the question of the utility of excising vaccine reac-
American Veterinary Medical Association, American Animal Hospital
tions or the type of excision that would be required (ie., marginal vs
Association, American Association of Feline Practitioners, and Veteri-
wide). 12.7 Based on these results, it is cautiously recommended to not
nary Cancer Society) has recommended the following (Box 22-4).17.
remove reactive granulomas unless they persist for more than four
months.1 It has been postulated that removing an injection site gran-
Client education
uloma may interfere with the body's development of immunity.16
These recommendations regarding the management of granulomas
Client education is imperative First the clients should be warned of
 may be shown to be erroneous as we learn more about this clinical
the risk of vaccine/injection-associated sarcomas and the occurrence
entity and may need to be revised as new information becomes avail-
of local vaccine/injection reactions. The owner should be taught how
able. If the mass is a sarcoma, proper treatment planning becomes
 jo aue ji aueisisse Areuaaa yaas pue ahis uoalui au auexa o
essential, which re-emphasizes the importance of performing a biopsy
first before making any kind of treatment decisions.
 REFERENCES
1.
Hendrick Ml, Goldschmidt MH.
6.
 Buracco P Martano M, Morello E, Ratto
12. Coyne Ml, Reeves NC, Rosen DK.
Do injection site reactions induce
A. Vaccine-associated-like fbrosarcoma at
Estimated prevalence of injection-site 
fbrosarcomas in cats? J Am Vet Med
the site of a deep nonabsorbable suture in
sarcomas in cats during 1992. I Am Vet
Assoc 1991;199(8):968.
a cat. Vet J 2002;163(1):105-7.
Med Assoc 1997;210[2):249-51.
 2. Hendrick Ml, Goldschmidt MH, Shofer
7.
 McEntee MC, Page RL. Feline vaccine-
13.
.Kass PH, Barnes WG Jr, Spangler WL,
FS, et al. Postvaccinal sarcomas in the
associated sarcomas. J Vet Intern Med
et al. Epidemiologic evidence for a causal 
cat: epidemiology and electron probe
2001;15(3):176-82.
 relation between vaccination and
microanalytical identifcation of
8. Morrison WB, Starr RM. Vaccine-
 fbrosarcoma tumorigenesis in cats. J Am
aluminum. Cancer Res 1992;52(19):
associated feline sarcomas. J Am Vet Med
Vet Med Ass0c 1993;203[3):396-405.
5391-4
Assoc 2001;218(5):697-702.
14. Burton G, Mason KV. Do postvaccinal
3. Cohen M, Wright JC, Brawner WR, et al.
9.
Hendrick MJ, Kass PH, McGill LD, Tizard
 sarcomas occur in Australian cats? Aust 
Use of surgery and electron beam
IR. Postvaccinal sarcomas in cats. J Natl
Vet I 1997;75:102-6.
irradiation, with or without
Cancer Inst 1994;86(5):341-3.
15. Lester S, Clemett T, Burt A. Vaccine 
chemotherapy, for treatment of vaccine-
MacEwen EG, Powers BE, Macy D,
site-associated sarcomas in cats: clinical
associated sarcomas in cats: 78 cases
Withrow Sj. Soft tissue sarcomas. In:
expenience and a laboratory review
(1996-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Withrow Sl, MacEwen EG, editors. Small
(1982-1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2001;219(11):1582-9.
animal clinical veterinary oncology.
1996;32[2):91 -5.
4. Gagnon A. Drug injection-associated
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.: 2001.
16. Gobar GM, Kass PH. World wide
fbrosarcoma in a cat. Feline Pract
p. 283-304.
Web-based survey of vaccination practices.
2000;28:18-21.
11.
Hendrick MJ, Shofer FS, Goldschmidt
postvaccinal reactions, and vaccine
5. Liptak JM, Forrest Ll. Soft tissue sarcomas.
MH, et al. Comparison of fbrosarcomas
site-associated sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet
In: Withrow Sl, Vail DM, editors. Withrow 
that developed at vaccination sites and
Med Assoc 2002;220[10):1477-82.
and MacEwwen's small animal clinical
at nonvaccination sites in cats: 239
17.
 Richards IR. Feline sarcoma task force
oncology. 4th ed. St Louis: Saunders 
cases [1991-2). I Am Vet Med Assoc
meets. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1997;210[3):
Elsevier; 2007. p. 425-53.
1994;205(10):1425-9.
310-11.
241
Section
4
 Skin and Adnexa
18. Hendrick Ml, Brooks Il. Postvaccinal
a vaccination site in a cat. Feline Pract
45.
Barber LG, Sorenmo KU, Cronin KL,
sarcomas in the cat: histology and
1996;24:20-3.
Shofer FS. Combined doxorubicin and
immunohistochemistry. Vet Pathol
32. Rudmann DG, Van Alstine WG, Doddy F.
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy for
1994;31(1):126-9.
 et al. Pulmonary and mediastinal
nonresectable feline fbrosarcoma.
19. Hershey AE, Sorenmo KU, Hendrick MJ.
metastases of a vaccination-site sarcoma
IAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36[5):
et al. Prognosis for presumed feline
in a cat. Vet Pathol 1996;33[4):466-9.
416-21.
vaccine-associated sarcoma after excision:
 33. McEntee MC, Sami VF, editors. The utility
46.
 Rassnick KM, Rodriguez CO, Khanna C.
6l cases [1986-1996). 1 Am Vet Med
of contrast enhanced computed
et al. Results of a phase ll clinical trial on
Assoc 2000;216(1):58-61.
tomography in feline vaccine-associated
the use of ifosfamide for treatment of cats
20.
 Doddy FD, Glickman LT, Glickman NW.
sarcomas: 35 cases. Vet Radiol and
with vaccine-associated sarcomas. Am ↓
Janovitz EB. Feline fbrosarcomas at
Ultrasound 2000;41[6):575.
Vet Res 2006;67(3):517-23.
vaccination sites and non-vacination
34.
Hahn KA, Lantz GC, Salisbury SK, et al.
47.
 Bregazzi VS, LaRue SM, McNiel E, et al.
sites. J Comp Pathol 1996;114(2):
Comparison of survey radiography with
Treatment with a combination of
165-74.
ultrasonography and x-ray computed
doxorubicin, surgery, and radiation versus
21.[
Phelps HA, Kuntz CA, Milner RJ, et al.
tomography for clinical staging of
 surgery and radiation alone for cats with
Radical excision with five-centimeter
subcutaneous neoplasms in dogs.
vaccine-associated sarcomas: 25 cases
margins for treatment of feline injection-
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1990;196(11):
[1995-2000). I Am Vet Med Assoc
site sarcomas: 91 cases [1998-2002].
1795-8.
2001;218(4):547-50.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;239(1):
 35. Gilson SD, Stone EA. Principles of
48. Martano M, Morello E, Ughetto M, et al.
97-106.
Oncologic Surgery. Compend Contin 
 Surgery alone versus surgery and
22.
Couto SS, Griffey SM, Duarte PC.
Educ Vet. [review]. 1990;12[6):
doxorubicin for the treatment of feline
Madewell BR. Feline vaccine-associated
827-38.
injection-site sarcomas: a report on G9
fbrosarcoma: morphologic distinctions.
36.
Kramer A, Walsh Pl, Seguin B.
cases. Vet J 2005;170[1):84-90.
Vet Pathol 2002;39(1):33-41.
Hemipelvectomy in dogs and cats:
49.
Hahn KA, Endicott MM, King GK,
23. Aberdein D, Munday IS, Dyer CB, et al.
technique overview, variations, and
Harris-King FD. Evaluation of
Comparison of the histology and
description. Vet Surg 2008;37(5):
radiotherapy alone or in combination
 immunohistochemistry of vaccination-site
413-9.
with doxorubicin chemotherapy for the
and non-vaccination-site sarcomas
37.
Langley-Hobbs S), Voss K, Montavon PM.
treatment of cats with incompletely
from cats in New Zealand. N Z Vet I
In: Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs
excised soft tissue sarcomas: 71 cases
2007;55(5):203-7.
 Sl, editors. Orthopedic surgery and
[1989-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
24. Romanelli G, Marconato L, Olivero D,
musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
2007;231(5):742-5.
et al. Analysis of prognostic factors
Saunders Elsevier; 2009. p. 527-33.
50.
Davis KM, Hardie EM, Martin FR, et al.
associated with injection-site sarcomas in
Liptak JM, Dernell ws, Rizzo SA, et al.
Correlation between perioperative factors
cats: 57 cases [2001-7). I Am Vet Med
Reconstruction of chest wall defects after
and successful outcome in fbrosarcoma
Assoc 2008;232(8):1193-9.
nb tumor resection: a comparison of 
resection in cats. Vet Rec 2007;161(6):
25.
.Giudice C, Stefanello D, Sala M, et al.
autogenous, prosthetic, and composite 
199-200.
Feline injection-site sarcoma: recurrence.
 techniques in 44 dogs. Vet Surg
51.
 Banerji N, Kanjilal S. Somatic alterations
tumour grading and surgical margin
2008;37(5):479-87.
of the p53 tumor suppressor gene in
status evaluated using the three-
39. McEntee MC, Samii VF, Walsh P, Hornof
vaccine-associated feline sarcoma. Am J
dimensional histological technique. Vet J
Wl. Postoperative assessment of surgical
Vet Res 2006;67(10):1766-72.
2010;186(1):84-8.
dip position in 16 dogs with cancer: a
52.
Davidson EB, Gregory CR, Kass PH.
26.
Cronin K, Page RL, Spodnick G, et al.
pilot study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Surgical excision of soft tissue
Radiation therapy and surgery for
2004;40(4):300-8.
fbrosarcomas in cats. Vet Surg
fbrosarcoma in 33 cats. Vet Radiol
40.
Reinbach D, McGregor JR, O'Dwyer PJ.
1997;26(4):265-9.
Ulltrasound 1998;39(1):51-6.
Effect of suture material on tumour cell
53.
 Sorensen KC, Kitchell BE, Schaeffer DJ.
27.
Kobayashi T, Hauck ML, Dodge R, et al.
adherence at sites of colonic injury. Br J
Mardis PE. Expression of matrix
Preoperative radiotherapy for vaccine
Surg 1993;80(6):774-6.
metalloproteinases in feline vaccine
associated sarcoma in 92 cats. Vet Radiol
41.
Kamstock DA, Ehrhart El, Getzy DM.
site-associated sarcomas. Am J Vet Res 
Ulltrasound 2002;43(5):473-9.
et al. Recommended guidelines for 
2004;65(3):373-9.
28.
.Poirier Vl, Thamm DH, Kurzman ID.
 submission, trimming, margin evaluation.
54.
 Eckstein C, Guscetti F, Roos M, et al. A
et al. Liposome-encapsulated doxorubicin
 and reporting of tumor biopsy specimens
retrospective analysis of radiation therapy
(Doxil) and doxorubicin in the treatment
 in veterinary surgical pathology. Vet
for the treatment of feline vaccine-
of vaccine-associated sarcoma in cats.
Patho] 2011;48[1):19-31.
associated sarcoma. Vet Comp Oncol
J Vet Intern Med 2002;16(6):726-31.
42.
 Kaestner S. Perioperative analgesia. In:
2009;7(1):54-68.
29. Nemanic S, London CA, Wisner ER.
Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl.
55.
Kirpensteijn J. Feline injection site-
Comparison of thoracic radiographs and
 editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
associated sarcoma: Is it a reason to
single breath-hold helical CT for detection
musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
citically evaluate our vaccination
of pulmonary nodules in dogs with 
Saunders Elsevier; 2009. p. 199-205.
policies? Vet Microbiol 2006;117(1):
metastatic neoplasia. J Vet Intern Med
43. Mcleod DA, Thrall DE. The combination
59-65.
2006;20(3):508-15.
of surgery and radiation in the treatment
56.
CVMP advice on injection-site
30. Esplin DG, Campbell R. Widespread
of cancer. A review. Vet Surg 1989;18[1):
fbrosarcomas in cats. Vet Rec
 metastasis of a fbrosarcoma associated
1-6.
2003;152(13 ):381-2.
with vaccination site in a cat. Feline Pract
44. Ogilvie GK. Recent advances in the
57.
Vaccine-Associated Feline Sarcoma Task
1995;23:13-16.
treatment of vaccine-associated sarcomas.
Force guidelines. Diagnosis and treatment
31.
Esplin DG, Jaffe MH, McGill LD.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 of suspected sarcomas. J Am Vet Med
Metastasizing liposarcoma associated with
2001;31(3):525-33, vi-vii.
Assoc 1999;214[12):1745.
242
Section
J.F Ladlow, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
The abdomen
 This part of the book is divided into four sections: abdominal surgery
 In the third section, conditions affecting the liver and spleen,
and the abdominal wall, the gastrointestinal tract, the hepatosplenic
including hepatic shunts, are described. Cats are prone to liver disease
and endocrine system, and the urogenital system.
and in many cases surgery would not be a frst line treatment option
 In the frst chapter the reader is guided through performing an
but surgical biopsy may be necessary to obtain a specifc diagnosis
exploratory celiotomy. It is important to be able perform a thorough
 and therefore direct appropriate management. Portosystemic shunts
and methodical inspection of the abdomen and take biopsies when
are conditions that can be managed both surgically and medically.
 appropriate, particularly if the disease process affecting the cat is of
 The surgical management of portosystemic shunts in cats is covered
an unknown etiology. Some abdominal procedures in the cat are
in detail. In subsequent chapters surgical management of conditions
now being performed endoscopically and the equipment required for
 of the pancreas, spleen and adrenal glands is described. Historically
su ul sanpasoid aunoi aou aui uojad ot mou pue Adosoiedel
 adrenal gland surgery in the cat is not a commonly performed tech-
minimally invasive manner is described in the next chapter. The final
 nique but with the increasing diagnosis of hyperaldosteronism (Conn
two chapters in this section cover conditions of the abdominal wall.
 syndrome) adrenalectomy may be become more frequent.
such as hernias and traumatic ruptures and diseases of the peritoneal
In the final section of this part of the book conditions of the geni-
cavity.
tourinary tract are covered. Cats are frequently affected by urinary
 In the second section of this part of the book, surgical management 
 conditions, and obstruction ofthe urinary tract can be life threatening.
of diseases affecting the entire gastrointestinal tract is covered. Cats
 New developments in the surgical management of this system include
sioalqo aiel isagu ol Ajaiun aojaiaqi aie pue siaiea snoipisey aie
 placement of stents in both the ureters and the urethra. The final two
that can cause intestinal obstructions. However, due to their grooming
chapters on the male and female genital tracts include commonplace
 habits and barbed tongue they are more likely to ingest linear foreign
 procedures such as castration and ovariohysterectomy, which are tech-
bodies such as pieces of string. As this is a relatively common condi-
niques that are often not covered in detail in some surgical texts, along
tion and is particularly associated with cats it is described in detail in
'uoisiol auain pue enaoad se yons saseasip xalduos aiou yiim
this section. The commonest surgical condition affecting the large
 intestine in cats is megacolon and the etiopathogenesis and treatment
of this condition is thoroughly described.
Abdominal surgery and the abdominal wall
23]
hapter
Celiotomy
C. Shales
Surgical exploration of the abdomen can provide invaluable informa-
to operating on the dog, anatomical differences between the feline
tion to help achieve a diagnosis of a large number of disease processes.
 and canine abdominal cavity and viscera that are relevant to explora-
-oa Asdoq aiseaun Aeuu sureu jo spiy au ut ssaaad
tory celiotomy surgery will be briefly highlighted.
niques, and endoscopy and laparoscopy (Chapter 24) has significantly
reduced the indications for open exploration of the abdomen. Despite
these techniques, the ability of the surgeon to perform both a
Midline
visual and manual examination of all abdominal organs and obtain 
 The linea alba is generally relatively wider and more readily visible in
aq ue Aiasins Aioeiodxa uado Suunp sans aidnu uoy saisdoiq
the cat than the dog, especially caudal to the umbilicus. Care is
invaluable. 1-3
required when gaining access to the abdominal cavity as the fascia is
Celiotomy refers to an incision into the abdomen; laparatomy, a
 significantly thinner and more delicate than in the dog.
term often used interchangeably with celiotomy, can also refer to
surgery performed through a flank incision, which is rarely performed
in cats except for ovariohysterectomy. Exploratory celiotomy cannot
Liver
be considered a benign procedure and therefore, whenever possible,
the clinician should ensure that all other diagnostic possibilities have
 The liver consists of seven major lobes, which in the cat are separated
been considered prior to surgery. While the limitations of preoperative
by particularly deep fissures, rendering them more mobile relative to
 paliey Aydeigouosein) paiepaidde aq pinous sanpasoid ssouae
each other than in the dog. The feline gallbladder is situated between
the right medial and quadrate lobes as in the dog and can be double
to identify the causative pathology in 25% of cases in one study4).
as a normal variation. The cystic duct of the cat is usually longer and
preoperative investigations can reduce the incidence of unnecessary
surgery and should minimize the risk of 'peak-and-shriek interven-
more undulating in its course than in the dog, and the common bile
tion where the pathology proves to be beyond the experience level of
duct shares a common opening at the major duodenal papilla with
the surgeon. At the very least, the principal surgeon involved in an
the dominant pancreatic duct (see below).5
exploratory procedure should be familiar with and have the necessary
equipment available to assess and biopsy any abnormal tissue.
Pancreas
In addition to facilitating a global assessment of the abdomen and
biopsy of tissue, in some cases the exploratory celiotomy also offers 
 The pancreas is similar in appearance to its canine counterpart
the opportunity to treat the pathology.23 It is inevitable therefore that
 and occupies the same anatomical location and blood vessel arrange-
the experience and competence level of the surgeon in recognition of 
ment as in the dog. Drainage of secretions from the feline exocrine
abnormality, application of biopsy techniques and in the surgical
sy au gop aun u uoens au uoiy sadsai omi ui sia seaued
treatment of disease will have an impact on whether the procedure
being that most cats (approximately 80%) only have one duct, with
can be judged as a success.
the result that all of, or the significant majority of, the secretions enter
the duodenum at the proximal (major) duodenal papilla (the canine
 pancreas drains predominantly via the minor duodenal papilla). The
second difference is that the pancreatic duct can join with the common
SURGICAL ANATOMY
bile duct in cats and therefore share the same opening into the duo-
denal lumen. These differences combine to make both the common
A more detailed account of the abdominal anatomy of the cat is pro-
bile duct and pancreatic duct prone to secondary obstruction in the
vided in the chapters on the relevant organs (see Chapters 27 to 40).
 presence of disease involving the region of the major duodenal
In this section, for the benefit of the surgeon who is more accustomed
papilla.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00023-8
245
Section
5
The Abdomen
Urogenital system
 The left renal artery can divide before it enters the kidney (resulting
uau,se yo i aeixde ui (aae ieuar au in i u
renal artery usually remains undivided outside the capsule. The vessels
running over the surface of the renal capsule (both arteries and veins)
are significantly more prominent in the cat than in the dog.
Venous drainage occurs into the caudal vena cava via the renal veins.
There are commonly several renal veins visible at the feline hilus,
 particularly on the right-hand side.8
 Feline ureters are comparable to those of the dog although their
significantly smaller diameter renders surgery very challenging except
in the presence of significant dilatation.
 The bladder neck/preprostatic urethra is significantly longer in the
cat than the dog. As in other species, the feline urethra can be divided
into different sections of which only the preprostatic and prostatic
parts are intra-abdominal. Unlike in the dog, the feline urethra is not
completely enclosed within the prostate gland.
Figure 23-1 A versatile lightweight retractor in position during excision
of the falciform fat using bipolar diathermy forceps. There is a
HOWW TO PERFORM AN
transdiaphragmatic thoracic drain in place.
EXPLORATORY CELIOTOMY
Preparation for surgery
(Fig. 23-1). Excision of the falciform fat can be very helpful in gaining
unimpaired access to the cranial abdomen in some cats (Fig. 23-1)
Despite diagnostic information that might indicate disease in only
and can be performed with judicious use of electrocautery or bunch-
one organ, the surgeon should be prepared for the necessity to extend
ligation at its cranioproximal extent.
the incision from the xiphisternum to the pubis as indicated during
The order in which viscera are examined is not itself important, but
the procedure. Hair removal should therefore be performed to include
aniupan uoeioidxa oeuaiss iesol e idope pinous uoains oea
a 10-15 cm margin from the incision that may be required. Prepara-
-iapun st unon Aroeixa ue ieu au yea pauad si i
tion for the'worst case scenario' in terms of skin preparation is always
taken. Adherence to a rehearsed exploration technique will minimize
 preferable to compromise of exposure or remedial preparation.
the risk of pathology being missed, and serve to familiarize the
 Before the procedure begins, as with all surgery, it is important that
surgeon with natural variations of normal anatomy.
the surgeon is aware of exactly what equipment is on the instrument
Abdominal exploration includes evaluation of the abdominal
trolley and what is available on request if required. Swab numbers
surface ofthe diaphragm, the distal extent of the esophagus, the entire
should be checked and noted to ensure that no errors occur at the end
stomach, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, colon, cecum, pancreas (both
of the procedure.
limbs), liver, gall bladder, kidneys (the duodenal and colonic maneu-
vers are useful; Figs 23-2 and 23-3), ureters (observe peristalsis if
The exploratory celiotomy
relevant), bladder and proximal urethra, and any genital organs that
are present or likely to be relevant. Table 23-1 gives details of a suitable
In order to perform a complete exploration of the abdomen the skin
approach to abdominal exploration although other techniques have
incision is made from the xiphisternum to the pubis. Reduced length
been described.
incisions either cranial or caudal to the umbiliaus can be used to
The jejunum can be temporarily arranged on a moist swab if neces-
access the cranial or caudal viscera, respectively, but will not provide
sary to make room within the abdominal cavity or to facilitate surgery
access suitable for complete exploration of the entire cavity. In cats,
involving the intestine itself (Fig. 23-4). Retraction of the bladder is
the linea alba is wider than in the dog (up to 4 mm wide) and usually
best performed using a stay suture in the cranial pole if repeat or
obvious after incision of the subcutaneous tissue and thus the tempta-
prolonged handling is necessary (Fig. 23-5). The spleen can also be
tion to undermine the fat or skin edges lateral to midline should be
exteriorized in most cats although care is required to ensure that the
avoided in order to minimize the potential for dead space following
short gastric blood vessels are preserved at its head (Fig. 23-6).
dosure.
ale suasis uesio euruopqe-enui aul jo lle ieu sueiodui si 1
In the presence of signifcant volumes of abdominal free fluid a
explored even if the diagnosis is immediately obvious once access to
Poole suction tip can be placed through a stab incision in the linea
the abdominal cavity has been obtained. This additional information
alba caudal to the umbilicus to remove fluid in a controlled fashion.
can become extremely useful in the postoperative treatment period
It is important to minimize fluid leakage over the animal due to the
and as an aid for the clinician in interpretation of biopsy results. In
increased potential for heat loss during the procedure. The linea alba 
 some cases the disease process will need to be addressed before the
incision can then be extended to match the skin incision.
remainder of the exploration is performed to improve access or avoid
Retraction of the abdominal wall can be performed by mini Balfour.
life-threatening complications.
Gosset, Gelpi, or other self-retaining retractors (Chapter 13), ensuring
 The surgeon is required to decide whether immediate treatment of
that no viscera become trapped between the retractor and the body
Auv 'aneudoidde si Aiagins Aioieioldxa ue guunp payuap! Asoloqied
wall. Moist swabs or laparotomy swabs are used to protect the abdom-
tissue excised during treatment should be considered for submission
inal wall from trauma that can be caused during retraction. Light-
for histopathology and additional biopsies from other tissue taken
weight self-retaining retractors with elasticated hooks are versatile
as appropriate (e.g., regional lymph nodes, splenic nodules, etc ). In
and can be very useful in small animals due to their reduced weight
the event that the primary source of pathology cannot be identified,
246
Celiotomy
Chapter
23
Figure 23-4 A loop of jejunum is shown arranged on a moist swab
The arboreal nature of the blood supply can be readily seen.
Figure 23-2 The duodenal maneuver. The right kidney and associated
vasculature are visible. Retention of the remainder of the abdominal
viscera was achieved using the mesoduodenum as a 'dam'. The
duodenum is grasped gently. ensuring that the right limb of the pancreas
is not damaged. The pancreatic appearance was not associated with
clinical signs and was considered acceptable.
Figure 23-5 A stay suture is placed in the cranial pole of the bladder to
stabilize the viscera during a ventral cystotomy procedure. Four stay
 sutures have also been placed at the edges of the cystotomy incision to 
multiple calcium oxylate uroliths were recovered.
Abdominal lavage prior to closure with warmed saline or lactated
 Ringer's solution can be a useful way of reducing the level of contami-
 nants such as bacteria or inflammatory mediators. However, it should
be remembered that the entire volume of lavage solution must be
Figure 23-3 The colonic maneuver. The mesocolon acts as a 'dam'
providing the surgeon with an excellent view and access to the left
recovered due to the potential detrimental effect on neutrophil eff-
kidney and sublumbar gutter.
cacy caused by residual fluid. Local lavage of biopsy sites packed-off
from the remainder of the abdominal cavity may be preferable, par-
ticularly in the absence of suction equipment. Lavage solution should
multiple organ biopsies should be obtained based on the preoperative 
always be warmed due to the potential for hypothermia associated
clinical signs and laboratory results.
with abdominal surgery, especially in relatively small species.
 In the majority of cases it is unacceptable to complete an explora-
tory celiotomy without either achieving treatment of the pathology
Closure of celiotomy
Or obtaining biopsies of tissue thought likely to be involved. Failure
to advance the diagnostic process or achieve treatment at surgery
 Prior to closure the surgeon may want to use the opportunity to place
sEM Auoioan Aioieionda uoyiad on uoisiap au ieu sisans
an open gastrostomy feeding tube (see Chapter 27) if there is any
inappropriate.
doubt about the cat's ability or willingness to eat postoperatively.
247
Section
5
The Abdomen
Table 23-1 Example of a protocol to achieve systematic exploration of the abdomen
Area of exploration
Technique
 Gastric cardia, distal esophagus, left 
The left medial and lateral liver lobes are retracted towards midline to reveal the diaphragm and distal
diaphragm, cranial pole of the left 
esophagus. Both surfaces of the left side of the liver can be assessed. The colonic maneuver (described
kidney and left adrenal gland
below) can be used to increase exposure of the left kidney and adrenal gland if necessary
Right liver lobes, right diaphragm
The quadrate, right medial and right lateral liver lobes are retracted towards midline. The surgeon can then
palpate and assess those liver lobes, and make a visual inspection of the surface of the right diaphragm
Gall bladder and extrahepatic biliary
The stomach is then retracted caudally slightly, facilitating inspection of the gall bladder, cystic duct and 
 system. Portal vein
common bile duct. Great care is taken over performing or interpreting manual gall bladder emptying due
to the potential for reflux into the hepatic ducts 
Gastric assessment
The entire stomach is then palpated, including the fundus, body, pyloris and assessment continued to
include the proximal duodenum. The proximal duodenum is tethered by the duodenohepatic ligament
Pancreas
The right limb of the pancreas is elevated by grasping the descending duodenum. Care is required in order
a a aa  pai a ue al eae alal sxa seae a a oi 
omentum ventrally and cranially or opening the omentum itself
 Small intestines
The duodenum is followed to the duodenocolic ligament that tethers it to the dorsal abdomen. A loop of
jejunum is grasped and followed in one direction. The surgeon will then either encounter the distal
duodenum and duodenocolic ligament again or the ileocecocolic junction. The surgeon then proceeds by
following the jejunum in the other direction from the start point. The ileum is identified by its
antimesenteric vessel
Large intestines
The cecum can be palpated and inspected along with the ascending. transverse and descending colon.
The proximal ascending colon is relatively immobile as it is secured dorsally in the abdomen by the
duodenocolic ligament 
 Proximal urinary tract
Duodenal maneuver: the descending duodenum is grasped, taking care to avoid handling of the pancreas,
and the mesoduodenum is used as a barrier to gently retract the jejunum etc. towards midline. The right
kidney, adrenal gland and proximal ureter can be examined, palpated if appropriate and observed. A
similar maneuver making use of the descending colon and mesocolon (colonic maneuver) will allow
inspection of the left kidney
 Distal urinary tract
The bladder is palpated and reflected ventrocaudally to inspect its dorsal surface and ureteric insertion
points. The neck of the bladder can be gently palpated
Genital system
The ovaries or stumps should have been visualized during the duodenal or colonic maneuvers. The uterus
or uterine stump(s) can be identified/palpated dorsal to the bladder and ventral to the colon, assisted by
caudoventral retraction of the bladder if necessary
Closure can be achieved using either a simple interrupted or a
simple continuous appositional suture pattern. For exploratory celi-
otomy where the patients may have underlying debilitating disease,
two or three metric absorbable materials such as polyglyconate or
 polydioxanone offer suitable absorption profles to provide suffcient
support for the six weeks likely to be necessary for the avascular linea
alba fascia to heal. There are prospective experimental studies that
have demonstrated poliglecaprone and polyglactin 910 to be safe for
linea alba closure following ovariohysterectomy in cats.10.1l However.
these were elective procedures on young healthy cats. Most incisional
hernias are a result of surgical error rather than incorrect choice of
suture material. The rectus sheath represents the tension holding layer
that must be engaged when closing a midline incision. The sutures
should include 3-5 mm of rectus sheath either side of the incision
 and bites should be approximately 3-5 mm apart along the incision.
There is no requirement to close the peritoneum.
 It is generally accepted that closure of the linea alba in cats should
include the external sheath ofthe rectus abdominis muscle as in other
species. However, there is a lack of consensus in the literature regard-
Figure 23-6 The spleen can usually be exteriorized with care. Notice that
ing suture placement within the subcutaneous tissues. As one would
the spleen is an irregular shape as part of normal variation.
expect, the absence of subcutaneous closure is likely to increase the
248
Celiotomy
Chapter
23
risk of seroma formationl but the inclusion of a subcutaneous layer
has been proposed to increase the risk of incisional postoperative
 Box 23-1 Full thickness intestinal biopsy technique
the relatively high incidence of incisional swelling following abdomi-
The section of intestine intended for biopsy is gently 'milked' free
nal surgery in cats, 13 but in reality the degree of swelling that occurs
from intraluminal ingesta and liquid. Doyen bowel forceps or an 
persip pue peso wn s-e Alatewixoudde paneld ane shabuly s,luersisse
is not usually clinically significant In the opinion of the author, the
to the biopsy site and the area is packed-off from the remainder of
abdominal closure should adhere to Halsted's principles and therefore
the surgical field using damp swabs.
include a subcutaneous layer except in very lean cats. One and a half
A number 11 scalpel blade is then used to create a full thickness 
or two metric monoflament poliglecaprone, polyglycomer 63l, poly-
 pauasaw-e aun ul (buo ww ol-s Aanewixoadde) uoisui gens
dioxanone and polyglytone 62ll are common selections for the sub-
aspect parallel to the long axis of the intestine. A second incision is 
cutaneous tissue and multiflament polyglactin 910 also offers suitable
then made parallel to the first, resulting in a full thickness biopsy of 
characteristics. The third layer of closure usually consists of intrader-
approximately 2-3 mm width. The blade can then be used to incise 
mal continuous absorbable suture or more conventional monofla-
away from the lumen to section one end of the biopsy, at which 
auanaad uoaans uo gupuadap 'sans us aqeqosqe-uou sa
point the tissue tends to evert into a curve based on the one end 
and the nature of the individual case.
that remains attached (Hg. 23-7). Adson or DeBakey forceps can 
then be used to stabilize the free end of the biopsy to facilitate 
section of the remaining attachment. An elliptical incision achieves 
the same end resultz but can require additional handling of the
BIOPSY PROCEDURES
tissue. The surgeon should check to ensure that the sample 
 comprises mucosa before arranging for it to be fixed in 10% formal
saline solution.
Full thickness biopsy of the intestine
 Alternate techniques include use of a Keyes skin biopsy punch23 
In the presence of the correct equipment and a skilled endoscopist,
(but these need to be very sharp): or use of a stay suture to elevate 
endoscopic intestinal biopsies are often preferred for mucosal disease
a small section of tissue and a scalpel blade to excise a wedge.
 of the proximal or distal intestinal tract due to the increased morbidity
 Whichever technique is used, the key is to minimize or avoid 
 handling the biopsy and to ensure that a full thickness sample is 
abnormal intestinal tissue with reduced capacity for suture holding in
 obtained.
 Several closure techniques are acceptable including appositional 
animals that may be compromised in terms of healing ability carries
 simple interrupted/continuous or inverting interrupted/continuous 
a significant risk of complications that require careful consideration
(e.g. Lembert or Connell) patterns. The suture-holding layer in the 
prior to the procedure.15
intestine is the submucosa and ensuring its inclusion usually requires
However, in contrast to partial thickness intestinal biopsies obtained
 full thickness bites with the needle.
 by endoscopy surgical biopsy of the small intestine (Box 23-1) usually
 If necessary. gastric biopsy can be performed using the same
ue pue uoains au jo ssapiai Aaenh aenbape jo sadues spia
technique and closed in one or two layers.
offer greater sensitivity when diagnosing lymphoma and inflamma-
tory bowel disease. 17-21
Standard protocol for surgical biopsy as part of an investigation for
small intestinal disease commonly involves samples from the duode.
num, jejunum, and ileum with the stomach, liver, and pancreas
sampled as indicated. Full thickness large intestinal biopsy is rarely
performed due to the poor healing and high bacterial load in this area.
Biopsies of the regional lymph nodes and spleen can be obtained as
the pathology dictates.
Biopsy of the liver
A biopsy of the liver should be performed routinely during any pro-
cedure involving confirmed or suspected hepatobiliary disease There
are a number of techniques available for sampling hepatic tissue.
depending on the location and nature of the intended site. While
agreement between cytology and histopathology samples has been
aipaau anss sedau te'sases jo os Aiaeuixidde aq ot pauodal
aspirates are usually avoided in open surgery due to the risk of insuf.-
ficient information being available.
Nodules or masses within the liver can be biopsied using a Tnu-
 Figure 23-7 A full thickness intestinal biopsy is being taken from the
Cut biopsy needle, Keyes skin biopsy punch25.26 or sampled as an
feline jejunum. Notice how the sample has curled and everted due to the
excisional biopsy if the location and size is considered suitable (i.e..
mucosal layer. (Photograph courtesy of Robert N. White.)
using partial or complete lobectomy techniques). Histologic data
gained using Tru-Cut type biopsy needles has the potential to be
significantly less reliable than that available from wedge biopsy tech-
niques25.26 with the result that multiple core biopsies or an alternative
placing a plug of hemostatic material (eg. gelatin sponge) over the
technique should be considered. Bleeding from penetration-type
bleeding area.
biopsy sites, particularly punch biopsy sites, can be more severe than
 It is useful to note that samples from the periphery of the liver (Box
with other techniques,2 but can usually be controlled effectively
23-2) are generally considered representative for the generalized
by application of pressure for two to five minutes or alternatively
changes seen with most hepatobiliary disease processes.
249
Section
5
The Abdomen
Biopsy of the lymph nodes
Box 23-2 Liver biopsy using hemostats
Regional lymph nodes should be visually and manually assessed and
 Biopsy of the periphery of a liver lobe can be performed without 
 biopsies obtained if there is a suspicion of abnormality. Palpation can
difficulty using a small pair of curved hemostatic forceps to form a
be a useful technique to determine whether the node(s) feel firmer or
line of crushed tissue (Fig. 23-8). With the hemostatic forceps in 
larger than would be considered normal. Nodes can be sampled by
position, a sharp clean blade is used to excise the distal section of
needle aspirate, core biopsy needle, or by excision, depending on the
the lobe and the sample placed in formal saline taking care to avoid
location and the individual case. The surgeon should bear in mind
crush artifact. Using a small section of card from a suture pack can
that many nodes are situated in close approximation to regional blood
facilitate transfer into the formal saline with minimal direct handling 
vessels and care is required to avoid hemorrhage.
of the tissue. Following a delay of approximately 30 seconds to one 
minute the forceps can be removed to leave a thin line of crushed 
tissue from which hemorrhage is usually minimal. Judicious use of
Biopsy of the kidneys
electrocautery can be helpful in the unlikely event that significant
hemorrhage occurs. Clamshell biopsy forceps can also be used to
Advances in imaging and availability of blood tests have significantly
 gain a peripheral biopsy.26
improved the non-invasive investigation of renal disease. Further-
more, the results of renal biopsy do not usually alter the treatment
protocol, with the result that it is not a common procedure during
exploratory surgery.
Renal biopsy can be performed using a Tru-Cut style core biopsy
needle oriented along the long axis of the organ, with care taken to
confine the sample to the outer cortical tissue (see Chapter 36). The
needle should not cross into the medullary region due to the risk of
severe hemorrhage. Digital pressure over the resultant small hole in
the capsule is usually sufficient to achieve hemostasis.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
The degree of analgesia and supportive nursing care required follow.
-au jo aaiap aul uo spuadap Aqeiaau Auooiede Aoteoldxa su
vention necessary during the procedure itself and the recovery of the
animal from both the surgery and the disease process. The reader is
 referred to Chapters 3 and 4 for detailed information on postoperative
monitoring and nursing. Surgeons should pay particular attention to
ym paieduos uaum Aesp sie ieu uied jo suis aqns aiou au
Figure 23-8 Liver biopsy. Most biopsies can be obtained from the
dogs, and use opioids in conjunction with non-steroidal analgesics
periphery of a lobe at a suitable location to apply curved hemostatic
when appropriate The importance of early enteral feeding has already
forceps.
been discussed but has additional significance when considering cats
at risk from hepatic lipidosis.
 Recovery and duration of hospital stay following intestinal surgery
Biopsy of the pancreas
are improved by achieving effective postoperative enteral nutrition30
and there is evidence to suggest that enteral nutrition is essential for
Handling of the pancreas must be particularly gentle in all species to
enterocyte function.31 Voluntary oral feeding is always preferable but
minimize the risk of iatrogenic pancreatitis. Pancreatic biopsies do not
the general anesthetic and celiotomy used to perform the exploratory
nq Aagins Aioieioldxa ioy losoioid piepueis aul jo jed uoy Allensn
should not be avoided if there is significant evidence to suggest
aqnt supaaj e aneid on Aiunoddo jeap! ue juasandan Aeu ainpanoid
 in appropriate cases (see Chapters 12 and 27).
pathology.
Hypokalemia can result from anorexia and can in turn contribute
 A biopsy can be obtained by careful isolation of the tip of one limb
(usually the right which is easier to access) or a suitable lobe, using a
to poor intestinal motility, nausea, and poor appetite. Supplementa-
combination of sharp and blunt dissection (see Box 33-2) to separate
tion of fluids in appropriate cases is usually worthwhile.
it from the mesoduodenum, major vessels and adjacent pancreatic
lobes. Monoflament suture (eg.. polydioxanone, polyglyconate or
polypropylene) of suitable size (eg. 1.5 metric (4/0) can be used to
ligate the base of the proposed biopsy tissue as a simple encircling
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
-ellL sz'uooas padeus-A, e alelosl ol pasn saimins oml se io aimeail
nium clips placed in a similar orientation to sutures can also be used
 The surgeon must monitor carefully for signs of complications that
to achieve hemostasis.2?
could result from the celiotomy procedure. The incidence of hernia-
 As for all biopsies, handling of the sample with forceps should be
tion of abdominal wall contents is very low in small animals com-
minimized to avoid crush artifact. The surgeon must take additional
pared to humans and is usually associated with technical error or
care to ensure that there is minimal damage to pancreatic tissue
inappropriate suture selection (Fig. 23-9). Postoperative complica-
remaining within the animal and that the ligation avoids the cranial
tions are two to three times more likely to be caused by theunderlying
 Or caudal pancreaticoduodenal vessels that can be intimately associ-
disease process rather than the exploratory procedure itself.23 Condi-
ated with the right limb.
250
Celiotomy
Chapter
23
Figure 23-9 (A) Abdominal wound dehiscence in a cat. (B) The simple continuous poliglecaprone closure failed at the knot but the skin closure
prevented catastrophic evisceration.
include gastrointestinal foreign body, hepatic lipidosis, ureteral abnor-
Suimooy sies pue saop yoq u pauea pue aqns yioq aq ues sasueup
malities, intussusception, pancreatitis, hepatic neoplasia, and lym-
open surgery. Clinical signs displayed by cats suffering from septic
 ae ae e aad au ria
 Full thickness intestinal biopsy or enterectomy can risk develop-
ary to peritonitis have been reported to be bradycardic rather than
ment of septic peritonitis, of which the signs and pathophysiologic
tachycardic.32
 REFERENCES
1. Harvey C), Lopez JW, Hendrick Ml. An
cat Felis domestica. Am J Anat 1953;93:
14. Elwood C. Best practice for small
uncommon intestinal manifestation of
457-74.
intestinal biopsy. Editorial. J Small Anim
feline infectious peritonitis: 26 cases
8.
 Caceres AV, Zwingenberger AL, Aronson 
Prac 2005;46:315-16.
[1986-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc
LR, Mai W. Characterization of normal
15. Shales Cl, Warren J, Anderson DM, et al.
1996;209:1117-20.
 feline renal vascular anatomy with
Complications following full thickness
2  Boothe Hw, Slater MR, Hobson HP.
dual-phase CT angiography. Vet Radiol
small intestinal biopsy in G6 dogs: a
et al. Exploratory celiotomy in 200
Ulltrasoun 2008:49:350-6.
retrospective study. J Small Anim Prac
nontraumatized dogs and cats. Veterinary
House A, Brockman D. Emergency
2005;46:317-21.
Surgery 1992;21:452-7.
management of the acute abdomen in
16. Day MJ, Bilzer T, Mansell J, et al.
3. Lester S, Welsh E, Pratschke K.
dogs and cats 2. Surgical treatment. In
Histopathological standards for the
Complications of exploratory coeliotomy
Practice 2004;26:530-7.
diagnosis of gastrointestinal inflammation
in 70 cats. J Small Anim Pract 2004;45:
10.
 Freeman Ll, Pettit GD, Robinette JD, et al.
in endoscopic biopsy samples from the
351-6.
Tissue reaction to suture material in
dog and cat: A report from the World
4. Pastore GE, Lamb CR, Lipscomb V.
 the feline linea alba. A retrospective,
Small Animal Veterinary Association
Comparison of the results of abdominal
prospective, and histologic study. Vet Sur
 Gastrointestinal Standardization Group.
ultrasonography and exploratory
1987:16:440-5.
J Comp Pathol 2008:138:(Supplement 
laparotomy in the dog and cat. I Am
11.
 Runk A, Allen SW, Mahaffey EA. Tissue
1j:S1-S43.
Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43:264-9.
 reactivity to poliglecaprone 25 in the
17. Baez IL, Hendrick MJ, Walker LM,
5.
. Grandage J. Functional Anatomy of the
feline linea alba. Vet Surg 1999;28:
Washabau RJ. Radiographic.
 Digestive System. In: Slatter D, editor.
466-71.
ultrasonographic, and endoscopic fndings
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. 3rd ed.
12.
 Muir P, Goldsmid SE, Simpson DJ.
in cats with inflammatory bowel disease
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
Bellenger CR. Incisional swelling
of the stomach and small intestine: 33
p. 499-521.
following coeliotomy in cats. Vet
cases [1990-1997). I Am Vet Med Assoc
6.
. Carlisle CH. Radiographic anatomy of the
Rec.1993;32:189-90.
1999;215:349-54.
cat gall bladder Vet Radiol Ultrasoun
13.
 Papazoglou LG, Tsioli V, Papaioannou N.
18. willard MD, Jergens AE, Duncan RB,
1977;18:170-2.
et al. Comparison or absorbable and
 et al. Interobserver variation among
7. Rieck AF, Reis RH. Variations in the
 nonabsorbable sutures for intradermal
histopathologic evaluations of intestinal
 pattern of renal vessels and their relation
 skin closure in cats. Can Vet J 2010;51:
tissues from dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med
to the type of posterior vena cava in the
770-2.
Assoc 2002;220:1177-82.
251
Section
151
The Abdomen
19. Kleinschmidt S, Meneses F, Nolte I,
instrument for intestinal biopsy versus a
pancreatectomy in the dog. Vet Surg
Hewicker-Trautwein M. Retrospective
standard biopsy technique. J Am Anim 
1989:18:274-8
study on the diagnostic value of full
Hosp Assoc 2004;40:405-10.
29. Barnes RF, Greenfeld CL, Schaeffer Dl.
thickness biopsies from the stomach
24.
 Roth L. Comparison of liver cytology
et al. Comparison of biopsy samples
 and intestines of dogs with chronic
 and biopsy diagnoses in dogs and cats:
obtained using standard endoscopic 
gastrointestinal disease symptoms. Vet
 56 cases. Vet Clin Path 2001;30:
instruments and the harmonic scalpel
Pathol 2006;43:1000-3.
35-8.
during laparoscopic and laparoscopic-
20.
Evans SE, Bonczynski J, Broussard JD,
25.
Cole TL, Center SA, Flood SN, et al.
 assisted surgery in normal dogs. Vet Surg
et al. Comparison of endoscopic and full 
Diagnostic comparison of needle and 
2006;35:243-51.
thickness biopsy specimens for diagnosis
wedge biopsy specimens of the liver in
30.
Lewis Sl, Egger M, Sylvester PA, Thomas S.
of inflammatory bowel disease and 
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Early enteral feeding versus'nil by mouth'
alimentary tract lymphoma in cats. J Am
2002;220:1483-90.
after gastrointestinal surgery: systematic
Vet Med Assoc 2006;229:1447-50.
26. Vasanjee SC, Bubenik Ll, Hosgood G,
review and meta-analysis of controlled
21. Willard MD, Mansell J, Fosgate GT, et al.
Bauer R. Evaluation of haemorrhage.
trials. Brit Med J 2001;323:773-6.
Effect of sample quality on the sensitivity
sample size and collateral damage for fve
 31. Souba Ww. Glutamine: A key substrate
of endoscopic biopsy for detecting gastric
hepatic biopsy methods in dogs. Vet Surg
for the splanchnic bed. Annu Rev Nutr
and duodenal lesions in dogs and cats.
2006;35:86-93.
1991;11:285-308.
J Vet Int Med 2008;22:1084-9.
27.
 Martin RA, Lanz Ol, Tobias KM. Liver
32.
Costello MF, Drobatz K], Aronson LR,
22. Cimino Brown D. Small intestines. In:
and biliary system. In: Slatter D, editor.
King LG. Underlying cause,
Slatter D, editor Textbook of Small
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. 3rd ed.
pathophysiologic abnormalities, and 
Animal Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
response to treatment in cats with
WB Saunders; 2003. p. 644-64.
p. 708-26.
septic peritonitis: 51 cases [1990-2001)
23. Keats MM, Weeren R, Greenlee P, et al.
28.
 Allen SW, Cornelius LM, Mahaffey EA. A
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:
Investigation of Keyes skin biopsy
 comparison of two methods of partial
897-902.
252
[24]
chapter
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
S.A. van Nimwegen, J. Kirpensteijn
Laparoscopy is becoming increasingly popular in veterinary medicine
sanss leuuopqe on ssase aaondu uen Adosoiedel 'snu Aagins 
for performing investigative and surgical procedures in small animals.
without requiring extensive manipulation (e.g. exteriorization of
Cats have a flexible abdominal wall that allows sufficient distension
 tissues) resulting in reduced pain and trauma of tissues compared to
for laparoscopic procedures at relatively low intra-abdominal pres-
seq Adossoiedel auipau paseq-asuapiaa ueuny ul Aiaains uado
sures. The advantages, disadvantages, and indications for laparoscopy
become the preferred approach for a growing number of surgical
in cats will be discussed in this chapter.
procedures, including cholecystectomy,? ovariectomy,4 and appendec-
tomy.5 Likewise, laparoscopy is increasingly used in veterinary medi-
cine and surgery,7? including in smaller animals such as reptiles.
ferets, and rodents.. everal advantages of laparoscopic surgery
LAPARASCOPIC SURGERY IN CATS
 compared to open surgery that have been described for humans, have
also been reported in dogs, including reduced peri- and postoperative
Rigid endoscopy enables visualization of the abdominal cavity in a
-Uo iaous e zl-s'uoneuoy uoisaupe aiadoisod sal t-z'uied
sanaeadosas pue adoedel ade aaisau aeuuu
valescence period and faster return to normal activity level,i8-21
used for the abdominal cavity and thoracoscopy for the chest. Laparo-
and reduced surgery-induced physical stress and inflammatory
 -us yno suaunu lads ym paad st Aras sos
diameter access-points (portals) in the abdominal wall (Fig. 24-1).
pue aseds ane sanpasond sidossoiedel jo suondusap 'sies ul
include exploratory laparoscopy forobservation of abdominal organs.
incisional trauma, theuse of an optical laparoscope enables a close-up
view of abdominal tissues, improving visibility compared to open
tomy,32 and abdominal cryptorchidectomy.3334 Few case reports of
Other procedures exist.$s,3 The smaller size of cats and their different
conformation of skin and abdominal wall, compared with dogs.
su u Aaans aiseaun Aeuuu on yeoidde juai e ainban
species. However, adapting to these differences enables minimally
invasive surgical approaches similar to those in other species to be
performed, with comparable advantages.
The main disadvantages of laparoscopic surgery are the associated
costs of investment in equipment, specific anesthetic requirements,
and the need for an assistant, especially in more advanced procedures.
Furthermore, the acquisition of minimally invasive surgery skills is
known to be associated with a distinct learning curve, requiring con-
siderable training. Practice on low-cost box-trainers or cadavers can
    si  a '  a
abdominal cavity. However, the anatomy of the abdominal wall in
cats also has advantages that will be discussed later.
Basic surgical principles
The owner should always be informed that in cases where laparo-
Figure 24-1 Laparoscopic surgery in a cat showing triangulation
scopic access is limited, or if unforeseen diffculties or complications
 An assistant holds the camera.
Occur, the procedure may have to be converted to an open approach.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00024-X
253
Section
5
The Abdomen
A
B
 Figure 24-2 Motorized surgery table showing Trendelenburg position and lateral tilt. On top are two moldable vacuum cushions and a heating pad.
Anticipation of conversion during aseptic preparation of a patient is
(Trendelenburg) or head-up (reverse Trendelenburg) position and
warranted. Laparoscopy should always be performed under sterile
towards a right or left lateral position, using gravity to move abdomi-
conditions. The type of surgery (including endoscopic) can never be
nal organs away from the area of interest. A motorized table that
an excuse for breaks in sterility or decreased vigilance.
allows tilting is very useful for endoscopic surgery. In order to freely
The operating room is set up according to the surgical procedure
tilt the patient during surgery, the patient needs to be securely adhered
to be performed. Ideally, the surgeon, the operating feld, and the
to the table Apart from tying the patient's legs to the table, a moldable
monitor displaying the image of the laparoscope are positioned in a
vacuum cushion greatly improves positioning (Fig. 24-2). Because of
straight line. This so-called coaxial set-up maximizes spatial awareness
the obvious advantage of the small size of cats, positioning is relatively
and hand-eye co-ordination. Deviation from this line increases per-
easy and repositioning during surgical procedures is possible if
ceptual distortion and makes operating more diffault. Changes in
necessary. The need to move the animal should not impede the need
 pinoys uoeiado autsujunp piay suneado o ucasins aul jo uoisod
to keep the procedure aseptic.
be accompanied by changing the position of the monitor/endoscopy
 In the presence of CO2 pneumoperitoneum, transperitoneal absorp-
tower The use of a second (or third) monitor may improve surgical
tion will cause an increase in partial arterial CO2 pressure (PaCO2),
circumstances in specific procedures. An assistant should preferably
hold the laparoscope while the surgeon uses both hands to control
minute volume to facilitate expulsion of CO. The most important
instrument manipulation, as would be the case in open surgery The
pue ieinoseaoipies ioae Aiaaneaau Aeu ieu adossoiede gunp zuaaa
assistant should also be positioned in a more or less straight line with
respiratory function is the increase in intra-abdominal pressure (IAP)
the monitor. The instnument cannulas should ideally be in a 30 ° -60 *
caused by pneumoperitoneum. Abdominal insufflation causes pres-
angle with the axis of the laparoscope port and surgical feld, also
e ui suinsan 'siassan pooia ieuoqe pue usinudep au uo ans
referred to as 'triangulation' (Figs 24-1 and 24-8). If the angle is too
pressure-dependent increase in intrathoracic pressure pulmonary
small, instruments may obscure the operative site inside the abdomen
vascular resistance, and systemic vascular resistance; and a pressure-
and the accompanying short distance between the portals may reduce
dependent decrease in venous return, portal-venous blood flow, and
 manipulation freedom of the instruments outside the abdomen. With
abdominal visceral blood flow. These events result in an increase in
a larger angle depth perception is impaired and fne movements are
 peak-inspiratory airway pressure, heart rate mean arterial blood pres-
more difficult.30.40
sure and pulmonary arterial blood pressure; and a decrease in pul-
monary compliance, tidal volume, minute ventilation, cardiac output,
hepatic arterial, and renal arterial blood flow.41
Pneumoperitoneum, patient positioning.
 In dogs and humans, an IAP up to 12 mmHg causes minimal car-
and anesthetic considerations
diovascular and respiratory changes and is considered safe for lapar-
In order to create a comprehensive space for visualization, manipula-
d ue sueuny ul -salqssod jl paproae aq pnous pue sasuep
tion, and surgery, the abdominal cavity is insufflated with gas. Carbon
of <12 mmHg, caused less postoperative pain and discomfort than an
dioxide is the preferred gas for the creation of pneumoperitoneum
IAP of >12 mmHg.4? Furthermore, an increase in IAP is not linearly
because it is inexpensive, highly soluble, chemically stable rapidly
eliminated, physically inert, suppresses combustion, and at physiolog
providing adequate surgical space should be used, avoiding any
ical levels it is non-toxic. To further enhance access to certain tissues,
umnecessary hemodynamic alterations. In dogs, an IAP of 8-10 mmHg
the patient, lying in supine position, can be tilted into a head-down
May aul jo zsis (aode Auoiaeao sidossoiedel ioy luayns sem
254
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
available descriptions of laparoscopic procedures in cats, most authors
 towel clamps to allow some counter pressure while inserting the
used an IAP of 8-12 mmHg,26.30.33-35 or up to 15 mmHg.28 which is
needle Depending on the location, aiming the needle somewhat
merely a result of extrapolation of the technique that is used in dogs.
craniolaterally or caudolaterally while manually lifting the abdominal
In cats, however, effects of increased IAP have never been investigated.
ul laall io 'iappelq 'uaalds aul on Ainlu jo ysu aui anpai Aeuu lem
Furthermore cats have a much more flexible body wall and skin that
cats, it is essential to always palpate the abdomen and evacuate the
allows the creation of suffcient laparoscopic surgical space at much
urinary bladder prior to needle insertion.
lower IAPs compared to dogs. We have found that a reduction in IAP
A Trendelenburg position may reduce thechance for splenic trauma,
to around 4-6 mmHg is suffcient in cats.2 A higher IAP is not needed 
because the spleen tends to slide craniolaterally away from the inser-
for most procedures and may cause significant detrimental effects in
tion point.2,60 Proper placement of the Veress needle into the abdomi-
this species and put them at an increased risk for complications.
nal cavity can be checked by the 'hanging drop' test. Using this test, a
A Trendelenburg position may also cause cardiovascular changes.
drop of sterile saline solution is applied to the hub ofthe needle and
Depending on the amount (angle) of tilting, an increase in intratho-
should be sucked into the abdomen by the negative IAP The test is
racic pressure compromises pulmonary function and baroreceptor
not fail-safe due to occlusion of the tip of the needle from contact
reflexes cause generalized vasodilation and reduced heart rate and
jsny Aq pan aq ueo uoisnioo aqissod 'wuao io ueio ue yi
Cardiac output. The reverse Trendelenburg position triggers barorecep-
flushing the Veress needle with 1-2 mL of sterile saline or lifing up
the abdominal wall to move the tip away from any organ and then
arterial blood pressure. Cardiac output is decreased, probably because
repeating the hanging drop test.28.60 The use of a low IAP, which is
of a decreased venous return.41 However, a 10-15° head-up or -down
 preferred in cats, may limit the possibilities for primary trocar inser-
tilt is usually suffcient, and it does not cause major physiological
tion because the abdominal wall is under relatively low tension and
changes, and the cardiovascular and respiratory effects of increased
will move inwards with pressure exerted on it when trying to puncture
it with a trocar, increasing the chance for iatrogenic damage. Some
Because of the expected alterations in hemodynamic and respira-
tory function, cats should be carefully monitored during the applica-
tion of pneumoperitoneum. Increased PaCO2 and intrathoracic
insertion can be facilitated using stay sutures to stabilize the abdomi-
l ueiue ons aeuan paseaun aai anssan
nal wall during insertion or by using threaded cannulas that can be
ventilation pressures and reduced lung volume and aiming for
screwed through a small stab incision in skin and fascia.
normocapnia. Mechanical intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Abdominal wall-lifting techniques have been described for direct
(IPPV) should be considered. Positive end expiratory pressure ventila-
tion (PEEP) should not be used because it further increases intratho-
si uoisu us leus e isy anbiuuai uado-quas e suisn uasu
racic pressure, depressing cardiopulmonary function.55,56
made (about the diameter of the trocar to be inserted) and the sub-
One should be aware that in unstable cardiovascular or pulmonary
cutaneous tissue bluntly dissected to reveal the linea alba. The linea
aq ueo apoq aul yo su pue dl pasaul o saa a 'suaed
alba is carefully lifted with forceps, and stay sutures placed at both
more severe and even dangerous. Furthermore, general anesthesia
corners (cranial and caudal) of the incision. To ensure enough
aggravates the effects of increased IAP and tilting and one could
strength, the stay sutures pass through both skin and linea alba. A
-onede ioy eisauisaue iesol pue uoepas jo uoeuqos e iapisuo
 2-3 mm incision is made through the abdominal wall at the linea
scopic procedures in critical patients.57 The use of local anesthetic
infltration of portal sites using lidocaine, bupivicaine or chirocaine
provide a good tight fit of the cannula. Incising the abdominal wall
has been shown to significantly improve postoperative analgesia
facilitates entry of air, which together with lifting the abdominal wall.
in humans.5 However, a signifcant advantage of bupivacaine infltra-
should prevent abdominal organs from being lifted with the abdomi-
tion of portal sites was not found in a recent controlled clinical trial
nal wall which could occur due to negative pressure-adherence with
in dogs.59
the closed approach. The abdominal wall is lifted up while the trocar
is inserted (Fig. 24-3). Using a blunt trocar or threaded cannula is the 
safest entry technique.
Abdominal access
To check proper placement, initiate insufflation at a low flow (1 L/
Introduction of the first trocar into the abdomen can be performed
using an open or closed technique A closed technique implies blind 
above 10-20 mmHg (because there is no available space to fill) and
insertion of the frst trocar, either after establishment of pneumoperi-
it will not fall back to <l0 mmHg immediately when insufflation
toneum by pre-inserting a needle through which COz is introduced
stops. If an open or direct trocar technique was used, proper place-
into the abdomen, or by direct insertion of the primary trocar while
 ment should be checked with the laparoscope Intact muscle fascia or
pulling up the abdominal wall. An open technique refers to perform-
Jo sasen ui einuue a o pua au ie aqisa aq lm wunauoad
ing a small skin incision and subcutaneous dissection, identifying and
improper placement, or abdominal organs when the procedure has
incising the abdominal fascia, and inserting a sharp or blunt trocar
been performed correctly. If a Veress needle was incorrectly placed, it
under visualization, through which the abdomen is inflated. The most 
should be re-inserted.
commonly used closed technique is the use of a Veress needle After
 The placement of a second or more trocars is then safely performed
a small skin incision, the needle is inserted through the abdominal
wall. Once the sharp Veress needle has penetrated the abdominal wall 
within the abdomen helps to avoid puncturing blood vessels in
and peritoneum, the blunt spring-loaded obturator protrudes past the 
the abdominal wall during trocar insertion. This is very easy and
sharp edge of the needle, protecting abdominal tissues from injury by
useful in cats because of their thin abdominal wall. If the low IAP
the tip of the needle The hollow obturator can then be connected to
 complicates proper entry of a sharp trocar, stay sutures may be used
a mechanical insufflator to initiate CO, inflow into the abdominal
to stabilize the abdominal wall during trocar insertion (Fig. 24-3). In
cavity. The point of insertion is usually caudal to the umbilicus to
order to reduce the number of cannulas needed for a specific proce-
avoid the falciform ligament but alternatively, insertion close to the
dure, transabdominal suspension sutures may be used to keep tissues
rib cage edge away from the midline to the right has been described
lifted up for surgical access without using extra laparoscopic forceps.
in dogs. In cats, the edge of the rib cage can be lifted up with fine
This creates a fixed position of the tissues and decreases freedom of
255
Section
[51
The Abdomen
A
B
C
Figure 24-3 Abdominal entry. (A) The linea alba is grabbed and lifted up while (B) stay sutures are placed in the cranial and caudal border of the skin
incision, penetrating skin, subcutaneous tissue, and linea alba/external rectus fascia. (c) The stay sutures are used to pull up the abdominal wall while 
inserting the trocar. After trocar placement, the stay sutures can be used to fixate the cannula. (D,E) Stay sutures can also be used for insertion of
secondary trocars, which are placed under laparoscopic guidance (F).
manipulation. The flexible abdominal wall of cats facilitates “lifting
up' procedures, but care needs to be taken not to apply too much
EQUIPMENT
jo ino pannd suaq anns aiis a ui insan pino ym 'uoiu
the tissue.
Insufflation
 An alternative to pneumoperitoneum has been evaluated in five
cats using a custom-made abdominal wall-lifing device to pull the
For use in cats, an automatic CO insufflation device should be at least
abdominal midline upwards to create a surgical space for laparoscopy
capable of switching between low (1 L/minute) and moderate (6 L/
without using gas insufflation. However, this technique seemed to be
minute) gas flow rates and automatically regulate insufflation rate to
associated with poorer visualization of the abdominal cavity com-
maintain a constant, manually adjustable pressure level, allowing low
Auoioiede on uoisiaauos gueissanau 'unauoadounaud o paid
pressure settings (4-8 mmHg).
in one cat In particular, lateral intra-abdominal space was reduced
because of the upward 'tenting' effect of abdominal wall lifting com-
Optical and video set-up
 pared to the dome-shape of pneumoperitoneum.62
After entering the abdomen for the first time, condensation of water
The rigid optical laparoscope preferably is composed of a Hopkins
'eui aul iniq Aeu adosopua au jo aneyins pios aul uo iodea
rod lens system, which has a relatively wide feld of view and bright
Warming up the laparoscope (with warm saline for instance) before-
image. A laparoscope with 0° or 30° viewing angle is adequate for
hand will prevent fogging-up' of the scope. A blurred image can also
most laparoscopic procedures. The 30° viewing angle allows observa-
Occur from blood or fat adhered to, or dripping down the laparoscope.
tion of abdominal organs from different angles by rotating the tele-
The tip of the laparoscope may be cleared by gently touching the
scope. The diameter of the scope determines the maximum width of
Tem Apoq aui io 'uaads au 'dool ieunsanu ue jo anejns [esoias
am sie ioy ynoiui sussed huail yo junoe au pue maia yo piay au
Commercially available anti-condensation solutions may also be of
recommend a 2.7-5 mm diameter endoscope for laparoscopic and
benefit. Holding the scope tip too close to the cannula tip is a frequent
thoracoscopic procedures (Fig. 24-4). In our opinion, the advantage
reason for the scope to blur and should be avoided. This is diffcult
of a further decrease in size does not compensate for the smaller and
in cats because of their small size and also because the cannula often
less bright field of view. We commonly use a 3.9 mm diameter laparo-
moves with the scope during insertion and retraction. Holding the
scope (Hopkins II, Storz) with 4.5 mm diameter cannula because of
cannula during these manipulations or the use of threaded cannulas
its superb image quality compared to smaller diameter scopes. Fur-
will prevent this.
thermore, smaller scopes are usually used with a protective sheath,
At the end of the procedure, the abdomen is properly deflated
increasing the total diameter without enhancing the image. The endo-
before cannula removal. For portal incisions of 5 mm we recommend
scope is connected to a camera system with monitor. Camera resolu-
closing the abdominal fascia with one or two sutures to prevent her-
tions range from single CCD-chip (450 horizontal lines, poor color
niation of omentum or other viscera. For smaller portals, closure of
poog pue sau ieiuozuoy ose) sdiun-aoo aanul on (uonpoidan
only subcutaneous tissue and skin may be sufficient.
color quality) to full HD ( 1080 horizontal lines and 16: 9 widescreen
256
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
A
B
C
IMAGE
HD
D
E
Figure 24-4 Endoscopic surgery instruments. (A) Basic pediatric instrument set with 3 mm diameter instruments, a 3.9 mm diameter laparoscope
(Hopkins Il, Storz), 3.8 mm and 4.5 mm outer diameter trocars. (B) Ternamian EndoTip threaded cannula (Storz). (C) Biopsy cup forceps, straight 
grasping forceps, curved Kelly forceps, and scissors; (D) two types of bipolar forceps: (E) HD camera (Storz)
257
Section
5
The Abdomen
laparoscopy contains an automatic valve to prevent leakage of CO2
gas when no instrument is inserted and a rubber washer to prevent
gas leakage between instrument and cannula. A cannula with a Luer
lock valve can be used for insuffation ofthe abdomen and instillation
of fluids.
Cats have a thin and flexible skin and abdominal wall. Smaller and
lighter cannulas reduce surgical trauma (incision length) and reduce
problems such as cannulas slipping in and out of the abdomen and
the weight of the cannula pushing onto the abdominal wall reducing
surgical space Because of the small size of cats, smaller-sized instru-
ments greatly improve surgical performance. Figure 24-4A displays a
basic pediatric instrument set that may be used for endoscopic surgery
in cats, containing 3 mm diameter laparoscopic equipment with
3.8 mm outer diameter cannulas. Specially designed reusable can-
nulas containing silicone leaflet valves and plastic casing further
reduce weight. Because of the abdominal wall anatomy of cats, slip-
 ping of cannulas in and out of the abdominal wall incisions can pose
[eod enui aui ayeu oinuiodui s l! 'st pioae ol oz's'uaqoid e
incisions smaller than the cannula size, which can be challenging
when using an open entry technique. The use of threaded cannulas
(Termamian EndoTip, Storz, Fig. 24-4B) or Hasson trocars that can be
sutured to skin can improve cannula stability in the abdominal wall.
Threaded cannulas also have the advantage of not needing a sharp
obturator to facilitate placement through the abdominal wall. Instead,
the cannula is 'screwed' in place through a small incision, which can
ale sejnuues papeaul s'adosoiedel o e suasul Aq pazensia aq
also available in pediatric sizes [3.9 mm inner diameter; see also
Figure 24-5 Endoscopic surgery equipment on cart. From top to bottom:
Chapter 42). Another option is the use of a purse-string suture around
Widescreen monitor, xenon light source, insufflator, camera power 
the incision to tighten the cannula in the abdominal wall. When stay
source, image and video capture device, and Ligasure power source.
 sutures are used for primary trocar entry, they can be wound around
The COz gas reservoir is on the right-hand side.
the cannula and secured with mosquito forceps to add stability (Fig.
24-3). Surgeons that perform arthroscopy can use some of the avail-
image; Fig. 24-5). The most popular light sources use xenon lamps,
able 2.7 mm equipment on cats. The size and length of the equipment
being much brighter and whiter than halogen.7.0.63 It can be helpful
is of course also an important consideration.
to be able to capture images and video clips of your laparoscopic
 procedures. Although dedicated devices are on the market, digital
Hemostasis
and several laptop computers enable digital video capturing as a
The biggest challenge in laparoscopic surgery is conducting hemosta-
standard feature.
uen gunnou pue sumns ieaiodoseiul uonassp anssn suunp sis
aq Aeu siu inq 'siapioy aipaau oidossoiedel suisn pauoad aq
Standard instruments
considered an advanced laparoscopic skill. Placing ligatures can also
be done through extracorporeal knot tying in which each throw of a
A basic set of instruments for laparoscopic surgery contains grasping
surgeon's knot is made outside the body and pushed down into the
forceps (Kelly, Babcock, etc), a biopsy forceps, a palpation probe, scis-
abdominal cavity using a knot pusher. Another way is to push down
sors, and bipolar forceps or other vessel-sealing device (Fig. 24-4). For
an extracorporeally tied slip-knot or to use commercially available
cats we recommend the use of 3 mm pediatric instruments.° A
pre-tied loops (Endoloop. Ethicon).266 Pre-tied loops are made for
suction/irrigation device can be helpful to maintain visualization of
human surgery and may be too big in suture size and length for the
tissue structures in case of hemorrhage, which can dramatically
small feline patient. Alternatively, most procedures can be performed
obscure the surgical feld. Because the smallest vessel-sealing devices
using electrosurgery or other devices designed for hemostasis, greatly
are 5 mm in diameter, port size needs to be sacrificed for ease and
improving the ease of surgery and decreasing surgery duration.7
speed of surgery in certain cats.
 The most economical, relatively safe and good quality hemostatic
Trocars/cannulas
devices are available as reusable autoclavable equipment and these
can be connected to a standard bipolar electrocoagulation unit.
A trocar is the combination of a cannula (or sleeve) and obturator.
Another advantage is that bipolar forceps come in a 3 mm diameter
Cannulas function as instrument portals in the abdominal wall. Place-
size Bipolar devices enable faster and better hemostasis of blood
ment through the abdominal wall can be facilitated by the use of a
vessels compared to monopolar devices.6 A major disadvantage of
sharp obturator. Puncturing the abdominal wall with a sharp trocar
 monopolar electrocoagulation is the chance of alternate site burns due
Apoq pue einuue uaamiaq iy iua e suear jo aseueape aun seu
wall. A disadvantage is the risk of damaging an organ iatrogenically
coagulation at a location of highest electrical resistance (thinnest
during blind enty (i.e, placement of primary trocar). A safer entry
point) away from the intended location of instrument contact in
may be facilitated by using a blunt threaded cannula without an
uassp anss saiaua jo sueau iauo or's'saims a-apipad
obturator, which has the benefit of also resulting in a tight fit.65 A
and hemostasis are ultrasonic energy (Harmonic scalpel, Ethicon).
blunt trocar can be used with an open entry technique. A cannula for
impedance-controlled pulsed bipolar energy vessel sealer/divider
258
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
forceps combined with sharp dissection (Ligasure, Tyco/ValleyLabs:
advantage over ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsies in that
PlasmaKinetic, Gyrus Medical), and surgical laser2? (see Fig. 24-9).
better quality tissue samples can be obtained, the lesions are clearly
There are also several more economical vessel sealer/divider devices
visible and magnifed through the endoscope allowing observation
combining regular bipolar forceps with sharp dissection (BiCOAG,
 and biopsy of smaller (metastatic) lesions. Furthermore because of
Gyrus Medical; HotBlade, Patton Surgical). Vessel sealer/divider
excellent control of hemorrhage from biopsy sites, larger biopsies can
instruments are very useful for laparoscopic tissue dissection because
be obtained. The advantage of laparoscopy over laparotomy is obvious,
coagulation and dissection is performed with the same instrument
except that laparoscopy cannot always replace a complete exploratory
[see Fig. 24-9). These devices do measure at least 5 mm in diameter
laparotomy. On the other hand, a laparoscopic exploration of the
and thus require larger cannulas. Additionally, most devices have a
relatively large beak, making application in a small space difficult.
tumor staging.7l The list of surgical indications is growing as knowl.
raai u u oi aie siade di pue siadeis siossoee ison
edge and experience are expanding. Because of its minimally invasive
(some 5 mm versions exist) and are expensive. Impedance-controlled
 nature there are few contraindications for laparoscopy. Absolute con-
vessel sealer/dividers are relatively expensive and, although they are
traindications include diaphragmatic herniation with severe respira-
disposable they can be gas sterilized a number of times (up to ten
tory complications, septic peritonitis, severe cardiac or pulmonary
times or more when cared for diligently). The blood vessels encoun-
dysfunction, and conditions in which open surgery is clearly indi-
tered in the cat during the procedures described in this chapter are
cated.72 Relative contraindications include ascites, extreme obesity.
usualy easily manageable using standard pediatric bipolar forceps.
 poor patient condition, and lack of skills. Ascitic fluid can be removed
More advanced surgeries are only performed with vessel-sealing
before or during laparoscopy: however, obesity will also complicate
devices in our hands. The advantage of the laser is obvious: its small
auaq Aeu uopuon juaed iood pue Kagns uado jeuonuaauo
fiber size (0.6-1.0 mm diameter) makes it very useful for feline endo-
from a less invasive surgical approach. Furthermore one can always
scopic surgery. Air leakage can happen if an adequate washer size is
convert to open surgery when necessary. Adhesions from prior surgery
not available. The use of laser and electrosurgery may occasionally
 may also pose an increased risk of complications.
cause a signifcant amount of smoke or fog obscuring the laparoscopic
image, which can be cleared by releasing some of the gas from the
abdomen while fresh CO, from the insufflator enters the abdominal
LAPAROSCOPIC PROCEDURES
cavity.
Tissue biopsy
INDICATIONS
Laparoscopy is used for biopsy (Box 24-1) of a variety of tissues in
cats including the pancreas (Box 24-2), liver (Box 24-3), and kidney
Indications for laparoscopy may be diagnostic or therapeutic Laparo-
(Box 24-4). Pancreatic biopsy is a safe means to obtain a definite
scopic evaluation and biopsy of abdominal abnormalities has the
diagnosis of pancreatic disease in cats and a laparoscopic approach
 Box 24-1 Laparascopic biopsy
Dorsal recumbency
collagen sponge or gel foam into the defect. In case of excessive
For most feline exploratory and biopsy procedures we prefer to position 
bleeding. other options include the use of electrosurgery or vessel
the animal in dorsal recumbency. Depending on the organ of interest,
sealer, clips, or a suture loop device. The use of pre-tied loops is
the cat can be tilted in any direction that improves access. Some
 advocated by some authors for improved hemostasis with biopsies of
examples of the laparoscopic view in a cat in dorsal recumbency and 
the pancreas or liver, especially when hemostasis may be impaired,
Trendelenburg position are displayed in Hg. 24-6. The initial (camera)
such as in cats with liver disease. An edge of the organ is grasped
port in a dorsal recumbent cat is usually placed in the midline to
with forceps and pulled through the pre-tied loop, which is 
minimize trauma to muscle layers and caudal to the umbilicus to avoid 
tightened, crushing through the parenchyma and ligating blood 
penetrating falciform fat. Distention of the stomach by fluid or gas may
vessels and ducts. Our experience is that pre-tied loops are too big
limit access to the cranial abdomen, necessitating the use of an 
and custom-made loops of smaller material work better and are
orogastric tube to empty the stomach. Depending on the ease of
aul ol lersip isn! siossps ylw ino s! alduwes anss!l aul ladeaup
loj auo :pasn ale sjelod aaul lo owl isalalu! jo anss!l aul ol ssanne
ligature .8,28,71.73
the laparoscope, one for the biopsy forceps, and one for an additional
Left lateral recumbency
instrument, such as a palpation probe, laparoscopic forceps, or
hemostatic device. Positioning of secondary ports is directed by
A left lateral position has been described for laparoscopic abdominal 
intra-abdominal findings, using a triangulated access to the tissues of
organ biopsies in cats.28 Lateral recumbency can be used to review
buluado pioae ot qu isel aul ot lepnen paneid ane sjelod aul isalau!
the organs located in the retroperitoneal and lumbar troughs. In a
the thoracic cavity. Most solid organs can be biopsied using a biopsy 
left lateral recumbent cat, the initial port is usually made halfway 
cup forceps, either by grasping the edge of an organ or tissue mass or
between the caudal border of the ribs and the wing of the ilium and 
by entering perpendicular to the tissue surface. After the instrument is
midway between the spine and ventral midline.&.71
closed, a delay of 10-30 seconds allows clotting to start and reduces
bleeding after specimen removal. The tissue sample is then gently
Sternal recumbency
lind oi rou uayel ag pinous ae) ypeg sdanuoy aut bund Ag panouay
There is limited experience with the use of sternal recumbency in 
in an asymmetrical direction to prevent accidental laceration of
cats, but adrenal visualization may be improved this way. When a cat
remaining tissue, especially in cats with, for instance, a fatty liver. A
is placed in sternal recumbency, both the hips (ventral pelvic area)
quick but careful twisting motion may improve sample removal. Proper
and the chest need to be supported, while minimalizing the pressure
hemostasis should be observed before ending the laparoscopic
on the abdomen. The position of the camera port in sternal
procedure. Hemostasis may be improved by inserting a piece of
recumbency is 3 cm caudal to the rib cage, midbelly.
259
Section
51
The Abdomen
E
F
Figure 24-6 Images of feline laparoscopy. (A-C) cranial and caudal abdomen with liver, gall bladder, spleen and intestines. (D) Caudal abdomen
showing uterus, colon, urinary bladder. (E) Caudal vena cava and left ureter (pointed out by forceps). (F) Adhesion of omentum to abdominal wall in 
 previously oper ated cat.
Box 24-2 Pancreatic biopsy
A two-portal technique may be used for inspection and biopsy
 of the right pancreatic lobe with the cat in left lateral or dorsal 
recumbency.&,7z.73 However, for access to the corpus or left lobe of the 
pancreas, dorsal recumbency and a three-portal technique are advised 
 pancreas and care should be taken to avoid the pancreatic ducts and 
 major vessels, especially in the corpus and proximal right lobe 
area.az8.73 The distal end of the right lobe in a cat ends closer to the
larger abdominal veins compared to dogs. A vessel sealer or suture 
loop device may be used for larger specimens. Grasping the
 descending duodenum and pulling it medially allows access to the right 
lobe. Access to the left lobe and corpus may be enhanced by a reverse 
Trendelenburg position.α The dorsal aspect of the left lobe of the 
pancreas can be exposed by maneuvering the spleen and associated 
jo padse euan aul gz lubu aui on pue uonaip lejuen e ui wnuauo 
the body and left lobe may be exposed by grasping and elevating the 
great curvature of the stomach with Babcock forceps and opening the
 omental bursa by creating a window in an avascular part of the ventral
leaf of the greater omentum, caudal to the gastroepiploic vessels. The 
 Canial part of the greater omentum is retracted over the stomach to 
paea ag uen yneois aul essaau ll oes eawo lassal aul lae
ranially to expose the body and left lobe of the pancreas.
 Figure 24-7 Trocar placement for laparoscopic biopsy of the pancreas.
260
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
 Box 24-3 Liver biopsy
Box 24-5 Laparoscopic-assisted intestinal biopsy
A right lateral approach with the cat in left lateral recumbency is the 
A three-portal midline approach with the cat in dorsal recumbency is 
approach preferred by several authors, because it gives good access 
 preferred to explore the entire intestinal tract by 'running' along the
to the majority of the liver.28,7z.74 However, unless a liver biopsy is
bowel using two grasping forceps. If combined with laparoscopic
the only intended procedure, we recommend dorsal recumbency
sanpanoud asaut suebio lauio jo saisdoig pue uoe loidxa peuiwopge
and tilting of the patient in any direction to access different parts of
should be performed first because pneumoperitoneum will be lost. In 
the liver combined with a routine exploration of the abdomen.871.73
case of a focal lesion, the intestine is grasped nearby and brought
The falciform ligament can partially block the cranial field of view
near the instrument cannula opening. which is subsequently enlarged 
KAessanau Jl (9-tz bi) siey u! walgoud e jo ssal s! ing 'shop u!
under laparoscopic vision using a number 11 scalpel blade. The
the falciform ligament can be removed with the use of a vessel-
cannula, forceps, and grasped loop of intestine are exteriorized 
sealing device. The gall bladder can be percutaneously aspirated 
[eujwopqe aut u! (wn z Alanewixodde) uospu! pabdejua aui yonout
under laparoscopic guidance using a 22G spinal needle or can be
wall and a standard full thickness intestinal biopsy can be
removed Ilaparoscopically if necessary.
 performed.8,73 In case of several intestinal biopsies, the peri-umbilical 
midline portal incision is enlarged to 2-4 m. A loop of intestine is 
 grasped and the entire intestinal tract up to the stomach and down
to the colon is inspected before taking full thickness biopsies. If 
indicated, intestinal resection with end-to-end enterostomy can also
 Box 24-4 Renal biopsy
 be performed outside the abdominal wall. It may be helpful to place
a small Balfour wound retractor or a specially designed laparoscopic 
Laparoscopic kidney biopsies are usually obtained using core-type
(Aabans pidonsouedel paisisse-puey lot paubisap) lopeuan punom
biopsy needles, such as Tru-Cut needles. Biopsy cup forceps are not
Because of the flexibility of the feline abdominal wall, biopsies can 
Auo fl 'suoisal lepiyadns jeoy loj idanxa saisdoig Aaupiy loy pasn
also be taken from stomach, right lobe of the pancreas, and 
one kidney has to be biopsied, a right lateral approach can be used
mesenteric lymph nodes if indicated,71.73 without the need of a
because the right kidney is less mobile and thus more suitable for
larger incision. The biopsy sites are wrapped in omentum prior to
euaa e shaup yrog jo Asdoig loypue uoeaasgo loi Asdoig 
routine closure of the wounds in three layers. The benefit of an 
midline approach is preferred.
exploratory laparoscopy before the procedure is that the total incision
 The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency in reversed Trendelenburg 
length can be kept to a minimum. Also, the flexible abdominal wall 
position with 30-60° lateral tilt. A second trocar is placed to insert 
sasen asau ui lauag jo uoeloidxa paisisse-idonsoiedel saye
au ie aunssad paxa ol (sdanoj lo agoud uoedled) juawnsui ue
biopsy site after tissue collection to aid hemostasis. Gel foam or 
electrosurgery can be applied if hemostasis is insufficient. A 2 mm
skin incision is made to allow insertion of the biopsy needle 
perpendicular to the skin surface at the desired location (usually 
for animals <7 kg.52 and does not decrease total incision length com-
close to the kidney). The needle is inserted at a shallow angle into
 pared to a two-portal approach, but considerably decreases freedom
the renal capsule, directing it away from the hilus, to avoid entering
of manipulation and access to the ovary and is therefore not com-
the medulla with associated blood vessels.&.7z Remember that these 
 monly used in cats. An advantage in cats compared to dogs is the small
instruments are forward tracking. so the stylet is pushed into the 
amount of fat deposited in the ovarian ligament. In obese dogs, a large
anssi buunlui Agissod jais aut jo yibual ahalduon aul oj anss!
amount of fat may be deposited in the ovarian ligament, completely
that is not visible. The chance that this happens of course increases
covering the blood vessels and ovary, which significantly increases
with decreasing size of the animal.
aul ul juasaid Alesjdki iou sl iey sie ui seaiaym s'uoemp Aagins
 Ovarian ligament, even in obese animals (Fig. 24-9).29
Laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy
iossiede 'se Auieay ul szez iqio ieins azuu lm
pancreatic biopsy using biopsy forceps did not negatively affect pan-
creatic health or clinical status in a controlled trial.2 The most impor-
most European countries, because it is more invasive and has no
lpanp aie yoeoidde Asdoiq ieuai sidosoiedel e jo saseueape juel
significant advantage over ovariectomy.78 OVH can be performed as a
-so aaaas se aaeuouau jo lonuos ue aupy auyo uonezns
fully laparoscopic or laparoscopic-assisted procedure (Box 24-7).
au yo zi un ino on paoan uaaq sey aeuau ieuan Asdo
 Because the utenus and ovaries have to be exteriorized for removal
anyway, the laparoscopic-assisted approach is not markedly different
The signifcant advantage of surgical full thickness intestinal biopsies
pu 'ssauaiseaui jo iadsan u ypeoidde sidossoede Aiy au uoy
compared to endoscopically obtained mucosal biopsies of the
 in the case of laparoscopic ligation, exteriorization of the uterine body
stomach and duodenum (Box 24-5) has been clearly demonstrated in 
and cervix willreduce surgery duration. In order to facilitate exteriori-
cats with intestinal malignant lymphoma.76
zation of the uterine body and cervix, care has to be taken that the
caudal portal is made at a point midway between umbilicus and pubic
bone or even more caudally. However, a too caudal position may
Laparoscopic ovariectomy
interfere with the ventral bladder ligament We tend to place this port
In contrast to dogs, cats are most commonly gonadectomised inde-
after determination of the correct location of the cervix and under
pendent of their gestation status.
endoscopic guidance.
 Laparascopic ovariectomy (lapOvE) can be performed using a two-
or three-portal approach (Box 24-6). In a one-portal approach
Laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy
described for dogs52 and cats,7 a relatively large diameter (12 mm)
portal is required to accommodate a laparoscope with working
Feline (or canine) endoscopic diagnosis and treatment of abdomi-
channel. This large diameter device is not considered to be practical
nally retained testicles [Box 24-8) is relatively straightforward and
261
Section
5
The Abdomen
 Box 24-6 Laparoscopic ovariectomy
The abdominal skin is clipped and prepared for surgery from the 
canal. The uterus or round ligament is grasped using a 3 mm 
aul anbiuupat lehod-omi aul loy auog pignd aul oi ssanoid pioudix
diameter self-retaining grasping forceps through the cranial portal 
width of the skin preparation must exceed the level of the mammary
and a 3 mm diameter curved Kelly grasping/dissecting forceps
 glands, while for the three-portal technique the width may be within
through the caudal portal. The uterus or its round ligament is 
the level of the mammary glands. Cats are placed in dorsal recumbency
followed cranially until the ovary is visualized. The ovary is then
in a 10-15° Trendelenburg position. The operating room set-up for
sdaoy buidsea6 buuleai-jas ay busn puemdn paul pue padseib
pue uoabans aul g-tz aanbi ui pakeidsp si Aieao yal aut jo leaouan
through the cranial portal (Fig. 24-9). In the two-portal approach,
assistant are on the right-hand side of the cat, the monitor/endoscopy
manipulation is performed by use of a pair of single grasping forceps.
 tower on the left-hand side. A primary (camera) portal is made just 
passed through the caudal portal. The ovary is then lifted upward 
below the umbilicus (see section on abdominal access). After
 and attached to the ventrolateral abdominal wall by use of a
 establishment of pneumoperitoneum and insertion of the laparoscope,
transabdominal suspension suture. The suspension suture is applied 
 the abdominal cavity is inspected for abnormalities and entry-related 
from outside the abdomen, puncturing skin and abdominal wall and 
complications. A second portal is made under visual guidance halfway
ovarian ligament just proximal to the ovary, pulling the ovary to the 
between the umbilicus and pubic bone, taking care not to traumatize
abdominal wall.61 Care is taken not to puncture the ovary while 
the ventral bladder ligament. In the three-portal approach, a third 
applying the stay suture. Ovariectomy is performed using bipolar
 portal is made halfway between umbilicus and xiphoid process. The 
electrosurgery forceps and endoscopic scissors or another hemostaticf
third trocar is commonly angled in a lateral direction during insertion or
dissecting device through the caudal portal. We prefer the use of
 placed slightly paramedian to avoid entering the falciform ligament
pidosopua ym uoeuiguon ui sdaoy selodig pepad pepuens
The cat is tilted 20-459 to the right side. The ovary is located using
scissors or a vessel sealer/divider forceps (such as Ligasure) to
euinbu! aui woy saneuibio jeun juawebil punon io snan aut lauie
coagulate and cut in a caudal-to-cranial direction the proper ligament
or uterus just caudal to the proper ligament, the ovarian pedicle with
associated blood vessels, and the suspensory ligament (Fig. 24-9).
 Please note that the uterine vessels attaching to the ovarian vessels
are relatively bigger in cats compared with dogs, which may be
Anestesia machine
U paneid uaul s! Aeao aul 'snieis uonieisah ui sanuaahp Aa pasne
the left caudal quadrant (or held attached to the transabdominal 
suspension suture in the two-portal approach) to be removed after
 aul 0i anow juensisse pue uoabans aul Aueao lybiu aul jo uoisoxa
left-hand side of the cat, and the monitor/endoscopy tower is placed 
Assistant
at the right-hand side of the cat. This last step is not necessary if a
second monitor is available at the right-hand side of the cat (Fig.
24-8). The cat is tilted to the left side and the procedure is repeated 
for the right ovary. Both ovaries can be removed under visual 
Second monitor
guidance through the caudal portal by pulling them into the portal
with the grasping forceps and removing the cannula. If the portal 
incision is too small, the incision is somewhat enlarged so that the
ovaries can be removed. However, the ovaries are usually small
Surgeor
enough to be exteriorized through the original portal, sometimes by
applying gentle force (Fg. 24-10). The procedure ends with a routine
exploration of the abdomen (while manually closing the caudal portal
if necessary). The abdomen is deflated and the incisions are closed 
routinely (see section on abdominal access) with 4-0 absorbable
suture material.
One advantage of the two-portal approach is that the procedure
Instrument table
may be performed without an assistant. However, the fixed position
of the ovary and the absence of a second pair of forceps greatly
reduces freedom of manipulation. Furthermore, care has to be taken
Auopaleao pidonsoedel loy dn-ias woou buie ado a-tz ane
not to injure the abdominal wall during electrosurgical use because of
 of the left ovary through three portals, showing triangulation of 
the close proximity of the ovarian ligament due to the transabdominal
instruments and a coaxial configuration of surgeon, operating field,
suspension suture. Whether the advantage of a decreased incision 
 and monitor. 1, laparoscope; 2, self-retaining grasping forceps to grab 
length with the two-portal technique outweighs the reduction in 
pue uoienbeos anss!l iot shossinssdaniot Aabansoala 'e ieno
surgical freedom compared to the 3-portal technique has not been
dissection.
investigated in cats.
laparotomy. Furthermore the use of a small laparotomy incision for
cryptorchidectomy is strongly discouraged because of the need to
OTHER PROCEDURES
properly identify all associated tissue structures before excision of any
tissue to prevent complications.34.80.81 After a thorough patient work-
If performed by an experienced endoscopic surgeon, multiple other
up. cryptorchidectomy can be performed using a laparoscopic or
procedures can be performed in felids. As mentioned before, the feline
laparoscopic-assted approach.&334
abdomen is quite expandable, allowing a great space to work in.
262
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
D
Figure 24-9 Laparoscopic ovariectomy. (A) The uterus is grasped and followed cranial. (B) The ovary is fixated using sef-retaining grasping forceps.
(C-F) Examples of dissection of the ovarian pedicle are shown using bipolar forceps and scissors, vessel sealer/divider, and surgical laser.
additional instruments and expertise. The benefit to the patient needs
to be weighed against the increase in procedural time.
COMPLICATIONS
 Data on complication rates of feline laparoscopic surgery is limited.82
Anesthetic complications may be associated with respiratory or circu-
latory derangement due to pneumoperitoneum or Trendelenburg
position, especially in respiratory or circulatory compromised animals
(see above). In human laparoscopic surgery, the overall complication
'moh %s-I> woy auei Aleauas sdnoie Apnis aiel ui saiei
rates are strongly related to the difculty of the procedure performed
(ranging from <1->15%). There are no differences found in major
complication rates between laparoscopic andopen surgical approaches.
Mortality is generally less than 0.1%.83-85 One of the most important
factors is experience of the surgeon, the complication rate being
almost four times higher during the frst 100 procedures compared
Figure 24-10 Removal of ovary or uterus through caudal portal
Occur during abdominal entry, either by the Veress needle or primary
trocar, resulting in injury to blood vessels, spleen, intestinal tract,
urinary tract, or other abdominal organs. In dogs, reported incidence
of mild splenic hemorrhage from trauma during abdominal entry
from either Veress needle or trocar insertion (both closed and open
video-assisted procedures (cystotomy, cystectomy, cystopexy, gastrot-
technique) ranges from 5-19% 125,67.a6 We do not expect the numbers 
omy, gastropexy, gastric tube placement), tumor excisions, to organ
to be different in the cat.
excisions (adrenalectomy, nephrectomy and splenectomy). All such
Other injuries may occur during surgical dissection, manipulation,
 procedures have been performed at the authors' institution but require 
 or the use of energetic devices, especially monopolar electrosurgery.
263
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 24-7 Laparascopic ovariohysterectomy
Laparoscopic-assisted ovariohysterectomy
the right ovary and uterine horn are exteriorized. Following the
The same three-portal configuration can be used as for lapOvE (see
bifurcation, the left uterine horn and ovary are also exteriorized. The
 Box 24-6). An important difference with lapOvE is that excision
uterus and associated blood vessels can now be routinely ligated and 
of the ovaries and mesometrium is performed in a cranial-to-caudal
transected at the level of the cervix. The uterine stump is returned 
direction. The cat is in dorsal recumbency. 10-159 Trendelenburg
into the abdomen and a routine laparoscopic exploration of the
 position, and 20-45° right lateral tilt. After establishing
abdomen is performed before routine closure of the portals (see
 pneumoperitoneum and inserting the three midline cannulas as
section on abdominal access).
for lapOvE, the left ovary is localized and grasped using a
 self-retaining grasping forceps through the caudal portal. Tissue
 Full laparascopic ovariohysterectomy
dissection is performed using a vessel sealer/divider or by
In the fully laparoscopic approach, ligation of the uterine body/cervix
exchanging a bipolar forceps with scissors through the cranial
and associated vessels may be performed inside the abdomen using
portal. Thus, the suspensory ligament, ovarian pedicle, and broad
extracorporeally tied ligatures or laparoscopic suture loops followed 
aul ot dn uoipauip lepnen-oi-euen e u! papasuen ae juawebi
by laparoscopic scissors excision. If the size of the uterine body/cervix 
level of the cervix. The same procedure is performed for the right ovary
permits, excision may be facilitated using the same laparoscopic
and uterine horn.
bipolar or vessel sealer/divider device as was used for the ovarian
In the laparoscopic-assisted approach, the caudal portal is now
pedicle.79 The excised uterus and ovaries are exteriorized through a
dightly enlarged (5-10 mm, depending on the size of the uterus) and
slightly enlarged portal.
 Box 24-8 Laparascopic cryptorchidectomy
Auagqunoan lesiop u! paneid pue Adosoyedel loy paedaid s! len aul
and 10-15° Trendelenburg position. A wide surgical preparation of the
Aewud aul pawuoyad ag pinoys uoiban jeuinbu! pue uawopge
cannula for laparoscopy is placed just caudal to the umbilicus and the
abdomen is inspected. Usually, the abdominal testicles are readily seen
after entry of the laparoscope. However, if a retained testicle is not 
apparent, both internal inguinal ring areas should be inspected. If the 
vas deferens and testicular vessels are entering the inguinal ring. the 
 testicle is located outside of the abdomen in the inguinal canal or
inguinal fat. In that case, gentle external pressure is applied on 
the inguinal canal to see if the testicdle can be pushed through the
internal inguinal ring. If not, a surgical approach to the inguinal canal
 is considered.81 If the gubernaculum is seen entering the inguinal ring.
it is followed into the abdomen to locate the testis, which could be
obscured by other organs. Both inguinal areas are inspected, even in
unilateral cryptorchidism, to rule out other abnormalities.
Full laparascopic cryptorchidectomy
In a full laparoscopic approach for bilateral cryptorchidism, a three-
portal technique is used (Fig. 24-11). The second and third cannulas
 are placed under visual guidance and transillumination in a paramedian
 position midway between umbilicus and pubic bone. The testicle is
grasped with laparoscopic forceps through the nearest portal, while a
/aleas assaa io (shosss y pabueuoxa Aaneuatie) sdanios lelodia
divider device is used through the other instrument portal to seal and
transect the vas deferens, testicular vessels, and associated ligaments
close to the testicle. It is sometimes useful to switch the camera and
instrument portals around to enhance surgical access to the testicle. In
Figure 24-11 Trocar placement for laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy.
a case of bilateral cryptorchidism, the procedure is repeated on the
other side. Both testicles can be exteriorized through one portal, which
may have to be slightly enlarged. After routine exploration of the 
portal is made in the midline, midway between umbilicus and pubic
abdomen, COz is expelled and the portals are routinely closed (see
buluado jehod aul spuemot palind pue paggeyb s! apiisal aul auog
 section on abdominal access). An approach through three caudal 
iat aur yi Aessaau j leod auyi buiieua pazoaxa ag ol
midline portals may also be used.
outside the abdomen, the testicular vessels and vas deferens duct
are identified, separately ligated, and transected to remove
Laparascopic-assisted cryptorchidectomy
the testicle. In a bilateral cryptorchid cat, this procedure can be
S! lelod puonas aul ypeoudde jelod-oml e e pawoyad ag uen sl
performed for both testicles through the same midline portal, the 
 placed in a paramedian location at the side of the retained testicle in
abdominal wall being flexible enough to exteriorize the testicles from
unilateral cryptorchidism. With bilateral cryptorchid testicles, the second 
both locations.
264
Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
The most common intestinal injuries are thermal or associated with
 different risks of complications between techniques. No matter which
abdominal entry?7 and less than 50% are diagnosed during surgery.8
entry technique is used, the abdomen should always be thoroughly
There is no consensus concerning differences in safety between open
'adossopua au ym Anua eu ne Anlu paeiai-aua ioy paadsu!
or closed entry techniques for laparoscopy in human literature.8?
The abdomen is then again thoroughly inspected for unforeseen
 a se rls u    
injury before ending the procedure.
 REFERENCES
1. Wildt DE, Kinney GM, Seager SW.
15. Schippers E, Tittel A, Ottinger A,
26. Cosford KL, Shmon CL, Myers SL, et al.
Laparoscopy for direct observation of 
 Schumpelick V. Laparoscopy versus 
Prospective evaluation of laparoscopic
internal organs of the domestic cat and
laparotomy: comparison of adhesion-
pancreatic biopsies in ll healthy cats.
dog. Am I Vet Res 1977;38:1429-32.
formation after bowel resection in a
JVet Intern Med 2010;24:104-13.
 2. Rothuizen J. Laparoscopy in small animal
cnine model. Dig Surg 1998;15:
27. Webb CB, Trott C. Laparoscopic diagnosis
medicine. Vet Q 1985;7:225-8.
145-7.
of pancreatic disease in dogs and cats.
3. Keus F, de Jong IA, Gooszen HG, van 
16. Szabo G, Miko I, Nagy P, et al. Adhesion 
J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:1263-6.
Laarhoven Cl. Laparoscopic versus open
formation with open versus laparoscopic
28.
 Webb CB. Feline laparoscopy for
 cholecystectomy for patients with
 cholecystectomy: an immunologic and
 gastrointestinal disease Top Companion
 symptomatic cholecystolithiasis. Cochrane
histologic study. Surg Endosc 2007;21:
Anim Med 2008;23:193-9.
Database Syst Rev 2006:CD006231.
253-7.
29.
van Nimwegen SA, Kirpensteijn J.
4. Medeiros LR, Rosa DD, Bozzetti MC, et al.
17.
 Gamal EM, Metzger P, Szabo G, et al. The
Laparoscopic ovariectomy in cats:
Laparoscopy versus laparotomy for benign
 influence of intraoperative complications
 comparison of laser and bipolar 
ovarian tumour Cochrane Database Syst
 on adhesion formation during
electrocoagulation. J Feline Med Surg
Rev 2009:CD004751.
laparoscopic and conventional
2007;9:397-403.
5. Li X, Zhang I, Sang L, et al. Laparoscopic
cholecystectomy in an animal model.
30.
Alves AE, Ribeiro AP, Filippo PA, et al.
versus conventional appendectomy - a
 Surg Endosc 2001;15:873-7.
 Evaluation of creatine kinase (CK) and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled
18.
 Qulp WT, Mayhew PD, Brown DC. The
 aspartate aminotransferase [AST) activities
trials. BMC Gastroenterol 2010;10:129.
effect of laparoscopic versus open
after laparoscopic or conventional 
6.
. Sauerland S, Lefering R, Neugebauer EA..
owariectomy on postsurgical activity in
 ovariectomy in queens. Schweiz Arch
Laparoscopic versus open surgery for
 small dogs. Vet Surg 2009;38:811-17.
Tierheilkd 2009;151:223-7.
 suspected appendicitis. Cochrane
19. Mayhew PD, Brown DC. Prospective 
 Alves AE, Ribeiro APC, Di Filippo PA.
Database Syst Rev 2004:CD001546.
wvaluation of two intracorporeally sutured
 et al. Leucogram and serum acute phase
 7. McCarthy TC. Veterinary endoscopy for
prophylactic laparoscopic gastropexy
protein concentrations in queens
the small animal practitioner. St. Louis.
techniques compared with laparoscopic-
submitted to conventional or
Mo: Elsevier Saunders; 2004.
 assisted gastropexy in dogs. Vet Surg
videolaparoscopic ovariectomy Arq Bras
8.
. Freeman Ll. Veterinary endosurgery.
2009;38:738-46
Med Vet Zootec 2010;62:86-91.
St. Louis: Mosby: 1999.
20.
Bohm B, Milsom Iw, Fazio Vw.
32.
 Schiochet F Beck CAC, Silva APFF, et al.
. Lhermeltte P Sobel DS, British Small 
Postoperative intestinal motility following
Laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy in 
9.
Animal Veterinary Association. BSAVA
conventional and laparoscopic intestinal
healthy felines: comparative study of three
manual of canine and feline endoscopy
surgery. Arch Surg 1995;130:415-19.
hemostatic methods. Arq Bras Med Vet
and endosurgery Gloucester: British Small 
 Nickel R, Stirtzbecher N, Kilian H, et al
Zootec 2009;61:369-77.
21.
Animal Veterinary Association; 2008.
 Postoperative Rekonvaleszenz nach 
33. Vannozzi I, Benetti C, Rota A.
10.  Divers S]. Exotic mammal diagnostic
laparoskopischer und konventioneller 
Laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy in a cat.
endoscopy and endosurgery. Vet Clin
Ovariektomie: eine vergleichende Studie.
I Feline Med Surg 2002;4[4):201-3.
North Am Exot Anim Pract 2010;13:
Keintierpraxis 2007;52:413-24.
34. Miller NA, Van Lue Sl, Rawlings CA.
255-72.
22.
Naitoh T, Garcia-Ruiz A, Vladisavljevic A,
Use of laparoscopic-assisted
 11.  Divers Sl. Reptile diagnostic endoscopy
et al. Gastrointestinal transit and stress 
 ayptorchidectomy in dogs and cats. J Am
and endosurgery Vet Clin North Am Exot
 response after laparoscopic vs
Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:875-8.
Anim Pract 2010;13:217-42.
conventional distal pancreatectomy in
35. Mouat EE, Mayhew PD, Weh JL,
12. Davidson EB, Moll HD, Payton ME.
 the canine model. Surg Endosc 2002:16:
Chapman PS. Bilateral laparoscopic
Comparison of laparoscopic
1627-30.
subtotal perinephric pseudocyst resection
ovariohysterectomy and
23.
 Matsumoto ED, Margulis V, Tunc L, et al.
in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:
ovariohysterectomy in dogs. Vet Surg
Cytokine response to surgical stress:
1015-8.
2004;33:62-9.
comparison of pure laparoscopic.
36. Schiochet F Beck CAC, Stedile R, et al.
13. Devitt CM, Cox RE, Hailey Il. Duration,
hand-assisted laparoscopic, and open 
Ovariectomia laparoscopica em uma gata
complications, stress, and pain of open
nephrectomy. ↓ Endourol 2005;19:1140-5.
com ovarios remanescentes. Act Sci Vet
ovariohysterectomy versus a simple
24.
Marcovich R, Williams AL, Seifman BD,
2007;35:245-8.
method of laparoscopic-assisted
Wolf JS Ir. A canine model to assess
37.
 Munz Y, Kumar BD, Moorthy K, et al.
Ovariohysterectomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med
the biochemical stress response to
Laparoscopic virtual reality and box
Assoc 2005;227:921-7.
laparoscopic and open surgery. I Endourol
trainers: is one superior to the other? Surg
14. Hancock RB, Lanz Ol, Waldron DR, et al.
2001;15:1005-8.
Endosc 2004;18:485-94.
Comparison of postoperative pain after
25. Yoder B, Wolf JS, Jr. Canine model of
38.
 Al-Abed Y, Cooper DG. A novel home
 ovariohysterectomy by harmonic
surgical stress response comparing
laparoscopic simulator J Surg Educ
scalpel-assisted laparoscopy compared
standard laparoscopic, microlaparoscopic.
2009;66(1):1-2.
with median celiotomy and ligation in
and hand-assisted laparoscopic
39. Jones DB, Wu JS, Soper NJ. Laparoscopic
dogs. Vet Surg 2005;34:273-82.
nephrectomy. Urology 2005;65:600-3.
 surgery: principles and procedures.
265
Section
5
The Abdomen
 St, Louis: Quality Medical Publishing;
54. Rist M, Hemmerling TM, Rauh R, et al.
owariohysterectomy. Vet Surg 2007;36:
1997.
Influence of pneumoperitoneum and 
541-7.
 40. Mayhew PD. Advanced laparoscopic
patient positioning on preload and
68. Van Goethem BE, Rosenveldt KW
procedures [hepatobiliary, endocrine] in
splanchnic blood volume in laparoscopic
Kirpensteijn J. Monopolar versus bipolar
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small 
 surgery of the lower abdomen. J Clin
electrocoagulation in canine laparoscopic
Anim Pract 2009;39:925-39.
Anesth 2001;13:244-9.
 ovariectomy: a nonrandomized,
Bailey JE, Pablo LS. Anesthetic and
55. Kraut El, Anderson JT, Safwat A, et al.
 prospective, clinical trial. Vet Surg
physiologic considerations for veterinary
Impairment of cardiac performance by
2003;32:464-70.
endosurgery In: Freeman LJ, editor.
laparoscopy in patients receiving positive
69.
Hunter JG. Laser use in laparoscopic 
Veterinary Endosurgery. St. Louis: Mosby:
end-expiratory pressure. Arch Surg
surgery Surg Clin North Am 1992;72:
1999. p. 24-43.
1999;134:76-80.
655-64.
42. Gutt CN, Oniu T, Mehrabi A, et al.
56.
Luz CM, Polarz H, Bohrer H, et al.
70.
Thompson SE, Potter L. Electrosurgery.
Circulatory and respiratory complications
Hemodynamic and respiratory effects of 
lasers, and ultrasonic energy. In: Freeman
of carbon dioxide insufflation. Dig Surg
pneumoperitoneum and PEEP during
Ll, editor. Veterinary endosurgery.
2004;21:95-105.
laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy in
St. Louis: Mosby; 1999. p. 61-72.
43.
Ishizaki Y, Bandai Y, Shimomura K, et al.
dogs. Surg Endosc 1994;8:25-7.
 Freeman Lj. Gastrointestinal laparoscopy
 Safe intraabdominal pressure of carbon
57.
Hewitt SA, Brisson BA, Sinclair MD, Sears
in small animals. Vet Clin North Am 
dioxide pneumoperitoneum during
WC. Comparison of cardiopulmonary
Small Anim Pract 2009;39:903-24.
laparoscopic surgery. Surgery 1993;114:
responses during sedation with epidural
72.
 Monnet E, Twedt DC. Laparoscopy. Vet
549-54.
and local anesthesia for laparoscopic-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
44. Windberger UB, Auer R, Keplinger F, et al.
assisted jejunostomy feeding tube
2003;33:1147-63.
The role of intra-abdominal pressure on
placement with cardiopulmonary
73.
 Mayhew P. Surgical views: techniques for
splanchnic and pulmonary hemodynamic
responses during general anesthesia for
laparoscopic and laparoscopic assisted 
and metabolic changes during carbon 
laparoscopic-assisted or open surgical
biopsy of abdominal organs. Compend
dioxide pneumoperitoneum. Gastrointest
jejunostomy feeding tube placement in
Contin Educ Vet 2009;3i:170-6.
Endosc 1999;49:84-91.
healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 2007;68:
74.
 Rothuizen J, Twedt DC. Liver biopsy 
 Dexter SP, Vucevic M, Gibson J, McMahon
358-69.
45.
techniques. Vet Clin North Am Small
 MJ. Hemodynamic consequences of
58.
 Coughlin SM, Karanicolas Pl, Emmerton-
Anim Pract 2009;39:469-80.
 high- and low-pressure capnoperitoneum
Coughlin HM, et al. Better late than
75.
Vaden SL, Levine JF, Lees GE, et al. Renal
during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Surg
never? Impact of local analgesia timing 
biopsy: a retrospective study of methods
Endosc 1999;13:376-81.
on postoperative pain in laparoscopic 
and complications in 283 dogs and 65
Williams MD, Murr PC. Laparoscopic
 surgery: a systematic review and
46.
cats. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:794-801.
insuflation of the abdomen depresses 
metaanalysis. Surg Endosc 2010;24:
76.
 Evans SE, Bonczynski Jl, Broussard JD.
ardiopulmonary function. Surg Endosc 
3167-76.
et al. Comparison of endoscopic and
1993;7:12-16.
59. Fitzpatrick CL, Weir HL, Monnet E. Effects
full-thickness biopsy specimens for
47. Marathe US, Lilly RE, Silvestry SC, et al.
of infltration of the incision site with
diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease
Alterations in hemodynamics and left
bupivacaine on postoperative pain and
incisional healing in dogs undergoing
 and alimentary tract lymphoma in cats.
ventricular contractility during carbon
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;229:1447-50.
dioxide pneumoperitoneum. Surg Endosc
owariohysterectomy I Am Vet Med Assoc
77.
Kim YK, Lee SY, Park SJ, et al. Feasibility
2010;237:395-401.
1996;10:974-8.
of single-portal access laparoscopic
48. Duke T, Steinacher SL, Remedios AM.
60. Kolata RJ, Freeman Lj. Access, port
ovariectomy in 17 cats. Vet Rec
 Cardiopulmonary effects of using carbon
placement, and basic endosurgical skills.
2011;169:179
dioxide for laparoscopic surgery in dogs.
In: Freeman L), editor. Veterinary
78.
van Goethem B, Schaefers-Okkens A.
Vet Surg 1996;25:77-82.
emdosurgery. St. Louis: Mosby: 1999.
Kirpensteijn J. Making a rational
p. 44-60.
49. Gurusamy KS, Samraj K, Davidson BR.
choice between ovariectomy and
Low pressure versus standard pressure
61.
 Rosin D, Kuriansky J., Rosenthal Rl, et al.
owariohysterectomy in the dog: a
pneumoperitoneum in laparoscopic
Laparoscopic transabdominal suspension
discussion of the benefits of either 
cholecystectomy. Cochrane Database Syst
sutures. Surg Endosc 2001;15:761-3.
technique. Vet Surg 2006;35:136-43.
Rev 2009:CD006930.
62.
 Fransson BA, Ragle CA. Lift laparoscopy
79.
Austin B, Lanz Ol, Hamilton SM, et al.
 50. Rayman R, Girotti M, Armstrong K.
in dogs and cats: 12 cases (2008-2009).
Laparoscopic ovariohysterectomy in nine
et al. Assessing the safety of pediatric
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;239:1574-9.
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003;39:
laparoscopic surgery. Surg Laparosc 
63.
 Van Lue Sl, Van Lue AP. Equipment and
391-6.
Endosc 1995;5:437-43.
 instrumentation in veterinary endoscopy.
80.
 Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Johnson CA.
 51. Van Nimwegen SA, Kirpensteijn J.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 Cryptorchidism and monorchism in cats:
 Comparison of Nd:YAG surgical laser and
2009:39:817-37.
25 cases [1980-1989). J Am Vet Med
Remorgida bipolar electrosurgery forceps
64.
 Divers S]. Endoscopy equipment and
Assoc 1992;200:1128-30.
for canine laparoscopic ovariectomy Vet
 instrumentation for use in exotic animal
81.
 Birchard Sl, Nappier M. Cryptorchidism.
Surg 2007;36:533-40.
medicine. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2008;30:
52.
.Dupre G, Fiorbianco V, Skalicky M, et al.
Pract 2010;13:171-85.
325-36; quiz 36-7.
Laparoscopic ovariectomy in dogs:
65.
 Ternamian AM. Laparoscopy without
82. McClaran IK, Buote NJ. Complications
 comparison between single portal and
rocars. Surg Endosc 1997;11:815-18.
 and need for conversion to laparotomy in
two-portal access. Vet Surg 2009;38: 
66.
 Stoloff DR. Laparoscopic suturing and
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small 
818-24.
 knot tying techniques. In: Freeman LJ,.
Anim Pract 2009;39:941-51.
53. Rauh R, Hemmerling TM, Rist M, Jacobi
editor. Veterinary endosurgery St. Louis:
83.
 Keus F, Gooszen HG, van Laarhoven CJ.
 KE. Influence of pneumoperitoneum and
Mosby: 1999. p. 73-91.
Open, small-incision, or laparoscopic
patient positioning on respiratory system
67.
 Mayhew PD, Brown DC. Comparison 
cholecystectomy for patients with
compliance. J Clin Anesth 2001;13:
of three techniques for ovarian pedicle
symptomatic cholecystolithiasis. An
361-5.
hemostasis during laparoscopic-assisted
 overview of Cochrane Hepato-Biliary
266
 Endoscopic surgery in cats: Laparoscopy
Chapter
24
Group reviews. Cochrane Database Syst
86. Fiorbianco V, Skalicky M, Dorner I, et al.
and comparison with the open
Rev 2010:CD008318.
 Right intercostal insertion of Veress needle
experience. Eur Urol 2009;55:836-50.
 84. Fahlenkamp D, Rassweiler I, Fornara P.
for laparoscopy in dogs: a comparative
 88. Lam A, Khong SY, Bignardi T. Principles 
 et al. Complications of laparoscopic
study of two entry points. American
and strategies for dealing with
 procedures in urology: experience with
 college of veterinary surgeons 19th
complications in laparoscopy Curr Opin
2,407 procedures at 4 German centers.
 Annual Scientific Meeting: Helsinki;
Obstet Gynecol 2010;22:315-19.
1 Urol 1999;162:765-70; discussion 70-1.
2010.
89. Ahmad G, Duffy JM, Phillips K, Watson 
 85. Makai G, Isaacson K. Complications of 
87.
Breda A, Finelli A, Janetschek G, et al.
A. Laparoscopic entry techniques.
gynecologic laparoscopy. Clin Obstet 
Complications of laparoscopic surgery for
Cochrane Database Syst Rev
Gynecol 2009;52:401-11.
 renal masses: prevention, management,
2008:CD006583.
267
25
tel
Abdominal wall hernias and ruptures
K.M. Pratschke
Cats are prone to abdominal wall hernias and ruptures either as con-
alba after passing round the rectus abdominis. Towards the midline
genital abnormalities or more often as a result of trauma. Concurrent
and frequently more severe life-threatening injuries may mask the
aponeurosis of the IAO and EAO. The IAO has a free caudal margin.
rupture and it may only become apparent when the owner notices a
which is important with regard to the formation of the inguinal canal.
swelling, or secondary signs due to strangulation of herniated organs
 In the dog, the cremaster muscle is formed from a caudal slip of
Occur. This chapter aims to cover the anatomy, diagnosis, and treat-
muscle from the IAO, but in the cat the levator scroti muscle replaces
 ment of the reported abdominal wall hernias and ruptures in cats.
the cremaster, which is absent. The levator scroti muscle is formed
from fibers of the caudoventral border of the external anal sphincter
 and the pars caudalis of the external anal sphincter.
The ransversus abdominis (TAB) arises from the inner surfaces
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 of the last ribs and the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae.
 The fibers run transversely internal to the rectus abdominis to their
Abdominal wall12
aponeurotic insertion at the midline.
 The rectus abdominis (RA) is a broad band of muscle on either side
The muscles of the abdominal wallfall into two groups, the ventro-
 of the linea alba that has a segmental appearance caused by irregular
lateral and the sublumbar. The sublumbar group are more properly
 transverse septae It takes its origin from the ventral surfaces of the rib
considered part of the girdle division of hind limb musculature The
cartilages and inserts at the pelvic brim via the strong prepubic tendon
muscles within the ventrolateral group comprise the flank and
in dogs. It has been speculated that in cats the strong attachments of
abdominal wall muscles which are of more immediate relevance for
abdominal hernias.
plus the EAO muscle aponeurosis to the medial thigh may serve the
The intrinsic musculature of the fank and abdominal wall com-
same function as the prepubic tendon does in the dog.4.5 Despite the
prises three broad, fleshy sheets that lie one on top of the other, with
ndad e on ianan on aed piepueis si il auaa orieu
contrasting orientation of muscle fibers. Ventrally each is continued
tendon in cats (Fig. 25-1).
by means of an aponeurotic tendon that has a main insertion along
The rectus sheath is the term used for the anatomic arrangement of
the linea alba. A fourth muscle, the rectus abdominis, lies along the
the aponeuroses from the IAO, EAO and TAB around the RA. The EAO
ventral abdominal wall to either side of the linea alba, where it is
aponeurosis always lies external to the RA, but the IAO aponeurosis
ensheathed by these aponeurotic tendons.
may lie either internal or external, depending on the portion of the
The external abdominal oblique (EAO) muscle has its origin over the
abdominal wall studied. In the cranial third of the abdomen, fbers
lateral surfaces of the ribs and the lumbar fascia from where the bulk
 pass both internal and external to the RA, but from the umbilicus
of the fibers run caudoventrally, radiating outwards slightly. The
caudally all fbers pass external. All fascial structures lying external to
aponeurosis of the EAO divides into two crura, with the larger medial
the RA are termed the extermal sheath or external leaf, while those lying
cus terminating on the linea alba after passing around the rectus
internal to the RA are termed the internal sheath or leaf. The internal
abdominis. The smaller lateral crus attaches to fascia over the ilio-
rectus sheath is lined by a thin layer of transversalis fascia and
psoas, and the pubic brim lateral to the insertion of the rectus
peritoneum.
abdominis.
 The linea alba is the ventral midline fibrous zone where the right
The internal abdominal oblique (IAO) muscle arises predominantly
 and left abdominal walls meet. In cats the linea alba is a broad white
from the tuber coxa, with smaller points of origin from the lateral crus
band, typically up to 3-4 mm wide, whereas in the dog the linea alba
 of the EAO, thoracolumbar fascia and the transverse processes of the
is a shallow trough rarely more than 2 mm wide.
lumbar vertebrae. The fibers of the IAO run largely caudoventrally.
The inguinal canal is located adjacent to the groin, between the
and the central fascicles insert via an aponeurotic tendon to the linea 
fleshy part of the IAO on one side and the lateral crus of the EAO
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00025-1
269
Section
5
The Abdomen
Internal 
abdominal
oblique
Extemal
abdominal
oblique
Rectus
abdominis
Linea alba 
Transversus
abdominis
Figure 25-2 The arrowheads in this figure show the line of the
 Superficial
peritoneal sheet that covers the entrance to the inguinal canal in a
inguinal
Attachments of
ring
extending into the inguinal ring. and no visible vaginal process.
External abdominal
medial 
(Courtesy of Joshua Miigram.)
oblique aponeuroses
crus
lateral
CrUS
not have a sacrotuberous ligament.* The principal structure contained
within the perineum is the pelvic diaphragm. This is a muscular
External
structure consisting of the coccygeal and levator ani muscles, together
Femoral avn
pudendal av
with their internal and external fascial coverings. These muscles are
anchored to the caudal vertebrae and pelvis. The ischiorectal fossa is
a wedge-shaped depression formed between the external anal sphinc-
ter, levator ani and coccygeal muscles medially, the internal obturator
muscle ventrally, and the superficial gluteal muscle laterally. The
 Figure 25-1 Cats do not have a structure that fits the precise description
pudendal nerve and internal pudendal artery and vein pass into the
buos aun aaamoh shop ui uopuan igndaid aut jo aueeadde pue
fossa on the ventrolateral surface of the coccygeus before passing
attachments of the medial and lateral crura of the superficial inguinal
across the dorsal surface of the internal obturator muscle.
ring on the iliopubic eminence, plus the external abdominal oblique
(EAO) muscle aponeurosis to the medial thigh may serve the same
pannid s! ovi aui bop aut ui saop uopuan pigndad aui se uouny
excised on the right side of this diagram to show the relationship of the
QASSIFICATION OF HERNIAS AND RUPTURES
underlying rectus abdominis (RA) to the crura of the superficial inguinal
The term hernia is used where the defect is congenital, due to a failure
and external pudendal artery and vein, are important to note from the
of embryonic signaling and fusion, and a distinct hernia ring and
point of view of surgery in this area.
sac will exist. The term rupture is used where the defect is acquired,
typically traumatically. Ruptures do not have a distinct hernia ring and
sac Therefore, although the terms 'hernia' and 'rupture' are not syn-
'ga qeaueuaui pasn aie Aau supuos uea iy 'snou
on the other. Other than where the external pudendal vessels, the
diaphragmatic hernia/diaphragmatic rupture, or perineal hermia/
 genitofemoral nerve, andthe spermatic cord (male) or vaginal process
 perineal rupture In this chapter the term hernia will be used, although
a ul anss aey auo suuos i ieu au yn sed (aea)
the reader should understand that this also includes ruptures
uay on 'ieus leuu a yniu saeuiaa unauad au so
(Table 25-1).
the vaginal tunic around the spermatic cord and testis while in the
bitch it envelops the round ligament of the uterus and is called the
Anatomical location
vaginal process. Recent dissection of eleven embalmed adult female
cats, however, failed to identify any evidence of either a vaginal ring
Describing the anatomical locations is probably the most common
or process. Similar anatomic information is not currently available
way of classifying hernias, e.g., umbilical, inguinal, or perineal. Exter-
in the literature for male cats; however, anatomic dissection of three 
nal abdominal hernias are defects in the external abdominal wall that
male cadavers identified a consistent vaginal tunic with no evidence
allow protrusion of abdominal contents; intermal abdominal hemias are
 of a vaginal process (personal communication, Joshua Milgram; also 
those that occur through a ring of tissue contained within the
Fig. 25-2).
abdomen, eg, hiatal hernia.
The deep inguinal ring is a slit-like entrance to the abdomen along
the free caudal edge of the IAO, while the superficial inguinal ring is
Congenital or acquired
 contained between the two crura of the EAO aponeurosis.
A congenital defect is present from birth and is usually due to failure
 Pelvic diaphragm1-3
of embryonic signaling and fusion, such as with certain umbilical
hernias. Although the defect or hernia ring is present from birth.
 The perineum describes the part ofthe body wall that covers the pelvic
herniation may not necessarily manifest until later in life An acquired
outlet, and surrounds the anal and urogenital canals. The sacrotuber-
hernia occurs sometime after birth, and is usually traumatic or iatro-
ous ligaments in the dog form the lateral borders; cats, however, do
genic in origin, although some may be degenerative.
270
Abdominal wall hermias and ruptures
Chapter
25
to palpating the hernia this can suggest ischemic damage or excessive
Table 25-1 Definition of common terms used in relation
 pressure accumulation, while color changes over the skin surface may
to hernias
reflect deeper vascular compromise or inflammation secondary to fat
Or other tissue necrosis. Gastrointestinal signs such as anorexia or
Term
Comments
vomiting may develop with entrapment of intestinal loops, or urinary
Hernia
tract obstruction with post-renal azotemia where the bladder is
Protrusion of an organ, in whole or in part 
involved. Rectal examination is essential if there is any suspicion of
through a defect in the wall of the anatomical
cavity within which it normally lies. The terms
 perineal hernia.
 Further comments specific to each type of abdominal hernia follow
"hernia’ and 'rupture' are not synonymous,
although for certain conditions they are used
later in this chapter.
interchangeably e.g. diaphragmatic hernia/
diaphragmatic rupture or perineal hernia/perineal 
Laboratory tests
rupture
 Laboratory tests will not specifcally diagnose the presence of a hernia,
True hernia
Consists of a hernia ring/defect and a hernia sac,
which contains the hernia contents
10 Buuueid pue quaussasse jo jed zuejodui ue uoy Aeuu Aau inq
aul 'ssaigoid aaeiadoisod ssasse ot oium isuiee auaseq e apiaoid
False hernia
 Does not necessarily imply the presence of either
 extent of testing required preoperatively will obviously depend both
a hernia ring or sac
poo un leue sunon y queidmon suuasaid aun pue juaed aun uo
Hernia defect
 This may be a normal opening such as the
health undergoing an elective surgery will require less testing than
or ring 
inguinal ring: an iatrogenic opening such as with
one due to undergo a more complex procedure, or an emergency
incisional hernia; or an abnormal defect as in 
procedure.?
 prepubic tendon avulsion
Hernia sac
 Diagnostic imaging
This is a thin serosal lining surrounding and
 covering the contents of the hernia. In the case of
For patients with uncomplicated, small, reducible hernias, routine
abdominal hernias this lining will be peritoneum.
abdominal imaging is unlikely to be of significant benefit unless there
There may be additional layers of muscle, fascia
is a specific indication, e.g., checking for peritoneopericardial hernia
and skin outside the hernia sac depending on the
with a supraumbilical defect If the history and/or physical examina-
location and type of hernia 
tion are suspicious for entrapment or strangulation of organs within
Incisional hernia
This occurs when surgical closure of any body
'ydiay aq on Aial isou si uoeuexa punosein uau 'ses eiuau
 cavity fails or disrupts
Plain and contrast radiography may be useful in specifc cases.
such as where bladder involvement is suspected (Fig. 25-3). Where
traumatic body wall ruptures are encountered, further imaging is
always warranted to investigate not only the abdominal injury but also
 concurrent pathologies such as possible pulmonary contusions, pneu-
Contents
mothorax or orthopedic injuries. Advanced imaging modalities such
A hernia is reducible when its contents lack adhesions, are freely move-
as CT or MRI can provide excellent levels of detail, and a CT scan is
able and can be readily manipulated back into the anatomic cavity
strongly recommended for investigation of traumatic abdominal wall 
from whence they came. If hernia contents cannot be replaced readily
 hernias in humans.? These modalities are unlikely to be necessary for
then it is considered non-reducible. Incarceration occurs when adhesions
routine investigation of abdominal hernias in veterinary patients
form between the hernia contents and surrounding structures, such as
unless the hernia is traumatic and concurrent neurological injury is
between intestinal loops and the body wall in inguinal hernias. Stran-
suspected.
gulation occurs when vascular supply to structures within the hernia
is compromised. This can be from direct compression on viscera/
vessels; torsion of a long vascular pedicle; or contraction of the hernia 
UMBILICAL HERNIAS
ring around the contents.
These are usually congenital, and are often identified as inconse-
quential findings during routine pre-vaccination examination. The
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
abdominal wall develops from migration of the cephalic, caudal
 and lateral folds, with the umbilical aperture remaining as a normal
defect after migration and fusion of the folds.? Umbilical vessels, the
vitelline duct, and the stalk of the allantois pass through this umbilical
ough history and clinical examination, but thereafter is largely dic-
ring in the fetus, but the opening should close at birth, leaving the
tated by the specific type of hernia present.
or improperly formed, then a hernia may result. Umbilical hernias are
Physical examination
usually congenital and are thought to be inherited. The Cornish Rex
breed is listed as over-represented for umbilical hernias although this
Initial observation should cover the animal's demeanor, mentation
auo um paoan sm ie auai ui e uo pq aiaie si
and gait, hydration, and nutritional state. A thorough systematic
family.? Umbilical hernias should not be confused with congenital
examination of all core elements should always be performed. Gentle
cranial abdominal hernias or supraumbilical hernias, which can be
abdominal palpation may assist in identifying organomegaly, dis-
associated with peritoneopericardial hernia. Two reports have docu-
 placement of organs, or localizing pain, although in painful or obese
amiaq se sie oooi iad seay ieuauon jo auapui au paua
asuodsan u ued si aaul jl gupiemaiun aq Aeu uonedied siuaed
1.43-1.66 (umbilical) and 0.25-0.2 (inguinal);10.1 however, these
271
Section
[51
The Abdomen
falciform fat is unlikely to cause major problems in the short term,
allowing repair to be postponed until the patient is older (Fig. 25-4).
If however, the defect is large enough to allow herniation of intestinal
loops orthis is already happening then the hernia should be addressed
regardless of age In dogs there is a known association between umbili-
cal hernia and cryptorchidism; similar information is not available for
cats but the presence of other concurrent congenital anomalies should
be carefully evaluated as these may affect prognosis as well as an
owner's willingness to treat.
Treatment and surgical techniques
It is recommended not to correct umbilical hernias in puppies less
than 6 months of age as there is potential for delayed closure up to
this time; no similar recommendations are available for kittens.4 The
surgical technique is described in Box 25-1.
A
Aftercare and prognosis
Following repair of an uncomplicated umbilical hernia, the prognosis
is excellent, with recurrence being uncommon and aftercare being
 as for any routine elective abdominal surgery. Where there is an incar-
cerated or strangulated hernia, then the aftercare and monitoring
 required may be intensive and the prognosis accordingly will be more
guarded.
INGUINAL AND FEMORAL HERNIAS
Inguinal hernias may be either indirect or direct. Indirect inguinal or
scrotal hernias occur when hernia contents pass through the hernia
ring to lie within the cavity of the vaginal tunic In male dogs these
ns  i osse d ae s
B
and organ dysfunction because of compression. This condition has
not yet been reported in a cat. Anatomic dissections in female cats
Figure 25-3 Plain and contrast radiography can be useful for identifying
have confirmed that there is no vaginal process present; the literature
specific injuries. (A) In this case the plain films show loss of the ventral
-Bns ueuu ieipaue nq sie aeu u alqns au uo ana si
abdominal wall line with loops of small intestine outside the normal
au op au ul uaas ieu 0 1s sisixa pi i1a e ieun ss
confines of the body wall. (B) The ruptured bladder/urethra is not,
apparent rarity of scrotal hernia in the cat may merely reflect the dif-
however, evident without administration of contrast.
fering anatomic arrangement of external genitalia between the two
species. Direct hernias exist where the hernia contents pass through
reports reflect the hospital population in the US and Canada in the
the hermia ring but then lie adjacent to the cavity of the vaginal tunic
early 1970s and may not be generally applicable. Acquired umbilical
and are not compressed by it. These hernias tend to be large and are
hernias may result from excessive traction during assisted parturition.
less prone to incarceration and strangulation. Inguinal hermias are rare
or from clamping and severing the umbilical vessels too close to the
in cats and whether they are inherited is unknown.
body wall.
 In dogs the contents of inguinal hernias can include omentum, fat,
Omphaloceles are large midline umbilical and skin defects that
Ovaries, uterus, small intestine, colon, bladder, and spleen.15 There are
result in evisceration of abdominal organs. Most affected neonates
only 16 cases of feline inguinal hernia reported in the literature, and
either die or are euthanized at birth. Attempted repair has been
other than one case report with bladder herniation the contents of the
reported in a litter of five-day-old kittens; however, treatment was
unsuccessful as the abdominal wall was too thin and fragile to hold
in question, both inguinal canals were apparently larger than normal.
2 Aq pazaeieu iaa iiuauo e si si] sisosose z 'saiins
uo pasq sm stu "u aun ioy  5 pue yal aun ioy uu oz 1
defect in the abdominal wall through which the abdominal contents
suigiapun sies uat uony sioune aui Aq pauiqo suauanseau
frely protrude) may appear similar to an omphalocele, but the condi-
surgery for reasons unrelated to inguinal hernia, which suggested an
tion is paramedian rather than midline It has been reported only
average 5 mm diameter.
rarely in cats, and typically results in early neonatal death.13
Congenital inguinal hernias in dogs are more common in males
than females, possibly due to delayed inguinal ring narrowing associ-
ated with testicular descent,18.19 while acquired inguinal hernias are
Physical findings
far more common in females, associated with estrogen levels. It is
commonly thought that in cats there is no sex or breed predilection,12
 Umbilical hernias are usually identifed soon after birth, unless the
but reported numbers are too low for meaningful conclusions to
defect is very small. A very small hernia ring that contains only
be drawn. Contributing factors for inguinal hernia may include
272
Abdominal wall hernias and ruptures
Chapter
25
A
B
C
D
Figure 25-4 (A) A large umbilical hernia in an adult cat that developed an area of ulceration on the most ventral aspect of the swelling.
sutures of polydioxanone.
 Box 25-1 Umbilical hernia repair
The patient is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the legs gently
difficult. If adhesions are present they are carefully broken down, and 
extended caudally.
any tissues that show devitalization are debrided.
 Many umbilical hernias will be corrected at the time of other
 If the hernia is incarcerated it may be necessary to carefully
elective surgery often ovariohysterectomy. If this is the case then the
enlarge the hernia ring along the linea alba to facilitate
ventral midline abdominal incision is continued cranially to encompass 
treatment.
the hernia.
In rare cases umbilical hernias may be associated with large
 The hernia sac is bluntly dissected free of surrounding skin and
defects in the abdominal wall, such that primary closure is not 
either removed following ligation across the neck of the hernia sac or 
possible. Although tension-relieving techniques for local myofascial
inverted within the abdomen prior to abdominal wall closure. Umbilical
Pauisod asn ot s! anuaalad s louine aut ti'pagisap ae sanss
hernias are repaired with tension-relieving suture patterns such as the
mesh for such cases. If the hernia is supraumbilical, and associated 
horizontal mattress, using heavy gauge synthetic monofilament sutures 
with a diaphragmatic defect, then the diaphragmatic defect should 
such as polydioxanone, nylon or polypropylene.
be closed first, followed by closure of the midline defect as described 
Large umbilical hernias containing abdominal viscera require a more
previously. Any associated sternal defects should preferably be
extensive surgical approach, with the skin incision usually following an
reconstructed with orthopedic wire of a suitable diameter to ensure
elliptical shape around the base of the hernia to remove redundant 
rigid stability, although the use of heavy gauge monofilament suture 
skin, taking care not to resect so much skin that wound closure is
material has also been described.14
weakening of the abdominal wall structures from nutritional or meta-
of a muscular lacuna (containing the femoral nerve within the sub-
bolic problems, and obesity.14
stance of the iliopsoas muscle) and a vascular lacuna (containing the
Femoral hernias occur through a defect in the femoral canal. They
femoral artery and vein and saphenous nerve). Femoral hernia may
are considered uncommon in humans? and there are only anecdotal
citings in both dogs and cats 13,14 The femoral canal is in the caudal
together. One study of 258 people identified an almost 50% incidence
abdominal wall just lateral to the inguinal ligament, and consists
 of concurrent femoral and inguinal hernia.20 It has been suggested
273
Section
5
The Abdomen
that femoral hernias in small animals are usually acquired, secondary
to trauma (associated with prepubic tendon rupture) or surgery
Box 25-2 Repair of inguinal and femoral hernias
 auapiaa ou si aiau ynoue (saop un Ai snaua)
Depending on the intended procedure, the patient may be positioned 
support this.14
in either dorsal or lateral recumbency. although most surgeons prefer
to work with the patient in dorsal recumbency without caudal 
Physical findings
traction applied to the hind limbs. Complicated hernias or those with
incarceration or strangulation should be approached both intra- and 
 The most common presentation and history is that of a painless, soft
extra-abdominally.
swelling in the inguinal ring, although if contents are strangulated
Ayonon bulms aut jo padse leatel aui lano apeu s! uoisu! uy 
then the patient can present with vomiting, depression, abdominal
 parallel to the flank fold. The hernia sac is carefully separated from
pain, and evidence of sepsis. In one study of inguinal hernia in 35
 attachments to skin and subcutis using blunt dissection, and if 
dogs, vomiting of two to six days' duration was predictive for intestinal
possible the contents are reduced through the inguinal canal by
u palaui s! lappelq Aieuun aui io snan piaeie au Jl t'sisoiau
direct gentle pressure and manipulation. If the contents are non-
the hernia then the swelling may be large, fluctuant and painful on
reducible then the hernia sac is opened and dissection continued to
 palpation, or may be associated with hematuria or vaginal bleeding.
the entrance of the inguinal canal to be enlarged. This should be
Reduction of hernia contents (unless incarcerated) and palpation of
done in a craniomedial direction, taking care to avoid traumatizing 
the femoral and inguinal rings is facilitated by laying the patient in
tissues that will be required for closure.
dorsal recumbency then elevating the hindquarters. Even if a hernia
Once the hernia contents have been reduced, the hernia sac is
appears, unilateral careful palpation of the contralateral side is advis-
pes aul pue 'ajqissod se bulu jeuinbu! jeulaju! aul ol asop se pajeb!l
able to avoid missing a small or occult hernia. When palpating sus-
is resected. Sutures of synthetic monofilament material such as
pected hernias over the medial thigh, inguinal hernias are typically
polydioxanone, nylon or polypropylene are placed through the 
identified craniomedial to the pelvic brim, whereas a femoral hernia
parietal peritoneum, the aponeurosis of the transversalis, the IAO
muscle and the RA to close the hernia.
should be located ventrolateral to the pelvic brim. If the suspected
hernia cannot be reduced then palpation alone is unlikely to be suf-
Inguinal hernia
ficient to differentiate femoral from inguinal hernia.
The majority of inguinal hernias can be closed using the patient's
own tissues without the necessity for prosthetic mesh. The use of the
Treatment and surgical techniques
cranial sartorius muscle with synthetic mesh has been reported for
reconstruction of large chronic caudal abdominal defects in two 
Inguinal hernias should be repaired as soon as they are diagnosed, as
cats?1 and may be considered as an alternative.
 delayed treatment increases the risk of complications. Surgical repair
 If the inguinal ligament is intact, the hernia may be closed by
 mandates good knowledge of anatomy, to ensure appropriate suture
placing sutures of synthetic monofilament material between the 
placement and high hernia sac ligation. Straightforward inguinal
inguinal ligament and the pectineus fascia.
hernias can be managed by a direct approach, but large or complicated
 If the inguinal ring is enlarged or damaged, synthetic 
hernias such as those with incarceration or following abdominal
monofilament sutures can be placed between the inguinal ligament,
trauma should be managed through a combination of an abdominal
external rectus fascia and the lAo muscle to close it to approximately
approach and a direct approach over the hermia (Box 25-2).
 5 mm diameter.17
 The abdominal approach for repair has the advantage of familiarity
Femoral hernia
for most surgeons, and where there is a complicated hernia it can
provide better exposure and access (Box 25-2).
The approach to a femoral hernia is similar to that for inguinal hernia
repair. Good knowledge of regional anatomy is essential to avoid 
iatrogenic trauma and allow appropriate suture placement.
Aftercare and prognosis
Seroma or hematoma formation is the most common complication
of inguinal hernia repair, typically from inadequate hemostasis or
excessive tissue handling during surgery, complicated by the high
motion nature of the site. Exercise restriction and wound hygiene are
TRAUMATIC ABDOMINAL HERNIAS
important after surgery, and gentle massage with warm compresses
may help to reduce fluid retention. Entrapment of neurovascular struc-
-Badoisod uied snoiaqo asnes im ieues au yanoiun sussed saim
The most common causes of traumatic abdominal wall hernias
tively, and in people a chronic pain syndrome is well recognized as a
(TAWH) are vehicular trauma, and animal bite injuries, most often
 complication of inguinal and femoral hernia repair.20
involving the caudoventral abdominal wall and paracostal area.
As with all hernias, strangulation and incarceration can have a sig-
In one report of traumatic abdominal hernias only 18% of feline
nificant adverse effect on prognosis. A complication rate of 17% was
hermias were due to dog-bite wounds;2 however, a subsequent report
described in one report of 35 dogs, with a 3% mortality rate.1 Peri-
tonitis, sepsis, incisional infection, and recurrence of hernia were
reflection of the different patient populations seen by the two centers
responsible for most of the complications. There is little information
 in question. TAWH are thought to have a relatively low incidence
available regarding succes rates, complications, or prognosis for cats
 overall, with one report of 600 vehicular accidents documenting only
with inguinal or femoral hernias. Anecdotally, pelvic limb swelling
 two TAwH, and another of 123 cats with high rise syndrome injuries
due to edema is common after surgery for femoral hernia and should
again identifying only two.24.25
uasanei st aiau ssaun sep uaaas o any um suas aq
 It has been postulated that pressure from blunt force trauma must
 obstruction to lymphatic and venous drainage in which case revision
be distributed over a relatively large surface area in order to prevent
surgery is needed. Nerve entrapment or compression is possible
penetration of the relatively elastic skinyet cause disruption of deeper
within the hernia repair, and will cause postoperative pain and/or
less elastic tissues such as muscle and fascia (Fig. 25-5). TAWH may
femoral nerve deficits. 14
also result from shearing forces across bony prominences such as the
274
Abdominal wall hermias and ruptures
Chapter
25
Figure 25-5 Where blunt force trauma is distributed over a relatively
A
large area of the abdominal wall, it is possible to see rupture of deeper
muscle and fascial structures with the overlying skin and subcutis
remaining intact. This can mean that on external examination all that
is present is severe extensive bruising without immediate evidence of
penetrating wounds or disruption of the abdominal wall.
pelvis or the caudal rib cage, which tear muscle/tendon away from
bone.26.27 Where TAWH is caused by an animal bite wound the hernia
is likely to be complicated by contamination, infection, devitalization,
and hemorrhage Animal bite wounds often involve trauma to inter-
nal organs, including perforation of the gastrointestinal tract, and
these cases will require emergency surgical intervention as soon as
stabilized.
 When there is blunt abdominal trauma in the presence of a closed
glottis, hernias result from rupture of the wall from within-out,
because intra-abdominal pressure rises rapidly while abdominal
muscles are still contracted (Fig. 25-6). If pressure is applied while the
glottis is open, then the rise in intra-abdominal pressure is limited
B
and avulsion-type injuries are more likely, such as prepubic tendon
 avulsion or traumatic inguinal hernia. 4 Paracostal hernias occur when
 Figure 25-6 These pictures were taken intraoperatively from the patient 
the origin of the EAO and transversus abdominis muscle separate
shown in Figure 25-3. The muscular layers of the abdominal wall show a
 e e s a r r q rn 
longitudinal tear through which intestinal loops and omentum have
herniated to lie beneath the panniculus muscle and skin.
been associated with diaphragmatic rupture in people2 and it has
been suggested that it is more common in cats than in dogs. TAWH
associated with pelvic fracture gaps have occasionally been reported
aimdnu uopuatsiqndaid ym saseyisou ul os't'sie u ou nq ssop u!
steady enlargement is more likely to reflect secondary obstruction.
there is either partial or complete avulsion of the tendinous attach-
 Prepubic tendon ruptures are often associated with pelvic fractures.
 and sometimes concurrent inguinal and/or femoral hernia.
caused by rupture of the musculotendinous junction.
 In many cases the clinical signs of TAwH are non-specific and for
Unlike congenital hernias, traumatic hernias do not typically
this reason they can be overlooked initially.31 In some cases, despite
have a peritoneal lining although chronic cases may demonstrate
diagnostic evaluation, the diagnosis of prepubic hernia may not be
'peritonealization: It has been suggested that TAWH may be more
 made until surgery is performed for exploration and management of
 prone to adhesion formation and incarceration due to this absence of
other associated abdominal injuries. The presence and exact site of
a serosal lined hernia sac, although this does not seem to be borne
an abdominal wall rupture can be very difficult to identify on initial
out by clinical experience. 4
clinical examination due to the combination of local tissue swelling
and pain, so where there is a reasonable index of suspicion physical
Physical findings
examination should be combined with appropriate diagnostic
imaging. bearing in mind that ultrasound is likely to be more reward-
The most obvious manifestation of TAwH is visible swelling or
ing than plain radiography. Partial thickness body wall ruptures are a
abdominal asymmetry. Depending on the location of the hernia.
particular challenge to diagnose.
viscera may move subcutaneously under the influence of gravity post-
As a general rule, acute traumatic hernias will be painful, and are
herniation, in which case the location of the swelling may not be the
usually reducible at least to some extent Clipping the hair coat will
same as the location of the hernia. Movements that increase abdomi-
facilitate recognition of bruising and other wounds, which may help
nal pressure through contraction, such as coughing or vomiting, may
with localization. Chronic hernias in comparison are often not
 painful, and may no longer be reducible.
275
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 25-3 Prepubic hernia repair
It is important to position the patient correctly to facilitate a 
tension-free repair; this can be achieved either through standard
dorsal recumbency without caudal traction applied to the hind limbs.
or in a modified dorsal recumbency where the hind limbs are actively
ypeoudde lael syl o abejueapesip aul tiAjeuen palind pue paxall
is that it does not mimic natural body position in a conscious patient,
so what appears to be a relatively tension-free repair in modified 
recumbency may come under significant pressure once the patient is
 awake. The initial approach is by ventral midline celiotomy so that 
axet uen suebio pauolsodlew io pazileap pabewep jo juawssasse
(Fg. 25-8). In cats it is important to check the crura of the superficial 
inguinal ring and the aponeurosis of the EAO muscle in addition to
the lateral margins of the prepubic tendon. If there are concurrent 
inguinal or femoral hernias present then the prepubic tendon rupture
aul Aude bodot lewuou anoisan oi lapio ui isuy passappe aa pinous
femoral artery and vein and the genitofemoral nerve should be
Figure 25-7 This cat was the victim of an animal bite injury from a fox,
identified within the femoral triangle and protected during hernia 
resulting in extensive skin lacerations as well as a full thickness abdominal 
repair.
"uonisod snoueinngns pasodxa ue ui buiil lappeig aui ylm anidna liem
 A tension-relieving suture pattern such as the horizontal or
In this case the result was partial obstruction of the bladder neck in
cruciate mattress suture should be used, with a synthetic 
 addition to the traumatic injuries received.
monofilament non-absorbable suture such as polypropylene or nylon.
Absorbable monofilament sutures such as polydioxanone can be used
but it has been suggested that despite providing reliable wound 
Treatment and surgical techniques
lou Aew auouexoiprlod Auabuns lalje syaam xis ot dn lof yoddns
retain sufficient tensile strength to support healing of a prepubic 
rupture.3z Absorbable sutures such as poliglecaprone 25 or
lems and stabilization of cardiopulmonary function. A penetrating or
polyglactin 910 should not be used as they lose most of their tensile 
impaling abdominal wound, evidence of intra-abdominal trauma, or
strength within two to three weeks, while muscle fascia takes
a patient that does not respond to stabilization are all indications
approximately three weeks to regain even 20% of its original 
0l uaai si Auoud 'sase asaul ul (2-57 Bu] Aiains Auaiaa 1oy
zybuans Aunul-ad jo %0g uiban oi eaA e oi dn pue yuas
dealing with organ damage, displacement, or dysfunction unless the
Nylon willretain 81% of its tensile strength at one year and 72% at 
hernia is directly contributing to the emergent problem. If the patient
um papebap Auenbis pou s! auadoadhlod alym seas oml
 is stable and the hernia is not associated with any breaks or devitaliza-
the body and will therefore maintain almost all of its tensile strength
tion in overlying skin, then conservative management for several days
at two years.
may be warranted to allow conditions such as myocardial or pulmo-
Holes are predrilled through the cranial brim of the pubis to allow
nary contusions to resolve With prepubic hernias the defect that
 passage of secure sutures without excessive soft tissue dissection.
results is usually very large, and therefore the incidence of incarcera-
This is recommended even where it appears that there may be 
tion and strangulation is quite low, meaning that repair can usually
sufficient tissue attached to the brim of the pelvis to allow direct
-ae uy ou s aau paba  sep eaaas io paeap ayes a
tissue apposition as the holding power of injured tendon is
ment regarding the optimal timing of surgery for non-emergency
questionable. In the cat, sutures are placed through the fascia of 
TAWH. Some surgeons favor waiting three to five days to allow revas-
the EAO and then through the holes in the pubis, unlike in the dog
cularization and reduction in inflammation, 14 while others prefer to
where sutures are placed through the avulsed prepubic tendon first.
 operate as soon as the patient is stable to avoid further problems.13
luanbasgns pue juawaneid aiepey ot paneidad ae saunns i
closure. Once all sutures are tied, the linea alba can be closed as
A large area should be clipped and prepared for aseptic surgery.
normal.
particularly with acute hernias where the exact location and number
of defects in the abdominal wall may be diffcult to pinpoint and full
abdominal exploration is required. Such cases should be approached
by a standard midline celiotomy that facilitates repair of multiple
patient's own tissues as vascularized autogenous tissue is far more
TAWH, e.g., animal bite injuries, and allows management of concur-
likely to survive without medium- or long-term complications in an
 rent intra-abdominal injuries. With chronic hernias it may be appro-
infected or contaminated environment than with a prosthetic mesh.
 priateto make an approach directly over the site ofthe hernia provided
Many variations in surgical technique for prepubic hernia repair
there is no other damage present.
have been described; the most common method is the only one that
Muscle, fat, fascia, and dermal tissues that are clearly devitalized are
will be discussed in detail here (Box 25-3).4
carefully debrided around the hernia, and all foreign material identi-
 Other technicques for repair of prepubic tendon rupture include the
fied and removed. Hernias that result from sharp injuries without
obturator foramen suture placement method, whereby sutures are passed
signifcant tissue loss can usually be closed primarily following
through the obturator foramina rather than predrilling holes, and the
copious sterile lavage Where the hernia results from blunt trauma
use of a cranial sartorius muscle fap.14 The risk with the obturator
there may be extensive bruising. but usually little tissue loss, and again 
aul iapun iuaneo aie sanss yos Aue ji ieul st anbiuuoan uaeioy
primary closure should be feasible. Where the injury is caused by a
 aaaisaid ss a se uast lm uexy uu 'so ans
high velocity injury or animal bite injury, there is typically more
through these tissues down to bone. The cranial sartorius muscle flap
extensive tissue trauma, with bnuising, contamination, and often
was first described in dogs,33 and then subsequently in cats for prepu-
marked tissue loss. Wherever possible, the defect is closed using the
bic tendon ruptures.21 To use it in this way the muscle flap must be
276
Abdominal wall hermias and ruptures
Chapter
25
 There are obvious risks involved in choosing not to manage this type
 of injury surgically, however, and it is very diffcult to recommend a
 non-surgical approach as standard.
PERINEAL HERNIA
Perineal hernia is relatively uncommon in cats, and in contrast to dogs
the available information suggests that the condition is more common
in neutered than intact animals.34-37 Bilateral herniation is more
Susixa-aid aie aiai sase Aueu ul pue 'eiaeiun ueu uouuon
medical problems that could increase the risk of perineal hernia, or a
history of trauma.35-37 Conditions associated with perineal hernia
include feline urologic syndrome requiring perineal urethrostomy.
megacolon, perineal masses, chronic fbrosing colitis,34.3 and cutane-
ous asthesia.36
Contents of perineal hernias most often include rectal sacculation
 Or dilation, fluid, connective tissue, and retroperitoneal fat that may
contain small nodules and cystic structures. Rectal sacculation implies
expansion into a unilateral hernia, and dilation a bilateral expansion.
 Flexure or deviation implies rectal herniation into the hernia and is
Figure 25-8 Severe intestinal ischemic injury is demonstrated in this case
uncommon. Many perineal hernias are covered with a mesothelial
following a penetrating abdominal wound, which resulted in avulsion of
membrane, but it is not known whether this represents a true perito-
the mesenteric blood supply from a 6 cm length of jejunum amongst
 neal outpouching, or peritonealization as seen with chronic traumatic
hernias.38
potentially and imminently life threatening.
Physical findings
rotated through 180°, and then secured with sutures. This technique
A visible perineal swelling may be present together with a history of
may be useful if there is a large defect or very little tendon left for
am aau se paodai au yo au u inq 'uoedsuos pue suuis
reconstruction, but there is the risk of devitalization following rota-
no clinical signs prior to development of a perineal bulge.34 Where
tion. In both the reported cats, there was abdominal bulging at the
bladder retroflexion exists, then signs of dysuria and urinary tract
flap site long term although not at the adjacent prosthetic mesh which
obstruction will be present, and the case should be treated as an
was used in each case. This may reflect a difference in muscle fiber
uaun 'unen cn suanasqns sdoaap euau ieauad jl ouaiaua
types between the sartorius (type Il) and the postural abdominal
triage and stabilization may be necessary as discussed in the section
muscles (type I), or denervation atrophy, both of which could lead to
covering TAwH. Other clinical signs will vary depending on the pres-
weaker support This weakness was not associated with recurrence of
ence of predisposing or concurrent conditions.
herniation in either case.
Given how many cats have additional medical problems, a thor-
The use of synthetic mesh is indicated where there is excessive
ough history and a comprehensive physical examination including
tension along the suture line when using autogenous tissues alone.
rectal examination are mandatory. Routine hematology and senum
Either a mesh cuff, or a double layer mesh onlay can be used to
biochemistry plus abdominal imaging are advisable in every case and
augment any of the aforementioned techniques.
in some cases additional lab tests such as fecal parasitology and bac-
Porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) has been described for
teriology should be carried out.
repair of perineal hernias and its use has been suggested to augment
 prepubic tendon repair.4 However, the expected pressure that might
Treatment and surgical techniques
be brought to bear on a prepubic tendon repair is quite different to
that within a perineal hernia, and there is currently no evidence to
Medical and dietary measures should be viewed as an adjunct to surgi-
show whether porcine SIS can actually provide adequate support in
cal management, and not the preferred treatment option. Without
this location.
surgery, conservative measures will only temporarily control the clini-
It is usually unnecessary to place wound drains in prepubic hernia 
cal signs, while allowing the condition to progres.
repairs, and the potential for additional complications should be care-
 There are several techniques described for perineal hernia repair, of
fully weighed against their likely benefit before using them.
which those described in cats include the anatomical reduction tech-
The failure rate for prepubic tendon repair is approximately 15%.
nique, the intermal obturator muscle flap (IOMF) and the semitendi-
and in the majority of cases morbidity and mortality are related to
nosis muscle flap (SMF).34-38 The IOMF is now widely considered the
concurrent abdominal or musculoskeletal injuries. Complications
standard technique for perineal hernia repair in dogs.38
directly relating to the prepubictendon repair include urethral entrap-
 Some surgeons recommend administering enemas up to 12 hours
ment within sutures and wound infection.
 prior to surgery; however, the author does not favor this approach as
any residual fecal material will form liquid slurry that increases the
Treatment: conservative management
risk of surgical site contamination. Digital evacuation of fecal material
within the terminal rectum followed by placement of a rectal plug or
Conservative management has been documented in two cats for pre-
tampon, and/or a purse-string suture will maintain a satisfactorily
 pubic tendon rupture? due to concurrent open wound management.
cean surgical feld.
277
Section
5
The Abdomen
Whether it is necessary to neuter patients that are intact at the time
ul s'ie e ui aniuuan sul yo asn aul yo ahep ot moa auo Auo si
of repair is not at all clear in cats. In dogs, it is well accepted that
this case the semitendinosus (ST) was dissected and transected at its
failure to neuter male animals results in a significantly higher risk of 
midbelly, and then rotated to the ventral perineum. The authors used
recurrence,3* but no such information exists for cats.
the right ST to repair a left sided hernia, with the original medial
 If the anatomic reduction technique is used, surgeons should bear
border of the ST sutured to the ventral border of the EAS, and the
 in mind that the cat has no sacrotuberous ligament to incorporate in
 original lateral border sutured to the ventral aspects of the IOM. LA
the repair and the perineal muscles of cats are considerably less sub-
stantial than those of dogs. Sutures are placed between the external
anal sphincter (EAS) medially, the levator ani (LA) and coccygeus
(CO) muscles dorsally, and the internal obturator muscle (IOm) ven-
trally38 In dogs, the use of this technique is associated with a higher
failure rate than the IOMF, but the small numbers and lack of detailed
 description in reported feline cases mean comparable information is
 not available.
 The technique for the IOMF is essentially identical to that described
for the dog and is described in Box 25-4.38
The semitendinosis muscle flap (SMF) was initially described in 199139
aaul ot' zooz ui sop ui seiuay leauad jeua ioy Alleyiads pue
 Box 25-4 Perineal hernia repair using an internal
obturator muscle flap
The cat is placed in sternal recumbancy with the tail pulled cranially
and the hind limbs suspended over the edge of the table. Care
should be taken to ensure that good padding is placed between the
hind limbs and the table to reduce the risk of neuropraxia or muscle
damage postoperatively. Either a purse-string suture or anal plug is 
used to prevent fecal contamination during surgery, and both anal 
uojekedad pjidase jo lhed se pausnlt pue palidua ag pinous soes
A skin incision is made from the tail base to just medial to the 
Figure 25-9 The internal obturator muscle should be elevated
ischial tuberosity, and the hernia sac opened carefully by blunt
subperiosteally in order to ensure maximum hold for sutures. Relative to 
dissection. Great care must be taken to identify the internal pudendal 
dogs, the internal obturator muscle in cats often seems to be a more
 artery and vein, the pudendal nerve and its branch, the caudal rectal 
robust structure with a large muscle belly.
nerve. These typically lie in the ventral part of the hernia sac but may
 be displaced by adhesions in chronic cases. The motor supply to
the external anal sphincter (EAS) must be preserved in order to avoid 
 postoperative fecal incontinence. The EAs, the rectum, the levator ani
(LA) and coccygeus (CO) muscles are identified. A sharp incision is 
made in the periosteum along the dorsocaudal border of the ischial
tuberosity to allow subperiosteal elevation of the lOM (Fig. 25-9). A
 common technical error is failure to elevate the entire muscle, leaving 
the medial and lateral borders firmly attached to the ischium, thereby
limiting the degree of mobiliation possible. The IOM may be 
elevated as far as the caudal margin of the obturator foramen, taking
care not to damage the ischiourethralis muscle. If required, the
tendon of insertion can be transected where it passes lateral to the 
ischium to allow greater movement, but in the author's experience 
aui oi abewep jo ys!u paseaui ue sauen pue Aessanau Alaien s! sul
pudendal and sciatic nerves. Once the IOM has been satisfactorily
elevated, sutures are preplaced between it and the LA/CO; the IOM
and the EAS: and the EAS and the LA/CO. A synthetic monofilament 
suture such as polydioxanone, nylon or polypropylene should be 
used, and all sutures are preplaced then closed sequentially from 
dorsal to ventral (Fg. 25-10). The hernia repair is palpated for any
areas of weakness or defects, which can be closed with additional
sutures as needed. Despite the fact that elevation of the IOM leaves
a visible space over the ischial tuberosity, placement of drains is not 
required and wilincrease the risk of postoperative complications and
infection. Following apposition of subcutaneous tissues the skin 
incision can be closed with either skin sutures or a buried intradermal
Figure 25-10 Once elevated the internal obturator muscle is secured in
 suture. Where there are bilateral hernias it is routine practice to 
position by means of sutures placed between it and the levator ani,
repair both simultaneously, although some surgeons prefer to stage
coccygeus, and external anal sphincter. As a general rule fewer sutures
the procedures a few weeks apart.
are required to achieve a secure herniorrhaphy than are required when
using the same technique in dogs.
278
Abdominal wall hernias and ruptures
Chapter
25
and CO muscles. The distal end of the muscle flap was secured to the
dorsal part of the LA and CO muscles. A concurrent left sided perineal
hernia was not repaired; however, despite this, at follw up one year
later there were no recorded problems with defecation.
Needless to say, regardless of technique selected, it is vital to remem-
ber to remove the purse-string suture and the rectal plug/tampon after
surgery! It is good practice to make a note on the anesthetic record,
Or write a reminder on adhesive tape stuck to the patient's head, to
ensure that this is not forgotten.
Bladder retroflexion with perineal hernia is unusual in cats,5 but
where present a ventral midline celiotomy approach should be made
frst to allow repositioning of the bladder without torsion. Cystopexy
a e jn auan ad c paaa uaq s
use of additional techniques recommended in dogs with large or
recurrent perineal hernia, such as colopexy and vas deferensopexy has
i as iai pue snau ad ie i si n
prolapse, which were treated with a combination of bilateral IOMF
Figure 25-11 Colopexy has been described as part of the treatment for
transposition and colopexy (Fig. 25-1l1). The use of porcine SIS, fascia
lata grafts and synthetic mesh to augment hernia repair has yet to be
recurrent rectal prolapse in cats. The cat in this picture had a history of
reported in cats.38.41.42
severe recurrent rectal prolapse and also had large bilateral perineal
hernia. The colopexy was specifically included for management of rectal
Aftercare and prognosis
prolapse, but may also contribute in such a case to prevent recurrence of
 perineal herniation.
Broad-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended for the imme-
diate perioperative period, and antibiotic cover is typically continued
launo Aq shodau aser ul papionai saosino inyssasons pue te pmis auo
for five to seven days after surgery. The use of stool softeners and/or
authors.35-37
laxatives such as psyllium or lactulose is based on individual surgeon
 In dogs, factors that influence recurrence include surgeon compe-
preference, as is the type of diet recommended postoperatively. The
tence, failure to neuter, follow-up time (recurrence rates are greater
surgical site should be kept clean to reduce the risk of contamination
after the frst year) and the number of times hernia repair has been
and infection, and an Elizabethan collar or similar used to prevent
 attempted.3 whether some or all of these factors are also relevant
licking and self-trauma, which is a signifcant problem following peri-
to feline perineal hernia is unknown as the numbers documented
neal surgery.
are too small for meaningful analysis. Intuitively, it seems likely
The prognosis is generally good following repair of perineal hernia
that factors such as the length of follow up, surgeon competence and
in cats, with a 73% success rate for bilateral perineal hernia repair in
 number of attempted repairs may be important.
REFERENCES
1.
.Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG. The
 7. Alef M, von Praun F, Oechtering G. Is
editors. Canine and Feline Surgery Vol 1.
locomotor apparatus. In: Textbook of
routine pre-anaesthetic haematological
Santa Barbara: American Veterinary
Veterinary Anatomy 1st ed. Philadelphia
and biochemical screening justifed in
Publishers; 1984. p. 23.
W.B. Saunders Company: 1987. p. 51-5.
dogs? Vet Anaesth Analg 2008;35:132-40.
14. Smeak DD. Abdominal hernias. In: Slatter
2. Crouch JE, Lackey MB. In: Text-Atlas of
Henrotay I, Honore C, Meurisse M.
DG, editor. Textbook of Small Animal 
Cat Anatomy. Philadelphia: Lea and
Traumatic abdominal wall hernia: case
Surgery. 3rd ed. Phildelphia: WB
Febiger; 1969. p. 177.
report and review of the literature. Acta
Saunders: 2003. p. 449-71.
Martin WD, Fletcher TF, Bradley WE.
Chir Belg 2010;110:471-4.
3.
15.
 Bellenger CR. Inguinal and scrotal
Perineal musculature in the cat. Anatom
9.
 Klein MD, Hertzler JH. Congenital defects 
herniation in 61 dogs. Austr Vet Pract
Rec 1974;180:3-14.
 of the abdominal wall. Surg Gynecol
1996;26:58.
4. Beittenmiller MR, Mann FA,
Obstet 1981;152:805-8.
16. Hayes HM. Congenital umbilical and
Constantinescu GM, Luther JK. Clinical
Robinson R. Genetic aspects of umbilical
inguinal hernias in cattle, horses, swine.
anatomy and surgical repair of prepubic
hernia incidence in dogs and cats. Vet Rec
dogs and cats: Risk by breed and sex
hernia in dogs and cats. J Am Animal
2007;100:9.
among hospital patients. Am J Vet Res 
Hosp Assoc 2009;45:284-90.
11.
 Priester WA, Glass AG, Waggoner NS.
1974;35:839.
5. Beittenmiller MR, Mann FA,
 Congenital defects in domesticated 
17. Zulauf D, Voss K, Reichler IM. Herniation
Constantinescu lA. Clinical anatomy of
 animals: general considerations. Am J Vet
 of the uninary bladder through a
the prepubic tendon in the dog and a
Res 1970;31:1871-9.
congenitally enlarged inguinal canal in a
comparison with the cat. J Exp Med Surg
12.
 Howard DR. Omphalocele in a litter of
cat. Schweizer Archiv fur Tierheilkunde
Res 2007:14:79-83.
kittens. Vet Med Small Animal Clin
2007;149:559-62.
6.
Watson A. Vaginal ring and round
1973;68:879.
18.
. Fox MW. Inherited inguinal hernia and
ligament of the uterus in the female cat.
13.
 Crowe DT, Archibald J. Abdominal wall
midline defects in the dog. I Am Vet Med
Anat Hist Embryol 2009;38:319-20.
and cavity. In: Crowe DT, Catcott EJ.
Assoc 1963;143:602-4.
279
Section
5
The Abdomen
19. Waters Dl, Roy RG, Stone EA. A
abdominal wall hernia. J Trauma
36.
.Benitah N, Matousek IL, Barnes RF, et al.
retrospective study of inguinal hernia in
1998;44:568
Diaphragmatic and perineal hernias 
35 dogs. Vet Surg 1993;22:44-9.
28. Dubois PM, Freeman MD. Traumatic 
associated with cutaneous asthenia in a
 20. Chan G, Chan CK. Longterm results of a
abdominal wall hernia. J Trauma 1981;21:
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;5:706-9.
 prospective study of 225 femoral hernia
72-4.
37.
Vnuk D, Babic T, Stejskal M, et al.
repairs: indications for tissue and mesh
 Dorn AM, Olmstead ML. Herniation of
Application of a semitendinosus muscle
repairs. Am Coll Surg 2008;207:360-6.
the urinary bladder through the pubic
flap in the treatment of perineal hernia in
21.
 Sylvestre A, Weinstein MJ, Popovitch C.
symphisis in a dog I Am Vet Med Assoc
a cat. Vet Record 2005:156:182-4.
et al. The Sartorius muscle flap in the cat:
1976:168:688.
38.
 Bellenger CR, Canfeld RB. Perineal
an anatomic study and two case reports.
30. Mann FA, Herron MR. What is your
hernia. In: Slatter DG, editor Textbook
J Am Animal Hosp Assoc 1997;33:91-6.
diagnosis? I Am Vet Med Assoc
of Small Animal Surgery. 3rd ed.
22. Waldron DR, Hedlunh CS, Pechman R.
1989;187:955.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
 Abdominal hernias in dogs and cats: a
31.
 Friend EJ, White RAS. Rupture of the
p. 487-98.
review of 24 cases. J Am Animal Hosp
canial pubic tendon in the cat. J Small
 39. Chambers JN, Rawlings CA. Application
Assoc 1986;22:817-22.
Animal Pract 2002;48:522-5.
of a semitendinosus muscle flap in two
23. Shaw SP, Rozanski EA, Rush JE. Traumatic
32.
 Boothe Hw. Suture materials, tissue
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;199:
body wall herniation in 36 dogs and
adhesives, staplers and ligating clips. In:
84-6.
Cats. J Am Animal Hosp Assoc 2003;39:
Slatter DG, editor Textbook of Small
40. Bottcher P Thiel C, Kramer M, et al.
35-46.
Animal Surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
 Transposition of the semitendinosus
24. Kolata RJ, Johnson DE. Motor vehicle
Saunders: 2003;235-43.
 muscle for ventral perineal hemia repair
accidents in urban dogs: A study of
33.
Weinstein M), Pavletic MM, Boudrieau RJ.
in dogs. Retrospective analysis of six cases
600 cases. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1975:
 Engler Sl. Cranial sartorius muscle flap in
[2003-2005). Tierartzle Praxis Kleintiere
167:938.
the dog. Vet Surg 1989;18:286-91.
2007;2:93-102.
25. Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High rise
34. Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Aronsohn MG,
41.
Stoll MR, Cook Il, Carson Wl, et al.
syndrome in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc
et al. Perineal hernia in the cat: a
The use of porcine small intestinal
1987:191:1399-403.
retrospective study of 40 cases. J Am
submucosa as a biomaterial for perineal
26. Damschen DD, Landercasper I, Thomas
Animal Hosp Assoc 1992;28:431-8.
herniorrhaphy in the dog. Vet Surg
CH, et al. Acute traumatic abdominal 
35.
Risselada M, Kramer M, Van de Welde B.
2002;31:379-90.
hermia: case reports. J Trauma 1994;36:
et al. Retroflexion of the urinary bladder
42.
 Bongartz A, Carofglio F, Balligand M.
273-6.
associated with a perineal hernia in a
et al. Use of autogenous fascia lata graft
27. Perez VM, McDonand DA, Ghani A,
female cat. J Small Animal Pract
for perineal herniorrhaphy in dogs. Vet
et al. Handlebar hernia: a rare traumatic
2003;44:508-10.
Surg 2005;34:405-13.
280
[26]
Chapter
Peritoneum
D. Holt, K.A. Agnello
Peritonitis in cats is a serious problem that can often prove fatal. Mild
communicate directly with underlying lymphatic channels, facilitat-
 Or non-specific clinical signs can delay definitive diagnosis and treat-
ing absorption of fluid and particulate matter.
ment. Therefore awareness of the possibility of peritonitis, careful
examination, and appropriate diagnostic tests are necessary for a
timely diagnosis. Even with prompt and aggresive treatment the prog-
PHYSIOLOGY
nosis for survival is still guarded.
The majority of the peritoneum behaves as a semi-permeable mem-
brane allowing bidirectional diffusion of water and solutes. A small
SURGICAL ANATOMY
amount of serous fluid, formed by the action of Starling forces across
the peritoneal capillaries is normally present in the space between the
The peritoneum is a closed cavity that contains all of the abdominal
parietal and visceral peritoneal surfaces. The fluid has a low protein
organs except for the kidneys and the adrenal glands. The parietal
concentration (<3 g/dL protein) and resembles an ultrafiltrate of
peritoneum covers the abdominal wall and diaphragm. The visceral
plasma. In humans, normal peritoneal fluid has antibacterial activity
peritoneum covers the abdominal organs (Fig. 26-1). The peritoneum
against Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria.4 A normal perito-
consists of a single layer of mesothelial cells covering a basement
membrane.' The peritoneal mesothelial cells have the same embryo-
lymphocytes and macrophages.
logical origin as vascular endothelial cells? and produce surfactant that
acts as a lubricant.? The basement membrane is a fbroelastic tissue
out the entire peritoneal space over a period of between 15 minutes
containing glycosylated proteins, mast cells, macrophages, and lym-
and two hours. Contraction ofthe diaphragm promotes a cranial flow
phocytes and it covers a well-defined network of elastic fibers.
The
of peritoneal fluid. Relaxation of the diaphragm generates a sub-
basement membrane is absent in parts of the diaphragm, omentum.
atmospheric pressure that draws fluid and small particles into the
and mesentery.' The absence of the basement membrane in the dia-
 01 (,eieuois, slas [eauosau au uaamiaq sdes aaie[ smole uzeiud
diaphragm ('stomata') that communicate with the underlying lym-
 phatic system. Contraction of the diaphragm closes the stomata and
V
forces fluid into the lymphatic system.' This lymphatic system trans-
 ports fluid and other absorbed material into the internal thoracic (or
'parasternal') mediastinal lymphatic system and mediastinal and para-
sternal lymph nodes, then to the thoracic duct system, and eventually
to the systemic venous circulation.7 Fluid is normally also absorbed
through other sites in the peritoneum, including the omentum. 18
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A physical, chemical, or microbiological injury to the peritoneum
Figure 26-1 llustration of the peritoneum in the cat. P parietal
activates local defense mechanisms. These defense mechanisms fall
peritoneum; V, viscer al peritoneum.
into three broad categories (Table 26-1).*-18
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00026-3
281
Section
5
The Abdomen
Table 26-1 Local defense mechanisms of the peritoneum
Defense mechanism
Pathogenesis
 Removal of bacteria and particulate
 Bacteria and small particles are rapidly absorbed by the diaphragm through the stomata
matter from the peritoneal cavity
 Immune cells and systems designed
 Peritoneal mast cells release histamine, resulting in vasodilation and the exudation from peritoneal
to kill bacteria
 capillaries of fluid that contains complement proteins and opsonins capable of coating bacteria
Activation of complement system by endotoxin, other components of bacterial cell walls, damaged 
cells, and antigen-antibody complexes
au Aa paeap ae Aaui se awl awes aul re saobeud jeauoiad Aa paisabui Aipiden ae eaeg
diaphragmatic lymphatic system
Acute inflammatory response with neutrophils serves to eliminate bacteria that have not been cleared
by macrophage phagocytosis or the diaphragmatic lymphatic system?
Activation of peritoneal mesothelial cells, resident macrophages, mast cells, lymphocytes, and 
complement initiates the production of protein mediators called cytokines 
 Cytokines regulate the complex interactions between the inflammatory cells and result in
chemoattraction and phagocyte recruitment to the peritoneal cavity1.11.16
 Sequestr ation of infection locally.
Fluid exuded into the peritoneal cavity is rich in fibrinogen. Injured cells release tissue thromboplastin,
promoting the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin, stimulating fibrin formation from fibrinogen
The normal fibrinolytic system is down regulated in peritonitis, leading to the accumulation of fibrin,
which walls off bacteriai
 The inflammatory response within the peritoneal cavity and the
in the gastrointestinal tract. Polymicrobial infections present a signif-
cant problem because of bacterial synergism. This appears to be most
effusion of a large volume of protein-rich fluid into the peritoneal
important in mixed infections with Gram negative and anaerobic
 space. This results in a substantial loss of intravascular volume. In
bacteria. Anaerobic bacteria alone (such as Bacillus fragilis) seem to
addition, systemic activation of the inflammatory and coagulation
cause minimal pathology in experimental models. However, when
cascades causes further loss of fluid and protein and often disregula-
combined with Gram negative enteric bacteria, the resulting infection
 tion of vascular tone and decreased tissue perfusion.19
is considerably more severe.25 Ingesta, exfoliated cells, blood, gastric
Systemically, macrophages and other cells in the immune system
mucin, and bile salts are adjuvant substances that worsen peritonitis.
respondto endotoxin andotherbacteria-derived molecules ('pathogen-
Blood is an excellent growth medium for bacteria and hemoglobin
associated molecular patterns' or PAMPS) and endogenous mediators
interferes with chemotaxis and phagocytosis. Bile salts destroy perito-
released from dead or dying cells20 through Toll-like receptors to initi-
neal mesothelial cells and inhibit neutrophil function.
ate a complex systemic inflammatory response (SIRS). The SIRS
Buug euaeq aq pae uaum sias, se oi paaai si asuonsa
Urinary tract leakage
of endotoxin from Gram negative bacteria to the lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-binding protein on macrophages stimulates the release of mul-
tiple cytokines.2l The mechanisms by which Gram positive bacteria
damaged by external or iatrogenic trauma. Severe trauma to the
induce systemic inflammation are less well characterized but several
kidneys or ureters often damages the peritoneum, allowing urine to
substances they contain, including peptidoglycan, teichoic acid, and
leak into the abdominal cavity from the retroperitoneal space Urine
their polysaccharide-hyaluronic acid capsules have pro-inflammatory
is hyperosmotic and pulls fluid from the vascular space into the peri-
effects, including the production of cytokines (tumor necrosis factor
toneal cavity, resulting in dehydration. Failure to excrete urine also
[TNF], interleukin-1 [IL1]) and nitric oxide,22,23
causes acidosis and progressively worsening hyperkalemia. Severe
 The macrophage is the main cell initiating the systemic response to
hyperkalemia is truly life threatening. For the effects and treatment of
bacteria and proteins from damaged cells.1 ILl and TNFo are rapidly
hyperkalemia see Chapters 1 and 3.
released after macrophage stimulation and promote activation of
many of the inflammatory and coagulation cascades. A detailed discus-
sion of cytokines involved in sepsis is beyond the scope of this chapter
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
and the reader is referred elsewhere for a more detailed review.19
The net result of sepsis in peritonitis is a decrease in intravascular
volume, decreased cardiac output as a result of decreased preload,
 The historical and physical examination findings of cats with perito-
abnormal vascular tone and vascular thrombosis, leading to maldis-
nitis are usually associated with the SIRS syndrome The historical
'aseuep uesio pue 'uoisnyad anss iood moy pooia jo uonq
fndings most commonly reported by owners tend to be non-specifc.
For more information on shock and SIRS the reader is referred to
However, a history of trauma or penetrating abdominal wounds may
Chapter 3.
increase the clinician's suspicion of peritonitis. Gastrointestinal signs
may be associated with primary gastrointestinal problems (ie., foreign
Gastrointestinal tract leakage
body) or may solely be due to peritonitis. An icteric animal may
suggest primary biliary disease or associated pancreatitis. In both
The gastrointestinal tract is the most frequent source of peritoneal
primary (not associated with feline infectious peritonitis [FIP]) and
secondary bacterial peritonitis in the cat, common historical fndings
 are grown in culture, although numerous species of bacteria are found
include lethargy, vomiting, anorexia, and diarrhea.2 Weight loss is
282
Peritoneum
Chapter
26
another clinical sign reported that appears to be more frequently
definitively diagnose small volumes of free peritoneal gas; close atten-
associated with secondary peritonitis than with primary.26
tion should be given to the diaphragmatic crura, as they are often
Aiae ieauoad au u pue Aeiuen sun au u ses Aq pauu
Physical examination findings
caudally. Loss of serosal detail and ileus also suggest intraperitoneal
disease. Plain abdominal radiography may also diagnose diseases
underlying peritonitis, including gastrointestinal foreign bodies, pyo-
tend to be associated with dehydration and shock, and can
metra, cholelithiasis, and abdominal neoplasia.
include depressed mentation, inadequate hydration, pale mucus
membranes, tachypnea, tachycardia, weakness, hyperthermia, and
Ultrasonography
aie sisdas pue suoad ym sie sz-szuouos jeuonu iood
often bradycardic and/or hypothermic.2-28 Abdominal distension,
Abdominal ultrasonography (Fig. 26-3) is very useful for obtaining
which has been reported to be a common finding in cats with perito-
pue sundden juepenb noy pulla pmy ieauoad aa jo saldues
neal effusion, can be identified by owners or on palpation during
diagnostic peritoneal lavagehavebeen described forthe same purpose.
physical examination.2?
In humans, abdominal pain is an early clinical sign of primary
ultrasound-guided aspiration has a subjectively higher diagnostic
soad jo ioeui poos eaq otiou sieadde l inq ieoe'suoad
 yield than a four quadrant tap and allows fluid to be directly analyzed
in cats.24.27 The overall incidence of abdominal pain elicited in cats
without the dilutional effect of diagnostic peritoneal lavage. The hair
with peritonitis ranged from 38-62%.24.27
over the abdomen is clipped and prepared with aseptic technique. A
fluid accumulation is located with ultrasound and aspirated using a
syringe and needle The fluid's pH, glucose, lactate, and cytology are
Diagnostic procedures
evaluated (Table 26-2).33 Ultrasonography can also evaluate the
Radiography
Survey abdominal radiographs are often taken to evaluate cats with
clinical signs of gastrointestinal, urinary, or non-specifc abdominal
disease The presence of free abdominal gas with no history of recent
 abdominal surgery or penetrating trauma warrants immediate stabili
zation and surgical exploration (Fig. 26-2).32 It can be difficult to
Figure 26-2 Pneumoperitoneum in a cat secondary to intestinal
Figure 26-3 A cat with suspected peritonitis undergoing abdominal
perforation. (Courtesy of Dr Adrienne Bentley.)
ultrasound.
 Table 26-2 Cytological analysis of peritoneal fluid4&,2.63
Levels
Does the cat have peritonitis?
 Nucleated cell count
>13,000 cells/μL
100% sensitivity and specificity *
 Glucose concentration
<20 mg/dL or more lower than peripheral blood glucose
86% sensitive, 100% specific *
 Peripheral venous 
1.3-10.6 mmol/L (median = 6.2 mmol/L)
 Affected cats
blood lactate
1.2-1.6 mmol/L (median = 1.4 mmol/L)
Unaffected cats
 Bile crystals 
Presence of intra- and extracellular bile crystals
Bile peritonitis 
 Bilirubin 
Two to three times higher than peripheral blood levels
 Bile peritonitis 
Creatinine
Increased levels compared to serum. Mean abdominal fluid creatinine-to-serum
Uroperitoneum
creatinine ratio = 2 : 1 (range, 1.1: 1 to 4.1: 1)
 Potassium 
Increased levels compared to serum. Mean abdominal fluid K+ to serum K+ ratio
Uroperitoneum
was 1.9 : 1 (range, 1.2 :1 to 2.4: 1)
*, for diagnosing peritonitis.
283
Section
5
The Abdomen
abdominal organs for masses and abscesses and evaluate the urinary
 and biliary systems.
Cytological analysis
Cytological analysis has traditionally been used to evaluate peritoneal
uasap uieuos Aleiauae suoisnya ieauoiad sdas (z-gg ae) pi
erate neutrophils and macrophages. The presence of intracellular bac-
aud o uosed v p'sad snas g ssui si e
fluid and peripheral blood lactate and glucose concentrations is also
useful for confirming the diagnosis of septic peritonitis. Bile peritoni-
tis is diagnosed based on cytological and biochemical analysis of
peritoneal fluid. The diagnosis of uroperitoneum is based on a history
of either blunt abdominal trauma, recent catheterization, or recent
expression of the bladder. In the majority of cats with uroperitoneum.
the peritoneal fluid creatinine and potassium levels are higher than
those in the serum (see Chapter 3).35
Figure 26-4 Peritonitis secondary to intestinal perforations from a linear
foreign body. (Courtesy of Dr Karen Tobias.)
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE PERITONEUM
septic peritonitis in 54% of cats.27 Adenocarcinoma and lymphosar-
Peritonitis (inflammation or infection of the peritoneum) is the most
coma were the most common neoplasms identified.27 Other reported
common disease affecting the peritoneum in the cat. It occurs subse-
causes of gastrointestinal leakage include perforation of the bowel due
quent to systemic infection or leakage of gastrointestinal tract con-
to a foreign body (Fig. 26-4), leakage from a previous surgical site,
tents. Peritonitis can be subdivided into primary, secondary, or tertiary
and perforation of the colon due to megacolon and enteritis.27
peritonitis, reflecting the cause or source of the infection. Neoplasia
Leakage from an enterotomy, gastrotomy, or a resection and anas-
of the peritoneum is rare, but both primary mesothelioma3-38 and
tomosis site is another potential cause of secondary peritonitis.54.5
secondary metastases to the peritoneum have been reported in the cat.
Dehiscence occurred in 14% of cases in one study of dogs and cats.
although none of the 25 cats had surgical dehiscence and leakage.55
Primary peritonitis
It is diffcult to interpret the significance of these findings due to the
limited numbers of cases in this study specifically evaluating cats. In
 Primary or spontaneous peritonitis is defined as an infection of the
a second study, no anastomosis or biopsy site leaked in 70 cats with
 peritoneal cavity where no cause for the intraperitoneal bacterial con-
asarsu ue sunsasans siopey 'ssop ul s'euosiesoydukl Aieuaue
tamination has been identifed.0,31,33 In primary peritonitis, bacterial
 in the risk of postoperative dehiscence include presence of a foreign
contamination of the peritoneal cavity occurs via blood-borne or
body or a traumatic injury, preoperative peritonitis, and hypoalbu-
lymphatic spread or by bacterial translocation from the intestinal
minemia.54,5s Perforation of a gastrointestinal ulcer, perhaps associ-
tract.30 The true origin of bacterial contamination is diffcult or impos-
ated with carprofen ingestion, has been reported in one cat with
sible to determine in many instances. Primary peritonitis is more
peritonitis.57
commonly reported in human than veterinary patients and is usually
Secondary peritonitis in cats may occur following bite wounds,
associated with diseases that cause ascites, such as cirrhosis30.3140.41 In
 gunshot wounds or vehicular trauma.27 Bacteria enter the peritoneal
veterinary medicine FIP is the most common cause of primary peri-
cavity directly from the environment or from trauma resulting in
pue shuo auay e yiim uoau Aq pani si dlld ztrs'suin
rupture of a viscus. Penetrating wounds warrant emergency surgical
 presents in two forms, the granulomatous (dry) form or the effusive
exploration to evaluate for possible bowel damage, wound debride-
(wet) form, which is the form that results in abdominal effusion and
ment, and lavage.
no inoy suad ynm sie uo Apns aadsonai e u srsuoad
Septic peritonitis from urinary tract infection is rare and urine is not
of 65 cats had primary peritonitis resulting from the effusive FIP44
considered an adjuvant substance in peritonitis.5 In a retrospective
 There are numerous reports of primary peritonitis in cats due to other
study of 5l cases of septic peritonitis in cats, only four cases of peri-
pathogens besides FIP: however, the true source of the infection in
zzuonaui ioen Aieun e uo pansan aey ot paieadde su
 most cases is unclear.45-49
 Feline pyometras occasionally rupture and cause secondary peritoni-
tis. In a retrospective study of cats with pyometra, seven out of 183
Secondary peritonitis
cats (3.8%) had a uterine rupture, and four of the seven cats died as
a result of the septic peritonitis.59
Secondary peritonitis is the most common form of peritonitis seen in
Secondary septic peritonitis can also occur because of biliary leakage
ing abdominal trauma, bite wounds, contamination from surgery or
cholecystitis, cholelithiasis, or iatrogenic injury from aspiration or
diagnostic aspiration procedures. Leakage of bacteria from abdominal
Organs into the peritoneal cavity is another frequent source of con-
septic bile peritonitis had a decreased survival rate and increased
tamination in secondary peritonitis.3l While all of the abdominal
mortality as compared to those with aseptic peritonitis.60,63
organs can be potential septic sources of contamination, leakage of
Other potential sources of secondary peritonitis include abscessa-
contents from the gastrointestinal tract is the most common cause of
tion of the pancreas, liver, or spleen4 or iatrogenic contamination of
the abdominal cavity after abdominal surgery. In 5l cats with second-
tonitis is most often the result of neoplasia.27 In one study, neoplasia
ary peritonitis, three developed septic peritonitis due to septic pan-
was the underlying cause of gastrointestinal leakage and subsequent
creatitis or a pancreatic absces, and one due to liver lobe necrosis.27
284
Peritoneum
Chapter
26
Tertiary peritonitis
Antibiosis
Tertiary or recurrent peritonitis is diagnosed when there is persistent
 Antibiotics are administered perioperatively in all cases of suspected
infection of the peritoneal cavity after an effort has been made to treat 
bacterial peritonitis. Samples for bacterial culture and sensitivity
testing are taken during surgery. Until these results are obtained, the
even after optimal, standard-of-care treatment and often cases present
choice of antibiotics is based on knowledge of the normal bacterial
with systemic sepsis without an obvious focus of infection.s6.67 In
flora of the organ suspected to be the source of the contamination,
humans, the mortality rate is greater than 60%.6 The lack of perito-
and antimicrobial pharmacokinetics. Intestinal bacteria are com-
neal inflammation due to immune paralysis and derangement in the
  sa e a s 
for these bacteria include a combination of ampicillin and either an
rence of tertiary peritonitis in people.67 The organisms that are gener-
 aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone Metronidazole is often added to
ally found in cases of tertiary peritonitis in humans tend to be from 
target anaerobes. Penicillin and cephalosporin antibiotics are 'time
the gastrointestinal tract or lesser pathogens such as Candida spp. or
dependent' as they rely on maintaining serum concentrations above
u a s sd a ssia sss
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) by frequent dosing.
been truly described in cats or dogs.
generally every six hours. Aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones
depend on obtaining the highest possible drug concentration ('con-
centration dependent') by using a single daily dose for their bacterio-
Mesothelioma
cidal effect.
Primary tumors of the peritoneal serosal surfaces are uncommon in
cats. They occur within the thoracic or abdominal cavities and are
Uroperitoneum
regularly associated with pleural or peritoneal effusions; involve-
an uaaq s (t r aas ie au u ea a j 
 In cats with uroperitoneum, rehydration should begin immediately.
using warm intravenous fluids. The rate of fluid administration is
neoplasms can be benign or malignant, and are classified as predomi-
based on the severity of dehydration. Severely dehydrated animals
nantly epitheloid, mixed (biphasic). or fibrous (spindle cell, fbrosa-
with no underlying heart disease can be given 40-60 mL/kg over the
 pe siea ii  ae u ai sie a zsssno
frst hour; subsequent rates of 5-15 mL/kg/hour are used depending
 on hydration status. Although some clinicians use 0.9% NaCl to avoid
imaging, fine needle aspiration, and peritoneal fluid analysis.
administering potassium, it is clear that more balanced electrolyte
Surgical fndings include infiltration of the omentum, which can
solutions (lactated Ringer's, Normasol R) allow for a more rapid cor-
form an irregular mass that extends onto the stomach, pancreas.
rection of acid-base status without affecting normalization of serum
spleen, and proximal intestinal tract.338 The visceral and parietal
-ong uniies 'ejualeyiadau payiu jo sase u orts'slaaal unisseiod
 peritoneal surfaces can be affected and appear thickened with off-
 nate (a functional antagonist of potassium) should be administered
white friable material and occasionally firm fbrous plaques.36
slowly, intravenously (0.5 mL/kg). Although it does not lower serum
Immunohistochemistry may be necessary for confirmation of the sus-
 potassium, calcium changes the threshold potential and returns mem-
pected diagnosis.36,37
Regular insulin (1 unit/kg) and/or glucose (1-2 g/unit of insulin) can
also be administered. Animals are often also severely acidotic. Sodium
bicarbonate can be administered (3-9 mEq/kg) to correct acidosis;
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
however, this can paradoxically lower ionized calcium and so worsen
the effects of hyperkalemia. Correction of the hyperkalemia and aci-
-eis pue juaugeueuu Auaiaua aimbai Aensn suoad yim sie
bilization prior to surgery.
sium and acid excretion from thebody. In animals with uroperitoneum
this involves placement of a catheter to drain urine from the perito-
neal cavity and ideally placement of a catheter into the bladder via
Intravenous fluids
the urethra. In cases where the urethra is completely transected a
Stabilization of the cat with bacterial peritonitis requires intravenous
cystostomy tube is placed surgically or by using interventional radiol-
access, generally with two peripheral catheters or one central catheter.
ogy techniques.
The type of fluid and the rate of resuscitation depend on an assess-
ment of the cat's perfusion, initial laboratory data, and the presence
of concurrent respiratory and cardiac diseases. In general, colloids
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND
are often used with crystalloids, as endothelial dysfunction and
increased vascular permeability are common. Synthetic colloids
TECHNIQUES FOR PERITONITIS
(Hetastarch, Dextran 70) are administered as a bolus (5 mL/kg) with
20-30 mL/kg of crystalloid. When available, fresh frozen plasma pro-
The goals of surgery for septic peritonitis are to remove the source of
vides albumin and clotting factors. Ongoing resuscitation is deter-
infection, decrease the infectious pathogen load, remove foreign mate-
mined by the response to therapy measured by clinical and laboratory
rial and other adjuvants, and prevent recurrence or persistence of
parameters, including heart rate, direct or indirect blood pressure.
infection in the peritoneal cavity. Surgery may also include the place-
acid/base status, and blood lactate levels. In some cases blood pres-
ment of feeding tubes (ie, gastrostomy or enterostomy tubes) for
sure and tissue perfusion do not improve despite apparently ade-
postoperative nutritional support (see Chapters 12 and 28).
jo asneaq nso Aeu sul uoisuedxa aunon iennseanu anen
sepsis-associated disruption of vascular tone. In these instances.
Celiotomy
careful use of a vasopressor (dopamine: 5 μg/kg/minute; norepine-
phrine: 0.1 μg/kg/minute) can be effective in restoring vascular tone
A standard ventral midline celiotomy from just caudal to the xiphoid
and tissue perfusion.
to just cranial to the pubis is recommended to allow for maximum
285
Section
151
The Abdomen
A
B
D
Figure 26-5 An 8-year-old domestic short-haired cat presented with a chronic history of peritonitis. (A) After celiotomy the abdominal wall is
e buisn ino pauons s! pin aul (a) uons oi loud pinl leauoiad jo abelids juaaid on uoean labuy Aa uoiiod paeaala ue ui pauienuie
Poole suction tip. Fibrinous material was present in the fluid. (c) The mesentery and peritoneal surface has a granular appearance with fibrin deposits
throughout the abdomen. (D) Multiple biopsies were taken, and following celiotomy closure a closed-suction drain (Jackson-Pratt) was placed. A
(ague jo ysan ay jo Asauno) pauap! rou sem asne Aued aun uahouied Aepuos e ag oi uonoun pann se wsuebio adi eipeon
exposure to perform complete exploration of the peritoneal cavity
omentum provides a rich blood supply, has absorptive capabilities,
(Fig. 26-5) (see Chapter 23). Complete exploration is crucial for deter-
and stimulates angiogenesis. The omentum will also form adhesions
mination of the underlying primary cause, correction and elimination
to help seal off or isolate sources of contamination. Omentalization
of continued contamination, and adequate lavage of the peritoneal
can be used when the source of the infection cannot be entirely
 cavity. The hepatobiliary, gastrointestinal, and urogenital systems are
removed, such as prostatic or pancreatic abscesses. The abscess cavity
carefully evaluated to identify the underlying cause of peritonitis.
is located by palpation, intraoperative ultrasound, or aspiration. It is
Resection and anastomosis of a gastrointestinal lesion, a cholecystec-
opened, drained, and the abscess cavity is gently debrided with a
tomy, or ovariohysterectomy to remove a pyometra, may be necessary
moistened gauze sponge. After thorough local lavage with a warm,
to treat the primary cause. Debridement of abnormal tissue and
balanced electrolyte solution, the omentum is packed loosely into the
osie aie uiqoloay se yns siueanie pue leaieu utaioy suaoa
cavity and the abdominal incision is closed. The immunologic and
performed during surgery. This will decrease the concentrations of
angiogenic properties ofthe omentum promote local infection control 
intra-abdominal pathogens, adjuvants, and fibrin, minimizing the risk
and healing. The technique has been associated with some success in
of persistent infections and clinical deterioration.
o sns eesassaqe seaue y sop (ieins o ii yo xis)
a large clinical study of omentalization for abdominal abscesses in
Omentalization and serosal patching
cats are lacking.
Omental wrapping involves placing the omentum around the
Peritonitis is associated with an increased risk of surgical dehiscence
suture line of an enterotomy or anastomosis and has been described
and leakage after closure of a viscus.571 Degradation of collagen and
the extracellular matrix by the proteolyic enzymes in peritonitis is
anso a iaan ununial jo sdooi suns saaau suued jesoias
thought to predispose enterotomies and intestinal anastomoses to
site of the viscus. It can be used over suture lines that are at a high
s,poq aul ui anan iuio ue saeid wuan aul z'auasr
risk of dehiscence.71 The technique for making an omental graft is
 au Kiaes ieauoad au u uoaun pue anju iue asua
described in Chapter 19.
286
Peritoneum
Chapter
26
Peritoneal lavage
space within the abdomen is at a sub-atmospheric pressure. Even with
experimental insufflation of air, the intraperitoneal pressure never
 The current standard of practice holds that the contaminated perito-
said ieaoadeu aui laua ssaun ainsaid saudsoue spaaxa
neal cavity is thoroughly lavaged after surgery. Whilst the concept of
sure becomes higher than atmospheric or air can enter the peritoneal
treating the peritoneal cavity in a similar manner to any other con-
taminated wound seems reasonable, peritoneal lavage has both ben-
cavity will not occur without the use of a vacuum system. The use of
 eficial and detrimental effects.75 Peritoneal lavage does not necessarily
drains within the peritoneal cavity is somewhat controversial because
decrease peritoneal bacterial contamination. Once bacteria have colo-
 of the discrepancy between reasonable clinical results from their use
nized and adhered to the peritoneum, they are difficult to remove by
and experimental studies clearly showing that the omentum and
lavage.76.77 Lavage fluid remaining in the peritoneal cavity dilutes com-
plement and other opsonins and suspends bacteria away from neu-
therefore not clear if drainage occurs from the peritoneal cavity proper
trophils and macrophages, making phagocytosis more difficult.
 Or, more likely, from the area around the encased drain. In an experi-
Lavage, then, should ideally be used to remove blood, purulent mate-
paneinsdeoua punoy aram suieip asonuad-duns 'sop ui apns leiua
nial, bile, mucus, and gross intestinal content from the peritoneal
 and isolated from the peritoneal cavity at necropsy performed after
cavity but all fluid should be aspirated before the abdominal cavity is
48 hours. Despite this isolation, the drains continued to remove
closed. The best fluid to use for peritoneal lavage has not been deter-
radio-opaque contrast material from the peritoneal cavity. In a clinical
mined. The addition of antiseptics to lavage fluid is not recommended
study of closed-suction silicone drains for septic peritonitis, drains
in clinical cases because of toxicity (povidone iodine) or a lack of
continued to accumulate fluid for up to eight days, seeming to indicate
perceived clinical efficacy in spite of benefits in some experimental
 adequate function. However, it is not clear if closed-suction drains are
models (chlorhexidine). The addition of antibiotics to lavage fluid has
encased to the same extent as sump-Penrose drains and are draining
no benefit over parenteral antibiotics administered intravenously at
a localized area, or if they retain functional drainage of the peritoneal
the appropriate doses.
cavity despite being encased.81 This study reported 70% survival in a
cohort of 30 dogs and ten cats with septic peritonitis managed with
closed-suction drains. Drains were in place for a mean of 3.6 days with
a range of two to eight days. The volume of fluid produced was vari-
PERITONEAL DRAINAGE
able but decreased with time The drains remained patent until
removal, as evidenced by ongoing fluid collection. However, it is
Once the source of the peritonitis has been addressed, access for
drained. No signifcant complications were reported with clinical use
enteral nutrition should be provided if necessary (see Chapter ll). The 
 of the closed-suction drains.
surgeon must then decide whether the abdomen should be closed
Closed-suction drains are relatively inexpensive, easy to place, and
primarily or if some type of local or more general peritoneal drainage
seem to be free of significant complications (see Fig. 26-5 and Chapter
is required. Local drainage has largely been recommended for pancre-
11). It should be noted, however, that experimentally, latex drains
atic abscess or prostatic abscesses in dogs. Localized drainage is
 can significantly impair bowel wound healing. It is not clear if silastic
used to limit accumulation of a large volume of ongoing infected
closed-suction drains impair bowel healing in a similar manner.
exudate as this might limit the effcacy of local peritoneal defense
Advantages of closed-suction drainage over open peritoneal drainage
mechanisms, prevent localization of the contamination, and speed
include the ability to quantify the volume of effusion and decreased
the systemic absorption of bacteria and endotoxin.75 However, the
 cost and labor.
technique of placing one or more drains into an intra-abdominal
Commercially available closed-suction drains consist of a fenes-
abscess has largely been replaced in clinical practice by omentalization
trated silicone drain connected to an external reservoir by a non-
(see above).
fenestrated tube (Jackson-Pratt drain, Cardinal Health Australia,
 In generalized peritonitis the surgeon must choose to close the
Sydney, Australia). The drain is typically positioned near the dia-
abdomen primarily, close the abdomen after placing drains, or leave
 phragm and liver in the most dependent portion of the peritoneal
the abdomen open. There are no objective criteria and few subjective
cavity, although a more caudal position may be appropriate, depend-
criteria to guide this decision, and no large scale randomized clinical 
ing on the source of the contamination. The non-fenestrated portion
trials of these treatment methods in cats with peritonitis.
 of the drain is exited through a small paramedian incision in the body
wall and is secured with a purse-string and finger trap of non-
absorbable suture. Compression of the bulb reservoir creates negative
Primary closure without drainage
e aeia si auea a n iead a urm ansad
A decision to close the peritoneal cavity without drainage is based on
to cover the exit site of the drain and to provide a means of attaching
control of the source of contamination and adequate decontamina-
the bulb reservoir to the patient (see Chapter 4). The contents of the
tion of the peritoneal cavity. The clinician then relies on the body's
reservoir are easily emptied, typically every 6 hours or when the res-
peritoneal drainage and immune defense systems to resolve residual
ervoir is half full.
infection and peritoneal contamination. Fifty-four per cent of dogs
with septic peritonitis treated by primary closure survived in one
Open peritoneal drainage
study.78 This form of management is most appropriate when the
source of contamination can be controlled definitively and peritonitis
Historically, open peritoneal drainage (Box 26-1) has been reserved
is not severe.
for the most severe cases of generalized septic peritonitis, which are
anecdotally associated with a large volume of effusion postoperatively.
Closed-suction drainage
Assessment of the severity of peritonitis is largely subjective and based
 on individual experience.
The use of closed-suction drains in generalized peritonitis has been
aeuep ieauoad uado jo uoenp uau e ndai sapns ieu
reported in cats and dogs. Some type of suction or vacuum system is
OMl oi dn on Aep auo ueu ssal o auei e ym 'sep any oi inoy jo
necessary for drains to be potentially effective because the peritoneal
287
Section
5
The Abdomen
complications of open peritoneal drainage although their clinical
Box 26-1 Open peritoneal drainage
significance is not well established.
Open peritoneal drainage is established through a long abdominal
incision, extending from the xiphoid process to the pubis and 
 including the most dependent portion of the abdomen. The falciform
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
fat should be excised according to standard exploratory laparotomy
technique (see Chapter 23), but omentectomy is not necessary or
The postoperative care of the cat with peritonitis is a critical part of
desirable. The linea alba is closed with non-absorbable suture in a
the management of the case and will influence its chances of recovery.
simple continuous pattern with a gap of 1-3 cm between the edges 
Particular attention should be paid to the cat's fluid status, electrolyte
(Fig. 26-6), depending on the patient's size. The subcutaneous tissues
 and skin are not closed. A sterile bandage consisting of a non-
balance, analgesia, and nutritional balance. The cat should be moni-
 adherent contact layer, such as petrolatum impregnated gauze.
tored frequently for complications associated with the procedures
laparotomy sponges, and surgery towels underneath routine bandage
 performed. The reader is referred to Chapter 3 on postoperative moni-
 material is applied and changed at least daily. If the bandage
toring and management of complications, and Chapter 4 on postop-
becomes wet from peritoneal effusion or urine, or if the bandage
erative nursing for more information.
becomes displaced, the bandage should be replaced as soon as 
possible. The bandage should be changed in the operating room
Perioperative nutrition
with the patient sedated or anesthetized. During each bandage
change, adhesions at the incision are digitally disrupted and the
Once the primary source of peritonitis has been controlled, the
aul asop oi uoispap aul 'uoiie lansaa uebio lot paypaun s! uoisu!
surgeon must consider options for postoperative nutrition (see
 peritoneal cavity is based on reassessment of the same factors used 
 Chapter 6). In cases of uncomplicated bladder rupture and uroperi-
in selecting open peritoneal drainage or cytological analysis of the
aua u ia oi i e iaxa qeuosn iui uiu a au
effusion. Closure is performed as a complete laparotomy.
to two days of a successful surgery. However, in cases of generalized
bacterial peritonitis, voluntary food intake is unlikely. At the same
time generalized peritonitis is associated with a signifcant hyper-
metabolic state, intraperitoneal protein loss, and protein/energy mal-
nutrition. An esophagosotomy, gastrostomy, or jejunostomy tube
allows early enteral feeding (see Chapter 12). Enteral feeding main-
tains mucosal enterocyte health and minimizes bacterial translocation
from the gut. In cases where enteral feeding is not tolerated, total
parenteral nutrition is considered; ideally, a multiple lumen catheter
is placed immediately before or after surgery.
PROGNOSIS FOR PERITONITIS
das ioy Aleiins paiean aiam ieun se 9z guuuexa Apnis e ul
peritonitis, 46% of the cats survived to discharge; the remainder of
the cats either died or were euthanized due to deterioration of their
clinical status.24 Similarly, the survival rate in a study of nine cats was
 44% and no differences were detected between cats that had primary
or secondary peritonitis.2? In another study. a 30% mortality rate
was reported in 23 cats having surgical treatment of septic peritoni-
 sd sas Aed sua aeais um  sz's
13 cats where treatment included surgery, the overall mortality rate
was 31%.28
 Figure 26-6 llustration of closure for open peritoneal drainage in a 
Gat. A simple continuous suture is placed leaving a gap of 1-3 cm
between the fascia lata. The skin and subcutaneous tissue is left 
aepueg allais e Aa papanod si uaope uado aul pannsun 
REFERENCES
1.
Hall JC, Heel KA, Papadimitriou JM,
2. Le Gros Clark WE. The tissues of the
3. Beavis J, Harwood JL, Coles GA, Williams 
 Platell C. The pathobiology of
body: an introduction to the study of
ID. Synthesis of phospholipids by human
peritonitis. Gastroenterology 1998;114:
anatomy. Oxford, England: Oxford
peritoneal mesothelial cells. Perit Dial Int 
185-96.
University; 1958. p. 62-3.
1994;14:348-55.
288
Peritoneum
Chapter
26
4. Bercovici B, Michel J, Miller J, Sacks TG.
19. Silverstein D, Otto CM. Sepsis. In: Greene
35. Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ.
Antimicrobial activity of human
CE, editor. Infectious diseases of the
Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
peritoneal fluid. Surg Gynecol Obstet
dog and cat 4e. Philadelphia: Saunders
(1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1975:141:885-7.
Elsevier; 2012. p. 359-69
1998;34:315-24.
5. Hosgood G, Salisbury SK, Cantwell HD,
20. Lotze MT, Zeh Hl, Rubartelli A, et al.
36. Heerkens TM, Smith JD, Fox L, Hostetter
DeNicola DB. Intraperitoneal circulation
The grateful dead: damage-associated
JM. Peritoneal fbrosarcomatous
 and drainage in the dog. Vet Surg
molecular pattern molecules and
mesothelioma in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest
1989;18:261-8.
reduction/oxidation regulate immunity.
2011;23:593-7.
6. Last M, Kurtz L, Stein TA, Wise L. Effect of
Immunol Rev 2007;220:60-81.
37. Bacci B, Morandi F, De Meo M, Marcato
 PEEP on the rate of thoracic duct lymph
21.
 Evans TJ. The role of macrophages in
PS. Ten cases of feline mesothelioma: an
flow and clearance of bacteria from the
septic shock. Immunology 1996;195:
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural
peritoneal cavity. Am J Surg 1983;145:
655-9.
study. J Comp Pathol 2006;134:347-54.
126-30.
22.
 Cohen J. The immunopathogenesis of
38. Kobayashi Y, Usuda H, Ochiai K, ltakura
 7. Abu-Hijleh MF, Habbal OA, Moqattash
 sepsis. Nature 2002;420:885-91.
C. Malignant mesothelioma with
ST. The role of the diaphragm in
23. Srisskandan S, Cohen J. Gram positive
 metastases and mast cell leukaemia in a
lymphatic absorption from the peritoneal
sepsis. Infect Dis Clin North Am
cat. J Comp Pathol 1994;111:453-8.
cavity. 1 Anat 1995;186:453-67.
1999:13:397-412.
39. Kirby BM. Peritoneum and peritoneal
8. Flessner MF, Parker RJ, Sieber SM.
24.
Parsons K J, Owen Ll, Lee K, et al.
cavity. In: Slatter D, editor Textbook of
Peritoneal lymphatic uptake of fbrinogen
A retrospective study of surgically treated
 small animal surgery. Philadelphia: WB
and erythrocytes in the rat. Am J Physiol
cases of septic peritonitis in the cat
Saunders; 2003. p. 414-45.
1983;244:H89-96.
[2000-2007). J Small Anim Pract
40. Evans LT, Kim WR, Poterucha Jl, Kamath
9. Dunn DL, Barke RA, Knight NB, et al.
2009;50:518-24.
PS. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis in
 Role of resident macrophages, peripheral
25.
Onderdonk AB, Bartlett JG, Louie T, et al.
asymptomatic outpatients with cirrhotic
neutrophils, and translymphatic
 Microbial synergy in experimental
ascities. Hepatology 2003;37:897-901.
absorption in bacterial clearance from
intra-abdominal abscess. Infect Immun 
41.
Boixeda D, De Luis DA, Aller R, De Argila
 the peritoneal cavity. Infect Immun
1976:13:22-6
CM. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
1985;49:257-64.
26.
 Qulp WT, Zeldis TE, Reese MS, Drobatz
Clinical and microbiological study of 233
10. Dunn DL, Barke RA, Lee JT Jr, et al.
 KJ. Primary bacterial peritonitis in dogs
episodes. J Clin Gastroenterol 1996;23:
Mechanisms of the adjuvant effect of
and cats: 24 cases [1990-2006). J Am Vet
275-9.
hemoglobin in experimental peritonitis.
Med Assoc 2009;234:906-13.
42. Seim HB. Management of peritonitis. In:
Vll. Hemoglobin does not inhibit
27.
Costello MF, Drobatz K), Aronson LR,
 Bonagura ID, Kirk RW, editors. Current
clearance of Escherichia coli from the
King LG. Underlying cause.
veterinary therapy xi small animal
peritoneal cavity. Surgery 1983;94:
 pathophysiologic abnormalities, and
practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
487-93.
response to treatment in cats with septic
1995. p. 933-7.
11. Heemken R, Gandawidjaja L, Hau T.
peritonitis: 51 cases [1990-2001). J Am
43. Gaskell R, Dawson S. FIP-related disease.
 Peritonitis: pathophysiology
Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:897-902.
In: Ettinger Sl, Feldman EC, editors.
and local defense mechanisms.
28
Ruthrauff CM, Smith J, Glerum L. Primary
Textbook of veteninary intermal medicine.
Hepatogastroenterology 1997;44:927-36.
bacterial septic peritonitis in cats: 13
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2000.
12. Hau T, Ahrenholz DH, Simmons RL.
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45:
p. 137-9.
Secondary bacterial peritonitis: The
268-76.
44.
Wnight KN, Gompf RE, DeNovo RC Jr.
biologic basis of treatment. Curr Probl
29.
Wnight KN, Gompf RE, DeNovo RC Jr.
Peritoneal effusion in cats: 65 cases
Surg 1979;16:1-65.
Peritoneal effusion in cats: G5 cases
(1981-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
13. Rohrer Rj. Basic immunology for
(1981-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
1999;214:375-81.
 surgeons. In: O'Leary Pl, editor. The
1999;214:375-81.
45.
 Qulp WT, Zeldis TE, Reese MS, Drobatz
 Physiologic basis of surgery. 3rd ed.
30.
Johnson CC, Baldessarre I, Levison ME.
KJ. Primary bacterial peritonitis in dogs
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and
 Peritonitis: update on pathophysiology.
and cats: 24 cases [1990-2006). I Am Vet
Wilkins; 2002. p. 169-77.
 dinical manifestations, and management.
Med Assoc 2009;234:906-13.
14. Heel KA, Hall JC. Peritoneal defences and 
Cin Infect Dis 1997;24:1035-47.
46.
 Costello MF, Drobatz KJ, Aronson LR,
peritoneum-associated lymphoid tissue.
31.
Laroche M, Harding G. Primary and
King LG. Underlying cause,
Br J Surg 1996;83:1031-6.
secondary peritonitis: an update. Eur ↓
pathophysiologic abnormalities, and
15.
 Fry DE. Surgical infection. In: O'Leary JP.
Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1998;17:
response to treatment in cats with septic
editor The Physiologic basis of surgery.
542-50.
peritonitis: 51 cases [1990-2001). J Am
Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams &
32.
 Smelstoys JA, Davis Gl, Learn AE, et al.
Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:897-902.
Wilkins; 2002. p. 213-34.
Outcome of and prognostic indicators for
47.
. Ruthraff CM, Smith J, Glerum L. Primary
16. Culp WTN, Holt DE. Septic peritonitis.
 dogs and cats with pneumoperitoneum
bacterial septic peritonitis in cats: 13
Comp Contin Ed Pract Vet 2010;32:
 and no history of penetrating trauma: 54
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45:
E1-15.
cases [1988-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
268-76.
17. Vipond MN, Whawell SA, Thompson JN,
2004;225:251-5.
48. Ingham B, Brentnall Dw. Acute peritonitis 
Dudley HA. Effect of experimental
33.
Bonczynski J, Ludwig LL, Barton L), et al.
in a kitten associated with Salmonella
peritonitis and ischemia on peritoneal
Comparison of peritoneal fluid and
typhimurium infection. I Small Anim
fbrinolytic activity. Eur J Surg
 peripheral blood pH, bicarbonate.
Pract 1972;13:71-4.
1994;160:471-7.
 glucose, and lactate concentration as
49.
 Dickie CW, Sniff ES. Chlamydia infection
18.
Van Goor H, de Graaf IS, Kooi K, et al.
a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis
associated with peritonitis in a cat. J Am 
 Effect of recombinant tissue plasminogen
 in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2003;32:
Vet Med Assoc 1980;176:1256-9.
activator on intra-abdominal abscess
161-6.
50.
Woolfson JM, Dulisch ML. Open
formation in rats with generalized
34.
Alleman AR. Abdominal, thoracic, and
abdominal drainage in the treatment of
peritonitis. J Am Coll Surg 1994;179:
 pericardial effusions. Vet Clin North Am
generalized peritonitis in 25 dogs and
407-11.
Small Anim Pract 2003;33:89-118.
cats. Vet Surg 1986;15:27-32.
289
Section
5
The Abdomen
51. Greenfeld CL, Walshaw R. Open
[1980-90). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;202:
peritonitis. J Surg Res 2000;88:
 peritoneal drainage for treatment of
1137-42.
135-41.
contaminated peritoneal cavity and septic
62. Moores AL, Gregory SP. Duplex gall
73. Johnson MD, Mann FA. Treatment for 
peritonitis in dogs and cats: 24 cases
bladder associated with 
pancreatic abscesses via omentalization
(1980-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
choledocholithiasis, cholecystitis, gall
with abdominal closure versus open
1987;191:100-5.
bladder rupture and septic peritonitis
peritoneal drainage in dogs: 15 cases 
52. Mueller MG, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ. Use of
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2007:48:
[1994-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
dosed-suction drains to treat generalized
404-9.
2006;228:397-402.
peritonitis in dogs and cats: 40 cases
63. Mehler Sl, Mayhew PD, Drobatz KJ, Holt
74. McLachlin AD, Denton DW. Omental 
(1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 DE. Variables associated with outcome
protection of intestinal anastomoses. Am
2001;219:789-94.
in dogs undergoing extrahepatic biliary
I Surg 1973;125:134-40.
53.
Staatz AJ, Monnet E, Seim HB 3rd. Open
surgery: G0 cases [1988-2002). Vet Surg
75.
 Platell C, Papadimitriou JM, Hall JC. The 
peritoneal drainage versus primary closure 
2004;33:644-9.
influence of lavage on peritonitis. J Am
for the treatment of septic peritonitis I
64.
 Sergeeff JS, Armstrong Pl, Bunch SE.
Coll Surg 2000;191:672-80.
dogs and cats: 42 cases [1993-1999). Vet
Hepatic abscesses in cats: 14 cases
76. Haagen IA, Heezius HC, Verkooyen RP.
Surg 2002;31:174-80.
(1985-2002). J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:
et al. Adherence of peritonitis-causing
54.
Allen DA, Smeak DD, Schertel ER.
295-300.
staphylococci to human peritoneal 
Prevalence of small intestinal dehiscence
65.
 Malangoni MA. Evaluation and
mesothelial cell monolayers. J Infect Dis
and associated clinical factors: a
management of tertiary peritonitis.
1990;161:266-73.
retrospective study of 121 dogs. J Am 
Am Surg 2000;66:157-61.
77.
Edmiston CE Jr, Goheen MP, Kornhall S.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:70-6.
66.
 Broche F Tellado IM. Defense
et al. Fecal peritonitis: microbial
55.
Ralphs SC, Jessen CR, Lipowitz AJ. Risk
mechanisms of the peritoneal cavity.
adherence to serosal mesothelium and
factors for leakage following intestinal
Qurr Opin Crit Care 2001;7:105-16.
resistance to peritoneal lavage. World J
 anastomosis in dogs and cats: 115 cases
Buijk SE, Bruining HA. Future directions
Surg 1990;14:176-83.
[1991-2000). I Am Vet Med Assoc
in the management of tertiary peritonitis.
78.
Lanz Ol, Ellison GW, Bellah JR, et al.
2003;223:73-7.
 Intensive Care Med 2002;28:1024-9.
Surgical treatment of septic peritonitis
56. Smith AL, Wilson AP, Hardie RJ, et al.
68.
 Nathens AB, Rotstein OD, Marshall JC.
without abdominal drainage in 28 dogs.
Perioperative complications after
Tertiary peritonitis: clinical features of a
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:87-92.
full-thickness gastrointestinal surgery in
complex nosocomial infection. World J
79.
Gold E. The physics of the abdominal
cats with alimentary lymphoma. Vet Surg
Surg 1998;22:158-63.
avity and the problem of peritoneal
2011;40:849-52.
G9.
. Qunha MG, Freitas GC, Carregaro AB.
drainage. Am J Surg 1956;91:415-17.
57.
Runk A, Kyles AE, Downs MO. Duodenal
et al. Renal and cardiorespiratory effects
80.
Yates JL. An experimental study of the
perforation in a cat following the
of treatment with lactated Ringer's
Jocal effects of peritoneal drainage. Surg 
administration of non-steroidal anti-
solution or physiologic saline (0.9%
Gynecol 0bstet 1905;1:473-92.
inflammatory medication. J Am Anim
NaCl) solution in cats with
81.
 Mueller MG, Ludwig LL, Barton Lj. Use of
Hosp Assoc 1999;35:52-5.
experimentally induced urethral
dosed-suction drains to treat generalized
 58. Hardie EM. Peritonitis from urogentital 
obstruction. Am J Vet Res 2010;71:
peritonitis in dogs and cats: 40 cases
 conditions. Prob Vet Med 1989:1:36-49.
840-6.
[1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
59. Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO.
 Drobatz K]J, Cole SG. The influence
2001;219:789-94.
Bradley RL. Pyometra in cats:183 cases
of crystalloid type on acid-base and
82. Woolfson JM, Dulisch ML. Open
[1979-84). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1987;191:
electrolyte status of cats with urethral
 abdominal drainage in the treatment of
1130-2.
obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
generalized peritonitis in 25 dogs and
60. Ludwig LL, McLoughlin MA, Graves TK,
2008;18:355-61.
cats. Vet Surg 1986;15:27-32.
Crisp MS. Surgical treatment of bile
71.
Crowe DT. The serosal patch: Clinical
83. Greenfeld CL, Walshaw R. Open 
peritonitis in 24 dogs and 2 cats: a
use in 12 animals. Vet Surg 1984;13:
peritoneal drainage for treatment of 
retrospective study (1987-1994). Vet Surg
29-38.
contaminated peritoneal cavity and septic
1997;26:90-8.
72.
 Tani T, Tsutamoto Y, Eguchi Y, et al.
peritonitis in dogs and cats: 24 cases
61. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB, Ulrich T,
Protease inhibitor reduces loss of tensile
(1980-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
et al. Cholelithiasis in dogs: 29 cases
strength in rat anastomosis with
1987:191:100-5.
290
Gastrointestinal
[27]
Chapter
Esophagus
J.M. Williams
The most frequently diagnosed esophageal surgical conditions are
Centrally, there are two spiral layers of muscle that cross over at right
angles and change from superfcial to deep by means of dorsal and
ring anomalies and intramural masses are also found. Diagnosis is
ventral decussation of the fibers; this is less well defined cranially and
based on good history taking combined with contrast radiography
caudally. Cranially, the esophageal muscle is a continuation of the
and or esophagoscopy (endoscopy). Though esophageal conditions
 cricopharyngeal muscle and the cricoesophageal tendon. The cranial
are rare in the cat, their early recognition and intervention gives the
esophageal sphincter is formed by the cricopharyngeal muscle and
best opportunity for a successful outcome. The esophageal anatomy
associated elastic tissues. The esophagus does not have a distinct outer
together with the diagnosis and surgical management of these condi-
serosal layer but is covered by adventitia, a layer of connective tissue,
tions is discussed in this chapter.
Jo aaiap e smone osie inq sainns jaoele ol sanaupe yoiu
mobility.
 Though the presence of a neural network in the submucosa is a
 matter of debate, there is a well-defined myenteric plexus of Auerbach
SURGICAL ANATOMY
between the muscle layers. The vagal nerve supplies the special visceral
efferent fibers to the esophagus via its various branches. The cervical
The esophagus is a hollow distensible muscular tube, some 18-19 cm
 esophagus receives its blood supply predominantly from the cranial
in length in the cat,' which dilates and propels food from the pharynx
to the stomach. The wall of the esophagus has four components, but
differs from other intestinal structures in having a loose outer adven-
Muscle
titial layer but no serosa.?-4 In common with other viscera it has
Submucosa-
 muscularis layers, a submucosa and a mucosa. The mucosa is plentiful
and thrown into longitudinal folds cranially (Fig. 27-1). In the distal
third the mucosa is folded transversely to create the herringbone
pattern that is seen on contrast radiography and esophagoscopy. The
mucosa is covered by stratified squamous epithelium that is continu-
ous with the oropharynx. Distally the intra-abdominal esophagus is
Mucosa
lined with columnar epithelium. Tubuloacinar glands, that maintain
luminal lubrication, are confined to the cervical portion of the feline
esophagus. The folds ofthe mucosa may have a role to play in closure
of the distal esophagus, as a true cardiac sphincter has not been identi-
fed in the cat.? Based on pressure manometry the functional lower
 esophageal sphincter is at the level of the diaphragm in the cat and is 
approximately 1.4 cm long.
The thick submucosa has a rich vasculature and elastic tissue,
though the presence of neural tissue in this layer is debated.
The submucosa is the suture-holding layer of the esophagus." The
aun yoddns ueo esosnuqns au ut siassan lennuenu jo snxard you
Adventitia
thoracic esophagus even if the segmental blood supply is compro-
 Figure 27-1 Anatomy of the esophageal wall showing the outer
mised.7 The majority of the muscle in the esophageal wall is striated
adventitia, two muscle layers (outer longitudinal and inner circular).
but in the distal few centimeters, in the cat, the muscle is smooth.
the submucosa and mucosa.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00027-5
291
Section
5
The Abdomen
and caudal thyroid arteries together with smaller branches from the
is normal in the distal third of the feline esophagus. Ifthere is concern
carotid arteries. The bronchesophageal artery supplies the majority of
ynod au ui 'aa) (i-z xog aas) sneydosa aul yo Aiou ayi laao
the intrathoracic portion, while the terminal portion is vascularized
cranial to a vascular ring anomaly) consideration should be given to
by the esophageal branch of the left gastric artery. Venous drainage is
using fluoroscopy, if available.
via the jugular veins in the cervical portion and the thoracic portion
drains into the azygous vein.
Esophagoscopy (endoscopy)
Both rigid and flexible endoscopes are suitable for examination of
the cat's esophagus (Fig. 27-2). Endoscopy is particularly valuable in
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
 J 'sasseu pue saoq uiang 'sainus jo auasand au gunguo
barium contrast studies have been carried out, endoscopy should not
Esophageal disorders in cats are rare comprising only 1% of referred
 be performed until 24 hours later as the barium may obscure any
feline cases in a recent study.? As the majority of the esophagus is
abnormality. For further information on endoscopy, see Chapter 9.
intrathoracic diagnosing esophageal disorders requires good history
taking and the use of ancillary diagnostic aids, in particular esophagos-
 copy and radiography. Masses or dilatation of the cervical esophagus
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE ESOPHAGUS
are potentially palpable and cats with esophagitis may resent palpa-
tion of the cervical area.?
 It is essential to carry out a full and thorough examination of the
Though esophageal disease is not common, in a recent study nearly
patient as concurrent conditions may also be present, e.g., laryngeal
 paralysis, peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia, gastroesopha-
geal reflux, esophageal hiatal hernia and inflammatory bowel disease.
sia. Disorders associated with the esophageal hiatus are rare; condi-
A summary of disorders causing esophageal dysmotility in the cat is
tions such as gastroesophageal intussusception and hiatal hernias
listed in Box 27-1.10
are covered in Chapters 28 (Stomach) and 45 (Diaphragm).
 Clinical signs of esophageal disease include the following, either
respectively.
singly or in combination: vomiting/regurgitation, dysphagia, ano-
rexia, coughing, noisy breathing, nasal discharge, dyspnea, weightloss
Intramural strictures
and poor growth.It should be noted that differentiating between true
vomiting and regurgitation can be diffcult in the cat, though the
An intramural esophageal stricture is the end stage of the submucosa
observant owner may note the lack of retching that is classically associ-
and muscular layers healing by fbrosis as a consequence of severe
ated with vomiting in cats. It should also be noted that cats may vomit
deep esophagitis. The possible causes of intramural esophageal stric-
'casts' of material that mimic esophageal contents.
ture in the cat are listed in Box 27-2. Clinical signs are seen within
five to 14 days of the injury or onset, with dysphagia, regurgitation
Diagnostic aids
and weight loss being the most common signs. Confirmation is by
positive contrast radiography (Fig. 27-3) and/or esophagoscopy: in
The decision whether to use endoscopy and/or radiography will
some cases radiographic evidence of aspiration pneumonia may be
depend on the clinician's experience and the equipment available.
seen (Fig. 27-4).
though both modalities are now commonplace.&? The use of CT or
MRI has been advocated in diagnosing esophageal tumors.
Radiography
When initially assessing the esophagus radiographically, it is impor-
O1 peal Aeuu Aaul se papioae aie eisauisaue pue uoepas ieu iue
relaxation of the esophagus and a false positive diagnosis of a gas-
filled dilated esophagus. Plain or survey radiographs should always
be taken before carrying out contrast studies. For most cases barium
sulphate is used as a positive contrast medium, but if an esophageal
perforation is suspected water-soluble iodine based contrast medium
should be used. The herringbone pattern seen with positive contrast
Box 27-1 Causes of esophageal dysmotility11
 on esophagoscopy. (Courtesy of lan Hopkins.)
 Idiopathic megaesophagus
 Foreign bodies
Vascular ring anomalies
 Esophageal stricture 
 Myasthenia gravis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Dysautonomia
Drug-induced esophageal disorder, e.g., doxycycline, dlindamycin&.13-1s
 Mediastinal/esophageal mass
General anesthesia12.16.17
292
Esophagus
Chapter
27
Caudal
Cranial
Stomach
Stricture
Figure 27-3 Fluoroscopy showing an esophageal stricture.
Figure 27-5 Chronic esophageal stricture. (Courtesy of lan Hopkins.)
Left subclavian
Esophagus
Aorta
Right subclavian
Brachiocephalic
Ligamentum
 arteriosum
Figure 27-4 Thoracic radiograph of the cat in Figure 27-3 showing
evidence of aspiration pneumonia with consolidated dorsal lung lobes.
The gas-filled stomach is due to aerophagia. The site of esophageal
Figure 27-6 Normal anatomical arrangement of the aortic arch and
stricture is indicated by an arrow. (Courtesy of lan Hookins.)
vessels in the cat.
Endoscopically, a ridge ring, or web of fbrous tissue (Fig. 27-5), is
Vascular ring anomalies
seen, which dramatically narrows the lumen (average diameter is
3-4 mm); this cannot be distended with insuflation and the endo-
Vascular ring anomalieshave been rarely described in theliterature.24.25
scope will not pass through. Over 75% are in the caudal thoracic
Affected cats are usually presented as kittens for regurgitation of solid
esophagus;12 multiple strictures may be present.
food that began at the time of weaning. Most cats are presented before
A number of techniques have been proposed for managing esopha-
6 months of age. Regurgitation of undigested food usually occurs
immediately after eating, but is sometimes delayed as ingesta is
bougienage, balloon dilatation, stents, and surgical resection and
retained in a large esophageal pouch that may develop cranial to the
 anastomosis. The median number of dilatation procedures per patient
obstruction. Liquids and semi-solid food are preferentially retained.
is two to three, with ranges varying from one to 20 attempts to dilate
 On physical examination, most cats are underweight Esophageal dila-
the stricture.& 12,18-21
tation cranial to the base of the heart in young kittens is normally the
result of an extramural constriction secondary to a vascular ring
Complications and prognosis
anomaly (Fig. 27-6). A persistent right aortic arch is by far the most
common anomaly, accounting for 8l% of cases, but others have been
Balloon dilatation of a single stricture is successful in up to 80% of
reported, such as anomalous subclavian artery, double aortic arches
patients; there is no correlation between the number of attempts and
sis and surgical intervention is required if the prognosis is to be favo-
bougienage was good in 75% of cats.22 Retrospective studies have
rable. Aggressive supportive therapy including, if required, rehydration,
shown no difference in complication rates between bougienage and
 nutritional support and antibiotic management for any respiratory
balloon dilatation, with perforation rates reported to be from
complications must be initiated prior to surgical intervention.
0-3.9%.4.22
 Resection and anastomosis of strictures has not been well described
Prognosis
in the cat, though Shamir and others?2 report success in one cat. With
the relatively high success rate of serial dilatation/bougienage, surgical
The degree of megaesophagus and hypomotility preoperatively are
resection can currently only be recommended when other techniques
important prognostic indicators. Those kittens demonstrating com-
have failed.
 paratively minor dilatation and demonstrable motility on fluoroscopy
293
Section
151
The Abdomen
 apog ubiaoy Auog e pamus sudeaoen euoouo pue paiiauisaue se pen aul uoiban ean lenuen
the mid cervical area. (c) The cervical area was clipped of hair and aseptically prepared for surgery. The
bony foreign body (D) was removed by passing long handled forceps into the proximal esophagus, the
percutaneous portion of the bone was then cut and then the reminder of the foreign body was carefully
withdrawn using the forceps. The esophagus should be checked endoscopically 5 days post bone removal.
The skin wound was left to granulate. (Courtesy of Jon Hal.)
C
D
O1 paneduos sisousoid paaoidu Aueyugis e aaey oi Aiall ane
those with major redundant sacculation. A proportion of cases will
require permanent feeding from a height the prognosis is therefore
guarded in some cases and owners should be made aware of this prior
to surgery. Resection or plication of redundant esophageal tissue has
not proved successful and the technique is not recommended. Recur-
rence of clinical signs may be due to postsurgical scarring around the
esophagus. In such cases bougienage may be attempted or repeat
loy sisougoid aul anssl ies aul aaoau ol Aiessanau aq Aeu Aiagins
such cases is generally guarded.
Esophageal foreign bodies
 Foreign body obstruction of the esophagus is common in the dog but
rare in the cat, due to their more fastidious eating habits. A variety of
foreign bodies have been described in the esophagus ofthe cat, which
are commonly acquired during hunting or play behavior. String, bone,
trichobezoars (hairballs), needles, and fishhooks have all been
seen.26.27 Bones that cause obstruction tend to be "V-shaped' avian
bones (wishbones; Fig. 27-7),28 though others may be seen (Fig. 27-8).
Obstructions reportedly occur in one of three portions of the esopha-
gus, namely the thoracic inlet, the heart base (or proximal to the
Figure 27-8 Cat with a bone esophageal foreign body as a result of
cardia) and the diaphragmatic hiatus. The presenting signs are those
being fed a bone and raw food (BARF) diet. (Courtesy of lan Hopkins.)
294
Esophagus
Chapter
27
then there is a risk of sequestered food being regurgitated after
tion, gagging, and retching. The severity of signs and the rate of onset
Aqissod sul ioy Apeai aq pnous auuosiad uonpu eisaysaue
will depend on whether the obstruction is partial or complete. Respi-
with suction apparatus close to hand and with the aim of trying for
ratory signs due to aspiration pneumonia or mediastinitis, secondary
rapid endotracheal tube placement so as to minimize the risk of aspi-
'sase aiaas ul panaiunoua aq Ae 'uoeoad ieeudosa c
ration pneumonia as a result ofthe anesthetic The patient should also
 Esophageal foreign bodies may present acutely due to total occlu-
 be checked at the end of surgery or anesthesia and the pharynx aspi-
sion. Such cases not only regurgitate and gag. but also may show
rated if required.
hypersalivation, signs of discomfort on swallowing, or collapse. Rapid
 For lesions in the caudal cervical esophagus the possibility of
deterioration may occur due to electrolyte imbalances, inhalation
needing to perform a thoracotomy should be prepared for (see
 pue sisouseip iduoid zs'sngeudosa auiya uoeioad io 'enuounaud
Chapter 25).
management is required. Prior to any defnitive management it is
essential to correct any dehydration and electrolyte changes with
Esophageal healing and closure
ame ieul sapoq uaiaioy isatui sieo aiaum adeiaun piny aieudoidde
incomplete obstruction, liquid or semi-solid food will pass in to the
1 nq siane leuosodde oml io auo ul pasop aq ue snseydosa au
stomach and it can be some time before a diagnosis is made, with
is essential that the submucosa is included as it is the layer of
veterinary attention only being sought when there are signs of chronic
-iaut aduis] ianel-oml e ieut paisasns uaaq sey l eszsz'qauans
wasting.
yanouie s'gueay pue uosodde anss isaq pue yauans punom
Prognosis
clinically a single layer has proved to be satisfactory in the cat.23,2° A
double layer of two continuous suture patterns, using a monoflament
The prognosis following removal is generally excellent However, the
suture with little friction between itself and the tissue has the advan-
presence of perforation or the breakdown of esophageal incisions.
tage of distributing the tension equally along the entire length of the
with the risk of developing mediastinitis and pleuritis, carries a poor
prognosis and requires aggressive management. With long-standing
incision and resists dehiscence as well as simple interrupted sutures.34
foreign bodies or where there is gross compromise of the esophageal
The choice of suture materials is one of personal choice; the studies
by Oakes?3 and Shamir23 used polydioxanone. In one recent clinical
wall there are the risks of permanent proximal dilatation or esopha-
geal strictures forming.
report in the cat, poliglecaprone 25 was used for single layer closure28
while Sale & Williams? used a two-layer closure with poliglecaprone
Neoplasia
25 in mucosa/submucosa and glycomer 630 in the outer layer. If there
is evidence of severe contusion or necrosis at the surgical site, the
 Esophageal neoplasia is rare in the cat, and is reported as accounting
 esophageal wound can be reinforced by using the caudal or cranial
 eouie  snownbs as'swseldoau aeud yo s'o ueui ssal ioy
 portions of the sternohyoideus muscle.36
(SCC) is the most commonly reported neoplasm predominantly seen 
in older cats and usually but not exclusively seen in the distal third
of the esophagus,1.3o Neuroendocrine esophageal carcinomas have
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
also been described in the cat.31 Cats usually present with a history of
FOR ESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
progressive anorexia, dysphagia and regurgitation, weight loss, and
depression. Plain radiographs may demonstrate a soft-tissue mass in
the distal esophagus, with contrast studies showing marked mucosal
Surgical management for esophageal disease can be carried out
filling defects. Confrmation of the diagnosis requires endoscopic
in three ways. Esophageal strictures and foreign bodies are best
evaluation and biopsy, though confrmation of the diagnosis may be
approached endoscopically initially. If this is unsuccessful, considera-
diffcult.ll The prognosis is generally poor as the lesions are often
tion is given to esophagotomy that may or may not be combined with
extensive at the time of diagnosis.
a thoracotomy, depending on the location of the lesion. Extraluminal
 The esophagus may be compressed by extraluminal masses, particu-
 obstructions, such as vascular ring anomalies, require surgical inter-
larly mediastinal lymphoma or thymoma.
vention that does not enter the esophageal lumen, but will require a
thoracotomy (see Chapter 41).
Prognosis
There is very little data available on feline esophageal neoplasia, but
Esophageal strictures: bougienage and
balloon dilatation
Resection may be feasible in some cats, dependent on the location and
 Surgery is generally not recommended for the management of esopha-
size of the intramural mass. In one case balloon dilatation was not
 geal strictures, rather dilatation of the narrowing by ballooning or
successful but the cat survived four months with a gastrostomy tube.1l
bougienage is usually attempted. Balloon dilatation (Box 27-3) is
The esophagectomy technique described by Ranen and others? can
be used, but there is little data on survival post resection in the cat.2?
 generally preferred to serial bougienage as the former applies an even
radial force and there are theoretically less shear forces applied to the
stricture (Fig. 27-14).27
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS FOR
 Bougies are long narrow rounded instruments that are available in
 a number of sizes (Fig. 27-12). Some are designed to pass over a guide
ESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
wire and are most easily used with rigid endoscopes or fluoroscopy.
 The aim is to start with the smallest size and progressively increase
Cats should be prepared for surgery by correction of any dehydration
the diameter of the bougie used in steps of 2 French gauge. In human
and electrolyte imbalances. Surgery that involves incising the esopha-
 surgery, there is a 'rule of three' where it is recommended to dilate
gus is considered clean contaminated and intravenous perioperative
only by three sizes at each procedure. Such a rule should always be
antibiotics are recommended. Antibiotics should also be considered
tempered by clinical judgment and it is advisable to stop once hemor-
if the patient has aspiration pneumonia. If megaesophagus is present
rhage is seen at the stricture site.
295
Section
151
The Abdomen
 Box 27-3 Balloon dilatation of an esophageal stricture
The cat is anesthetized for mechanical dilatation of the stricture under
seconds with the pressure monitored (Fig. 27-11). The balloon is 
endoscopic visualization. Balloon catheters with a balloon size (when 
deflated and withdrawn allowing the stricture to be reassessed (Fig.
inflated) of 10 or 20 mm in diameter and 6-8 cm in length are used
 27-10C) and the procedure repeated if necessary. Some hemorrhage
(Fig. 27-9). The catheter diameter when deflated is 2.8 mm and it can
is inevitable, but if it seems excessive then assess for any evidence of
either be passed via the operating channel of a flexible endoscope or 
esophageal tearing. The procedure is repeated at three to five day 
ou! pahasu! s! uoolleg patetap aul adonsopua aul apisbuole papinb
intervals for a minimum of three treatments. Serious complications
the lumen of the stricture, with a small part of the balloon visible 
(hemorrhage, perforation) are rare.
proximally (Fig. 27-10A,B), it is then inflated to 40-50 psi for 60-90
/
A
B
 Figure 27-9 Balloon catheters. (A) Deflated balloon catheter. The attached pressure scale corresponds to the balloon diameter. (B) Inflated balloon
catheter.
A
B
C
Figure 27-10 Endoscopic images of (A) an esophageal stricture in a cat and (B) balloon placement. (C) After dilation. (Courtesy of lan Hopkins.)
Recently. the use of intraluminal esophageal stents has been
described with limited success.18.37 The use of a suitable biodegradable
stent after two or three attempts at balloon dilatation may be a viable
option in the future, though further work is needed in this area before
it can be recommended as a routine treatment.18
Vascular ring anomalies
For the majority of vascular ring anomalies a left-sided fourth inter-
costal thoracotomy is employed, which provides the best access for
the left-sided ligamentum arteriosum found with a persistent right-
sided aortic arch (Box 27-4). For further information on thoracotomy
see Chapter 41.
Esophageal foreign bodies
 In most cases, esophagoscopic retrieval with forceps is the safest and
Figure 27-11 Inflation handle with syringe and pressure gauge.
Open, rigid esophagoscopes (Fig. 27-15) in combination with long
296
Esophagus
Chapter
27
A
B
C
Figure 27-12 Bougies are thin cylinders that are inserted into the esophagus to widen a stricture. (A,B) Rubber blunt-ended bougies in a range of
sizes from 20 to 60 French Gauge. (A) full length, (B) close up of tips, (C) silicone bougies that are tapered.
 Box 27-4 Thoracotomy for left-sided ligamentum arteriosum found with a persistent right-sided aortic arch
The cat is positioned in right lateral recumbency for a left-sided fourth 
Aorta
intercostal thoracotomy (see Chapter 41, Box 41-3). The lungs are
gently displaced from the surgical field and held away by moist surgical
swabs. The pericardium is incised longitudinally between the 
vagosympathetic trunk and the phrenic nerve. In order to facilitate
Ligamentum
localizing the esophagus and the stricture, an esophageal tube is 
arteriosum
inserted per os. The ligamentum arteriosum is identified (Fig. 27-13)
and dissected free of the esophageal wall, then two encircling ligatures
 S! upum 'wnuaweb!l aui uo Aiewlxoud pue Allersip pall ane yl We jo
then divided. It is essential at this stage to break down the 
periesophageal fibrous tissue proximal and distal to the stricture; failure
to do this will result in inadequate dilatation of the narrowed portion 
of the esophagus. Dilatation can be aided by bougienage or balloon 
dilatation from wvithin the esophageal lumen, if required.
 The defect in the pericardium is left unsutured and all swabs removed 
Esophagus
from the thoracic cavity. Three to four sutures of polypropylene (3 or 
3.5M) are pre-placed and passed bluntly around adjacent ribs either in a
simple interrupted or cruciate mattress pattern. Care is taken to avoid 
Figure 27-13 Persistent right aortic arch. Ligamentum arteriosum runs 
the intercostal vessels. Muscles are reattached and sutured with a
from the pulmonary artery to the anomalous right-sided aorta.
synthetic absorbable suture and skin closure is routine. The thorax
should be drained of air using a wide bore cannula and three-way tap: in 
kittens, tube thoracostomy is not required.
forceps (Chevalier-Jackson pattern; Fig. 27-16) have the advantage of
 of a foreign body the esophagus should be inspected for evidence of
allowing dilatation ofthe esophagus suffciently to recover the foreign
ulceration or perforation. If there is any doubt regarding viability a
body. It is also possible to use a flexible endoscope in combination
gastrostomy tube should be placed. Esophagotomy is required if
with a basket retrieval system for small foreign bodies, but this has
forceps delivery is not possible.
the disadvantage of not being able to dilate the esophagus around the
-iad io aneiase ot iou uayei aq aie ze euassa st l poq uiaiog
Esophagotomy for intramural masses39
forate the mucosa on withdrawal of the foreign body. With some distal
foreign bodies it is easier to retropulse the foreign body into the
 Resection may be feasible in some cats, dependent on the location
stomach as bony foreign bodies can be left in the stomach to be
and size of the intramural mass. Small esophageal masses can be
digested, while non-digestible foreign bodies should be retrieved via
excised with a margin of unaffected muscle andthe remaining esopha-
a gastrotomy or endoscopy. It has been suggested that hairballs can
 gus closed with a single or double layer of interrupted simple continu-
be managed by oral laxatives once in the stomach.2 Following removal
ous sutures (Boxes 27-5 and 27-6).3? The diameter of the esophagus
297
Section
151
The Abdomen
can be maintained by making an additional transverse incision or by
cosing the longitudinal incisions in a transverse fashion (Fig. 27-18).
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AFTER
ESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
Postoperative or procedure pain relief is achieved in the first 24 hours
with systemic opioids (see Chapter 2). All cats can be fed small volumes
of a soft tinned proprietary diet 12 hours postoperatively. Following
Pinous ie aul Aieuoue su ieinosea e jo juauaueu ioy Aagins
initially be fed from a height until it is certain that no further regurgita-
tion occurs. Some cats will have a persistent dysfunctional esophagus
due to the dilatation and will require long-term postural feeding.
 During the course of stricture dilatation ongoing medical therapy
Figure 27-14 Fluoroscopy after a barium swallow showing successful
for esophagitis is essential. Concurrent use of corticosteroids systemi-
dilation of the esophageal stricture seen in Figure 27-4. The barium is
cally is not likely to be beneficial though their use intralesionally may
black rather than white because it is a fluoroscopy.
have some merit.4 It is further recommended that following the last
dilatation procedure or esophagotomy, medical management for
esophagitis should be continued for at least three weeks. This should
include oral mucosal protectants and antacids (either an H2 blocker
 Or a proton pump inhibitor). The use of ranitidine as the antacid has
the added advantage of accelerating gastric emptying and so further
reducing the risk of gastroesophageal reflux.4
 There is some debate as to whether a gastrostomy tube should be
placed routinely following esophagotomy orbougienage.41 It has been
advocated to divert food and to allow healing of the esophagus,23
but movement of the esophagus is unavoidable postoperatively.35
Augusto? placed a gastrostomy tube, but the cat was fed orally after
two days and recovered well. None of the dogs in one series of tran-
sthoracic esophagostomies had a tube placed and all healed unevent-
fully."s There is some anecdotal evidence that the esophagus is
maintained.
Figure 27-15 An open rigid endoscope for esophagoscopy in the cat.
COIMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS AFTER
ESOPHAGEAL SURGERY
Complications after esophageal surgery in general are rare, but can
include incisional breakdown, stricture formation, and megaesopha-
gus. The prognosis is dependent on the severity of the disease preop-
ai pue suosaa go aaaap au ieyas pue kiaa
presence and size of esophageal necrosis or perforation as well as the
location of the lesion. If mediastinitis and pleuritis develops this
Figure 27-16 Chevalier-Jackson forceps passed down the endoscopy
carries a poorer prognosis and requires aggressive management, which
instrument channel and (inset) close up view of the tips. These are
includes placement of thoracic drains and lavage of the pleural cavity.
Useful for foreign body retrieval.
 Box 27-5 Cervical esophagotomy
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbancy with the head extended. A
and any defects sutured, though experimental evidence suggests that
 ventral midline approach is used to access the cervical esophagus.28
snbeydosa aul o Aisnoaueuods jeay Aew wuw Zl ot dn spajap uaaa
can be closed in one or two appositional layers (Fig. 27-17) using 
Foreign bodies
 5! l! ing 'suaned aunins snonuiuon lo paidnaui aldwis lauia
The site of foreign body lodgment is identified visually and by palpation 
essential that the submucosa is included as it is the layer of
 uoeoad o suoisnon aot pauexa Anaen si eae aun pue
strength.3.28,3 The author uses a two-layer closure with
incision should be made longitudinally over the foreign body: stay
 aul u! oeg lawosajb pue esosnwgnsyesoonu u! sz auoidenajbod
uoiean aneiey oi pasn ag uen auadoudAlod ws'l lo z jo saunins 
outer layer. If there is evidence of severe contusion or necrosis at the
 and handling of the esophageal wound. Once the foreign body has
surgical site, the esophageal wound can be reinforced by using the 
 been removed, the esophagus is reassessed for evidence of perforation
 caudal or cranial portions of the sternohyoideus muscle.36
298
Esophagus
Chapter
27
 Box 27-5 Continued
Intramural masses
diameter (Fig. 27-18). After closure of the closest incision, the 
A longitudinal incision is made in the esophageal wall opposite where
esophagus is rotated using the stay sutures, to allow closure of the
the bulk of the mass is present. A full thickness incision is then made
other side. Closure is either by a single or double layer of simple 
around the base of the mass with a margin of approximately 1 cm of
interrupted sutures, or interrupted simple continuous sutures as 
unaffected esophagus. After mass removal, there are two incisions in
described previously.32
the esophageal wall, which are closed longitudinally, but if necessary
 a short transverse closure is carried out to maintain esophageal
Figure 27-17 Closure of the esophageal wall can be achieved in one
 aduis y pasop s! lael lauui aui we bep st ul 'sael omi o
interrupted sutures, ensuring the sutures engage the submucosa. The 
paidnaui aldwis jo lakel anesedas e ym pasop s! lakel laino 
Figure 27-18 Longitudinal esophageal wall incisions can be closed 
 sutures.
 Box 27-6 Transthoracic esophagotomy
 Cats are positioned in right lateral recumbency and a standard left
cuciate mattress pattern. The subcutaneous tissues and skin are
intercostal thoracotomy performed at the level of the intercostal space
closed routinely. Air and fluid are drained from the pleural cavity via
overlying the foreign body or mass (see Chapter 41).39 The esophagus
 the thoracostomy tube immediately after closure. Where there is no 
is identified, the vagus retracted where necessary, and stay sutures (2 
local contamination due to perforation the thoracostomy tube can be
ol ats papage aul jo apis lautla paneid (auadoidaiod s'l o
removed immediately. If an effusion is present it should be left in situ
provide traction and stability during handling. Saline soaked swabs are
and aspirated as required until the effusion resolves.
packed around the affected esophageal site to limit contamination of
Intramural masses
the pleura.
After thoracotomy, esophageal masses are readily identified by
Foreign bodies
 palpation and the affected part of the esophagus packed off from 
A longitudinal incision is made overlying the foreign body. A suction
the thorax with moistened swabs. Polypropylene stay sutures can be
cannula is inserted into the incision to remove esophageal fluid
used proximal and distal to the mass to facilitate manipulation. A
paan pue sdanioy lauoy ym padseh s! apog uhiaoy aul luatuo
longitudinal incision is made in the esophageal wall opposite where 
from the lumen by gentle manipulation and traction. Post removal
the bulk of the mass is present. A full thickness incision is then made
the distal esophageal wall is checked for perforation and necrotic
around the base of the mass with a margin of approximately 1 cm of 
Aue pue atis Auonobeydosa aul uessanau se papigap pue anss!
unaffected esophagus. After mass removal, there are two incisions in
perforations are closed using a double or single layer appositional
the esophageal wall, which are closed longitudinally but if necessary
aa pinous eanaid pue anis au uasad s! uenoyad e fl anbuupat
a short transverse closure is carried out to maintain esophageal
lavaged with warm physiologic saline. An intercostal thoracostomy tube
diameter (Fg. 27-18). After closure of the closest incision, the 
(8 or 10 Fr gauge) is placed through the dorsocaudal thoracic wall prior 
 esophagus is rotated using the stay sutures, to allow closure of the
to thoracic closure. The thoracotomy is closed routinely (see Chapter
other side. Closure is either by a single or double layer of simple
41) using monofilament 3 or 3.5M polydioxanone sutures. These are
interrupted sutures, or interupted simple continuous sutures as 
 pre-placed and passed bluntly through adjacent intercostal spaces in a
described above.32
299
Section
5
The Abdomen
REFERENCES
Reynolds RP, El-Sharkawy TY, Diamant 
associated with doxycycline therapy.
28. Augusto M, Kraijer M, Pratschke KM.
 NE. Lower esophageal sphincter function
I Feline Med Surg 2005;7:33-41.
Chronic oesophageal foreign body in a
in the cat: role of central innervation
15.
Beatty IA, Swift N, Foster DJ, Barrs VR.
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:237-40.
assessed by transient vagal blockade. Am.
Suspected clindamycin associated
29.
Ridgway R, Suter P. Clinical and
I Physiol 1984;246:G666-74.
oesophageal injury in cats: five cases.
radiographic signs in primary and
2.
. Grandage J. Functional anatomy of the 
I Feline Med Surg 2006;8:412-19.
metastatic esophageal neoplasms of the
digestive system. In: Slatter D, editor.
16.
Pearson H, Darke PG, Gibbs C, et al.
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1979;174:
Textbook of small animal surgery. 3rd ed.
 Reflux oesophagitis and stricture
700-4.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002. p. 504.
formation after anaesthesia: a review of
30.
Gualtieri M, Monzeglio MG, Di
3.
Ellenport CR. Carnivore digestive system.
seven cases in dogs and cats. I Small 
Giancamillo M. Oesophageal squamous
In: Getty R, editor. Sisson and Grossman's
Anim Prac 1978;19:507-19.
cell carcinoma in two cats. J Small Anim
The anatomy of the domestic animals.
17.
 Galatos AD, Rallis T, Raptopoulos S.
Prac 1999;40:70-83.
5th ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.1
Post anaesthetic oesophageal stricture
31.
Patnaik AK, Erlandson RA, Lieberman PH.
1975. p. 1547.
formation in three cats. J Small Anim Prac
Oesophageal neuroendocrine carcinoma
 4. Glazer A, Walters P. Oesophagitis and
1994;35:638-42.
in a cat. Vet Pathol 1990;27:128-30.
Oesophageal Strictures. Compend
18.
 Glanemann B, Hildebrandt N, Schneider
32.
 Ranen E, Shamir MH, Shahar R, Johnston
Continuing Educ 2008;30:281-92.
MA. Recurrent single oesophageal stricture
DE. Partial oesophagectomy with single
 5. Hasim MA, Waterman AE. Determination
treated by a self-expanding stent in a cat.
layer closure for treatment of oesophageal
of the length and position of the lower
J Feline Med Surg 2008;10:505-9.
sarcomas in 6 dogs. Vet Surg 2004;33:
 Oesophageal sphincter (LOS) by
19.
 Harai BH, Johnson SE, Sherding RG.
428-34.
 correlation of external measurements with
 Endoscopically guided balloon dilation of
33.
 Oakes MG, Hosgood G, Snider TG 3rd,
 combined radiographic and manometric
benign esophageal strictures in G cats and
et al. Oesophagotomy closure in the
estimations in the cat. Br Vet J 1992;148:
7 dogs. I Vet Int Med 1995;9:332-5.
dog. A comparison of a double layer
435-44.
20. Melendez L, Twedt DC, Weyrauch EA.
appositional and two single layer
 Dallman Ml. Functional suture-holding
et al. Conservative therapy using balloon
appositional techniques. Vet Surg
 layer of the oesophagus in the dog. I Am
dilation for intramural, inflammatory 
1993;22:451-6.
Vet Med Assoc 1988;192:638-40.
esophageal strictures in dogs and cats: a
34.
Poole GV Jr, Meredith JW, Kon ND, et al.
7. Macmanus JE, Dameron JT, Paine JR. The 
retrospective study of 23 cases (1987-
 Suture technique and wound bursting
extent to which one may interfere with
1997). Eur J Comp Gastroenterol
strength. Am Surg 1984;50:569-72.
the blood supply of the esophagus and
1998;3:31-6.
35.
 Sale CSH, Williams JM. Results of
obtain healing on anastomosis. Surgery
21.
Leib MS, Dinnel H, Ward DL, et al.
transthoracic oesophagotomy retrieval of
1950;28:11-23.
Endoscopic balloon dilation of benign
oesophageal foreign body obstructions in 
8.
Frowde PE, Battersby IA, Whitley NT,
esophageal strictures in dogs and cats.
dogs: 14 cases (2000-2004). J Am Anim
Elwood CM. Oesophageal disease in 33
JVet Int Med 2001;3:139-43.
Hosp Assoc 2006;42:450-6.
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:564-9.
22.
Bissett SA, Davis J, Subler K, Degernes LA.
36.
Purinton PT, Chambers JN, Moore JL.
9. Ruaux CG, Steiner JIM, williams DA. The
Risk factors and outcome of bougienage
Identifcation and categorization of the
 gastrointestinal tract. In: Chandler EA,
for treatment of benign oesophageal
vascular patterns to muscles of the
et al, editors. Feline medicine and
strictures in dogs and cats: 28 cases
 thoracic limb, thorax, and neck of dogs.
therapeutics. 3rd ed. Oxford: wiley.
[1995-2004). JAm Vet Med Assoc
Am I Vet Res 1992;53:1435-45.
Blackwell; 2007. p. 397.
2009;235:844- 50.
37.
 McLean GK, LeVeen RF Shear stress in the
10.
Moses L, Harpster NK, Beck KA,
23. Shamir MH, Merav H, Shahar R, et al.
performance of oesophageal dilation:
Hartzband L. Esophageal motility
 Approaches to oesophageal sutures.
comparison of balloon dilation and
dysfunction in cats: a study of 44 cases.
Compend Continuing Educ 1999;21:
bougienage. Radiology 1989;172:983-6.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:309-12.
414-20.
38.
Houlton JEF, Herrtage ME, Taylor PM,
11.
 Berube D, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Rohleder J.
24.
 Urich Sl. Report of a persistent right aortic
et al. Thoracic oesophageal foreign bodies
Vemireddi V. Primary esophageal
arch and its surgical correction in a cat.
in the dog: a review of ninety cases.
squamous cell carcinoma in a cat. J Am 
J Small Anim Prac 1962;4:337-8.
J Small Anim Prac 1985;26:521-36.
Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45:291-5.
25
White RN, Burton CA, Hale IS. Vascular
39.0
 Orton EC. Surgical diseases of the
12.
Adamama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS.
 ring anomaly with coarctation of the
thoracic wall. in: Slatter D, editor.
 Prassinos NN, Galatos AD. Benign 
aorta in a cat. J Small Anim Prac 2003;44:
Textbook of small animal surgery. 3rd ed.
esophageal stricture in the dog and cat: a
330-4.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002. p. 373.
retrospective study of 20 cases. Can J Vet
26.
 Squires RA. Oesophageal obstruction by
Killen DA, Pridgen W. Tolerance of the
Res 2002;66:55-9.
a hairball in a cat. J Small Anim Prac
dog to esophageal perforation. J Surg Res
13. McGrotty YL, Knottenbelt CM.
1989;30:311-14.
1961;1:315-17.
Oesophageal stricture in a cat due to oral
27.
Barrs VR, Beatty JIA, Tisdall Pl, et al.
41.
Williams JM, White RAS. Tube
administration of tetracyclines. J Small
Intestinal obstruction by trichobezoars
gastrostomy in dogs. J Small Anim Prac
Anim Prac 2002;43:221-3.
in fve cats. J Feline Med Surg 1999;1:
1993;34:59-64.
14. German AJ, Cannon MJ, Dye C, Booth
199-207.
Ml, et al. Oesophageal strictures in cats
00E
[28]
Chapter
Stomach
Z. Halfacree
This chapter discusses the surgical diseases of the stomach in the cat.
 as they pass through the esophageal hiatus. The sympathetic innerva-
Apoq uiainy ioy Aunsee iened u Aiaans ssea adus
tion arises from the splanchnic nerves, with the post-ganglionic fibres
removal or full-thickness gastrointestinal biopsy, is sometimes indi-
from the celiacomesenteric ganglion traveling along the branches of
cated in the cat. More involved gastric surgery, such as gastric resec-
the celiac artery. The feline enteric nervous system is composed of two
tions and pyloroplasty are encountered less frequently. This chapter
 ganglionated plexuses. The gastric lymphatic system drains to the
includes an overview of the preoperative and perioperative considera-
 gastric, hepatic, or splenic lymph nodes.' The gastric lymph nodes are
-aipui aui yo Aieuuns e pue Aiasins ssea sujogiapun sies ioy suon
located on the lesser curvature of the stomach within the lesser
tions for gastric surgery. The surgical techniques for commonly
 omentum and are inconsistently present.
indicated procedures, including gastrotomy and tube gastrostomy, are
 The mesenteric structures supporting the stomach are known as the
discussed in detail and the techniques used for pyloric surgery are
jo pasoduos si wunuauo iaieai aui wumuauo iassal pue iaeai
summarized.
 parietal and visceral layers and each layer is composed of two perito-
neal sheets. A meshwork of blood vessels and lymphatics running
within strands of adipose tissue lies between the fine sheets, creating
SURGICAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 a net-like appearance. The visceral layer of the greater omentum origi-
nates at the dorsal abdominal wall in common with the transverse
mesocolon and extends caudally, covering the ventrolateral aspect of
The stomach is positioned in the cranial abdomen at the level of the
the small intestines. At the level of the pelvic inlet the omentum is
costal arch, sitting within the concavity of the visceral surface of the
reflected upon itself to form the parietal layer of the greater omentum
liver (Fig. 28-1). The position of the stomach varies depending upon
filling and the size of the surrounding viscera. A cat's stomach can
accept 300-350 mL of liquid.' Ingesta enters the stomach at the
cardia, passing through the lower esophageal sphincter. In the cat this
sphincter is comprised of an oblique gastric sling muscle, which lies
on the left lateral aspect of the sphincter, and a circular muscle that
fully encircles the distal esophagus.2 Ingesta exits the stomach via the
pylorus; although the exact mechanisms are not clear, it is evident that
the pylorus plays an essential role in coordinating gastric motility and
gastric emptying.
 The vascular supply of the stomach is derived from the celiac artery.
which branches into the hepatic artery, left gastric artery, and splenic
artery. The right and left gastric arteries are situated along the lesser
curvature and the right and left gastroepiploic arteries situated along
the greater curvature of the stomach. A few branches from the splenic
artery (short gastric arteries) supply the fundus. The hepatic artery
gives rise to the gastroduodenal artery before continuing as the right
gastroepiploic artery. In turn, the gastroduodenal artery supplies the
cranial pancreaticoduodenal artery, which is responsible for the vas-
 cular supply to the proximal duodenum.4
Figure 28-1 A computed tomography scan in transverse section of an
The parasympathetic innervation is supplied by the vagus nerve and
adult domestic short-haired cat demonstrating the position of the
its dorsal and ventral vagal trunks that supply branches to the stomach
stomach within the concavity of the visceral surface of the liver.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00028-7
301
Section
151
The Abdomen
R
Figure 28-2 Topographic anatomy in the normal cat: the tips of the
pu hen aul ten e jo ypews aui ui apog uiaoy alpaau  e-az ana
forceps are inserted into the epiploic foramen in the craniodorsal
ingested a needle and thread and the radiopaque needle is clearly visible.
abdomen.
that lays adjacent to the ventrolateral abdominal wall and continues
Cranially to insert on the greater curvature of the stomach.
170dB/C4
 The stomach sits between the two sheets of the greater omentum
2DOpt:Res
and these then converge at the lesser curvature of the stomach to form
FrRate:Max
the lesser omentum. The potential space between the visceral and
 parietal layers of the omentum is called the omental bursa. Access to
this space is gained via the epiploic foramen (Fig. 28-2) in the crani-
Buuado les e suean uas Aq Ains io 'upe iesioo
through the greater omentum, into the omental bursa. The left limb
of the pancreas is present between the sheets of the visceral layer of
the greater omentum adjacent to the dorsal aspect of the stomach and
the spleen is situated between the sheets of the parietal layer of the
greater omentum. The portion of greater omentum extending between
the greater curvature of the stomach and the spleen is referred to as
the gastrosplenic ligament.
Figure 28-4 An ultrasound image demonstrating a mass involving the
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
cardia of the stomach in a 1-year-old domestic short-haired cat. (Courtesy
 Alison Moores; @ Anderson Moores Veterinary Specialfsts.)
Hematology, serum biochemistry. serum electrolytes, and urinalysis
are routinely performed in cats with gastric disease Gastric ulceration
may lead to anemia and serum electrolytes may be deranged in any
 Inflated thoracic radiography, including both lateral projections, is
patient suffering from vomiting.Vomition and loss of chloride, potas-
indicated in patients in which neoplasia is suspected to screen for
sium, and acid-rich gastric secretions can lead to hypochloremic
metastatic pulmonary disease In patients suffering from regurgitation
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis; however, acid-base imbalances can
thoracic radiography is advised to identify evidence of aspiration
be complex and hypovolemia may lead to metabolic acidosis.
pneumonia.
Diagnostic imaging
Gastroscopy
Plain abdominal radiography can be valuable in diagnosis of intralu-
Gastroscopy can be extremely useful in the management of gastric
minal foreign bodies (Fig. 28-3) and gastric distension. In order to
disease. It provides an unrivalled perspective of the gastric lumen
identify gastric mucosal or mural lesions using radiography, contrast
and mucosal surface and may reveal lesions eluding other imaging
studies may be necessary. However, ultrasonography is frequently
modalities, which could also be missed on external evaluation of the
rewarding for evaluating these lesions (Fig. 28-4) and often eliminates 
stomach at laparotomy. Endoscopy allows biopsy samples to be
the need for contrast studies of the stomach in these patients. Approxi-
obtained for histopathology, thereby providing prognostic informa-
mately 30% of normal cats have submucosal fat which appears as a
tion and aiding surgical planning if appropriate (Fig. 28-5). Unfortu-
radiolucent line within the gastric wall on radiography: it is impor-
nately, the mucosal surface of neoplastic lesions may be necrotic or
 tant to note that this is a normal finding.
inflamed and histopathology can be misleading.1 Gastroscopy is also
 Studies of gastric motility and gastric emptying often rely upon
a useful technique to allow retrieval of foreign bodies without the
fluoroscopic contrast studies.? Nuclear scintigraphy is the gold stand-
need for surgery. However, the withdrawal of very large or sharp
ard for monitoring of gastric transit times and gastric emptying.
objects through the cardia and esophagus should be avoided.
302
Stomach
Chapter
28
Figure 28-5 Two images captured during gastroscopy performed in an
11-year-old domestic short-haired cat with a history of weight loss and
vomiting. Cytologic and histopathologic specimens obtained at
gastroscopy confirmed a diagnosis of large cell lymphoma.
Figure 28-6 Lateral thoracic and abdominal radiograph of a 1-year-old
female neutered domestic short-haired cat with a cotton thread linear
foreign body lodged under the cat's tongue. A barium study had
au u pauung eadde sausaun lls al paoad ua Aisnoad
SURGICAL DISEASES
absorbed by the cotton thread, highlighting the path of the cotton
Full thickness gastric biopsy and gastric foreign body removal are the
through the thoracic esophagus from the oral cavity to the abdomen
lauo ien au ul Aains pse suoad ioy suoseai uoo jso
(arrows).
less common indications include surgery for management of gastric
outflow disease, neoplasia, and gastroduodendal perforation and
combination of gastrotomy and one or more enterotomy incisions
addressing gastric dilatation associated with diaphragmatic rupture.
 au u paad si Ansi e niul a aq ai
aspect ofthe gastric body allowing acces to the most proximal portion
Gastric foreign bodies
of the foreign body. Gentle traction can be applied to attempt retrieval
via the gastrotomy site; however, caution must be exercised to prevent
Gastric foreign bodies are occasionally seen in the cat, but due to the
further damage to the mesenteric border of the small intestine. If any
relative dietary discretion of this species they are far less common than
resistance is experienced the foreign body must be removed in pieces:
in the dog. The most common gastric foreign bodies include trichob-
the large portion present within the gastric lumen is sectioned from
ezoars (fur balls) and linear foreign bodies, such as a needle and
the portion extending into the small intestine allowing the plication
thread (see Fig. 28-3). Foreign bodies may be responsible for vomiting
effect to be released. The remaining portion of the linear foreign body
secondary to gastric outflowobstruction,nitiation ofgastritis orintes
pue panbai se suoisiun Auoonaua ieuope ynanr paaouan si
tinal plication. They may be seen as incidental fndings on abdominal
gastrotomy and enterotomy sites are closed routinely. Careful inspec-
radiographs in the absence of clinical signs.
tion of the mesenteric border of the small intestine is essential to
Where facilities and expertise permit, endoscopic retrieval of gastric
determine if perforation or necrosis of the intestinal wall has occurred.
foreign bodies is preferable to surgery unless the nature of the foreign
Multiple sites of intestinal resection and anastomosis can be neces-
body suggests that damage to the cardia or esophagus may occur
sary: however, the incidence of intestinal perforation and requirement
during retrieval.
for intestinal resection anastomosis is far lower in the cat compared
to the dog.1213 It has been theorized that the thinner, less bulky, nature
of linear foreign bodies in cats is responsible for a lesser degree of
Linear foreign bodies
intestinal plication, resulting in a lower morbidity and mortality in
The most common site of anchorage of linear foreign bodies in the
aul jo manaan uodn pasea s gop aul on uoseduon un saoads si
cat is under the tongue (Fig. 28-6); however, anchorage at the gastric
literature, it is suggested that the probability of septic peritonitis and
pylorus is also seen.12 Plication of the duodenum and jejunum occurs
death secondary to a linear foreign body is approximately half that in
Apoq uaiaioy panounue aul aaou oi sdae sisieisad reusaui se
a cat in comparison to a dog.12.13
 aborally, resulting in a functional and/or structural intestinal obstruc-
A technique has been described via which linear foreign bodies may
tion; however, unlike the dog secondary intussusception has not been
l a t'i a u aa aus e ynn p a
observed.12.1# The radiographic appearance of linear foreign bodies
foreign body is secured to a red rubber catheter that is inserted into
does not conform to the classical picture of dilated loops of small
the intestinal lumen and milked towards the anus, together with the
intestine normally associated with intestinal obstruction and could
intestinal foreign body. Due to the difference in the nature of the
lead to the diagnosis being overlooked. Thorough patient evaluation
foreign bodies they ingest, this technique is unlikely to be applicable
together with inspection of the abdominal radiographs for bunching
to the dog, but it should always be considered in the cat The authors
of the small intestine, potentiallyinan abnormal position,andirreu
describe that this technique would be applicable when the anchorage
lar accumulations of small intestinal gas should alert the clinician to
site was within the stomach; however, the catheter would be intro-
the diagnosis.
duced via the gastrotomy and advanced aborally towards the anus.
Removal ofthe linear foreign body requires release of the anchorage
 Conservative management of linear foreign bodies in the cat has
point, which is commonly at the base of the tongue or the gastric
pylorus. Surgical management should be performed promptly follow-
the anchorage site of the foreign body under the tongue and releasing
ing release at the base ofthe tongue, sinceloss of intestinal plication
it, therefore allowing the foreign body to pass. This could be consid-
may expose areas of intestinal perforation and allow leakage of
ered if surgical intervention is not possible due to financial con-
intestinal contents. When the anchorage site is at the pylorus a
straints; however, due to the risk of gastrointestinal perforation
Section
5
The Abdomen
the author would advocate surgical management via exploratory
Gastroduodenal ulceration and perforation
laparoto my.
Gastroduodenal ulceration is occasionally seen in the cat.18-21 Predis-
posing factors include stress associated with surgery, administration
Pyloric stenosis
of steroid or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, and as a
ined ui 'sie paiq and sunon ui uaas si uounysip sse
paraneoplastic syndrome (e.g., systemic effects of mast cell neoplasia
Siamese cats.1 They are generally less than 6 months old at presenta-
 Or pancreatic gastrinoma).18-21 Several cases reported in the literature
tion. The presenting clinical signs include vomiting. which may be
have failed to identify an underlying cause. Gastric ulceration and
perforation may also occur secondary to primary gastric disease.
projectile, and weight loss; regurgitation may also be present. Investi-
gations reveal gastric distension and a functional delay in gastric
including neoplasia and inflammatory bowel disease. Clinical signs
outflow associated with pyloric stenosis (Fig. 28-7). Normal gastric
include inappetence, vomiting, hematemesis, and melena; progres-
emptying should start within 15 minutes of barium ingestion and the
sion to gastric perforation may result in depression and collapse due
stomach is generally empty in four hours.? Concurrent megaesopha-
-s ym s u suuy iiu u e si eiauh 'sisdas o
gus is often present (Fig. 28-7) and while primary megaesophagus is
testinal blood loss; however, it is important to note that hematemesis
suspected, it can be unclear if this is due to secondary esophagitis.
Or melena were present in less than a third of cats with gastrointestinal
 Postmortem examination of one cat has documented gastric hetero-
ulceration in one review.18
topia, with secretory gastric mucosa within the distended esophagus.
Cats that have suffered from gastric perforation may present with
ons uaq aey sie aos e'sgudosa on unquon Aqeunsand
depression and abdominal distension due to pneumoperitoneum.
cessfully managed medically with postural feeding and gastroprotec-
Radiographic evidence of marked spontaneous pneumoperitoneum
tion; however, when delayed gastric emptying or pyloric stenosis are
in the cat should raise the suspicion of gastric perforation (Fig. 28-8).
documented, pyloroplasty is warranted. As this appears to be largely
Utrasonographic findings of gastric perforation can be quite non-
a functional obstruction, pyloromyotomy or Y to U pyloroplasty are
specifc, with bright regional mesenteric fat and peritoneal effusion
likely to be suffcient a Billroth procedure is not warranted. Tube
noted most frequently.22 Abdominal radiography is advocated to facil-
gastrostomy (see Box 28-3) is recommended due to the potential for
itate detection of pneumoperitoneum.
Tension pneumoperitoneum causing respiratory embarrassment
on Aiiesai iaddn iuauo ym ie e u paqap uaaq seu
gastric motility may already be abnormal.
The outcome is likely to be influenced by presence of megaesopha-
obstruction.23 Therapeutic abdominocentesis may be required in this
gus, but the prognosis for resolution of megaesophagus is unclear
situation to achieve stabilization; however, this is uncommon.
ae uoeiasn jeuaponponsea yim sies ut Aaans ioy suoeipul
until resolution of vomiting has been achieved, together with an
listed in Box 28-1. Surgery is invariably required as cats tend to present
appropriate period of medical management for esophagitis.
when disease is advanced and gastric perforation has occurred.
Septic peritonitis is a life-threatening condition with a guarded
 prognosis; its presence necessitates careful patient stabilization and
prompt surgical intervention (see Chapter 26). In one study looking
at septic peritonitis in cats, with a range of underlying causes, only 12
of 26 cats survived to discharge.24 Thorough exploratory laparotomy.
gastric resection at the site of perforation (see Box 28-4), copious
lavage, and empirical antibiosis (while pending culture results) are
A
B
Figure 28-7 Hluoroscopic barium swallowing study in a 6-month-old
male neutered Siamese kitten. (A) The esophagus is moderately dilated 
Figure 28-8 A lateral abdominal radiograph of a 5-year-old male entire
along its length. (B) The stomach is distended with food particles, fluid 
domestic short-haired cat that presented following discovery of small 
sausaun lius aun oui buissed wnea jo auapa ou si aaul seb pue
focal penetrating wounds. The cat had been shot with an air rifle and 
after 15 minutes, suggestive of pyloric stenosis.
one of the airgun pellets had perforated the gastric wall.
304
Stomach
Chapter
28
Box 28-1 Indications for surgery in cats with
duodenal ulceration
 Failure to respond to medical management 
 Life-threatening gastrointestinal hemorrhage
 Evidence of gastric perforation
essential. The site of gastric perforation can be challenging to identify
and thorough inspection must be performed.
Perforation of a gastric ulcer involving the pylorus can present a
surgical challenge The morbidity associated with a Billroth I (pylorec-
tomy and gastroduodenostomy) or Billroth Il (pyloroduodenectomy
and gastrojejunostomy) is ideally avoided in patients with potentially
benign disease When possible, local debridement and primary closure
should be performed in the frst instance, avoiding more radical gastric
resection which is potentially unnecessary. It is essential that the repair
is augmented with omentum or a serosal patch. Tissue must always 
Figure 28-9 A lateral abdominal radiograph of a 4-year-old domestic
be obtained for histopathology to rule out gastric neoplasia.
short-haired cat that presented with acute collapse and dyspnea. The cat
Gastric perforation may be caused by trauma; due to the protected
has a traumatic diaphragmatic rupture and herniation of the stomach
site of the stomach within the costal arch the most common traumatic
into the pleural cavity with subsequent development of tension
lesion is a ballistic projectile, such as an airgun pellet (Fig. 28-8)
gastrothorax. (Courtesy Victoria Lipscomb.)
Disorders associated with the
esophageal hiatus
life-threatening complication of 'tension gastrothorax' (Fig. 28-9).
 Respiratory compromise occurs due to occupation of the pleural space
Gastric disease associated with the esophageal hiatus occurs infre-
by the stomach which, depending upon position, can become mark-
quently in the cat, with only a few case reports available in the
aul jo uoisaiduoap Auaiaug gss'le pade Aq papuaisp Aipa
literature,25-28 Gastroesophageal intussusception is the term used to
distended stomach is required via passage of a nasogastric tube or
describe invagination of the stomach into the lumen of the distal
anpai ot Aasims uoeziqeis sumod sisauanansee sncaueiniad
 esophagus. Predisposing factors are reported to be megaesophagus, an
the herniated viscera and repair the diaphragmatic rupture must also
incompetent lower esophageal sphincter, and chronic vomiting. Pre-
be performed.
senting signs include regurgitation, vomiting, dyspnea and collapse.
 Abdominal viscera, including the stomach, may become incarcer-
The prognosis is considered guarded, but successful outcome has
 ated following diaphragmatic rupture and non-viable tissue must be
been reported in the dog following prompt diagnosis and interven-
resected (Fig. 28-10).
Gastric dilatation and volvulus occurs rarely in cats and diaphrag-
e jo juauaneid pue xadansee 'uondassnssnui au jo uonpa
matic rupture, with the stomach remaining within the peritoneal
stomach tube Non-surgical management with endoscopic reduction
no jyssans sese susosid e aq oi side 
of the intussusception intraluminally and percutaneous endoscopic
sea pue uonezllqeis anedoidde sumony paodan uaaq seu
ul os Xddnd auo ul paodai uaaq sey yuauaneld aqn Auoisonse3
derotation at surgery, following the same management approach as
s uonasnssmul ieseudosaonee yrum u sop au on senuon
for the dog. Gastropexy is advocated; however, the literature indicates
this is not consistently performed when the predisposing factor of
tion, intermittent gastroesophageal intussusception with mild chronic
sey eiuay leieiy sups paguapi uaaq sey amnu seaede
clinical signs represents two of the four individual case reports in
been reported as a complication following diaphragmatic rupture and
the cat.26.28
diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy in the cat;?3 successful surgical manage-
Congenital sliding hiatal hernia has been reported in a small
ment is reported with hiatal herniorrhaphy and tube or incisional
number of cats.a-3 Surgical management by herniorrhaphy.
gastropexy.
there was no long term follow up. Successful management by dietary
Gastric neoplasia
Surgical management of sliding esophageal hiatal hernia has been
u uaas Aleiaua si pue ies aul ui uoosun si eiseldoau ose
reported in a lynx, cougar, and a lion.*4 For more information on
older animals. Lymphoma is the most commonly reported gastric
management of hiatal hernia, see Chapter 45.
tumor in the cat and it is not amenable to surgical resection due to
the diffuse nature of disease In comparison to lymphoma at other
Gastric disorders associated with
 sites, a histopathologic diagnosis is often required to achieve a diag-
diaphragmatic rupture
nosis in visceral lymphoma.?? Even then, it can be diffcult to differ-
entiate low grade lymphoma from lymphoplasmacytic enteritis on the
Traumatic diaphragmatic rupture is frequently encountered in the cat
basis of cytology and histopathology and therefore other tests such as
(see Chapter 45) and is associated with herniation of abdominal
Clonality may be required.4 Most cats are feline leukemia virus nega-
contents, often including the stomach, into the pleural cavity. Rarely.
tive. Feline gastric adenocarcinoma is rare and the stomach is the least
herniation of the stomach into the pleural cavity can result in the
commonly affected gastrointestinal site in the cat.
305
Section
|51
The Abdomen
A
B
C
D
Figure 28-10 A chronic traumatic diaphragmatic rupture in an 8-year-old domestic short-haired cat with herniation of the stomach, small intestines
and omentum into the pleural cavity. (A) The diaphragmatic defect in the tendinous portion of the diaphragm following reduction of the herniated 
abdominal contents. (B, C) A section of jejunum and a region of the gastric wall had become strangulated. (D) The portion of devitalized gastric wall 
was resected and closed in two layers. (Courtesy Mathieu Caricu.)
Perioperative antibiotic use
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
Gastric surgery in which the gastric lumen is entered is classified
Thorough preoperative investigations are essential to attempt to
as clean contaminated surgery, provided appropriate care is taken
 achieve a diagnosis prior to surgery, therefore allowing a surgical plan
to ensure minimal intraoperative contamination. Perioperative
to be formulated. Adequate preparation can then be made to prepare
prophylactic antibiosis is therefore appropriate but postoperative anti-
the cat for surgery, decide on therapeutics and anesthetic needs, and 
biotic administration is not justified.41 Minimal intraoperative con-
also to consider the postoperative conditions that will be required.
tamination is achieved by use of stay sutures to manipulate the
ahs Aononse aul anelost ol sqems Aoioiedel jo asn Koioses
Surgical considerations
from the rest ofthe abdomen, designation of both clean and contami-
nated areas for surgical instruments, and use of copious peritoneal
Despite preoperative investigations, additional findings may be made
lavage. Septic peritonitis, due to pre-existing gastric perforation or
at surgery and it is important to perform a full systematic abdominal
necrosis, necessitates the use of therapeutic antibiosis postoperatively.
exploration. Evaluation of a gastric mucosal lesion and its extent can
This will initially be empirical but should be adjusted based upon
be facilitated by inspection through a gastrotomy made opposite the
culture and sensitivity results from bacteriology samples obtained
lesion, thereby aiding intraoperative decision making.
at surgery.
306
Stomach
Chapter
28
Box 28-2 Gastrotomy
Isolate the stomach using moistened laparotomy swabs to pack off
other abdominal contents. Place stay sutures in the ventral stomach 
wall using monofilament suture material, full thickness bites and 
sutures placed 1 cm apart. Make a stab incision at a non-vascular
part of the ventral gastric wall into the gastric lumen, using the 
stay sutures to 'tent' the gastric wall (Fig. 28-12). The stomach wall
naturally separates into two distinct layers, with the outer layer
including the serosa and muscularis and the inner layer including the
submucosa and mucosal layer. Extend the incision using Metzenbaum
scissors, making a full thickness cut through the gastric wall. Use 
'abellds juaaaid pue siuauos piiseb aeuidse oi sniesedde uons
 If indicated, a full thickness gastric biopsy can be obtained at this 
 punom Auoioise aui jo abpa aui wouy uood e buispxa Ag abens
using Metzenbaum scissors. The serosa muscularis and the 
 submucosa mucosal layers will naturally separate. It is recommended 
Figure 28-11 Stay sutures have been placed in the ventral surface of the
to tack the two together with a suture to avoid loss of one half of
stomach to aid in atraumatic manipulation and to reduce the risk of
 the biopsy sample. Place additional stay sutures at either wound edge
spillage of gastric contents following gastrotomy.
to minimize tissue trauma and facilitate manipulation of the
gastrotomy. Remove gastric foreign bodies using swab holding
forceps or Allis tissue forceps.
Any instruments that were used within the gastric lumen should
Anesthesia considerations
be discarded and if gloves have become contaminated with gastric
contents they should be changed. The gastric wall should be closed
Gastric fluid retention may result in regurgitation with the risk of
in two layers. The author uses a simple continuous appositional
aspiration at the time of induction. It is important to achieve a smooth
 suture in both the mucosa/submucosa layer and the outer muscularis/
induction and intubate the patient promptly: stomach tubes and
serosa layer. Absorbable monofilament suture (e.g. polydioxanone,
suction apparatus should be made available.
poliglecaprone 25) in 1.5 or 2M is appropriate. Chromic catgut is not
 Multimodal analgesia should be provided where possible in patients
recommended. Whenever a gastric foreign body is removed ensure
undergoing a laparotomy. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
 that the stomach and the entire gastrointestinal tract are carefully
tion is contraindicated in patients that may be suffering from gastroin-
 checked for additional foreign bodies.
testinal ulceration and in patients that are hypovolemic. Premedication
with systemic gastroprotectant medication (cimetidine or ranitidine)
may be indicated in cats with a high risk of gastrooesophageal reflux
 Or regurgitation; elevation of the pH of gastric fluid ameliorates the
potential effects upon the esophagus or lungs should regurgitation
and/or aspiration occur. For further information on anesthesia see
Chapter 2.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
The surgical approach to the stomach is via a routine ventral midline
xiphoid. Removal of falciform fat is recommended to improve visuali-
zation. Increased mobilization of the stomach may be achieved by
Figure 28-12 Stay sutures are placed prior to performing a
transection of the hepatogastric ligament and the avascular peritoneal
 gastrostomy. The stay sutures are used for atraumatic manipulation of
reflection. Manipulation of the stomach is facilitated by placement of
the stomach.
stay sutures in the ventral aspect of the stomach to reduce tissue
trauma and reduce the risk of gastric contents spillage. The stay sutures
should be passed full thickness through the gastric wall to engage the
submucosa, with a bite l cm in length to avoid suture pull through
(Fig. 28-11).
Gastrostomy
Gastrotomy
Gastrostomy tube placement in the cat has several indications (Box
28-3). The tube can be inserted per endoscopically (see Chapter 12)
Gastrotomy (Box 28-2) is commonly indicated for foreign body
 Or by open surgery (Box 28-4). The latter technique is indicated if the
retrieval, inspection of lesions within the gastric lumen and to obtain 
cat is having a celiotomy, if there are not facilities for endoscopic tube
full thickness biopsies. The principles of gastrostomy that should be 
placement, or the tubes are not of the type that are ideally placed
applied prior to performing a gastric resection state that a simple
 endoscopically. The major advantage of surgically placed gastrostomy
gastrotomy is performed ata site that allows initial luminal inspection
tubes in comparison to perautaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes
without interfering with the subsequent surgical plan.
is the reduced risk of peritoneal leakage.42
Section
5
The Abdomen
The patient can be fed orally with the tube in place and, if ongoing
the abdominal wall, the author still does not recommend early
enteral nutrition is required, the cat can be discharged with the tube
removal. Experimental studies in healthy dogs have reported that the
 in place, following appropriate client education.43
risk of peritoneal contamination is low after three days postopera-
The gastrostomy tube should not be removed earlier than ten days 
tively due to adequate adhesion formation;44 however, it is unclear
 postoperatively to ensure satisfactory healing resulting in an adhesion
between the gastric and body walls, and therefore avoiding intraperi-
 patient. The tube is removed by traction and the stoma is left to heal
toneal contamination. While early adhesion formation is promoted
by second intention. The insertion of a trocar into the lumen of the
 in surgically placed gastrostomy tubes by suturing the gastric wall to
tube to efface the mushroom tip can be useful to facilitate removal.
Sedation or general anesthesia is advisable in the cat Foley catheters
aul jo uonepeigap se 'saqnt Auuoisonseg se asn ioy aqninsun ane
 Box 28-3 Indications for tube gastrostomy
balloon by exposure to gastric acid may cause premature failure and
leakage of gastric contents to occur.
Nutrition
 Indications 
Gastric resection
 Prolonged inappetence or inability to eat
Gastric resection (Box 28-5) is rarely indicated in the cat It may
To bypass the oral cavity, pharynx or esophagus
be indicated for excision of a perforated gastric ulcer (Fig. 28-15).
 Contraindications
excision of a focal neoplastic lesion, or a devitalized region of gastric
Primary gastric disease
wall (see Fig. 28-10).
Vomiting patient 
Used with caution in patients with esophageal dysfunction or
Pyloric surgery
 altered mentation due to risk of aspiration 
Gastric decompression
 Pyloric surgery is infrequently indicated in the cat Pyloroplasty (Fig.
28-17) is indicated for management of congenital pyloric stenosis
 Surgery involving the pylorus commonly affects pyloric function and
(Fig. 28-18), which is associated with delayed gastric emptying.
gastric motility postoperatively which may cause gastric retention and 
Surgical procedures involving the pylonus may be indicated for
inappetence. Placement of a tube gastrostomy allows gastric
 decompression to be achieved and enteral nutrition to be provided 
 management of a discrete gastric tumor or for resection of a perforated
where necessary.
area of ulceration (Table 28-1).
Gastropexy
Gastropexy is seldom indicated in the cat. However, it is 
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
recommended in cases of gastric dilatation and volvulus, esophageal 
 hiatal hernia and gastrooesophageal intussusception, that are 
Ol yrog shualied asaul u! leap! s! xadoiseh agnl kasen paloda
Multimodal postoperative analgesia is provided where appropriate,
 prevent recurrence of dilation and volvulus and provide nutrition.
combining a pure (methadone) or partial (buprenorphine) opioid
agonist together with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug if
 Box 28-4 Tube gastrostomy technique (Fig. 28-13)
 Choose an appropriate position for the tube gastrostomy between the
body of the stomach and the left body wall, approximately one third of
 the distance from ventral to dorsal along the body wall and just behind
the last rib (Fg. 28-14A).
 Make a stab incision through the body wall with a number 10 or 
15 blade. Pass the external end of the mushroom tipped tube through
the body wall using Kelly artery forceps (note the tube is not tunneled 
at all) (Hg. 28-14A,B). Now block the end of the tube to prevent 
contamination of the surgical field. Place a purse-string suture in the 
 gastric body at the site where the tube wil enter, prior to creating the
stab incision (Fig. 28-14C).
Insert the mushroom tube via the stab incision. The mushroom tip
must be folded within the jaws of a pair of artery forceps to achieve 
this. Once the tube is inserted (Fig. 28-14D), withdraw it until the 
'uhi aunins buls-asand aut all pue llem yseh aul singe woouusnu 
Figure 28-13 Diagram summarizing placement of a gastrostomy tube.
The stomach is then secured to the body wall using four horizontal
Only two sutures are shown between the stomach and body wall:
mattress sutures between the stomach wall and the body wall, placed
usually four would be placed.
 around the tube in sequence to create a box of sutures (Fig. 28-14E,F).
aul punoe wnuawo auos buidde am Aq anis ewois aut azenuawo 
tube and sutures.
 Secure the tube externally using a finger trap suture. Additional
fixation of the tube is essential prior to recovery from anesthesia to 
aaunois e buisn paalune ag uen sul leaoan juataapeui uaaaid
dressing or bandaging material.
808
Stomach
Chapter
28
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 28-14 Surgical placement of a tube gastrostomy in a cat. See Box 27-4 for details of the technique with a description of parts (A) to (F).
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 28-15 Gastric ulceration and perforation in a 5-year-old female neutered Persian cat. (A) Lateral abdominal radiography revealing a
pneumoperitoneum. (B) DeBakey forceps indicate the site of gastric perforation on the lesser curvature of the stomach. Local inflammation of the
serosal surface is the only apparent abnormality on initial inspection. (c) A full thickness incision is made through the gastric wall adjacent to the 
lesion to allow inspection of the mucosal surface and evaluate the extent of the lesion. (D, E) A focal area of mucosal erosion is identified on the 
luminal surface. A focal area of gastric wall with a margin of normal tissue surrounding the ulcer is resected. This will be closed in two layers, as for a
standard gastrotomy incision.
6DE
Section
5
The Abdomen
 appropriate Cats that are hypotensive or have evidence of gastroin-
dehiscence. Dehiscence of gastrotomy wounds and subsequent septic
testinal ulceration should not receive non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
peritonitis is uncommon; in one study describing the underlying
drugs.
cause of septic peritonitis in cats, none of the cats had developed
 Early enteral nutrition is recommended as soon as the cat has fully
septic peritonitis due to gastrotomy dehiscence, while five of 26 cats
 recovered from general anesthesia. Intravenous fluid therapy should
had developed septic peritonitis due to enterotomy dehiscence.25
be continued until normal oral intake of fluid and food is resumed.
COIMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
Complications associated with gastric surgery include routine surgical
 complications such as bleeding. wound infection, and wound
Box 28-5 Gastric resection (Fig. 28-16)
 Perioperative assessment of the gastric mass or lesion, at the time of
 exploratory laparotomy, is often necessary to establish if resection is 
feasible. Evaluation of the extent of a focal mass lesion, and
feasibility for resection, is often aided by inspection of the mucosal
surface of the lesion via a gastrostomy on the opposite side. In some
cases (e.g. benign adenomatous polyps), submucosal resection may 
be appropriate and can be useful for resection of lesions within the 
S! uosoxa lenibans fl Aabuns lenipey alow bupioae Agalaut snuoad 
 not straightforward, incisional biopsy of the gastric lesion and 
 regional lymph nodes should be performed to achieve complete 
 surgical staging.
 Lesions involving the greater curvature may be amenable to
[eusaulouseb) juawdinba buders jenibans buisn uoasan
 anastomosis stapler; see Chapter 10). Alternatively, the area that 
 requires resection should be removed using scissors or a scalpel 
 blade. The use of Doyenne bowel clamps, careful use of stay sutures,
and a surgical assstant aid the procedure and reduce the risk of
 gastrointestinal spillage. The stomach should be closed in two layers 
 as for gastrotomy: an additional layer of inverting sutures (e.g..
Figure 28-16 A small lesion can be removed by partial gastrectomy.
 interrupted or continuous Cushing or Lembert sutures) may be used
 Closure is achieved by placement of a continuous appositional suture in
 to over-sew the site and reinforce the closure.
the two distinct layers of the gastric wall, reinforced by an inverting
suture if required.
A
D
E
Figure 28-17 A 6-month-old male neutered Siamese kitten undergoing a Y-to-U pyloroplasty. (A) The pyloric region of the stomach appears relatively
unremarkable on external examination. (B) A full thickness Y-shaped incision is made over the pylorus with the centre of the Y situated at the pylorus.
au uapi oi le soge pauepe si ypm dei padeysn e paean  aui jo uood doi aul (a) paadsui si snod au jo aens ieuunl al ()
pylorus. (E) The Y-to-U pyloroplasty is complete. (Courtesy Dr Stephen Baines.)
310
Stomach
Chapter
28
Table 28-1 Summary of the options for pyloric surgery in the cat
Surgical technique
Technique
Indications
Disadvantages
Comments
 Fredet-Ramstedt
Longitudinal incision over the
This technique is of
 Does not allow inspection of mucosal surface
pyloromyotomy
pylorus through the serosa and
limited use
Does not allow full thickness biopsy
muscularis layers only, leaving
Improvement in outflow may be short-lived due to
 submucosa and mucosa intact
narrowing during healing 
Heineke Mikulicz
 Full thickness longitudinal incision
Pyloric stenosis
These are preferable first-line procedures due to
Pyloroplasty
over the pylorus which is then
simplicity and reduced disruption of pyloric function.
(HMP)
closed transversely to create
Subjectively, the Y-U pyloroplasty creates a greater
widening
degree of widening than the HMP and allows greater
access to achieve mucosal resection. These techniques
YU advancement 
 A full-thickness Y-shaped incision is 
made over the pylorus with the leg
may afford limited benefit in patients with severe 
pyloroplasty
 disease, in particular if muscular hypertrophy is advanced
(see Fig. 28-18)
of the Y oriented towards the
duodenum. The created flap is
and pylorectomy may therefore be indicated 
used as an advancement flap
creating a U-shaped wound 
Pylorectomy and
 End-to-end anastomosis of the 
Severe pyloric stenosis 
 For neoplastic lesions
Take great care to avoid
gastroduodenostomy
distal stomach to the duodenum.
Gastric resection due
 margins of 1-2 cm should 
damage to the common
(Billroth I)
Luminal disparity must be
to neoplasia or severe
ideally be achieved, but 
bile duct in its course
corrected and can be achieved
gastroduodenal
close proximity to the
through the lesser
by spatulation of the duodenal
ulceration
common bile duct and
omentum
end or partial closure of the
pancreas may preclude
gastrotomy
this
 Partial gastrectomy
The distal stomach and proximal
Gastric resection due
 Complex surgical procedure resulting in significant 
and gastrojejunostomy
duodenum are closed and a
to neoplasia or severe
(Billroth II)
side-to-side anastomosis of the
gastroduodenal
This technique should be avoided unless all other options
jejunum to the diaphragmatic
ulcer ation
have been ruled out
surface of the stomach is created.
Careful client communication regarding morbidity and 
Surgical stapling equipment can be 
the need for long-term medical management is essential
used
Biliary diversion and potentially
ligation of the pancreatic duct are
also necessary
Surgery involving the esophageal hiatus or the gastric pylorus may
 interfere with regulation of gastric motility in the postoperative period
and therefore patients should be monitored for gastric distension.
 Occasionally, gastric decompression may be required and is facilitated
11111
 by prior placement of a tube gastrostomy. Careful monitoring of
A
B
serum electrolytes is essential if gastric decompression is performed.
Figure 28-18 Y-to-U pyloroplasty for pyloric stenosis. (A) A Y-shaped
The feeding of a low fat diet will reduce gastric retention and may
incision full thickness incision is made just proximal to the pylorus.
ameliorate gastric motility dysfunction.45
{B) The first suture, indicated by the arrow, converts the Y to U.
Complications of gastrostomy tube placement include peristomal
(C) Additional sutures are placed to close the gastrotomy.
inflammation or infection, premature tube removal, septic peritonitis.
and fistula formation after tube removal.42 Stoma site metastasis has
been reported associated with gastrostomy tube placement in the
human and dog.4 Fungal colonization precipitating tube failure has
been reported with long-term use.47
REFERENCES
1. Barone R. Systeme lymphatique du chat.
sphincter sling and circular muscles have
vitro. Neurogastroenterol Mot 2000;12:
In: Barone R, editor. Anatomie compare
different functional inhibitory responses.
467-73.
des mammiferes domestiques. Tome 5
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 
4.
 Gilbert SG. Pictorial anatomy of the cat.
angiologie. Paris: Editions Vigot; 1996.
2006;290:G23-9.
University of Washington Press; 1968.
p. 833-44.
3.
Lammers Wl, Slack JR, Stephen B, Pozzan
p. 49-55.
2.
.L'Heureux M-C, Muinuddin A, Gaisano 
 O. The spatial behaviour of spike patches
5.
Kleinschmidt S, Nolte I, Hewicker-
HY, et al. Feline lower oesophageal
in the feline gastroduodenal junction in
Trautwein M. Structural and functional
311
Section
5
The Abdomen
 components of the feline enteric nervous
20. Lykken JD, Brisson BA, Etue SM.
Panthera leo. J Zoo Wildl Med 2010;41:
system. Anat Histol Embryol 2011 (epub
Pneumoperitoneum secondary to a
90-4.
ahead of printj.
 perforated gastric ulcer in a cat. J Am Vet
35. Zedan M, El-Ghazaly M, Fouda A.
6.
.Schreurs E, Vermote K, Barberet V, et al.
Med Assoc 2003;222:1713-16.
E-Bayoumi M. Tension gastrothorax:
Ultrasonographic anatomy of abdominal
21.
 Cariou MP, Halfacree Zl, Lee KC, Baines
a case report and review of literature.
lymph nodes in the normal cat. Vet
 SJ. Successful surgical management of 
I Pediatr Surg 2008;43:740-3.
Radiol Ultrasound 2008;49:68-72.
 spontaneous gastric perforations in three
36. Zarelli M, Carrillo JD, Soler M, et al. What
 Bebchuk TN. Feline gastrointestinal
cats. I Feline Med Surg 2010;12:36-41.
is your diagnosis? Tension gastrothorax.
foreign bodies. Vet Clin Small Anim 
22.
 Boysen SR, Tidwell As, Penninck DG.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;236:733-4.
2002;32:861-80.
Ultrasonographic fndings in dogs and
37.
Bredal wP, Eggertsdottir AV, Austefjord O.
 8. Heng HG, Wrigley RH, Kraft SL, Powers
cats with gastrointestinal perforation. Vet
Acute gastric dilatation in cats: a case 
 BE. Fat is responsible for an intramural 
Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44:556-64.
series. Acta Vet Scand 1996;37:445-51.
radiolucent band in the feline stomach
23.
ltoh T, Nibe K, Naganobu K. Tension 
38.
 Formaggini L, Schmidt K, De Lorenzi D.
wall. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:
pneumoperitoneum due to gastric
Gastric dilatation-volvulus associated
54-6.
 perforation in a cat. J Vet Med Sci
with diaphragmatic hernia in three cats:
9. Hall JA, Washbau RJ. Diagnosis and
2005;67:617-19.
dinical presentation, surgical reatment
treatment of gastric motility disorders.
24. Parsons KJ, Owen Ll, Lee K, et al. A
and presumptive aetiology. I Fel Med Surg
Vet Clin Small Anim 1999;29:377-95.
retrospective study of surgically treated
2008;10:198-201.
10.
Lamb CR. Recent developments in
cases of septic peritonitis in the cat
39.
 Moore PF, Rodriguez-Bertos A, Kass PH.
diagnostic imaging of the gastrointestinal
(2000-2007). Journal Small Anim Pract 
 Feline gastrointestinal lymphoma:
tract of the dog. Vet Clin Small Anim
2009;50:518-24
mucosal architecture, immunophenotype
1999;29:307-42.
25. Van Camp S, Love NE, Kumaresan S.
and molecular clonality. Vet Pathol 2011;
11.
 Evans SE, Bonczynski Jl, Broussard JD.
Radiographic diagnosis-
epub ahead of print.
et al. Comparison of endoscopic and
gastroesophageal intussusception in a cat.
40.
Briscoe KA, Krockenberger M, Beatty JA.
full-thickness biopsy specimens for
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998;39:190-2.
et al. Histopathological and 
diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease
26. Martinez Nl, Cook W, Troy GC, Waldron
immunohistochemical evaluation of 53
and alimentary lymphoma in cats. J Am 
D. Intermittent gastroesophageal
cases if feline lymphoplasmacytic enteritis
Vet Med Assoc 2006;229:1447-50.
intussusception in a cat with idiopathic
and low-grade alimentary lymphoma.
12.
Felts JF, Fox PR, Burk RL. Thread and
megaoesophagus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
J Comp Pathol 2011;145:187-98.
sewing needles as gastrointestinal foreign
2001;37:234-7.
41.
Page CP, Bohnen JM, Fletcher JR, et al.
bodies in the cat: a review of 64 cases.
27.
 Owen MC, Morris Pl, Bateman RS.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgical
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;184:56-9.
Concurrent gastro-oesophageal
wounds. Guidelines for clinical care. Arch
13.
.Evans KL, Smeak DD, Biller DS.
intussusception, trichobezoar and hiatal 
Surg 1993;128:79-88.
Gastrointestinal linear foreign bodies in
hernia in a cat. N Z Vet J 2005;53:371-4.
42.
 Salinardi Bl, Harkin KR, Bulmer Bl, Roush
32 dogs: a retrospective evaluation and 
28.
 van Geffen C, Saunders IH, Vandevelde B.
JK. Comparison of complications of
 feline comparison. J Am Anim Hosp
et al. Idiopathic megaoesophagus and
percutaneous endoscopic versus surgically
Assoc 1994;30:445-50.
intermittent gastro-oesophageal
placed gastrostomy tubes in 42 dogs and
14. Anderson S, Lippincott CL, Gill PJ. Single
 intussusception in a cat. Journal Small
52 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42:
 enterotomy removal of gastrointestinal
Anim Pract 2006;47:471-5.
51-6.
linear foreign bodies. J Am Anim Hosp
29. Graham KL, Buss MS, Dhein CR, et al.
43.
Ireland LM, Hohenhaus AE, Broussard ID,
Assoc 1992;28:487-90.
Gastroesophageal intussusception in a
Weissman BL. A comparison of owner
15. Basher AW, Fowler JD. Conservative versus
Labrador retriever. Can Vet J 1998;39:
management and complications in 67
surgical management of gastrointestinal
709-11.
percutanesous esophagostomy and
 Jinear foreign bodies in the cat. Vet Surg
30. McGill SE, Lenard ZM, See AM, Irwin PJ.
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
1987:16:135-8.
Nonsurgical treatment of a puppy with
feeding tubes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
16. Pearson H, Gaskell Cl, Gibbs C.
gastroesophageal intussusception. J Am
2003;39:241-6.
Waterman A. Pyloric and oesophageal
Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45:185-90.
44.
 Bright RM, Burrows CF. Percutaneous
dysfunction in the cat. J Small Anim Pract
31.
 Robotham GR. Congenital hiatal hernia
 endoscopic tube gastrostomy in dogs.
1974;15:487-501.
in the cat. Fel Pract 1979;9:37-9.
Am I Vet Res 1988;49:629-33.
17. Bishop LM, Kelly DF, Gibbs C, Pearson H.
 Ellison GW, Lewis DD, Phillips L, et al.
45.
Washabau Rj. Gastrointestinal motility
Megaoesophagus and associated gastric
Esophageal hiatal hernia in small
disorders and gastrointestinal prokinetic
heterotopic in the cat. Vet Pathol 1979;16:
 animals: literature review and a modifed
therapy. Vet Clin Small Anim 2003;33:
444-9.
surgical technique. J Am Anim Hosp
1007-28.
18.
Liptak JM, Hunt GB, Barrs VR, et al.
Assoc 1987;23:391-9.
46.
Nielsen C, Anderson GM. Metastasis
Gastroduodenal ulceration in cats: eight
33. Bright RM, Sackman JE, Denovo C, et al.
of gastric adenocarcinoma to the
cases and a review of the literature. J Fel
Hiatal hernia in the dog and cat: a
abdominal wall following placement of
Med Surg 2002;4:27-42.
retrospective study of 16 cases. J Small
a gastrostomy tube in a dog. Can Vet J
19.
Mellanby Rl, Baines EA, Herrtage ME.
Anim Pract 1990;31:244-50.
2005;46:641-3.
Spontaneous pneumoperitoneum in two
34.
Hettlich BF, Hobson HP, Ducote I, et al.
 Boutilier P, Carr A. Fungal colonization
cats. Journal Small Anim Pract 2002;43:
Esophageal hiatal hernia in three exotic
and failure of a long-term gastrostomy
543-6.
felines: Lymx lymx, Puma concolore and
tube in a cat. Can Vet J 2005;46:709-10.
312
[29]
Chapter
Small intestines
G.W. Ellison
pabai si Auaaua pue auaua Ksdoiqgo ug au u aains
to diagnose or treat conditions of the small intestine in the cat such
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
 as neoplasia or foreign bodies. Surgery of the intestinal system is not
without complications; dehiscence can result in life-threatening con-
Clinical findings
ditions such as peritonitis. This chapter will cover the principles of
diagnosis and treatment of small intestinal problems in cats and give
 In the cat (unlike the dog) it is as common to see anorexia and weight
advice on how to perform intestinal surgery and how to minimize the
chance of complications.
a thorough physical examination including abdominal palpation
and oral examination. Cats are prone to ingestion of linear foreign
 bodies and sublingual examination will often lead to a quick diag-
nosis of yarn or fishing line entrapped at the glossal frenulum. One
 study of linear foreign bodies in cats reported a diagnosis rate of 75%
SURGICAL ANATOMY
using oral examination in combination with abdominal palpation
(Fig. 29-1).2
The small intestine of the cat constitutes a simple continuation of the
alimentary canal from the stomach to the large intestine, consisting
of the duodenum, jejunum and ileum. The upper small intestine is
primarily secretory and the lower small intestine primarily absorptive
in function. Within the duodenum the location of the common bile
duct and pancreatic ducts differs from the dog. The major duodenal
papilla typically receives the common bile duct and major pancreatic
duct, whereas a minor duodenal papilla is only present in cats, in
ausu lus au o aidans ieay seue jo oz aiaeuiide
is via branches of the cranial mesenteric artery and venous return is
primarily by the cranial mesenteric vein, a major tributary of the
hepatic portal vein. The intestinal wall consists of an outer serosa
formed by visceral peritoneum, the tunica muscularis with its outer
longitudinal, and inner circular layers. The submucosa, which is rich
in collagen, also serves as the principal holding layer for sutures. The
intestinal mucosa is lined by simple columns of epithelial cells mixed
with variable population of mucus providing goblet cells. The cat's
perforating the outer longitudinal and inner circular muscularis layers
and supplying a rich submucosal vascular plexus. One distinguishing
factor in cats is the presence of prominent lymphatic nodules in
Figure 29-1 Photograph of a 6-week-old kitten with laceration of the
the mucosa, mostly along the antimesenteric aspect of the small
lingual frenulum and sewing thread entrapped around base of tongue.
intestine.
(Courtesy of Stephen Birchard, The Ohio State University)
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00029-9
ELE
Section
151
The Abdomen
Figure 29-2 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a kitten with an
intussusception. Black arrows indicate the ratio of the maximum diameter
loop of smallintestine (30 mm) divided by the dorsoventral height of the
Figure 29-3 Contrast study of a cat with small intestinal pleating
cranial endplate of L2 (9 mm) to be >3.0, making this suggestive of
secondary to ingestion of linear foreign body. (Courtesy of Stephen Birchard.
complete intestinal obstruction.4
The Ohio State University.)
Physiology of obstruction
170dB/C4
Distinguishing  between  simple  mechanical  and  strangulated
PersistOff
(ischemic) bowel obstruction is critical, because the latter condition
FrRate:Sury
requires early and rapid surgical intervention. Mechanical obstruc-
tions can be luminal (foreign bodies), intramural (neoplasia),
Or extramural (adhesions). With simple mechanical luminal obstruc-
tion, blood flow to the distended bowel is typically not completely
obliterated, but increased bowel wall tension may cause both histo-
logic and physiologic changes. Venous and lymphatic hydrostatic
 pressures are exceeded but arterial pressures are not which results
in vascular congestion. Reduced capillary flow, diminished tissue
 perfusion, and ultimate increase in vascular permeability result in
extravasation of fluid into the interstitium. Mural edema further com-
promises blood flow causing hypoxia, tissue ischemia, and mucosal
necrosis.
 Strangulation obstruction often occurs secondarily to mesenteric
-daosnssmui 'saipoq usiaing aaisuedxa Aq pasne uodnusip ieinosa
Figure 29-4 Ultrasound image of a linear foreign body (arrow) in a
tion, mesenteric volvulus, a strangulated hernia, or trauma. With
10-month-old female cat. (Courtesy of the University of Cambridge.)
strangulation obstruction, the mucosa is sensitive to insuffcient
perfusion and anoxia and undergoes necrosis. After the mucosal
barrier is destroyed, bacteria and endotoxins pass transmurally into
the lymphatics and peritoneal cavity where they enter the systemic
 granulomatous peritonitis (Fig. 29-3) Ultrasonography is also a sensi-
circulation and septic shock ensues. Eventually full thickness infarc-
tive way of detecting foreign bodies and occasionally linear foreign
tion and perforation may occur.
bodies can be diagnosed using this non-invasive modality (Fig. 29 -4).
Utrasonography may also be used to evaluate gastrointestinal motil.
ity, the presence of fluid distension, and diagnosing foreign bodies
with characteristic acoustic signals. Utrasonography has been identi-
Diagnostic imaging
fied as a highly sensitive indicator of intussusception. On lateral
 In cats with intestinal disease, abdominal radiographs may reveal a
views the intussusceptum is easily identifed and on axial views a
radiopaque foreign body, loss of visceral detail, or an obstructive gas
characteristic “bull's eye' image is seen (Fig. 29-5). However, ultra-
 pattern. Smallintestinal distension of greater than 12-14 mm is sug-
 sonography may not always accurately predict the presence of intesti-
gestive of intestinal obstruction in this species. Also, a quantitative
nal perforation."
index has been established in cats by calculating the ratio of the
maximum small intestinal diameter/the dorsoventral cranial end plate 
measurement of the second lumbar vertebra. The probability of an
SURGICAL DISEASES OF
intestinal obstructive is >70% if this ratio is greater than 3.0. (Fig.
THE SMALL INTESTINES
29 -2).4 Linear foreign bodies will often cause pleating of the jejunum,
which can be noted on palpation. Likewise, pleating of the small
intestine can sometimes be seen on plain films. If contrast material is
 Diseases and conditions affecting the feline small intestine that may
used the clinician should avoid the use of barium sulfate and instead
require surgery include foreign bodies, intussusception, mesenteric
use an iodine-containing contrast in order to avoid the potential for
volvulus, trauma, and non-neoplastic lesions, such as feline infectious
314
Small intestines
Chapter
29
2DOpt:FSCT
CT
KRes"
Figure 29-6 llustration of typical anatomic configuration of a single
intussusception with the inner invaginated intussusceptum and
outer ensheathing intussuscipiens. (Samantha / Elmhurst BA Hons/
wwwjivingart.org.uk from Stanley BR. The smallintestine. in W/iliams IM and Niles
JD. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Aboominal Surgery Gloucester 2005;
0 107.)
removal of the foreign body. If too few enterotomies are made,
with too much traction placed on the string, the mesenteric border
 may be perforated in an area which is diffcult to explore and suture.
Figure 29-5 Axial ultrasonic image of an ileocolic intussusception
Occasionally the string has already cut through at several locations
showing the characteristic bull's eye sign. (Courtesy of the University of
 and peritonitis is evident. In 64 cases of linear foreign bodies in cats.
Cambrioge.)
most animals were less than four years old. Surgery and multiple
enterotomies or enterectomy were used in 90% of the cases and 84%
peritonitis, granulomas and adenomatous polyps, and neoplastic
 of the cases survived. However, the survival rate in cats that had con-
masses such as lymphoma.
for removal of linear foreign bodies can often be used successfully in
cats, but survival rates for this technique are not known.? There
Foreign bodies
have been failures associated with the single catheter technique for
removal of linear foreign bodies. In one case report, passage of the
Non-linear foreign bodies
catheter created tearing of the mesenteric border at the location where
a s ui soq uia  an o j ai
the linear foreign body was embedded, thus necessitating resection
caused by non-linear foreign bodies. Non-linear foreign bodies com-
and anastomosis of 60% of the small intestine.? Likewise, in long-
monly identifed in the cat include coins, ear-plugs, small toys.
standing cases of intestinal linear foreign body, fbrosis may occur so
almonds, or fishing tackle Small intestinal obstruction by a foreign
that even after its removal the bowel retains its pleated configuration.
body can be complete or partial and the clinical signs vary in severity
 In these cases, massive intestinal resection and anastomosis may be
as a result of the level and degree of obstrucsion. The degree of
necessary.
 obstruction also defines the variability in the presenting clinical signs.
Abdominal palpation may identify intestinal distension, a palpable
Intussusception
object, or abdominal pain. Cats commonly swallow coins but these
usually do not exit the stomach. Rubber balls, cellophane or chew
The exact pathogenesis of the condition is unknown but theories
asnes oi Alaxll aiou aie pue le ie iou io Aimois ssed oi pual sAol
 include a local incongruency of the intestine caused by induration
complete mechanical obstruction requiring enterotomy or enterec-
(secondary to neoplasia), or spasticity (intestinal parasitism), or ana-
tomy. Opaque objects are easily identifiable on plain radiographs but
tomical diameter change occurs in which a proximal bowel segment
aie saipoq ugiaioy asuap ssal 'luaonoipei aie saipoq uaiaiog Aue
invaginates (intussusceptum) into a distal section of bowel (intus-
sometimes missed on ultrasound. If contrast radiography is needed
suscipiens) (Fig. 29-6). Intussusceptions are also seen with increasing
for diagnosis aqueous iodine contrast should be used. Most proximal
frequency after laparotomy on elective or non-elective intra-abdominal
small intestinal obstructions are visible within six hours whereas a 24
procedures. Clinical signs depend on the completeness and level of
hour study may be indicated for more distal obstructions. Surgical
obstruction. In older cats intussusception is often associated with
uo supaap saea sapoq uiarg leusaun jo juaaaeuu
intestinal neoplasia (Fig. 29-7). The intussusception often becomes
the type and location of the foreign body. Sharp foreign bodies such
irreducible as a result of the congestion and outpouring of fbrinous
as straight pins, safety pins, bones, or glass will often pass through the 
exudate from the serosa. Although the invaginated bowel may become
gastrointestinal tract without creating intestinal perforation unless
devitalized, perforation is rare because the outer ensheathing layer
they are attached to thread or yarn.
retains its viability and the adhesions seal the proximal border of the
intussusception. Occasionally spontaneous recovery occurs when the
Linear foreign body
non-viable intussusceptum is sloughed and patency of the lumen is
recovered.
Linear foreign bodies, caused by such items as fishing line meat
 The outcome of 20 cats with gastrointestinal tract intussusception
wrappers, or sewing yarn, present a diffcult surgical problem. Some
identifed that this disease differs significantly from intussusception
linear foreign bodies will pass spontaneously but the trailing
in dogs.0 Intussusception in cats appears to be a biphasic disease, with
end often catches over the base of the tongue or in the stomach
 one group of cats being less than one year of age and having concur-
and acts as an anchor.? Intestinal peristalsis moves the foreign body
rent intestinal endoparasitism. The second group was over six years of
aborally resulting in bowel plication. Linear foreign bodies should
 age and the majority of the older cats had either intestinal lymphoma
be managed by initially identifying and releasing the anchor point,
 or inflammatory bowel disease as the common etiology for their intus-
either from the tongue, or via a gastrotomy to free the wadded
susception. Clinical signs included anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, dehy-
string or fishing line from its gastropyloric anchor (see Chapter 28).
 dration, poor body condition, and signs of abdominal pain. Diagnosis
Multiple enterotomies are sometimes required to facilitate complete
was made using a combination of abdominal palpation, abdominal
315
Section
151
The Abdomen
Figure 29-8 Benign adenomatous polyp located in mid-jejunum caused 
 the intussusception in the cat described in Figure 29-7.
Figure 29-7 Intraoperative image of a mid-jejunal intussusception in a
13-year-old British short-haired cat.
radiography, and abdominal ultrasonography. Most specific was
abdominal ultrasonography, which was diagnostic in seven of seven
cases in which it was performed. Jejunojejunal was the most common
[xand punog aram suodasnssmu ou pue udassnssnun yn as
to the duodenum. Thirteen cats were taken to surgery and ll of these
cats required intestinal resection and anastomosis.
The need for prophylactic bowel plication or enteropexy remains
controversial. Bowel plication involves laying the bowel side by side
in a series of gentle loops. The loops are sutured together on their
antimesenteric border using simple interrupted sutures of non-
absorbable 4/0 suture material that penetrate the seromuscular layers
 of bowel but do not enter the lumen.l However, a retrospective report
in dogs indicated that intestinal plication might not be necessary since
the risk of complications is higher after plication and there was only
a slight reduction in the recurrence rate of intussusception.12
Mesenteric volvulus
Figure 29-g Feline infectious peritonitis-induced granulomatous change,
which is widespread in the small intestine of an affected cat
 Pathologic twisting of bowel on its mesenteric axis is termed intestinal
Or mesenteric volvulus. Mesenteric volvulus is rare in cats. There have
Siamese and Himalayan breeds were over represented. The polypoid
clinical signs included acute onset of abdominal distension in the
mucosal masses were located in the upper duodenum and tended to
 presence of shock, anemia, air-flled loops of bowel, and vomiting or 
cause vomiting and weight loss. When the lesions ulcerate hematem-
retching. Of the three non-survivors, two cases were diagnosed at
esis may occur. About half the cats became anemic secondary to
necropsy and the third cat failed to survive surgery. Of the two suc-
chronic blood loss. Diagnosis was made on contrast radiography or
cessful surgical cases one was a l6-month-old domestic short hair and
endoscopically. This is a surgical disease and requires excision of the
the other a five-year-old Bengal. Both animals had acute abdominal
signs and presented in a very anemic state with packed cell volumes
mosis. The lesions are benign but regrowth is possible if inadequate
below l0%. Both animals received blood transfusions and had resec-
submucosal resection occurs. In one case study, 13 of 18 cats were
tion of the proximal jejunum and the ileum. The lengths of resected
cured, four had recurring signs and one cat died following surgery.'
intestines were 35 and 40 cm, respectively. Postoperatively, both cats
The author has also seen benign adenomatous polyps located in the
had chronic diarrhea for a period of time, which ultimately improved
jejunum which caused a secondary intussusception (Fig. 29-8).
Sieadde ii saseo oml asaul uo paseg anlosai Alaalduos iou pip inq
that cats can survive mesenteric volvulus so long as surgery is per-
Feline infectious peritonitis (FiP) granulomas
formed promptly after appropriate stabilization of the cat, including
blood transfusion (see Chapter 5) and some of the small intestine
A large case series of 26 cats with FIP had concurrent solitary mural
including the duodenum and upper jejunum is retained.13
intestinal lesions that mimicked intestinal neoplasia.15 The majority
Aunoiedel Aroieioixa sunp panouai suoisal aui pey sies asaun jo
although some of the lesions were diagnosed at necropsy. The pre-
Non-neoplastic lesions
sumptive diagnosis in most of the cats was a solitary intestinal lesion
Adenomatous polyps
most consistent with neoplasia. However, results of histologic exami-
nation revealed that the lesions were predominantly granulomatous,
Adenomatous polyps of the duodenum have been reported in cats.
nodular, firm and white and extended throughout the wall of the
They were older cats with a median age of about 12 years and the
intestine on histologic examination (Fig. 29-9). Associated lymph
316
Small intestines
Chapter
29
Leiunur
Figure 29-10 Small intestinal ischemia secondary to blunt abdominal
 trauma and avulsion of the mesenteric vessels in a five-month-old kitten
Figure 29-11 Ultrasound image of jejunal lymphoma and secondary
intestinal obstruction in an 11-year-old domestic short-haired cat.
Intestinal wall thickening (+) has caused accumulation of a radiodense
nodes were enlarged and had evidence of inflammation. Serology was
foreign body in the intestinal lumen. (Courresy of Shona Reese.)
positive for the FIP virus in all 26 cats. The clinical outcome of these
cats was poor. Many cats were euthanized at the time of surgery and
all cats that were recovered from anesthesia died within nine months
of the surgical procedure. Many of the cats also had signs of multi-
Malabsorption, stearrhea, diarrhea, and weight loss are usually seen.!7
systemic FIP The clinical implications of this study are the focal nature
With immunohistochemistry typing it appears that both mucosal and
of intestinal lesions with this type of FIP is easily confused with neo-
transmural T-cell lymphoma are largely confined to the small intestine
'ood s sisougoid uai-suol pue Aiagins jo aun au ie eise[d 
'is au u no oi ail aio s eudui la-a aui seaiam
jejunum, and the ileocecal junction. If the lesion is confined to the
Trauma
mucosa survival times of up to 29 months are seen. However, with
transmural extension survival times are short: T-cell tumors have a
Intestinal trauma may occur secondary to major abdominal trauma
median survival rate of 1.5 months and B-cell tumors have a median
or incisional dehiscence and often involves evisceration (Fig. 29-10).
 a ' r 's ' g n s
d  sie e e  is a 
sometimes effective in reducing tumor mass, but may 'melt' the tumor
uo paoai aps saai v g aqeiaey aq ue suaed asau ig siou
so that intestinal perforation results. For this reason it may be advis-
eight dogs and four cats with major abdominal evisceration. The
 able to resect obstructive lymphosarcoma lesions prior to instituting
evisceration was secondary to blunt abdominal trauma in four animals
chemotherapy.
and secondary to spay wound dehiscence in eight animals. All cases
The intestinal adenocarcinoma neoplasm accounts for an estimated
had evisceration of the intestines and gross contamination with dirt,
20-35% of gastrointestinal neoplasia in the cat, with affected cats
leaves or litter. The surgical procedure included lavage and replace-
ausanui leus aul siean ot ueu ialeaie jo ase aaeiaae ue sura
auo ul aiaualds 'sas aay u aoiaaa 'sas inoy ui auo jua
accounts for approximately 70% of the cases. Cats typically have a
case and primary colonic repair in another. All patients survived to
long history of non-specific gastrointestinal disease including weight
discharge from the hospital, with a median duration of hospitaliza-
-xde si uonqs xas au uoa io uaaddeu pue sso
tion of four days. Cultures were positive in all cases where they were
 mately 60% male and 40% female. Asian breeds such as Siamese and
taken, with three animals having single contaminants and nine
Persian are predisposed.1 Intestinal adenocarcinoma usually causes a
animals having multiple contaminants. The most commonly used
segmental intramural mass, which expands toward the lumen. This
antimicrobial combinations were ampicillin, enrofloxacin, and met-
constricting ring, which is classically called a 'napkin ring lesion'.
ronidazole. Of the four cats, two required significant enterectomy
usually undergoes very little external enlargement and may be mis-
needing resection of 60% and 100% of the jejunum, respectively. One
taken for a stricture (Fig. 29-12). Local invasion or seeding of the
of the cats with massive intestinal resection had long-term diarrhea
 mesenteric omentum and regional lymph nodes is common. Surgical
up to three months after intestinal resection and anastomosis.
treatment involves wide resection of the tumor with a minimum of
five and preferably ten centimeter margins and anastomosis of adja-
Neoplasia
cent segments of bowel. Survival times range from 0 to 24 months
with some clinical studies showing mean survival times as low as 2.5
Lymphosarcoma, adenocarcinoma and mast cell tumors are the three
 and others as long as 15 months. In one study tubular adenocarcino-
most common intestinal tumors in cats. Hemangiosarcoma, leiomyo-
mas had a mean survival time of almost ll months whereas mucinous
mas, and leiomyosarcomas are seen much less commonly. Ultrasono-
and undifferentiated carcinomas had a survival time of just four
months. 1 In another study of 32 cats with intestinal adenocarcinoma,
the tumors occurred in older animals with a mean age of about 12
and/or asymmetric echogenicity seen with intestinal adenocarcinoma
years.20 The lesions were typically located in the jejunum although
(Fig. 29-1l). Intestinal lymphosarcoma in cats may occur as a diffuse
duodenal or ileal lesions were also reported. Overt radiographic
infltrative lesion or a distinct nodular mass. Extensive infltration of
obstructive pattern was rare, 50% of the diagnoses were made on
the lamina propria and submucosa with neoplastic cells occurs.
 palpation and only 35% made radiographically. Although many of
317
Section
151
The Abdomen
Figure 29-12 Contrast study showing mid-jejunal adenocarcinoma in a
nine-year-old male Siamese cat. The lesion caused abrupt intraluminal
Figure 29-13 A 14-year-old female neutered Ragdoll had an intestinal
narrowing and a radiographic 'cobra head' lesion (black arrows).
mass detected on a routine physical examination prior to vaccination.
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a 3 cm x 2 cm × 5 cm nodular mass at
the ileocecocolic junction, with loss of layering of the intestinal wall.
the cats in that study were euthanized intraoperatively those who
(Courtesy of Laura Owen.)
underwent enterectomy did quite well, with a mean survival time
greater than 15 months.
Intestinal mast cell tumor (MCT) is the third most common feline
gastrointestinal tumor. It occurs in older cats with a mean age of 13
emergency cases this may not be possible. Many cats with intestinal
years and it is equally distributed between the duodenum, jejunum,
disease also suffer from anemia. Whole blood transfusion or packed
and ileum. Peritoneal effusion is relatively common. The sonographic
red cells are an advisable addition to therapy in the perioperative
features of intestinal MCT were reviewed in 14 cats.21 There were 16
 period in patients with a packed cell volume (PCV) less than 20% (see
focal intestinal tumors and one diffuse submucosal infltrate The
Chapter 5). Cats with intestinal tumors are often aged and due process
most common pattern was focal, hypoechoic wall thickening that was
should be followed with respect to staging the disease using abdomi-
non-circumferential and eccentric, or circumferential, asymmetric,
nal ultrasonography and thoracic radiography. Aged cats also need to
and eccentric. The majority ofthe cats had enlarged abdominal lymph
have adequate cardiac workup to rule out cardiomyopathy.
nodes, often due to MCT metastasis. Metastatic disease was not rou-
Typically, cats are anorexic at the time of presentation so starving
tinely detected in the liver or the spleen. Concurrent small cell (T-cell)
the patient prior to surgery is often unnecessary. Antibiotics should
lymphoma was present in four of 14 cats with intestinal MCT. A
not be given preoperatively since in the case of intestinal perforation,
variant of feline intestinal MCT is also described in 50 cats.2 These
samples for culture and sensitivity will be taken at the time of surgery.
cats had a sclerosing variant of intestinal MCT (Fig. 29-13), which had
In the absence of pre-existing sepsis or spillage of ingesta during
a high propensity for metastasis and a guarded prognosis. Neoplastic
surgery antibiotic therapy is often given intravenously at the time of
cells formed a trabecular pattern admixed with moderate to abundant
surgery and ceased within 24 hours. With intestinal perforations or
dense stromal collagen resulting in intestinal sclerosis. Neoplastic cells
Adei snaue adua pinors ueiu au sd susixaand
had poorly discernible intracytoplasmic granules that demonstrated
aimed at Gram positive and Gram negative aerobic as well as anaero-
bic bacteria for at least four to five days.
cell granules. Additionally, a subset of cases stained for mast cell-
specific tryptase and c-kit demonstrated positive immunoreactivity.
 Intestinal healing
Eosinophilic infiltrates were moderate to marked in almost all cases.
Lymph node and hepatic metastases were present in 66% of the cases.
 The inflammatory phase of intestinal healing lasts three to four days.
Prognosis was poor. Of 25 cases available for follow up. 23 patients
Immediately after wounding, contraction of blood vessels occurs, the
died or were euthanized within two months of initial diagnosis.
 coagulation mechanism is activated, and fibrin clots are deposited to
control hemorrhage. The fibrin clot offers minimal wound strength
on the first postoperative day: the main wound support during the lag
phase of healing comes from the sutures. Enterocyte replication and
PERIOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
regeneration begins almost immediately after wounding however, the
epithelium offers little biomechanical support The inflammatory
 Preoperative complete blood count and clinical chemistries should be 
phase is the most critical period during visceral wound healing, since
performed. Dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities should ideally
most dehiscences take place within 72 to 96 hours after the wound
be corrected prior to the induction of anesthesia, but in some
has been created.
Small intestines
Chapter
29
It is best to approximate the wound edges using 4/0 swaged on
 Box 29-1 Enterotomy
suture with a narrow tapered needle. Direct approximation of the
wound edge allows for optimum rapid healing characterized by
 primary intestinal wound healing. Rapid mucosal re-epithelialization
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbancy and a midline celiotomy
aa pinous pen leusaui aua aul (ez laideun aas) paopad s!
and early formation of young well-vascularized collagen between the
 aul auiwuaap ol 'uojon ol ypewois wouy 'uoiiedjed Ag patenjeaa
submucosa, muscularis, and serosa occurs without compromising
number of foreign bodies and assess the viability of the bowel
lumen diameter and minimizing the number of adhesions. Sutures
 wall. The affected bowel segment is isolated from the remainder
should be snug but not overly tight. The crushing suture has been
 of the viscera with saline-soaked laparotomy sponges. Intestinal
shown to cause more tissue ischemia directly at the suture line and
contents are milked 10 cm to either side of the foreign body and
its use is discouraged. Mucosal eversion or tissue overlap between
 the bowel is held between an assistant's fingers or with Doyen
sutures retards healing increases the risk of leakage and should be
intestinal forceps. With a number 15 scalpel blade, a full thickness 
avoided. Inversion of the wound edge creates an internal cuff of tissue
longitudinal incision is made in the antimesenteric border of the
that reduces lumen diameter and should be avoided in cats.
intestine in the viable tissue immediately proximal or distal to the 
foreign body. The length of the enterotomy approximates the
diameter of the foreign body. Continuous suction is used to reduce
spillage, and the surgeon pushes the foreign body gently through
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
 aul suibew uospui aul leal on ou aen buyen Xuooanua aul
FOR SMALL INTESTINAL SURGERY
 bowel lumen is examined for evidence of perforations or strictures
before closure.
With intestinal obstruction, varying degrees of intestinal distension
Linear foreign bodies
are present and the distended loops of bowel may take on a
These should be managed by identifying the proximal anchor
cyanotic appearance. Intestinal viability is best evaluated after decom-
point and releasing it during or just before laparotomy. Surgical 
 pression of dilated loops of intestine. Decompression of fluid and
management should be performed promptly following release at 
gas from the proximal segment of the distended bowel is performed
the base of the tongue, since loss of intestinal plication may expose 
with a 20G needle and suction apparatus or a 60 mL syringe with a
areas of intestinal perforation and allow leakage of intestinal
three-way stop cock. Standard clinical criteria for establishing intesti-
contents. Commonly, a gastrotomy (see Chapter 28) is necessary
to free wadded string or fishing line from a gastropyloric anchor.
nal viability are color, arterial pulsations, and the presence of peristal-
aqepuadap isou au sl sisieisad 'sanaueied aai asa jo 'sis
The traditional way of linear foreign body removal requires
multiple enterotomies to complete removal of the linear body.
criterion of viability. In most cases of simple non-strangulated obstruc-
 Occasionally, the intestinal foreign body perforates at several
tion, bowel viability is maintained and the visual appearance of dark
locations before surgery, and local peritonitis is evident; sometimes.
distended loops of bowel improves rapidly after decompression.
uana 'os Apog ubiaioy aut punoue pauuno sey sisoug ybnoua
Usually non-viable intestine is distended, blue, black, or gray in
 after its removal, the bowel retains its plicated conformation.
appearance and easily discernable from normal bowel. If intestinal
 In both these groups of patients massive enterectomy may be
wall ischemia and necrosis is present, then resection and anastomosis
necessary.
is performed.
Linear foreign body removal using the urinary
catheter technique
Intestinal biopsy
With this technique only one or two enterotomies are necessary.
Intestinal biopsy is indicated in all cases where neoplasia or inflam-
Once the foreign body is released from its proximal anchor point,
it is tied or sutured to the tip of an eight to 12 French vinyl urinary
matory bowel disease (IBD) is suspected but there is no overt mass
catheter (Hg. 29-14A). As the catheter is pushed distally the 
aul Asdoiq oi alqesiape st ll Qal paioadsns jo saseo ul luasaid uoisal
im eusui ay woy seuasp Apog uiat eau papagua
duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The availability of transmural biop-
sies from all segments of the intestine and the collection of extrain-
Si Apog ubiaioj aui auo (atl-az bh) hastisieaidun jamog aui pue
lous puonas e 'llem jamog aun woy pabebuasip Alanaiduon
testinal samples, especially mesenteric lymph nodes, is especially
enterotomy is made distally over the distal tip of the catheter and the
helpful for diagnosing intestinal tumors such as lymphomas and
remainder of the foreign body is retrieved (Fg. 29-14C). Alternatively.
SI aqunu e uisn uay aqu saisdoa eauo a isu yo siou
a longer catheter can be used and pushed down through the colon.
blade and creating a transverse 2 mm wide × 3 mm long sample. The
The foreign body can then be retrieved from the anus. The author
wound is then closed using two to three simple interrupted 4/0 mono-
has found catheter-facilitated removal to be a very useful method for
flament absorbable sutures on a taper cut needle. Alternatively the
 linear foreign body retrieval in cats.
surgeon can use a 2 or 3 mm dermatologic skin punch to take a round
sample These small wounds are then closed using two simple inter-
rupted sutures. Biopsy techniques are described in detail in Chapter
23 (open intestinal biopsy, Box 23-1) and Chapter 24 (laparoscopic-
assisted intestinal biopsy, Box 24-5).
Enterectomy (resection and anastomosis)
Enterotomy
Enterectomy (Box 29-2) is indicated for removal of masses, both
neoplastic and non-neoplastic, areas of devitalized intestine, non-
 The most common indication for enterotomy (Box 29-1) in cats is to
reducible intussusceptions, eviscerated contaminated intestines, and
remove intraluminal intestinal foreign bodies that cause obstruction.
after mesenteric volvulus. The procedure must be performed carefully
Enterotomy also is performed to examine the intestinal lumen for
to avoid intestinal spillage and with meticulous attention to closure
evidence of mucosal ulceration, strictures or neoplasia. Superficial
 t0 prevent postoperative leakage and peritonitis. Due consideration
ulcerations or intestinal polyps sometimes can be resected via enter-
must also be given to the effects of enterectomy of a large percentage
 Otomy, but most intramural lesions require enterectomy.
of the intestine and the consequences of short bowel syndrome.
319
Section
151
The Abdomen
A
C
Figure 29-14 (A) A segment of yarn is sutured to the tip of a 12 French urinary catheter. (B) The catheter is pushed distally and the yarn is
disengaged from the intestinal mucosa. (c) The yarn is retrieved through a small distal enterotomy incision.
Box 29-2 Enterectomy
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbancy and a midline celiotomy is 
transected, and the excised bowel is removed from the surgical field.
performed (see Chapter 23). The area to be resected is packed away
After resection, the small intestinal mucosa has a tendency to evert 
eusaul sabuods Auooedel pauansiou yhm aopge aun woe 
and can be trimmed back with Metzenbaum scissors.
 contents are milked proximally and distally and the bowel is held
 Suturing should be performed with 4/0 monofilament absorbable
between an assistant's index fingers or with Doyen intestinal forceps
aague paypow e io paidnaui aidwis lauia buisn jeatew ainins
10 cm from the proposed resection site. A 1-2 cm margin of normal
suture pattern. The Gambee engages all layers except the mucosa.
viable intestine is included in the proximal and distal boundaries of the 
thus preventing mucosal protrusion between sutures (Fig. 29-16).
area to be resected, which is clamped with Carmalt or Doyen forceps.
 When the anastomosis is closed with an interrupted suture technique,
 If luminal disparity is present, the forceps are placed at a 75-90°
the first suture is placed at the mesenteric border because the presence
 angle on the dilated proximal segment and at a 45-60° angle on the
of fat in this area makes suture placement most difficult, and this is 
contracted distal segment of bowel (Fig. 29-15). If angling the intestinal 
where leakage is most likely to occur. The second suture is placed on 
lallews aut uedsip jeuunl loj pauon Alatenbape pou saop uoisou!
the antimesenteric border, and the third and fourth sutures are placed 
stoma can be enlarged by incising the bowel section for a distance of 
laterally at 90° quadrants depending on bowel diameter; two to four 
1-2 cm along the antimesenteric surface and then trimming off two
Il sanins jueapenb aut jo ypea uaamiag paneid aie saanins aou
triangular flaps. This procedure creates an ovoid larger stoma, which
sutures are placed 3 mm apart and 2-3 mm from the wound edge.
 can be anastomosed to the larger diameter section of the bowel.
 Suture bites on the dilated side of the anastomosis are placed further
 Branches of the mesenteric artery and veins supplying the devitalized 
apart than on the contracted side of the anastomosis to correct for 
algnop ae pue sdanioy otinbsou parun ylm parelos! ane jamog
luminal disparity. Once one side of the anastomosis is sutured, the 
ligated. The arcadial vessels located within the mesenteric fat are 
bowel is flipped over, and the opposite side is completed. From 12 to
double ligated at the area of proposed resection. A scalpel blade is
 20 sutures are used to complete the anastomosis (Fg. 29-17). After 
used to excise the bowel along the outside of the intestinal forceps.
the anastomosis has been completed it is checked for leakage by 
With dissecting scissors, the vessels are divided, the mesentery is
infusing saline under low pressure into the bowel lumen and 
massaging the fluid past the anastomosis (Hg. 29-18). The anastomosis
can also be checked by gently probing the spaces between sutures
with mosquito hemostats for openings. The mesenteric defect is then 
closed with a simple continuous suture pattern, taking care not to 
include any mesenteric vessels within the suture line.
 Alternatively a simple continuous approximating technique can be
used to create the anastomosis. This is performed with two lengths 
 of suture. The first knot is tied at the mesenteric border and the
second at the antimesenteric border. The sutures are then advanced 
 apa in aui woy ww e Aaewiodde aaad aut punoe
the wound edges gently approximated .24 The needles are advanced 
in opposite directions, so one knot is tied to the tag at the 
antimesenteric border. The final knot is tied to the tag on the
mesenteric border. If the knot is tied too tightly, a purse-string effect
will be produced, and stenosis of the anastomosis may occur. The 
completed anastomosis is tested for leakage, and the mesenteric 
Figure 29-15 Enterectomy in a cat. After applying Doyen forceps the
defect is closed.
 mesenteric vessels are ligated. Enterectomy incisions are made adjacent
To help prevent anastomosis leakage, a pedicle of greater
 to str aight forceps placed perpendicular to the intestine on the dilated 
 omentum is wrapped around the suture line. The omentum is critical
segment and angled 45° on the contracted segment. (Wlustration by
to the successful healing of intestinal wounds because it can seal 
 Samantha 1. Elmhurst BA Hons/www livingart. org.uk from Stanley BR. The small
 i wnuawo aul suoad puaad uen pue syeal pooiseue lis
intestine. In W/iliams IM ano Niles JD. B5AVA Manual of Canine and Felfine
tacked to the serosa with two simple interrupted sutures of 4/0 
Aboominal Surgery. G/oucester 2005: 0 104.)
suture material placed on each side of the bowel wall (Fig. 29-19).
320
Small intestines
Chapter
29
seros
mucosa
submucosa
muscularis and submucosa leaving an internal cuff of mucosa to help
seal the intestinal lumen. (lustration by Samantha J. Emhurst BA Hons/
www.ivingart.org.uk from Stanfey BR. The smalf intestine. in Wilims IM and 
Niles /D. B5AVA Manual of Canine ano Feline Abdominal Surgery. Gloucester 2005;
0 103.)
Figure 29-19 After completion of the enterotomy or enterectomy a
'sisowoseue aun punoe paddem si unuawo aeae po uawbas
(Courtesy of the University of Cambrioge.)
metoclopramide 2.2 mg/kg IV every eight hours to reduce ileus and
promote intestinal motility. Anorexia or vomiting in the presence of
fever, abdominal tenderness, and leukocytosis suggests that anasto-
motic leakage and peritonitis may have occurred. If low glucose levels,
teria are present on abdominocentesis, early re-exploration of the
abdomen is warranted.
Nutrition after intestinal surgery
Figure 29-17 Intraoperative image of an end-to-end intestinal
 Early if not immediate postoperative enteral feeding has been shown
anastomosis after enterectomy with 4 cm margins for a sclerosing MCT
(see Fig. 29-13). Repair was performed with 4/0 monofilament sutures of
mosis in dogs. Malnutrition induces intestinal mucosal atrophy.
polydioxanone in a simple interrupted pattern. (Courtesy of Laura Owen.)
reduced motility, increased incidence of ileus, and the potential for
bacterial translocation through the bowel wall, with resultant sepsis.
Impaired wound healing due to nutritional causes may be amelio-
rated by feeding an enteral or parenteral diet that supplies energy
needs in the form of fatty acids and sugars, and provides essential
amino acids. Feeding high protein meals after injury can optimize
conditions for normal visceral wound healing. Amino acids provided
through enteral nutrition are utilized for the synthesis of structural
proteins such as actin, myosin, collagen, and elastin. Bursting pres-
sures and collagen levels of ileal and colorectal anastomosis were
compared in Beagles fed elemental diets versus those fed only electro-
lytes and water for four days.25 The dogs fed elemental diets had nearly
twice the bursting strengths of the control group and nearly double
the amount of both immature and mature collagen at the wound site.
Conversely, total parenteral nutrition (TPN) does not appear to amel-
Figure 29-18 Intraoperative image of an intestinal anastomosis in a cat,
iorate the mucosal atrophy or increase collagen deposition as does
performed with 4/0 monofilament sutures in an interrupted pattern. The
enteral nutrition. In human studies, the incidence of septic complica-
mesentery has been closed to prevent strangulation and the anastomosis
sanoy th pue suaia uaamiaq pay aidoad ui lamol aiueyiugis sem suon
 is leak tested with sterile saline.
patients had a reduced incidence of postoperative ileus and reduced
hospital stay.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AFTER SMALL
 The effect of early feeding is unknown in cats but we advocate early
postoperative feeding in our clinical setting based on studies in other
INTESTINAL SURGERY
species. Therefore feeding a bland diet such as canned I/D (Hills Pet
Nutrition Inc., Topeka, KS), mixed with water to form a gruel, is initi-
Fluid and electrolyte deficits are corrected and antibiotic therapy is
 ated the evening of surgery. In uncomplicated cases, reasonable appe-
continued in the postoperative period. The author also
uses
tite usually resumes within 48 hours.
321
Section
5
The Abdomen
syndrome may result. The propensity for short bowel syndrome after
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
massive intestinal resection depends on the amount of tissue excised,
the location of the resection, and the time allowed for adaptation.
Feline intestinal surgery can generally be performed with a good result
After resection of large portions of small intestine, maldigestion, mal-
 but any intestinal procedure is not without potential morbidity.
absorption, diarrhea (induced by fatty acids or bile salts), bacterial
Overgrowth, and gastric hypersecretion may all occur. Location of the
resection is important. High resection of the duodenum and upper
Dehiscence and peritonitis
-eaue aseaq uoaas azua oeaued aseaap a uunial
Intestinal dehiscence and secondary peritonitis are the most signif-
stimulating hormones such as secretin and cholecystokinin are pro-
cant complications. Intestinal leakage has been associated with a high
duced in the mucosa of these sections. These reductions of pancreatic
mortality rate in dogs: as high as 74%. This compares with a mortality
enzymes contribute to maldigestion of protein, carbohydrate and fat
of only 7.2% in animals without intestinal dehiscence.2 However, it
with resultant catabolism, negative nitrogen balance, and steatorrhea.
appears that cats have fewer incidences of intestinal dehiscence and
Unabsorbed sugars may also cause osmotic diarrhea. If the ileocecal
aaeyeal ne Suyool Apms e ul za'ssop ueut sanei [eaiains iauay ypnu
valve is resected, bacteria may ascend, overgrow in the small bowel,
following intestinal anastomosis in ll5 dogs and cats, there was a
 and contribute to diarrhea.
16% anastomosis leakage rate in dogs (13 of 90 dogs) but there were
After massive resection, the remaining small intestine adapts by
no intestinal leakages in 25 cats.2 It was suggested that the low inci-
increasing lumen diameter, microvilli height, and mucosal cell
dence of intestinal dehiscence in cats and higher survival rates in that
number. These compensatory changes may take several weeks and
study were due to the fact that none of the cats had pre-existing peri-
during this period parenteral fluids, electrolytes, and parenteral ali-
 tonitis at the time of their initial surgery. On the other hand, cats with 
mentation may be necessary for the survival of the animal. During
pre-existing peritonitis due to linear foreign body perforation had a
this time, the cat ideally will be able to maintain weight even with
50% mortality rate in another study.2 Preoperative factors significantly
diarrhea. Medical treatments for unresponsive diarrhea after massive
associated with development of anastomosis leakage include preop-
resection include frequent small meals, low-fat diets, elemental diet
erative peritonitis, low serum albumin concentration, left shift, and
the etiology of the obstruction. Enterotomy or enterectomy after intes-
 plements, B vitamins, kaolin antidiarrheal drugs, and poorly absorbed
tinal foreign body removal is more likely to have leakage than cases
 oral antibiotics such as neomycin.
with intestinal tumors. Because the risk of the dehiscence is multiplied
 In one clinical study involving seven cats with extensive (>50%)
according to the number of surgical wounds, reduction in the number
resection of small intestine all cats were discharged from the hospital
 of enterotomy wounds is desirable whenever possible.
and most had good outcomes, with mean survival times of two to
three years.22 However, in an experimental study in cats where 85%
Short bowel syndrome
of the small intestine and all but 2 cm of the ileum were removed
significant morbidity occurred in the form of moderate to severe
Massive resection of part of the small intestine is sometimes indicated
diarrhea and weight loss. Administration of ursodeoxycholic acid
with ischemia secondary to intestinal volvulus or needed due to mul-
was helpful in reducing the morbidity by reducing increasing intesti-
tiple perforations or continued pleating from linear foreign bodies.
nal transit time. However, these cats were all euthanized within a
When large sections of the small intestine are resected short bowel
two-month period.30
REFERENCES
1.
Hudson LC, Hamilton WP. Atlas of feline
 7. Basher AwP, Fowler ID. Conservative vs
for the prevention of intussusception 
anatomy for veterinarians. Philadelphia:
surgical management of gastrointestinal
recurrence in dogs: 35 cases [1989-1999].
WB Saunders: 1993. p. 156-63.
linear foreign bodies in the cat. Vet Surg
IAm Vet Med Assoc 2001;219:
Felts JF, Fox PR, Burk RL. Thread and
1987;16:56-9.
1415-18.
2.
sewing needles as gastrointestinal foreign
8.
 Anderson SL, Lippincott CL, Gill PJ.
13.
Knell SC, Andreoni AA, Dennler M,
bodies in the cat: a review of 64 cases.
Single enterotomy for removal of
Venzin CM. Successful treatment of small
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;184:56-9.
gastrointestinal linear foreign bodies.
intestinal volvulus in two cats. J Feline
 3. Morgan IP The upper gastrointestinal
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:487-90.
Med Surg 2010;12:874-7.
examination in the cat: Normal
9. Muir P, Rosen E. Failure of the single
14.
 MacDonald JM, Mullen HS, Moroff SD.
radiographic appearance using positive
 enterotomy technique to remove a linear
Adenomatous polyps of the duodenum in
contrast medium. Vet Rad 1993;22:
intestinal foreign body from a cat. Vet
cats: 18 cases [1985-1990). I Am Vet Med
148-91.
Record 1995;136:75.
Assoc 1993;202:647-51.
4. Adams WM, Sisterman LA, Klauer JM,
10.
 Burkitt JM, Drobatz K], Saunders HM.
15.
Harvey Cl, Lopez [w, Hendrick M]. An 
et al. Association of intestinal disorders
Washabau Rj. Signalment, history, and
uncommon intestinal manifestation of
in cats with fndings of abdominal
outcome of cats with gastrointestinal tract
feline infectious peritonitis: 2G cases
radiography. I Am Vet Med Assoc
intussusception: 20 cases (1986-2000).
[1986-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc
2010;236:880-6.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;234:771-6.
1996;209:1117-20.
 5. Larson MM, Biller DS. Ultrasound of
11.
 Oaks MC. Bowel plication for preventing
16.
Gower SB, Weisse Cw, Brown DC.
the gastrointestinal tract. Vet Clin
recurrent intussusception. In: Bojrab MJ,
Major abdominal evisceration injuries
North Am: Small Anim Pract 2009;39:
editor. Current techniques in small
in dogs and cats: 12 cases [1998-2008].
747-59.
animal surgery, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;234:
 Bebchuck TN. Feline gastrointestinal
Williams and Wilkins; 1997. p. 254.
1566-72.
foreign bodies. Vet Clin North Am: Small
12. Applewhite AA, Hawthorne JC, Cornell
17.
 Moore PF, Rodriguez-Bertos A, Kass PH.
Anim Pract 2002;32:869-73.
KK. Complications of enteroplication
Feline gastrointestinal lymphoma:
322
 Small intestines
Chapter
67
Mucosal architecture, Immunophenotype
tumour: 50 cases [1997-2008). Vet Comp
and associated clinical factors: a
and molecular clonality. Vet Path 2011.
Oncol 2010;8:72-9.
retrospective study of 121 dogs. J Am 
online April 11.
23. Keinschmidt S, Harder J, Nolte I, et al.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:70-6.
18. Pohlman LM, Higginbotham ML, Welles
Chronic inflammatory and non-
27.
.Wylie KB, Hosgood G. Mortality and
EG, Johnson CM. Immunophenotypic
inflammatory diseases of the 
 morbidity of small intestinal surgery in
and histologic classifcation of 50 cases
 gastrointestinal tract in cats: diagnostic
dogs and cats 74 cases [1980-1992).
of feline gastrointestinal lymphoma. Vet
advantages of full-thickness intestinal and
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1994;30:469-74.
Path 2009;46:259-68.
extraintestinal biopsies. J Feline Med Surg
28.
. Ralphs SC, Jessen CR, Lipowitz AJ. Risk
19. Cribb AE. Feline gastrointestinal
2010;12:97-103.
factors for leakage following intestinal
adenocarcinoma: A review and
24
Weisman DL, Smeak DD, Birchard SJ.
anastomosis in dogs and cats: 1l5 cases
retrospective study. Can Vet Journal
Zweigart SL. Comparison of a continuous
(1991-2000). I Am Vet Med Assoc
1988;29:709-12.
 suture pattern with a simple interrupted
2003;223:73-7.
20.
.Kosovsky JE, Matthiesen DT, Patnaik AK.
 pattern for enteric closure in dogs and
29.
. Gorman SC, Freeman LM, Mitchell SL,
Small intestinal adenocarcinoma in cats:
cats: 83 cases [1991-1997]. IAm Vet Med
 Chan DL. Extensive small bowel resection
32 cases [1978-1985). 1 Am Vet Med
Assoc 1999;214:1507-12.
in dogs and cats: 20 cases [1998-2004).
Assoc 1988;192:233-5.
25.
Moss G, Greenstein A, Levy S.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:
21.
Laurenson MP, Skorupski KA, Moore PF.
 Bierenbaum A. Maintenance of bowel
403-77.
Zwingenberger AL. Ultrasonography of
function after bowel surgery and
30.
. Kouti V, Papazoglou LS, Laskos I, et al.
intestinal mast cell tumors in the cat. Vet
immediate full nutrition. J Parent Enteral
 Ursodeoxycholic acid promotes intestinal
Radiol Ultrasound 2011;52:330-4.
Nutrit 1980;4:535-8.
 adaptation in a cat model of short bowel
22. Halsey CH, Powers BE, Kamstock DA.
26.
Allen DA, Smeak DD, Schertel ER.
syndrome. Fundamental & Clinical
 Feline intestinal sclerosing mast cell
Prevalence of small intestinal dehiscence 
Pharmacology. Online Jan 7th, 2011.
323
30l
tel
Large intestine, rectum and anus
R.N. White
Colorectal disease is a common problem in cats. The term covers a
considered important in maintaining mechanical strength during the
wide range of conditions including congenital abnormalities such as
 process of suturing or stapled closure and anastomosis.
atresia ani and rectovaginal fistulae and acquired conditions such as
The large intestine obtains its arterial blood supply from branches
megacolon and neoplasia. The surgical management of the majority
of both the cranial mesenteric and caudal mesenteric arteries (Fig)
of conditions encountered should not be considered routine as com-
30-1). The ileocolic artery, a branch of the cranial mesenteric artery.
plications associated with both colonic and rectal surgery are reported
supplies the ileum, cecum, and ascending and transverse colon. The
commonly.
ileocolic artery gives rise to the middle colic and right colic arteries.
 The middle colic artery supplies part of the transverse colon and half
of the descending colon. The right colic artery supplies the cecum, the
ascending colon, and part of the transverse colon. The left colic and
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 cranial rectal arteries arise from the caudal mesenteric artery. The left
colic artery supplies the distal half of the descending colon before
The large intestine extends from the ileocecal valve to the anus. It is
anastomosing with the right colic artery. Vessels arising from the
divided anatomically and functionally into the colon (ascending.
caudal mesenteric artery and passing in a caudal direction are consid-
transverse, and descending), rectum, and the anus. The walls of the
ered to be supplying the rectum. The cranial rectal artery primarily
colon and rectum comprise five distinct layers: mucosa, submucosa,
supplies the cranial and caudal rectum. The caudal rectum also
inner circular muscle, outer longitudinal muscle, and serosa. The
receives a supply from vessels arising from the internal iliac artery via
intraperitoneal colon and proximal part of the rectum are covered by
the prostatic or vaginal arteries.
serosa; much of the distal rectum is extraperitoneal and, therefore,
 The venous drainage follows similar anatomy to the arterial supply.
lacks serosa.
 The caudal mesenteric vein drains into the portal vein.
The ascending colon communicates with the terminal small intes-
The paravertebral sympathetic trunk supplies the colon via the sym-
tine [ileum) via the ileocolic orifice and with the cecum via the ceco-
 pathetic ganglia. The parasympathetic innervation to the colon is
colic orifice The region of bowel containing these structures is often
supplied by the pelvic and vagus nerves.
termed the ileocecocolic junction.
The short ascending colon turns towards the left side of the abdomen
at the right colic (hepatic) flexure to become the transverse colon. The
 colon takes a further turn at the left colic (splenic) flexure to pass in
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
a caudal direction, becoming the descending colon. There is no his-
tological difference between the ascending, transverse, and descending
Cats need to have a complete history taken with specific attention paid
colon; the sub-division is purely one of gross anatomical position.
to duration and onset of clinical signs, diet, and history of any trauma.
 The descending colon with its associated mesocolon lies dorsal to the
 A physical examination of the cat should be performed with a careful
small intestine passing to the left side of the peritoneal cavity in a
 abdominal palpation, inspection of the anal and genital orifices and
caudal direction towards the pelvic inlet. At the level of the pelvic
 a rectal examination should be performed to check for narrowing
inlet, the colon continues caudally as the rectum. The colorectal junc-
Or strictures; however, this is usually done with the cat sedated or
au yo jaal au ie pauood si i iissoe pauass aq rouue uon
anesthetized.
pelvic brim, with the rectum continuing through the pelvic canal.
In the normal individual, the total colonic length as a percentage
Definitions
of the intestinal length is remarkably constant at 20.9 ± 2.0%. The
layers of the colon are the mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and
Presenting signs of cats with colorectal disease will often typify
serosa. Like the small bowel, it is the submucosal layer that is
the condition encountered such as the constipation associated with
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00030-5
325
Section
5
The Abdomen
Middle colic
 In cats without anal sac disease gas (air) within one or both anal
artery
sacs should be considered an unusual but normal variant on survey
Aorta
radiographs that include the caudal aspects of the pelvis. This finding
Right colic
should not be mistaken for bony lysis of the ischial tuberosity on the
artery
ransy
erse colon
ventrodorsal view.
Contrast radiography may be used to increase the radiographic
contrast between the large bowel lumen and its mucosal surface. Some
preparation of the patient is required to empty the large bowel of fecal
material prior to performing a contrast procedure of the colon/rectum.
Cranial
bupu
Food should be withheld for at least 24 hours and some form of
leocolic
mesenteric
Cleansing enema should be administered (see section on bowel prepa-
artery
artery
ration prior to surgery). Plain survey films should be obtained prior
to performing the contrast studies.
Pneumocolonography describes the instillation of a negative con-
trast agent (most commonly air) into the rectum/colon via a catheter
lleal△
Left
placed through the anus. In general, a volume of 8 mL/kg bodyweight
arteries
colic
will be suffcient and this should be instilled slowly to reduce the
artery
incidence of discomfort and increased peristaltic activity.
Antimesente
 Positive contrast colonography describes the instillation of a posi-
branch
tive contrast agent into the lumen of the large bowel via the anus.
 Positive contrast agents that are used include barium suspension and
lleum
Caudal
Vasa
iodinated contrast media. A 20% w/v barium suspension (one part
mesenteric
recti
barium to two parts water) at a dose of 8 mL/kg should be instilled
artery
into the large bowel via a balloon tipped catheter (Foley catheter).
Inflation of the balloon will discourage the leakage of contrast agent
via the anus. The contrast should be instilled slowly to reduce the
incidence of discomfort and peristaltic activity. The air can be removed
at the end of the study.
Rectum
 Barium should not be used in any individual with suspected large
bowel rupture or perforation. In such cases, diluted (20%) ionic or
Figure 30-1 Blood supply to the large intestine.
 non-ionic iodinated contrast media should be used as an alternative
[the use of an iodinated contrast media will result in a less well-
 megacolon and the complete lack of defecation in individuals suffer-
defined mucosal surface since the agent is rapidly absorbed through
ing from atresia ani. Constipation has been defined as infrequent or
the mucosal surface). The positive contrast should be gently aspirated
difficult defecation associated with the retention of feces within the
at the end of the study.
colon and rectum.2 Obstipation is a condition of prolonged and
Indications for positive contrast colonography include assess-
intractable constipation resulting in severe fecal impaction through-
ment of mucosal surface abnormalities, strictures, diverticula, and
out the rectum and colon. Obstipated animals are unable to eliminate
intussusception.
the impacted fecal material. Dyschezia describes difficult or painful
 Double contrast colonography is performed by coating the mucosal 
evacuation of feces from the rectum. This clinical sign is commonly
surface of the large bowel with a positive contrast agent followed by
associated with lesions in or near the anal region. Alimentary tenes-
the subsequent instillation of a negative contrast agent (air) to maxi-
O snens ieun ie ue sza i uis iu an si s
mize the contrast interface The technique is performed by instilling
defecate The straining is often painful and ineffectual. Alimentary
a positive contrast agent as described already. Once completely
tenesmus is commonly associated with disease of the large intestine
instilled, this agent is then removed and an equal volume of air is
and lower intestinal tract.
immediately instilled prior to obtaining orthogonal abdominal radio-
graphs. The air can be removed at the end of the study.
 Indications for double contrast colonography include assessment
Diagnostic imaging for intestinal disease
of space-occupying lesions of the wall of the large bowel and the loca-
tion of strictures and intramural lesions.
Pain radiography and contrast radiography?
When examining the large intestine of the cat, orthogonal (lateral and 
Ultrasonographys
ventrodorsal) survey radiographs including the pelvis and perianal
region should be obtained. The normal colon will have a shape
Although the entire colon is accessible for transabdominal ultrasono-
similar to a numeral '7' on the dorsoventral view. The cecum is gener-
graphic examination its gas and fecal contents often make it diffcult to
ally not visible on plain radiography in the cat.
image the organ with clarity. Reverberation artifacts obscure the major-
The content, position and size of the large intestine may be variable.
ity of the large bowel wall from observation; only the wall closest to
 The width of the normal feces-filled colon should not be greater than 
the transducer can be clearly imaged in the majority of individuals.
three times the width of the small intestines or the length of the
 Ultrasonography can be used to effectively assess lesions within the
seventh lumbar vertebra. Enlargement of the diameter of the colon
bowel wall (masses, strictures, intussusceptions, etc.). In certain cases
beyond 1.5 times the length of the seventh lumbar vertebra is indica-
the technique can be used to obtain ultrasound guided fine needle
tive of chronic large bowel dysfunction and megacolon.4 The normal
aq sa us us aas eo ses
colonic wall may have a corrugated appearance (due to peristalsis)
to visualize the regional lymph nodes (right colic, medial iliac, and
and this finding should not be interpreted as abnormal unless it is a
hypogastric). Enlarged nodes may be amenable to fine needle aspira-
consistent finding on subsequent, serial radiographs.
tion under ultrasonographic guidance.
326
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
Ultrasonography can be useful for defining the presence and posi-
tion of free peritoneal fluid. The technique should be performed in
patients with suspected large bowel peritonitis and will allow pock-
diopathic megacolon
eted fluid accumulations to be aspirated with the maximum degree of
Pelvic canal stenosis
accuracy and safety.
Nerve injuries
Computed tomography
23
Manx sacral spinal cord
Computed tomography (CT) is a very useful modality for imaging the
deformity
large bowel in the cat. Modern machines will provide high quality
■Cther including unproven
images that can be manipulated to show any cross-section view in all
colonic aganglionosis,
three dimensions. A CT scan is particular well suited for the investiga-
colopexy, colonic neoplasia
tion of intrapelvic disease. In addition, rapid staging of any neoplastic
disease (pulmonary, liver, and local lymph node assessment) can be
performed as necessary.
Figure 30-2 C auses of megacolon. (From Washabau Ri, Hasler AH.
Constipation, obstipation, and megacofon. in: August IR, eoitor. Consuftations in 
Colonoscopy/proctoscopy
Feline lnternal Medicine. 3rd eo. Philade/phia: W8 5aunders Company: 1997.
0. 104-12.)
Colonoscopy and proctoscopy will in general, be performed with a
flexible endoscope in the cat. Such an endoscope should have a biopsy
channel so that suitable lesions can be sampled at the time of the
 In humans, a congenital form of megacolon (Hirshsprung disease)
procedure The importance of correct bowel preparation cannot be
 is well recognized. It occurs in neonates and is characterized by agan-
over-emphasized. Preparation will normally include a period of
glionosis of a segment of colon, resulting in the persistent contraction
24-48 hours of starvation with the administration of some form of
of smooth muscle within the affected segment and the subsequent
enema (possibly on more than one occasion) prior to the study. To
 dilatation of the colon proximal to the constricted, affected site. This
be performed safely, the procedure will require a full general anes-
 condition has been suggested to occur in cats, although its true exist-
thetic. Inadequate cleansing of the large bowel will produce unsatis-
'as aun ui paanop uaaq auo seu saads si ui aua
factory and meaningless findings at the time of the endoscopy.
 In a review of 120 cases of megacolon in cats, 62% were accounted
Difficulty in achieving adequate and safe cleansing of the bowel in the
for by idiopathic megacolon, 23% demonstrated pelvic canal stenosis,
'saads aul ul ainpaoid aul woad ol aunai e cl pal sey ie
6% demonstrated nerve injuries, 5% showed Manx sacral spinal cord
This is unfortunate since the large bowel is very accessible for a com-
deformity, and the remaining 4% included unproven colonic agan-
plete endoscopic examination and the procedure will frequently
glionosis, complications of colopexy, and colonic neoplasia (Fig.
provide a definitive diagnosis without recourse to surgery. Indications
30-2).10 It was concluded that although it remains truethat megacolon
for colonoscopy include dyschezia, tenesmus, constipation, or chronic
 may have an extensive list of differential diagnoses and may be associ-
diarrhea containing mucus and/or fresh blood. For more information
ated with other disease processes including active colonic inflamma-
see Chapter 9
tion, dysautonomia, and metabolic disorders, the majority of cases
are idiopathic, orthopedic, or neurologic in origin.
 A diagnosis of megacolon is made by estimation of the colon size
 on radiography. Enlargement of the diameter of the colon beyond 1.5
SURGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE LARGE
times the length of the body of the seventh lumbar vertebra is indica-
INTESTINE AND ANUS
tive of chronic large bowel dysfunction and megacolon.4
 Megacolon is most commonly observed in middle-aged (mean 5.8
Megacolon
 years) male cats (70% male, 30% female) cats. The domestic shorthair
(46%) followed by the domestic longhair (15%) and Siamese (12%)
-aou ou seui asn si pue uo uan aaidsap e si uoosesan
are the breeds most commonly affected.10
tion regarding specific etiology or pathophysiology. The condition
 Specifc therapy depends on the severity of the constipation and
should be considered a disorder characterized by recurrent constipa-
the underlying cause for the condition. A summary of non-surgical
tion and/or obstipation associated with dilatation and hypomotility
 management and the drugs that can be used is listed in Box 30-1 and
of the colon. Often the underlying etiology for the condition remains
Table 30-1.
wknown and in many cases it is more appropriate to define the
In the majority of cats with idiopathic megacolon, medical treat-
mechanism by which the condition developed. The common two
 ment using laxatives, enemas, and dietary management offers only a
pathologic mechanisms are either dilatation or hypertrophy.
temporary relief of clinical signs. It is now widely accepted that colec-
Dilated megacolon is the end stage of colonic dysfunction. The
tomy should be considered in cats with the condition that is refractory
underlying etiology for colonic dysfunction megacolon is nearly
to medical therapy. Several different surgical techniques for the man-
always idiopathic Cats affected with idiopathic dilated megacolon
 agement of the condition have been described and these include colo-
have permanent loss of colonic structure and function although
plasty,12 a partial colectomy 12-15 or the more complete or subtotal
histologic assessment of the affected colon is normal in the majority
colectomy.& 16-20 The surgical management of idiopathic megacolon
of cases.
 and constipation has been reviewed comprehensively.21
-sqo ue jo auanasuo e se sdoaaap uoioea yiudoad
Causes of outlet obstruction causing secondary megacolon in
tive lesion such as malunion of a pelvic fracture or a distal large bowel
the cat are listed in Box 30-2. Of these, the most common cause of
tumor. Hypertrophic megacolon may be reversible if the site of
outlet obstruction causing secondary megacolon is pelvic fracture
obstruction is removed early in the course of the disease. With time,
malunion.22
the changes within the colonic wall will become irreversible and
Outlet obstruction will initially result in the development of a
removal of the site of obstruction will have little or no effect on the
hypertrophic megacolon.32 Hypertrophic megacolon is often reversi-
megacolon.
ble with the early removal of the colonic outflow obstruction. If left
327
Section
5
The Abdomen
 Box 30-1 Summary of non-surgical management of constipation in the cat
Removal of impacted feces
they are likely to be most effective in mild cases of constipation
The removal of impacted feces may be accomplished using laxatives
and their administration should probably be limited to rectal
The use of a suppository will require both a compliant patient and a
euownaud uoneaidse jo ysu puengubis e si aaun se uoe nsuiupe
compliant owner.
with oral administration, especially in debilitated and depressed
patients.2 Of the stimulant laxative agents available, Bisacodyl
 of an enema in conjunction with manual extraction. Manual extraction
is considered to be most effective. The drug brings about the
 will require the sedation or general anesthesia of the patient. Enema
production of diarrhea by the combined effect of increased mucosal
 solution should be administered slowly via a well-lubricated 10-12 Fr
secretion and colonic propulsive motility. Lastly, there are the
feeding tube, or equivalent.
hyperosmotic laxatives. Of these, the most effective is the
polysaccharide, lactulose. The fermentation of the lactulose in 
the gastrointestinal tract leads to the production of organic acids,
 Administration of laxatives
 which stimulate colonic fluid secretion and propulsive motility
Laxatives promote evacuation of the large bowel through stimulation
of fluid and electrolyte transport and/or increase in propulsive motility.
Administration of colonic prokinetic agents
 Bulk-forming laxatives are dietary fiber supplements of poorly digestible
Unfortunately, the colonic prokinetic agent, Cisapride was withdrawn
 polysaccharides and celluloses. They should be used with care in cats 
from sale in 2000 from Western Europe, North America, and Canada
with megacolon since if they fail to induce defecation their bulk-
following reports of untoward cardiac effects in people. There is little 
forming action may actually lead to a worsening of the fecal impaction.
launo jo asn aut buipueban awil juasaid aul ie algellere eiep ou o
Lubricant laxatives such as mineral oil should also be used with caution;
en aul ui uoedisuo jo suawabeuew aul ui shuabe pauioid
 Table 30-1 Pharmaceutical products useful in the management of megacolon
Plan
Drugs and solutions 
Administration
Comments
Laxatives
Bufk-forming faxatives: dietary fiber
 Orally mixed with food
Use with care since if fail to induce
 supplements of poorly digestible 
defecation may worsen the impaction
 polysaccharides and celluloses 
Lubricant faxatives: mineral oil
Best administered per rectum in
Use with caution. Most effective in mild
glycerin
debilitated animals as risk of aspiration2
cases
 Stimufant faxatives: bisacodyl
Increases mucosal secretion and colonic
 propulsive motility
Hyperosmotic laxatives: lactulose
Administer orally at a dose of 0.5 mL/
Lactulose fermentation leads to production
kg body weight every 8-12 hours
of organic acids, which stimulate colonic 
fluid secretion and propulsive motility
Overdose can lead to diarrhea
Emofient faxatives: dioctyl sodium
 Pediatric rectal suppository
Requires compliant cat and owner
sulfosuccinate
 Enema and manual
 Enema solutions include warm tap
Administer slowly via lubricated
Sodium phosphate enemas are
extr action
water, warm isotonic saline, dioctyl
10-12 Fr feeding tube, or equivalent.
contraindicated in cats as high levels of
sodium sulfosuccinate, mineral oil.
Requires heavy sedation or general
sodium and phosphate might induce 
or lactulose
anesthesia
severe hypernatremia, hyperphosphatemia
and hypocalcemia
 Administration of
 Cisapride
Oral
Withdrawn from sale in 2000 in many
 colonic prokinetic 
parts of the world due to cardiac effects in 
agents
people
Box 30-2 Causes of outlet obstruction causing secondary megacolon in the cat
 Pelvic fracture malunionzz
 Perineal herniation28
Colonic and rectoanal tumors19
Intestinal foreign bodieszz
 Extrapelvic extraluminal stricture formation following neutering
Improper dietzz
surgery23-2T
 Anal, rectal or colonic atresia2-31
 Intrapelvic extraluminal tumors or masses
328
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
untreated, the obstruction will result in progression of the condition
clinical signs without the necessity to perform a subsequent subtotal
to an irreversible dilated megacolon. In general, therefore, prompt
colectomy.24-26 It has been suggested that the risk of this complication
treatment of outlet obstruction will involve removal of the underlying
may be reduced by ensuring that the uterus is amputated at, or as
cause of the obstruction. A major complication in cases that have
aaisuoan al sup aqissd se xiai an 'on aso
already developed dilated megacolon is the continued dysfunction of
procedure.24,25
the colon following the removal of the outlet obstruction. In such
 A similar condition has been reported in the tom.27 In this instance,
instances, continued problems with constipation/obstipation may be
 an open castration had been performed and clinical signs of constipa-
managed medically. In cases that are unresponsive to medical man-
au ains aul iae saam huaia padoaaap ssauan ieag pue u
agement, a subtotal colectomy should be considered.
cause of the stricture was found to be a non-adherent fibrous ring
 Complications after surgery for megacolon include diarrhea from
encircling the distal descending colon. The origin of the fbrous band
short bowel syndrome (see Chapter 29) and peritonitis from dehis-
was unclear, but it was considered possible that retraction of the sper-
cence of the anastomosis (see Chapter 26). In the long term, the most
matic cord following an open castration may, especially if the proce-
common complication is recurrence of the constipation. In the major-
dure was performed without adequate asepsis, result in theformation
ity of such affected individuals, the constipation can be treated by
 of a fibrous ring around the descending colon. As with the female cats
dietary management, stool softeners, and the occasional manual
following ovariohysterectomy, removal of the offending tissue resulted
removal of feces, until a satisfactory medical regime for the manage-
in the long-term resolution of the clinical signs.
ment of the constipation is developed.? Affected individuals should
be carefully assessed to ensure that there is no evidence of either outlet 
Constipation associated with
obstruction or megarectum (see section below) that might cause
perineal herniation
 ongoing issues with distal physical or functional bowel obstruction.
It might be expected that recurrent constipation would be a more
 Perineal herniation is not as commonly diagnosed in the cat as in the
common complication in individuals in which the ileocolic junction
dog, but in affected individuals the condition may induce fecal impac.
was retained at the time of colectomy. In these individuals, the
tion, constipation, and obstipation.28 Obstipated individuals may go
retained colonic segment is likely to be larger than in those individu-
on to develop a secondary dilated megacolon.
 Surgical repair of the hernia or hermias (see Chapter 25) will allevi-
performed. In fact, studies suggest that there is no significant differ-
ate the constipation in the majority of individuals. Cats with any
ence in the rate of recurrent constipation between the two surgical
degree of fecal colonic impaction should have the impacted feces
procedures of colocolostomy and enterocolostomy.20
removed prior to, or at the time of, hernia repair. In individuals in
which fecal impaction recurs, a careful assessment of the repairs and/
Colonic entrapment following
or assessment of a previously unaffected side should be performed to
rule out the presence of further hernia development. If it is concluded
ovariohysterectomy or castration
that no further perineal herniation is present, but the animal is suf-
The development of constipation or obstipation is a rare complication
fering from megacolon, a subtotal colectomy should be considered,
following routine ovariohysterectomy or castration in the cat.23-27 In
since further straining associated with the fecal impaction/megacolon
all the reported cases the constipation/obstipation was associated with
is likely to result in a breakdown of the herniorrhaphy repair. There-
an extrapelvic, extraluminal stricture of the colon situated just cranial
fore, the early removal of the diseased colon is to be recommended.
to the pelvic brim (Fig. 30-3).
yioq wuouy suuajyns slenpiaipu ul ieut pasaaans uaaq sey i! 'oey ul
In queens, the complication becomes manifest within ten weeks of
 perineal herniation and a secondary dilated megacolon, the removal
the ovariohysterectomy. The cause of the stricture is either a collar of
of the megacolon alone may relieve the clinical signs, making concur-
residual uterine horn tissue that forms adhesions with the mesocolon
 rent perineal hernia repair unnecessary.32
Or a ring of non-adherent fbrous tissue the origin of which remains
unclear. Surgical resection of the offending tissues and fibrous adhe-
Neoplasia of the colon
sions appears to result in the long-term resolution of the obstructive
sas ase saie auul sloum jas iseu pue uoudul q pamo
sm uusad ie ae uau aue 'uoo a go sio ym se jo
12.5 years, 46% of the tumors were adenocarcinoma, 41% were lym-
phoma, and 9% were mast cell tumors.34
Clinical signs often include constipation, fecal tenesmus, diarrhea,
anorexia, and weight loss.35 Clinical examination will often confrm
the presence of a caudal abdominal mass on abdominal palpation.
Further investigations should include full blood analyses [including
testing for feline leukemia and immunodeficiency viruses), imaging
of the abdomen (survey radiographs, abdominal ultrasonography.
contrast enhanced CT scan, etc.), and protoscopy/colonoscopy
(to allow visualization and biopsy) (Fig. 30-4). In cases with cancer.
the disease should be staged with thoracic radiography/CT and
ultrasonography/CT imaging of the liver, spleen, and local lymph
nodes.36
 Treatment, in most instances, is the surgical excision of the mass
followed by end-to-end anastomosis via a ventral midline celiotomy.
Figure 30-3 A 1-year-old cat presented with an inability to defecate
Obtaining clean margins at the time of excision will, not surprisingly.
eight weeks after ovariohysterectomy. Stenosis at the rectocolic junction
increase survival time. Conversely, gross evidence of local or distant
is demonstrated after administering a barium enema.
metastasis at the time of surgery will lead to a decrease in survival
329
Section
151
The Abdomen
Cats with certain forms of colonic cancer may benefit from radia-
tion therapy (see Chapter 15) of the local disease but there are no
reports describing its use for this disease at the present time.
Atresia coli
Atresia coli describes a segmental intestinal anomaly affecting a
portion of the colon. The anomaly is characterized by the absence or
closure of a segment of colon. Congenital atresia develops when areas
of the intestine either fail to vascularize or the blood vessels degener-
ate early in development. Causes of the condition in domestic animals
and humans include fetal enteritis, peritonitis, anomalies or diseases
 of the fetal blood vessels, and injuries sustained in utero by a previ-
jsou aut paiapisuos si uopuos au yanouiv zis'smay ieuou Aisno
common segmental anomaly of the intestine in domestic animals, it
has only rarely been described in the cat.31.41
12.3 mm (2D)
 Clinical signs include abdominal distension, abdominal discom-
fort, and an absence of defecation postpartum.
Although, in theory, the treatment for the condition involves the
Figure 30-4 CT scan of a colorectal adenocarcinoma causing stenosis of
surgical excision of the affected portion of colon followed by colonic
the large bowel at the colorectal junction.
anastomosis, in reality the poor prognosis, very young age of affected
leu ueau uoeuasaid je uopuos Apoq iood iaut pue 'sienpiaiu
 euthanasia should be considered the most appropriate management
time. Margins of excision have been suggested to be at least 2.5 cm
in the majority of cases.
and, ideally, up to 5 cm from each end of the mass.37 For tumors at
 Should surgical intervention be performed, it may be more appro-
the colorectal junction, it will often prove impossible to achieve such
margins on the rectal side of the growth, making local recurrence at
megacolon segment of colon at the same time as removing the under-
the site a real possibility. Access to the intrapelvic rectum can be
developed atretic portion of large bowel. In some instances there is
isds oqnd auiu e la sud aq pi
no gross evidence of the atretic portion of bowel and it is truly com-
pletely missing. Under such circumstances, the closed end of the distal
Cats suffering from adenocarcinoma are very likely to have meta-
portion of bowel will require excision to allow bowel anastomosis to
static disease at the time of presentation; in one study about 80% of
be performed following proximal subtotal colectomy.
cats with this colonic tumor had metastasis (local or distant) at the
time of surgery.34 Cats with negative lymph nodes at surgery lived a
median of 259 days, versus 49 days if positive. Four cats with adeno-
SURGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE RECTUM
carcinoma were treated with doxonubicin, and lived a median of 280
days, versus 56 days without.34
AND ANUS
For cats with adenocarcinoma, there is some evidence to suggest
that the excision of the mass should be combined with a subtotal
Atresia ani
colectomy. One study showed a mean survival time (MST) of 138 days
in those cats undergoing mass excision and subtotal colectomy com-
 In the feline embryo, the gastrointestinal, urinary, and reproductive
sxa s au m ui asn u sp s yo i e um pad
tracts communicate initially. At approximately seven weeks of devel-
a leins ui auaa siu in uosai aul tpaad sem
opment, the urorectal fold grows caudally, separating the urogenital
remains unclear but may reflect the increased possibility of obtaining
and rectal tracts and their shared cloaca horizontally. The anal mem-
'clean' margins. No such advantage was seen with additional subtotal
brane eventually thins and ruptures, forming an anus. A failure of the
colectomy in cats surgically managed for lymphoma. Despite this, the
current recommendation in cats suffering from an unidentified
embryological development will result in atresia ani.
colonic mass isthat, as part of their surgical management, they should
Four types of atresia ani have been reported (Fig. 30-5 and
receive a subtotal colectomy to increase survival time.
Table 30-2).
a on ie Aans ym s u is ae 
Animals with type IV atresia ani may have normal development of
equally poorly with or without adjunctive chemotherapy (MST of just
the anus and terminal rectum including accessory structures such as
over three months in both groups).3
the anal sacs and anal sphincter Types Ill and IV have also been clas-
There is little information available for the management of large
sified as rectal atresia or segmental rectal aplasia.
intestinal mast cell tumor in the cat. In one study, in four cats with
Clinical signs of atresia ani usually begin within a few weeks of
mast cell tumor, two had local metastasis; one distant and one local.
birth. Cats with congenital stenosis (type I) will usually develop con-
 All the cats were treated with surgery and prednisolone with a MST of
stipation and tenesmus soon after weaning. Cats with types II, IIl, and
199 days.34
There is some evidence that cases with non-resectable colonic
 sion from accumulation of meconium and feces within the rectum.
cancer might benefit from the placement of colonic stents as part of
Other findings include abdominal distension, abdominal discomfort
the management of their disease Metal stents placed under fluoros-
copy were palliative in two cats with colonic adenocarcinoma, one for
and dehydration can develop. Individuals with atresia ani may have
274 days (with good quality of life and euthanasia due to eventual
multiple congenital anomalies and, therefore, should be fully exam-
distant metastasis) and one for only 19 days (euthanasia due to per-
ined with care before any form of surgical correction is considered. A
 ceived reduction in quality of life).40
number of concurrent congenital and acquired lesions have been
DEE
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
?
?
?
Figure 30-5 Atresia ani in the cat. (A) Normal cat, (B) type I, (C) type Il, (D) type Ill (E), type IV.
Table 30-2 Types of atresia ani in the cat
 Box 30-3 Conditions seen in conjunction with atresia ani
 in the cat
Type I
Congenital stenosis of the anus
Urethrorectal fistulae (congenital)
Type II 
Imperforate anus; characterized by persistence of the anal
Rectovaginal fistulae (congenital)
membrane with the rectum ending blindly cranial to the 
imperforate anus 
 Rectocutaneous fistulae (acquired)
Type II 
 Imperforate anus combined with more cranial termination
 of the rectum as a blind pouch
dehiscence and stricture development at the site of surgery is a
Type IV
 Discontinuity of the proximal rectum with normal anal and
 ommon complication.
terminal rectal development 
Urethrorectal fistulae
jsow aanun aul ie au ul iue eisae yiim uouno ul paoda
Urethrorectal fistulae in association with atresia ani (commonly type
recognized are listed in Box 30-3.
II) has only rarely been reported in the cat.20,43.44 This condition is
Like atresia coli the prognosis for atresia ani is poor. Affected indi-
described in Chapter 38.
viduals are young, small, and typically in poor body condition.
Attempted surgical correction carries high rates of both morbidity and
Rectovaginal fistulae
distension of the colon and rectum may have already led to irrevers-
Congenital rectovaginal fistulae in association with atresia ani (com-
ible damage. Repeated surgical procedures may be necessary as local
sl uoipuos aul st'ies aul ul klaiei paodan si (ll adki Aquou 
Section
151
The Abdomen
Figure 30-6 Positive contrast retrograde vestibule-vaginogram in a
12-week-old kitten showing the presence of a rectovaginal fistula.
characterized by a communication between the dorsal wall of the
vagina and the ventral portion of the rectum, so that the vulva func-
[eunsauosee pue [eiuagoin au oi suuado uoos e se suon
tracts.
 Clinical signs are similar to those seen with urethrorectal fistulae
and include tenesmus, abdominal distension, megacolon, irritation
of the vulva, and the passage of fluid fecal material through the vulva.
Again, similar to urethrorectal fistulae, many of the signs will not be
Figure 30-7 Rectal prolapse in a 10-week-old kitten that had a history
evident while the cat is on a liquid (milk) diet Diagnosis is based
of diarrhea.
 on history, clinical signs, and physical examination. Radiographic
examination with contrast medium infused through the vagina Or
vertical perineal raphe. Affected animals are usually both fecally and
fistula may be useful for determining the position of the fistula and
urinary continent. Surgical management is described below.
terminal rectum (Fig. 30-6). Surgical management of this condition
is described below.
Colonic and rectal duplication cysts
Rectocutaneous fistulae
Enteric duplication is a rare developmental malformation in the cat.
A rectocutaneous fistula represents an acquired communication
The pathogenesis is not completely understood, but errors in normal
between the rectum and the perirectal skin.4 The condition may be
embryological canalization or embryological connections between the
the result of trauma, pelvic facture, rectal foreign body, pararectal
developing intestines and the neural tube have been postulated. Con-
abscess, atresia ani, or surgery and has only been reported rarely in
frmed diagnosis depends on the fulfllment of three anatomic crite-
cats.47 The defect will result in the discharge of fecal material through
ria:48 the cyst must be attached to the alimentary tract, it must be lined
the skin wound.
by mucous membrane similar to that part of the alimentary tract, and
 Management of rectocutaneous fistulae is, in most instances, con-
 s u a  a  e u i i
sidered surgical. Very superficial fistulae (fstula-in-ano) may be laid
described in both the colon and rectum in the cat.42.50
open: Deeper fistulae may require pararectal exploration, excision of
 Presenting clinical signs include signs consistent with colonic/rectal
the fistulous tract, and, most importantly, mucosal closure of the rectal
obstruction: anorexia, obstipation, and straining to defecate. Abdomi-
wall opening. The cause of the fistula should be ascertained as part of
nal palpation confirms the presence of a non-painful, smooth struc-
the clinical investigation. Also, a full appreciation of the position and
ture within the caudal abdomen and/or cranial pelvic canal. Imaging
extent of the fistula/ae should be considered mandatory before
tests reveal a cystic mass associated with the descending colon (colonic
embarking on the surgical management of the condition. This might
duplication cyst) or rectum (rectal duplication cyst).
require the use of proctoscopy and contrast radiography.
 The treatment of choice for a duplication cyst is surgical excision.
Dehiscence and local contamination of the pararectal tissues is
The approach is dependent on the site and position of the lesion and
 considered a common complication of the surgery. In an attempt to
may be via the abdomen (caudal midline celiotomy), the pelvic canal
minimize this complication, the use of a temporary incontinent
(ventral pubic osteotomy or symphysectomy), or via the perineum.
end-in colostomy (see Box 30-7) has been described to divert fecal
Complete removal of the cystic structure carries a good prognosis
material from the rectum during the period of rectal wall healing.47
Complications are related to diffculty in complete excision and intra-
operative iatrogenic damage to local structures.
Anogenital clefts
Rectal prolapse
Anogenital clefts are a rare congenital abnormality in the cat In the
female (anovulval cleft). the mucosa of the anus or rectum and
Rectal prolapse most commonly occurs as a consequence of an under.
the vestibule/vulva are continuous along the vertical perineal raphe.
lying disorder that produces severe or persistent straining. It may be
The anus may be incomplete ventrally or the anus may be atretic, in
associated with intestinal diseases that cause diarrhea and tenesmus,
which case a rectal fistula may form part of the dorsal aspect of the
anorectal diseases that produce constipation and dyschezia, or lower
cleft. In the male (anourethral cleft), the urethra is often incomplete
urinary tract diseases that cause stranguria and dysuria. The most
ventrally, resulting in hypospadias. In such cases, the mucosa of the
common cause is severe enteritis/proctitis associated with endopara-
anus or rectum and the urethral mucosa are continuous along the
sites, most often affecting kittens under four months of age (Fig. 30-7).
332
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
Prolapses may be described as partial or complete, depending on
aul ieain ol pamban uouaaiu ieogins aul jo Aixaduon aul uo
whether they involve just mucosa, or all layers of the rectal wall. In
condition.
most instances, the prolapsed mass will be cylindrical with a depres-
A recent study has described the use of a silicone elastomer sling
sion at its centre. In early cases, the prolapse might be intermittent,
for the management of rectal prolapse in cats with less than adequate
affecting only part of the circumference of the rectoanal junction. In
anal tone/musculature.54 Although the procedure may prove effective
general, the extent of the prolapse increases with continued straining.
in the management of the prolapse, it is associated with significant
leading to the everted tissue becoming progressively more swollen and
complications including the sling eroding through the perineal skin
edematous. This makes spontaneous retraction of the prolapsed
necessitating the removal of the device. As such, the technique cannot
'a yim pasdeioid uaaq sey anssi au iauoi aui aianil ssal sanssl
be recommended as any other than a last resort' procedure.
the prolapsed tissue may become traumatized, hemorrhagic, desic-
A further recent study has described performing a laparoscopic-
cated, and necrotic.
Management of rectal prolapse involves both repair of the prolapse
two portals and was considered effective for the treatment of recurrent
and treatment/elimination of the underlying cause. It is important to 
rectal prolapse, without postoperative complications or recurrences in
differentiate rectal prolapse from ileocolic intussusception.5l Grossly.
both the short and long term.
they appear similar, but signs of partial or complete obstruction
usually accompany intussusception. Confrmed differentiation of the
two conditions can be achieved by probing the prolapse with a blunt
SURGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE ANAL SACS
 aqissod si sseuu pasdeioid au ot jeiaiel aqoid aut jo uoasu raqoid
with an ileocolic intussusception but not possible in a case suffering
from a rectal prolapse. Options for management of rectal prolapse
Anal sac impaction
have been well described52 and are summarized in Box 30-4.
The prognosis for rectal prolapse is variable and depends on the
Anal sac impaction is rare in the cat and is defined as the retention of
 anal sac secretions, often leading to inflammation and infection.56
severity and chronicity of the presenting condition and, subsequently.
 The cause of anal sac impaction often remains unclear but possible
causes are listed in Box 30-5.
Clinical signs of anal sac impaction are related to discomfort and
Box 30-4 Treatment options for rectal prolapse in the cat
include pain on defecation, licking and biting at the tail base, scoot-
ing, and fecal tenesmus. Examination of the glands may confirm the
First minor prolapse
perianal region to be red and swollen but, in many cases, visual
 examination will reveal no apparent abnormalities. Gentle palpation
Treat the predisposing condition(s)
Aensn] ses ieue ly e jo anuasaid au ieaan im uoiean leuead au go
 Warm water lavage, massage
on both sides).
Apply lubricant (e.g.. water-soluble gel)
 Treatment consists of expressing the anal sacs externally or with
Sedation or general anesthesia, depending on the individual case. An
internal compression with a gloved finger in the rectum. It is likely
 epidural may be an important part of the treatment
that the cat will require sedation if adequate expression is to be
Reduce the prolapse digitally and place a purse-string suture around 
achieved. Following expression, the sacs should be irrigated and
a rectal probe
flushed with an antiseptic solution. Expression and irrigation may
The cat should be fed a low residue diet and treated with a stool
 need to be repeated intermittently into the longer term. The cat should
 softener such as lactulose syrup
be treated for possible tapeworm infection and any necessary changes
The purse-string suture should be let in place for three to five days
made to the diet If the condition becomes chronic and the sacs
Moderate to massive prolapse with viable tissue.
require frequent expression, it may become necessary to perform an
either first or recurrent episode
anal sacculectomy (see Box 30-9).
Treat the predisposing condition(s)
Sedation ± general anesthesia ± epidural
Anal sacculitis
Warm water lavage, massage and apply lubricant. Reduce swelling
Anal sacculitis is a rare condition in the cat. Causes and clinical signs
 with saline compresses
are similar to those for anal sac impaction.
Reduce the prolapse and secure as described for first minor cases. If 
 Expression of an affected anal sac will produce a thin mucopurulent
prolapse is recurrent, consider performing a colopexys3
 Or serosanguineous discharge. Expressed sacs should be flushed and
Prolapse with devitalization and necrosis, either first
irrigated with an antiseptic solution and the flushed sac may then be
or recurrent episode
flled with an antibiotic agent Consideration should be given to the
administration of a systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic.
Necrotic or irreducible prolapses must be resected and sutured in a
 circumferential manner, one quadrant at a time
Stay sutures should be placed before resection commences, to
prevent retraction of healthy tissue
 Box 30-5 Possible causes of anal sac impaction
 Correct alignment of margins must be maintained
in the cat56
A colopexy is advisable in severe or recurrent cases (in many cases, to
reduce the risk of tension-related dehiscence, the colopexy should 
Dietary (lack of roughage)
only be performed once the rectal resection and anastomosis 
External anal sphincter dysfunction
surgery has completely healed)
 Undersized anal sac ducts 
(Modified from Pratschke K. Surgical diseases of the colon and rectum in small 
Persistently loose feces
animals. In Pract 2005;27:354-62.)
Tapeworm proglottids lodged in the anal sac duct orifice
Section
5
The Abdomen
Chronic or unresponsive anal sacculitis may progress to the forma-
tion of an anal sac abscess. Chronic anal sacculitis and anal sac absces-
Box 30-6 Perioperative administration of antibiotics
before large intestinal surgery
sation will require anal sacculectomy (see Box 30-9).
Cefuroxime (second generation cephalosporin) at 20 mg/kg in 
Anal sac neoplasia
30 minutes)
 In the cat, the anal sacs are surrounded by tubular apocrine glands
and sebaceous glands, whereas only apocrine glands are found in
Amoxicillin clavulanate at 20 mg/kg intravenously in combination
dogs.57 Anal sac gland carcinoma (ASGC), also known as adenocarci-
with metronidazole at 10 mg/kg intravenously (given over at least
noma of the apocrine glands of the anal sac is a malignant tumor
30 minutes)
a h posse aa aaas auoe ar u 
wall of the anal sac. The tumor has only rarely been reported in the
also be taken to ensure that the enema does not contain soap as this
 cat and treatment options and prognosis remain unclear.
is likely to induce mucosal irritation and colitis/proctitis. Enemas
 containing sodium phosphate are contraindicated in cats because of
Society of Surgical Oncology concluded that the domestic short-
their potential to induce electrolyte disturbances. Safe enemas include
haired cat was the most common breed represented, with a mean age
warm tap water, warm isotonic saline, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate,
of 12.5 years.58 Common clinical signs included rectal bleeding, peri-
mineral oil, or lactulose.
anal ulceration and tenesmus. Preoperative hypercalcemia was not
The potential complications associated with the use of enemas and
-iad sem ioum Aieuuud aul jo uoisioxa [esiins ze Aue ul paaiasqo
their common failure to produce an empty and 'clean' large bowel at
formed in all cases. Local recurrence was identified in 35% of cases
ou oad suoalns jo Aogeu au ieul ueau Aans jo a a
ul 'asa jo a a un yi jo a an sm pu
form of local bowel preparation prior to large bowel surgery in cats.
regarding the use of adjunctive chemotherapy or radiation therapy
remains unclear. The disease free interval and the median survival
time following surgical excision of the primary tumor were 343 and
Perioperative administration of antibiotics
373 days, respectively. It was concluded that ASGC in the cat appears
 The use of perioperative prophylactic antibiotics should be considered
to be a locally invasive tumor with a low incidence of systemic metas-
mandatory in cats undergoing large intestinal surgery. The bacterial
tasis and a lack of a hypercalcaemic paraneoplastic syndrome. Local
population within the colon and rectum is mixed and includes Gram
recurrence was considered a significant issue (and probable cause
positive and Gram negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Prophy-
of death) following the local excision of the tumor in the majority
lactic antibiotic coverage should, therefore, include the administration
of cases.
of agents that are effective across a wide range of both aerobic and
anaerobic organisms. Practical and safe regimes are listed in Box 30-6.
The specific choice may be dictated by the specifics of the case and
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS FOR
the personal preferences of the surgeon.
Antibiotics should be administered intravenously 30 minutes prior
LARGE INTESTINAL SURGERY
to surgery and, apart from metronidazole, should be repeated every
 90 minutes for the duration of the surgery, unless otherwise indicated
Preparation of the large intestine
by the manufacturer's recommended dosing intervals.
 Controversy remains with regards to the benefit and use of large bowel
Healing of the colon and rectum
preparation in cats. In humans it is common to perform some form
of mechanical cleaning of the large bowel prior to surgical interven-
As with all forms of intestinal surgery, the goal of colonic and rectal
tion. The rationale for bowel preparation is that removing fecal mate.
surgery is to achieve rapid healing without leakage, maintenance of
rial will decrease the bacterial load in the colon and rectum, thereby
normal luminal diameter without the development of stenosis, and a
reducing the risk of contamination at the time of surgery and decreas-
quick return to normal function. The consequences of colonic or rectal
ing the incidence of postoperative infection.
leakage or dehiscence are associated with both an increased morbidity
Recent studies suggest that such mechanical cleansing of the large
and mortality due to the large numbers of pathogenic organisms
bowel actually produces only a transient reduction in overall colonic
 present within the lumens of both structures (1o" to lo" bacteria per
bacterial numbers, with any remaining fecal material containing high
gram of feces).
concentrations of both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Several studies
 Although in humans many experiments have studied the mechani-
in humans suggest that a mechanical bowel preparation does not
cal properties and biochemical changes in the colon following anas-
decrease the risk of postoperative wound infection or anastomotic
tomosis, there is a general consensus that the results of such studies
dehiscence.52Thereis litte, orno, equivalent data available for cats
should be interpreted with caution."l It is accepted that immediately
but common sense would indicate that the use of an orally adminis-
following colonic anastomosis, as with small intestinal anastomosis,
tered large bowel evacuant preparation would be dangerous and con-
the site of anastomosis is sealed by fibrin. The breaking strength of
traindicated in any individual suffering from large bowel obstructive
the anastomosis is significantly less (up to 30%) than that of the intact
disease such as neoplasia or chronic fecal impaction such as
colon, representing the holding strength ofthe sutures used to fashion
megacolon.
the anastomosis.2.63 Similar to the small intestine, the strongest
The use of enemas to promote fecal evacuation per rectum should
suture-holding layer of the colon is the submucosa and, as such, great
also be viewed with caution. These products will commonly convert
care should be taken to ensure that the sutures are anchored through
fecal material into a slurry which is much more likely to cause a local
this layer. Synthetic monoflament absorbable sutures should be used
physical contamination at the time of colostomy/colectomy surgery
for large bowel closure; for example, polydioxanone, glycomer 631, or
when compared to the drier, impacted fecal material that was present
polyglyconate.
originally. If enemas are to be used they should be administered a
siskl uasenos jo anei au u shnsai sueay u aseud sei pasuoioid y
number of days before the date of the proposed surgery. Care should
exceeding that of collagen synthesis for the first three to four days
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
following bowel incision/anastomosis. The large bacterial population
Preservation or resection of the ileocolic sphincter?
and high intraluminal pressures generated during the passage of fecal
The ileocolic sphincter functions to allow small intestinal contents to
material, coupled with a prolonged lag phase in healing. mean that
the risk of dehiscence is high for the first four days after surgery. In
enter the colon while preventing the reflux of colic contents into the
ileum." The removal of the sphincter is considered to allow the reflux
the healthy, well-sutured large bowel, bursting strength at the anasto-
of colonic microorganisms into the small intestine, with the subse-
mosis is considered equal to, or greater than, control values by five to
quent development of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and pos-
seven days postoperatively. To enhance colonic wound healing, the
sible steatorrhea.20,67,6s The rationale for preservation of the ileocolic
site of colostomy/anastomosis should be routinely wrapped in
 omentum prior to closure of the abdomen.
junction is that it minimizes the development of postoperative
diarrhea; the rationale for excision is that it minimizes recurrence of
segmental megacolon and associated constipation." Further studies
have indicated that preservation of the ileocolic junction does not
result in greater recurrences of constipation, but that excision of the
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND
ileocolic junction is associated with increased incidence and severity
of diarhea2uch studies suggest that, i at all possible, theilecolic
TECHNIQUES FOR LARGE INTESTINAL
 junction containing the ileocolic sphincter should be preserved during
AND ANAL SURGERY
colectomy. However, the issue of resection or preservation remains
controversial.
Coloplasty
Coloplasty is a technique for the reduction of the diameter of the
The use of surgical staplers
affected bowel by the resection of a longitudinal elliptical section of
Surgical stapling techniques have been described for performing
the colon wall. It was first described in 1959,1 but the procedure has
the end-to-end colocolostomy following subtotal colectomy in the
not found long-term acceptance because further studies have indi-
cat.70-72 An end-to-end anastomosis stapling instrument is used to
- jo suis ieiu a aaiosn oi sy aiuran an ieu pa
perform a colocolostomy following the resection of the diseased
on iamonu e anpaid aeu anaan aun yanou z'uonon
colon. In humans, when performing a colocolostomy, the access for
 segment, it has no effect on the smooth muscle function within the
the end-to-end stapling device would commonly be via the anus. In
remaining colonic wall and thereby has no positive effect on colonic
the cat, the anus is almost always too small to allw the passage
function.
of the end-to-end anastomosis stapler and the device is introduced
via the dilatated and flaccid cecum instead. Safe introduction of a
Partial colectomy
proprietary stapler (commonly with a working diameter of 2l mm)
requires the cecum and proximal colon to be actively affected by the
Partial colectomy involves the removal of the segment of colon that
dilated megacolon condition. In many individuals with megacolon
 demonstrates dilatation and atony at the time of surgical exploration.
this is not the case, with the cecum and proximal colon still showing
Colon that appears to be of normal shape and dimension is not
muscle tone with little or no evidence of flaccidity and/or dilatation.
resected, but is left in situ. The technique has been most commonly
In such individuals, passage of a commercial available end-to-end
described in early veterinary literature relating to the management of
stapler via the transcecal approach could be either unfeasible or very
megacolon.12.1315 Most authorities would now agree that differentiat-
dangerous, carrying a high risk of cecal spliting. Advantages of stapled
jo au aui ie alqissod jou st uoos ieuu wuoy uojo paseasip su!
 colocolostomies are reported to include formation of a mechanically
surgery. In fact, it is likely that none of the colon remains unaffected
 stronger anastomosis, and a reduced surgical time with less potential
in individuals with megacolon and it is, therefore, considered unwise
 for intraoperative contamination.71
to preserve a significant length of apparently unaffected colon at the
time of colectomy.
Secondary hypertrophic megacolon associated with
a malunion pelvic fracture
Subtotal colectomy
A malunion pelvic fracture in the cat will often result in the narrowing
The technique of subtotal colectomy (Box 30-7) involves the removal
of the pelvic canal leading to the development of extraluminal
of the majority of the colon, whether it is grossly diseased or not In
obstruction to the distal descending colon. An outlet obstruction such
essence, two techniques have been described and the main difference
as this will initially result in the development of hypertrophic mega-
colon. This form of megacolon is often reversible with the early
removal of the ileocolic sphincter or not.
removal of the outflow obstruction. Left untreated, the obstruction
Box 30-7 Subtotal colectomy (Fig. 30-8)
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. The peritoneal cavity is
Assuming that the ileocolic valve is to be preserved, the branches
approached via a routine ventral midline abdominal incision (see
of the right colic, middle colic, and left colic arteries need to be
Chapter 23). This incision should extend from a point mid-way
identified, double ligated, and divided approximately 1-2 cm from the
between the xiphoid process and umbilicus to the brim of the pubis.
mesenteric side of the colon to be removed. Caudally, the blood 
The enlarged colon, cecum and distal ileum are exteriorized and 
supply to the distal colon requires ligation. Options include ligation of 
packed-off from the remaining peritoneal structures using moistened
the left colic and caudal mesenteric arteries. Alternatively, only the
ab dominal swabs.
vasa recta of the left colic and caudal mesenteric arteries may be 
SEE
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 30-7 Continued
ligated in an attempt to preserve as much blood supply as possible to
 the remaining distal segment of colon/rectum.
Colonic contents are milked manually into the segment of bowel
initially used as stay sutures. The intestine is then closed using either
to be removed. Atraumatic bowel clamps are applied to the bowel 
a simple interrupted or simple continuous suture pattern. The 
 2-3 cm proximal and distal to the proposed sites of proximal and 
anastomosis may be achieved as a one- or a two-layer closure. There
distal resection, respectively. Further bowel clamps are applied to the 
is no reported advantage to either of these techniques although 
proposed proximal and distal ends of the segment to be removed.
single layer closure using a monofilament suture material is widely
The bowel is transected with the aid of a scalpel blade. Suitable
samples of the excised bowel can be submitted for histopathology. if
advantage between the use of a simple interrupted or a simple 
required. Everted mucosa at the ends of the bowel segments to be 
continuous suture pattern.64
anastomosed should be trimmed using curved Metzenbaum scissors.
When a luminal disparity exists between the two bowel segments 
 For healing of the bowel anastomosis to occur without 
to be anastomosed, one of two techniques is commonly used to 
 complication and dehiscence, it is considered vital that minimal 
achieve luminal parity: either the larger of the two lumens is 
tension is applied to the site of anastomosis.64 A trial apposition of
sutured closed until its remaining lumen approximates the size
the proximal and distal bowel segments should be performed to
 of the lumen to which it is to be anastomosed,65 or, the lumen 
 confirm the ability to perform the anastomosis in a tension-free 
of the smaller structure can be spatulated to achieve the luminal 
anowan o Aessanau aaoud Aeu l anss! ue ag uoisual pinous lauuew 
 approximation.20
 the ileocecocolic junction so that tension-free bowel continuity can be 
The finished anastomosis should be drape-wrapped with omentum 
 achieved by performing an ileocolic anastomosis.
prior to abdominal wall closure. It often proves impossible to close 
 Full thickness, simple interrupted appositional sutures of 3/0 or 4/0 
the rent in the mesentery following a subtotal colectomy in which the
monofilament absorbable material (for example, polydioxanone,
ileocolic valve has been preserved.
A
B
C
D
G
H
on a saline soaked laparotomy swab. (B) The local arterial supply to the colon is ligated and divided. In this case, the ileocecocolic junction is to be
preserved. (c) A non-traumatic bowel clamp is placed near the colorectal junction. (D) An occlusion bowel clamp is placed proximal to the non-
traumatic bowel clamp. Bowel contents have been 'milked' into the main body of the colon. (E) The colon is transected between the two bowel
clamps using a scalpel blade. Note that the abdomen has been 'packed-off' using a number of sterile swabs to reduce the risk of contamination.
(F} A non-traumatic bowel clamp is placed on the proximal colon near the ileocecocolic junction, which is to be preserved in this case. An occlusion 
clamp will then be placed distal to this allowing the affected part of the colon to be transected and excised. (G) The remaining two ends of colon are
brought together to confirm that an end-to-end anastomosis can be performed without undue tension. The exposed mucosa may be trimmed using
Metzenbaum scissors to ensure the formation of an adequate anastomosis. (H) One side of the anastomosis has been completed using a continuous 
paapisuon sem peui aunsop aut jo uood e u uonenad e se paneid (ansop piu aunns pandnaui aldwis abuis e jo asn aul aron uaned anins
inadequate. (l) The half-closed bowel has been turned revealing the remaining open side that is awaiting closure using a continuous suture pattern.
9E8
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
Box 30-8 Colostomy
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. A ventral midline 
celiotomy is performed. The descending colon is identified.
exteriorized and transected approximately 3 cm cranial to the
 pelvic brim. The distal end is oversewn and closed with a 4/0 
monofilament suture in an inverting pattern. The proximal end is 
pazoaxa Auanbasgns s! ll lauuew selwis e ui pasop Aleodual
aul lim leuuopge euaaoael yal aui ui uosui ue yonoui
circumference of the serosal surface of the exteriorized colon is 
sutured to the abdominal musculature using 3/0 monofilament 
 sutures in a simple interrupted pattern.
The stoma is formed by the removal of the sutures that were
used to temporarily close the colon during its exteriorization. The
O/t busn uys suaneipe ay ot ssauspz In, panins s! uojo uado 
monofilament sutures in a simple interrupted pattern.
Figure 30-9 An eight-year-old cat presented with a chronic history of
The stoma can be closed and the colon repaired once the site of
constipation and obstipation following conservative management of a
u paneid s! lewue aul pajeay Ainy sey Aabans leue loypue jean 
pelvic fracture. The cat has a megacolon, and given the chronic history
lateral recumbency (stoma site uppermost). A circular incision is made
of problems, subtotal colectomy was deemed the most appropriate
around the site of the colostomy and the incision is extended full 
treatment for this cat.
thickness through the abdominal wall musculature. The colon is freed
and mobilized so that it can be exteriorized through the abdominal 
Wall. The site of the stoma is excised leaving healthy intestinal tissue.
The open colon is temporarily closed, as described previously. and 
will result in progression of the condition to an irreversible dilated
replaced in the peritoneal cavity.
megacolon (Fig. 30-9).
The abdominal wall and skin at the previous stoma site are closed
There remains some controversy with regards to the most appropri-
in a routine fashion. The animal is re-positioned in dorsal recumbency
ate treatment for cats with outlet obstruction associated with malun-
and a ventral midline celiotomy is performed. The distal end of the 
 s a   e a ra 
colon is identified and after debridement of the two colonic
recommended for cats with pelvic fracture malunion and hypertrophic
segments an end-to-end anastomosis is performed using a 4/0 
absorbable monofilament suture material in either a simple
interrupted or simple continuous pattern.
instances, the early treatment of such cases with pelvic osteotomy
 The site of anastomosis is 'drape' omentalized. The abdominal
will result in the relief of the clinical signs of constipation/
wall is closed in a routine manner.
obstipation, some authorities prefer to perform a colectomy because
of the technical difficulty of performing an adequate osteotomy in
many individuals.30
 Surgical treatment is generally directed at widening the pelvic canal
Reconstruction of congenital rectovaginal
-asol auoq gugudui au guaouai Aqjuauaguidut eai aaai oi
and anal conditions
tomy), by redirecting the impinging bone (corrective osteotomy), or
by separating and distracting the symphysis (symphyseal distraction
Rectovaginal fistulae
osteotomy).10,73-76
Two surgical techniques are described forthetreatment of rectovaginal
Performing a subtotal colectomy (see Box 30-5) is recommended
fistula and atresia ani: in one the fistula is isolated (via a horizontal
in cats with pelvic fractures if the colonic hypertrophy and clinical
incision between the anus and rectum), transected, and the rectum
 signs have persisted for longer than six months. Hypertrophy is super-
and vaginal defects are closed separately, followed by reconstruction
seded by neuromuscular degeneration and pathologic dilatation in
of the anus (Fig. 30-1l); in the other, the rectum is transected cranial
these cases. Pelvic osteotomy alone will not provide relief from obsti-
to the fstulous opening. the affected segment is removed, and the
terminal part of the rectum is sutured to the anus.7-79
 Osteotomy will alleviate the clinical signs in the majority of affected
Among the reported complications following surgery, fecal incon-
individuals.30
tinence is one of the most important; it may be associated with lack
of function, possble absence of the external anal sphincter or nerve
Temporary colostomy for fecal diversion
damage during the surgical procedure.8 Other posble complications
include obstipation and tenesmus, constipation, anal gland odor,
Temporary colostomy (Box 30-8) is used to divert feces and facilitate
edema of the anal area, rectal prolapse, urinary incontinence, anal
rectal wall healing. This procedure results in an incontinent end-on
stenosis, and wound dehiscence.80
colostomy requiring the use of an Elizabethan collar to prevent
self-traumatization of the surgical site and owner compliance and
commitment to minimize the formation of soiling and peristomal
Anogenital clefts
dermatitis.
Surgical management of anogenital clefts in the female involves
opening and/or reforming the anus, closure of the rectal fistula (see
Colopexy
Fig. 30-1l) if it is part of the condition, and reformation of the peri-
neum (episioplasty) between the anus and vulva (Fig. 30-12).
Colopexy (Box 30-9) involves suturing the descending colon to the
Surgical management of the condition in the male involves the
left ventrolateral abdominal wall in order to prevent recurrence of
creation of a perineal urethrostomy (see Chapter 38) and reconstruc-
rectal prolapse.
tion of the perineal skin.
LEE
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 30-9 Colopexy
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. A ventral midline celiotomy 
 is performed. The descending colon is located, pulled cranially, and 
 positioned adjacent to the left ventrolateral abdominal wall.
 The colon may be anchored to the abdominal wall using either an 
 incisional or a non-incisional technique. Regardless of the technique 
 used, the colopexy should be formed on the left ventrolateral 
 abdominal wall approximately 2-3 cm lateral to the linea alba.
 Incisional technique: two adjacent seromuscular incisions are
made, one in the antimesenteric colon and one in the adjacent 
abdominal wall. Each edge of the seromuscular layer of the colon is
 sutured to the corresponding edge of the incision in the abdominal
wall (Fg. 30-10).
 Non-incisional technique: a single row of five or six interrupted 
 mattress sutures is placed between the antimesenteric colon and 
 abdominal wall, making sure the colonic submucosa is incorporated in 
each suture.
 With both techniques, care should be taken to avoid penetration of
 the colonic lumen. The site of colopexy may be 'drape' omentalized
 prior to closure of the linea alba. Suitable suture for the colopexy
 includes a non-absorbable monofilament material such as 
 polypropylene, or an absorbable monofilament such as polydioxanone
 or polytrimethylene carbonate
Figure 30-10 Diagram showing the formation of an incisional colopexy.
(A)
B
?
?
G
 Figure 30-11 Diagrams illustrating the repair of rectovaginal fistula. (A) Fistula is shown between the rectum and vagina. (B) Site of incision on
midline of perineum. (c) Incision is extended through dorsal wall of vagina and ventral wall of rectum to expose the fistula. This involves incising
the ventral aspect of the anal sphincter. If a fistula is present, it is excised. If not, the incisions in the vagina and rectum are extended to expose the 
vaginorectal communication. (D) The rectum and vagina are separated and fibrous tissue is excised from the fistula's opening in both structures. The
dorsal wall of the vagina and vulva is closed with continuous inverting or appositional sutures. (E) The rectal incision is closed in a similar manner.
{F) Incised muscle of the anal sphincter is sutured and sutures are inserted around the anocutaneous junction. (G} The skin incision from vulva to anus 
is closed with simple interrupted sutures
8E8
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
imperforate rectum. The resultant triangular flaps of rectum are
excised and the rectum is sutured to the subcutaneous tissue and skin
with a one-layer simple interrupted suture pattern using 4/0 or 5/0
monoflament suture material.
Type Il
The skin is incised over the anus with a cruciate incision. The external
anal sphincter should be identifed and the underlying rectal pouch
should be located adjacent to the anal sphincter. The rectum should
be freed locally using blunt dissection so that it can be mobilized
towards the skin (through the anal ring). The blind pouch is then
(A
incised and rectocutaneous apposition accomplished in a similar
fashion to that described for the type I anomaly.
Type IlI
The skin is incised over the anus with a cruciate incision. The external
anal sphincter should be identified. Blunt dissection is required
to locate the caudal aspect of the distended rectal pouch. As with
type II, the rectum should be freed locally using blunt dissection so
that it can be mobilized towards the anal skin (through the anal ring).
The blind pouch is then incised and rectocutaneous apposition
accomplished in a similar fashion to that described for the type I
anomaly.
D
Type IV
The normal anal opening is probed to assess the depth of the caudal
blind pouch. The pouch is opened allowing the cranial segment
 of the rectum to be located, locally dissected and mobilized through
and out of the caudal segment. Both portions of rectum are exterior-
ized (rectal pull out) allowing anastomosis using a one-layer simple
internupted suture pattern of 4/0 or 5/0 monoflament suture
material.
Anal sacculectomy
Removal of anal sacs (Box 30-10) in cats may be indicated for chronic
anal sacculitis that does not resolve after medical or dietary manage-
F
ment, anal abscessation, or anal neoplasia.
Figure 30-12 Repair of anovulval cleft. (A) An H-shaped incision is
made between the anus and vulva. (B) Median and ventral edges of the 
incision are undermined. (c) Mucosal margins are apposed over the
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AFTER LARGE
dorsal vagina using an absorbable suture. Lateral cutaneous edges of
the wound are undermined. (D) Cutaneous edges are apposed with skin
INTESTINAL AND ANAL SURGERY
sutures. (E,F) Ventral episioplasty may be required to relieve tension
on the wound.
Colonic surgery
Colonic surgery (colostomy, colectomy) will most commonly be per-
Atresia ani
formed via a ventral midline celiotomy. Postoperative analgesic
requirements will be aimed at managing the discomfort associated
Cats with atresia ani (see Table 30-2) will usually need surgical treat-
with the celiotomy rather than the colonic surgery per se As such.
 passnosip se yanouie 'ieaians jo anueu Aue aaeq oi aie Aaut ji suau
the administration of some form of systemic opioid will generally
(see above) mortality and morbidity is high and repeat surgery is often
suffice There is controversy regarding the use of non-steroidal anti-
necessary. The surgical repair of imperforate anus and rectal agenesis
inflammatory dnugs (NSAIDs) in small animals following colonic
is shown in Fig. 30-13.
surgery; there is some evidence that these drugs might compromise
the integrity and barrier function of the colonic mucosa in the post-
operative period. In the clinical setting, the use of NSAIDs for analge-
Type I
sia in the postoperative period does not appear to be associated with
 The skin is incised over the anus with a cruciate incision. The resultant
significant compromise to healing of the surgical site.
triangular flaps of skin are excised. The external anal sphincter is
 Perioperative administration of antibiotics: An extended postopera-
identifed and bluntly dissected free from the rectal pouch. The rectal
tive course (five to seven days) of oral broad-spectrum antibiotics will
 o  a e  asi   i o
be a requirement in the majority of cases (see above).
Section
5
The Abdomen
(A)
B
D
F
G
H
 Figure 30-13 Diagrams illustrating surgery for imperforate anus. (A) Cruciate incision is made over the anal dimple. (B) The triangles of skin are
excised and the ventral fibers of the external anal sphincter are severed. (c) The external sphincter is dissected free of its ventral attachments.
(D) Dissection with forceps or blunt scissors will expose the blind end of the rectum, which can then be grasped and pulled caudally. (E) The blind end
of the rectal pouch is excised. (F) The previously severed sections of the anal sphincter muscle are reunited at the ventral aspects of the rectal pouch.
(G)} The severed end of the rectum is sutured to the skin surrounding the orifice. (H) The completed procedure.
Box 30-10 Anal sacculectomy
 Several techniques have been described for the removal of anal sacs
The techniques broadly can be classified as either 'open' or 'closed.
The ‘open' technique
 Once the cat has been anesthetized, both anal sacs are emptied and 
 flushed with a dilute solution of chlorhexidine. The perianal fur 
A
u! paneid ag Aewu qems azneb v paddip s! (aseg llet leluan buipnjpu) 
 the rectum to reduce the incidence of fecal contamination during the 
 procedure.
 The cat is placed in sternal recumbency and the tail is held upright
 and forwards with ties or tapes. The orifice of the anal sac duct in cats
aul on lelael wn sz'o Alarewixoidde anuauiwoud jepiwe sd e uo suado
 anus and not at the mucocutaneous junction as is seen in the dog.
The anal sacs are located between the fibers of the external and 
 internal anal sphincter at the 4 o'clock and & o'clock positions. A
 passed through the anal sac duct and positioned at the most 
 be angled towards the skin and an incision made directly over it using
pnp ses jeue aut te paleis aq pinous uoispu! aul apeig ladlens e
 orifice and extended towards the lateroventral aspect of the sac using
the director as a guide (Fig 30-14B). Once the anal sac has been
opened its gray mucosal lining will be easily recognized (Fig. 30-14C).
This may be grasped using Mosquito forceps. Gentle traction and the 
judicial use of blunt dissection using fine Metzenbaum scissors will 
 allow the detachment of the sac from its surrounding tissues. Care 
should be taken to stay as close to the anal sac as possible, thereby
minimizing trauma to the anal sphincter musculature. Once the sac has 
 been freed it can be retracted, allowing the blunt dissection and
complete removal of the associated anal sac duct. The external anal
sphincter and subcutaneous tissues are apposed using an absorbable 
Figure 30-14 The open technique for anal sacculectomy. (A) Director.
 monofilament suture material placed in a simple interrupted or simple
(B) The incisions are made over the director once placed in the anal 
 continuous suture pattern. The skin may be closed using subcuticular 
gland. (c) The gland is cut open and the gray inner lining can be seen.
alisoddo aui uo paneadan uaul s! ssanoud aul saunins us lo aansop 
This is dissected away from the surrounding tissue.
 side, if required.
340
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
 Box 30-10 Continued
The 'closed' technique
Once the cat has been anesthetized, both anal sacs are emptied and
are subsequently filled with a proprietary bulking agent or wax. The
perianal fur (including ventral tail base) is clipped. A gauze swab may
be placed in the rectum to reduce the incidence of fecal contamination 
during the procedure.
The cat is placed in sternal recumbency and the tail is held upright 
and forwards with ties or tapes. The filled anal sac can be readily
palpated and a curved incision is made directly over it (Fig. 30-15A) at
the 4 o'clock position on the left side and & o'clock position on the 
right side). A combination of both sharp and blunt dissection can be 
yim Anyaien padseh ag uaut kewu ypum ses leue aul anenol ol pasn
(A
Mosquito forceps. Gentle traction and the judicial use of blunt 
dissection using fine Metzenbaum scissors will allow the detachment 
of the sac from its surrounding tissues (Hg. 30-15B). Care should be
taken to stay as close to the anal sac as possible, thereby minimizing 
 trauma to the anal sphincter musculature. Once the sac has been
mobilized it can be retracted, allowing its associated duct to be freed 
from surrounding muscle fibers. The duct may then be ligated using a
transfixion suture of an absorbable monofilament suture material. The
external anal sphincter and subcutaneous tissues are apposed using an
absorbable monofilament suture material placed in a simple 
ag aew us aul uaed aunins snonuuon aldwis lo pandnau
closed using subcuticular closure or skin sutures. The process is then
repeated on the opposite side, if required.
 The excised sac and duct may be submitted for histopathology. if
considered appropriate.
B
Figure 30-15 The closed technique for anal sacculectomy. (A) A tube is
inserted into the anal duct and the gland filled and a curved incision
made over the filled gland. (B) The intact gland is then dissected out
trying to preserve the anal sphincter. The duct is ligated as close to the
anus as possible.
 In general, the patient can be fed their normal diet in the postopera-
 suppository anti-inflammatory/analgesic drugs). In the longer term,
tive period. Straining associated with either diarrhea or constipation
the complication may be managed with the administration of an
should be avoided if at all possible Constipation may be treated by
 NSAID and the administration of an oral laxative to maintain a soft
the judicial administration of an oral laxative.
but formed fecal consistency.
-s zuid aun dois oi paai aq A iion uuaqeza ur
 The patient will commonly show fecal incontinence following rec-
 traumatizing the abdominal skin wound.
toanal surgery. As a result, soiling of the perianal region is a common
The development of a raised rectal temperature, unexpected abdom-
issue and should be managed be maintaining good hygiene of the
inal discomfort/guarding, abdominal distension, lethargy, anorexia.
area. This may best be achieved with gentle washing/showering rather
-dojaap aut aiipu huatu suis asaul se paiout aq iou pinoys sa
than wiping. An Elizabethan collar should be used to prevent the
ment of septic peritonitis (see Chapter 26). The development of any
 patient excessively cleaning/grooming the perianal region. Local skin
of these signs should prompt further investigations (abdominal radi-
excoriation should be treated promptly with the application of some
ography, abdominal ultrasonography peritoneal paracentesis, etc.) to
form of barrier cream/spray. In most instances, the postoperative fecal
rule out the presence of peritonitis.
incontinence will be self-limiting but it is not uncommon for the issue
to persist for a number of weeks following the surgery, necessitating
Rectal surgery
a prolonged period of hospitalization.
 An extended postoperative course (five to seven days) of oral broad-
Rectal surgery at the level of the rectoanal junction is invariably associ-
 spectrum antibiotic (see above) will be a requirement in the majority
ated with significant discomfort, especially during the process of def-
of cases.
ecation. Such a patient will often exhibit fecal tenesmus and dyschezia.
 The development of a raised rectal temperature, unexpected abdom-
In some instances, the discomfort will be suffcient to prevent defeca-
inal discomfort/guarding, abdominal distension, lethargy. anorexia,
tion, leading to progressive constipation. This should be avoided since
etc. should not be ignored as these signs might indicate the develop-
constipation will itself lead to straining and possible damage/
ment of septic peritonitis. The development of any of these signs
dehiscence of the site of surgery. In the immediate postoperative
should prompt further investigations (abdominal radiography.
l sis   a   ns 
 abdominal ultrasonography, peritoneal paracentesis, etc.) to rule out
example, epidural analgesia, systemic opioids, systemic NSAIDs, local
the presence of peritonitis.
341
Section
5
The Abdomen
Postoperative care after anal surgery
Short bowel syndrome
 An Elizabethan collar should be placed prior to the patient's recovery
Removal of the majority of the colon will have obvious metabolic
effects on the animal. In the normal individual, the role of the colon
the wounds, the collar should be left in place until the skin sutures
is to absorb water along an osmotic gradient created by the active
are removed (approximately seven to ten days postoperatively). In
absorption of sodium. Bicarbonate ions are secreted in exchange for
many instances it will prove prudent to administer a five to seven day
chloride ions, and potassium is lost from the extracellular fluid and
postoperative course of an oral broad-spectrum antibiotic such as
in mucus and cells shed from the colon. The distal colon stores the
clavulanate amoxicillin. A normal diet may be fed.
dehydrated fecal material.22 All these functions will be affected to a
The owner should be warmed that any form of anal surgery might
 greater or lesser degree following the subtotal colectomy procedure.
lead to local swelling and/or temporary bruising of the sensory nerves
 The enteric function of four cats that had undergone subtotal colec-
at the anal mucocutaneous junction. This, in turn, may produce
tomy for idiopathic megacolon was compared to that of four normal
a degree of desensitization and short-term fecal incontinence. In
cats.17 It was concluded that, in general, enteric function in the oper-
general, no specific intervention is required for this self-limiting
ated cats was similar to that of the control cats. Bowel movements
complication.
Occurred slightly more frequently, with no significant differences in
 Surgery of the anus will often result in a degree of fecal tenesmus
fecal volume or water content In the operated cats, serum cobalamin
 and dyschezia in the immediate postoperative period. Again, in most
concentrations and fecal water sodium concentrations were higher
instances this complication will be self-limiting and may be control.
and fecal potassium concentrations were lower in comparison with
led with the judicious use of an oral laxative and the oral administra-
unoperated cats. The results of the study demonstrated no significant
tion of a NSAID.
clinical or subclinical evidence of abnormal bowel function in cats
after subtotal colectomy. In the majority of individuals, stool consist-
weeks of the surgery a soft, formed stool is developed.
COMPLICATIONS AFTER LARGE
INTESTINAL SURGERY
Dehiscence of the intestinal anastomosis
Incisional dehiscence at the site of bowel anastomosis is a rare but
The complications that can occur after large intestinal and anal surgery
potentially life-threatening complication after colonic surgery.64 The
include wound dehiscence with peritoneal contamination and perito-
occurrence of dehiscence is most commonly associated with poor
nitis and short bowel syndrome. Any intraoperative spillage of colonic
surgical technique, such as inaccurate suture placement or tension
contents is likely to result in bacterial contamination, with a localized
across the anastomosis.
 or generalized peritonitis. Other than good surgical technique, the
Common signs of the development of dehiscence in the postopera-
likely development of peritonitis may be reduced by not performing
tive period include pyrexia, anorexia, decreased frequency or a failure
any form of preoperative bowel preparation and by the administration
to pass feces (associated with the development of ileus), and discom-
of perioperative broad-spectrum antibiotics (see above). The most
fort on palpation of the caudal abdomen. Plain radiography and/or
common postoperative complication observed in cats following sub-
abdominal ultrasound may be used to identify localized steatitis, free
total colectomy is the development of diarrhea or loose stools in the
abdominal fluid, and ileus. Diagnostic peritoneal lavage may be used
immediate period following the surgery. Other reported complica-
to confirm the presence of fecal material and free bacteria within the
tions of subtotal colectomy include lethargy, depression, anorexia,
peritoneal cavity.
weight loss, vomiting. diarrhea or the production of soft, unformed
The frequency of leakage at the anastomosis site is considered
stools, increased defecatory frequency, tenesmus, hematochezia, and
similar when intestinal stapling techniques are compared to conven-
fecal incontinence.21
tional suturing techniques.7
REFERENCES
1. Sturgess CP, Canfield Pl, Gruffydd-Jones
4.
 O'Brien TR. Large intestine. In:
7.
 Rosin E. Megacolon in cats. The role of
TJ, Stokes CR. A gross and microscopical
Radiographic diagnosis of abdominal
colectomy. Vet Clin North Am Small
morphometric evaluation of feline large
disorders in the dog and cat.
Anim Pract 1993;23:587-94.
intestinal anatomy. J Comp Pathol
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company:
8.
Rosin E, Walshaw R, Mehlhaff C, et al.
2001;124:255-64.
1978. p. 352-95.
Subtotal colectomy for treatment of
 Foley P. Constipation, tenesmus,
 5. Gaschen L, Rodriguez D. Stomach, small
chronic constipation associated with
dyschezia, and fecal incontinence. In:
and large intestines. In: Barr F, Gaschen L,
idiopathic megacolon in cats: 38 cases
Ettinger Sl, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook 
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
(1979-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc
of veterinary internal medicine. 7th ed.
feline ultrasonography. Quedgeley: British
1988;193:850-3.
St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
Small Animal Veterinary Association;
9.
Roe KA, Syme HM, Brooks HW.
p. 206-9.
2011. p. 124-38.
Congenital large intestinal
 3. Gaschen L. The large intestine and
6. Simpson IW. Gastrointestinal endoscopy.
hypoganglionosis in a domestic
perianal region. In: R O'Brien, F Barr.
In: Hall E), Simpson JW, williams DA,
shorthair kitten. J Fel Med Surg
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
2010;12(5):41 8-20.
feline abdominal imaging. Quedgeley:
feline gastroenterology. Quedgeley: British
10.
Washabau RJ, Hasler AH. Constipation,
British Small Animal Veterinary
Small Animal Veterinary Association;
obstipation, and megacolon. In: August
Association; 2009. p. 132-43.
2005. p. 34-49.
JR, editor. Consultations in feline internal
342
Large intestine, rectum and anus
Chapter
DE
medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
29. van den Broek AHM, Else RW, Hunter
46.
. Fransson BA. Rectocutaneous fstulas.
Saunders Company: 1997. p. 104-12.
 MS. Atresia ani and urethrorectal fstula
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2008;30(4):
11.
Bruce RH. Operation for megacolon in
in a kitten. J Small Anim Pract 1988;29:
224-7.
cats. Mod Vet Pract 1959;40:66.
91-4.
 Tsioli V, Papazoglou LG, Anagnostou T.
12. Leighton RL, Grain E. Partial colectomy
30. Matthiesen DT, Marretta SM. Diseases of
et al. Use of a temporary incontinent 
 for the treatment of feline megacolon.
the anus and rectum. In: Slatter D, editor.
end-on colostomy in a cat for the
Fel Pract 1978;3:31-3.
Textbook of small animal surgery. 2nd ed.
management of rectocutaneous fistulas
13. Yoder IT, Dragstedt LR 2nd, Starch CJ.
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company:
associated with atresia ani. J Feline Med
 Partial colectomy for correction of
1993. p. 627-45.
Surg 2009;11:1011 -14.
megacolon in a cat. Vet Med Small
31.
 Bredal wP, Thoresen Sl, Kvellestad A.
48.
 Gross RE, Holcomb Gw Jr, Farber S.
Anim Clin 1968;63:1049-52.
Atresia coli in a nine-week-old kitten.
 Duplications of the alimentary tract.
14. Fellenbaum S. Partial colectomy in the
JSmall Anim Pract 1994;35:643-5.
Pediatrics 1952;9:449-68.
treatment of recurrent obstipation/
32.1
Washabau Rl, Holt D. Pathogenesis,
49.
.Kramer A, Kyles AE, Labelle P. Surgical 
megacolon in the cat. Vet Med Small
 diagnosis, and therapy of feline idiopathic
correction of colonic duplication in a cat.
Anim Clin 1978;73:737-42.
 megacolon. Vet Clin North Am Small
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43(2):
15. Webb SM. Surgical management of
Anim Pract 1999;29:589-603
128-31.
acquired megacolon in the cat. J Small 
33. North S, Banks T. Tumours of the
50.
Kook PH, Hagen R, Willi B, et al. Rectal
Anim Pract 1985;26:399-405.
 gastrointestinal tract and associated
duplication cyst in a cat. J Feline Med 
Bright RM, Burrows CF, Goring R, et al.
 structures. In: Small animal oncology:
Surg 2010;12:978-81.
16.
Subtotal colectomy for treatment of
 an introduction. Edinburgh: Saunders
51.
 Bhandal J, Kuzma A, Head L. Cecal
acquired megacolon in the dog and cat.
Elsevier; 2009. p. 129-43.
inversion followed by ileocolic
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;188:1412-16.
34.
 Slawienski MJ, Mauldin GE, Mauldin GN.
intussusception in a cat. Can Vet J
17. Gregory CR, Guilford WG, Berry CR, et al.
Patnaik AK. Malignant colonic neoplasia 
2008;49:483-4.
in cats: 46 cases (1990-1996). J Am Vet 
52.
Pratschke K. Surgical diseases of the colon
Enteric function in cats after subtotal
colectomy for treatment of megacolon.
Med Assoc 1997;211:878-81.
and rectum in small animals. In Pract 
Vet Surg 1990;19:216-20.
35.
Bedford PN. Partial intestinal obstruction
2005;27:354-62
18. Matthiesen DT, Scavelli TD, Whitney WO.
due to colonic adenocarcinoma in a cat.
53. Popovitch CA, Holt D, Bright R. Colopexy
 Subtotal colectomy for the treatment of
Can Vet I 1998;39(12):769-71.
 as a treatment for rectal prolapse in dogs
obstipation secondary to pelvic fracture
Laurenson MP, Skorupski KA, Moore PF.
and cats: a retrospective study of 14 cases.
36.
malunion in cats. Vet Surg 1991;20:
 Zwingenberger AL. Ulltrasonography of
Vet Surg 1994;23:115-18.
113-17.
 intestinal mast cell tumorsin the cat.
54. Corgozinho KB, Belchior C, Moreira de
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2011;52:
Souza H), et al. Silicone elastomer sling
19. deHaan Il, Ellison GW, Bellah JR. Surgical
correction of idiopathic megacolon in
330-4.
for rectal prolapse in cats. Can Vet J
cats. Feline Pract 1992;20:6-11.
37.
Carpenter IL, Andrews LK, Holzworth J.
2010;51:506-10
20. Sweet DC, Hardie EM, Stone EA.
Tumors and tumor-like lesions. In:
55. Secchi P, Filho HC, Scussel Feranti JP.
Preservation versus excision of the
Holzworth J, editor. Diseases of the cat;
et al. Laparoscopic-assisted incisional
ileocolic junction during colectomy for
medicine and surgery. Philadelphia: WB
colopexy by two portals access in a
Saunders: 1987. p. 494-500.
domestic cat with recurrent rectal
 megacolon: a study of 22 cats. J Small 
Anim Pract 1994;35:358-63.
Yoon HY, Mann FA. Bilateral pubic
prolapse. J Feline Med Surg 2012;14(2):
38.
21. White RN. Surgical management of
 and ischial osteotomy for surgical
169-70.
constipation. J Feline Med Surg
management of caudal colonic and rectal
56. Bright RM, Bauer MS. Surgery of the
masses in six dogs and a cat. J Am Vet
 digestive system. In: Sherding RG.
2002;4:129-38.
Med Assoc 2008;232:1016-20.
editor. The cat: diseases and clinical
22. Bertoy Rw. Megacolon. In: Bojrab MJ,.
management. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
editor. Disease mechanisms in small
39.
 Selting KA. Intestinal tumors. In: Withrow
WB Saunders Company: 1994.
animal surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lea
SJ, Vail DM, editors. Small animal clinical
p. 1353-401.
& Febiger; 1993. p. 262-5.
oncology. 4th ed. St Louis: Saunders
 Elsevier; 2007. p. 491-503.
57.
.Shoieb AM, Hanshaw DM. Anal sac gland
23. Furneaux Rw, Boysen BG, Mero KN.
carcinoma in G4 cats in the United
Complications of ovariohysterectomies.
40.
Hume DZ, Solomon JA, Weisse Cw.
Kingdom (1995-2007). Vet Path 2009;46:
Can Vet J 1973;14:98-9.
Palliative use of a stent for colonic
 obstruction caused by adenocarcinoma
677-83.
24.
 Muir P, Goldsmid SE, Bellenger CR.
in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
58. Cavanaugh R, Bacon NJ, Schallberger S.
 Megacolon in a cat following 
2006;228(3):392-6.
et al. Biologic behavior and clinical
 ovariohysterectomy. Vet Rec 1991;129:
 outcome of cats with anal sac
512-13.
41.
 vanderGaag I, Tibboel D. Intestinal atresia
adenocarcinoma: a veterinary society of
25.
 Smith MC, Davies NL. Obstipation
and stenosis in animals: a report of 34
surgical oncology retrospective study of
 following ovariohysterectomy in a cat.
cases. Vet Path 1980;17:565-74.
 23 cats. Proceedings of the 28"h Annual
Vet Rec 1996;138:163.
42.
 Johnson R. Intestinal atresia and stenosis:
 Conference of the Veterinary Cancer
26. Coolman BR, Marretta SM, Dudley MB.
a review comparing its etiopathogenesis.
Society, Seattle, Washington, 2008.
Averill SM. Partial colonic obstruction
Veterinary Research Communications
1986;10:95-104.
p.63.
 following ovariohysterectomy: a report
59.
 Fa-Si-Oen P, Roumen R, Buitenweg l, et al.
of three cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
43.
Waknitz Dw, Greer DH. Urethrorectal
Mechanical bowel preparation or not?
1999:35;169-72.
fistula in a cat. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
Outcome of a multicenter, randomized
27.
 Demetriou JL, Welsh EM. Colonic
1983;78:1551-3.
trial in elective open colon surgery. Dis
obstruction in an adult cat following
44.
.Holt P. Anal and perianal surgery in dogs
Colon Rectum 2005;48:1509-16.
 open castration. Vet Rec 2000:147;1G5-6.
 and cats. In Pract 1985;7:83-9.
60. Nicholson GA, Finlay IG, Diament RH,
28.
Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Aronsohn MG.
45.
 Suess RP, Martin RA, Moon ML, Dallman
 et al. Mechanical bowel preparation does
Matthiesen DT. Perineal hernia in the cat:
 Ml. Rectovaginal fistula with atresia in
not influence outcomes following colonic
a retrospective study of 40 cases. J Am
three kittens. Cornell Vet 1992;82:
cncer resection. Br J Surg 2011;98:
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:431-8.
141-53.
866-71.
Section
5
The Abdomen
61. Holt DE, Brockman D. Large intestine.
67. Bright RM. A clinical, radiographic,
autograf for the treatment of pelvic canal
In: Slatter D, editor. Textbook of small
histological and microbiological 
stenosis in three cats. Vet Rec 1994;134:
animal surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
ewaluation of subtotal colectomies in
132-5.
Saunders; 1993. p. 665-82.
cats. Vet Surg 1986;15:115.
 75. Ferguson JF. Triple pelvic osteotomy for
62.
Bundy CA, Jacobs DM, Zera RT, Bubrick
68. Holt DE, Johnston DE. Idiopathic
the treatment of pelvic canal stenosis in
 MP. Comparison of bursting pressure of
megacolon in cats. Compendium on
the cat. J Small Anim Pract 1997;37:
sutured, stapled and BAR anastomoses.
 Continuing Education for the Practicing
495-8.
Int J Colorectal Dis 1993;8:1-3.
Veterinarian 1991;13:1411-16.
76.
 Prassinos NN, Adamama-Moraitou KK,
63. Schwab R, Wessendorf S, Gutcke A, Becker
69. Bright RM. Idiopathic megacolon in the 
Gouletsou PG, Rallis TS. Symphyseal
 P. Early bursting strength of human colon
cat: subtotal colectomy with preservation
distraction-osteotomy using a novel
anastomosis - an in vitro study
 of the ileocolic valve. Vet Med Rep
spacer of spirally fashioned orthopaedic
comparing current anastomotic
1991;3:183-7.
wire for the management of obstipation.
techniques. Langenbecks Arch Surg
 70. Kudisch M, Pavletic MM. Subtotal
I Feline Med Surg 2007;9:23-8.
2002;386:507-11.
colectomy with surgical stapling
77. Aronson L Rectum and anus. In: Slatter
64. Pavletic MM, Berg I. Gastrointestinal
instruments via a trans-cecal approach for
DH, editor. Textbook of small animal 
surgery. In: Lipowitz Al, Caywood DD,
treatment of acquired megacolon in cats.
surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Newton CD, Schwartz A, editors.
Vet Surg 1993;22:457-63.
Saunders Company: 2003. p. 682-708.
 Complications in small animal surgery.
71.
 Kudisch M. Surgical stapling of the large
78.
 Prassinos NN, Papazoglou LG, Adamama-
Baltimore: williams & wilkins; 1996.
intestine. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Moraitou KK, et al. Congenital anorectal
p. 365-98.
Pract 1994;24:323-33.
abnormalities in six dogs. Vet Rec
65.
Bright RM. Subtotal colectomy in the cat.
72.
 Banz WJ, Jackson DJ, Richter K, Launer
2003;153:81-5.
In: Bojrab Ml, editor. Current techniques 
DP. Transrectal stapling for colonic
79.1
Wykes PM, Olson PN. Vagina, vestibule.
in small animal surgery. 4th ed.
resection and anastomosis [10 cases). J
and vulva. In: Slatter DH, editor. Textbook
Baltimore: Williams & wilkins; 1990.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008;44:198-204.
 of small animal surgery. 3rd ed.
p. 272-6.
73. Schrader SC. Pelvic osteotomy as a
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company:
66.
. Strombeck DR. Small and large intestine:
treatment for obstipation in cats with
2003. p. 1502-10.
normal structure and function. In:
acquired stenosis of the pelvic canal: six
80. Rahal SC, Vicente CS, Mortari AC, et al.
Guildford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR,
cases [1978-1989]. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Rectovaginal fstula with anal atresia in
et al, editors. Strombeck's small animal
1992;200:208-13.
5 dogs. Can Vet I 2007;48:827-30.
 gastroenterology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
74. McKee WM, Wong WT. Symphyseal
WB Saunders Company: 1986. p. 318-50.
distraction-osteotomy using an ulnar
344
Hepatosplenic and endocrine system
[311
Chapter
Liver and biliary tract
J.K. McClaran, N.J. Buote
While hepatobiliary disease is quite common in feline patients, dis-
the liver include production and excretion of bile detoxifcation of
numerous substances, as well as synthesis of plasma proteins. Diag-
nostic biopsy is most commonly performed as an isolated procedure
or in conjunction with an abdominal exploration. Liver lobectomy
(partial or complete) and diseases requiring biliary decompression,
diversion, or cholecystectomy will be detailed. Anesthetic considera-
tions and common complications following hepatic and biliary surgi-
cal procedures will be discussed.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The feline liver consists of six lobes (Fig. 31-1). The liver may be
further described by its visceral and parietal surfaces. The parietal
Figure 31-2 Parietal surface of the liver.
surface is convex and abuts the diaphragm (Fig. 31-2) and the visceral
surface is slightly concave and contacts the stomach, duodenum, and
right kidney (Fig. 31-1). The gallbladder sits in the fossa between the
right medial and quadrate lobes of the liver. The feline liver extends
Quadrate
Right medial
Gallbladder
Left medial
from the diaphragm into the xiphoid region between the left and right
costal arches.2 The afferent blood supply of the liver consists of the
 uaisis euod ainsaid mo au se lam se uaiss ieane ainsaid yau
 The portal system supplies 80% of the blood to the liver while the
remaining 20% of the blood is supplied by branches of the proper
hepatic arteries.? Efferent hepatic drainage is via the hepatic veins.
Supporting ligaments of the liver include the right and left triangular
ligaments (attaching to the muscular portion of the diaphragm), the
right and left coronary ligaments (attaching to the central tendinous
Caudate
portion of the diaphragm), and the falciform ligament. Nervous
supply to the liver is from afferent and efferent fibers of the vagus
process
(caudate)
 nerve and by sympathetic fibers of the celiac plexus.5
Left
lateral
BILIARY ANATOMY AND FLOW
Papillary process
(caudate)
Right lateral
The biliary system consists of a gallbladder, cystic duct, common bile
Figure 31-1 Hepatic anatomy, visceral surface.
duct (CBD), hepatic ducts, segmental, septal, and interlobular bile
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00031-7
345
Section
5
The Abdomen
ducts, bile ductules, and hepatic canaliculi. The gallbladder is made
referable to cholecystic disease but does not distinguish extrahepatic
up of the larger fundus toward the apex and the infundibulum, or
and intrahepatic causes. Hypercholesterolemia and bilirubinuria may
neck, which empties into the cystic duct. The gallbladder has four
also be seen with EHBTO patients. .11
main functions: reservoir, absorptive secretory and motor Congenital
biliary anomalies are seen commonly in cats (12.3%) and include
Diagnostic imaging
partially divided gallbladders (bilobed, trilobed, or quadrupally
divided gallbladder), double gallbladder, and a singular galbladder
Radiography can be of use in selected cases of hepatobiliary disease.1l
with two or more ductular bladders.? Most of these cases are found
Liver size and confguration may be evaluated and hepatic masses can
incidentally at necropsy.
uuiim sailisuap pazieiaun z 'sueaio juaneie jo juaaeidsip asne
 The cystic duct extends from the neck of the gallbladder to the junc-
the gallbladder, or choleliths, can be seen in approximately 50% of
tion with the first hepatic duct and continues distally as the CBD. The
cases. Identifcation of radiopaque choleliths is not diagnostic for
CBD continues to the duodenum, receiving more hepatic ducts along
biliary obstruction as these may be an incidental fnding in some
the way. In the dog, the CBD opens near the smaller of the two pan-
normal animals.1l Dystrophic mineralization of the biliary tree can be
creatic ducts (the pancreatic duct). The larger duct is the accessory
seen in some cases of chronic cholangiohepatitis. Rarely, a mass or
duct, which opens into the duodenum a few centimeters aborad on
space-occupying lesion (pancreatitis, neoplasia, enlarged gallbladder)
the minor duodenal papilla. In the cat, the CBD and the major pan-
may be visible in the region of the CBD in cases of EHBTO. Diffuse
 pasny Alensh aie (saiads siu ui np iaie aul s yoium) inp sea
peritoneal effusion seen on abdominal radiographs should encourage
prior to the entrance at the major duodenal papilla.' The major duo-
further diagnostics such as abdominocentesis to rule out bile perito-
denal papilla is approximately 3-6 cm aborad from the pylorus or
eaq io sas aeq au uim si ga auasai aue se s
2 cm aborad from the junction ofthe CBD and the duodenal serosa.
parenchyma indicates the presence of emphysematous cholecystitis or
Some cats have varied anatomy, with the major pancreatic duct
 absces, which should be surgically explored promptly
opening separately but immediately adjacent to the CBD. Approxi-
mately 2 cm caudal to the major duodenal papilla, the accessory
but experimental studies with different contrast agents have been
 pancreatic duct enters the duodenum at the minor duodenal papilla.
suisn pauad aq ue anpannd su ised au u panpuon
This duct is sometimes absent in the cat Pancreatic and biliary disease
iodinated contrast agents given orally (ipodate sodium/calcium,
-a uiy sn jn aiaq i au ui iaua uaas Au a
150-500 mg/kg) or intravenously (5.2% iodipaminde meglumine,
 grated anatomy.?
0.3-1.0 mL/kg over 30 minutes); however, many variables affect the
 The circulation to the gallbladder and CBD is derived from the left
usefulness of this test and there is a potential for adverse reactions
 branch of the proper hepatic artery.5 This circulation must be pre-
such as anaphylaxis and vomiting.&1l Cholecystography is best used
served during surgical procedures of the gallbladder in order to avoid
for diagnosis of choleliths, polyps, or biliary sludge. Percutaneous
necrotizing cholecystitis. The parasympathetic innervation of the gall-
transhepatic cholangiocystography (PTC) also allows for direct
bladder via the vagus nerve aids in contraction of the gallbladder and
visualization of the gallbladder and biliary tract but requires ultra-
 relaxation of the duodenal sphincter. The sympathetic innervation via
sound guidance. Approximately 25% of the bile should be withdrawn
the splanchnic nerves has the opposite effects." Filling of the gallblad-
 prior to injection of contrast media and radiographs should be
 der occurs continuously and bile flow is driven by hepatic secretion
taken immediately, 45 minutes, 120 minutes, and 24 hours after
and gallbladder contraction. This is a low-flow, low pressure system.
injection."
 The sphincter of Oddi is the functional sphincter located at the termi-
 Abdominal ultrasound is an excellent tool for assessing the struc-
nal portion of the CBD. This sphincter demonstrates both tonic and
tures of the biliary tree and hepatic parenchyma. Contrast-enhanced
rhythmic contractions and acts as a one-way valve to regulate pressure
ultrasonography has been used to help differentiate between benign
within thebiliary system. It also provides resistance against retrograde
-nsia sl'suaed auues jo saas e ui sanpou seday seueu pue
passage of duodenal contents into the biliary tree. Spontaneous con-
alization of the normal gallbladder in cats can be difficult because the
traction of the gallbladder is also known to occur, which explains why
liver is oriented in a dorsoventral axis and displaced cranially under
serum bile acid values may appear higher after a 12 hour fast than
the ribs." Distension of biliary ducts and increased wall thickness of
during a two hour postprandial period.
the gallbladder can be seen easily as the anechoic oval shape of the
gallbladder is well recognized. A healthy gallbladder wall is usually
poorly visible, as are biliary and hepatic ducts when not distended by
disease. The CBD lies ventral to the portal vein and has a diameter of
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
apeal auigo suu uaum 'se Ayeay u uu  uey ssa
wall is seen, many possibilities must be considered (Table 3l-1). In
Diagnostic tests
one study an ultrasound measurement of the wall ≥l mm was accu-
aul jo quauasieua tl'sie ul aseasip iappelqles supipaid ui aiei
Diagnostics are usually initiated due to the presence of ictenus or
CBD can occur within 24-48 hours of acute bile duct obstruction,
hyperbilirubinemia or clinical signs associated with hepatobiliary
whereas intrahepatic biliary duct distension requires five to seven days
disease Patients with extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction (EHBTO)
 of obstruction. Cholelithiasis can be diagnosed by ultrasonography
are usually overtly icteric, have lost weight, and show symptoms of
nq pagewui aq ueo sauois anbedoipei pue asuapoipei yioq asneoaq
vague illness (anorexia, lethargy, etc). Patients with clinical signs
stones within the cystic or CBD can be diffcult to visualize as they
associated with necrotizing cholecystitis or septic bile peritonitis may
are not surrounded by anechoic bile and there is the presence of
 present in shock, with diffuse abdominal pain or distension, icterus.
interference by intestinal or gastric gas. When studying a cohort of cats
and fever. Icterus is present when serum total bilirubin is greater than
with spontaneous EHBTO, ultrasound detected a CBD >5 mm in 97%
2 mg/dL.? Serum biochemical profles can indicate cholestasis by
of cats but only 50% of cats had a dilated gallbladder.15 Polyps, neo-
increased serum transaminases (alanine aminotransferase, ALT; aspar-
 plastic masses such as adenomas or adenocarcinomas, or cysts within
tate aminotransferase, AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and gamma-
the gallbladder, cystic or CBD can be imaged via ultrasound although
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and increased total bilinubin. ALP
ao i ui lem ina asn ym eisey o
lacks steroid induction in cats, therefore any increase in ALP is
common.
346
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
Table 31-1 Diagnostic imaging techniques for hepatobiliary disease in cats
Ultrasound
Radiography
Cholecystography
Hepatic Scintigraphy
CT, ERCP
Thickened GB wall
 Mineralized densities
 Percutaneous transhepatic
 Intestinal transit should 
Only
 partially empty
·choleliths
injection of contrast material:
be seen within 3 hours
reported in
cholecystitis
dystrophic
 25% of bile should be removed
of IV injection - if not 
experimental
wall edema (due to portal hypertension,
miner alization
before injection; radiographs
 EHBTO diagnosed
studies in 
hypoalbuminemia, or CHF)
 Right quadrant mass
taken at 0, 45. 120 minutes,
dogs
 ascites (spurious thickening)
effect:
and 24 hours post injection
Enlarged GB size
pancreatitis
anorexia
focal peritonitis 
 neoplasia
◆
enlarged GB
mucocele
·neoplasia
 EHBTO from CBD neoplasia, choleliths,
Emphysematous GB
pancreatitis
鲁
 cholecystitis
Multifocal hyperechogenicity
choledochitis
cholangiohepatitis
Poor detail
Distended bile ducts 
·effusion
EHBTO
peritonitis
GB, gallbladder.
Due to the close anatomic association between the biliary and
have shown excellent results in diagnosing EHBTO compared to other
pancreatic systems, the pancreas should always be imaged when using
no ul paodan uaaq iou aaey inq Dld se ypns sanbiuupat juan
ultrasonography. Pancreatic enlargement, focal steatitis or masses
saop ui paodai uaaq auo seu dia aep oi suaed iee ls
-doaid aneudoidde ue uodn spuadap tuaunean pue OlaHa asnes ue
to date. This combination modality uses endoscopy and fluoroscopy
erative diagnosis. For cats with suspected cholangitis or cholan-
giohepatitis, ultrasonography also allows for diagnostic testing to be
requires considerable training but is used commonly in humans to
performed, such as cholecystocentesis if the biliary tree is not patho-
highlight masses, papillary stenosis, and choledocholiths.
logically affected. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis 
can be performed in cats and in one experimental study performed in
healthy cats the risks of this procedure appeared to be low.1 Culture
PRESURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
samples of bile yielded a significantly higher percentage of positive
results when compared to hepatic cultures.17 Cholecystocentesis of a
diseased or distended gallbladder increases the risks of complications,
 Thorough preoperative evaluation of patients undergoing hepatic or
therefore biochemical analysis of blood, including a coagulation
biliary surgery should include a complete blood count, biochemistry
panel, should be considered before performing this procedure. All
profile, urinalysis, and coagulation profle. Even though the liver has
patients should be monitored for any signs of peritonitis for 24 hours
great regenerative capacity,the condition of the remaining liver deter-
after the procedure.1 In humans, severe vagal complications have
mines how well removal of a portion of the liver may be tolerated.
been seen with diagnostic procedures of the gallbladder but this has
Diseases such as cirrhosis, prolonged biliary obstruction and hypoalbu-
not been reported in cats undergoing simple aspiration.
minemia may result in reduced tolerance for removal of large amounts
Hepatic  scintigraphy  has been  reported  in  small  animals and
of liver tissue.7.26 Patients may be anemic and preoperative blood
involves the use of radioisotopes such as technetium (?"mTe) attached
typing and access to blood for transfusion (see Chapter 5) as needed
to organic anions (iminodiacetic analogs). In humans, this modality
during surgery is warranted. Hypoglycemia as well as hypoalbumine-
can diagnose CBD occlusion, acute and chronic cholecystitis, segmen-
 or  s u a a a e
tal biliary tree obstruction, and sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.° One
Animals with evidence of hepatic encephalopathy should be stabi-
 Jo sisouseip e ioy Aipyiads %te pue Aiianisuas eg pamous Apns
lized before proceeding with surgery. Decreased hepatic metabolism
biliary obstruction if no scintigraphic material was seen within the
 of drugs used to anesthetize patients should be taken into considera-
intestinal tract after passage of suffcient time for bile emptying
pue paonpai aq pinoys snup isou jo sasoa (z iandeuo aas) uon
(within three hours).1" Another study reported scintigraphic criteria
inhalant anesthetics are the preferred method of anesthestic mainte-
for partial biliary obstruction in smallanimals.2 Disadvantages to this
nance.3 Use of propofol for anesthesia in cats with primary hepatic
technique include limited availability, restrictions on patient han-
lipidosis did not appear to increase morbidity or mortality in a study
dling. and the resultant delays to surgical intervention.
 of feline patients undergoing feeding tube placement.2? Prophylactic
 Future diagnostic imaging modalities for use in cats may include
 antibiotic usage is recommended for hepatic and biliary disease. Nor-
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as
mally, the liver filters portal blood and bacteria may proliferate with
well as endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP). CT
hepatic ischemia or hypoxia.37
and MRI may be used to delineate the extent of hepatic masses and
Cats with prolonged obstructive biliary disease are at risk for coagu-
show promise in distinguishing between benign and malignant proc-
lopathies due to vitamin K malabsorption, which leads to deficiencies
esses.21 Three-dimensional spiral CT has been used in human studies
in factors II, VIl, IX, and X.37 Any evidence of clinical bleeding Or
of patients with suspected obstructive biliary disease 2.23 These studies
increases in prothrombin or activated partial thromboplastin times
347
Section
5
The Abdomen
Hepatic cysts
Box 31-1 Suggested antibiotics for hepatobiliary surgery
Hepatic cysts are epithelium lined cystic cavities in cats and dogs that
Amoxicillin: 20 mg/kg PO, IM, SQ. BID or TID
have been associated with liver tumors, polycystic kidney disease, liver
Cefazolin: 20 mg/kg IV or IM, TID or QID
hydatidosis and congenital hepatopathies.40 Patients may be asymp-
 Enrofloxacin: 5 mg/kg PO, IM or IV, BID
tomatic for cysts, present with abdominal pain, or a rare complication.
seen in humans, may be biliary obstruction.41 In a study reporting on
 Metronidazole: 10 mg/kg IV, TID
nine cats with hepatic cysts, the common presenting clinical signs
were anorexia, reduced activity, and vomiting. All patients had
abdominal pain on palpation. Four out of nine cats had concurrent
renal cysts. Ultrasound-guided drainage and alcoholization of the
hepatic cysts was reported, with a low rate of complication and amel.
01 t7 ioy (ep auo s y/ Z'o-Io) i u aiaa1 Pnous
48 hours before surgery or a plasma transfusion.* Partial or complete
ioration of clinical signs.40 Other reported treatments include partial
lobectomy, excision of the cystic membrane, as well as omentaliza-
biliary obstructions may allow ascending aerobic and anaerobic infec-
tion.42.43 Hepatic cysts have also been reported in conjunction with
tion and subsequent bacteremia. The organisms most commonly iso-
lated from bilary infections include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp..
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia in a cat.44
Enterobacter spp, Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas spp* Antibiotics that
are excreted in an active form in the bile are most effective for treat-
Hepatic abscess
ment (see Box 31-1).* Nutritional deficits should be considered (see
Hepatic abscesses may form as isolated lesions, manifestations of
Chapter 6), and placement of a feeding tube (see Chapter 12) either
systemic infections, or as diffuse microabscesses.45 In human patients
at surgery or preoperatively may be extremely important to aid in
most abscesses are bacterial in nature and most commonly affect
management of these cases.28
the right liver lobes. This may be due to its proximity to the biliary
 Anesthetic considerations (see Chapter 2) have been studied at
is oeans Aeq o spiean ym siapou ieue u yua
flora.4-43 In a study of 14 cats with reported hepatic abscesses, the
importantly, systemic hypotension has been repeatedly discovered as
a complication with obstructive jaundice.31,32 Loss of vascular respon-
S         
cultured from 66% of the cats, with E. coli most frequently isolated.45
siveness to sympathomimetic pressor agents with chronic bile duct
Feline patients often present with non-specific clinical signs such as
obstruction is associated with systemic vasodilation and appears mul-
Au uoddns iossand on sauaisuosan jo ypel siu tes'leonne
anorexia, lethargy and weight loss. Most affected cats were septic and
many were hypothermic. In dogs with hepatic abscessation, 100% of
make intraoperative and postoperative management of these patients
patients were reported to have had an increase in serum ALP activity.
challenging and in many studies postoperative hypotension has been
while this study reported 50% of feline patients failed to have an
linked to a poor prognosis.s.36
paodai sase auay aul jo son ot'sauazua ial wunas ui aseaiu
 The association between obstructive jaundice and renal failure has
had multiple macroscopic abscesses, but the survival rate was higher
also been well established in the human population and is associated
(75%) in the cases where a solitary abscess was found which was surgi-
with a mortality rate of 70-80% in people who develop it.37 Theories
cally resected. Results were favorable in one cat treated with percutane-
behind the cause of renal failure in this patient group include cardio-
ous ultrasound-assisted drainage and alcoholization of a focal hepatic
vascular dysfunction (hypotension) leading to poor blood flow to the
abscess.50
kidneys and acute renal tubular necrosis as a direct nephrotoxic effect
of bile constituents. This functional hypovolemia may leave the
uanbasqns pue euaxonopua uoy aseuep on uado arou shaup
Liver lobe torsion
renal vasoconstriction as well.3
Hepatic lobe torsion is exceptionally rare and has only been reported
in one cat.4 The left side of the liver is most commonly affected in
dogs, with one study documenting a left lateral lobe torsion in 48%
of animals and the left medial lobe was most commonly affected in
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE LIVER
another study of 13 dogs.51 The supposition is that the left lateral lobe
is the largest, most well defined and most mobile of all hepatic
lobes.525s While an underlying cause for liver lobe torsion is often
Hepatic trauma
never found, one feline case report documented torsion of the right
 Traumatic injury to the hepatic parenchyma may lead to hemorrhage.
medial liver lobe, and the lobe contained a ruptured hepatocellular
Isolated hepatic injury is uncommon and small lacerations or frac-
u soy auaa ue o pauasad sm uad sul 'eui
tures ofthe parenchyma rarely require surgical intervention, but severe
trauma leading to hemorrhage that cannot be controlled with con-
neum. The patient was euthanized due to poor condition and the
torsion was documented on postmortem examination. This is in con-
Blunt trauma from automobiles is the most frequent cause of hepatic
Buiosiapun sop ioy auono uat-suol poog e aiaum 'ssop ol isen
injury, although other rare causes such as hepatic rupture due to amy-
surgery for liver lobe torsion has been reported.5 Other reported
loidosis in six cats have been reported.38 A surgical technique that may
causes may include congenital absence or traumatic rupture of the
be used to control hemorrhage includes temporary occlusion of the
supporting ligaments of the liver.54.55
hepatic artery and portal vein through the epiploic foramen via the
Pringle maneuver to slow hemorrhage by using either a finger or an
Hepatobiliary neoplasia
instrument to compress the vessels.? Other documented methods to
 control traumatic hemorrhage documented in human patients include
Liver neoplasia may be primary or due to metastatic disease. Tumors
direct suturing of intrahepatic vessels, resectional debridement, lobar
may arise from hepatocytes, bile duct epithelium, neuroendocrine
resection, as well as perihepatic packing and replaparotomy.
cells or stromal cells.5 Tumors generally occur in older animals and
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
Figure 31-3 Biliary Cystadenoma in a cat.
Figure 31-4 Metastatic pancreatic carcinoma
 presenting clinical signs are generally non-specifc.58 Cats with malig-
saul o suis ieu mous on all arou aie 'ynou 'sio suu
than those with benign masses, and overall benign masses seem to be
sieo jo saseo It jo apms e ul ss'sioum jueueuu ueui uouo aio
with primary hepatobiliary masses, the most common malignant
sou auipue eouie ieimaoitueou aq otpunoy sem ad ioum
lular adenomas, and biliary cysts (Fig. 31-3).58 Cats with benign
disease that underwent exploratory surgery had no complications or
recurrence documented at two months following surgery, yet 86% of
cats with malignant disease were euthanized or died during surgery.58
Benign hepatic nodular myelolipomatosis has been reported in con-
survival following surgical excision of a solitary myelolipoma was
favorable.0 Carcinomas of the biliary system in cats behave aggres-
sively and one report documented an 80% rate of metastasis.6l Hepa-
tobilliary neuroendocrine carcinoma has been studied in 17 cats, and
was associated with a poor prognosis, with 14/17 cats being eutha-
nized during or immediately after surgery.57
 Treatment for solitary tumors is partial or complete liver lobectomy
 Figure 31-5 Diffuse lymphosarcoma of the liver.
 l n     s)
nodes should be evaluated for metastatic disease. In patients where
diffuse neoplastic disease is present, liver biopsy is warranted (see
 Chapter 23). There are many indications for hepatic biopsy, including
liver enzyme elevation for more than 30 days, ultrasonographic
liver biopsy information section below) (Fig. 3l-4). In two reports,
soiu sid pue isasas suisa
the liver was involved in 20-24% of cats with lymphocytic lymphoma
(Fig. 31-5).62,63
For diffuse hepatic disease, such as lipidosis (Fig. 3l-6) or neoplasia.
cytology may provide an adequate diagnosis, but fails to show archi-
Radiographic and ultrasound imaging can document the location
and extent of hepatic tumors.64 Additional imaging such as CT
tectural details that can only be obtained via histopathology. One
and MRI may be useful to determine resectability of a tumor and
study documented agreement between cytologic and histopathologic
three-view thoracic radiographs should be taken to look
for
pulmonary metastatic disease.5 Non-resectable and metastatic liver
lipidosis instead of lymphosarcoma.°α As cytology provides only a
chemoembolization.65
small sample size and does not detail parenchymal architecture,
hepatic biopsy is generally favored.
pue saaeueape sey poyiau ypea pue isixa sanbiuyal aidinnn
 disadvantages. Less invasive methods are ideal but may provide only
SURGICAL PROCEDURES OF THE LIVER
smalltissue samples, yet general anesthesia may be needed to obtain
 larger speimens. Techniques reported for obtaining a liver biopsy
Liver biopsy
including loop guillotine suture (Fig. 3l-7), punch biopsy, ultrasoni-
-oedei pue uado yoq u pasn aq u yom) aiess paee ai
Liver biopsy is commonly performed as a solitary procedure or
scopic fashion), as well as stapling methods 3769 The loop suture
in conjunction with an abdominal exploratory procedure (see
method is adequate for sampling the margin of the liver, while a skin
349
Section
[51
The Abdomen
Figure 31-6 Hepatic lipidosis.
Figure 31-8 Laparoscopic biopsy of hepatic parenchyma.
Figure 31-7 Guillotine (loop) biopsy of the liver.
 punch biopsy is ideal for focal lesions within the central portions of
the liver. Absorbable gelatin foam (Gelfoam Pfzer, New York), a mat-
Ksdoig idosoedel bumt als Asdog jo anue leadd 6-le anb
tress suture, or omental tissue may be used to control hemorrhage.?
Use of tissue forceps is avoided in grasping the specimen to avoid
in 26 cats has been reported. In that study, 19% of the cats developed
creating a crushing artifact Surgically obtained wedge samples should
fatality following biopsy, attributed to a pressure wave that may have
be at least 1 cm, preferably 2 cm deep, as subcapsular tissue contains
caused a vagal mediated shock.74
-uasaidai se paaidau Aupeasiu aq ues pue anssi snoiqy anou
Laparoscopic biopsy (see Chapter 24) is an ideal method for
ing the entire liver.70 An ideal liver biopsy should be of adequate size
acquiring a larger sample size (Fig. 31-8). This technique allows for
and taken from a location that is representative of the primary liver
magnifed visualization of hepatic pathology as well as permitting
pathology. At least two to three samples should be obtained from
observation of the sites following biopsy to be monitored for hemor-
separate liver lobes, including both peripheral and central locations,
rhage (Fig. 3l-9). In addition, laparoscopy has proven safe and effec-
as well as grossly normal and abnormal-appearing tissue.70 Human
studies suggest that at least six to eight portal triads must be obtained
jo au au 'eisausaue ieaua iapun pauoad si adossaiede am
for adequate histopathologic interpretation.71
the procedure is rapid, with a mean reported surgery time of 35
Ultrasound-guided needle-core biopsy techniques are minimally
Alensn ae sdaioy Asdoq oidossonedel uan sadues se'sanunu
invasive, but they require a skilled ultrasonographer, do not allow
about 5 mm in diameter, depending on surgeon technique and depth
access to all areas of the peritoneal cavity, and have been shown to
of penetration. Laparoscopic cup biopsies provide about 45 mg of
produce inferior samples in many cases when compared with open
tissue, a 14G Tru-Cut-type biopsy needle provides 15-20 mg, and an
surgical or laparoscopic techniques.72 In a study of 124 animals, the
18G needle biopsy provides only 3-5 mg of liver tissue.70 Disadvan-
morphologic diagnosis assigned to needle biopsy specimens agreed
juaudimba jo asuadxa aul apnpul Asdoiq pidossoiedel aul jo sasn
and the expertise needed, but the advantages over open laparotomy
high rate of complications using an automatic Tru-Cut biopsy device
are significant, including faster patient recovery, lower postoperative
350
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
Box 31-2 Liver lobectomy and partial hepatectomy
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a cranial midline 
abdominal approach is made. Additional surgical exposure can be
provided via a paracostal incision or a caudal sternotomy. Thorough
evaluation and palpation of both the parietal and visceral surfaces of 
 all hepatic lobes should be performed.
Hand suturing
 The liver is dissected around the hilus and individual vessels identified 
and ligated for complete lobectomy. A single encircling ligature at 
 the base of the hilus is not recommended, as dislodging of the
single suture may lead to postoperative hemorrhage. For a partial
hepatectomy the parenchyma can be gently crushed by using the
'finger fracture' technique. After the parenchyma is separated the
remaining vessels and biliary ducts may be individually ligated.
Stapling
The 2.0 mm and 3.5 mm devices are best suited for use in feline 
patients. The stapling device may be placed across the parenchyma.
Figure 31-10 Use of the thoracoabdominal (TA) stapling device for liver
but placing the stapling device at the level of the hilus, where the 
lobectomy
parenchyma is less thick, may help ensure adequate hemostasis.
More blood loss may occur using the suction and clip method 
 compared to use of the SurgiTie, LigaSure, Ultracision Harmonic 
u pue ieuan aul oi ssaiy e'saniuuoat sumns ueui anando
Scalpel or thoracoabdominal stapling devices.7 Temporary inflow
liver lobes is more difficult than access to the left liver lobe.8 The
occlusion of the hepatic artery and portal vein with an atraumatic
thickness of the liver lobe is usually the limitation for lobectomy, and
bulldog dlamp may be used to minimize hemorrhage.?
hepatic parenchyma can be more difficult to compress in a partial
Vascular occluding staples (hemoclips) or suturing may be used 
lobectomy, rather than stapling at the hilus for a complete lobectomy.
to reinforce staple lines. Minor bleeding may be controlled with 
The thoracoabdominal (TA) 3.5 mm or 4.8 mm stapling device has
electrocautery, absorbable gelatin foam (Gelfoam), oxidized 
been used for a partial lobectomy in the dog, although the 2.0 mm
regenerated cellulose (Surgicel), and by placing omentum along the
remaining liver.
vessels (Fig. 31-10),7,81 The 2.0 mm and 3.5 mm devices are best
The abdomen is flushed with warm sterile saline and thoroughly
suited for use in feline patients. Vascular occluding staples (hemo-
inspected for hemorrhage (ensuring the patient is normotensive)
before routine closure.
clips) or suturing may be used to reinforce staple lines. A study com-
 paring five surgical techniques for partial liver lobectomy in the dog
found no difference in surgical time between techniques, but signifi-
cantly more blood loss was encountered using the suction and clip
method compared to use of the SurgiTie, LigaSure, Utracision Har-
morbidity, decreased infection rate, less postoperative pain, and
decreased hospitalization time.70.72
monic Scalpel, or thoracoabdominal stapling devices.77 Temporary
inflow occlusion of the hepatic artery and portal vein with an atrau-
loy paiui iou aeaug si (e iandeu aas) Auniedel uado
matic bulldog clamp may be used to minimize hemorrhage.7
hepatic biopsy alone, but liver biopsy is often done in conjunction
with an abdominal exploration. A keyhole incision may also be used.
by making a 2-4 cm incision caudal to the xiphoid process and grasp-
ing a small portion of exposed liver.76 Obviously, the increased mor-
DISEASES OF THE BILIARY SYSTEM
bidity associated with open laparotomy is necessary when a discrete 
mass of considerable size must be excised.
Cholecystitis
Lobectomy and hepatectomy
Cholecystitis, or inflammation of the gallbladder, can present acutely
or be considered chronic in duration. Cholecystitis may be caused by
Partial lobectomy (Box 3l-2) is defned as separation and removal of
bile stasis (EHBTO or choleliths), or blood-borme pathogens from
hepatic parenchyma at any location other than the hilus. Removal of
hepatic circulation, or intestinal reflux into the biliary system. Clinical
a lobe at the level of the hilus is considered a complete liver lobec-
signs, as with many biliary diseases, can be quite vague, and include
[aaas jo eaoai saaloui (z- ie xog aas Auoioaiedau ieied y uo
reduced appetite, anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
hepatic lobes. Partial or complete liver lobectomy is generally per-
fever. The biochemical profle of affected animals includes elevated
formed through an open laparotomy via a cranial midline abdominal
 transferases, ALP, mildly elevated total bilinubin, and occasionally an
approach. Additional surgical exposure can be provided via a paracos-
 elevated leukocyte count with a left shift.? In cats, a new classification
tal incision or a caudal sternotomy. Removal of up to 70% of the
scheme was proposed by the WSAVA Liver Disease Group: a neu-
trophilic, a lymphocytic and a chronic cholangitis.1α Diagnosis of
feline patients.
cholecystitis relies most heavily on abdominal ultrasound as radio-
Partial or complete liver lobectomy may be performed with hand
 graphs will only be helpful if the gallbladder rupture has led to diffuse
suturing or with stapling equipment. For tumors that encroach on the
 peritoneal effusion or radiodense gallstones are visualized. The ultra-
hilar region, a hilar liver lobectomy technique involving dissection of
sound results will vary according to the stage of the disease, ranging
individual lobar vessels has been described in dogs.78 Study of canine
from a bright or thickened gallbladder wall, to distension of the gall-
lobectomy found stapling techniques faster, simpler, and more
bladder and associated ducts.
351
Section
5
The Abdomen
Treatment of cholecystitis also depends on the stage of the disease
and the clinical picture of the patient. If caught early before the gall-
Box 31-3 Causes of extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction
bladder wall becomes compromised, cholecystitis may respond to
in cats
appropriate antibiotic and choloretic therapies. If cholecystocentesis
Cholelithiasis
an be performed safely, bile is collected for aerobic and anaerobic
Parasitic
culture and sensitivity. The most commonly identifed bacterial isolate
 Choledocholithiasis
 Trematode infestation
'paioadsns sl aimidnu iappeialles Jl a 'sauas aseo auo ul iroo g sem
Choledochitis 
 Extrinsic compression
immediate exploratory surgery and probable cholecystectomy is war-
Neoplasia
Lymph nodes
ranted. As discussed later in this chapter, bile peritonitis causes a
Bile duct adenocarcinoma
 Pancreatic masses
severe chemical peritonitis and if the bile is infected mortality rates
 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma
 Entrapment in diaphragmatic
in these patients can increase significantly. Gallbladder mucocoele.
Lymphosarcoma 
hernia
reported frequently in dogs. has only been reported once in a cat and
 Biliary cystoadenoma 
 Duodenal foreign body
did not have the characteristic stellate or striated pattern commonly
Osteosarcoma
Fibrosis
described. In this case, concurrent hepatic lipidosis was present and a
Congenital
 Peritonitis 
cholecystoenterostomy was performed to avoid the risk of EHBTO in
Choledochal cyst 
 Pancreatitis
the future."2
 Polycystic liver disease
 Blunt trauma 
Duplex gallbladder
latrogenic 
Cholelithiasis
Sphincter of Oddi pathology
 Surgical 
Cholelithiasis, also known as gallstones, has been reported in the cat.
Stone formation occurs due to multiple biliary variables including bile
saturation, type and proportion of bile acids, protein, and mucin.
Components in feline choleliths include bilirubin, and to varying
degrees cholesterol and calcium. Even though calcium carbonate is
the most common type of cholelith according to some studies, the
calcium content in many stones is low enough that they remain radio-
lucent.83-85 Cholestasis has been associated with cholelith formation
due to the increase in mucin production and cholecystitis is lithogenic
due to the assoiated inflammation, hemorrhage, and bacterial com-
 ponent.7 Alterations of gallbladder motility associated with certain
types of gastric surgery involving the antrum and pylorus may also
cause gallstone formation. Co-ordination between gastric and gall-
bladder motor activity through extrinsic neural connections has been
shown experimentally in dogs.
 Most choleliths remain asymptomatic unless they lead to biliary or
 pancreatic obstruction. With obstructive cholelithiasis, clinical signs
include dehydration, vomiting, anorexia, ictenus, and lethargy. Blood
work abnormalities are consistent with extrahepatic biliary tract
obstruction. The largest case series in cats reports on nine patients that
underwent surgical treatment for obstructive cholelithiasis.? Five of
Figure 31-11 Torturous common bile duct from extrahepatic biliary tract
the nine cats had a cholecystectomy, three cats had biliary diversion,
obstruction.
and one had cholecystotomy. Concurrent hepatic lipidosis was associ-
ated with a higher mortality rate and cholecystectomy had the lowest
postoperative morbidity. Treatment of choleliths is only undertaken
necrosis and fbrosis of the bile ducts. Clinical signs associated with
if they are causing clinical signs or biochemical elevations. In human
EHBTO are varied but include lethargy. jaundice intermittent vomit-
medicine, dissolution of gallstones by chenodeoxycholic acid is
ing and inappetence Gastroenteric ulceration at the pyloric-duodenal
attempted as this decreases the hepatic synthesis and secretion of
junction is common and can lead to substantial blood loss Diagnosis
cholesterol. This is not usually attempted in small animals due to the
of EHBTO includes increases in serum enzyme and total bilirubin
low incidence of cholesterol stones. Surgical stone removal along with
concentrations. Coagulopathies can also appear due to vitamin K
cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice in most cases. When a
defciency. Confrmation of EHBTO is made with ultrasound or
cholecystectomy is performed, patency of the CBD must be ensured.
 exploratory surgery. Ultrasonographic features of bile duct obstruction
Cholecystotomy or choledochotomy alone can be performed to
include a distended and torturous CBD (Fig. 31-1l ), enlarged gallblad-
 remove stones but most authors believe that leaving the gallbladder
 der, and enlarged intrahepatic bile ducts.7 Hepatic scintigraphy could
also be helpful in diagnosis of EHBTO but cholecystography is not
Sample procurement for aerobic and anaerobic culture is always
recommended.
indicated.
Certain causes of EHBTO such as parasitic infections with liver
flukes may carry a poor prognosis in some cases due to severe damage
to the biliary structures whereas congenital anomalies such as choledo-
Extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction
chal cysts may be managed quite successfully with palliative surger-
Extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction is associated with many different
ies0.3.5 Although trauma-related (diaphragmatic herniation) or
eday oi speal sisesalou t-o8'sss(e-ie xog) sasssond aseas
other extrabiliary causes (duodenal foreign body) of EHBTO are
 parenchymal injury, such as cell membrane and organelle damage
rare, they have been reported, and if addressed in a timely fashion
within a few weeks. Over time, biliary stasis leads to inflammation.
ases e Auaad so't'luaed aul ioy saono jyssans o peal Ae
free radical formation, biliary epithelial hyperplasia, and eventually
series of six cats presented data on obstructive sphincter of Oddi
352
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
pateposse uoounysp pey sies aulgo aanun hodan stun ul e oouied
with a congenital duplex gallbladder and choledocholithiasis.?
with pre-existing inflammatory bowel disease, two had inspissated
The most common cause of biliary leakage was trauma (blunt or
bile causing an obstruction, and one cat was diagnosed with cholan-
penetrating or leakage from a previous surgical site) or necrotizing
giocelular carcinoma. Al six cats were taken to surgery, where sphinc
cholecystitis.
terotomies as well as other procedures were performed. Four of the
Treatment of bile peritonitis (see Chapter 26) almost always requires
six cats did well postoperatively.
surgical exploration, especially in the case of suspected sepsis. At
Not surprisingly, neoplasia of the gallbladder, CBD, or duodenal
 surgery, the abdomen should be lavaged until it is grossly free of bile-
seaiaum zoit'suaed auay isou iy sisousid iood e spioy eded
oy iog iuaea aaissaaee paau lm siuaed Aue imu pauiis
volemic shock, endotoxemia, and hypoalbuminemia preoperatively.
 aaadsnai aiel omL soo Apeai aiou yonu juauean ens pue
Culture samples should be collected to aid in postoperative antimi-
case series have been published reporting on prognostic factors and
crobial selection and often there are multiple types of bacteria
outcome in biliary diversion surgeries in cats.36.37 In one, the mortality
detected. 100 Overall survival with bile peritonitis is 50%, while septic
rate within 48 hours of surgery was 57%o: in cats diagnosed with neo-
peritonitis only carries a 27% survival rate. Patients with lower white
plasia it was l0o% versus those with non-neoplastic causes, where it
blood cell counts (mean 20 608/μL) and lower neutrophil counts
was 40%.37 The second study looked at only cats undergoing chole-
(mean 686/μL) had a significantly better survival rate.0 If necrotizing
cystoenterostomy procedures and identified risk factors associated
o atep jl paa si Auoiaisao e quasaid si ssiaoo
with poor outcome in these patients. This study also found the major-
the biliary ducts has occurred, biliary diversion is necessary but may
ity of EHBTO was due to inflammatory causes (13/22) versus neoplas-
 be difficult depending on the condition of the tissue.
tic (9/22). Only 27% of cats survived longer than six months after
u si sul ss'saseasp Aoeuueu suoe pey yum yo le Aaains
agreement with previous literature reviews.? The only variable associ-
ated with median survival time was the presence of neoplasia; 14 days 
BILIARY PROCEDURES
for neoplasia versus 255 days with inflammatory disease.3 Overall the
prognosis of EHBTO in catsthat require biliary diversion interventions
Biliary decompression procedures
is poor and the postoperative complication rate quite high.36,37.99 The
most common complications include postoperative hypotension,
Much debate still remains regarding which patients may benefit from
blood loss or anemia requiring transfusions, vomiting, anorexia, and
 preoperative biliary drainage, but the procedure has been postulated
cardiopulmonary arrest.
to allow for normalization of liver enzymes, which may stabilize the
Bile peritonitis
cholecystostomy may be used instead of open surgical techniques or
endoscopic techniques. One experimental study in cats performed
temporary biliary decompression after chronic CBD ligation and illus-
stage cholecystitis, EHBTO, cholelithiasis, blunt or sharp abdominal
trated decreases in transaminases, total bilinubin and improved atti-
tude and appetite; however, bacterial infections were common.10g
In the dog, the most common location for rupture is the gallbladder
Self-retaining or pigtail catheters of sizes ranging from 8-10 French
 u pa uaq nu s s iq  a e su
with 22G needles can be used in cats. Laparoscopic-assisted catheteri-
species.7 Leakage of bile into the peritoneal cavity can be associated
zation allowed for direct visualization to avoid penetrating the
with clinical signs ranging from fever, anorexia, abdominal pain.
pleura.107 If placed during laparotomy, the catheter is introduced
ictenus, lethargy, to shock. Abdominal effusion may take days to weeks 
through a right ventral abdominal wall stab incision and passed
to evolve depending on the amount and location of the leakage.7.10
through omentum or hepatic tissue to decrease postoperative leakage.
Blood work abnormalities can include increased liver transferases.
The potential for postoperative cholecystographic studies to deter-
ALP GGT, and leukocytosis if there is chronic inflammation or sepsis.
mine CBD patency before tube removal is an advantage to this
Abdominocentesis may illustrate bilinubin crystals and inflammatory
technique.
cells in a brown-green fluid if the leakage is long-standing. Determina-
loj ainpanoid aaounipe io juaueanl Aieuud e se guuais Ae
tion of bilirubin concentrations in fluid and serum will illustrate a
 primary choledochal repairs has also been reported in small animals.
disproportionate amount in the abdominal effusion (two times
This use is controversial but is commonplace in human medicine. The
yim ou'sisoueep ui aaaa yooi aq ot umous uaaq sey pue iauay
cited advantages include prevention of stricture formation in the early
supununs Aa ot pazeo aq Au usa au samnu aine
phase of healing, decompression of the gallbladder, and minimiza-
the gallbladder and require ultrasound guidance to obtain samples.
tion of leakage Potential complications associated with stent usage
In these cases, omental adhesions may undergo an intense inflamma-
include stricture formation, ascending infections, and increased mor-
tory reaction and derange the normal anatomy seen at ultrasound.
bidity and hospitalization.7 A more recent clinical study reported the
Peritoneal reactions to bile leakage vary but eventually lead to large
use of choledochal stenting in seven cats for pancreatitis-associated
amounts of effusion. Unconjugated bile salts are cytotoxic and can
EHBTO and found red rubber catheters placed surgically through the
induce tissue inflammation by altering the permeability of vascular
major duodenal papilla did allow for temporary biliary drainage
structures within the peritoneal membranes. Small amounts of bile
without re-routing procedures. Five of the seven cats survived to dis-
leakage may go undetected but if the bile is septic a life-threatening
uoat siul uiim paieiosse Aiiqiou iaieai e sem aiaun inq aieu
condition can quickly develop. Fluid shifts into the peritoneal cavity
nique in cats than previously described in dogs. most likely due to
and translocation of bacteria from the liver and intestine can lead to
differences in the pathogenesis of these diseases. 08.109
systemic hypotension, endotoxemia, and shock. Other systemic effects
 of bile salts include red cell lysis, electrolyte imbalances, hypopro-
Cholecystotomy/dochotomy
teinemia, anemia, and marked dehydration due to alkaline pH and
hyperosmolality.10
The most common indications for a cholecystotomy (Box 31-4) (inci-
  ae e   a sr s a
sion into the gallbladder) or choledochotomy (Box 3l-4) (incision
le auo Jo uodau ase e ul se [aM se ou'sies oMl pue ssop tZ Uo
into CBD) are inspissated bile, choleliths, or liver flukes.
ES5
Section
151
The Abdomen
 Box 31-4 Cholecystotomy/dochotomy
Box 31-5 Cholecystectomy
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a cranial midline
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a cranial midline
 abdominal approach is made.
abdominal approach is made.
The gallbladder can be mobilized from the hepatic fossa by gentle
Cholecystotomy
dissection accomplished with a combination of electrocautery, manual
The gallbladder may need to be mobilized from the hepatic fossa 
traction with cotton tipped applicators and blunt dissection with
 by gentle dissection. Dissection can usually be performed by a
hemostats. The cystic duct and artery are then identified. Special care
must be taken not to ligate or damage any of the hepatic lobar ducts
applicators or hemostats and sharp dissection with scissors. Hepatic
(especially those of the central division that enter the CBD near the 
bleeding can usually be controlled by manual pressure or the
pen auaap on sueodui s! ll raa aui oui buidua (np ys
application of hemostatic agents. Decompression of the gallbladder
the CBD is patent before performing a cholecystectomy. A small
can be performed before dissection by cholecystocentesis but may
duodenotomy should be made to catheterize the major duodenal
make dissection more difficult.? Once emptied, an incision is made in
papilla and a red rubber catheter (3.5-5 French) used to flush the
the fundus of the gallbladder. Decompression is performed with a
duct. Once that has been performed, the cystic duct and artery are 
 22-20G needle attached to a syringe or extension set and syringe
Dieisoway lo (o/t ot o/e) ainins aigequosge-uou yi paiebil aignop
and gentle pressure is used to remove as much bile as possible. If 
 aul pue saanieb!l ot jeisip paasuenl uaul s! pnp ysho aul 'sdi
the bile is inspissated, suction through a needle may be impossible 
gallbladder is submitted for histopathologic analysis and bile is
 aul Aidua ol pawojad aq oi aey Aeu Awonoisoaloup aul pue
submitted for culture.3
gallbladder. The gallbladder should be packed off with sterile lap 
 The abdomen is flushed with warm sterile saline and thoroughly 
 sponges to ensure there is no contamination of the abdomen with
inspected before routine closure.
 bile. An incision is then made along the fundus of the gallbladder 
and the gallbladder is flushed. The cystic and CBDs can be
 cannulated with a red rubber catheter of the appropriate size to
 ensure patency. Cannulating from this direction (normograde) may
be difficult because of the sharp turn the cystic duct usually makes
entering the CBD. If there is any question of patency, the duodenum
should be opened on the antimesenteric border to allow retrograde 
cannulation through the major duodenal papilla (Fig. 31-12). The
gallbladder should be closed in one layer in a simple continuous
inverting (Lembert or Cushing) or simple interrupted pattern using 
absorbable suture (4/0 to 5/0).28.110 The abdomen is flushed 
with warm sterile saline and thoroughly inspected before routine
closure.
Choledochotomy
The area surrounding the CBD is packed with moist gauze to avoid 
Si uoisiou! leuipnbuol v uawopge aun ou leateu Aue jo abeeal 
made along the grossly dilated bile duct. After the material has been
removed, a catheter is passed in a normograde and retrograde
fashion to ensure patency and to flush out any residual debris. This
incision is closed with 4/0 to 6/0 absorbable sutures in a simple
interrupted or simple continuous pattern. If there are concerns
 regarding the diameter of the duct, the incision can be closed 
 transversely. A stent can also be placed to divert bile across this
Figure 31-12 Catheterization of the major duodenal papilla after
incision. This is accomplished by performing a duodenotomy, placing 
a red rubber catheter through the major duodenal papilla and 
duodenotomy.
suturing it in place at the papilla with one to two 4/0 to 5/0
 absorbable simple interrupted sutures. The abdomen is flushed 
with warm sterile saline and thoroughly inspected before routine
Biliary diversion
closure.
Biliary diversion techniques (Box 31-6) include cholecystoduodeno-
sotomy (CCD), cholecystojejunostomy, and choledochoenterostomy.
These techniques are used most commonly for EHBTO, neoplasia of
the CBD, and trauma. CCD is a more physiologic technique as it
Cholecystectomy
empties bile into the duodenum where it usually is released. Cultures
of bile and biopsies of any masses and liver should be obtained at
Removal of the gallbladder (cholecystectomy) (Box 31-5) in cats
surgery. Liver histology will help predict future hepatobiliary compro.
Suzoau 'eiseldoau 'eunen ioy pauad Aquoun isou s!
mise. Complications of these procedures include bile or intestinal
cholecystitis, EHBTO, and cholelithiasis. Laparoscopic cholecystec-
content leakage from the stoma, ascending cholangiohepatitis from
im paie sop ioy saas ase ao u paodan uaaq seu An
intestinal reflux, stoma obstruction, and pancreatic exocrine insuff-
aie pue sies u panodai uaaq iou sey aniuupat sul u'salanonu
must be taken that the surgeon be absolutely convinced the major
ciency can be treated by supplementation with pancreatic enzymes.
duodenal papilla and CBD are patent before performing this proce-
 The most important factor for success when performing these tech-
 dure because this technique does not allow for catheterization of these
niques is to create an appropriate sized stoma between the gallbladder
structures.
and the intestine. Contraction of approximately 50% should be
354
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
Box 31-6 Biliary diversion techniques
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a cranial midline
in a simple continuous or simple interrupted pattern. The caudal
abdominal approach is made.
ventral incision lines are closed to complete the anastomosis.
Special attention is paid to the knot security at both ends of the
Cholecystoduodenostomy
anastomosis in continuous patterns as this is the most likely area for
CCD is performed by positioning the duodenum next to the
leakage.
gallbladder. The gallbladder is completely dissected from the hepatic
 An alternative technique is to use the Roux-en-Y loop.7.110 A
fossa as described previously to decrease the tension along the suture
segment of jejunum is anastomosed to the gallbladder as previously
line.7 The gallbladder and duodenum are packed off with moistened 
described but the oral aspect of the jejunal loops is transected and 
lap sponges or gauze to minimize leakage of bile and intestinal
sutured closed. The jejunum just caudal to the duodenum is then 
contents. An incision of approximately 2.5-3 cm in length is made in
 anastomosed to this segment of jejunum approximately 40 cm aboral 
lolew aut alejnuuen ol apew Aljlensn s! iduale ue pue wnuaponp auf 
to the gallbladder anastomosis.
duodenal papilla to confirm that an obstruction is present. If neoplasia 
Choledochoenterostomy
is the suspected cause of an obstruction, biopsies of the papilla or CBD
are performed. Then an incision of the same length is made in the 
Choledochoenterostomy should only be performed if the CBD is
gallbladder to lie parallel to the duodenal incision. Stay sutures placed 
dilated to at least 1 cm and a stoma of approximately 2.5 cm can be
at the cranial and caudal aspects of these incisions can aid in
created.? The CBD is isolated as described previously and transected 
[esaop leluen aul buunins buunp uoendiuew pue uojezliens
 at the area of greatest dilation. Then a longitudinal incision of
incision line is closed with 4/0 synthetic absorbable suture from within
5-10 mm is made in the CBD at the end of the duct. A piece of the
the lumen in a simple continuous or simple interrupted pattern. The 
 alll se loj molle ol pauojisod s! wnunla! yo wnuaponp jewixoad
sisowoiseue aul aiadwon ol paso ane saull uoispu! jeuan epne
tension as possible and a transverse incision is made into the lumen.
spua yiog ie Alunnas jouy aui oi pied s! uojuae lepads (el-le by)
 The length of the incision should be approximately half the diameter
of the anastomosis in continuous patterns as this is the most likely area
 Diauiuks o/s ol o/e busn pawoyad s! sisowoiseue aul aay aul jo
for leakage.
absorbable or monofilament non-absorbable sutures in a simple 
interrupted pattern. Care should be taken if the CBD must be 
Cholecystojejunostomy
resected to try to preserve the major pancreatic duct and all hepatic
CCJ is performed by positioning the jejunum next to the gallbladder. It 
lobar ducts emptying into it. If the pancreatic duct must be ligated,
is not usually necessary to mobilize the gallbladder with this technique
pancreatitis and pancreatic exocrine insufficiency should be
 as the jejunum is not tethered by the duodenocolic ligament and 
anticipated. If neoplasia of the CBD or the major duodenal papilla is 
therefore the incision will not be under tension. Two incisions 
suspected, biopsies should be procured. This procedure does not 
approximately 2.5-3 cm in length are made parallel to each other in
allow for extensive margins so other procedures should be performed
lojew aul te uopnsqo ue 'ulebe anuo wnunla! pue lappejaib aul
if the mass is large.
duodenal papilla is usually confirmed prior to the gallbladder incision 
 After all the procedures described, the abdomen is flushed
 aul uoisui jesiop jeluen aul paaojad ae saisdoig Aessanau lle pue
with warm sterile saline and thoroughly inspected before routine
is closed with 4/0 synthetic absorbable suture from within the lumen
closure.
expected after healing.7 An incision of at least 2.5 cm, approximating
the length of the fundus to the infundibulum, must be created to take
into account the inevitable fibrosis that occurs during healing. This
opening size not only allows for drainage of bile but also of any
refluxed intestinal contents that could lead to severe ascending cholan-
giohepatitis. Cholangiohepatitis must be treated with antibiotics and
usually responds as long as the stoma is not obstructed.
CCD is usually performed by making two parallel incisions in
the gallbladder and duodenum and then suturing the two resultant
apertures together (Box 3l-6). Other authors have reported a tech-
nique in which the gallbladder is frst sutured to the duodenum and
then the incisions are made into the lumens for stoma creation.328
This creates a two-layer closure but there has been no evidence that
this technique is preferable and it adds to surgical trauma as well as
potentially decreases the size of the stoma.7.28.10 A newer technique
recently reported the use of a 30 mm endoscopic gastrointestinal
s sop s ui a e uad on aaap sueis () sisouiseue
The overall survival rate in this study was 64%, which is similar to
 other studies but this technique has not been reported in cats.
Figure 31-13 Cholecystoduodenostomy.
Cholecystojejunostomy (CCI) can be performed in a similar manner
to CCD but leads to bile being emptied into the jejunum, which is
less physiologic Maldigestion of lipids and an increased incidence in
duodenal ulceration have been described with this technique.37 An
alternative technique in which an isoperistaltic antireflux (Roux-en-Y)
355
Section
5
The Abdomen
loop is utilized have also been described ( Box 31-6).7.10 This technique
is performed to decrease or prevent intestinal reflux into the biliary
HEPATOBILIARY SURGICAL COMPLICATIONS
system but may lead to overgrowth of bacteria due to stagnant intes-
tinal contents or short bowel syndrome, as the resected segment is
Hemorrhage is the most common complication reported in both
usually more than half the length of the jejunum.?
human and canine patients following liver lobectomy.141 Following
Choledochoenterostomy (Box 3l-6) is best performed if the CBD
liver biopsy or lobectomy, patients should be monitored closely for
is dilated to at least 1 cm and a stoma of approximately 2.5 cm can
bleeding and serial measurement of packed cell volume is warranted.
be created.? The size of the CBD in small animals makes choledoch-
Intraoperative techniques to control acute hemorrhage, such as tem-
oenterotomies diffcult Care should be taken if the CBD must be
porary occlusion of the hepatic artery and portal vein are detailed in
resected to try to preserve the major pancreatic duct and all
Box 3l-2. At the time of surgery, several techniques can be used to
hepatic lobar ducts emptying into it. If the pancreatic duct must be
reinforce biopsy or staple lines. Minor bleeding may be controlled
ligated, pancreatitis and pancreatic exocrine insuffciency should be
with electrocautery, hemostatic clips or suture material. A small piece
anticipated.
of absorbable gelatin foam (Gelfoam) can also be used to control
hemorrhage Alternatively, oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel)
Repair of common bile duct trauma
may be used and has an antibacterial effect due to its lower pH.77
Hepatic abscessation in conjunction with the use of gelatin sponges
 The techniques to repair the CBD are dependent on the location and
has been reported.7.16 A study of coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats
severity of the injury. If the injury is severe and distal to the hepatic
with liver disease found that at least one coagulation abnormality was
ducts, the duct should be ligated and a biliary diversion procedure is
present in 82% of feline patients, including prolongation of pro-
recommended (Box 31-6).37 Incidence of leakage and dehiscence is
thrombin time, diminished factor Vll activity, and vitamin K def-
se] siuans jo juauaeid pue 'siedan Aed ioy qu kipaoda
ciency. Cats that had marked increases in alkaline phosphatase activity
described above) across the incision line is recommended by one
reference.7 The ends of the CBD are identified, the edges debrided if
indication, however, that cats have more complications with bleeding
necessary and reapposed, paying close attention to avoid tension as
following hepatic surgery than dogs. Overall rate of complication in
this will lead to an increased risk of stricture The ends are sutured in
dogs following hepatic lobectomies is low, with only three of 18 dogs
a simple interrupted pattern using absorbable suture (5/0 to 6/0).
requiring blood transfusions following surgery. l5 No similar data for
feline patients is available.
Sphincterotomy/plasty
Other postoperative considerations include close monitoring fol-
lowing anesthetic recovery due to the increased half-life of many drugs
Sphincterotomy is a procedure performed through a duodenotomy
in animals with hepatic dysfunction.° Additionally, transient hypogly-
in which the duodenal surface of the major duodenal papilla is
cemia may occur within 48 hours of partial hepatectomy. Postopera-
enlarged.7 The sphincter mechanism is destroyed by this procedure
tive glucose supplementation should be considered with large
and intestinal reflux is expected. Indications are limited to causes of
resections. Other reported postoperative metabolic alterations follow-
intraluminal obstructions (partial or complete), which are rare
ing hepatectomy include glucagon elevation, hypoalbuminemia and
an increase in ALP and ALT concentrations following removal of 70%
a routine duodenotomy, the major duodenal papilla is identified and
of the liver in dogs.?
cannulated. The catheter is then removed and one blade of a Metzen-
baum or Iris scissor is placed within the intraluminal bile duct and
intravenous fluid support, with close monitoring of protein levels and
incised through the sphincter and duodenal mucosa. This incision is
 blood pressure. As mentioned previously, many of these patients have
not full thickness through the wall of the bile duct or duodenum and
diffculty maintaining normal blood pressure and will require inter-
careful attention should be paid to try to avoid the pancreatic duct,
ventions such as vasopressor support Some patients will require criti-
which enters at the same location. Sphincteroplasty utilizes the same
cal care postoperatively involving blood or plasma transfusions and
technique as above except that the incised mucosa of the bile duct is
enteral or parenteral nutrition. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are of
sutured to the incised mucosa of the duodenum with fine (6/0)
special importance to animals undergoing biliary diversion surgeries
absorbable suture This technique has not been reported in cats but
due to the potential for ascending infections. Administration of gas-
does carry the potential advantage of maintaining the stoma for longer
troprotectants such as sucralfate and pepcid are recommended due to
periods of time.?
the high incidence of gastrointestinal ulceration.
REFERENCES
1.
 Zawie DA, Shaker E. Diseases of the
3. Fossum Tw. Surgery of the liver. In:
6. Center S. Diseases of the gallbladder
liver. In: Sherding RG, editor The cat
 Fossum TW, editor. Small animal surgery.
and biliary tree. In: Guillford WA,
disease and clinical management, 1st ed,
3rd ed, vol. 1. St Louis: Mosby: 2007.
Center SA, williams DA, Meyer DJ.
vol. 2. New York: Churchill Livingston;
p. 531-59.
editors. Strombeck's small animal
1989. p. 1015-36.
4.
Swann HM, Brown DC. Hepatic lobe
 gastroenterology. 3rd ed.
 Done SH, Goody PC, Evans AE.
torsion in 3 dogs and a cat. Vet Surg
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996.
Stickland NC. The cat. In: Done SH,
2001;30:482-6.
p. 860-88.
Goody PC, Evans AE, Stickland NC.
5.
 Evans HE. The digestive apparatus and
7.
 Martin RA, Lanz Ol, Tobias KM. Liver
editors. Veterinary anatomy of the
abdomen. In: Evans HE, editor. Miller's
and biliary system. In: Slatter D, editor.
dog and cat, 1st ed, vol. 3.
anatomy of the dog, 3rd ed, vol. 1.
Textbook of small animal surgery, 3rd
London: Mosby-Wolfe; 1996.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993.
ed, vol. 1. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003.
p. 10.22-10.23.
p. 451-8.
p. 708-26.
356
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
8. Moores AL, Gregory SP. Duplex
21.
 Gaschen L Update on hepatobiliary
35.
Buote NJ, Mitchell SL, Penninck D, et al.
gallbladder associated with
imaging. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Cholecystoenterostomy for treatment of
choledocholithiasis, cholecystitis,
Pract 2009;39:439-67.
extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction in
gallbladder rupture and septic peritonitis
Park Sl, Han JK, Kim TK, Choi Bl.
cats: 22 cases [1994-2003]. J Am Vet
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2007;48:
 Three-dimensional spiral CT
Med Assoc 2006;228:1376-82.
404-9.
cholangiography with minimum
 36. Mayhew PD, Holt DE, McLear RC,
9. Zawie DA, Garvey MS. Feline hepatic 
intensity projection in patients with
Washabau RJ. Pathogenesis and outcome
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
suspected obstructive biliary disease:
of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in
Pract 1984;14:1201-30.
comparison with percutaneous
cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:
10. Neer TM. A review of disorders of the
transhepatic cholangiography. Abdom
247-53.
gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary
Imaging 2001;26:281-6.
37.
 Green J, Better O. Systemic hypotension
tract in the dog and cat. I Vet Int Med
23.
 Fleischmann D, Ringl H, Schofl R, et al.
and renal failure in obstructive jaundice
1992;6:186-92.
Three-dimensional spiral CT
- mechanistic and therapeutic aspects.
11.
Smith SA, Biller DS, Kraft SL, et al.
cholangiography in patients with
J Am Soc Nephrol 1995;5:1853-71.
Diagnostic imaging of biliary
suspected obstructive biliary disease:
38.
Beatty JA, Barrs VR, Martin PA, et al.
obstruction. Compend Cont Educ
comparison with endoscopic retrograde
 cholangiography. Radiology 1996;198:
 Spontaneous hepatic rupture in six cats
Pract Vet 1998;20:1225-34.
with systemic amyloidosis. J Small Anim
12. Wnigley RH. Radiographic and
861-68.
Pract 2002;43:355-63.
ultrasonographic diagnosis of liver
 24. Spillmann T, Happonen I, Kahkonen T.
39.
 Krige JE, Bornman PC, Terblanche J.
diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
et al. Endoscopic retrograde cholangio-
Liver trauma in 446 patients. S Afr J Surg
North Am Small Anim Pract 1985;15:
pancreatography in healthy beagles. Vet 
1997;35:10-15.
21-38.
Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:97-104.
40. Zatelli A, D'lppolito P, Bonfanti U, Zini 
13. Nakamura K, Takagi S, Sasaki N, et al.
25. Spillman T, Schnell-Kretschmer H,
E. Ultrasound-assisted drainage and
Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography for
 Dick M, et al. Endoscopic retrograde
 alcoholization of hepatic and renal cysts:
 cholangio-pancreatography in dogs with
characterization of canine focal liver
22 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
lesions. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2010;51:
chronic gastrointestinal problems. Vet
2007;43:112-16.
79-85.
Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:293-9.
41.
Terada N, Shimizu T, Imai Y, et al.
14. Hittmair KM, Vielgrader HD, Loupal G.
26.
Bjorling DE, Prasse KW, Holmes RA.
Benign, non-parasitic hepatic cyst 
Ulltrasonographic evaluation of
Partial hepatectomy in dogs. Compend
causing obstructive jaundice. Intern Med
gallbladder wall thickness in cats. Vet
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1985;7:
1993;32:857-60.
Rad Ultrasound 2001;42:149-55.
257-63.
42. Washizu M, Kobayashi K, Misaka K,
15. Gaillot HA, Penninck DG, Webster CR,
27.
Posner LP, Asakawa M, Erb HN. Use of
et al. Surgery of hepatic cysts in a cat.
Crawford S. Ultrasonographic features of 
 propofol for anesthesia in cats with
J Vet Med Sci 1992;54:1051-3.
 extrahepatic biliary obstruction in 30
primary hepatic lipidosis: 44 cases
(1995-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
43.
 Friend El, Niles ID, williams JM.
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2007;48:
2008;232:1841-3.
Omentalisation of congenital liver cysts
439-47.
in a cat. Vet Rec 2001;149:275-6.
16. Savary-Bataille KCM, Bunch SE,
28.
 Bjorling DE. Surgical management of
hepatic and biliary disease in cats.
44.
Liptak JM, Bissett SA, Allan GS, et al.
Spaulding KA, et al. Percutaneous 
Compend North Am Small Anim
Hepatic cysts incarcerated in a
ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis in
1991;9:1419-25.
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 2003;17:
hermia. J Feline Med Surg 2002;4:123-5.
298-303.
29.
.Utkan ZN, Utkan T, Sanioglu Y, Gonillu
 NN. Effects of experimental obstructive
45.
Sergeeff Js, Armstrong Pl, Bunch SE.
17. Wagner KA, Hartmann FA, Trepanier LA.
jaundice on contractile responses of
Hepatic abscesses in cats: 14 cases
Bacterial culture results from liver.
dog isolated blood vessels: role of
[1985-2002). J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:
gallbladder, or bile in 248 dogs and
endothelium and duration of bile duct
295-300.
cats evaluated for hepatobiliary disease:
1998-2003. J Vet Intern Med 2007;21:
ligation. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol
46. Balint TD, Bailey BM, Mendelson KG,
2000;27:339-44.
 Pofahl W. Hepatic abscess: Current 
417-24.
30. Schafer J, d'Almeida MS, Weisman H,
concepts in diagnosis and treatment.
18. Brain PH, Barrs VR, Martin P, et al.
Lautt ww. Hepatic blood volume
Curr Surg 2001;58:381-4.
Feline cholecystitis and acute
responses and compliance in cats with
47.
Perez B, Velasco RN, Marine RE. Solitary
neutrophilic cholangitis: clinical
long-term bile duct ligation. Hepatology
pyogenic abscess of the left lobe of the
fndings, bacterial isolates and response
1993;8:969-77.
Jiver Rev Sanid Milit Argent 1953;52:
to treatment in six cases. J Feline Med
Surg 2006;8:91-103.
31.
 Friedman LS. The risk of surgery in
5-8.
 patients with liver disease. Hepatology
48. Klatchko BA, Schwartz Sl. Diagnostic
19. Boothe HW, Boothe DM, Komkov A,
Hightower D. Use of hepatobiliary
1999;29:1617-23.
and therapeutic approaches to pyogenic
32.
Green J, Beyar R, Sideman S, et al. The
 abscess of the liver. Surg Gynecol Obstet
scintigraphy in the diagnosis of
extrahepatic biliary obstruction in
jaundiced heart: a possible explanation
1989:168:332-6.
dogs and cats: 25 cases [1982-1989).
for postoperative shock in obstructive
49. Farrar ET, Washabau RJ, Saunders HM.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1992;201:
jaundice. Surgery 1986;100:14-20.
Hepatic abscesses in dogs: 14 cases
134-41.
 Rege RV. Adverse effects of biliary
(1982-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc
33.
Head LL, Daniel GB. Correlation
obstruction: implications for treatment
1996;208:243-7.
20.
between hepatobiliary scintigraphy and
of patients with obstructive jaundice. Am
50.
 Zatelli A, Bonfanti U, Zini E, et al.
surgery or postmortem examination
J Roentol 1995;164:287-93.
Percutaneous drainage and
fndings in dogs and cats with
34.
Bomzon A, Rosenberg M, Gali D, et al.
alcoholization of hepatic abscesses in
extrahepatic biliary obstruction, partial 
Systemic hypotension and decreased
fve dogs and a cat. I Am Anim Hosp
obstruction, or patency of the biliary
 pressor response in dogs with chronic
Assoc 2005;41:34-8.
system: 18 cases [1995-2004). J Am Vet
bile duct ligation. Hepatology 1986;6:
51.
 Schwartz SG, Mitchell SL, Keating IH,
Med Assoc 2005;227:1618-24.
595-600.
Chan DL. Liver lobe torsion in dogs: 13
357
Section
5
The Abdomen
cases [1995-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
68. Willard MD, Weeks BR, Johnson M.
hyperthyroidism in a cat. J Feline Med
2006;228:242-7.
 Fine-needle aspirate cytology suggesting
Surg 2001;3:247-52.
 52. Morin M, Sauvageau R, Phaneuf JB, et al.
hepatic lipidosis in four cats with
85.
Harvey AM, Holt PE, Barr Fl, et al.
 Torsion of abdominal organs in sows: a
infiltrative hepatic disease. J Feline Med 
 Treatment and long-term follow-up of
report of 36 cases. Can Vet J 1984;25:
Surg 1999;1:215-20.
extrahepatic biliary obstruction with
440-2.
69
Vasanjee SC, Bubenik LJ, Hosgood G.
bilirubin cholelithiasis in a Somali cat
 53. Turner TA, Brown CA, Wilson JH, et al.
 Bauer R. Evaluation of hemorrhage.
with pyruvate kinase deficiency I Fel 
Hepatic lobe torsion as a cause of colic
sample size, and collateral damage for
Med Surg 2007;9:424-31.
 in a horse. Vet Surg 1993;22:301-4.
five hepatic biopsy methods in dogs. Vet
86. Eich CS, Ludwig LL. The surgical
54. Tate PS. Hepatic torsion and dislocation
Surg 2006;35:86-93.
 treatment of cholelithiasis in cats: a
with hypotension and colonic
70.
Rothuizen J, Twedt DC. Liver biopsy 
study of nine cases. J Am Anim Hosp
obstruction. Am Surg 1993;59:455-8.
techniques. Vet Clin North Am Small
Assoc 2002;38:290-5.
55.
 McConkey S, Briggs C, Solano M, Illanes
Anim Pract 2009;39:469-80.
87.
 Naus MJA, Jones BR. Cholelithiasis and
O. Liver torsion and associated bacterial
71.
 Bravo AA, Sheth SG, Chopra S. Liver
choledocholithiasis in a cat. NZ Vet I
biopsy. N Engl I Med 2001;344:
1978;26:160-1.
peritonitis in a dog. Can Vet J 1997;38:
438-9.
495-500.
88.
 Jorgensen LS, Pentlarge Vw, Flanders JA,
 Balkman C. Hepatobiliary neoplasia in
72.
 Mayhew P. Surgical views: techniques for
Harvey Hl. Recurrent cholelithiasis in a
56.
 dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small 
 laparoscopic and laparoscopic assisted
cat. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 1987;9:
Anim Pract 2009;39:617-25.
 biopsy of abdominal organs. Compend
265-70.
 Patnaik AK, Lieberman PH, Erlandson
Contin Educ Vet 2009;31:170-6.
89.
Best EJ, Bush Dl, Dye C. Suspected
57.
73.
Cole TL, Center SA, Flood SN, et al.
 choledochal cyst in a domestic shorthair
 RA, Antonescu C. Hepatobiliary
neuroendocrine carcinoma
 Diagnostic comparison of needle and
cat. J Fel Med Surg 2010;12:814-17.
in cats: a clinicopathologic.
wedge biopsy specimens of the liver in
90.
 Grand JG, Doucet M, Albaric O, Bureau
immunohistochemical, and
dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
S. Cyst of the common bile duct in a cat.
ultrastructural study of 17 cases. Vet
2002;220:1483-90.
Aust Vet J 2010;88:268-71.
Pathol 2005;42:331-7.
74. Proot SJ, Rothuizen J. High complication
91.
Stimson El, Cook WT, Smith MM, et al.
58. Lawrence Hl, Erb HN, Harvey HJ.
rate of an automatic Tru-Cut biopsy gun
 Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in the
 device for liver biopsy in cats. J Vet
duodenum of a cat. I Am Anim Hosp
 Nonlymphomatous hepatobiliary masses
in cats: 41 cases (1972 to 1991). Vet Surg
 Intern Med 2006;20:1327-33.
Assoc 2000;36:332-6.
1994;23:365-8
75. Petre SP, McClaran JK, Bergman PJ.
92.
Geigy CA, Dandrieux J, Miclard J, et al.
 Schuh JC. Hepatic nodular
 Monette S. Safety and efficacy of
 Extranodal B-cell lymphoma in urinary
59.
laparoscopic hepatic biopsy. J Am Vet 
 bladder with cytological evidence of
myelolipomatosis (myelolipomas]
Med Assoc 2012;240:181-5.
concurrent involvement of the gall 
associated with a peritoneo-pericardial
bladder in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. J Comp
76.
Tobias KM. Liver biopsy. In: Tobias KM,
Pathol 1987;97:231-5.
editor. Manual of small animal soff
2010;51:280-7.
tissue surgery, 1st ed, vol. 1. Ames:
93.
Haney DR, Christiansen JS, Toll J. Severe 
60. McCaw DL, da Silva Curiel JM, Shaw DP
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010. p. 131-2.
 cholestatic liver disease secondary to
Hepatic myelolipomas in a cat. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1990;197:243-4.
77. Risselada M, Ellison Gw, Bacon Nl, et al.
liver fluke (Platynosomum concinnum)
Comparison of 5 surgical techniques for
 infection in three cats. J Am Anim Hosp
61.
 Patnaik AK. A morphologic and
Assoc 2006;42:234-37.
immunocytochemical study of hepatic
partial liver lobectomy in the dog for
intraoperative blood loss and surgical
94.
Della Santa D, Schweighauser A, Forterre 
neoplasms in cats. Vet Pathol 1992;29:
time. Vet Surg 2010;39:856-62.
 F, Lang l. Extrahepatic biliary tract
405-15.
 obstruction secondary to a duodenal
62.
Gabor LJ, Malik R, Canfeld PJ.
78.
 Covey IL, Degner DA, Jackson AH, et al.
Hilar liver resection in dogs. Vet Surg
foreign body in a cat. Vet Radiol
Clinical and anatomical features of
Ulltrasound 2007;48:448-50.
lymphosarcoma in 118 cats. Aust Vet J
2009;38:104-11.
95.
 Jenkins CC, Lewis DD, Brock KA, et al.
1998;76:725-32.
79. Lewis DD, Bellenger CR, Lewis DT, Latter
 Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
63.
 Kiselow MA, Rassnick KM, McDonough
 MR. Hepatic lobectomy in the dog A
associated with Platynosomum
 SP, et al. Outcome of cats with low-grade
comparison of stapling and ligation
 concinnum in a cat. Compend Contin
lymphocytic lymphoma: 41 cases
 techniques. Vet Surg 1990;19:221-5.
Educ Pract Vet 1988;10:628-32.
(1995-2005). J Am Vet Med AssoC
 80. Bellah JR. Surgical stapling of the spleen,
96.
 Cornell KK, Jakovljevic S, Waters DJ.
2008;232:405-10.
 pancreas, liver and urogenital tract. Vet
 et al. Extrahepatic Biliary Obstruction
64. Whiteley MB, Feeney DA, Whiteley LO,
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
secondary to diaphragmatic hernia in
 Hardy RM. Ultrasonographic appearance
1994;24:375-94.
two cats. J Am Anim Hosp AssoC
of primary and metastatic canine
81.
Lewis DD, Ellison GW, Bellah JR. Partial
1993;29:502-7.
hepatic tumors A review of 48 cases.
 hepatectomy using stapling instruments.
97.
 Furneaux Rw. A series of six cases of
J Ultrasound Med 1989;8:621-30.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1987;23:
sphincter of Oddi pathology in the cat
65. Weisse C. Hepatic chemoembolization: a
597-602.
[2008-2009). I Feline Med and Surg
 novel regional therapy. Vet Clin North
82.
.Bennett SL, Milne M, Slocombe RF.
2010;12:794-801.
Am Small Anim Pract 2009;39:627-30.
Landon BP. Gallbladder mucocoele and
98.
Herman BA, Brawer RS, Murtaugh RJ.
66. Rawlings CA, Howerth EW. Obtaining
concurrent hepatic lipidosis in a cat.
 Hackner SG. Therapeutic percutaneous
quality biopsies of the liver and kidney.
Aust Vet J 2007;85:397-400.
ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis 
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2004;40:352-8.
83.
.van Geffen C, Savary-Bataille K, Chiers 
in three dogs with extrahepatic biliary
Wang KY, Panciera DL, Al-Rukibat RK,
K, et al. Bilirubin cholelithiasis and
obstruction and pancreatitis. J Am Vet
 Radi ZA. Accuracy of ultrasound-guided
haemosiderosis in an anaemic pyruvate
Med Assoc 2005;227:1782-86.
fne-needle aspiration of the liver and
kinase-deficient Somali cat. J Small Anim
99.
 Bacon NJ, White RS. Extrahepatic biliary
cytologic fndings in dogs and cats: 97
Pract 2008;49:479-82.
tract surgery in the cat: a case series and
cases [1990-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
84.
.Elwood CM, White RN, Freeman K.
review. J Small Anim Pract 2003;44:
2004;224:75-8.
White M. Cholelithiasis and
231-35.
858
Liver and biliary tract
Chapter
31
100. Ludwig LL, Mcloughlin MA, Graves TK,
106.
.Lawrence D, Bellah JR, Meyer DJ, Roth L.
112
 Tanger CH, Turrell JM, Hobson HP.
Crisp MS. Surgical treatment of bile
 Temporary bile diversion in cats with
Complications associated with
peritonitis in 24 dogs and 2 cats: a
 experimental extrahepatic bile duct
 proximal duodenal resection and
retrospective study (1987-1994). Vet
obstruction. Vet Surg 1992;21:446-51.
cholecystoduodenostomy in two cats.
Surg 1997;26:90-8.
107.
Murphy SM, Rodriguez ID, McAnulty JF.
Vet Surg 1982;11:60-4.
101.
Aly EAH, Johnson CD. Preoperative
 Minimally invasive cholecystostomy in
113.
Morrison S, Prostredny I, Roa D.
biliary drainage before resection in 
the dog: evaluation of placement 
 Retrospective study of 28 cases of
obstructive jaundice. Dig Surg 2000;18:
techniques and use in extrahepatic
cholecystoduodenostomy performed
84-9.
biliary obstruction. Vet Surg 2007;36:
using endoscopic gastrointestinal
102.
 van Sonnenberg E, D'Agostino HB.
675-83.
anastomosis stapling equipment.
Casola G, et al. The benefits of
108. Mayhew PD, Weisse CW. Treatment 
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008;44:
percutaneous cholecystostomy for
 of pancreatitis-associated extrahepatic
10-18.
decompression of selected cases of
 biliary tract obstruction by choledochal
114.
Voyles CR, Vogel SB. Hepatic resection 
 obstructive jaundice. Radiology
stenting in seven cats. J Small Anim Pract 
using stapling devices to control the
1990;176:15-18.
2008;49:133-8.
hepatic veins. Am J Surg 1989;158:
103.
 Pitt HA, Cameron IL, Postier RG, Gadacz
109. Mayhew PD, Richardson RW, Mehler SJ.
459-60.
TR. Factors affecting mortality in biliary
 et al. Choledochal tube stenting for
115.
Kosovsky JE, Manfra-Marretta S,
 tract surgery. Am I Surg 1981;:141:
 decompression of the extrahepatic
Matthiesen DT, et al. Results of
66-72.
 portion of the biliary tract in dogs: 13
partial hepatectomy in 18 dogs with
104.
Kawarada Y, Higashiguchi T, Yokoi H.
cases [2002-2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc
hepatocellular carcinoma. J Am Anim
 et al. Preoperative biliary drainage
2006;228:1209-14.
Hosp Ass0c 1989;25:203-6.
in obstructive jaundice.
110.
 Blass CE. Surgery of the extrahepatic
116.
Lipowitz Al, Blue J. Spleen. In: Slatter
Hepatogastroenterology 1995;42:
 biliary tract. Compend Contin Educ
 DH, editor. Textbook of small animal
300-7.
1983;10:801-9.
surgery, 2nd ed, vol. 1. Philadelphia: WB
105. Sewnath ME, Karsten TM, Prins MH,
111.
 Mayhew PD, Mehler Sl, Radhakrishnan 
Saunders; 1993. p. 948-61.
et al. A meta-analysis on the effcacy of
A. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy for 
117.
Lisciandro SC, Hohenhaus A, Brooks M.
 preoperative biliary drainage for tumors
 management of uncomplicated gall 
Coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats
cusing obstructive jaundice. Ann Surg
 bladder mucocele in six dogs. Vet Surg 
with naturally occurring liver disease.
2002;236:17-27.
2008;37:625-30.
J Vet Intern Med 1998;12:71-5.
359
32
pter
Portosystemic shunts
V. Lipscomb, M.S. Tivers
'Portosystemic shunting is a broad term that has several possible
Buuus suisisod jo asne u au se u ssne suapun
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
is a congenital portosystemic shunt (CPSS), although even this is seen
uncommonly, with a reported incidence of 2.5 per 10 000 cats treated
Signalment and clinical signs
in referral practice. This chapter provides a comprehensive summary
 of feline shunts, their diagnosis and surgical management.
Cats with a CPSS are typically young (under six months of age) but
the condition is also recognized in mature animals which may not
have exhibited clinical signs for months or years.16.7,0,1,415.1-20
Although the majority of affected cats are domestic short-
SURGICAL ANATOMY
haired breeds, a number of pedigree breeds have been suggested
as being predisposed, including the Persian, Himalayan, and
A CPSS is an abnormal communicating vessel between the portal
vasculature (draining the stomach, intestines, spleen, and pancreas)
The clinical signs associated with a CPSS can be variable and non-
and the systemic vasculature. The abnormal vessel results in the diver-
specific Signs often wax and wane and can be intermittent. Some cats
sion of blood away from the portal blood system into the systemic
can essentially appear 'normal' and the condition may only be identi-
system, thus bypassing the liver and resulting in high levels of waste
fied as a result of abnormalities seen on routine blood tests in older
uoeinii siaisis au un suasai tuaq (enuoe se ns) sonoid
cats. However, the vast majority of cats (93-100%) present with some
which manifest clinically as signs of hepatic encephalopathy. Cats
degree of neurologic abnormality due to hepatic encephalopathy:
[o a eia ial aui on Ains pooa pni ey osie ssd u
including seizures, ataxia, central blindness behavioral changes.
vein and therefore the liver is not stimulated to develop in a normal
-omau asaul ozzlrz-ssiouan pue susad peay Kiual uossaase
fashion. This results in a small, underdeveloped liver and functional
logical signs are typically intermittent and can be triggered by or
hepatic insuffciency.
Normal feline portal vein and caudal vena cava anatomy is depicted
The pathogenesis of hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is poorly under-
in Fig. 32-1. CPSS can take the form of an extrahepatic (outside the
stood and it is likely that multiple factors are involved. HE results
hepatic parenchyma) or an intrahepatic (lying partly or wholly within
from the failure of the liver to remove toxic products of gut metabo-
the hepatic parenchyma) vessel. Extrahepatic CPSSs are the most
0 iaall aul jo amy aui oy ose pue pooa ieod au woy wsl
jsou auu-i'sies ui sssdo yo %ooi-e ioy suunome 'uoy uouuon
 produce factors important for normal brain function. One of the
 commonly reported extrahepatic CPSS in cats is an abnormal vessel
 major factors contributing to HE is ammonia but several other factors
connecting the left gastric vein to the caudal vena cava9.1213 (Fig.
 have been implicated including aromatic amino acids (phenylalanine.
32-1B). Other extrahepatic shunt morphologies described in cats
 tyrosine, tryptophan, and methionine), central nervous system inhibi-
au uaamaq slassa sunus pue ieaesonod snoshze-onod apnu
tors (gamma-aminobutyric acid [GABA] and GABA receptors), mer-
colonic vein or gastrosplenic vein and caudal vena cava.7,8.10,12,14,15 The
captans, and increased short chain fatty acids. It is believed that
majority of intrahepatic CPSSs in cats are due to a patent ductus
 several of these factors act synergistically in a given animal with HE
venosus (PDV), which results from failure of this normal embryonic
maq suis ieu u un an ua aed au s pue
vessel, on the left side of the liver, to close after birth16.17 (Fig. 32-1C).
individuals.
Right-sided and centrally located intrahepatic shunts have also been
 Another hallmark of CPSS is ptyalism (hypersalivation), which is
reported in cats.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00032-9
361
Section
/5
The Abdomen
C
 Figure 32-1 Feline portal vein anatomy and congenital portosystemic shunts. (A} Normal feline portal vein and caudal vena cava anatomy. (B) The
intrahepatic CPss in cats is a PDV, which empties into a venous dilatation (ampulla) just prior to entering the caudal vena cava in a post-hepatic
location in front of the diaphragm.
a low body condition score, have copper-colored irises (13-64%)
(Fig. 32-2), or intolerance to anesthetics or sedatives. l6.7,10,12,13,18,20
Other clinical signs include gastrointestinal signs (vomiting and 
diarrhea), urinary tract signs (dysuria, hematuria or stranguria relating
 to urate urolithaisis), and polyuria/polydipsia, but these signs are not
 as commonly seen in cats as in dogs. l6.7.12
Biochemical and hematological
investigations
Biochemical and hematological changes are typically mild and non-
specific and may be largely unremarkable in cats with CPSS. Perform-
ing routine hematological and biochemical analysis of blood may be
 most useful to rule out other differential diagnoses in the investigation 
 of cats with suspected CPss. The most common abnormality is low
urea due to reduced synthesis of urea in the liver as the product of
minemia, hypoproteinemia, hypoglycemia and anemia are less fre-
not been any studies examining clotting abnormalities in cats with
CPSS but these have been reported in affected dogs. 23,24 The presence
 of ammonium biurate crystals in urine sediment increases the suspi-
cion of CPss.
A bile acid stimulation test is the most accurate test available to
 measure liver function for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease It is
Figure 32-2 Copper-colored irises are commonly seen in cats with a
very reliable for the diagnosis of portosystemic shunting in cats, with
CPSS
362
 Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
ZE
a sensitivity of 58-100% (preprandial) and 100% (postprandial), and
eg., hepatic artery to portal vein, and treatment is by removal of the
liver lobe(s) containing the abnormal vascular structures.
in the majority of cats with CPSS but can occasionally
be
normal.6 10.12,14,1225 The sensitivity and specificity of ammonia for the
Diagnostic imaging
diagnosis of CPsS in cats has been reported as 83% and 86%, respec-
tively.25 Ammonia is very labile so samples must be analyzed very
Although surgery often allows the direct diagnosis of a CPSS, in most
quickly e.g., using a 'point of care' ammonia analyzer, which has been
 instances some form of preoperative imaging is performed to both
shown to have potential in cats.27
confrm the diagnosis before electing to proceed with surgery and to
acquire information regarding the nature of the shunt to help with
Differential diagnoses
surgical planning.
Plain abdominal radiographs may be performed as part of a diag.
The most likely diagnosis for portosystemic shunting is a CPSS; other
 nostic workup but cannot be used alone to diagnose a CPss. Abdomi-
very rare differentials include multiple acquired portosystemic shunts
nal ultrasonography can be extremely useful, particularly as it is
(secondary to severe liver disease and portal hypertension), primary
relatively inexpensive and non-invasive, but unfortunately it is highly
portal vein hypoplasia, and arteriovenous fistula.234 Management of
panodai uaaq seu (e-ze su) Auqdeigouosein ruapuadap ioieiado
multiple acquired shunts involves treatment of the underlying liver
to have a sensitivity and specificity of loo% for shunt diagnosis and
disease if possible and medical management of HE (Table 32-1).
 type in one study,2 whereas other studies have only identifed approx-
Primary portal vein hypoplasia was previously called microvascular
Audes iod un iad ort'sie u sd yo o-t ane
dysplasia and is described as microscopic portosystemic shunting
with technetium pertechnetate (??Te"O4-) can be very reliable in the
within the liver which results in similar clinical signs to animals with
diagnosis of CPss in cats, with good sensitivity and specifcityl1228.29
a gross CPSS and is managed using medical therapy for HE (Table
[see Chapter 8). However, this is not readily available and its use may
be limited in some countries by radiation safety guidelines and avail-
with hepatic fbrosis and portal hypertension and this can also lead
to the development of multiple acquired shunts. Primary portal vein
aaey aeu i ynoue 'uuueid ieigins aaeadoaid ioy junus a su!
hypoplasia is a specific disease that should not be confused with
 a role in the follow up of surgically treated cats to assess for continued
underdevelopment (unfortunately also referred to as hypoplasia) of
shunting.29
the portal vein. Cats with an extrahepatic CPss often have an
 Many different techniques involving contrast imaging have been
underdeveloped/small portal vein secondary to diversion of blood
 described, including cranial mesenteric angiography. splenopor-
flow away from the portal vein into the shunt. Hepatic arteriovenous
fistula is a communication between the arterial and venous systems
into a jejunal vein and imaged using a mobile fluoroscopy unit or
a mobile radiography unit (Fig. 32-4). Intraoperative portography
allows the imaging and surgical attenuation of the shunt to be per-
ou ie aul aao oi Aiissanau au sioae pue Auanuo pag
 radiography for the imaging or the requirement for two procedures.17
Table 32-1 Recommendations for medical therapy in cats
While intraoperative mesenteric portovenography is not essential for
with a CPSS
every case, it is a quick procedure (approximately ten minutes) and
easy to perform with the right equipment.
Medical treatment
Recommendations
Confirmation of the presence of a shunt and its morphology using
 Dietary modification
Highly digestible, highly palatable
portovenography is particularly useful if a CPS could not be identi-
(there are a variety of
Carbohydrate as prime source of calories
fed preoperatively and/or if the shunt is not easily identified at
commercially available
 Protein of high biological value that 
surgery (more likely if the shunt is intrahepatic). Additionally, porto-
hepatic diets which may
meets the cat's needs without being
venography rules out the presence of a second congenital shunt (very
be suitable for cats with
excessive
rare) or multiple acquired shunts (these may be mistaken for a CPSS
(55d)
High levels of branched chain amino
acids and arginine (low levels of aromatic
amino acids and methionine)
Lactulose
0.5-2 ml orally two to three times a day
(ideally cat produces two to three soft
stools daily)
 Antibiotics, choose from:
Obliqu
Ampicillin
10-20 mg/kg orally three times daily
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
12.5 mg/kg orally twice daily
Metronidazole
10 mg/kg orally twice daily
Anti-seizure medication (if needed):
Phenobarbitone
1.5-3 mg/kg orally twice daily (serum
phenobarbitone levels should be
measured two to three weeks after
paisnipe asop aul pue Adeyaul buuens
accordingly. Dose may be tapered
following prolonged period without
seizures (e.g., three to six months)
Figure 32-3 Abdominal ultrasound image of a cat with an extrahepatic
Levetiracetam
20 mg/kg orally three times daily
CPSS. St, stomach; pv, portal vein; *, shunt branching from portal vein
and bypassing the liver. (Courtesy of Chris Lamb.)
Section
[51
The Abdomen
A
B
Figure 32-4 (A) The 'C-arm' of a mobile digital fluoroscopy unit has been positioned around the operating table over the region of the shunt.
(B) Intraoperative portovenograms are then obtained by injecting contrast through a catheter into a jejunal vein.
25.19:08
5.11:05
A
B
 Figure 32-5 Ventrodorsal portovenograms from a cat with a left gastric extrahepatic CPSs. Contrast has been injected through a jejunal vein under
fluoroscopic guidance with digital subtraction. The images are orientated so that cranial is at the top. VC, vena cava; PV, portal vein; S, shunt. (A) The 
bueo iseo ssal) iey ae suue daueui sh pue (d) ua o aul () lass unus ael au yono so iseo au jo Ao
 them compared to the shunt). There is minimal intrahepatic portal vein branching. (B}) Repeat portovenogram following temporary intraoperative 
occlusion of the shunt demonstrates increased contrast opacification of the liver and a vast increase in intrahepatic portal vein branching. There is no
 contrast progressing beyond the point of temporary shunt attenuation.
-aqeu pue Asooudiou sunus supiesan uoeuou paliap pue
after temporary intraoperative occlusion of the shunt confrms the
 patic vasculature development prior to surgery.
correct vessel has been identifed as the shunt and provides an assess-
 ment of the degree of intrahepatic portal vascular branching. which
 may be used to help decide if a CPSS will tolerate complete permanent
PREOPERATIVE STABILIZATION
attenuation ( Fig. 32-5). One study examined the extent of intrahepatic
vasculature development as assessed on portovenography in cats with
 CPSS and found it was useful as a prognostic indicator.
Surgery involving some form of shunt attenuation is the recom-
 There have been reports of the use of computed tomography (CT)
 mended treatment for most cats with a CPss. The purpose of surgery
angiography or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) for diagnos-
is to identify the shunting vessel and to attenuate it in order to redirect
-e I jo asn au yo uodai auo auo ynu szssaop u ss u
blood flow to the liver and improve hepatic function. Thus surgical
yqiey ia sii pausnd uaq sey s ym ie e u yeio
treatment should theoretically offer the best long-term outcome for
techniques will be used increasingly to provide a definitive diagnosis
the individual. There have not been any studies comparing surgical
364
 Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
32
Table 32-2 Treatment protocol for the collapsed/seizuring cat with a suspected CPSS
1. Physical examination and
minimum database
hypoglycemia
 Give IV fluid therapy to correct acid-base deficits, dehydration and/or hypovolemia 
●Supplement with glucose and potassium as necessary
2. If the cat is conscious give
●Lactulose: 0.5-2 ml two to three times daily
oral medication
●Antibiotics: ampicillin (10-20 mg/kg three times daily). amoxicillin-clavulanate (12.5 mg/kg twice daily) or
metronidazole (10 mg/kg twice daily)
 3. If the cat is not conscious or
◆
 Cleansing warm water enema: 10 mL/kg
unable to take oral medication
 Lactulose: retention enema 20 mL/kg of a 3: 7 dilution with water for 30 minutes every six to eight hours
provide parenteral/rectal drugs 
 Antibiotics: Intravenous (recommended) amoxicillin-clavulanate 20 mg/kg every eight hours, or a retention
enema of neomycin 15 mg/kg diluted with water every six hours
Mannitol: 0.25-0.5 g/kg intravenously over 30 minutes (severe cases with cerebral edema)
4. If the cat is seizuring
 [Diazepam: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg intravenously, repeated up to three times] *
Phenobarbitone: A loading dose of up to a maximum of 8-12 mg/kg should be given as 2-3 mg/kg
 boluses intravenously as necessary to control the seizures (allow at least 20-30 minutes between doses and
reassess the cat prior to dosing). Once loaded, phenobarbitone should be continued at 1.5-3 mg/kg every 
12 hours 
●Propofol: 0.5-1 mg/kg bolus intravenously followed by 0.05-0.4 mg/kg/min infusion titrated to effect
● Levetiracetam: 20 mg/kg intravenously or as a retention enema every eight hours followed by same dose
orally once recovered 
*Note: The use of diazepam in cats with a CPss is controversial. See the text for a full explanation
and medical treatment in the cat. However, a study comparing surgical
 Preoperative seizure management
and medical treatment of CPSS in dogs concluded that in terms of
 Overall survival time surgical treatment was preferable.35
Cats can suffer seizures for a variety of reasons and will often receive
diazepam as a frst-line treatment. However, there is some controversy
over the use of diazepam in cats with CPSS due to concerns over
 Stabilization and medical management
increased GABA and GABA receptors in cats with HE. Cats that do not
respond to diazepam and aggressive treatment of HE should be
Many cats with a CPSS show relatively severe clinical signs at the time
treated with phenobarbitone intravenously. Once the cat is stabilized
of diagnosis and medical management is recommended to stabilize
oral phenobarbitone can be started. If seizures are not controlled by
their condition prior to defnitive surgical treatment In one study of
intravenous phenobarbitone administration then it may be necessary
 25 cats managed medically prior to surgery there was no response to
to treat the cat with propofol either by bolus or infusion to control
medical treatment in 12%, a partial response in 56%, and 32% of cats
the seizures for 24-48 hours before attempting downstaging back to
had complete resolution of their clinical signs. Medical management
phenobarbitone alone. Propofol infusions should be used with care
of cats with CPSS treats the signs of HE but does not correct the
in cats as prolonged use is associated with delayed recoveries and may
underlying portosystemic shunting. Medical therapy (see Table 32-1)
in rare cases cause Heinz body anemia. Cats treated with phenobar-
aims to reduce ammonia [and other toxin) levels, which usually sig-
bitone and propofol infusions should be closely monitored, with
nificantly improves the clinical signs of HE.
regular measurerment of pulse rate, respiratory rate, temperature and
 In some instances cats can be presented collapsed, comatose, Or
blood pressure. Endotracheal intubation may be necessary in some
in status epilepticus due to severe HE and in these cats additional
instances. Levetiracetam is a relatively new antiseizure medication that
investigations and therapies are required (Table 32-2). A minimum
has been used in cats, although there are no published reports of its
database (including blood glucose and serum electrolytes) should be
use in cats with HE.3 In cats with severe HE, cerebral edema can
performed to rule out other potential causes of seizure or collapse
 develop and may contribute to neurologic signs. In these situations a
such as electrolyte abnormalities or hypoglycemia and to identify any
single bolus of mannitol can be administered to see if this improves
complicating factors. Cats should be given intravenous fluid therapy
the clinical signs. Mannitol should not be used in severely dehydrated
with appropriate supplementation to correct any hypoperfusion,
 or hypoperfused animals. Monitoring progression and response to
dehydration, or metabolic abnormalities, which may be potentiating
therapy of severely encephalopathic cats may be facilitated by use of
the problem. In a comatose or seizuring cat it will not be possible to
a modifed Glasgow coma scale described in dogs.37
administer drugs orally and parenteral antibiotics are given, although
they are likely to be less efficacious than oral antibiotics. The authors
recommend intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanate but neomycin can
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
retention enema. A warm water cleansing enema is administered prior
to medicated enemas. The cleansing enema will remove feces and
hence reduce ammonia absorption from the colon. If there is evidence
and critical care facilities: advice on anesthetizing cats with a CPSS is
of gastrointestinal hemorrhage then omeprazole (a proton pump
given in Box 32-1. Careful, meticulous planning is required prior to
 inhibitor) is recommended.
Auagiaua ue se pauoyad jou Aleiauag si uoenuane junus Aiagins
365
Section
151
The Abdomen
 Box 32-1 Advice on anesthesia for cats undergoing
Box 32-2 Guidelines for intraoperative changes in
 surgical CPSS attenuation
objective parameters associated with attenuation
of cPSS in cats
 Agents that are metabolized by the liver should be avoided or
used in low doses
Normal portal pressures in cats:
 Opiates can be used for premedication and analgesia with
● 0-14 cm HzO/3-13 mmHg6.12.7,9.22
minimal cardiovascular depression 
Guidelines for acceptable increases in portal pressures associated with
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are contraindicated in cats 
attenuation:
with a CPSS
●Maximum total pressure reading 20-23 cm H2O
Anesthesia can be induced with propofol or alfaxalone, taking
(15-18 mmHg)17,19.40-42
 extra care to use the minimum amount necessary to achieve 
● Maximum total pressure reading not more than double
intubation30
 pre-occlusion level
Isoflurane and sevoflurane are minimally metabolized in the liver
● Increase in pressure reading not greater than 10 cmHz0
 and are therefore good choices for maintenance of anesthesia
(8 mmHg)S21.40-42
 There is a significant risk of hypothermia and steps should be 
loegnou! ue pue Aabins aut buunp ssol jeay azjwuuiu oi uazen
 associated with attenuation:
is extremely useful for recovery
● Maximum decrease in systemic blood pressure 5 mmHg.43
 Although hypoglycemia is not as common in cats as dogs, glucose
ideally no change
should still be monitored perioperatively and supplemented as 
● Maximum decrease in central venous pressure 1 cmHz0.44
necessary
ideally no change
● No significant increase in heart rate
Typical histopathologic changes associated with CPSS include lobular
atrophy, hepatocyte degeneration, reduced or absent portal veins,
arteriole hyperplasia, biliary hyperplasia, dilated lymphatics, and
investigated the relationship. if any, between the histopathologic
saop ul payuap! uaaq sey auou qanouie aono pue sasueup
with CPSS.38,39
 A cat with a CPSS should not be used for breeding and neutering
of affected cats should be considered at the same time as shunt attenu-
ation. Cystic calculi can be removed from affected cats at the same
time as surgical correction of the CPss. If the surgery is prolonged
 Or complicated then both neutering and the removal of calculi may
be postponed until the cat has recovered sufficiently for a second
procedure.
Portal hypertension
Figure 32-6 Grossly. the liver of a cat with a CPSS is usually small and
Normal portal pressure in cats is between 6 and 10 mmHg. Cats with
may demonstrate abnormal color. This picture shows a very pale-colored
a CPSS usually have normal or low portal pressure. Low portal pres-
liver in a cat with a CPSS.
sure in a cat with a CPSS is a result of the majority of the splanchnic
circulation being diverted through the shunt bypassing the portal
 procedure so all the necesary preoperative investigations, blood tests.
caused by obstruction of the portal vein. Some cats with a CPSS toler-
imaging and stabilization should have been conducted, and a com-
 prehensive plan made both for surgery and for the postoperative care.
ate complete occlusion (obstruction) of the portal vein whereas in
others the portal vein is poorly developed (hypoplastic) and unable
The most important intraoperative considerations should include
to accommodatethe increased hepatic blood flow resulting from acute
how to identify the shunt, decide if it is possible to complete or par-
  '  s s s e g 
tially attenuate it, and how to assess portal pressure before and after
rapidly fatal if the vessel is left occluded. Portal hypertension can be
attenuation.
assessed by direct measurement of portal pressures using a catheter
placed in a mesenteric vessel and connected to a manometer or pres-
Concurrent procedures during
sure transducer. There is little published information on acceptable
shunt attenuation
increases in portal pressures in the cat. The authors use a combination
of values extrapolated from the information available in the cat and
Concurrent procedures such as removal of calculi, neutering, and
hepatic biopsy may need to be performed. Liver biopsy is recom-
recommended to monitor arterial blood pressure [ideally directly via
mended at the same time as surgical correction of CPss in cats. This
an arterial catheter) and central venous pressure (via a jugular cathe-
allows assessment of the underlying pathology and identification of
uyuais e asnes pinous uoisuaaau ieod aaisaixa asnesaq (ial
any additional pathology. Grossly, the liver of a cat with a CPSS is
 drop in both of these measurements. Portal hypertension can also be
usually smaller in size and may have abnormal coloration (Fig. 32-6).
assessed subjectively by observing the intestines and pancreas, and
366
Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
32
this is reported to be as reliable as objective measurements.17.45 Intes-
tinal hypermotility, pulsation in jejunal vessels, and cyanosis of the
intestine and pancreas are all associated with portal hypertension.
Portal pressure and other objective measurements are influenced by a
variety of factors and may not be accurate so they should always be
interpreted together with subjective changes and, if available, the
appearance of the hepatic vasculature on portovenography. 17
Development of the portal vein
Some reports have described cats with portal atresia where the portal
vein was apparently underdeveloped or absent. .8.14 Some of these cats
were euthanized due to a perceived poor prognosis. Cats with CPSS
au jo (eiseldodku) zuadoaaapapun jo aaap e aey on Aiall aie
portal vein as a consequence of the shunting vessel. This will vary in
'uasqe ieadde Aeuu uiaa ieiod aul sanueisui aaxa ul pue Auaais
 The authors believe that true portal vein aplasia is extremely uncom-
mon in cats. A very underdeveloped portal vein may not be visible on
gross inspection at laparotomy but may become obvious after tempo-
rary occlusion of the CPSS. Similarly, studies have shown that although
there may be no opacification of the intrahepatic vasculature on por-
tovenography before attenuation there is a significant improvement
following temporary occlusion of the CPSs.6?
Figure 32-7 Intraoperative image of a left gastric extrahepatic CPss in a
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
s aie a len oi en paean ua sey ys aui in
aul ot leluean Allenibans punoue passip ol isaisea s! lunus siul lassan
 There are a variety of surgical techniques described for the manage-
stomach but caudal to the liver (see also Hg. 32-1B).
ment of CPSS in cats. Making a decision between different techniques
is made more diffcult by the limited availability of evidence support-
ing one technique over another. Ideally, a CPSS is attenuated at its
 Box 32-3 Key points in the surgical management of
point of drainage into the systemic circulation to ensure that any
congenital portosystemic shunts in cats
branches to it are also attenuated. However, this is not practical for
all types of shunt confguration and in some cats the shunt is attenu-
 Surgical CPSS attenuation is the recommended treatment but the 
ated as far cranially as possible, but at least beyond any branches to
method of choice remains controversial. Cats with a simple
the shunt (this is very simple to assess if access to intraoperative por-
extrahepatic CPss that cannot tolerate complete attenuation at 
tovenography is available). Left gastric shunts in cats are usually atten-
surgery have the option of having a staged suture attenuation 
uated cranial to the stomach but caudal to the drainage site in the
(two surgeries), placement of an ameroid constrictor, or
caudal vena cava, which is relatively inaccessible due to the surround-
placement of a cellophane band. Substantial long-term data that 
ing liver (Figs 32-1B and 32-7). Conversely, it is possible to attenuate
directly compares these techniques is lacking
a PDV in cats in a posthepatic location, just in front of the diaphragm.
 Intrahepatic shunts are more challenging to treat surgically. In 
as it enters a venous dilatation/ampulla just prior to entering the
some instances where space around the CPss is restricted.
caudal vena cava4 (Fig. 32-1C). The key points in the surgical manage-
 attenuation may only be achieved by placement of a suture
ment of CPSSs in cats are listed in Box 32-3.
ligature. A cellophane band is more likely to fit around an
 Intraoperative complications are not common, but hemorrhage
intrahepatic shunt than an ameroid constrictor
from the shunt is occasionall reported.48,2.12 Surgical dissection
around a CPSS (whichever method is chosen for attenuation) must
be carefully performed. The dissection is usually uncomplicated for
Suture ligation of CPSSs
an extrahepatic CPss (Fig. 32-8) but is more challenging when the
CPSS is less accessible (see 'intrahepatic shunts' below).
The surgical technique originally described for cats with CPSS was
attenuation of the shunting vessel usinga ligaturel14.18, 12.2 (Box 32-4).
Partial vs complete attenuation
However, in some cats the hepatic vasculature is poorly developed
(hypoplastic) and is unable to accommodate the increased hepatic
Several studies have shown that cats with complete CPSS attenuation
blood flow resulting from acute occlusion of the CPss. This causes
have a better long-term outcome than those treated with partial atten-
papnoyal si jassa aul ieie Aiide si yum 'usuay ied
jo Auanay uu e pey unuane ieid yim paean sie oin
Consequently complete, acute attenuation of the CPSS is only possi-
relapse of clinical signs which are usually attributable to persistent
Anodan on zuodui aoyaau si ll 'se jo uoooid e ui aa
shunting but may also be due to the development of multiple acquired
-uaaday lehod jo anuapiaa ioy ssasse on assaa gunus au apniio 
 sion prior to deciding whether complete attenuation will be possible
following partial attenuation.14.17.47 It is unclear whether these animals
(Box 32-5 and Fig. 32-9).
achieve full attenuation with time or whether they cope with a small 
 In cats with portal hypertension (either objectively or subjectively)
amount of residual shunting. A second surgery is recommended at a
a partial attenuation is performed, which causes an acceptable increase
later date to achieve full vessel occlusion, if possible.
e sea a u aa r e  ou s e assa ie u
9E
Section
151
The Abdomen
Box 32-4 Surgical attenuation of a single extrahepatic
congenital portosystemic shunt
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency. clipped and prepared for
au woy buipuaxa apeu s! Awooedel auiw y Aabuns yidase
pubic brim to the xiphisternum. The abdomen is explored for the 
shunting vessel. An accurate knowledge of normal anatomy is 
required to be able to identify the abnormal vessel. The descending
duodenum is elevated to examine the caudal vena cava at the level
of the epiploic foramen for presence of a portocaval shunt entering
the caudal vena cava cranial to the right kidney/adrenal gland. The
double leaf of greater omentum is perforated and the stomach
is retracted caudally to permit visualization of a left gastric
portosystemic shunt coursing cranially in front of the stomach to 
insert on the caudal vena cava in front of the diaphragm (insertion 
 site is not visualized). Intraoperative portovenography may be 
performed to identify/confirm the shunting vessel by injection of 
pabew! pue uia jeunlal e ou! paneid aauien e ybnoul isesuon
using a mobile fluoroscopy unit or a mobile radiography unit
(Fg. 32-4). Dependent on the protocol adopted once the shunting 
vessel is identified, it is attenuated by placement of a suture 
(ligature), an ameroid constrictor, or cellophane band.
 The abdomen is inspected for signs of portal hypertension prior to 
closure.
 Figure 32-8 Mixter forceps have been used to carefully dissect around 
A liver biopsy is taken (see Chapter 31). If appropriate, removal of 
the left gastric extrahepatic shunt in this cat.
Cystic calculi or ovariohysterectomy may be performed at this stage.
Abdominal closure is routine (see Chapter 23).
Suture ligation
Ligation is achieved by placement of a prolene suture. Whether to go
for total occlusion or partial is dependent on several factors. Acute
S 1l uoisuaady eod ui shnsan l! j! leiey Aipide aq uen uoisnoo
important to temporarily oclude the shunting vessel to assess for
evidence of portal hypertension prior to deciding whether complete
attenuation will be possible (see section on portal hypertension). In 
cats with portal hypertension (either objectively or subjectively) a
partial attenuation is performed, which causes an acceptable increase
in portal pressure and has no or a minimal effect on the pancreas 
and intestines. In cats that only have partial ligation performed a 
second piece of suture material can be left around the shunting 
vessel. This can then be tied at a second surgery and preplacement 
avoids the need for further dissection around the shunt.
Ameroid constrictor (AR) and cellophane
banding (CB)
The aim with ameroid constrictors or CB is that they will cause
gradual occlusion of the shunt over time, thus potentially avoiding
the negative effects of acute occlusion and allowing a gradual
development in hepatic vasculature. Some surgeons simply place an
AR or CB around a CPss without measuring portal pressure and 
without any initial shunt attenuation, others recommend measuring 
uoisnpno ssd aladuon Aue soduan buiuopad pue aunssand leo
regardless in all cases. Any cat that can tolerate complete shunt 
occlusion will have a better prognosis than with gradual shunt 
occlusion, thus temporary intraoperative shunt occlusion is 
recommended in all cats for the reasons outlined in Box 32-5. A
5 mm constrictor is most commonly used (although sizes used in cats
 Figure 32-9 Suture material that has been placed around a shunt has
range from 2-6.5mm)1 -
 placement can be tricky and it is important 
been passed through a piece of tubing (Rummel tourniquet) to enable
temporary, atraumatic occlusion of the shunting vessel during surgery.
to limit dissection around the vessel so there is less chance for the 
constrictor to move and acutely occlude the shunt. Excess cellophane
is cut approximately a centimeter distal to the surgical clips.
 For CB a three-layer strip of cellophane approximately 10 cm long
 and 4 mm wide is placed around the shunt and secured with surgical
clips to achieve a degree of partial attenuation, depending on 
evidence of portal hypertension.
898
Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
32
Figure 32-10 Two lengths of polypropylene suture have been passed
around the shunting vessel to allow temporary occlusion and subsequent
ligation.
Box 32-5 Temporary complete CPsS occlusion in cats
 Figure 32-11 Complete occlusion of the abnormal vessel was tolerated
in this cat so the suture has been tied tightly. The other length of suture
The advantages of measuring portal pressure and performing 
will be removed prior to routine abdominal closure.
temporary complete CPss occlusion in cats are:
 Any cat that can tolerate a complete acute CPss attenuation
(using suture or a CB) can benefit from this, instead of receiving a 
 gradual, possibly incomplete, CPSS attenuation
Ameroid constrictor and cellophane
A cat with a very high initial portal pressure (e.g.. >25 mmHg)
banding of portosystemic shunts
following temporary CPss occlusion may not be a good candidate
for an AC due to the risk of development of multiple acquired
Ameroid constrictors (AR) and cellophane banding (CB) have been
shunts if the rate of shunt attenuation exceeds the capacity of
used for the surgical treatment of CPSS in cats with the aim of gradu-
Si yeode siu sraam jo pouad e laao uus a senue ae
blood flow30
intended to produce complete shunt attenuation gradually without
 A CB can be placed to provide initial partial attenuation of
causing portal hypertension, therefore avoiding the need for multiple
the CPss to an acceptable level (similarly to partial suture 
surgeries in cats that cannot tolerate complete attenuation at the frst
 attenuation), with the expectation of further attenuation with 
attempt. Long-term residual shunting is common with both tech-
time
niques and the exact rate of attenuation is unknown.
 Although some surgeons simply place an AR or CB around a CPSS
without measuring portal pressure and without any initial shunt
attenuation, others recommend measuring portal pressure and
intestines. In the original publications silk is used for the liga-
 performing temporary complete CPSS occlusion regardless in all cases
tures, 14,1.19.2 but the authors recommend the use of prolene suture
with several potential advantages (Box 32-5).
material for shunt ligation as it has superior strength and knot security
 Whichever technique is used it is still important to perform close
(Fig. 32-10). Conversely, silk loses tensile strength and is slowly
 postoperative monitoring in all cats as it is possible for acute portal
absorbed over the course of two years [there is a report of recurrence
hypertension to develop if an AC suddenly moves and occludes the
 -uo esop e ui aimei ys e jo uoniossip suimonoy suunus go
CPSS, if a CB is applied too tightly, or with either method if acute
 plete ligation of the CPss has been reported in 29-43% of catsl5,6.7.19
thrombus formation in the CPSS occurs.
(Fig. 32-11).
A second surgery performed two to three months later allows a
Ameroid constrictors
second attempt at complete attenuation in cats treated initially with
amesea seday auiaun su sua tos'uoenuane aimns ieied
Ameroid constrictors (Fig. 32-12; see Chapter 12) have been shown
will have developed, allowing full attenuation in the majority of
experimentally to cause vessel occlusion primarily by thrombus for-
mation. This occlusion may be more rapid than desired and
portovenography at frst and second surgery, which showed that the
 re-canalization is possible.48.49
degree of opacification of intrahepatic vessels increased significantly
Aans dn-moy uad araunai siine aui ,'sains uaami
Cellophane banding
in cats that have had partial attenuation and leave a length of suture
material around the shunt to be tied at the second surgery, thus
'Normal cellophane (e.g., from a florist) is used (Fig. 32-13). The
avoiding further dissection around the shunt. Repeat surgery has a
cellophane is cut and folded to form a three-layer strip approximately
negligible postoperative complication rate.
10 cm long and 4 mm wide The cellophane is placed around the
698
Section
151
The Abdomen
hepatic vein is not included in the ligation4 (Fig. 32-1C). One report
described the successful use of an ameroid constrictor in a Siamese
cat with a right divisional intrahepatic CPSS but it is usually more
difficult to apply either an AC or CB to an intrahepatic shunt because
there is generally restricted space around the shunt following dissec-
tion compared to an extrahepatic shunt.5 Intraoperative hemorrhage
is much more of a concern for intrahepatic shunts and ideally these
Aiabins ot ioud ie iouop pooq e ot paupieur-sso aq pinous sie
An alternative to surgical management is coil embolization using
interventional radiology, which has been described in one cat with an
intrahepatic CPSS.51
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND COMPLICATIONS
lowing surgical attenuation of a CPss. Temperature should be moni-
tored and cats kept warm (ideally in an incubator) until normal body
temperature is restored. Glucose is monitored and intravenous fluid
therapy is continued (with additional glucose if necessary) at 2-4 mL/
kg/hour until the cat is eating and drinking normal quantities. The
3
most serious complication is development of neurologic signs, which
can develop with any of the methods of attenuation. It is best treated
promptly and aggressively, and occurs more frequently in cats com-
pared to dogs. Other postoperative complications include mild to
moderate ascites (likely due to subclinical portal hypertension which
Figure 32-12 An ameroid constrictor
is an expected sequel to CPSS attenuation), seroma formation, a clini-
cal coagulopathy, a transfusion reaction, and pyrexia.7.10
Portal hypertension
Heart rate, respiratory rate, arterial blood pressure, central venous
 pressure (if a jugular catheter was placed), and signs of abdominal
pain or distension should be monitored to assess for progressive
shock that could indicate development of portal hypertension. Portal
hypertension is characterized by ascites, abdominal pain, hypovo-
lemic shock, and hemorrhagic diarrhea. Significant portal hyperten-
[enpeis io aimean e anoual ol uoneiado-al saimnbai ieul uois
 Occlusion device is indicated by progressive hypovolemic shock that
is not responsive to initial stabilization measures such as increased
Figure 32-13 Roll of cellophane used for attenuation of CPSS
fluid therapy and appropriate analgesia. Historically, the development
 of postoperative portal hypertension, which can be fatal, was a major
concern following CPSS surgery. However, with improvements in
shunt and secured with surgical clips to provide a degree of partial
anesthesia and surgery and more familiarity with the risk of portal
attenuation, depending on evidence of portal hypertension. The cel-
hypertension, overall surgical mortality has decreased and the risk of
lophane causes fibrosis of the vessel, resulting in gradual occlusion
serious portal hypertension is very rare. Recent studies of treatment
Over a period of weeks.
with suture ligation or ameroid constrictors report mortality rates
of 0-4.5%, with mortality in these studies being due to neurologic
complications, not portal hypertension.7 10.12
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF
INTRAHEPATIC CPSS
Neurologic complications
Neurologic problems are the most common postoperative complica-
Intrahepatic CPSSs are more challenging to treat surgically than ext-
tion in cats and are reported in 13.3-37%.7.8,12.52 It has been shown
rahepatic shunts due to their location within the hepatic parenchyma.
that these complications do not seem to relate to HE or hypoglycemia
Intraoperative mesenteric portovenography is particularly useful to
as ammonia has been normal or dramatically reduced postsurgery
aid correct identification of a shunt that is mostly obscured by hepatic
compared with the situation before surgery and glucose and electro-
 parenchyma at surgery. It is usually possible to attenuate an intrahe-
lytes are normal.7.53 Neurologic signs are variable and include mild
patic shunt directly with suture material either posthepatically in cats
tremors or ataxia, central blindness, depression and weakness, hyper.
with left divisional CPSS or via intrahepatic dissection in right or
esthesia, seizures, and status epilepticus. Seizures are a particularly
 central divisional CPSS, without the need for more complicated intra-
severe complication and are reported in 6.5-22.4% of cats treated
vascular techniques.7.17 Note that when a PDV is attenuated, the left
with suture attenuation.l7.8.17 Seizures usually occur within 72 hours
Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
32
of surgery and it is recommended that cats are monitored closely
during this time.67,10.53 In cats treated with ameroid constrictors it
might be expected that neurologic signs present before surgery would
PROGNOSIS
persist for a period of time and no new neurologic signs would occur,
as attenuation of the CPSS should be gradual. However, neurologic
Buimoy auono poog e aney se isou ieu sisans eiep uanay
complications still occur following placement of gradual occlusion
'anamoh '/ssop ioy palodai sauosuno olalqeieduos s up!um Kiasins
devices.10.12 Two studies have reported the outcome for cats with ext-
all long-term outcome data are based on subjective owner assessment.
rahepatic CPSS treated with ameroid constrictors with mixed results:
Although objective measures such as bile acid testing and scintigraphy
one study did not identify any postoperative complications,12 whereas
have been used in some studies, these have assessed short-term
 sau ai yn ar y e pun as naa a
outcome (six months or less).7.10.1,52 It therefore remains unclear
tions (77%) during the immediate postoperative period.10
whether all cats achieve full shunt attenuation following surgery and
 Phenobarbitone is the first line of treatment for cats with neurologic
what proportion develops multiple acquired shunts. Although it has
complications. However, cats with severe or refractory seizures may
been shown that cats have a better outcome with full attenuation
also need boluses of propofol or an infusion to manage their signs
compared with partial attenuation, in some instances partial attenu-
during the initial 24-48 hours7.51 (see Table 32-2). Levetiracetam
ation may be associated with a good outcome as assessed by the
could be used in addition or as an alternative to phenobarbitone but 
owner. The authors still recommend complete attenuation in all
there is no published information regarding its postoperative use in
instances if possible.
cats with seizures following shunt surgery. Although treatment for HE
 The degree of vascular development at first surgery has been shown
should be continued in animals that have had a partial or gradual
to be significantly associated with age duration of and response to
medical treatment, the probability of neurologic complications, the
complications and antiseizure medication should be given as early
clinical response, the existence of neurologic signs at follow up and
-se io eiaiody se qns sioiey bupunoguo Auy aiqissod se
decrease in bile acids at follow up. Thus, portovenography can also
 be used as a prognostic indicator. Logically, cats with well-developed
number of cats (4-13.3%) die or are euthanized due to the severity
intrahepatic vasculature are likely to have a better response to treat-
of neurologic complications.78.10 Other cats never fully recover or
ment, with fewer complications.
require long-term antiseizure medication. One study identifed that
Follow-up bile acids can be used to asses cats after surgery. However,
cats with poor development of their intrahepatic vasculature (as
in some cats bile acids may still be mild to moderately increased,
assessed on portovenography) had an increased risk of developing
despite a good clinical outcome.7 Scintigraphy has also been used to
postoperative neurologic complications. However, no other risk
P pey aey sie uaum sanueisul ul ol'luaean ot asuodsai iojuou
factors have been identified for the occurrence of postoperative neu-
rologic signs and there does not seem to be a difference between
ing, presumably due to failure to achieve complete attenuation or due
intrahepatic and extrahepatic CPSs, full or partial ligation, the age of 
ans auo ui 'laamoh o'shunus panse aldnu jo uoeung aui o
 -eiadoisod andsaa aaeiadoaid sainzias jo anuasaid au io ie a
using ameroid constrictors 57% of cats had persistent shunting at
tive neurologic problems cats can still make a full recovery, with 56% 
Ue aey oi uo juam s inq Aans Bumooy siaam uan on 1ua
having complete resolution of neurologic signs and 22% having a
excellent outcome. 10
 In the largest case series which reported cats treated with suture
signs in one study.?
ligation 30/36 cats were still alive after a median of 47 months, with
 The origin of postoperative neurologic complications is unclear
-eadoisod jo juadolaaap ot anp paziueuna uaaq suiaey oml kluo 
because seizures can occur in cats following surgery despite a postop-
am is ses ge au o 'anzias/su sioou a
 considered to be normal, 19% exhibited very minor clinical signs, 8%
 bile acid stimulation results.12 Thus, continued neurologic signs may
had a good quality of life with continued medical management for
HE, 11% were treated medically for intermittent seizures, and 6% had
addition, HE has a profound effect on cerebral metabolism and it is
been euthanized due to persistent seizures. This suggests that surgical
suggested that this chronic abnormal metabolism affects the brain so
treatment is associated with a good long-term outcome.
that it is unable to function normally immediately after the shunt has
Two case series described the outcome of cats treated with ameroid
been corrected.54 Postsurgical decreases in endogenous inhibitory
uat-suot ym sies (%st] auu jo inoy Xpns auo ul zu'ou'siosuo
central nervous system benzodiazepine agonist levels or an imbalance
follow up were euthanized at a median of 1l.5 months after surgery
of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters are possible explana-
because of progression or persistence of seizures or neurologic
tions for these neurologic signs.55 It is also possible that in some cats
   n u  m ( s  'sis
 preoperative seizures result in a degree of irreversible damage to the
years after surgery and the remaining two cats (22%) had progression
nervous system that persists after surgical correction of the CPSS
 Or recurrence of clinical signs six months after surgery. In the other
(although this clearly does not account for cats without seizures prior
study follow up was available for 20/2l cats at a mean of 26 months.0
to surgery).
Three cats (15%) had been euthanized or died due to persistent neu-
Prophylactic treatment of cats with phenobarbitone has been sug-
rologic signs, two cats (10%) had intermittent clinical signs (one was
gested in order to reduce the likelihood of postoperative seizures.
On medical treatment) and 15 cats (75%) were considered to be
Little information is available to support this concept in the cat. Sei-
normal. Studies have also shown persistent portosystemic shunting
zures or neurologic complications occurred despite preoperative
(as measured with scintigraphy) in a significant proportion of cats
antiseizure medication in 83-100% of cats.10.12 Phenobarbitone is
treated with ameroid constrictors, sugesting failure of the ameroidto
metabolized in the liver and must be used carefully in animals with
fully occlude the CPSS or the development of multiple acquired
hepatic insuffciency. For these reasons the authors do not routinely
shunts. 10, 12,56
give preoperative phenobarbitone to cats, but do closely monitor cats
One study described the outcome of CB in five cats.50 The cello-
for development of neurologic signs in the postoperative period so
phane was applied so that it partially attenuated the shunt. All of the
that these can be detected and treated as soon as possible, even if rela-
cats survived the postoperative period although one developed mild
tively mild.
neurologic signs, which resolved after seven days. Three cats had
371
Section
5
The Abdomen
normal liver function assessed by ammonia or bile acid testing and
euthanized three months after surgery due to recurrence of clinical
two cats had persistent abnormal liver function. Repeat surgery
signs refractory to medical therapy. Five cats were clinically well with
revealed that one cat had developed multiple acquired shunts and the
normal serum bile acid concentrations three months postoperatively.
other cat had persistent shunting due to failure of the cellophane to
In the longer term, two cats were lost to follow up at five and eight
 produce fibrosis. Another study described CB in nine cats but in con-
months, two cats were alive and clinically normal after one year, one
trast to the earlier study the cellophane band was applied without
cat was alive after three years with persistent ptyalism but normal
serum bile acid concentration, and one cat was alive after three years 
postoperative period due to refractory seizures. Another cat was
but required a cystotomy for removal of urate calculi.
REFERENCES
1.
Levy IK, Bunch SE, Komtebedde J.
congenital extrahepatic portosystemic
ammonia and serum bile acids in the
Feline portosystemic vascular shunts.
shunts in cats: 12 cases (1993-2000].
diagnosis of portosystemic shunts in dogs
In: Bonagura ID, editor. Kirk's current
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;220(3):337-41.
and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 2010;39(1):
veterinary therapy Xll small animal
13. Center SA, Magne ML. Historical,
57-64.
practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
physical-examination, and
26.
Center SA, Baldwin BH, Erb H, et al.
1995. p. 743-9.
dinicopathological features of
Bile-acid concentrations in the diagnosis
2.
.Van den Ingh TS, Rothuizen J, Meyer HP.
 portosystemic vascular anomalies in the
of hepatobiliary disease in the cat. J Am
 Circulatory disorders of the liver in dogs
dog and cat. SeminVet Med Surg Small
Vet Med Assoc 1986;189(8):891-6.
and cats. Vet Quart 1995;17(2):70-6.
Anim 1990;5(2):83-93.
27.
Goggs R, Serrano S, Szladovits B, et al.
3.
Legendre AM, Krahwinkel Dl, Carrig CB.
14.
Blaxter AC, Holt PE, Pearson GR, et al.
Clinical investigation of a point-of-care
et al. Ascites associated with intrahepatic
 Congenital portosystemic shunts in the
blood ammonia analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol
arteriovenous-fistula in a cat. J Am Vet
cat - a report of 9 cases. J Small Anim
2008;37(2):198-206.
Med Assoc 1976;168(7):589-91.
Pract 1988;29(10):631-45.
28. Koblik PD, Hornof Wl. Transcolonic
4.
.d'Anjou MA, Penninck D, Cornejo L,
15.
 Rothuizen J, Vandeningh Ts, Voorhout G.
sodium pertechnetate Tc-99m scintigraphy
et al. Ulltrasonographic diagnosis of
et al. Congenital porto-systemic shunts in
 for diagnosis of macrovascular
 portosystemic shunting in dogs and cats.
16 dogs and 3 cats. J Small Anim Pract
portosystemic shunts in dogs, cats, and
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2004;45(5):
1982;23(2):67-81.
potbellied pigs - 176 Cases [1988-1992).
424-37.
16.
 Lamb CR, White RN. Morphology of
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207(6):729-33.
5.
 Birchard Sl, Sherding RG. Feline
congenital intrahepatic portacaval shunts 
29.
 Forster-van Hijfte MA, McEvoy Fl, White
portosystemic shunts. Comp Cont
in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 1998;142[3):
RN. Per rectal portal scintigraphy in the
Ed Prac Vet 1992;14(10):1295-301.
55-60.
diagnosis and management of feline
6.
Lipscomb Vl, Lee KC, Lamb CR.
17.
White RN, ForstervanHijfte MA, Petrie G.
congenital portosystemic shunts. J Small 
et al. Association of mesenteric
et al. Surgical treatment of intrahepatic
Anim Pract 1996;37(1):7-11.
portovenographic findings with outcome
portosystemic shunts in six cats. Vet Rec
30.
Tillson DM, Winkler IT. Diagnosis and
in cats receiving surgical treatment for
1996;139(13):314-17.
treatment of portosystemic shunts in the
single congenital portosystemic shunts.
18.
 Scavelli TD, Hornbuckle WE, Roth L, et al.
cat. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2009;234(2):221-8.
Portosystemic shunts in cats - 7 cases
2002;32(4):881 -999.
7.
Lipscomb V, Jones Hl, Brockman DJ.
(1976-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc
31.
Moon ML. Diagnostic imaging of
Complications and long-term outcomes
1986;189(3):317-25.
 portosystemic shunts. Semin Vet Med
of the ligation of congenital portosystemic
19.
VanGundy TE, Boothe Hw, Wolf A.
Surg Small Anim 1990;5[2):120-6.
shunts in 49 cats. Vet Rec 2007;160(14):
 Results of surgical management of feline
 32. Zwingenberger A. CT diagnosis of
465-70.
 portosystemic shunts. I Am Anim Hosp
 portosystemic shunts. Vet Clin N Am
 8. Wolschrijn CF Mahapokai W, Rothuizen
Assoc 1990;26(1):55-62.
Small Anim Pract 2009;39[4):
I, et al. Gauged attenuation of congenital
20.
Lamb CR, ForstervanHijfte MA, White RN,
783-92.
portosystemic shunts: results in 160 dogs
et al. Ultrasonographic diagnosis of 
33. Seguin B, Tobias KM, Gavin PR, et al. Use
and 15 cats. Vet Quart 2000;22(2):94-8.
congenital portosystemic shunt in 14 cats.
of magnetic resonance angiography for
9. White RN, Macdonald Nl, Burton CA.
I Small Anim Pract 1996;37(5):205-9.
diagnosis of portosystemic shunts in
Use of intraoperative mesenteric
21.
 Schunk CM. Feline portosystemic shunts.
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2009;40(3):
 portovenography in congenital
Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim
251-8.
portosystemic shunt surgery. Vet Radiol
1997;12(1):45-50.
34.
 Brown JC Jr, Chanoit G, Reeder J.
Ultrasound 2003;44(5):514-21.
22.
Berger B, Whiting PG, Breznock EM, et al.
Complex extrahepatic portocaval shunt
10.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Mehl M, et al.
Congenital feline portosystemic shunts. J
with unusual caval features in a cat:
Evaluation of ameroid ring constrictors 
Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;188(5):517-21.
computed tomographic characterisation.
for the management of single extrahepatic
23.
Kummeling A, Teske E, Rothuizen J.
J Small Anim Pract 2010;51[4):227-30.
portosystemic shunts in cats: 23 cases
et al. Coagulation profles in dogs with 
35.
Greenhalgh SN, Dunning MD, McKinley
[1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 congenital portosystemic shunts before
Tl, et al. Comparison of survival after
2002;220(9 ):1341-7.
 and after surgical attenuation. J Vet Int
 surgical or medical treatment in dogs with
11.
 Hunt GB. Effect of breed on anatomy
Med 2006;20(6):1319-26.
a congenital portosystemic shunt. J Am
 of portosystemic shunts resulting from
24. Niles JD, williams JM, Cripps PJ.
Vet Med Assoc 2010;236(11):1215-20.
congenital diseases in dogs and cats:
Hemostatic profles in 39 dogs with
86.
 Smith Bailey K, Dewey CW. The seizuring
a review of 242 cases. Austr Vet J
congenital portosystemic shunts. Vet Surg
cat. Diagnostic work-up and therapy. ↓
2004;82(12):746-9.
2001;30(1):97-104.
Feline Med Surg 2009;11(5):385-94.
12. Havig M, Tobias KM. Outcome of
25.
Ruland K, Fischer A, Hartmann K.
37.
Platt SR, Radaelli ST, McDonnell Jl. The
 ameroid constrictor occlusion of single
Sensitivity and specifcity of fasting
 prognostic value of the modifed Glasgow
372
 Portosystemic shunts
Chapter
32
coma scale in head trauma in dogs. J Vet
44. White RN, Burton CA. Anatomy of
 51. Heldmann E, Holt DE, Brockman DJ,
Int Med 2001;15(6):581-4.
the patent ductus venosus in the cat.
et al. Use of propofol to manage seizure 
38. Baade S, Aupperle H, Grevel V.
J Feline Med Surg 2001;3(4):
activity after surgical treatment of
et al. Histopathological and
229-33.
portosystemic shunts. J Small Anim Pract
immunohistochemical investigations of
45. Burton CA, White RN. Portovenogram
1999:40(12):590-4.
hepatic lesions associated with congenital
 fndings in cases of elevated bile acid
 52. Matushek KJ, Bjorling D, Mathews K.
 portosystemic shunt in dogs. I Comp
concentrations following correction of
Generalized motor seizures after
Pathol 2006;134[1):80-90.
portosystemic shunts. J Small Anim Pract
portosystemic shunt ligation in dogs - 5
39. Parker JS, Monnet E, Powers BE, et al.
2001;42[11):536-40.
cases (1981-1988). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Histologic examination of hepatic biopsy
46.
Besancon MF, Kyles AE, Griffey SM, et al.
1990;196(12):2014-17.
samples as a prognostic indicator in
Evaluation of the characteristics of venous
53. Hardie EM, Kornegay IN, Cullen JM.
 dogs undergoing surgical correction of
 occlusion after placement of an ameroid
 Status epilepticus after ligation of
congenital portosystemic shunts: G4 cases
constrictor in dogs. Vet Surg 2004;33(6):
portosystemic shunts. Vet Surg
(1997-2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc
597-605.
1990;19(6):412-17.
2008;232(10):1511-14.
47.
Adin CA, Gregory CR, Kyles AE, et al.
54. Vogt JC, Krahwinkel Dl, Bright RM, et al.
40. Martin RA, Freeman LE. Identification and
 Effect of petrolatum coating on the rate
Gradual occlusion of extrahepatic 
surgical management of portosystemic
 of occlusion of ameroid constrictors in
 portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats
shunts in the dog and cat. Semin Vet Med
the peritoneal cavity. Vet Surg 2004;33[1):
using the ameroid constrictor. Vet Surg
Surg Small Anim 1987;2[4):302-6.
11-16.
1996;25(6):495-502.
41. Birchard Sl. Surgical management of
48.
Bright SR, Williams JM, Niles JD.
55.
.Hunt GB, Bellenger CR, Pearson MRB.
portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats.
Outcomes of intrahepatic portosystemic
Transportal approach for attenuating
Compendium of continuing education
 shunts occluded with ameroid constrictors
 intrahepatic portosystemic shunts in dogs.
for the practicing veterinarian 1984;G[9):
in nine dogs and one cat. Vet Surg
Vet Surg 1996;25(4):300-8.
795-801.
2006;35(3):300-9.
 56. Swalec KM, Smeak DD. Partial versus
42. Butler LM, Fossum Tw, Boothe HW.
49.
Weisse C, Schwartz K, Stronger R, et al.
 complete attenuation of single
Surgical management of extrahepatic
 Transjugular coil embolization of an 
 portosystemic shunts. Vet Surg
portosystemic shunts in the dog and
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in a
1990;19(6):406-11.
 Cat. Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002;221(9):
57.
. Cabassu J, Seim HB Ill, MacPhail CM.
1990;5(2):127-33.
1287-91, 1266-7.
et al. Outcomes of cats undergoing
43.
 Mathews K, Gofton N. Congenital
50.
Hunt GB, Kummeling A, Tisdall PL, et al.
 surgical attenuation of congenital 
extrahepatic portosystemic shunt
 Outcomes of cellophane banding for 
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts
occlusion in the dog - gross observations
 congenital portosystemic shunts in 106
 through cellophane banding: 9 cases
during surgical correction. J Am Anim
dogs and 5 cats. Vet Surg 2004;33[1):
(2000-2007). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Hosp Assoc 1988;24[4):387-94.
25-31.
2011 ;238(1):89-93.
33]
Chapter
Pancreas
L.M. Liehmann
Cats are susceptible to a wide range of exocrine pancreatic diseases:
The endocrine part of the pancreas consists of several thousand
acute and chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic absces, pancreatic pseudo-
 pancreatic islets of Langerhans and accounts for approximately 2% of
 cyst and cyst, exocrine pancreatic insufciency, and neoplasia. This
the gland's weight.5 Pancreatic α- and β-cells produce glucagon and
chapter will review the anatomy of the pancreas, investigations for
insulin, respectively, which regulate carbohydrate homeostasis. 8-Cells
and the diseases of the pancreas, and their surgical management
secrete the growth inhibiting hormone somatostatin and PP cells
where applicable.
 produce pancreatic polypeptide that self regulates pancreas secretion
activities and affects hepatic glycogen levels and gastrointestinal
secretions.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
Gall bladder
The pancreas develops from the dorsal and ventral primordium in
the hepatopancreatic ring of the duodenum and grows into the
dorsal omentum. It has a long and slender confguration in the cat.
Remains of
taking the shape of a wide V or boomerang. The right or duodenal
Cystic duct
ventral omental
lobe is located in the mesoduodenum and often takes a hook-like
eaf
shape at the end.l It is best accessed surgically by gentle traction
Hepatic ducts
on the descending duodenum ventrally and medially. The left or
splenic lobe runs in the dorsal mesogastrium towards the dorsal
Common bile duct
extremity of the spleen and has an omental connection to the meso-
colon. For surgical visualization the omentum and stomach need to
Stomach
   r a  r   s
Major duodena
opened by tearing the ventral leaf. Both pancreatic lobes unite in the
papilla
 pancreatic body close to the cranial part ofthe duodenum and pylorus 
(Fig. 33-1).
Dorsal leaf
 The normal pancreas has a pale pink color and is finely lobulated.
Accessory,
ofomentum
The exocrine portion of the pancreas is a compound tubuloacinar
pancreatic
gland whose ducts are totally concealed within the substance of the
ponp
Organ. Interlobular and interlobar ducts unite to form the main pan-
Pancreatic tail
creatic duct that opens into the duodenum on the major duodenal
papilla together with the common bile duct In about 20% of cats, a
Pancreatic
second smaller duct, the accessory pancreatic duct, opens approxi-
head
mately 10 mm aborad on the minor duodenal papilla (Fig. 33-1). A
pancreatic bladder consisting of aberrant pancreatic tissue with a
dilated pancreatic duct is described in 0.2% of cats.4 It lies beside the
Duodenum
gall bladder with which it can communicate. It is regarded as a patho-
logic variant without clinical significance. Rarely, accessory nodular
 pancreatic lobes are found along the feline gut, especially in the area
of the duodenum, and in the portal mesentery. These often extend
 Figure 33-1 Anatomic relationships of the pancreas and pancreatic
towards the hepatic fossa.4
ducts.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00033-0
375
Section
5
The Abdomen
 The exocrine portion ofthe gland consists of acinar and ductal cells.
Acinar cells are arranged in clusters around the terminal pancreatic
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
ductules. They primarily secrete digestive enzymes: proteases
(trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, procarboxypeptidase,
Cats seem to be susceptible to a wide range of exocrine pancreatic
ribonucleases, and deoxyribonucleases), which cleave polypeptide
diseases: acute and chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic abscess, pancreatic
chains; amylase and lipase which hydrolyze carbohydrates and fat;
cyst/pseudocyst, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and neoplasia.
Middle-aged to older cats are most often affected with pancreatitis;
are either synthesized, stored and secreted as inactive zymogens
cats with pancreatic mass lesions such as neoplasia, cyst/pseudocysts,
and abscesses tend to be older (mean 12.8 years, range 4-20 years).
form is directly secreted and activated within the duodenum (pro-
Clinical signs are often non-specific, and additionally could be easily
phospholipase A2) and/or they need cofactors like bile salts and coli-
attributable to concurrent hepatic and intestinal disease Hence the
pase for function (phospholipase A2, lipase, carboxylesterase). Amylase
level of suspicion of the attending clinician is often low and the disease
is secreted intact and active.?
prevalence seems to be underestimated. Nevertheless, even with an
Ductal cell secretions contain bicarbonate and water that serve to
insidious onset the disease can quite dramatically progress to a life-
 neutralize pH in the duodenum, intrinsic factor that facilitates cobala-
threatening state of acute pancreatic necrosis. Pancreatic disease in
min (vitamin Bi2) absorption in the distal ileum, and antibacterial
the cat is difficult to diagnose, and a careful integration of collected
proteins that regulate small intestinal bacterial flora.? In cats, the
historical data, physical examination results, laboratory, and imaging
pancreas is the only source of intrinsic factor, whereas in dogs intrinsic
findings is mandatory in order to establish a preliminary diagnosis. It
factor is also secreted by the stomach.
is not recommended to rely on a single diagnostic modality to diag-
 The pancreatic arterial supply derives mainly from the celiac artery:
 nose pancreatic disease; furthermore, histopathology might be neces-
 the splenic artery contributes branches to the left pancreatic limb and
sary to support a definitive conclusion. Diagnosis and treatment of
 the cranial pancreaticoduodenal artery and right gastric artery give
the most common pancreatic disorders are described in the follwing
radicles to the cranial part of the right pancreatic limb. The caudal
section.
s    s e nn
artery and supplies the caudal half of the right pancreatic limb (Fig.
33-2).? Anastomoses between these various vessels occur within the
History and clinical examination
gland.0 Venous drainage is via portal tributaries.
Historical data usually includes lethargy. anorexia and, in more
 Lymphatic drainage is into the pancreaticoduodenal and hepatic
chronic cases, weight loss. In acute pancreatitis, cats suddenly deterio-
lymph nodes; however, there are lymph vessels draining from the
rate or clinical signs worsen in spite of aggressive therapy. Vomiting is
 pancreas to the jejunal and splenic lymph nodes.11
only present in about 35% of cats.
 Innervation is via vagal afferents that increase pancreatic secretions.
and sympathetic fibers from the celiac and mesenteric ganglia that
 A complete physical examination including a thorough evaluation
of the cat's abdomen is mandatory. Cranial abdominal masses and
decrease pancreatic secretions.
cranial abdominal discomfort are easily overlooked as the clinical
response of the cat can be very subtle. Jaundice is a common finding
Celiac a.
and is usually a sign of complicating cholangiohepatitis, hepatic lipi
dosis, or biliary obstructions secondary to pancreatic disease Lethargy.
anorexia, dehydration, and hypothermia are the most prevalent clini-
Splenic a.
Hepatic a.
cal signs (Tables 33-1 and 33-2). The cat can dramatically deteriorate
Right
gastrica.
Gastroduodenal a.
with development of shock and progression to a moribund state
Cr. pancreatico-
despite aggressive fluid therapy.12
odenal a.
Clinicopathologic tests
A minimum database should consist of a complete blood cell count,
serum bilirubin, cholesterol, glucose, total protein, albumin, and
Stomach
Pancreatic tail
Pancreatic br.
Table 33-1 Common clinical findings in cats with
acute pancreatitis78
Spleen
O. mesenteric a.
Pancreatic head--
dinical
Occurrence
dinical
Occurrence
finding
finding
Anorexia
97%
Jaundice 
37%
Leth argy 
81%
Fever
25 %
Caudal
Dehydr ation
54%
Abdominal pain
19%
Duodenal br.
pancreatico-
diodenal a.
Weight loss
47%
Diarrhea
12 %
Duodenum
Hypothermia
46%
 Abdominal mass
11%
Figure 33-2 Blood supply of the feline pancreas and proximal
Vomiting
46%
duodenum.
376
Pancreas
Chapter
serum activity of liver enzymes (serum alanine aminotransferase and
Table 33-2 Typical clinical findings in cats with pancreatic
alkaline phosphatase), calcium, urea, creatinine, and potassium.
neopl a sia48,60.66
Common clinicopathologic fndings in cats with pancreatic disease
are listed in Tables 33-3 and 33-4. Ionized hypocalcemia was found
Exocrine pancreatic
Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
to be a negative prognostic indicator in cats.13
adenocarcinoma 
The measurements of senum lipase and amylase activities do not
seem to be of clinical value in the diagnosis of feline pancreatic
Anorexia
75%
Vomiting ±
Seizures
Vomiting
63%
hematemesis
Depression 
disease. Several different lipase isoenzymes originate from various
 Abdominal pain
38%
 Abdominal pain
cells in the body and circulate in the blood; they are all detected by
Disorientation
Palpable cranial
Hematochezia
Weakness
catalytic lipase assays, thus the tissue of origin cannot be determined.
abdominal mass
Anorexia
-usdan aua jo juauanseau au ioy saesseounuu syads-saads
Hypothermia
 like immunoreactivity (fTLI) and feline pancreatic lipase immuno-
Jaundice
Bradycardia
 Paraneoplastic alopecia
reactivity (fPLI) have therefore been developed and validated.
 Abdominal effusion
Feline pancreatitis is best detected by the measurement of elevated
Depression 
u uaai s asasp seaued no sisat yads o Aeuuns s'e lidy
Table 33-5.
Abdominal effusion is sometimes encountered during physical
examination, abdominal ultrasound, or on radiographs. Abdomino-
sterile exudate or a modified transudate Cytological evaluation can
be helpful in the diagnosis of pancreatic neoplasia.
Table 33-3 Common clinicopathologic abnormalities in cats
Table 33-4 Clinicopathologic abnormalities in cats with
with acute pancreatitis78
pancreatic neoplasia48,60.66
Abnormality
Occurrence
Abnormality
Occurrence
Exocrine
Gastrinoma
Insulinoma
38%
 Total bilirubin ↑ 
58%
 pancreatic
Anemia
 adenocarcinoma
Leukocytosis
46%
Cholesterol ↑
72%
Leukocytosis
Regenerative anemia 
Hypoglycemia
Leukopenia
15%
Hyperglycemia 
45%
 Hyperglycemia
Leukocytosis
<3.3 mmol/L
 Hemoconcentration
17%
Hypokalemia 
56%
ALT↑
Neutrophilia
Normal or high
ALP ↑ 
insulin level
ALT ↑
57%
Hypocalcemmia 
65%
Albumin ↓
(reference range
 Electrolyte abnormalities
ALP ↑
36%
72-583 pmol/L)
49%
Albumin ↓
 due to vomiting
 ALP, Alkaline phosphatase; ALT, Alanine aminotransferase.
 ALP, Alkaline phosphatase; ALT, Alanine aminotransferase.
Table 33-5 Pancreas-specific serum tests and their availability
Substrate tested
Application
Reference range
Availability
 Serum lipase activity
 Serum test not recommended for the 
25-250 U/L
Routine
assay
diagnosis of feline pancreatitis because 
of very low sensitivity and specificity
fTLI
Diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic
12-82 μg/dL
Texas A+M University.
insufficiency (if low). Elevation may be
gastrointestinal laboratory
indicative of pancreatitis, but sensitivity 
SCL Bioscience Services, UK
is low and specificity is less than in dogs
 fPLI
 Sensitivity 82 %
2.0-6.8 μg/L,
IDEXX laboratories, SNAP test
 Specificity up to 100% for the detection
6.8-12 μg/L mild or resolving pancreatitis,
of pancreatitis in cats15
>12 μg/L diagnostic for pancreatitis
Glucose, insulin
 Diagnosis of insulinoma
Glucose <3.3 mmol/L
Specialist endocrine
Insulin 72-583 pmol/L
labor atories 
 diagnostic if insulin is normal or high
UK: Cambridge Specialist Labs
fPLl, feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity; fTLl, feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity.
LLE
Section
[51
The Abdomen
Box 33-1 Diseases associated with acute
necrotizing pancreatitis
Concurrent biliary tract disease
Ischemia 
 Pancreatic ductal obstruction
Infection
Toxopla smosis
Feline Herpes virus infections
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 Pancreatic fluke infestations (Eurytrema procyonis. Amphimerus
pseudofelinus)
Trauma
 Organophosphate poisoning
Hepatic lipidosis
Figure 33-3 Abdominal ultrasound of a cat with severe pancreatitis.
non-responsive cases, severely affected animals or those with malig
Note the hypoechogenic pancreas (arrowhead) and hyperechogenic
nant disease, surgical intervention by celiotomy or laparoscopy may
peripancreatic tissue (arrow). (Courtesy of Katharina M. Hittmair)
be required to obtain biopsy specimens and thus a definitive diagnosis
for specifictherapy. In cases with mass lesions, surgery may be required
Diagnostic imaging
for definitive treatment.
Radiography
Pancreatitis
Lateral and ventrodorsal projections are evaluated for loss of perito-
 Depending on the presence of permanent histopathologic changes
neal detail suggestive of peritoneal effusion or a cranial abdominal
after resolution of the disease, pancreatitis is classified as acute [no
 mass and subsequent displacement of internal organs into the upper
 permanent changes) or chronic (irreversible morphological change).21
right quadrant of the abdomen. The duodenum often appears dis-
Acute necrotizing pancreatitis (ANP) is characterized by a pre-
placed and corrugated in traumatic pancreatitis; rarely, calcification in
dominance of pancreatic acinar cell necrosis and peripancreatic fat
the pancreatic and peripancreatic area is visible. In acute cases, radio-
uu pue 'aeuua ueuuu yo sunoue snea z'sisau
 graphs are also useful to rule out other causes of acute abdomen.
eralization can be present.? Some fibrosis is possible if there is chronic
underlying disease with an acute flare-up. The etiopathogenesis of
Ultrasonography
ANP is unknown and it is mostly considered idiopathic; however,
various diseases and conditions have known associations with cats
 Ultrasonography is the most useful imaging modality to support the
developing ANP (Box 33-1).
 Pancreatitis may be caused by a reduction in pancreatic blood flow
 masses located in the cranial abdomen can be caused by pancreatitis.
due to hypotension under general anesthesia, or due to temporary
cysts/pseudocysts, abscesses, or neoplasia. Concurrent abdominal
venous outflow occlusion during surgery.2 It rarely develops second-
effusions can be readily identifed. Acute feline pancreatic disease is
ary to pancreatic biopsy or excision of pancreatic neoplasia.23,24
In acute suppurative pancreatitis, neutrophilic inflammation is the
atic fat and thickening of gastric and duodenal walls. More chronic
predominant histologic feature The condition is less common than
cases with acute flare-ups usually show mixed echogenicity of the
ANP and appears to affect younger animals.12.13,25.26
peripancreatic tissues. Cats with chronic disease can have a dilatation
Chronic non-suppurative pancreatitis (CP) is a continuous and
of the gall bladder and common bile duct.7-1The use of Doppler
usually progressive inflammatory process of the pancreas, where
ultrasonography has shown promise in preliminary studies.2 Although
the predominant feature are lymphocytic inflammation, fibrosis, and
specificity is high, the overall sensitivity of abdominal ultrasound to
detect eline pancreatitis is low 2435%).71 While acutepancreatitis
acinar atrophy.
There is significant overlap in the various forms of pancreatitis, and
can be identified as described above, chronic pancreatitis does not
ultimately histopathology is needed to distinguish the conditions.25
 often produce ultrasonographically visible changes.
Pancreatic atrophy is believed to be the consequence and end stage
of CP in most feline cases and it may or may not affect the endocrine
Computed tomography (CT)
 portion of the gland as well. Many cats develop exocrine pancreatic
 The feline pancreas can be visualized using CT scans, and CT imaging
insuffciency, resulting in severe nutrient maldigestion, acid injury to
the duodenal mucosa, cobalamin and fat-soluble vitamin malabsorp-
might be useful in the identification of pancreatic mass lesions.
tion, and bacterial proliferation in the gut.27
However, it is not a useful diagnostic test for feline pancreatitis.14
Pathophysiology
-ine usdan aieuand ieul paaaaq Aleiaua si ll 'sneaued ul
SURGICAL DISEASES
tion of digestive zymogens within pancreatic acinar cells is followed
by pancreatic autodigestion and inflammation: acinar cell necrosis.
Conditions of the feline pancreas can often be treated successfully
hemorrhage and fat necrosis and saponifcation take place.7 Systemic
with therapeutic intervention and nutritional manipulation. In
consequences of intracellular enzyme activation are mast cell
Pancreas
Chapter
degranulation, leukocyte chemotaxis, platelet aggregation, vasodila-
tion, surfactant degradation within the lungs and, in severe
cially for dogs with pancreatitis. This should only be extrapolated to
cases, initiation of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
the cat in cases of severe vomiting at risk for aspiration pneumonia.
Under normal conditions, circulating proteolytic enzymes
are
With their predilection for the development of fat mobilization and
bound by c-macroglobulins and rapidly cleared. When circulating
hepatic lipidosis, it is extremely important to feed cats through their
Q-macroglobulins are depleted, proteases activate the kinin, coagula-
bouts of pancreatitis. Esophagostomy, gastrostomy, gastroduodenos-
tion, fibrinolytic and complement cascades, resulting in the develop-
tomy, or jejunostomy feeding tubes may be placed to provide enteral
ment of acute DIC and death.5
support in anorexic animals (see Chapter 12). Ideally, small frequent
portions of a diet high in carbohydrate and low in fat are given.
Therapy
Aggressive analgesic therapy based on systemic opioids should be
provided (Table 33-6). Pain in cats is not easily detected as they tend
Supportive and symptomatic care is central to the treatment of cats
su (u und 'an guaa] iemuim Aq ued muxa o1
with pancreatitis. Aggressive therapy is critical in order to improve the
chance for survival. Underlying causes for pancreatitis should be diag-
Nausea and vomiting in affected cats can be severe and there is a
 nosed and treated if possible.
variety of anti-emetics available for use in cats; these are listed in
 Fluid, acid-base and electrolyte deficits should be corrected. Pan-
Table 33-6.
 i    aq u si 
 Septic complications of acute pancreatitis are rare in cats, but broad-
nate should be given at a dose of 50-150 mg/kg IV over 12-24 hours
spectrum antibiotics should be given if toxic changes are present in
if necessary and serum total or ionized calcium concentration should
the blood or if the patient is febrile. Necrosis and inflammation pre-
be monitored during therapy. Anemic cats with a packed cell volume
dispose to colonic bacterial translocation and colonization of the
below 15-20% are transfused with whole blood or packed red blood
 pancreas, mainly with E. coliand other coliforms.28.29
cells after blood typing and cross-matching (see Chapter 5). Plasma
 Indications for surgery for pancreatitis include an enlarging or per-
transfusion may be beneficial to increase available C-macroglobulins
sistent pancreatic mass in a patient unresponsive to medical treat-
that bind circulating active proteases, and to combat DIC. Increased 
pue juaeanl lepau aaissaise ot aaisuodsai-uou sisdas pue huau
concentrations of albumin will help to maintain plasma oncotic pres-
 extraluminal bile duct obstruction. Abscesses and large necrotic areas
sure and blood volume and reduce pancreatic edema.
are debrided (see Box 33-3), and omentectomy (see Chapter 19) with
Table 33-6 Therapeutics for pancreatitis cases
Drug
Dose rate and interval
Comments
Analgesia
Methadone
0.1-0.3 mg/kg sowly IV, IM, SQ every 3-4 hours
Suitable to treat moderate to severe pain, may
up to 0.6 mg/kg oral transmucosal76 every
 produce euphoriazg
3-4 hours
Monitor analgesic effect
Morphine
0.1-0.4 mg/kg sowly IV, IM every 3-4 hours or
 Monitor analgesic effect
continuous rate infusion 0.1-0.2 mg/kg/hour IV
Fentanyl
2-5 μg/kg as an IV loading dose, followed by a
Very potent analgesic, suitable for the treatment of
continuous rate infusion of 1-5 μg/kg/hour
severe pain
 Causes respiratory depression
Buprenorphine
20-30 μg/kg IV, IM, SQ or oral transmucosal
Provides visceral and somatic analgesia, has a longer
every 6 hours
duration of action compared to other opioidsa0 
 Pethidine
3-5 mg/kg IM or SQ every 2-4 hours
Requires frequent dosing to be effectivea1.82
 Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg SQ every 90 minutes
Ketamine
Continuous rate infusion of 2-10 μg/kg/min. IV
Used as supplements to opioids in patients with
preceded by loading dose of 0.25 mg/kg 
more severe pain3
Lidocaine
Continuous rate infusion of 20 μg/kg/min. IV
 Used as supplements to opioids in patients with
preceded by a slowly administered loading dose
more severe pain3
of 0.25-1.0 mg/kg
Cats tend to be more sensitive to CNS side effects
Anti-emetics
 Maropitant
0.5-1 mg/kg PO or SQ every 24 hours
αz-Adrenergic antagonist, e.g..
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM or SQ every 8 hours
chlorpromazine
 5-HT antagonists: Ondansetron
0.1-1.0 mg/kg
Granisetron
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
Dolasetron 
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO or IV every 12 to 24 hours
 Dopaminergic antagonists, e.g..
Less effective anti-emetic agents in cats4
metoclopramide
379
Section
5
The Abdomen
essanau j paad si (te iaideu aas Aoauaids inoi o
provided if necessary. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous or endoscopic
The abdomen is lavaged with warm sterile saline to remove activated
drainage of pancreatic abscesses has been reported in human beings:
proteases from the abdomen. Hyperbilinubinemia due to extrahepatic
however, experience in veterinary medicine is rare. Antibiotic treat-
bile duct obstruction can occur as a consequence to pancreatitis or
 ment should be based on culture and sensitivity results
pancreatic fibrosis and needs to be addressed surgically if non-
 Two of the three cats with pancreatic abscess that were treated surgi-
responsive to medical treatment. In those instances, a biliary diversion
cally, survived. Survival of dogs with pancreatic abscesses treated surgi-
technique such as cholecystoduodenostomy or cholecystojejunos-
cally is 29-40%.33-37
tomy (see Chapter 3l) can be used. Alternatively, biliary diversion is
facilitated by tube cholecystostomy Recently, choledochal stenting has
Pancreatic pseudocyst and pancreatic cyst
aqeioney ssal aq ol suaas sisougoid pue Mol aie se paieiado jo
Pancreatic pseudocysts are non-epithelial lined cavity lesions filled
than in the dog. Two of seven cats died directly postoperatively, three
with fluid containing pancreatic cells and/or pancreatic enzymes. They
more within seven to 24 months and only two survived long term
are a common complication of acute or chronic pancreatitis in
following stenting. An overall mortality rate of 50% for biliary diver-
humans, and are seen less frequently in dogs and cats.38a.3 Clinical
0lluapnud suaas l os ls'pauodai uaaq sey ie aut u sanbuypal uois
signs are those associated with pancreatitis. There seems to be a pre-
be very cautious not to operate prematurely.
 Samples for culture (aerobic and anaerobic) and sensitivity should
vomiting by indentation of the stomach. True pancreatic cysts are
be taken from the pancreas and the liver. Open or closed abdominal
lined by a layer of cuboidal epithelium and typically do not commu-
drainage might be required, depending on the severity of intra-
nicate with the pancreatic duct. There are three reports of feline cases
abdominal changes.
that were either associated with polycystic disease in the liver and
kidneys, pancreatitis alone,2 or pancreatitis, pancreatic atrophy, and
Pancreatic abscess
the development of diabetes mellitus.43
 A large fluid-filled lesion might be felt on a thorough abdominal
 Pancreatic abscess is a rare complication of acute pancreatitis in cats,32
 palpation, but it is usually diagnosed by ultrasonography. CT scan,
it consists of a circumscribed collection of punulent and necrotic mate-
during surgery, or at necropsy.3 In ultrasound, a cystic structure adja-
cent to the pancreas is noted, which can be solitary or multiple.
and organs. In most feline and canine cases the abscesses are sterile.
Definitive diagnosis is via aspiration and evaluation of the fluid. Pseu-
but in one of the three reported cats, cultures positive for Escherichia
docysts usually consist of modifed transudate with a higher concen-
coli were obtained. Typically, a hypoechoic mass can be found on
tration of pancreatic enzymes than in the serum.
ultrasound adjacent to the pancreas, as well as signs of generalized
 Medical treatment consists of supportive treatment of pancreatitis,
severe pancreatitis.
pue ishopnasd/ss autgo uonendse papime-punosen snoauenoiad
 Preoperative fine needle aspiration cytology should be performed
close monitoring of the size of the lesion. If clinical signs do not
to differentiate pancreatic abscess from other pancreatic mass lesions
improve the lesion enlarges or fails to resolve, or if percutaneous
and to assess the severity of pancreatic changes. Surgery is recom-
drainage is not possible, surgical intervention is considered. The lesion
mended in the face of a persisting or enlarging pancreatic mass non-
is either drained internally or externally or completely excised. Three
responsive to aggressive medical treatment It consists of debridement
cats with pancreatic pseudocysts are reported in the veterinary litera-
of the abscess[es) and necrotic tissue Altermatively, drainage and
ture. Two cats were treated medically and they died ten days and two
 omentalization of the abscess is helpful in cases where complete exci-
months after diagnosis, the other cat had surgery including complete
sion would compromise the main pancreatic duct (Fig. 33-4). Patency
excision of the pseudocyst. This cat survived. Unfortunately, necrop-
of the common bile duct is ensured or biliary decompression
sies were not performed that could explain the two cats' deterioration.
True pancreatic cysts have been reported in three cats; two of them
underwent surgical resection. In one case multiple cysts recurred one
 month after surgery, and the cat was euthanized because of the lack
of clinical improvement Internal drainage techniques including cysto-
gastrostomy, cystoduodenostomy, or cystojejunostomy are preferred
in human medicine.
Pancreatic trauma
Blunt abdominal trauma such as automobile accidents or high-rise
adu ieaued pue st't dny ym pateiosse uaaq sey aopus
has been described following high-rise syndrome in the cat in 1% and
0.6% of cases.16.46 The incidence of traumatic pancreatitis might be
underestimated because of the vague clinical signs and being masked
by other, more obvious diseases. The incidence of pancreatic injury
and subsequent pancreatitis seems to increase with the height of the
fall. Time to diagnosis and surgery is often protracted and ranges from
one to 17 days. 16.46
enzymes in the abdominal cavity and rapid progression to severe
Figure 33-4 Intraoperative view of a cat with severe necrotizing
generalized pancreatitis and peripancreatic fat necrosis. The condition
pancreatitis and a pancreatic abscess (arrow). The location of the abscess
is likely to result in multiorgan failure and death if not diagnosed and
in the pancreatic angle prohibited complete excision and necrotic
treated aggressively early in the course of the disease. Abdominal pain
material was carefully debrided and omentalized.
seems to be very prevalent in cats after pancreatic rupture. Abdominal
088
Pancreas
Chapter
A
Figure 33-6 Abdominal ultrasound scan of a cat with a cystic
pancreatic neoplasia in the right pancreatic limb. On histopathology.
adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. (Courtesy of Katharina M. Hirtmair)
associated clinical signs. Likewise, inflammatory masses of chronic
se panapisuos aq oi paau pue eiseidoau alquasan ueo sieaiued
differentials. Gastrinoma and insulinoma are the most common
endocrine tumors of the feline pancreas, and glucagonomas have been
described in the dog., but not in cats. Pancreatic endocrine tumors
 originate from specialized neuroendocrine cells, the amine precursor
uptake, and decarboxylation cells, and are also called APUDomas.
Adenocarcinoma and adenoma
ranging from 0.013% to 0.6% in various reports.48-50 Cats suffering
B
from diabetes mellitus seem to be at higher risk.51,52 History and clini-
cal signs mostly resemble those of pancreatitis. Anorexia, vomiting.
Figure 33-5 (A) Intraoperative view of the severely inflamed right
abdominal pain, a palpable mass, and icterus from biliary obstruction
pancreatic limb of a cat after a trauma from a high-rise syndrome.
are the most prevalent findings. Abdominal efusion might be second-
areas within the mesentery.
sion. Paraneoplastic alopecia may be seen, which usually is a
non-pruritic, symmetrical alopecia affecting the face, ventral body, and
medial aspects of the limbs. Crusty lesions sometimes present on the 
footpads.53,54
effusion might be detected on ultrasound and typically consists of a
Alterations of echogenicity and mass effects can be seen ultrasono-
sterile modified transudate. Lipase activity in the peritoneal fluid
graphically in many pancreatitis cases (Fig. 33-6), so further evalua-
um sieo ui Aianoe asedi uas on pando paneaala aq on sans
tion via ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration or biopsy is
 traumatic pancreatitis and pancreatic rupture.46.47 Otherwise, clinical
warranted. Alternatively, abdominal effusion can be examined cyto-
signs and diagnosis resemble those of severe acute pancreatitis.
logically, but sensitivity is much lower.55
 In cats with deteriorating clinical signs and worsening ascites, surgi-
Therapy of exocrine pancreatic carcinoma should be directed at
cal exploration is indicated. Treatment is partial pancreatectomy (see
surgical excision since the tumor is uniformly resistant to chemo-
Box 33-3) of the ruptured pancreas, performed in a similar manner
therapy and radiation therapy. Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple
as for severe pancreatitis (Fig. 33-5).
procedure) has been advocated for humans and carries an intraopera-
Prognosis for cats with pancreatic rupture is very guarded. In the
tive morbidity of 5-10%. Unfortunately, mortality and morbidity in
two studies reported, only one cat out of ten and two out of four cats
diseased animals is much higher. Also, invasive growth and metastasis
survived; the others were either euthanized or died during the periop-
are present in most cases at the time of diagnosis. Metastases occur to
erative period.
au on '(uoisnya lenad sunpoid Auanbay) sun aui on laail au
small intestine, and regional and distant lymph nodes. Lesions have
Pancreatic neoplasia
also been found in the heart and diaphragm. Palliative surgical bypass
such as gastrojejunostomy for relief of bowel obstruction is recom-
Pancreatic neoplasia can be exocrine or endocrine (hormone secret-
mended for metastatic disease in humans, but yields only short-lived
ing). Most exocrine pancreatic neoplasia is adenocarcinoma or
 aa ue r ii e y o a  e i aa ss
adenoma with acinar or ductular origin. Nodular hyperplasia is a
atic adenocarcinoma that was completely excised from the left pan-
common fnding in older cats during ultrasonography or surgery and
creatic lobe, but metastasis occurred 18 weeks after surgery and the
is a differential diagnosis of pancreatic masses; however, there are no
cat was euthanized.54 Prognosis is generally grave.
188
Section
5
The Abdomen
Gastrinoma
-ssasons siseiseau pue sewuounnsun asouseip ol ssop pue sueuny
fully. As this modality becomes more widely available, it might prove
Gastrinomas are islet cell tumors that secrete excessive amounts of
useful for the diagnosis, presurgical planning, and prognostic assess-
aul ui osle inq seanoued au ul pauap! uaaq aney Aaul use
ment in the feline species as well.
 peripancreatic lymph nodes and mesentery. Gastrinomas are part of
 Surgical resection is the treatment recommended for insulinomas.
the Zollinger-Ellison syndrome consisting of a non-B-cell neuroen-
Existing hypoglycemia should be corrected with dextrose infusions. In
hypoglycemic crisis 0.25-0.5 g dextrose per kilogram can be given as
mous s yo  on dn sa t ae a u
a 25% solution as a bolus over three to five minutes. Treatment should
involvement of the liver, lymph nodes, spleen, and mesentery at the
time of surgery.5t.57 The clinical signs are related to the severe gastric
be continued with a continuous rate infusion of a maintenance solu-
tion with added 2.5% dextrose. Blood glucose levels are monitored
acid hypersecretion, with gastrointestinal ulceration occurring in 80% 
during and after surgery. During surgery, the pancreas is carefully
of cases and often consist of vomiting with or without hemate-
inspected and palpated to detect abnormalities. Intravenous infusion
mesis, abdominal pain, hematochezia, and anorexia. Endoscopically.
of methylene blue to stain insulinomas intraoperatively has been
esophagitis, gastritis, and upper gastrointestinal ulceration might be
leo au ul papuauuosau jou st ampanoid aul rsgop ul papuawosa
noted.
because of possible adverse effects of hemolytic anemia due to Heinz
Laboratory fndings show a regenerative anemia due to gastro-
body formation and acute renal failure secondary to hemoglobinuric
intestinal bleeding and leukocytosis and neutrophilia caused by
nephrosis.
gastrointestinal inflammation. Biochemical abnormalities include
 Partial pancreatectomy (see Box 33-3) is the method of choice and
hypoalbuminemia and elevated alkaline phosphatase and electrolyte
can be undertaken easily if the tumor involves the extremity of the
abnormalities consistent with chronic vomiting. Diagnosis is made by
au Aonsap ot ou uayet aq o sey ai ia qu oeaued ya
measurement of elevated fasted serum gastrin levels, but should be
duodenal blood supply when part of the right pancreatic limb is
suspected in any animal with severe gastrointestinal signs. Somatosta-
reseted. The procedure has a better prognosis than enucleation
tin receptorscintigraphy with pentreotide has been reported in a dog58
alone.° In three out of five cats reported in the veterinary literature,
and might be helpful to diagnose suspected gastrinoma in cats.
insulinomas were located in the left pancreatic limb, one in the right
 Treatment is directed at surgical excision if possible and a reduction
 pancreatic limb and one in the body between the portal vein and the
 of tumor burden, even if complete removal of the gastrinoma is not
 pancreatic duct.60,63-6 If the tumor location precludes partial pancrea-
possible This will reduce gastrin secretory capacity and thus improve
tectomy or if multiple lesions are present, careful enucleation of the
the effcacy of medical therapy. Gastrointestinal ulcerations can be
tumor and metastases is recommended. Metastases of the lymph
removed during exploratory surgery. Medical therapy consists of oral
nodes and liver are resected if possible to achieve cytoreduction. It is
proton pump inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole), Hz-blockers, and sucral-
important not to euthanize the animal because of an abnormal gross
fate Prognosis is poor, and survival times in animals undergoing
81 o yaam auo w auei uean iepau Aq pamoy Aans
hepatic appearance as there is little correlation between visual inspec-
Jo eaie aul ui sasseu aiel zg'saisdoiq peday jo Asoloisiy pue uon
months.57
the pancreatic head can be very diffcult to excise and excessive
manipulation can lead to severe postoperative pancreatitis. Debulking
Insulinoma
for cytoreduction and, in severe cases, a conservative approach includ-
ing medical therapy should be considered. If no primary tumor can
 Insulinomas are functional B-cell tumors arising from insulin-
be detected, a surgical biopsy is taken to rule out diffuse pancreatic
 producing pancreatic islet cells. They are rare in cats, and have been
disease. Postoperative hypoglycemia is usually a sign of remaining
reported in six cats older than 12 years. Three of the cats were Siamese,
tumor cells. Repeat surgery or medical treatment can be considered.
two were domestic short-hair cats and one was a Persian cat Insuli-
If cats are normoglycemic after surgery, continued monitoring of
nomas have multihormonal productivity independent of negative
glucose levels is recommended. Hyperglycemia occurs if islet cell
feedback mechanisms.5? Clinical signs associated with insulinomas
'sase aaaas u pue iou a Aq passadns si uonaid unsu
are typically secondary to hypoglycemia and result from neuroglyco-
penia and hypoglycemia-mediated stimulation of the sympathoadre-
Medical treatment is aimed at prevention of hypoglycemia by a
nal system. Intermittent periods of normoglycemia do occur, caused
variety of approaches: small frequent meals of a diet high in fat,
by the effect of those counter-regulatory hormones, mainly catecho-
protein, and complex carbohydrates should be fed. Glucocorticoids
lamines and glucagon, cortisol, and growth hormone.
stimulate hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis and antagonize
 Clinical signs include seizures, weakness, ataxia, mental dullness,
the effect of insulin production at a cellular level. Prednisolone is
disorientation and collapse staggering with muscle fasciculations, and
Aeu sasop uiseaout ep aimi Od sy/u I-s'o yo asop e ie paes
weight loss with polydipsia. Prolonged neuroglycopenia can lead to
be necessary.5 If hypoglycemia is not controlled adequately, diazoxide
irreversible neurologic complications.90 In dogs and ferrets, insulin-
(5-20 mg/kg PO twice daily), the somatostatin-uptake inhibitor
secreting B-cell tumors are malignant with a high likelihood of metas-
octreotide (1-2 μg/kg SQ q8-12h), and propanolol (0.2-1.0 mg/kg
tasis at the time of diagnosis5 and the same probably holds true for
PO qsh) have been recommended.5.68
'papiene ol iood aq ot suuaas sases panodai may aul ul sisougoid
lymph nodes and liver In the dog, insulinomas also metastasize to the
 Recurrence of clinical signs is described at five days, six days, seven
 mesentery, omentum, duodenum, spleen, kidney, and spinal cord.61
months and 18 months postoperatively. One cat was euthanized
 Diagnosis normally requires detection of hypoglycemia (blood 
because of persistence of neurologic signs l month after surgery:
glucose <3.3 mmol/L) and the presence of a normal to high insulin
however, one cat was still alive and clinically normal 32 months after
level in a cat with seizure-like symptoms. Some cats need to be fasted
surgery. In dogs, median survival without metastasis at the time of
to show hypoglycemia. Hematology, blood biochemistry and urinaly-
 surgery is about 18 months and seven to nine months for those with
sis results typically are normal or reflect those of other, concurrent
loy Aains suoiapun ssop Kpns uana arou e ul sg'siseiseau
disease. Ultrasound can be helpful to find pancreatic nodules and
insulinoma survived for a median of 785 days, while dogs that received
hypoechoic hepatic lesions suspicious of metastases. Nuclear scintig-
additional medical treatment after relapse of hypoglycemia lived for
a median of 1316 days.70
382
Pancreas
Chapter
EE
Partial pancreatectomy (Box 33-3)
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
 Partial pancreatectomy is indicated for focal lesions like neoplasms,
abscesses or pseudocysts.
Pancreatic biopsy (Box 33-2)
Total pancreatectomy
Biopsy is indicated for tissue diagnosis of pancreatic disease. Cytology
from an ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration is the frst step to
Therapeutic total pancreatectomy is rarely performed in cats and dogs
establish a diagnosis and often yields reliable results.55 Should the
since it bears a high preoperative morbidity and mortality. Possible
diagnosis not be conclusive, histopathology from pancreatic biopsies
indications are intractable pancreatitis or trauma. Total pancreatec-
is indicated. Biopsies can be taken laparoscopically or surgically.
tomy for exocrine pancreatic neoplasia is not recommended because
Laparoscopy (see Chapter 24) offers a minimally invasive and safe
 of the high metastatic rate and poor prognosis. Experimentally, total
sidosiedel zle's sasdoq seaiued Aenh yaiy uiqo on Apou
pancreatectomy is described for the dog only.76.77
biopsy results in local reactions, but neovascularization and adhesions
tr'sz Asdoiq lesjains iaye ueu paunouoid ssal ane
the right pancreatic limb and pancreatic head. Because of extensive
 Box 33-2 Pancreatic biopsy
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency. clipped and prepared for
leaf. Alternatively. small tissue samples can be retrieved via suture
aseptic abdominal surgery.
fracture technique or blunt dissection and ligation technique. For the 
euawo lesop lo wnuaponposaw aut anbiuuat anpey anins
Laparoscopic pancreatic biopsy
leaf is opened and non-absorbable suture material is passed around
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency and after establishment of
the tissue to be removed. By tightening the suture, pancreatic
 a pneumoperitoneum and routine camera and instrumental portal
parenchyma is crushed, thereby ligating small pancreatic ducts and 
insertion (typically a three-port technique is used) (see Chapter 24), the
ladiens e yim ins s! aunins aut ot jeisip anssil aul 'siassa pooig
left and right pancreatic limbs are inspected. The left limb can be
blade and submitted for histopathology (Hg. 33-7)
manipulated by lifting and retracting the spleen to the right. A punch
 For the dissection and ligation technique, sterile cotton buds
type biopsy instrument should be used, as it has been shown to help
or Halstead mosquito forceps are used to dissect the pancreatic
 obtain biopsy speimens with minimal crush or traction artifacts.s
parenchyma (Fig. 33-8). Pancreatic ducts and blood vessels remain 
poolg pleaued aul oi abewep plone ot uaxei ag oi sey aien lepads
and are ligated and transected. Alternatively, careful bipolar cautery
supply and duct system when tissue is excised from the pancreatic
can be used for transection and ligation. The mesoduodenum is 
body or the right lobe.
closed with fine absorbable suture material. The abdomen is 
thoroughly lavaged with warm sterile saline solution to reduce the
Open surgical pancreatic biopsy
concentration of activated digestive enzymes and toxins. If the
A cranial midline abdominal incision is made. A TruCut needle is used 
cat has been anorexic or not eating well, establishment of an 
or a smalltissue wedge is taken using a scalpel blade from abnormal
esophagostomy, gastroduodenostomy, or jejunostomy tube should be
pancreatic tissue after incising the mesoduodenum or dorsal omental
considered (see Chapter 12).
Mosquito forceps
Duodenum
Figure 33-7 Suture fracture technique.
Hgure 33-8 Blunt dissection and ligation technique.
Section
151
The Abdomen
intake should be restricted for 12-24 hours; however, longer periods
 Box 33-3 Partial pancreatectomy
of anorexia should be avoided. Food is mostly provided via a surgi-
cally placed gastoduodenostomy or jejunostomy tube As obligate
loy pauedaid pue paddip ouaqunoan jesiop u! paneid s! ren aul
carnivores, cats have a predilection for the development of fat mobi-
aseptic abdominal surgery. A cranial midline incision is made to
lization and hepatic lipidosis if protein intake is not adequate. If the
 enable entry into the abdomen.
A suture fracture or dissection and ligation technique can be
cat is vomiting in spite of anti-emetic treatment, parenteral nutrition
should be instituted to meet nutritional requirements. Even in these
o unuaponosau aut 'anbuupat aanpey aunns aul os paondua
dorsal omental leaf is opened and non-absorbable suture material is
cases, minimal amounts of oral food intake will be beneficial to
passed around the tissue to be removed. By tightening the suture,
maintain enterocyte integrity. Fluid and electrolyte balance is moni-
pancreatic parenchyma is crushed, thereby ligating small pancreatic
tored and maintained as necessary.
ducts and blood vessels. The tissue distal to the suture is cut with a
Glucose levels should be monitored at least twice daily and, if
scalpel blade and submitted for histopathology (Fig. 33-7).
 For the dissection and ligation technique, sterile cotton buds or 
tion is administered. Persistent hypoglycemia after removal of insuli-
 Halstead mosquito forceps are used to dissect the pancreatic
noma is typically a sign of remaining tumor cells. Insulin is used to
 parenchyma (Fig 33-8). Pancreatic ducts and blood vessels remain
treat hyperglycemia.
and are ligated and transected. Alternatively, careful bipolar cautery
Cats with peritonitis are closely monitored for the development of
 can be used for transection and ligation.
sepsis and DIC. It is critical to treat hypoalbuminemia by administra-
For dissection of the left pancreatic limb, blood supply coming
tion of synthetic colloids, human albumin, or plasma transfusions.
 from the splenic artery is ligated and transected, or cauterized if 
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are administered in those patients until
vessels are small; care is taken to preserve integrity of the splenic 
culture and sensitivity results are available.
artery. In disease with severe peripancreatic involvement this might 
au yo uoisxa loy painban si Aunauaids uaut 'aigisea, aod sou
distal part of the right pancreatic limb, great care has to be taken
not to obstruct the caudal pancreaticoduodenal artery. because of
COMPLICATIONS
the particular blood supply in the cat.? Because of the strong
regenerative capacity of the pancreas, up to 80% of the pancreas
Pancreatitis is a possible complication after pancreatic surgery. Fortu-
 can be resected without impairment of the exocrine or endocrine 
function.7s Non-resectable abscesses in the pancreatic body should be
nately, the incidence after surgical biopsy of the pancreas or resection
 drained and omentalized.
of pancreatic neoplasia is low when atraumatic tissue handling is
 The mesoduodenum or dorsal omental leaf are cdosed with fine
strictly executed.23,24,73
absorbable suture material.
 Hepatic lipidosis is a well-recognized complication after ANP and
 In cats with severe peritonitis or pancreatic abscess, closed
is a poor prognostic sign. This underlines the necessity for adequate
 abdominal drainage with a Jackson-Pratt drain should be considered
nutritional intake in cats with pancreatitis. Cats with necrotizing and
to provide ongoing evacuation of fluid from the abdomen. Routinely.
suppurative or septic conditions of the pancreas need to be monitored
two drains are used: one is placed cranial to the liver and the
carefully for the development of septic peritonitis, pneumonia, and
second one should lie in the area of the pathology (i.e., pancreas)
thoracic effusion.
to optimize drainage. An esophagostomy, gastrostomy.
 Pre-existing diabetes mellitus might worsen after a further bout of
gastroduodenostomy, or jejunostomy feeding tube is placed
pancreatitis or afer pancreatic surgery. Diabetes mellitus is a rare
 complication of chronic pancreatitis.
inflammatory changes it is most often not feasible to excise the
PROGNOSIS
pancreatic tissue without traumatizing the shared pancreatic and duo-
denal vasculature, so pancreaticoduodenectomy and cholecystojeju-
nostomy are necessary.
Generally, prognosis for surgical inflammatory pancreatic disease in
cats is guarded to poor Non-specific clinical signs require high levels
of suspicion by the attending clinician, and diagnosis is often delayed.
Many cats with severe necrotizing pancreatitis or pancreatic rupture
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
examination. New diagnostic developments such as the radioimmu-
 Postoperative care is dependent on the underlying disease. Analgesia
suopuo asoueeip ot diaq luaiuu lldy umas jo uopaap ioy Aesseou
 is provided as necessary. Opioid agonists-antagonists like buprenor-
earlier, but still the systemic effects of pancreatitis can be severe.
phine 10-30 μg/kg IV q6-8h were historically preferred over pure
Aggressive treatment must be started immediately in order to improve 
agonists, since they were thought not to increase pressure of the
survival and stop the vicious circle of intra-abdominal pancreatic
sphincter of Oddi and are not associated with gastrointestinal hypo-
 enzyme activation and necrosis. Pancreatic tumors are mostly malig-
 motility. However pain relief is paramount so clinicians should not
nant and highly metastatic and, with the exception of resectable
be afraid to administer pure opioid agonists to the painful cat. Oral
insulinomas, bear a poor to grave prognosis.
REFERENCES
1. Vollmerhaus B, Habermehl KH.
 Blackwell-Wissenschafts-Verlag: 1994.
pancreas. Microsc Res Tech
Bauchspeicheldrise. In: Frewein J.
p. 163-5.
1997;37:384-98.
Vollmerhaus B, editors. Anatomie
2.
 Motta PM, Macchiarelli G, Nottola SA,
3.
Schummer A, Vollmerhaus B.
von Hund und Katze. Berlin:
Correr S. Histology of the exocrine
Bauchspeicheldruse, Pankreas. In:
Pancreas
Chapter
EE
Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle E, editors.
different diagnostic tests for pancreatitis
in cats: 8 cases [(2003-2007). J Vet Emerg
Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haustiere.
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 200i;15(4):
Crit Care (San Antonio) 2010;20[4):
Berlin, Hamburg: Verlag Paul Parey: 1987.
329-33.
426-35.
p. 128-31.
18.
 Saunders HM, VanWinkle T), Drobatz K.
83.
 Salisbury SK, Lantz GC, Nelson RW.
4.
.Boyden EA. The problem of the pancreatic
et al. Ultrasonographic findings in cats 
Kazacos EA. Pancreatic abscess in dogs: six 
bladder - A critical survey of six new
 with clinical, gross pathologic, and
cases [1978-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 
cases, based on new histological and
histologic evidence of acute pancreatic
1988;193(9):1104-8.
embryological observations. American 
necrosis: 20 cases [1994-2001). J Am Vet
84.
Thompson Ll, Seshadri R, Raffe MR.
Jourmal of Anatomy 1925;36(1):151-83.
Med Assoc 2002;221(12):1724-30.
 Characteristics and outcomes in surgical
 5. Cormell K, Fischer J. Surgery of the.
19.
Hittmair KM, Vielgrader HD, Loupal G.
management of severe acute pancreatitis:
exocrine pancreas. In: Slatter D, editor.
 Ulltrasonographic evaluation of
37 dogs (2001-2007). J Vet Emerg Crit 
Textbook of small animal surgery.
 gallbladder wall thickness in cats. Vet
Care (San Antonio) 2009;19(2):165-73.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003. p. 752-62.
Radiol Ultrasound 2001;42(2):149-55.
85.
. Anderson JR, Comell KK, Parnell NK,
6. Brobst DF. Pancreatic function. In: Kaneko
20.
 Rademacher N, Ohlerth S, Scharf G, et al.
Salisbury SK. Pancreatic abscess in 
, Harvey IW, Bruss M, editors. Clinical
Contrast-enhanced power and color
36 dogs: A retrospective analysis of
biochemistry of domestic animals. San
seapued aul jo dqdesouosen[n a[ddog
 prognostic indicators. J Am Anim Hosp
Diego, California: Academic Press; 1997.
in healthy and diseased cats. J Vet Intern
Assoc 2008;44(4):171-9.
p. 353.
Med 2008;22(6):1310-16.
86.
 Johnson MD, Mann FA. Treatment for
7. Washabau Rj. Feline pancreatic disease.
21.
De Cock HE, Forman MA, Farver TB.
pancreatic abscesses via omentalization
In: Ettinger S), Feldman EC, editors.
 Marks SL. Prevalence and histopathologic
with abdominal closure versus open
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine:
characteristics of pancreatitis in cats. Vet
peritoneal drainage in dogs: 15 cases 
diseases of the dog and the cat. St. Louis.
Patho] 2007;44(1):39-49.
[1994-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Mo: Elsevier Saunders; 2010. p. 1704-9.
22.
Yotsumoto F, Manabe T, Ohshio G, et al
2006;228(3):397-402.
8. Cornell K. Pancreas. In: Tobias KM,
 Role of pancreatic blood flow and 
87.
Bellenger CR, llkiw JE, Malik R.
Johnston SA, editors. Veterinary surgery
vasoactive substances in the development
Cystogastrostomy in the treatment of
small animal. Elsevier, Saunders; 2012.
of canine acute pancreatitis. J Surg Res
pancreatic pseudocyst/abscess in two
p.1659-73.
1993;55(5):531-6.
dogs. Vet Rec 1989;125(8):181-4.
9. Pott G. Die artenielle Blutversorgung des 
23.
Lightwood R, Reber HA, Way LW. The risk
38. Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ.
 Magendarmkanals, seiner Anhangsdruesen
 and accuracy of pancreatic biopsy. Am J
et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic.
(Leber, Pankreas) und der Milz bei der
Surg 1976;132(2):189-94.
 radiographic, and ultrasonographic
Katze. Hannover, Germany: Veterinary
24.
Wilson JW, Maywood DD. Functional
abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute
 Medical Dissertation; 1949.
tumors of the pancreatic beta cells. Am J
pancreatitis: 70 cases [1986-1995). J Am
10.
 Egerbacher M, Bock P. Morphology of the
Surg 1981;3:458.
Vet Med Assoc 1998;213(5):665-70.
 pancreatic duct system in mammals.
25.
 Ferreri JA, Hardam E, Kimmel SE, et al.
39.
1.VanEnkevort BA, O'Brien RT, Young KM.
Microsc Res Tech 1997;37[5-6):407-17.
Clinical differentiation of acute
Pancreatic pseudocysts in 4 dogs and
11.
 Baum H. Das Lymphgefassystem des
 necrotizing from chronic nonsuppurative
2 cats: Ultrasonographic and
 Hundes. Archiv der wissenschaflichen 
pancreatitis in cats: 63 cases [1996-2001).
dinicopathologic findings. I Vet Intern
und praktischen Tierheilkunde
jAm Vet Med Assoc 2003;223:469-74.
Med 1999;13[4):309-13.
1918;44:521-650.
26.
 Swift NC, Marks SL, MacLachlan NJ.
40. Hines BL, Salisbury SK, Jakovljevic S,
 12. Hill RC, Van Winkle TJ. Acute necrotizing
 Norris CR. Evaluation of serum feline
DeNicola DB. Pancreatic pseudocyst
pancreatitis and acute suppurative
 trypsin-like immunoreactivity for the
associated with chronic-active necrotizing
 pancreatitis in the cat. A retrospective
diagnosis of pancreatitis in cats. J Am Vet
pancreatitis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
study of 40 cases [1976-1989). J Vet
Med Assoc 2000;217(1):37-42.
Assoc 1996;32(2):147-52.
Intern Med 1993;7(1):25-33.
27.
Washabau RJ, Holt DE. Pathophysiology
41.
 Bosje IT, van den Ingh TS, van der
13. Kimmel SE, Washabau Rl, Drobatz KJ.
of gastrointestinal disease. In: Slatter D,
Linde-Sipman JS. Polycystic kidney and
Incidence and prognostic value of low
editor. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
liver disease in cats. Vet Q 1998;20[4):
 plasma ionized calcium concentration in
3rd ed. vol 1. Philadelphia: Saunders;
136-9.
cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases
2003. p. 530-52.
42.
 Coleman MG, Robson MC, Harvey C.
[1996-1998). JAm Vet Med Assoc
28.
Widdison AL, Alvarez C, Chang YB, et al.
Pancreatic cyst in a cat. N Z Vet J
2001;219(8):1105-9.
 Sources of pancreatic pathogens in acute
2005;53(2):157-9.
14. Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE, et al.
pancreatitis in cats. Pancreas 1994;9[4):
43. Branter EM, Viviano KR. Multiple
Evaluation of serum feline pancreatic
536-41.
recurrent pancreatic cysts with associated
 lipase immunoreactivity and helical
29.
Widdison AL, Karanjia ND, Reber HA.
pancreatic inflammation and atrophy in a
computed tomography versus
Antimicrobial treatment of pancreatic
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12[10):822-7.
 conventional testing for the diagnosis
 infection in cats. Br J Surg 1994;81(6):
44.
 Suter PF Olsson SE. Traumatic
of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med
886-9.
hemorrhagic pancreatitis in the cat: A
2004;18(6):807-15.
30.
 Mayhew PD, Weisse CW. Treatment of
report with emphasis on the radiological
15. Steiner JM, Wilson BG, williams DA.
pancreatitis-associated extrahepatic biliary
diagnosis. J Am Vet Rad Soc 1969;10:
Development and analytical validation
 tract obstruction by choledochal stenting
4-11.
 of a radioimmunoassay for the
in seven cats. J Small Anim Pract
45.
Westermarck E, Saario E. Traumatic
measurement of feline pancreatic lipase
2008;49(3):133-8.
pancreatic injury in a cat - a case history.
immunoreactivity in serum. Can J Vet Res 
31.
 Bacon Nl, White RA. Extrahepatic biliary
Acta Vet Scand 1989;30(3):359-62.
2004;68(4):309-14.
tract surgery in the cat: A case series and
46. Liehmann LM, Dorner J, Hittmair KM.
16. Lettow E, Kabisch D, Arnold U.
review. J Small Anim Pract 2003;44[5):
et al. Pancreatic rupture in four cats with
Pankreasruptur nach Fenstersturz bei der
231-5.
high-rise syndrome. I Feline Med Surg
Katze. Kleintierpraxis 1989;31:191-6.
32.
 Son TT, Thompson L, Serrano S.
2012;14(2):131-7.
17. Gerhardt A, Steiner IM, williams DA,
Seshadri R. Surgical intervention in the
47.
 Guija de Arespacochaga A, Hittmair KM,
et al. Comparison of the sensitivity of
management of severe acute pancreatitis
Schwendenwein I. Lipase activity in
588
Section
5
The Abdomen
peritoneal fluid in cats - a complimentary
59. Jackson TC, Debey B, Lindbloom-Hawley
forceps biopsy by laparoscopy in healthy
diagnostic tool? Vet Clin Pathol
S, et al. Cellular and molecular
beagles. Vet Ther 2002;3(1):31-6.
2007;36(4):392-3.
charactenization of a feline insulinoma.
72. Webb CB, Trott C. Laparoscopic diagnosis
48.
 Seaman RL. Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia
JVet Intern Med 2009;23(2):383-7.
of pancreatic disease in dogs and cats.
in the cat: A case series. J Am Anim Hosp
60. Kraje AC. Hypoglycemia and irreversible
J Vet Intern Med 2008;22(6):1263-6.
Assoc 2004;40(3):238-45.
neurologic complications in a cat with
73.
Cosford KL, Shmon CL, Myers SL, et al.
49.
 Priester WA. Data from eleven United
insulinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
Prospective evaluation of laparoscopic 
States and Canadian colleges of veterinary
2003;223(6):812-14.
pancreatic biopsies in l1 healthy cats.
medicine on pancreatic carcinoma
61.
Kyles A. Endocrine pancreas. In: Slatter D.
j Vet Intern Med 2010;24(1):104-13.
in domestic animals. Cancer Res
editor. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
74.
Lutz TA, Rand JS, Watt P, Galloway A.
1974;34(6):1372.
3rd ed. vol 2. Philadelphia: Saunders;
Pancreatic biopsy in normal cats. Aust Vet
50.
 Owens JM, Drazner FH, Gilbertson SR.
2003. p. 1724-36.
1 1994;71(7):223-5.
 Pancreatic disease in the cat. I Am Anim
62. Mehlhaff Cl, Peterson ME, Patnaik AK,
75.
 Mizumoto R, Yano T, Sekoguchi T.
Hosp Assoc 1975;11:83-9.
Carillo IM. Insulin-producing islet cell
Kawarada Y. Resectability of the pancreas
51.
Goossens MM, Nelson Rw, Feldman EC.
neoplasms: surgical considerations and
without producing diabetes, with special
Griffey SM. Response to insulin treatment
general management in 35 dogs. I Am
reference to pancreatic regeneration. Int J
and survival in 104 cats with diabetes
Anim Hosp Assoc 1985;21:607-12.
Pancreato] 1986;1(3-4):185-93.
mellitus [1985-1995). J Vet Intern Med
Hawks D, Peterson ME, Hawkins KL,
76.
Cobb LF, Merrell RC. Total
1998;12(1):1-6.
Rosebury ws. Insulin-secreting pancreatic
pancreatectomy in dogs. I Surg Res
52.
Kipperman BS, Nelson RW, Griffey SM.
(islet cell) carcinoma in a cat. J Vet Intern
1984;37(3):235-40.
Feldman EC. Diabetes mellitus and 
Med 1992;6(3):193-6.
77.
Papachristou DN, Fortner JG. A simple
exocrine pancreatic neoplasia in two cats
64.
O'Brien TD, Norton F, Turner TM,
method of pancreatic transplantation in
with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Anim
Johnson KH. Pancreatic endocrine tumor
the dog. Am I Surg 1980;139(3):344-7.
Hosp Assoc 1992;28(5):415-18.
in a cat: Clinical, pathological, and 
78.
Washabau Rj. Acute necrotizing
53.
 Brooks DG, Campbell KL, Dennis JS.
immunohistochemical evaluation. J Am
pancreatitis. In: August IR, editor.
Dunstan Rw. Pancreatic paraneoplastic
Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;26(5):453-7.
Consultations in feline internal medicine.
 alopecia in three cats. J Am Anim Hosp
65. McMillan FD, Barr B, Feldman EC.
vol 5. St. Louis, Mo: Elsevier Saunders: 
Assoc 1994;30(6):557-63.
Functional pancreatic islet cell tumor in a
2006. p. 109-19.
54. Tasker S, Griffon Dl, Nuttall T), Hill PB.
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1985;21(6):
79.
 Ferreira TH, Rezende ML, Mama KR, et al.
Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia 
741-6.
Plasma concentrations and behavioral,
following surgical removal of a pancreatic
66.
Greene SN, Bright RM. Insulinoma in
antinociceptive, and physiologic effects
 carcinoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2008;49(1):
of methadone after intravenous and oral
1999;40(1):16-19.
38-40.
transmucosal administration in cats. Am ↓
55.
 Bennett PF, Hahn KA, Toal RL,
67.
 Tobin RL, Nelson Rw, Lucroy MD, et al.
Vet Res 2011;72:764-71.
Legendre AM. Ulltrasonographic and
Outcome of surgical versus medical
80.1
 Jakobs R, Adamek MU, von Bubnoff AC.
 Cytopathological diagnosis of exocrine
treatment of dogs with beta cell
Riemann JF. Buprenorphine or procaine
pancreatic carcinoma in the dog and cat.
neoplasia: 39 cases [1990-1997). 1 Am
for pain relief in acute pancreatitis. A
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37(5):
Vet Med Assoc 1999;215[2):226-30.
prospective randomized study. Scand ↓
466-73.
68.
 Bergman Pl. Paraneoplastic syndromes.
Gastroenterol 2000;35[12):1319-23.
56. Nelson Rw. Beta-Cell neoplasia:
In: Withrow Sl, Vail DM, editors. Withrow
81.
Lascelles BD, Robertson SA. Use of
Insulinoma. In: Feldman EC, Nelson RW.
& MacEwen's small animal clinical
thermal threshold response to evaluate
editors. Canine and feline endocrinology
oncology St. Louis, Mo: Saunders 
the antinociceptive effects of butorphanol
and reproduction. St. Louis, Mo:
Elsevier; 2007. p. 77-94.
in cats. Am J Vet Res 2004;65(8):1085-9.
Saunders; 2004. p. 616-44.
69. Caywood DD, Johnston SD, Norris AM,
82. Steiner JM, williams DA. Feline exocrine
 57. Ward CR. Gastrointestinal endocrine
et al. Pancreatic insulin-secreting
pancreatic disorders. Vet Clin North Am
disease. In: Ettinger Sl, Feldman EC,
neoplasma: Clinical, diagnostic, and
Small Anim Pract 1999;29[2):551-75.
editors. Textbook of veterinary internal
prognostic features in 73 dogs. J Am
 83. Gaynor AR. Acute pancreatitis. In:
medicine: diseases of the dog and the cat.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:577-84.
 Silverstein DC, Hopper K, editors. Small
 St. Louis, Mo, Elsevier Saunders; 2010.
70.
Polton GA, White RN, Brearley MJ.
animal critical care medicine. St. Louis,
p.1857-65.
 Eastwood JM. Improved survival in a
Mo: Saunders/Elsevier; 2009. p. 537-41.
58.
.Altschul M, Simpson KW, Dykes NL, et al.
retrospective cohort of 28 dogs with
84.
Allenspach K, Chan DL. Antiemetic 
Evaluation of somatostatin analogues for
insulinoma. J Small Anim Pract
therapy In: August JR, editor.
 the detection and treatment of gastrinoma
2007;48(3):151-6.
Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine.
in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 1997;38[7):
71.
Harmoinen J, Saari S, Rinkinen M.
vol. 6. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2010.
286-91.
Westermarck E. Evaluation of pancreatic
p. 232-9.
988
34]
Chapter
een
N.J. Bacon, D.A. Kamstock
Disease of the feline spleen is not common. Splenic lesions in feline
Gastroplenic
rsalsplenica
-Ins Areuuanan os pue z%e's-e'o uoy aguei suauads Asdonoau
splenic disease. Splenomegaly, or splenic enlargement, may be diffuse
(symmetric) or focal (asymmetric) and feline splenic disease is more
Jo e oi dn yim asas piuaids auu ueu snsidoau aq on aia
Celiac a.
splenic changes being neoplastic.? Despite this, however, the feline
spleen is less frequently removed than its canine counterpart This
Aorta
eft gastroepiploic a.
chapter outlines broad principles involved with splenic disease, with
attention paid to the spectrum of conditions encountered in the cat.
Pancreatic
branches
Ventral splenic a.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
Figure 34-1 Blood supply of the spleen.
The spleen is often not immediately visible on opening the abdomen,
where it is located in the left cranial quadrant. The head of the spleen 
splenic disease in cats are typically non-specific and the history
is closely associated with the fundus ofthe stomach and the body and
usually includes weight loss, anorexia, lethargy and vomiting. A pal-
tail can be entirely on the left or move more towards the midline The
pable abdominal mass or splenomegaly is found in approximately
blood supply comes from the celiac artery: branches are sent off to
%0g 1aao ul pagie[ua Allensn sl uaalds ayl qanouile zgs'sases jo %0s
au sapiip Aae siuaas au ua pue 'seaue a o aqoi gal a
 of cats with lymphoma. It is typical to fnd splenomegaly when the
dorsal and ventral branches a centimeter or so from the spleen. The
ena uo s uaas au pue 'sa is m au s ua
ventral branch arborizes with the left gastroepiploic artery after sup-
in contour.* These patients also often present with anorexia and vom-
plying the main body of the spleen. The dorsal branch gives rise to
iting due to gastric and duodenal ulcers from paraneoplastic hista-
the short gastric arteries after supplying the dorsal extremity of the
mine release.
spleen. Venous drainage is via the splenic vein, which drains into the
portal vein via the gastrosplenic vein (Fig. 34-1).
Hemoperitoneum
 There are unique ultrastructural properties of the non-sinusoidal
feline spleen which make it unable to remove non-deformable eryth-
Most cases of hemoperitoneum in cats are traumatic in nature and
rocytes containing Heinz bodies from the circulation,4 resulting in the
evidence of abdominal effusion or a palpable abdominal mass is often
high incidence of Heinz bodies in clinically normal cats.5
absent. Following blunt trauma, the spleen and liver are the most
likely sources of severe ongoing hemorrhage.? The clinical signs tend
to be non-specifc and include lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, abdomi-
nal distension, generalized weakness, pale mucous membranes,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
hemoglobinuria, and sometimes syncope and overt signs of shock.
Cats rarely present with spontaneous hemoperitoneum, with only
History and clinical signs
[eopqe aay guaey Auoiauads suioiapun bi jo ino sien inog
blood in one study.d In spontaneous hemoperitoneum cases bleeding
Cats presenting with splenic disease are typically older, with a median
 Occurs most commonly from the liver, with the spleen only account-
age of 12 years, and with no sex predilection." Presenting signs of
ing for 17% of cases.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00034-2
Section
5
The Abdomen
A ruptured spleen from hemangiosarcoma is the most common
identify an underlying cause of splenomegaly in two of five cats? and
neoplastic cause although neoplasia only accounted for 46%
in another study cytology only corresponded to the histologic diag.
of cases. Splenic lymphoma is a rare cause of spontaneous
nosis in 6l% of splenic aspirates, although this included cats and
hemoperitoneum.7.10*
dogs.21 The cat is sedated and positioned in right lateral or dorsal
should be collected with a non-aspiration technique (needle pushed
Blood analysis
into spleen and retracted and redirected several times), as this has
Cats with spontaneous hemoabdomen are often anemic, with many
sa pue aean aui aiid in uas auy an u umars ua
blood yet the same cell morphology compared to samples obtained
having a packed cell volume of 20% or lower. An increased reticulo-
cyte count and thrombocytopenia are also frequently found.6.7
by aspiration techniques (applying suction through a syringe).22
There is no evidence to suggest that bleeding is common or impor-
common. Cats with hemoabdomen also often have high serum lactate
tant after splenic aspiration in cats, even in the face of thrombocyto-
levels, indicative of their low circulating blood volume and poor
piualds isagans ol gop io jeo aul ui aruapiaa ou osle si aiaul sa'eiuad
blood pressure. Elevations in serum urea and creatinine may also be
aspiration has resulted in tumor-seeding to the needle tract in the
body wall.
cell disease involving the spleen, it is common to see a circulating
st in 1a ieo Amq e ay si yo ot on dn pue edouisoa
positive for mast cells." Erythrocytosis due to catecholamine release
SURGICAL DISEASES
lejnosnu aui ypel Aaul se 'sies u! paisadxa jou sl sop ul uaas se
 component to the spleen and sinusoid splenic blood.12
-souse iadoid aui 'aseasip siualds u pateiu saemie iou si Aralins
Common abnormalities in the coagulation profle of cats with
tic tests (along with signalment, history, and clinical signs) should be
hemoabdomen include prolongation in prothrombin time (PT) and
pursued to obtain the most accurate diagnosis. These tests may include
 partial thromboplastin time (PTT).
hematology. imaging, and cytology as addressed above, as well as
biochemical analysis, bone marrow aspirate to rule out myeloprolif-
Imaging
erative diseases or leukemia (acute myeloid leukemia or chronic
 myeloid leukemia),24-2 polymerase chain reaction to nule out specifc
 Ultrasound is the most useful imaging modality for examination of
the spleen though inflated thoracic radiographs or computer tomog-
possibly bacteremia inducing immune-responsive splenomegaly/
raphyl3 are used to screen for metastatic disease. The normal feline
hyperplasia. Also, while these diseases are less common, genetic tests
spleen is diffusely homogenous, has a finer echotexture than the liver
are available to rule out specifc hemolytic (e.g. pyruvate kinase defi-
(like the dog), and is more echogenic than the liver or renal cortex.
eaads u lnsai sie u pm sasasp ais ia zee aun
o siraau pe sray yq ieade u sassu suas 
ultrasound.7 The spleen in cats with lymphoma is reportedly diffusely
 Surgical conditions of the feline spleen include laceration, torsion,
hypoechoic, mottled in texture and may contain small hypoechoic
some neoplasia (benign and malignant), and occasionally other
[euoq t'siaauep ui u z-I on dnaq ue yoy au yanoue 'oy
causes such as foreign bodies and abscesses, as listed in Box 34-1.
effusion and at least one enlarged abdominal lymph node are also
Abscesses within the spleen are uncommon in the cat and usually
found. Myeloproliferative disease involving the spleen is also diffusely
hypoechoic Mast cell disease often results in a subjectively larger
spleen, with a diffusely hypoechoic or nodular/mottled texture
splenic mast cell tumor, hemangiosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, fibrosa-
although it might present as single or multiple nodules.15 Liver
rcoma), but many do not (Box 34-1). Conditions of the spleen may
involvement is also present in approximately 30% of cases. No char-
be generalized or localized, but the decision about whether a patient
acteristics allowing differentiation of cats with lymphosarcoma from
requires surgery is more dependent on the overall clinical situation
cats with mast cell tumor have been described, although the former
rather than the exact distribution of lesions within the spleen.
are more likely to have abdominal effusion or lymphadenopathy.
Common incidental fndings in feline spleens include myelolipomas
which are well-defined, hyperechoic foci.16
Splenic laceration, trauma and torsion
Rarely, the splenic vein will thrombose, normally in association
 Laceration of the splenic capsule, splenic hematoma, and avulsion of
with feline liver disease or portal vein thrombosis; in this situation
the splenic vessels are all possible sequelae to abdominal trauma.
color flow Doppler will reveal no flow within the spleen. 17
latrogenic laceration of the spleen with a scalpel or scissors is also
 Computed tomography is increasingly being explored for staging of
aasa de e up uae au ua um aqisso
loy i uaads aui se yns suein iupqe-enu uiiaui eisedou
if the abdomen is already distended. Following blunt trauma, the
identifying the origin of an abdominal mass.1α It is likely this practice
spleen and liver are the most likely sources of severe ongoing hemor-
will increase with growing availability of these scanners.
rhage.? Many smaller tears or lacerations will spontaneously seal and
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not widely used at this time
do not require further treatment. If small tears are encountered during
for imaging the feline cranial abdomen although the appearance of
surgery, the capsule can be carefully sutured with a simple continuous
normal liver, spleen, kidneys, and pancreas has been published as a
pattern of monoflament absorbable material, such as poliglecaprone.
reference guide.1
Larger lacerations might require topical hemostatic agents, for example
Gelfoam (gelatin) or Surgicel (cellulose). For large lacerations or frac-
Cytology
tures, or if a large section of the spleen has had the blood supply
avulsed, a partial or total splenectomy may be required.
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirates can be used to distinguish
Occasionally following trauma, the spleen can herniate into the
causes of splenomegaly, and they provided a diagnostic sample in 81
thorax through a diaphragmatic tear, along with other organs such as
of 10l cats, although in another study fine needle aspirates could not
stomach, liver, or intestines. Splenic infarction is a possible outcome
888
Spleen
Chapter
34
that can be diagnosed with ultrasound.40 Rarely, the spleen is found
Box 34-1 Conditions of the feline spleen
amongst other abdominal viscera in a pericardioperitoneal diaphrag-
matic hernia.41
Traumatic*
Laceration (Hg. 34-2)
Torsion/vascular occlusion
Torsion
Infectious/inflammatory (generalized)
 Splenic torsion is rare, but an affected cat might present with abdomi-
Visceral leishmaniasis, histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis,
nal pain, splenomegaly and cardiovascular shock. Some cats may have
mycobacteriosis
a more insidious onset, with clinical signs of anorexia, vomiting.
 Cytauxzoonosis (typically granulomatous)
 ascites, anemia, and progressive neutrophilia.
AP, Sporotrichosis, Blastomycosis (typically pyogranulomatous)
After splenic torsion acute venous obstruction occurs initially.
Bacterial splenitis, Toxoplasmosis (typically suppurative)
without arterial occlusion, resulting in splenic distension, sequestra-
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (eosinophilic)
tion of blood in the spleen, and ultimately hemolysis. Following
thrombosis of the splenic artery, the spleen becomes necrotic, leading
Hemotropic mycoplasmosis (lymphoplasmacytic)
to bacterial proliferation. It would be unusual for splenic torsion to
Benign neoplasia (localized/multifocal)*
 present with hemabdomen. Diagnosis is made by ultrasound exami-
Hemangioma,34 myelolipoma1 5 (Fig. 34-3), lipoma, leiomyoma
nation and this is confirmed at exploratory celiotomy once the patient
 Malignant neoplasia (localized)*
is stable following intravenous crystalloids or even blood products. It
 Hemangiosarcoma ,3s fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma,
is not recommended to untwist the splenic pedicle at time of surgery
chondrosarcoma, myxosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and 
for fear of releasing bacteria and associated toxins into the circulation.
extraskeletal osteosarcoma ,36 histiocytic sarcoma37
 Either the hilar splenectomy or pedicle splenectomy approach as out-
Malignant neoplasia (generalized/multifocal)
lined below can be used. It should be noted that the short gastric
Lymphoma, mast cell neoplasia*, myeloproliferative disease, acute 
vessels are often already avulsed.
myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Metastatic neoplasia (localized or multifocal)
 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, cholangiocellular adenocarcinoma,
colonic carcinoma, thyroid carcinoma, transitional cell 
carcinoma (Fig. 34-4)
Other
Foreign body *38
 Nodular hyperplasia 
Hematoma *
Splenic abscess *
Lymphoplasmacytic splenitis (secondary to antigenic stimulus)
 Hemolytic diseases
Storage diseases
*Potential surgical disease (taking into consideration the entire clinical picture).
1.
 Figure 34-3 Multifocal myelolipoma in a 10-year-old cat.
Pe pn e w p a o pnd e es  e an
accident had a small blood clot adjacent to a fractured spleen presumed
Figure 34-4 Splenic transitional cell carcinoma metastasized from the
to be due to traumatic rupture. (Courresy of University of Cambrioge.)
bladder in a 15-year-old cat.
688
Section
5
The Abdomen
Neoplasia
 Box 34-2 Splenectomy
 h is 'o s ts an y eisu d
plasia, hemangiosarcoma,"5 fbrosarcoma, liposarcoma, leiomyosar-
Following induction of anesthesia, the patient is surgically prepared 
coma, chondrosarcoma, myxosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and
uaamiag Aempiu wouy apeu uosoui ue pue Aooan aupwu e ioy
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma.3 Benign diseases include hemangioma,34
wn ol Alatewixoudde bupuaixa 'pioudix aul pue snpqun aul
 ds a   'a il se'
caudally. The spleen is identified and exteriorized from the abdomen,
also be a site of metastatic, or secondary tumors, such as thyroid,14
 placing it onto moistened gauze swabs at the incision site. The
spleen,42 colonic adenocarcinoma,43.44 pancreatic carcinoma,45 and
spleen should be handled very gently to avoid rupture and
cholangiocarcinoma4 (see Box 34-1).
peads ounl lo aeuouau Aessanauun
 Splenic neoplasia is generally found in middle-aged to older cats.
Total splenectomy
 In a recent review of neoplasia in cats less than 12 months of age.
Techniques of splenectomy vary, but the simplest involve double-
 only two of 233 submissions were from the spleen, so in young cats
ligating the line of splenic hilar vessels with 2M (3/0) absorbable
splenic neoplasia is rare.34
material (e.g. poliglecaprone or polyglactin) and incising between the
 Mast cell neoplasia is the most common splenic disorder in cats,
knots. This approach will keep the surgeon away from dissecting
accounting for 15-53% of splenic lesions,2 although primary splenic
near the splenic vein, or the blood supply to the left side of the 
mast cell disease in cats is rare in real terms. The splenic and more
stomach, although splenectomy is also possible by ligating the major
suaq aiaie uapuadapu aste o readde sg snoauin uoo
splenic vessels and short gastric arteries. Electrothermal bipolar vessel 
B aq sie oe jo ina aua auo ym skisnouinuis juasand
sealing devices (e.g.. Ligasure) have been used for canine 
nosed with both splenic and cutaneous forms concurrently.8.4 Patients
splenectomies4 and will become increasingly used for feline splenic 
 are typically older cats with a median age of 10-12 years.
 surgery as they become more available.
 Hemangiosarcoma of the spleen is rare in the cat compared to the
Hemisplenectomy
dog. with the disease affecting an estimated 2-21% of abnormal
The hilar vessels feeding the abnormal section are ligated, and then
spleens.2 In one study only two of 53 cases of feline hemangiosar-
large gauge silk (e.g. 3.5M [o]) is used to circumferentially ligate the
coma occur red in the spleen, the majority were cutaneous or subcu-
spleen, crushing and encircling the pulp vessels as the loop tightens.
taneous?5 (see Box 34-1). Hemangiosarcoma in the cat is similar to
The isolated section of spleen can be excised leaving a 5 mm cuff of
the dog, with affected animals having abdominal effusion and ane-
normal spleen adjacent to the ligature. There is no need to oversew
choic foci seen on ultrasound.3
the exposed splenic tissue, although the omentum could be brought
in to cover the raw surface.
Any suspicious lesions within the omentum and liver should also
be biopsied and submitted for analysis (see Chapters 23 and 31).
PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
Before the abdomen is closed, the peritoneal cavity should be
poolg bujuiewan Aue abposip ol aujes wuem ylm pabeael Ajuab
clots. The splenic pedicle should be inspected for bleeding.
 Cats with splenic disease need stabilization prior to surgery. Many are
 Following surgery, the entire spleen should be sliced as a loaf of 
dehydrated and inappetent and have a history of weight loss. A thor-
bread to help tissue fixation in formalin or to find abnormal areas of
 ough investigation should have been performed prior to surgery.
different tissue and texture within the spleen if the whole organ 
 including imaging and cytology of any mass or splenomegaly.
cannot be submitted.50
 Antibiotic therapy prior to surgery is rarely indicated unless clearly
 directed by the findings of physical examination and cytology of any
abdominal mass.
 Crystalloid fluid therapy preoperatively is usually indicated. If the
 need in many cats for additional surgical procedures, including biopsy
cat has a hemoperitoneum then a blood transfusion may be required
preoperatively (see Chapter 5). It is worth noting that in one study
of suspected metastatic lesions, for example in the liver or lymph
73% cats undergoing splenectomy required a blood transfusion, most
nodes, or placement of an esophageal or gastric feeding tube in ano-
 of which did not have free abdominal blood, and steps to prepare
rexic patients.
for this prior to surgery should be taken.
Partial splenectomy
s  s rd   
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
some splenic tissue when non-neoplastic disease is considered to be
localized to the tail or the head of the spleen. It is usually a hemi-
splenectomy procedure (Box 34-2), with care being taken to identify
The two main surgical techniques that are performed on the spleen
the major splenic vessels to be preserved.
are partial or total splenectomy.
Splenectomy
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND COMPLICATIONS
Removal of a bleeding spleen provides relief of clinical signs and a
chance to stabilize an otherwise critical patient. The majority of
Following removal of large splenic masses, there is a risk of postopera-
splenic surgery in the cat, however, will differ from the dog in that the
sassa sauasu au u poa jo suoo on anp usuao a
spleen is unlikely to be bleeding at the time of surgery.
following the rapid decrease in intra-abdominal pressure. This is com-
 In one study the average surgical time for a total splenectomy in a
plicated by the possibility of hemorrhage, either ongoing if the splenic
cat was 90 minutes? and the entire surgical team should be prepared
pedicle was not securely ligated, or delayed if the ligatures on
for a procedure of this duration. This surgical time also included the
the pedicle come loose The patient should be monitored for signs
068
Spleen
Chapter
34
of hypoperfusion, including lethargy, weakness, pale mucous mem-
branes, and collapse. Fluid volume needs to be maintained with crys-
PROGNOSIS
talloids, and potentially even cross-matched blood transfusions if
packed cell volume is low (see Chapter 5). Diagnosis of hemoabdo-
The prognosis following splenectomy is dependent on whether the
men post splenectomy is not an immediateindication for re-exploration
cat has neoplastic or non-neoplastic disease, with reported survival
as long as the facilities and resources exist to closely monitor and
times of 197 versus 339 days, respectively."
support the patient. Free fluid obtained by abdominocentesis should
 Splenic mast cell disease typically carries a significantly worse prog-
have the hematocrit measured. If the value closely approximates
nosis than cutaneous/subcutaneous mast cell disease in the cat. His-
 peripheral hematocrit then ongoing bleeding is likely. Any indication
torically, splenectomy has been described to result in the spontaneous
that the patient is worsening clinically, or is failing to respond to sup-
 regression of metastatic mast celesions and survival is reported to
-aeueu ase aui malaai ot uoeipu ue aq pinous 'sanseau aaod
be 132-365 days,.51 although survival times ranging from 1-80 days
ment and decide whether surgical re-exploration is now sensible.
eiseueuna ol anp Aenid sl yeal sg laded auo ul paodai aiam
Complications arising from splenectomy include vascular damage
after return of clinical signs. A variety of chemotherapeutic agents
to the left lobe of the pancreas or the gastric fundus. These will mani-
including prednisolone, dexamethasone vinblastine, CCNU, and
fest themselves as pancreatitis, pancreatic abscess formation, or gastric
Cyclophosphamide have all been used to treat mast cell disease in cats.
injury or necrosis. In people there are concerns about immunologic
but the relative benefit is unclear. 848 Anorexia, significant weight loss,
impairment following splenectomy, but the reality of this has not
and male gender are considered negative prognostic indicators for cats
been determined in the cat or the dog. It is known, however, that
with splenic mast cell disease.
blood-borne diseases such as hemobartonellosis and babesiosis are
Median survival time for hemangiosarcoma in cats post plenectomy
more common in splenectomized dogs.
y essep da 
S i au u aias og ui as is a
has not been extensively studied in cats but doxonubicin-based pro-
sudden death, which may occur within 24 hours of surgery. The exact
tocols are a sensible choice In one study of 65 cats with hemoperito-
neum, most were euthanized and only 12% survived to discharge.
catastrophic internal hemorrhage from one or more bleeding vessels.
 There were no details of whether this number included any cats with
respiratory failure from pulmonary thromboembolism, and ventricu-
splenic disease.?
lar tachycardia of unknown origin post splenectomy.
ae si euu suads ny as um ssoud a
For further general information on postoperative care after abdomi-
nal surgery see Chapters 3 and 4.
and one lived 415 days.
REFERENCES
1.
 Ishmael J, Howell J. Observations on the 
 Crowe DT. The Steps to Arresting
splenic disease in 101 cats. Vet Radiol
pathology of the spleen of the cat. J Small 
Abdominal Hemorrhage. Vet Med
Ultrasound 2001;42:441-5.
Anim Pract 1968;9:7-13.
1988;83:676
17.
Rogers C, O'Toole T, Keating I, et al.
2. Spangler W, Culbertson M. Prevalence
10.
 Ottenjann M, Kohn B, Weingart C.
Portal Vein Thrombosis in Cats: 6 Cases
and type of splenic disease in cats; 455
Rupturiertes Hamangiosarkom der Milz
[2001-2006). J Vet Int Med 2008;22:
cases [1985-1991). J Am Vet Med AssoC
als Ursache eines Hamoperitoneums bei 4
282-7.
1992;201:773-6
Katzen. Kleintierpraxis 2003;48:345-52.
18.
. LeBlanc A, Daniel G. Advanced Imaging 
3. Hanson JA, Papageorges M, Girard E,
11.
 Murphy S. Skin neoplasia in small 
for Veterinary Cancer Patients. Veterinary
et al. Ulltrasonographic appearance of
 animals 2. Common feline tumours.
Clinics of North America: Small Animal
splenic disease in 101 cats. Vet Radiol
In Practice 2006;28:320-5.
Practice 2007;37:1059-77.
Utrasound 2001;42:441-5.
12.
 Stockham SL, Keeton KS, Szladovits B.
19.
. Newell SM, Graham JP, Roberts GD, et al.
4. Christopher MM, White JG, Eaton JW.
Clinical assessment of leukocytosis:
 Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging
 Erythrocyte pathology and mechanisms of
distinguishing leukocytoses caused by
of the normal feline cranial abdomen. Vet
Heinz body-mediated hemolysis in cats.
 inflammatory, glucocorticoid, physiologic.
Radiol Ultrasound 2000;41:27-34.
Vet Pathol 1990;27:299-310.
and leukemic disorders or conditions.
20. O'Keefe DA, Couto CG. Fine-needle
5.
 Beritic T. Studies on Schmauch Bodies. I.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
aspiration of the spleen as an aid in the
the incidence in normal cats [felis
2003;33:1335-57.
diagnosis of splenomegaly. J Vet Int Med 
 domestica) and the morphologic
13.
Pastore GE, Lamb CR, Lipscomb V.
1987;1:102-9.
relationship to Heinz bodies. Blood
Comparison of the results of abdominal
21.
Ballegeer EA, Forrest Ll, Dickinson RM,
1965;25:999-1008.
ultrasonography and exploratory
et al. Correlation of ultrasonographic 
6. Gordon SSN, McClaran JK, Bergman Pl.
laparotomy in the dog and cat. J Am
appearance of lesions and cytologic and
et al. Outcome following splenectomy in
Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43:264-9.
histologic diagnoses in splenic aspirates
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12:256-61.
14.
Marioni-Henry K, Van Winkle TJ, Smith
from dogs and cats: 32 cases (2002-
7. Culp WTN, Weisse C, Kellogg ME, et al.
SH, et al. Tumors affecting the spinal cord
2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:
Spontaneous hemoperitoneum in cats: 65
of cats: 85 cases [1980-2005). J Am Vet
690-6.
cases [1994-2006). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Med Ass0c 2008;232:237-43.
22.
LeBlanc C, Head L. Comparison of
2010;236:978-82.
15.
 Sato A, Solano M. Ulltrasonographic
aspiration and nonaspiration techniques
 8. Litster AL, Sorenmo KUl. Characterisation
fndings in abdominal mast cell disease:
for obtaining cytologic samples from the
of the signalment, clinical and survival
a retrospective study of 19 patients. Vet
cnine and feline spleen. Vet Clin Pathol
characteristics of 41 cats with mast cell
Radiol Ultrasound 2004;45:51-7.
2009;38:242-6.
neoplasia. J Feline Med Surg 2006;8:
16.
Hanson JA, Papageorges M, Girard E.
23.
. O'Keefe DA, Couto CG. Fine-needle
177-83.
et al. Ulltrasonographic appearance of
 aspiration of the spleen as an aid in the
391
Section
5
The Abdomen
diagnosis of splenomegaly. I Vet Int Med
34. Schmidt J, North S, Freeman K, et al.
43.
.Hume DZ, Solomon JA, Weisse CW.
1987:1:102-9.
Feline paediatric oncology: retrospective
Palliative use of a stent for colonic
24. Yates Rw, Weller RE, Feldman BF.
assessment of 233 tumours from cats up
obstruction caused by adenocarcinoma in
Myeloproliferative disease in a cat. Mod
to one year [1993 to 2008). J Small Anim
two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:
Vet Pract 1984;65:753-7.
Pract 2010;51:306-11.
392-6.
25.
.Blue JT, French Tw, Kranz JS. Non-
35.
Johannes CM, Henry Cl, Tumquist SE.
44.
Cribb A. Feline gastrointestinal
lymphoid hematopoietic neoplasia in
et al. Hemangiosarcoma in cats: 53 cases
adenocarcinoma: a review and
cats: a retrospective study of 60 cases.
(1992-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
retrospective study. Can Vet I 1988.
Cornell Vet 1988;78:21-42.
2007;231:1851-6.
 Seaman RL. Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia
26.
 Sharif H, Nassiri SM, Esmaelli H, et al.
36.
 Dimopoulou M, Kirpensteijn J, Moens H,
in the cat: a case series. J Am Anim Hosp
Eosinophilic leukaemia in a cat. J Feline
et al. Histologic Prognosticators in Feline
Assoc 2004;40:238.
Med Surg 2007;9:514-17.
Osteosarcoma: A Comparison with
46.
 Feldman B, Strafuss A, Gabbert N. Bile
27. Mylonakis ME, Petanides TA, Valli VE.
Phenotypically Similar Canine
duct carcinoma in the cat: three case 
et al. Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia
Osteosarcoma. Vet Surg 2008;37:
reports. Feline Prac 1976;1:33-9.
 with short-term spontaneous remission
466-71.
47.
Liska WD, Macewen EG, Zaki FA, et al.
in a cat. Aust Vet J 2008;86:224-8.
37.
Ide K, Setoguchi-Mukai A, Nakagawa T.
Feline Systemic Mastocytosis - Review
28. Carli E, Trotta M, Chinelli R, et al.
et al. Disseminated Histiocytic Sarcoma
and Results of Splenectomy in 7 Cases.
Cytauxzoon sp. infection in the frst
with Excessive Hemophagocytosis in a
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1979;15:
endemic focus described in domestic cats
Cat. J Vet Med Sci 2009;71:817-20.
589-97.
in Europe. Vet Parasitol 2012;183:343-52.
38.
 Qulp WTN, Drobatz KJ, Glassman MM.
 48. Litster AL, Sorenmo KUl. Characterisation
29.
. Sukasi P Development of multiplex
et al. Feline visceral hemangiosarcoma.
of the signalment, clinical and survival
 polymerase chain reaction for detection of
JVet Int Med 2008;22:148-52.
characteristics of 41 cats with mast cell
feline hemotropic mycoplasma in blood
39.
 Sergeeff J. Armstrong P, Bunch S. Hepatic
neoplasia. J Feline Med Surg 2006;8[3):
 and tissue specimens. SE Asian J Trop
abscesses in cats: 14 cases [1985-2002).
177-83.
 Med Public Health 2010;41:1447-53.
J Vet Int Med 2004;18:295-300.
49.
 Rivier P Monnet E. Use of a vessel sealant
30.
Bromel C, Sykes JE. Histoplasmosis in
Baker T, Davidson A. Pediatric abdominal
device for splenectomy in dogs. Vet Surg
dogs and cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
ultrasonography. Vet Clin NAm: Small
2011;40:102-5.
2005;20:227-32.
Anim Prac 2006;36:641-55.
50.
 Smith AN. Hemangiosarcoma in dogs and
31.
Mansfeld CS, Clark P. Pyruvate kinase
Reimer SB, Kyles AE, Filipowicz DE, et al.
cats. Vet Clinics NAm Small Anim Prac
deficiency in a Somali cat in Australia.
Long-term outcome of cats treated
2003;33:533.
Aust Vet I 2005;83:483-5.
conservatively or surgically for
51.
Carpenter J, Andrews L, Holzworth J.
32. Kohn B, Goldschmidt MH, Hohenhaus
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
Tumors and tumor-like lesions In:
AE, et al. Anemia, splenomegaly, and
hernia: 66 cases [1987-2002). J Am Vet
Holzworth J, editor. Diseases of the cat
increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
Med Assoc 2004;224:728-32.
medicine and surgery. Philadelphia: WB
in Abyssinian and Somali cats. J Am Vet
42. Novosad CA, Bergman Pl, O'Brien MG,
Saunders: 1987. p. 406-596.
Med Assoc 2000;217:1483-91.
et al. Retrospective evaluation of
52. Scavelli TD, Patnaik AK, Mehlhaff CJ,.
33. Jordan HL, Cohn LA, Armstrong PJ.
 adjunctive doxorubicin for the
 et al. Hemangiosarcoma in the Cat
Disseminated Mycobacterim avium
treatment of feline mammary gland
- Retrospective Evaluation of 31 Surgical
complex infection in three Siamese cats.
adenocarcinoma: 67 cases. I Am Anim
Cases. J Am Vet Med Ass 1985;187:
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:90-3.
Hosp Assoc 2006;42:110.
817-19.
392
[35]
hapter
Adrenal gland
A. Harvey, E.J. Friend
Adrenal gland problems in the cat are recognized with increasing
 medical management where appropriate. Adrenal disorders predomi-
frequency. They are most commonly identified in cats presenting for
nantly affect older cats, and so concurrent disease may be common,
investigation of clinical signs attributed to excessive aldosterone, cor-
and this is important to consider as it may significantly influence
tisol, or progesterone secretion. Surgery can be performed in selected
management For the adrenal conditions reported there does not
cases of neoplasia, but frst thorough investigation and stabilization
appear to be breed predisposition; most cases have been described in
are paramount. Adrenal surgery in cats is certainly not without risk,
domestic short-hair cats. No sex predisposition exists; all reported
and is a technically challenging surgery that requires thorough plan-
cases have affected neutered animals, with roughly equal proportions
of female and male cats.
Diagnostic imaging
SURGICAL ANATOMY
Imaging is essential both for diagnostics and patient assessment
before surgery. Currently, ultrasonography is the best imaging modal-
The adrenal glands are found cranial to each kidney. They are cream
ity for detecting adrenal masses in dogs and cats. Inflated thoracic
colored as they are rich in lipids, and on ultrasound examination they
radiographs and/or computed tomography are used to rule out meta-
have been reported to be 0.29-0.53 cm in size along their short axis.
static disease Abdominal ultrasound, preferably combined with CT
At surgery, the duodenal maneuver is used to identify the right side
or MRl, should be performed to look for evidence of metastatic
and the colonic maneuver the left.
disease within the abdominal cavity (liver, spleen, lymph nodes), but
The right adrenal gland is harder to visualize than the left gland.
also to assess local invasion or thrombosis within the vena cava. This
because it is situated more cranially and it sits slightly dorsal to the
information can make a great difference to surgical planning and
vena cava; the caudate lobe of the liver may also partly cover it. The
 treatment advice. Invasion into the adjacent vena cava, or renal vessels,
phrenico-abdominal veins cross over both adrenal glands.
renal or liver parenchyma is possible with more aggressive neoplasms
 The arterial blood is supplied by branches of the renal artery.
and may be a contraindication for surgery if invasion is extensive.
directly from the aorta and from the phrenico-abdominal and lumbar
There are few reports in the literature about surgical management of
arteries. Venous drainage is into the vena cava, phrenico-abdominal
caval invasion in the cat? and so guidelines are not available for when
or lumbar veins. Neoplastic disease will often disrupt this and make
surgery should be undertaken, but this may be largely dictated by
an understanding of this supply rather academic.
surgeon experience.
Disease of the adrenal gland may affect surrounding structures.
including the vena cava medially (and possibly the aorta), the kidneys
caudally, and the sublumbar musculature dorsally.
SURGICAL DISEASES
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn syndrome)
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Hyperaldosteronism or Conn syndrome is a condition caused by
increased secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal glands. It has
It is important for the surgeon to have knowledge of the disease proc-
become increasingly recognized in cats, but whether this is due to an
esses involved, to ensure that surgical management is appropriate and
increased awareness and testing for the condition, or a true increase
that the patient has been optimally stabilized preoperatively, with
in frequency is not known.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00035-4
868
Section
[51
The Abdomen
Figure 35-2 The ventral abdomen of a cat with concurrent
hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism. Note the failure of hair
Figure 35-1 A cat with retinal detachment and vitreal hemorrhage, as a
regrowth and the thin skin with prominent subcutaneous blood vessels.
result of systemic hypertension associated with hyperaldosteronism. (Photo
courtesy of Tim Knott, Rowe Veterinary Group, UK. Reprinteo from August, JR.
2010 Consuftations in Feline ntermal Medicine 6e, W.8. Saunders, with permissicn
G130
from Elsevier.)
Etiology
Hyperaldosteronism may be of primary or secondary etiology. Sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism occurs as a response to stimulation of the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and therefore may
' se ys 's arn ses i  ae un n
hypotension, reduced renal perfusion (most commonly secondary to
renal disease), or sodium deficiency (reduced intake or increased
loss). In primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) there is an inappropriate
increase in aldosterone secretion, independent of the RAAS. Unilateral
adrenocortical neoplasia is the most commonly described cause of
PHA in cats, with unilateral adrenal adenomas and carcinomas
appearing to have approximately equal incidence. Although rare bilat-
eral adrenal neoplasms have also been described. Bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia? is also recognized, and in these cases medical manage-
-1.3dBMI0.7TIS0.6
ment is advised.
Figure 35-3 Ultrasound image demonstrating the typical hypoechoic
ue sem sul Aaup huhi aui o eue ssew euape ue jo aueeadde
Clinical features
adrenocortical carcinoma. (Reorinted from August /R. (201o) Consultations in
Feline lnternal Medicine, 6, W.8. 5aunders, with permission from Esevier.)
 The major clinical signs of primary hyperaldosteronism are similar,.
whether it results from adrenal adenoma, carcinoma or hyperplasia,
are usually normal or only mildly increased. Creatine kinase is usually
and they can be divided into two main groups:
elevated in cats with polymyopathy, with the degree of elevation being
Hypokalemic polymyopathy
highly variable. Urea and creatinine may be elevated secondary to
 Intraocular hemorrhage or acute onset blindness resulting from
peal iou pinous eianoze jo anuasand aul os pue 'usjuoiaisopieaday
retinal detachment (Fig. 35-1) as a result of systemic
the clinician to conclude that hypokalemia and/or hypertension is a
hypertension.
consequence of the renal disease itself.
 Additional clinical signs such as polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia
Adrenal masses are rarely visible on radiographs, but if the mass is
have also been reported
seen it is more likely to be an adrenocortical carcinoma than an
 Concurrent hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism has also
adenoma. Pulmonary metastases can occur, albeit infrequently. In all
aui sas asau ul s't'eiseidoau ieuaipe jo sasen auos ui paodan uaa
signs of hyperprogesteronism usually predominate, resulting in very
ultrasonography was performed, unilateral adrenal enlargement with
similar clinical signs to those encountered with hypercortisolemia
evidence of an adrenal mass was identified, ranging in size from
(Fig. 35-2).
10-46 mm in diameter (Fig. 35-3). The contralateral adrenal gland
may appear normal in appearance or may be unidentifiable It is.
however, vital that the contralateral gland be assessed, because bilat-
Diagnosis
eral adrenal neoplasms have been reported. Ultrasonography should
On serum biochemistry, hypokalemia is most often present; however.
also be used to identify the presence and degree of invasion of the
the degree is variable and normokalemia does not exclude the pos-
caudal vena cava by the tumor or related thrombus, and the presence
sibility of primary hyperaldosteronism. Serum sodium concentrations
 of metastasis to other organs. Close association of the tumor with the
394
Adrenal gland
Chapter
35
Figure 35-5 A cat with hyperadrenocorticism, illustrating skin tears as a
result of skin fragility syndrome.
amlodipine treatment, but higher doses are sometimes required.
Spironolactone, a competitive aldosterone receptor antagonist, is also
recommended (2-4 mg/kg PO q24h), for the control of both hypoka-
lemia and hypertension.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome)
Figure 35-4 T2-weighted sagittal MRl scan of the abdomen
demonstrating significantly enlarged right adrenal gland.
Hyperadrenocorticism or Cushing's syndrome is rare in cats and
usually associated with pituitary neoplasia rather than primary disease
of the adrenal glands.
caudal vena cava is usually evident. Other imaging modalities, includ-
ing MRI (Fig 35-4), CT, and saphenous venography, have been used
Etiology
in a small number of cases in an attempt to establish the extent of the
adrenal mass before underta king surgery.
Hyperadrenocorticism results from chronic cortisol excess, and may
Confirmation of diagnosis relies mainly on demonstrating an ele-
Occur secondary to iatrogenic cortisol administration, or with natu-
vated plasma aldosterone concentration. The assay is widely available
rally occurring disease. Naturally occurring disease can be pituitary
at commercial endocrine laboratories and requirements for collection
dependent, whereby a pituitary neoplasm secretes excessive ACTH
and handling of serum or plasma are routine. Ideally, plasma aldos-
with subsequent bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and increased
terone concentration needs to be interpreted together with plasma
cortisol secretion, or it may be adrenal dependent, as a result of a
renin activity. which would be expected to be elevated in cases of
 cortisol secreting adrenal neoplasm. Hyperadrenocorticism is rare in
 secondary hyperaldosteronism. There are diffculties with measuring
cats, but when it does occur the majority of cases (~8o%) are pituitary
au yn uoisuuap auanasuo e se pue ane uuan esid
dependent, most commonly as a result of a pituitary adenoma. About
presence of adrenocortical neoplasia concurrently with a markedly
50% are microadenomas (<3 mm diameter) and 50% are macroad-
elevated plasma aldosterone concentration is considered to be suff-
enomas (>3 mm diameter). Pituitary carcinoma has only been rarely
cient to make a diagnosis of aldosterone-secreting adrenocortical
reported. In reported cases of adrenal-dependent disease, about
tumor in cats, especially in conjunction with persistent hypokalemia
50% have been adrenocortical adenomas, and 50% adrenocortical
and hypertension. Histopathologic confirmation of the neoplasm
carcinomas.
together with resolution of clinical signs and plasma aldosterone
Clinical features
 ad douuu  usad si ss e ou 
aldosteronism should be considered, and this is more diffcult to
The major clinical signs are similar, whether hyperadrenocorticism
diagnose without assessment of plasma renin activity. Surgical treat-
results from adrenal adenoma, carcinoma or hyperplasia. Approxi-
ment would not be indicated in these cases.
mately 75% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism develop secondary
diabetes mellitus, and the signs of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
usually predominate, namely polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia.
Medical management
Other clinical signs include lethargy, weight loss, an unkempt coat,
 Initial treatment of primary hyperaldosteronism is directed at control-
and abdominal enlargement/pot belly appearance, although this is
usually less appreciable than it is in dogs. Failure of hair regrowth,
uaq sey yzib od louu g-z jo sasop ie aneuooni unisseiod suisn
thin skin, and poor wound healing are common dermatologic fea-
au un paan aq a apuor unissiod snouanu pa
tures. Cushingoid cats may also exhibit severe skin fragility where the
      
skin is so thin that it easily tears (Fig. 35-5). This is a serious complica-
PO q24h) is the initial treatment of choice for hypertension. Most
-al ui insan osie ues i pue Kood leay spunom jueinsan se uon
hypertensive cats become normotensive with the aforementioned
threatening sepsis.
568
Section
5
The Abdomen
Diagnosis
very sensitive for differentiating adrenal versus pituitary-dependent
 There are no striking hematological and biochemical abnormalities in
disease, and for this either a high-dose dexamethasone suppression
test (using lmg/kg dexamethasone), or a combination of endogenous
cats with hyperadrenocorticism. Of particular note is that the classical
biochemical abnormalities seen in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
ACTH measurement and adrenal ultrasound is recommended. Plasma
ACTH levels are expected to be undetectable with adrenal-dependent
are not observed in cats. Cats lack the steroid-induced isoenzyme of
disease, and high with pituitary-dependent disease. The disadvantages
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) so the marked elevation in serum ALP
of measuring endogenous ACTH are that it is expensive, blood must
frequently seen in dogs does not occur in cats. There may be mild to
be collected in plastic or silicone lined EDTA tubes, collected and kept
moderate elevations in liver enzymes, often secondary to diabetes
on ice, and it needs to be immediately centrifuged and frozen. Incor-
mellitus, but this is not a consistent feature Hyperglycemia may be
rect handling will lead to falsely low results.
present as a result of secondary diabetes mellitus in many cases. In
dogs the urine is often isosthenuric; in cats very few have urine specifc
abdominal fat, and a pot-bellied appearance may be evident. Abdomi-
uaaq aaey suopaut en Aeuun pue 'szo'l uui ssal jo Aies
nal ultrasonography may reveal bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands in
uncommon in the reported cases.
the case of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, but this is,
Urine cortisol to creatinine ratio performed on a home collected
highly operator dependent and is not sensitive or specific for diag-
sample can be used to exclude hyperadrenocorticism if it is normal.
'si punosenn usposouapeiady uapuadap-areimd suisou
However, although not thoroughly evaluated in cats, it is likely to be
however, very useful for discriminating between adrenal and pituitary-
very non-specifc as in dogs, and so an elevated result is difficult to
dependent disease, since in cases of adrenal-dependent disease, a
interpret. In cats, the adrenocortical trophic hormone (ACTH) stimu-
unilateral adrenal mass should be evident, with the contralateral
lation test has not been as widely evaluated as it has in dogs, and its
 adrenal gland being either normal in appearance or unidentifable.
sensitivity and specificity has been questioned. Nevertheless, it is often
Advanced imaging. such as MRI and CT scanning may be of use for
the first endocrine function test to be performed since it is relatively
adrenal-dependent disease to assst in surgical planning. For pituitary.
 straightforward and inexpensive to perform, and can distinguish iatro-
-ad sl (ise xog) isal aul aseasip suno Aeieu uog suaa
dependent disease, MRI/CT of the brain can detect macroadenomas
(>3 mm in diameter), and may be useful for preoperative (hypophy-
sectomy) or preradiotherapy assessment.
response following ACTH administration is variable and so the
optimum timing for blood sampling differs. The best time for blood
Medical management
sampling following ACTH administration remains controversial, with
different studies suggesting diferent times for peak cortisol. The
If surgery is being considered, then medical stabilization should be
authors' protocol is shown in Box 35-1.
attempted first, with the aim of reducing risks of sepsis, wound dehis-
 The low dose dexamethasone suppression test appears to be a very
cence, and thromboembolic disease. Any concurrent diabetes mellitus
 sensitive test for hyperadrenocorticism in cats and so is recommended
should also be partially stabilized. There is, however, no ideal medical
as the test of choice for screening. The protocol for this test (Box 35-2)
treatment for feline hyperadrenocorticism. A few reports exist of treat-
also differs to that used in dogs, with a higher per kilogram dose of
 ment using mitotane, ketoconazole and metyrapone, with variable
dexamethasone given to cats.
success. The most promising treatment is trilostane, which has been
 In a normal cat, cortisol levels should be low at both four and eight
reported to be efficacious in some cats with hyperadrenocorticism.
hours, whereas in a cat with hyperadrenocorticism cortisol levels
Unilateral adrenalectomy is the treatment of choice in adrenal-
should remain high at four and eight hours or can be suppressed at
 dependent cases that are suitable surgical candidates. Bilateral adrena-
four hours, and high again by eight hours. This test, however, is not
lectomy used to be recommended for pituitary-dependent disease, but
has probably been largely replaced by the use of external beam radio-
Buisid auos umous sey uium pueg Aemd au yo Adeia
Box 35-1 Protocol for the adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH) stimulation test for cats
physectomy (see Chapter 58).
 1. Take blood sample for base-line cortisol
Other endocrinologically active
 2. Administer 125 μg of synthetic ACTH intravenously 
adrenal neoplasms
 3. Take blood samples for cortisol measurement one and three hours
later (ensure cat is kept quiet and calm throughout this time)
Hyperprogesteronism can occur alone, or in combination with hyper-
4. Place 1 mL blood in plain/serum tubes
aldosteronism. Reported cases have been due to unilateral4.5 or bilat-
 5. Submit to endocrine laboratory (there are no special sample
eral adrenocortical carcinomas. Clinical features are very similar
handling or storage requirements)
to those seen in hyperadrenocorticism, and so the diagnosis is most
often considered in a cat with clinical signs suggestive of hyperadreno-
corticism, but where low dose dexamethasone suppression and ACTH
stimulation tests yield normal results. Defnitive diagnosis is based
 Box 35-2 The low dose dexamethasone suppression test
on demonstrating an elevated serum progesterone concentration.
for cats
together with identification of an adrenal mass. The particular signifi-
cance of these cases in relation to performing surgery is that there are
1. Take blood sample for base-line cortisol
more potential complications that could occur The potential compli-
 2. Administer 0.1 mg/kg of dexamethasone intravenously
3. Take blood samples for cortisol measurement four and eight hours
 Effective medical management of hyperprogesteronism has not been
later (ensure cat is kept quiet and calm throughout this time)
reported. One of the authors A.H.) has used trilostane in one cat with
4. Place 1 mL blood in plain/serum tubes
concurrent hyperaldosteronism and hyperprogesteronism. Treatment
5.
 Submit to endocrine laboratory (there are no special sample 
was only attempted for a short period of time when the clinical signs
handling or storage requirements)
were quite advanced, and was not successful in suppressing progester-
one concentrations. Use of aminoglutethimide has also been reported
96E
Adrenal gland
Chapter
35
for preoperative stabilization in one case but was of questionable
 and blood typing/cross-matching (see Chapter 5) is recommended to
benefit.
prepare for blood transfusion should it be required during surgery.
Cases of excessive production of androstenedione, testosterone, and
Packed cell volume and platelet count, as well as coagulation profles,
estradiol have also been reported, either due to an adrenocortical
should be collcted within 48 hours prior to surgery. Careful attention
adenoma? or bilateral adrenal gland enlargement." These cases pre-
to electrolyte status should be paid, and monitoring should be con-
sented with aggressive male-type behavior and urine spraying.
Ele-
tinued during the perioperative period.
vated senum concentrations of sex hormones were demonstrated. A
good outcome was achieved with unilateral adrenalectomy in the cat
Anesthesia and medicationfor adrenalectomy
with a unilateral adrenal adenoma. A moderate improvement in clini-
o logodoid se rns juae uonpun ue raunoi si uoeipau
cal signs was seen with trilostane treatment in the cat with bilateral
adrenal enlargement.
alphaxalan should be used followed by intubation and maintenance
with gaseous anesthesia. Muscle relaxant anesthesia may aid exposure
 of the abdominal organs. Perioperative antibiotics are recommended
 as the surgery will often be prolonged and the patient may be systemi-
PREOPERATIVECONSIDERATIONS
cally unwell even after preoperative stabilization. For further informa-
tion on anesthesia see Chapter 2.
Indications and contraindications for surgery
For cortisol-producing adrenal tumors intravenous soluble cortico-
steroid (eg. hydrocortisone 0.6 mg/kg/hour) should be started at the
 The primary indication for surgery is presence of unilateral adrenal
time of anesthetic induction (it takes about an hour to reach effective
gland neoplasia, secreting excessive aldosterone, progesterone, corti-
levels). This produces blood cortisol levels ofthe order of 500 nmol/L,
sol, or sex hormones. Bilateral adrenalectomy has been described for
which is equivalent to the hematogenous levels that would be expected
treatment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
in cats subjected to major trauma and surgery.
The main contraindications for surgery are the presence of bilateral
adrenal disease with hyperaldosteronism, a poorly medically stabi-
lized patient, presence of metastatic disease [rare, but can occur with
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
adrenal carcinomas), extensive invasion of the caudal vena cava by the
adrenal neoplasm, and the presence of signifcant concurrent disease.
Adrenalectomy
Preoperative assessment
The surgical technique is similar whether the indication is resection
 of neoplastic tissue or bilateral adrenalectomy for primary hyperaldos-
eiadoaid paziqeis Aeudo aq ue juaed au ieu os sisouei e
teronism. The affected adrenal gland(s) are usually removed through
tively. Intraoperative hemorrhage can be profuse with adrenalectomy
a midline laparatomy (Box 35-3). Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has
 Box 35-3 Adrenalectomy
The animal is placed in dorsal recumbency and the ventral abdomen
this lobe. Nephrectomy may be required if extensive invasion of the
uv Aabans pdase lot paedad pue paddp ane xelout lepnen pue
adjacent kidney has occurred (see Chapter 36).
incision from the xiphisternum to the pubis is recommended, as a long
 Blunt dissection continues dorsally around the gland, maintaining 
e yonouiy uawopge jeshopouen aul oi ssane aaoudu! lm uoisu!
hemostasis with electrocautery. Intermittent compression of the vena 
combined ventral midline and paracostal incision is recommended in 
cava is inevitable during dissection and so monitoring of arterial 
canine patients by some surgeons, this is unnecessary in the cat due to
blood pressure is important. Dissection should be intermittently halted
its smaller size and more flexible abdominal wall.
to allow periods of normal caval blood flow to occur. As the 
 Careful hemostasis using electrocautery should be maintained at all
dissection progresses great care should be taken to ensure the tumor
times. A thorough exploration should be made, in particular looking 
is removed from the great vessels without entering their lumen.
for evidence of metastatic disease in other abdominal organs. If this is
If preoperative imaging suggests caval invasion or thrombosis has 
suspected, fine needle aspirate samples or Tru-Cut biopsies should be 
occurred, then Rummel tourniquets should be placed around the cava
taken.
cranial and caudal to the tumor. Occlusion time should be as short as 
 The affected side should be exposed with the aid of an assistant
Auabans aiojag pauinban ae lubnout pue buuueid os pue alqissod
by performing the duodenal or colonic maneuver, and abdominal
Once dissection has freed up the lateral parts of the tumor, the
retractors (Fig. 35-6A). Laparotomy swabs moistened with sterile saline
Rummel tourniquets are tightened and the cava incised;: any
should then be used to pack around the adrenal gland if neoplasia is
thrombus can be removed and the portion of caval wall invaded 
suspected, in order to reduce contamination of surrounding structures
by tumor excised with sharp dissection if appropriate. Closure of
during the surgical excision.
the cava wall is performed with 1.5M polypropylene in a simple 
 Dissection is best started laterally or abaxially, away from the great 
ju oz e buisn uawnl aui woy paaowan s! liy uaed snonuuon
vessels that are more axial or medial, by incising the peritoneum
syringe, three-way tap and intravenous over-the-needle catheter, and 
followed by blunt dissection using sterile cotton-tipped swabs (Fig.
the tourniquets are then released.
 35-6B). The tumor is usually contained within a capsule and care is
If there is no caval invasion, dissection continues bluntly around 
taken to avoid entering this (Fig. 35-6C). The phrenico-abdominal vein
the tumor until it is free. The laparotomy swabs should be removed 
is ligated with vascular clips, divided, and blunt dissected free from the
and gloves and instruments should be changed. The site of excision
underlying gland.
should be checked for bleeding and hemostasis achieved using
On the right side, the caudate lobe of the liver is freed, by incising
electrocautery. The author often packs the site with hemostatic gel 
the peritoneal fold that holds it caudally, and then retracted cranially
(such as collagen sponge) and closure of the peritoneum is performed
with a malleable retractor. Partial liver lobectomy using a
with absorbable suture if the tumor was relatively small and this is
thoracoabdominal stapling device can be used if the tumor is involving
possible. Swabs are counted and abdominal closure is routine.
Section
[51
The Abdomen
A
B
Figure 35-6 A ten year old female neutered cat with
hyperadrenocorticism is having adrenalectomy for a unilateral adrenal
tumor. (A) Exposure of right kidney and adrenal gland. The caudate 
lobe has been retracted cranially. and the duodenal maneuver
performed. The adrenal mass is craniomedial to the kidney and lateral
 a o psi a y wd a a)  ea ai o
with blunt dissection, particularly dorsomedially. (C) The excised mass
lou sey ansden aui aton Aoolouiedoisjy uo eouape ue ag ot paoud
been disrupted during excision.
been described in the dog for cases of adrenocortical carcinoma in
1 mg/kg cortisone acetate twice daily for several weeks, to allow the
which there was no caval invasion detected on MRI scan.1l This tech-
contralateral adrenal gland to recover from atrophy, and then arbitrar-
 nique is not yet reported in the feline but is likely to be applicable if
ily weaned off. Dexamethasone or prednisolone can be used instead
caval involvement is ruled out. See Chapter 25 for information on
of cortisol but the advantages of using cortisol are that it is replicating
laparoscopy.
the endogenous hormone, it has both mineralocorticoid and gluco-
aq s (  as ao rs-s
corticoid activity, and if necessary both blood and urinary corticoid
described as a treatment for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
levels can be measured to assess whether the dose being used is
-uoat iesgns pue juaudimba pazeiads a kiesauone iog pue  usp
appropriate.
nique are required for this procedure.
 Blood products may be required if hemorrhage has been extensive,
and are usually given immediately post recovery whilst adequate
monitoring for a transfusion reaction can occur. Analgesia should be
maintained until the cat is comfortable postoperatively, the mainstay
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
being opioid analgesia. These are usually maintained for at least 48
hours after surgery. Fluid therapy is continued to ensure good circula-
Supplementation with intravenous soluble corticosteroid is recom-
tory function, and regular monitoring of electrolytes should be con-
sioooieiau (sinoq tz isy aul iog snoy iubia Aaaa) panu
the contralateral gland becomes functional. Intravenous soluble cor-
are indicated if persistent hyponatremia or hyperkalemia is docu-
ticosteroid (e.g., hydrocortisone) infusion should be continued at the
mented, or post bilateral adrenalectomy.14 Postoperative antibiotics
same rate as started preoperatively (eg. hydrocortisone 0.6 mg/kg/
are continued for seven days, as these cats are systemically compro-
hour) for approximately 12 hours post surgery. and then the rate
Pinous pood s't Alanjeiadoisod panodai uaaq sey sisdas pue pasu
arbitrarily weaned down 24 hours later (eg., reduce to 0.3 mg/kg/
be offered as soon as the cat can safely swallow, and fluid therapy
hour hydrocortisone). From day 3 onwards there should only be a
continues until the patient is eating a normal amount and regulating
   aq t  n l a  
its own fluid intake. Small room confinement is recommended for
868
Adrenal gland
Chapter
35
four weeks postoperatively to ensure the abdominal wall has adequate
  g  d-m y  u a 
time to heal.
1803 days.
 The impact of invasion of the caudal vena cava is difficult to assess,
 as in most studies surgery has been ruled out in cases where this has
occurred. In one case report of surgery involving caval venotomy
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
 survival was prolonged postoperatively,2 but instinctively one would
Surgery for adrenal masses is challenging, and in the dog, periop-
au ul zrgi'panodai uaaq aaey z oi bl jo saei Aaeou anea
tional surgical risks, including wound dehiscence, sepsis, pancreatitis.
largest case series of adrenal tumor surgery in the cat, four cases out
and thromboembolic disease The prognosis for these cases remains
of ten did not survive beyond 14 days post surgery, in most cases due
guarded, with affected cats rarely surviving longer than one year even
to severe hemorrhage from the caudal vena cava immediately follow-
when they have survived the postoperative period. Hypoadrenocorti-
ing surgery.15 Survival appeared unrelated to histologic type 
of
 adrenalectomy, and life-long mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid
d a an ps i s a un  i
 supplementation is required in these cases.
REFERENCES
1. Zimmer C, Horauf A, Reusch C. 2000
 in 5 cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:
hypophysectomy for treatment of
Ultrasonographic examination of the
160-4.
 pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
adrenal gland and evaluation of the
7. Mayer MN, Greco DS, LaRue SM.
in 7 cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:72-86.
 hypophyseal-adrenal axis in 20 cats.
 Outcomes of pituitary tumor irradiation
13. Meij BP, Auriemma E, Grinwis G, et al.
J Small Anim Pract 2000;41:156-60.
in cats. J Vet Intern Med 2006;20:1151-4.
 Successful treatment of acromegaly in
2. Rose SA, Kyles AE, Labelle P, et al.
8.
Quante S, Sieber-Ruckstuhl N, wilhelm S.
a diabetic cat with transsphenoidal
Adrenalectomy and caval thrombectomy
et al. Hyperprogesteronism due to
hypophysectomy I Fel Med Surg
in a cat with primary hyperaldosteronism.
bilateral adrenal carcinomas in a cat with
2010;12:406-10.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2007;43:209-14.
diabetes mellitus. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
14.
Feldman EC, Nelson Rw Acromegaly and
3. Javadi S, Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC,
2009;151:437-42.
hyperadrenocorticism in cats: A clinical
Kooistra HS, et al. Primary
9.
 Millard RP, Pickens EH, Wells KL.
perspective. Proceedings of ESFM Study
hyperaldosteronism, a mediator of
 Excessive production of sex hormones in
Day, WSAVA 2000. J Feline Med Surg
 progressive renal disease in cats. Domest
a cat with an adrenocortical tumor. J Am
2000;2:153-8
Anim Endocrinol 2005;28:85-104.
Vet Med Assoc 2009;234:505-8.
15.
 Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S. Primary
4. DeClue AE, Breshears LA, Pardo ID,
10.
Boag AK, Neiger R, Church DB. Trilostane
hyperaldosteronism in the cat: a series of
et al. Hyperaldosteronism and 
 treatment of bilateral adrenal enlargement
13 cases. J Feline Med Surg 2005;7:
hyperprogesteronism in a cat with an
and excessive sex steroid hormone
173-82.
adrenal cortical carcinoma. J Vet Int Med
production in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
16. Anderson CR, Birchard SJ, Powers BE.
2005;19:355-8.
2004;45:263-6.
et al. Surgical treatment of adrenocortical
5. Briscoe K, Barrs VR, Foster DF.
11.
Jimenez Pelaez M, Bouvy BM, Dupre GP.
tumors: 21 cases (1990-1996). J Am
Beatty JA. Hyperaldosteronism and
 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for treatment
Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:93-7.
hyperprogesteronism in a cat. J Feline
of unilateral adrenocortical carcinomas:
17.
 Schwartz P, Kovak JR, Koprowski A, et al.
Med Surg 2009;1:758-62.
technique, complications and results in
Evaluation of prognostic factors in the
6.
Neiger R, Witt AL, Noble A, German AJl.
seven dogs. Vet Surg 2008;37:444-53.
surgical treatment of adrenal gland
Trilostane therapy for treatment of
12.
 Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS.
tumors in dogs: 4l cases [1999-2005]
 pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
Rijnberk A. Transsphenoidal
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;232:77-84.
665
Urogenital
36]
Chapter
Kidney and ureter
L.R. Aronson
Many conditions affecting the upper urinary tract of cats require surgi-
the cortex and eventually give rise to the afferent arterioles of the
cal intervention. The most common conditions currently identifed in
glomerulus.7& The surface of the feline kidney is grooved because of
the author's practice are partial and complete ureteral obstructions
the presence of large subcapsular veins that eventually join the renal
secondary to calcium oxalate urolithiasis and cases of urinary tract
vein at the renal hilus.8 The left testicular or ovarian vein typically
trauma.
drains into the left renal vein. Normal renal vascular anatomy was
evaluated in a group of ll4 healthy feline kidney donors using helical
computed tomography angiography (CTA). Similar to humans, mul-
tiple renal veins were more common on the right (45/l14) compared
SURGICAL ANATOMY
to the left (3/ll4) and multiple renal arteries were more common on
the left (8/114) compared to the right (0/114).? Additionally, a split
Kidney
vena cava was occasionally identified.
 The kidneys are retroperitoneal organs that lie adjacent to the sublum-
Ureter
bar musculature on either side of the abdominal aorta and caudal
vena cava. The right kidney lies more cranial than the left, lying within
The ureter, which is retroperitoneal for the proximal two-thirds and
the renal fossa of the caudate lobe of the liver attached by the hepa-
intraperitoneal for the distal third, courses adjacent to the sublumbar
torenal ligament. Although the right kidney is located at the Ll-L4
musculature from the renal hilus, travels through the two layers of
vertebrae and the left kidney is located at L2-L5, the kidneys are not
-ial pue iappelq aul jo suaueil ieael au uoy yrum unauoad
rigidly fixed to the surrounding tissues and are equally mobile The
 minates on the dorsal surface at the bladder neck.1 It courses in a 'J'
entire left kidney can often be easily palpated on physical examina-
shape, looping around the ductus deferens in the male eventually
tion; the cranial pole of the right kidney may be harder to palpate
because of its location adjacent to the ribs and liver Normal renal size
Diverticulum of renal pelvis
Orifice to ureter
in the cat has been determined radiographically by calculating the
Papilla
ratio of kidney length to the second lumbar vertebral body length.
Renal
Renal v.
pelvis
Based on multiple studies, a normal renal size ratio of 2.0-3.0 has
aul ui anuaia ueyuiis e si aiaun euopy s- panodai uaag
Renal a.
ratios between neutered and intact cats. Neutering of cats resulted in
a ratio of 1.9-2.6 compared with 2.1-3.2 for intact cats and should
be taken into consideration when evaluating kidney size, particularly
in the diseased state.
 The renal hilus, located medially, is the opening into the renal sinus
and transmits the renal artery, vein, nerves and is the location of the
renal pelvis (Fig. 36-1). Because the aorta is normally located to the
left of the caudal vena cava, the left kidney has a long renal vein and
le au ui Aiae ieuan aul iae ieuan suon e sey Aaupy nuau a
typically lies dorsal and sometimes slightly cranial to the renal vein.
Upon entering the kidney, the renal artery divides into interlobar
arteries. These vessels radiate through the medulla to the corticomed-
Renal capsule
Ureter
Renal pyramid
ullary junction, where arcuate arteries are formed. These arteries then
give rise to other interlobar arteries that run perpendicular through
Figure 36-1 Anatomy of the feline kidney.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00036-6
401
Section
5
The Abdomen
 passing obliquely through the bladder wall to empty into the lumen
just cranial and lateral to the vesicourethral juncture. The oblique
passage of the distal ureter is important in preventing reflux from the
bladder into the ureter. As the bladder expands, the terminal ureter
becomes compressed. Enough pressure generated by a peristaltic wave
is necessary to force urine through the compressed distal ureter.!l The
blood supply of the feline ureter is derived from multiple sources
including a cranial supply from the renal artery, a caudal supply from
the vaginal or prostatic artery, and additional branches that join the
ureteral artery from surrounding sources.12.13 The cranial and caudal
lano aul unuim ianan aul jo yual aui guoie asowoiseue saae
paiddns eane au smoy aeuep snoua t'uaape aujo siaae
The ureter is composed of smooth muscle with an inner longitudi-
nal layer and middle circular layers. An outer longitudinal layer is also
Figure 36-2 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a four-year-old male
 present and is best developed adjacent to the bladder. The normal
(castrated) domestic short-haired cat that was hit by a car and had a
pacemaker for this muscle is located within the kidney '5 and when
the muscle contracts, urine is propelled from cranial to caudal in peri-
as a widening of the retroperitoneal space secondary to urine leakage.
staltic waves. Surrounding the smooth muscle is a layer of adventitia
Additionally, displacement of the kidneys is identified.
containing the ureteral vessels, lymphatics, and fat. Innervation of the
ureter is derived from sympathetic parasympathetic, and sensory
complicating factors such as the identification of an obstruction or
nerves. This innervation is not necessary for normal ureteric function;
infection, and prognosis are important questions that should be
however, sympathetic tone may affect the frequency and force of an
 individual peristaltic wave.16
Diagnostic imaging
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Common imaging modalities used to evaluate the upper urinary
 tract in the cat include survey radiography, ultrasonography, and intra-
venous urography (IvU). Depending on the underlying condition,
The clinical approach to evaluating a patient with renal and/or ure-
other techniques that may be employed include antegrade pyelogra-
teral disease that may require surgical intervention begins with a
phy, computed tomography. angiography, and magnetic resonance
thorough history and physical examination. Historical information
imaging
includingthe onset andprogression of clinical signs, previous response
to therapy as well as any history of trauma, toxin exposure, previous
Radiography
surgery or illnes, and dietary history is important. Specific clinical
signs that may suggest a disorder of the upper urinary tract include
Plain abdominal radiography provides information on renal size.
the presence of polyuria/polydipsia and/or hematuria, particularly
shape, and position. The right kidney is positioned slightly cranial to
hematuria at the end of urination. Anuria may be identifed in patients
the left kidney although it can be superimposed, and renal size can
with bilateral ureteral obstructions and is life threatening if not
be assessed by comparing renal length with the length of vertebra L2.
addressed immediately. It is important to note that patients with
 Although plain abdominal radiography does not often provide addi-
disorders of the upper urinary tract may have no clinical signs present.
tional information when evaluating a normal ureter, the technique
au un uoedied uo uied 'ennl go Aioisiy umou e yim shuaed ul
can be very informative for patients with radiopaque renal and/or
sublumbar region or evidence of bnuising may be suggestive of a
ureteral calculi. Additionally, this technique can be helpful in the
 primary renal and or ureteral injury. A complete physical examination
assessment of the retroperitoneal space. Urine leakage or hemorrhage
should include a fundic examination to evaluate the retina for any
in the retroperitoneal space can result in widening of the space, dis-
evidence of hemorrhage or detachment that may be an indication of
placement of the kidneys from their normal position, as well as an
hypertension. The patient is evaluated for evidence of weight loss and
increased heterogeneous opacity that can be visualized (Fig. 36-2).
dehydration and the kidneys are evaluated for size, shape, evidence of
discomfort on palpation, and location. Patients that have sustained
Ultrasonography
trauma to the kidney and/or ureter may have varying degrees of ret-
roperitoneal and/or peritoneal effusion depending on the integrity of
Utrasonography is often performed in conjunction with plain radi-
the peritoneal lining.
Ography and provides information regarding the size, shape, internal
 In addition to taking a history and performing a physical examina-
architecture and location, information on surrounding tissues and
tion, a complete blood count, serum chemistry profle, and urinalysis
 allows for the differentiation of solid from fluid-filled lesions. Normal
should be performed. Blood work may reveal varying degrees of azo-
ureters are typically not visible, but the distal portion of the ureter as
temia and anemia or may be unremarkable in patients with unilateral
well as the vesicoureteral junction may be seen using a high resolution
disease Neither the cause nor the reversibility of renal dysfunction
-n ym payuap! ioen Aieun iaddnaulgo saseasa eu's lanpsuen
can be determined from the degree of azotemia.17 A routine urinalysis 
 should be performed to evaluate the physical and chemical properties
disease, hydronephrosis and/or hydroureter secondary to urolithiasis.
of the urine as well as evaluate the urine sediment. If the patient has
blood clots, mural fibrosis or extramural compression, perinephric
a history of urinary tract infections or if there is evidence of bacteria.
 pseudocysts, ectopic ureter, and a ureterocele.17 It is important to note
 pyuria, and/or hematuria on sediment evaluation, then a urine culture
that the presence of urinary dilation does not definitely diagnose an
should be performed on aseptically collected urine.
obstruction and the presence of a surgically correctable disorder.18.19
Determining the cause as well as the extent of the renal disease,
 The presence of retroperitoneal fluid in conjunction with renal pelvic
chronicity, reversibility as well as progression, and the presence of
and ureteral dilation may be visualized in a patient with a ruptured
402
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
36
ureter.2 Additionally, patients that are candidates for renal transplan-
tation may have changes suggestive of end stage or polycystic kidney
diameter of the pelvis is reduced by about one-half and a small bolus
disease.
of a non-ionic contrast media such as iohexol is administered. A
urinalysis and culture should be performed. If ultrasound guidance is
Contrast radiographic studies
used, abdominal radiographs should be taken immediately after injec-
l' 'san si u paidan uan pue siaan a aznsia o uon
Intravenous urography
Baseline films should be taken first to make sure that the colon is
Buosod aieine ainsua ot aressau st eisauisaue ieaua idua
and minimize adverse reactions associated with contrast administra-
tion. IVU can be performed using a bolus technique or an infusion
technique The bolus technique is useful for assessing the renal vas-
culature as well as identifying any parenchymal lesions during the
angiographic, nephrographic, and pyelographic phases. The infusion
technique optimizes visualization of the ureters and any pathology
that may exist. The technique can provide detailed information
regarding the location, size, morphology, and integrity of the kidneys
and ureters. Contrast seen outside of the kidneys or ureters is indica-
tive of rupture (Fig. 36-3).
Antegrade pyelography
In patients with a complete ureteral obstruction, the pyelographic
phase of an IVU may be inadequate and perautaneous antegrade
pyelography may be the preferred technique (Fig. 36-4). The tech-
(spayed) domestic short-haired cat that was attacked by a dog. Note the
nique can be performed under ultrasonographic and/or fluoroscopic
extravasation of contrast from the renal pelvis. The urine leakage was 
paseid s arpaau ieuis szz e anbuuan siun uiad oh auepig
confined to the retroperitoneal space and the patient was not azotemic
 perautaneously into the renal cortex perpendicular to the capsule and 
 on presentation. A ureteronephrectomy was performed.
A
B
20
C
D
E
Figure 36-4 A five-year-old male (castrated) domestic short-haired cat that presented acutely azotemic. (A) Note the small right kidney and the
compensatory hypertrophy of the left kidney. Multiple nephroliths are present in the left kidney as well as a proximal ureterolith obstructing the left
kidney. (B) Intravenous urography was performed. Although the pyelographic phase of the unobstructed right kidney is easily visible, the pyelographic
phase of the obstructed left kidney is inadequate. (c-E) CT angiography was performed in conjunction with antegrade pyelography to determine the
location of the ureteral obstruction. Additionally. CT angiography was able to identify a more distal ureteral calculus (yellow arrow) not identified on
plain survey radiographs.
403
Section
151
The Abdomen
cut
vol
DFOV13.4
Nb Views:24
Cn
DETAIL
DETAII
Rot
tion:15.0de
No vOI
No vOI
2.5mm 1.375:1/2.5sp
2m
1,375:1/1.2sp
A
B
96L
=396
AIL
400L
40
ASR
Figure 36-5 (A) Arterial phase of CT angiography. Note the single renal artery with a split close to the kidney arising from the aorta on both the right 
and left side. (B) Venous phase of CT angiography. Note the double renal vein on the right side.
Potential risks include renal injury and bleeding. clot formation
resulting in a ureteral obstruction, laceration of the renal pelvis, and
Jo as e ul ze'ais siuoa aun  aerel an i ise
antegrade pyelography for suspected ureteral obstruction in ll cats
(18 kidneys), leakage of contrast developed in 8/18 cases and pre-
 Pip ieui saseo ei aul iod sa'sase asouijo aay ur uoeiaidraiui paiuaa
not have leakage of contrast material, the technique allowed for
correct identifcation of the anatomical location of the ureteral
obstruction.
Computed tomographic angiography (Fig. 36-5)
Helical computed tomographic angiography is a non-invasive tech-
 nique that has been used extensively to evaluate the renal vasculature
of cats selected for renal donation in feline renal transplantation. In
addition to providing a three-dimensional image of the renal vascu-
lature detailed information regarding renal anatomy as well as the
 Figure 36-6 A seven-year-old female (spayed) domestic long-haired cat
with multiple renal and ureteral uroliths.
identification of pathology can be obtained.
 per cent of nephro-ureteroliths evaluated from 1599 cats between
1981 and 2003 were composed of CaOx; only 8% were composed of
SURGICAL DISEASES
magnesium ammonium phosphate.26
 In addition to urolithiasis, dried solidifed blood (DSB) calculi have
also been identifed in the upper urinary tract of cats associated with
Diseases of the kidney and ureter that may benefit from surgery
ureteral obstructions (Fig. 36-7). These DSB calculi are firm and feel
include uroliths that can cause blockage and affect function, trauma.
like stones, but typically do not contain crystalline material.27 These
neoplasia, and ectopic ureters.
stones present a diagnostic challenge since they are not typically radio-
paque and often not identifed on ultrasonographic examination.
Urolithiasis in cats
Although uncommon, fbrosis, congenital stenosis, stricture, circum-
caval ureter, neoplasia, blood clots, surgical trauma, and retroperito-
Calcium oxalate (CaOx)-containing uroliths are the predominant
neal infarction have all been associated with ureteral obstruction
szz'(9-9e sy) sie yo laan pue Aauply ay ul paynuap adAi auos
in cats.28-35
 The increase in occurrence of CaOx urolithiasis in cats over the past
20 years has paralleled the increase in identifcation of these stones
Medical and minimally invasive management
in the kidneys and ureters.2 In fact, information collected from nine
It is not clear if CaOx uroliths lodged in the kidney or ureter will
a tenfold increase in frequency of upper urinary tract uroliths, with
migrate into the bladder. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some
stones will eventually pass into the bladder without therapy. In one
404
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
36
obstructions, 76% (58/76) were azotemic and ultrasonographic evalu-
 ation of the contralateral kidney revealed changes suggestive of paren-
au 'saepou aau suisn ieu aou otiueuodui s al 'aseasp ieuay
end point of the ureteral obstruction is not always identified.
Surgical management of uroliths
As medical dissolution of CaOx uroliths is not available surgical
removal is often recommended if the stones are causing clinical
disease. The presence of nephrolithiasis in normal cats and those with
naturaly occurring stage 2 or 3 chronic kidney disease is not neces-
sarily an indication for surgical removal. In a recent study in cats with
nephrolithiasis and mild or moderate chronic kidney disease, the
 presence of nephrolithiasis was not associated with disease progres-
sion or an increase in mortality rate.40 If surgical intervention is neces-
sary, it is not always clear how long one should wait to address either
renal or ureteral uroliths. The degree of dilatation of the renal pelvis
does not correlate with the amount of functional damage.? In the
 author's experience, if medical management does not appear to be
Figure 36-7 Dried solidified blood calculi within the renal pelvis and
effective within 24-48 hours and a partial or complete ureteral
Ureter of a cat. (Courtesy of Dr Allyson Berent.)
obstruction is present, or the ureterolith is associated with an infection
that does not respond to medical therapy, surgical removal is recom-
report of 1l cats with ureteral CaOx uroliths, however, imaging studies
mended. Factors that also need to be considered with regards to
were performed over periods of ll to 42 days and no stone migrated
aul pue Aaupy ieiaelenuon aut jo uoouny aul apnput sisousoid
in any of the cats over these time periods.3 Patients diagnosed with
 Overall health of the patient The ability of the feline kidney to recover
ureteroliths are often treated initially with a period of medical man-
from partial or complete outflow obstruction is unknown. Recovery
agement, including the parenteral administration of fluids alone or in
of renal function depends on the severity and duration of the obstruc-
tion and the presence of pre-existing renal disease Unfortunately, in
of ureteral calculi will occur. Additional therapies with anecdotal eff-
cases of unilateral ureteral obstruction, a diagnosis may go undetected
cacy include the administration of various smooth muscle relaxants
if function in the opposite kidney is normal.
including prazosin, the tricyclic antidepressant amitryptilline, and
 There are two options for removing nephroliths, a nephrotomy or
 other alpha antagonists such as tamsulosin. There are no reported
 pyelithotomy (see Box 36-3). Pyelithotomy may be performed if the
studies as to the efficacy of any of these drugs in cats with ureterolithi-
renal calculi have created dilation of the renal pelvis and avoids occlu-
asis. Unfortunately, these uroliths are less susceptibleto fragmentation
sion ofthe renal vasculature. Stones lodged in the proximal ureter may
using shock wave lithotripsy compared to those in dogs. Because
be removed by ureterotomy (see Box 36-6). This technique can also
of the high number of shock waves that may be necessary in cats in
be used for the mid to distal ureter or the affected area of the ureter
order to fragment a nephrolith or ureterolith, significant renal injury
 may be removed in toto and ureteral re-implantation or a ureteroneo-
may occur.37
cystostomy performed (Fig. 36-8; see Box 36-8).
Clinical presentation and investigation
Ureteral stenting
Cats with uroliths affecting the kidney and ureter can appear asymp-
 Ureteral stenting is a novel technique currently being performed in
cats. The author has used this technique for patients with multiple
lethargy weight loss, anorexia, vomiting, fever, and polydipsia and
ureteroliths located unilaterally or bilaterally with or without the pres-
polyuria.36.38 Hematuria may or may not be present, but was the most
ence of nephroliths (Fig. 36-9). Nephroliths do have the potential to
commonly reported sign in one study on feline nephrolithiasis.39
 pass into a ureter that was recently unobstructed, but the exact occur-
Patients may also present with abdominal pain and splinting or
rence of this complication is unknown in cats.1 As the majority of
renomegaly A complete physical examination is performed, as many
stent cases are performed surgically (in some female cats they can be
affected cats are older and may have concurrent disease(s). A urinalysis
placed cystoscopically), knowing the incidence of re-obstruction in
and urine culture, complete blood count, biochemical profle and
cases with nephroliths but only a few ureteroliths would be important
plain abdominal radiographs are usually recommended as initial
when making a decision regarding the appropriate treatment option
investigative steps. In a study of 163 cases of ureteral calculi, azotemia
-lad Auoaan e pey aney ieu suaed (suuas s Auooiaan)
(83%: 134/162) and hyperphosphatemia (54%: 84/156) were com-
formed should be evaluated periodically following surgery since
monly identified; hypercalcemia (14%;22/152) was less commonly
 nephroliths have the ability to migrate into the ureter and cause sub-
reported.3 A urinary tract infection was documented in 8% of cases
 sequent obstructions.
(10/119).3 Uroliths are often visualized on plain radiographs.
although small ureteroliths, radiolucent ureteroliths or those calculi 
Renal and ureteral trauma
Overlying colonic contents are occasionally missed. Further imaging
studies including ultrasonography, excretory urography, antegrade
Trauma to the upper urinary tract can be associated with automobile
-Ayuap! ul inydlay uao aie Aqdeigouon panduos pue Kqdeigojaad
accidents or fals, penetrating wounds secondary to bites, gunshot
ing smallureteroliths, thepresenceof hydronephrosis andhydroureter
wounds and penetrating foreign bodies, iatrogenic injury secondary
as well as delineating the level of a ureteral obstruction. In one report,
to surgical trauma, and trauma related to the presence of obstructive
a combination of survey radiography and abdominal ultrasonography
or irritating calculi. Because of their retroperitoneal location, the
revealed ureteroliths in 90% (63/73) of cats.38 In cats with unilateral
kidneys and ureters are less commonly damaged when compared to
405
Section
[51
The Abdomen
LTURETER
A
29 
B
B
C
with a large stone in the distal ureter. (B) An IVU reveals that the stone is
causing a partial obstruction of the right ureter. The left ureter is normal 
Figure 36-9 (A) Abdominal radiograph of a four-year-old female
and the cat was not azotemic. A neoureterostomy was performed.
(spayed) Himalayan cat with multiple ureteroliths bilaterally
the bladder and urethra. Ifthe peritoneal lining remains intact follow-
multiple ureteroliths along the length of the left ureter. (C} Post ureteral
ing a traumatic event and only one kidney and/or ureter is affected,
stent placement. Stent is bypassing the ureteroliths in the right ureter.
the cat's clinical presentation may be subtle and not reflect the severity
Black arrows identify the shaft of the stent, yellow arrows are the double
of the injury. If the retroperitoneal space has been disrupted resulting
pigtails curled in the renal pelvis and bladder.
in urine leakage into the peritoneal cavity, the patient's clinical signs
will be more representative of the injury. In patients in hypovolemic
 present with a life-threatening bleed asociated with splenic or hepatic
shock, body fluids may redistribute and minimize the presence of
trauma, neurological defciencies, as well as respiratory distress associ-
 abdominal effusion.
ated with thoracic trauma. Thoracic radiographs should be performed
A diagnosis of renal and/or ureteral trauma is based on history.
on any trauma patient to rule out pneumothorax, pulmonary contu-
 physical examination, clinical pathological fndings, evaluation of
sions, rib fractures, as well as a possible diaphragmatic hernia.
 peritoneal or retroperitoneal fluid (if present), abdominal radio-
Although not life threatening, fractures and superficial skin wounds
 graphs, abdominal ultrasound, and contrast studies. Advanced diag-
should also receive appropriate frst aid following resuscitation and
nostic imaging including fluoroscopy and CT may also be benefcial
 patient stabilization.
in some cases of urinary tract trauma. Not only is it important to make
a diagnosis, but the aim is also to determine the location of urinary
 injury and/or leakage.
Initial stabilization
 Patients should also be evaluated carefully for other systemic inju-
Depending on the time delay until diagnosis, many patients will have
ries. Along with trauma to the upper urinary tract, patients may
electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities that need to be corrected as
406
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
much as possible prior to surgery, since these changes can make them
from a renal or ureteral injury can result in dehydration, azotemia.
hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, acidosis, and hypovo-
lemic shock; however, these electrolyte abnormalities are not always
a consistent finding in the cat The rate of fluid administration as well
pyiads sjuaed e uo paseq aq pinoys Adeiaul pimu jo adk au se
needs. Although potassium-free solutions such as 0.9% saline are
recommended, a balanced electrolyte solution such as Normosol-R
will correct hypovolemia and not contribute substantially to the
serum potassium on an acute basis. Cats are typically started at a rate
of 40-60 mL/kg/hour. The patient is then reassessed after approxi-
mately 30 minutes and the rate and supplementation adjusted
accordingly.
An ECG trace should be recorded and if hyperkalemia is present, it
should be treated (see Chapter 2). In some severely unstable patients
that present with a uroperitoneum, temporary peritoneal dialysis (see
0l Aessanau aq Aeu uoisiaap Areuun io sishieipoay '(e-oe xog
more completely resolve azotemia and fluid, electrolyte and acid-base
 imbalances prior to definitive surgery.
Figure 36-10 Complete avulsion of the right kidney in a three-year-old
male (castrated) domestic short-haired cat after being hit by a car. The
vascular pedicle was identified and was not bleeding. It appeared to have
Clinicopathological evaluation
twisted and clotted.
A complete blood count, serum biochemical analysis and urinalysis
should be performed. Depending on the time to presentation, degree
 An increased risk of toxicity exists when contrast material is adminis-
of trauma, and concurrent abnormalities, the complete blood count
tered to azotemic animals.45
may reveal a regenerative or non-regenerative anemia and if significant
 Treatment of renal trauma is dictated by the extent of injury. Many
hemorrhage has occurred, the platelet count may be low due to con-
 patients that are azotemic secondary to renal contusions are treated
sumption. A neutrophilia with or without a left shift may be indicative
with supportive care to address their renal failure. Simple lacerations
of inflammation or sepsis, particularly if there was a urinary tract
as well as the presence of a subcapsular hematoma may be successfully
infection present prior to the injury. Serum biochemistry may reveal
managed conservatively: some lacerations of the kidney need to be
azotemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypochloremia, and
-aeu aimns aqeqiosqe 'auy e suisn pauiad aq ue siul pamns
hyponatremia. A venous blood gas may reveal a metabolic acidosis 
adaui 'snonuuo e ul (o/ io o/s) auouexoaiod se yons i
due to lactic acidosis in hypoperfused patients, uremia, or renal tubular
 Or mattress suture pattern. Additionally, depending on the extent of
acidosis. If peritoneal effusion is present, a sample should be obtained
the injury, the laceration can be augmented with a transversus
by abdominocentesis with or without ultrasound guidance or from a
-is yum un sas aos ul 'aa in de asn suo
a e inid a  aun j rae sis r
cant damage has occurred to the renal pelvis resulting in urine extrava-
concentration of the creatinine and potassium in the fluid retrieved on
sation, surgical repair can be augmented with the placement of an
abdominocentesis should be compared with that of the peripheral
ipsilateral nephrostomy tube (see below) with or without a ureteral
blood (see Chapter 37). Cytological evaluation of the abdominal fluid
a ie paad aq u saa an yo yo (maq aas) ruas
should also be performed to evaluate for signs of inflammation, sepsis
 time of surgical repair or percutaneously with intraoperative fluoro-
 Or evidence of damage to other intra-abdominal organs.
scopic guidance. If severe injury has occurred resulting in persistent
hemorrhage, urine extravasation, or the presence of non-viable tissue,
Kidney
a ureteronephrectomy (see below) is often necessary, provided the
Isolated renal trauma is often difficult to diagnose since clinical signs
remaining kidney is thought to be functional. Although not common,
are often non-specifc. Historical information in conjunction with the
complete avulsion of the kidney can occur, potentially resulting in
presence of gross or microscopic hematuria and pain on palpation in
severe and often fatal hemorrhage in the patient (Fig. 36-10).
the sublumbar region may be suggestive of a primary renal injury, but
Ureter
Similar to unilateral renal injury, unilateral ureteral tears can be dif-
severity of the injury.44 Survey radiographs may reveal loss of detail
ficult to diagnose if urine accumulation is confned to the retroperi-
and the inability to visualize one or both kidneys, displacement or
toneal space. Clinical signs in these patients are often vague and may
asymmetry of the kidneys, and an increase in density as well as widen-
include lethargy, dehydration, weak peripheral pulses, pale mucous
 Pld 'uoeinunsse pimy oi Aiepuosas aeds ieauoadoai aui yo gu!
membranes, prolonged capillary refill time, sublumbar pain, vomit-
evaluation is important to determine if uroretroperitoneum or hemor-
ing. anorexia, and pyrexia.46 Clinicopathological findings in these
rhage in the retroperitoneal space is present If the peritoneal lining
 patients may be normal. Similar to renal trauma, abdominal radio-
 graphs often reveal a loss of retroperitoneal detail and an increased
cavity will result in loss of normal abdominal detail. Occasionally
size of the retroperitoneal space Utrasound may identify fluid accu-
renal injury can be confirmed by excretory urography and abdominal
mulation. If both ureters are disnupted, signs of acute azotemia will
ultrasound; however, if the renal vascular pedicle has been damaged.
-neil ol Arepuonas Aaes leauoiad aul sialua aeyeal aun jl inoio 
CT and MR angiography or exploratory surgery may be necessary
1n
matic disruption of the parietal peritoneum, uroperitoneum will
 order to make a diagnosis. If excretory urography is performed, it is
develop. Excretory urography. antegrade pyelography or contrast
important that a patient be hemodynamically stable ensuring ade-
enhanced CT is beneficial in cases of both unilateral and bilateral
 quate renal perfusion prior to the administration of contrast material.
ureteral abnormalities. Similar to patients that have sustained renal
407
Section
5
The Abdomen
injury, it is imperative that the patient be hemodynamically stable
of a partial obstruction of the feline ureter on long-term function is
 prior to performing the study.
um known.
Treatment options for ureteral trauma are often dictated by patient
stability, function of the contralateral kidney and integrity of the
Para-ureteral and perinephric pseudocysts
contralateral ureter, damage to the ipsilateral kidney, and location of
the injury. Options include primary repair, end-to-end anastomosis
and urinomas
(ureteroureterostomy), ureteral  re-implantation  (neoureterocysto-
Although rare, urinomas (para-ureteral pseudocysts) have been described
stomy), ureteral stenting or ureteronephrectomy. Ureteral stenting can
-anxa ureuos sisopnasd asaul szs'eunen on Aiepuonas sien ul
be used alone or in conjunction with primary repair or end-to-end
sated urine following disruption of the proximal urinary tract. Physical
anastomosis to allow for urinary diversion while the incision sites are
examination might reveal a palpable dorsal abdominal mass and
healing. A nephrostomy tube can also be placed in these cases to divert
imaging confrms the presence of a fluid-filled mass in the retroperi-
urine away from the primary surgical site.
toneal space with evidence of ureteral obstruction. A diagnosis is
confirmed with exploratory laparotomy. Ureteronephrectomy with or
Ureteral pelvic disruption
without omentalization of the cavity has been performed to treat the
In cases of ureteral pelvic disruption or avulsion, repair of the injury
condition.54 If contralateral renal function is normal the prognosis for
should be performed in conjunction with a nephrostomy tube and
these patients is very good.
a ureteral stent for urinary diversion as well as to promote healing
Perinephric pseudocysts are fluid-filled cavities in a perirenal location,
and prevent stricture.42 Anastomosis of the ureter to the renal
usually a subcapsular accumulation of a transudate, which lack a true
pelvis is performed with 5/0 or smaller synthetic absorbable mono-
epitheliallining. Pseudocysts can beunilateral or bilateral andpatients
Aaup ieiaeenuos au il uaed padnuau ue u aimns suauey
often present with renomegaly and abdominal distension (Fig. 36-11 ).
function is normal, ureteronephrectomy is considered because of the
These occur most commonly in older male cats, with clinical signs of
technical difficulty in performing this type of repair and associated
renal dysfunction, but no history of trauma.5556 In these cases, under-
complications.
lying renal pathology often dictates the prognosis. Percutaneous
drainage is not effective in controlling recurrence of fuid accumula-
Proximal ureter injuries
tion. Resection of the pseudocyst wall can relieve clinical signs, but
 In many cases of trauma involving the proximal ureter, a ureterone-
is not likely to provide long-term benefit unless the underlying
 phrectomy is performed in cats with normal contralateral renal func-
disease is reversible (Fig. 36-12).57 If surgical resection is performed,
tion. Although rarely identified, small lesions resulting in urine
omentalization may be helpful to resolve continued transudation.58
[a o/g io uou o/g susn Ad panedan aq u ueaa
Survival in these patients is dictated by the degree of azotemia at
in a single interrupted or single continuous suture pattern. More often,
presentation.
injuries to the proximal ureter are repaired using an end-to-end anas-
A perirenal urinoma has been grouped under the term perinephric
tomosis. This technique is particularly difficult in cats and should only
pseudocyst: however, these contain urine and are thought to be
be performed using appropriate magnification and by someone with
paieiosse amnu io Kinlun leiins 'eunen on Aiepuoas pannbe
with urolithiasis.5-1 A diagnosis is confrmed using excretory urogra-
experience in microvascular surgery.
phy demonstrating a communication between the urinary tract and
injuries to the middle and distal ureter
the pseudocyst Additionally, fluid analysis from the fluid-filled cavity
-ad aq ue Auonsniaan-aiaan se am se iedai Areud yanou
auuar pue (nnal uaau ean pooiq yiu e aensuoup m
formed for injuries to the middle and distal ureter, more often ureteral
concentration compared to peripheral blood. The azotemia resolves
after fluid drainage and removal of the source of extravasation.
re-implantation is performed. In the author's experience, because of
the mobility of the feline kidney, particularly following dissection
Treatment options include nephrectomy, ureteral anastomosis or
from its retroperitoneal attachments, ureteral re-implantation can also
be performed for some proximal ureteral injuries. In these cases, ure-
teral re-implantation is always performed in conjunction with a renal
descensus and a cystonephropexy.
Devascularization or crushing injuries
The effect of devascularization or crushing of the feline ureter has not
been previously evaluated. In dogs. damage to the ureteral vascular
supply and the duration and extent of the obstruction dictate the
severity of injury to the ureter and associated kidney. In dogs, devas-
Ul 'sanu yh uu usap au aam sanu uize
one canine research study, approximately 50% of ureters that were
devascularized by removing 2-3 cm of proximal adventitia developed
persistent strictures and obstruction.47 In contrast, crushing injuries
lasting up to 60 minutes did not result in permanent renal damage
and radiographic evaluation demonstrated that 90% of the strictures
returned to normal within 12 weeks. Crushing of the ureter iatrogeni-
Buunp Auaapeul '?'a] uoeat no gudseie Aq Aagins Buunp Ae
the ureter.4 If a ligature can be removed from the ureter within one
week of placement, normal function of the kidney and ureter should
10 ueu iaieaig ioy iananm au jo uonsqo sueuny ul t'pauieaan an
Figure 36-11 Bilateral pseudocysts in an eight-year-old male (castrated)
equal to four weeks results in complete loss of function.50.51 The effect
Persian cat. The cat presented with renomegaly and abdominal distension.
408
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
36
diagnosed with primary renal neoplasia, if the disease is unilateral
and the remaining kidney is functional, the treatment is ureterone-
phrectomy (see Box 36-4).6l69
Ureteral ectopia
 Ureteral ectopia is a rare congenital condition identified in the cat and
  s '      
cases have been reported in the veterinary literature.70-81 Unilateral and
bilateral cases appear with equal frequency, with the urethra being the
most common site of ureteral termination. Intravenous urography in
conjunction with retrograde urethrography in males and vagino-
urethrography in females are used to make the diagnosis. Concomi-
tant abnormalities can include hydroureter and hydronephrosis (most
common), cystitis, pyelonephritis, urinary tract infection, and renal
and bladder hypoplasia and aplasia. Extramural ectopia is common
in the cat, with the ureters completely bypassing the bladder. Surgical
 treatment is often curative and may include ureteronephrectomy (see
below) or ureteral re-implantation (see below).
Figure 36-12 Surgical resection of the pseudocyst wall in the cat in
Figure 36-11. Resection can relieve clinical signs, but will likely not 
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
provide long-term benefit unless the underlying disease is reversible.
AND TECHNIQUES
ureteral re-implantation, depending on the extent and location of
the damage.
Renal biopsy
Renal biopsy is indicated in order to determine a histologic diagnosis
Renal and ureteral neoplasia
of the cause of renal failure as well as establish progression of a condi-
Renal tumors in cats are uncommon, comprising 1.6-2.5% of all
tion and response to therapy. A renal biopsy can be performed using
neoplasia identifed.6l Primary ureteral neoplasia has not been
a blind percutaneous technique percutaneously under ultrasound
reported. The most common renal tumor in the cat is lymphoma, with
guidance or surgically. Because cat kidneys are readily palpable and
the kidney often being the site of metastasis rather than a primary site
easy to immobilize, the blind percutaneous technique works well.
of disease.62-5 Lymphoma confined to the kidneys occurs in approxi-
Prior to performing a biopsy, a hematocrit, plasma protein, and clot-
mately 40% of documented cases and is usually bilateral.6 In the
ting ability should be evaluated. When performing the technique
largest retrospective study to date on primary renal tumors in cats,
percutaneously, care should betaken when directingthe biopsy needle
carcinomas (tubular and tubulopapillary) were the most common,
so as not to damage the renal vasculature or pelvis. Because of the
followed by transitional cell carcinomas." Adenoma, hemangiosar-
 larger vessels present in the renal medulla, which can result in infarc-
coma, and nephroblastoma were also identified."6
tion and fbrosis following biopsy, the biopsy needle should be
Presenting clinical signs in cats with primary renal tumors are non-
directed so that only cortical tissue is obtained (Fig. 36-13). This can
specifc, with signs of anorexia, weight los, depression, and lethargy
be challenging because of the small renal size in cats. For a sample
au yn xis u pyuapi sem eah g'uo iso a sua
collected percutaneously, the most commonly employed biopsy
patients for which urine was evaluated and may be an indication
instrument is the Tru-Cut biopsy needle ( Box 36-1). Following biopsy.
of the presence of primary renal neoplasia.° Other signs including
a brisk fluid diuresis should be performed to prevent clot formation
neurological signs, abdominal pain and distension, blindness, and
within the renal pelvis.17
dyspnea have also been reported. Polycythemia, possibly secondary
 In a large multi-institutional study on the methods and complica-
u paodan uaaq siu 'uonpoid uanodonuia ui aseaun ue on
tions of renal biopsy, complications were reported in 18.5% of feline
one cat.66
cases.82 The most common complication reported was hemorrhage If
 Diagnostic evaluation should include a complete blood count, bio-
the biopsy is performed percutaneously, following the biopsy the
chemical panel, urinalysis, three-view thoracic radiographs, and an
perirenal area should be assessed under ultrasound guidance for any
abdominal ultrasound examination. Contrast enhanced computed
evidence of hemorrhage. Subcapsular hemorrhage may occur at the
 tomography may also be useful in differentiating tumoral from non-
biopsy site and there may be evidence of microscopic hematuria
tumoral regions.7 Blood work may reveal anemia with varying degrees
during the first two days following the procedure. Macroscopic hema-
turia is much less common. The patient's hematocrit and total protein
     
should be monitored regularly over the frst 24 hours and if concerns
phosphokinase activity.668 Hematuria and/or proteinuria may be
of severe hemorrhage into the peritoneal cavity exist, the patient
 present. If renal lymphoma is suspected, a fne needle aspirate and/
should be treated aggressively with whole blood transfusions, a com-
or biopsy is recommended for cytological evaluation and diagnosis
pression bandage of the abdomen and possibly exploratory surgery.
confrmation.63
Care must also be taken when performing biopsies to avoid penetra-
tion of the renal pelvis. Although rare, bleeding into the renal pelvis
with subsequent clot formation may result in a ureteral obstruction
Treatment
and hydronephrosis. The author has identifed one case of ureteral
If lymphoma is diagnosed, the cancer should be clinically staged and,
obstruction secondary to clot formation from a biopsy that resulted
if appropriate, the patient treated with chemotherapy. For patients
in leakage of urine from the biopsy site.
409
Section
5
The Abdomen
A
 Figure 36-13 A Tru-Cut biopsy needle can be used percutaneously or
surgically. The biopsy needle should be inserted in the direction of the
plain black arrows so that only cortical tissue is obtained, and not into
the medulla (crossed black arrow).
B
 Box 36-1 Renal biopsy
Figure 36-14 (A) Placement of a temporary nephrostomy tube for a cat
that had a proximal ureterotomy to remove a ureterolith. A 5 French 
To perform a renal biopsy surgically, a similar technique using the
gauge locking loop catheter has been passed through the body wall.
Tru-Cut biopsy needle can be performed during a standard
Prolene sutures are being preplaced to pexy the kidney to the body wall.
laparotomy. Alternatively, a wedge of cortical tissue (2-5 mm thick)
(B} The sharp trocar tip of the catheter allows for placement of the
can be obtained. To perform this technique, retroperitoneal fat is
e oi paupee a uaui uen aan al sad euan an ou aauie
dissected from the kidney to mobilize it and provide access to the 
external drainage system. Note the proximal ureterotomy.
 convex lateral surface. In many cases in the cat, however, minimal to
uen juersisse ue 'aunssaid labuiy buisn Auessanau s! uoiassp ou 
suture using 3/0 to 4/0 synthetic absorbable suture material is placed,
but not tied, on the convex surface through cortical tissue. A number
Complications that have been reported with nephrostomy tubes
11 blade is then used to cut a wedge of cortical tissue from within 
include the development of uroabdomen (25%: 6/24), tube dislodge-
the limits of the mattress suture. Once the wedge is removed, the 
ment, and poor drainage (21%: 5/24).41
mattress suture is tied to appose the cortical parenchyma and 
eay aeuiouau jo anuapiaa Aue ot passasse si alis aul ainsde
biopsy can also be performed laparoscopically (see Chapter 24).
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis may be useful for severely unstable patients that
Nephrostomy
 present with a uroperitoneum, to more completely resolve azotemia
and fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances prior to defnitive
In some patients that are severely azotemic and unstable, hemodialy-
surgery. The technique of peritoneal dialysis (Box 36-2) should be
aq A aqn Auisudau uaaua ue jo juaaneid aun io sis
 performed using aseptic technique under general anesthesia or with
beneficial in stabilizing the patient prior to surgery. Because of the
the use of a local anesthetic
mobility of the feline kidney and the risk of leakage, some clinicians
Maintenance of sterility is critical to the success of peritoneal
recommend that feline nephrostomy tubes be placed surgically. The
dialysis. The most common complications reported with peritoneal
aaond aun rg moe u aq au e jo zui
dialysis in cats are dialysate retention and sequestration of dialysate
assessment of renal function in the obstructed kidney as well as deter-
under the skin.*s Other reported complications include catheter
 obstruction, leakage of fluid from the catheter site, abdominal pain,
 In cats, a 5 or 6 French locking loop catheter is used (Fig. 36-14).
septic peritonitis and pleural effusion.?5 Laboratory abnormalities
 The tube can be secured on the skin with a purse-string and Chinese
may include hypoproteinemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and
finger trap suture.
hyperglycemia.85.86
410
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
Box 36-2 Peritoneal dialysis
Box 36-3 Nephrotomy and pyelolithotomy
A small stab incision is made 2-3 cm caudal to the umbilicus and just 
Nephrotomy
off midline and the peritoneal catheter introduced 84 A wide variety
of peritoneal dialysis catheters have been used for the cat, most 
 renal artery and vein are isolated and temporarily occluded with
being made out of silicon with multiple fenestrations and one or two
Dacron cuffs(see Chapter 11) $s.86 The fenestrated portion of the
 Rommel tourniquets. A longitudinal incision is made with a scalpel 
 through the convex lateral surface of the kidney (Fg. 36-16). The 
catheter is positioned into the peritoneal cavity and the cuffs are
 blunt end of the scalpel handle can then be used to extend the 
placed within the subcutaneous tissue. Ideally, the catheter should 
 incision through the renal parenchyma. Calculi are removed from
not be used for approximately 24 hours following placement to allow
 the renal pelvis and the collecting duct system, both of which are 
a fibrin seal to form; however, often the animal's condition dictates 
flushed with sterile saline. The nephrotomy incision is closed by 
uenuos pue euseid ot yejwis aq pinous aiesklep aul asn areipawu!
approximating the two 'halves' of the kidney and the renal capsule
physiologic concentrations of calcium, magnesium, sodium, and 
is sewn with 4/0 PDs in a simple continuous pattern. The Rommel 
chloride. Additionally, the dialysate should be mildly to moderately
 tourniquets are released and the two 'halves' of the kidney are held 
hyperosmolar depending on the needs of the patient. Dextrose is the
firmly opposed for five minutes.
anpaod aueupxa aul sen ui sube pso pasn Auouon io
initially occurs frequently (every 45-60 minutes) and then is gradually
Pyelolithotomy
decreased (four times a day) as the uremia improves. At each
To expose the pelvis, the kidney is dissected free of its peritoneal
exchange, the volume infused is 40 mL/kg.
attachments and folded medially. An incision is made over the 
 proximal ureter and pelvis and the stones are removed (Fig. 36-15A).
A suture (5/0 prolene) can be passed distally to ensure that there is 
Nephrotomy and pyelolithotomy
pelvis are closed with either a continuous suture pattern or single
interrupted, appositional sutures using polydioxanone, polyglactin.
A nephrotomy (Box 36-3) provides the greatest exposure of the renal
 polypropylene, or nylon (Hg. 36-15B).
uoaiu aeiouan sieua inq 'uaiss np suanos pue siad
of the affected kidney's blood supply. Alternatively, pyelolithotomy
(Box 36-3) may be performed if the renal calculi have created dilation
of the renal pelvis. This approach does not provide as good an expo-
sure of the pelvis as a nephrotomy, but does not necessitate occlusion
of the renal vasculature.
Two separate studies have evaluated the effect of nephrotomy on
renal function in clinically normal cats. In the first study, bisection
nephrotomy did not adversely affect renal function during the 12
week study period.87 In the second study, nephrotomy resulted in
uey 1ejauolg Aaupy al3uss ueau ul uonpan %oz-01 e
u iq a l lae an m  () a
(A)
B
significant difference from cats that underwent a sham surgical proce-
dure This difference may reflect the ability of the non-operated con-
 Figure 36-15 Pyelolithotomy. (A) An incision is made on the dorsal
tralateral kidney to undergo compensatory hypertrophy in response
surface of the dilated renal pelvis and proximal ureter and calculi
to the decrease in GFR in the kidney that had the nephrotomy
patency. the incision is closed with a simple continuous suture pattern.
performed.88
Ureteronephrectomy
 Box 36-4 Ureteronephrectomy
   u   i aa
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a midline celiotomy
ing in persistent hemorrhage, urine extravasation, or the presence of
 performed. To expose the left kidney for nephrectomy, the mesentery
non-viable tissue in cases of severe trauma involving the proximal
of the descending colon can be used to reflect away some of the
ureter, and for para-ureteral and perirenal urinomas. Additionally.
abdominal viscera. The right kidney can be exposed using the
d ym pasop suad a pasn ose s aauauaann
mesoduodenum in a similar manner. The kidney can then be
renal neoplasia, if the disease is unilateral and the remaining kidney
dissected from its retroperitoneal attachments to expose the renal
is functional.62,70,73,81
 artery and vein (Fg. 36-17). Care should be taken to identify all
To perform a nephrectomy and ureterectomy (Box 36-4), the
vessels supplying the kidney since multiple renal arteries can be 
identified on the left and multiple renal veins can be identified on 
kidneys are exposed through a ventral midline incision. The author
 both the right and left side.? The left testicular or ovarian vein should
prefers this technique over a retroperitoneal flank incision since the
 also be identified as it often drains into the renal vein rather than the
entire abdomen can be explored including examination of both
caudal vena cava. The renal artery and vein are ligated separately
kidneys. Alternatively, based on the surgeon's experience, the kidneys
with 2/0 to 3/0 silk or synthetic absorbable suture such as
can be removed laparoscopically (see Chapter 24).
polydioxanone. Both vessels are ligated twice and one of those 
Aa panelos! uaut s! laaan aul aanins uoexysue e ag uen saunins
Ureteroureterostomy
aul ol asop bueb!l pue lappeig Aueuun aul ot umop bupassip
 D/e lo o/z jo sanins oml lo auo yhm uoiun! jealanonisaa
Although rarely identified, small lesions resulting in urine extravasa-
synthetic absorbable suture. A transfixation suture is not necessary.
aus e ul [a 0/g io uoau 0/g susn Aed paiieda aq um uo
411
Section
5
The Abdomen
B
D
Figure 36-16 A 12-year-old female (spayed) domestic short-haired cat with a history of chronic renal failure. (A) Multiple nephroliths and ureteroliths
are identified bilaterally. (B) The right kidney at surgery. The kidney was turgid and retroperitoneal effusion was present. (c) The renal artery and vein
are isolated with Rommel tourniquets. Note the multiple renal veins (three) that are present. (D). Following temporary occlusion of the Rommel
 tourniquets, a nephrotomy was performed. Significant loss of renal cortex is noted.
412
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
98
A
B
Figure 36-17 Isolation of the (A) renal artery, (B) vein, and (C) ureter for nephrectomy.
Box 36-5 End-to-end anastomosis (ureteroureterostomy)
To perform this technique, both ends of the ureter should be
mobilized, taking care not to disrupt the blood supply or 
inadvertently traumatize the ureter. Debridement of the disrupted 
edges should be performed. Because of the small size of the ureteral
lumen in a cat, a ureteral guidewire or stent can be placed 
retrograde from the ureterovesicular junction across the two ends
to aid in suture placement. The ends of the ureter can also be
U! pie ol sisouoiseue ol loud shossps yeinoseaounjw ylw pateinieds
closure (Figs 36-18 and 19). The author prefers to use 8/0 nylon or
8/0 polyglactin in an interrupted suture pattern. The ureteral stent 
can be left in place to prevent stricture formation and allow for
urinary diversion. The stent can be removed at a later date,
cystoscopically in a female and with a limited surgical approach to
the bladder in a male, if indicated. Following complete ureteral
transection and repair, normal peristalsis was reported to return from
 seven to ten days to three weeks post anastomosis.89
Boari flap
The Boari flap or a modification of the flap could theoretically be
used if a significant loss of ureteral length exists. To perform this 
technique, a full thickness bladder flap is created with the base
located at the apex of the bladder. The bladder defect is closed 
routinely and the edges of the flap are sutured together to create a
0l laain aut po pua lersip ayi ot paanins ag uaul uen ypum 'aan
minimize tension, a cystopexy can be performed. In a modification of
this technique, following creation of the flap, the ureter could be 
Figure 36-18 Ureteroureterostomy.
placed through the flap. spatulated and then ureteral mucosa sutured 
to bladder mucosa. The edges of the bladder flap are then sutured
together to create a tube and the top of the tube sutured closed.
interrupted or single continuous suture pattern. More often, injuries
evaluating 153 cases, the prevalence of complications in cats following
to the proximal ureter are repaired using an end-to-end anastomosis
surgical removal of ureteral calculi was 3l%, with the most common
Pinous pue sie u hnoy keinoed si anbiuyat siul (s-ge xog)
complication being urine leakage, followed by persistence of ureteral
 only be performed using appropriate magnification and by someone
obstruction. The 12 month survival rate following medical and surgi-
with experience in microvascular surgery.
cal management was 66% and 91%, respectively.41
Ureterotomy (Box 36-6)
Surgical stenting of the ureter
Indications for ureterotomy include urolith removal from the proxi-
Ureteral stenting (Box 36-7) is a novel technique currently being
mal, middle and distal ureter.
performed in cats. The author has used this technique for patients
-nsiu rm uaaa u e a paad Aaan
 r ae r aai i sa a r
 cal technique does not require the placement of a nephrostomy tube.
without the presence of nephroliths (see Fig. 36-9). Surgical stents can
The most common complications associated with ureterotomy are
be placed retrograde via a cystotomy, antegrade via pyelocentesis, Or
leakage and stricture formation.3.92 In a large multicenter study
through a ureterotomy site (antegrade or retrograde).3
413
Section
|51
The Abdomen
A
Figure 36-19 Ureteroureterostomy performed after surgical transection
and resection of the proximal ureter during an ovariohysterectomy.
Mobilization of both ends of the ureter was performed, debrided and a
double pigtail ureteral stent was placed to aid in suture placement and 
 allow for urinary diversion during healing. Stent not visible.
B
cat with a distal ureteral stone causing a partial ureteral obstruction.
(B} The stone was embedded into the wall of the ureter and so the
Ureterotomy was made directly over the stone.
 Figure 36-20 A seven-year-old female (spayed) domestic short-haired cat
with a partial obstruction of the distal ureter. Two small stones can be 
identified on visualization and palpation (black arrow).
For injuries to the middle and distal ureter, ureteral re-implantation
is the most common technique performed. Ureteral re-implantation
can also be performed for some proximal ureteral injuries, because of
the mobility of the feline kidney, particularly following dissection
from its retroperitoneal attachments. In these cases, ureteral re-
implantation is always performed in conjunction with a renal descen-
sus and a cystonephropexy.
extravesicular, and ureteral papilla implantation techniques have been
described in the cat, all attempting to reduce the complications that
 can occur when re-implanting the ureter due to its very small luminal
diameter (see Box 36-4).4.,95
The normal ureter in a cat measures approximately 0.4 mm in
Figure 36-21 The affected segment of ureter is isolated using silastic
diameter at the level of insertion in the bladder, making an operating
material proximally and distally.
microscope essential when working with normal-sized ureters.
However, cats with ectopic ureters or any degree of chronic obstruc-
Ureteral re-implantation
tion often have hydroureter, making ureterovesicular anastomosis less
technically demanding in some cases.
(neoureterocystostomy)
For conditions that require the distal end of the ureter to be
Neoureterocystostomy (Boxs 36-8-36-11) is indicated for extramural
 transected from the bladder and then re-implanted in a different loca-
ectopic ureters (see Chapter 37), ureteral calculi, strictures, cystectomy
tion, such as extramural ectopic ureters or tumors involving the
involving the trigone or ureteral papilla, and renal transplantation.
trigone or ureteral papilla, either an extravesicular or intravesicular
414
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
 Box 36-6 Ureterotomy
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a midline celiotomy
is performed. Ureteral surgery in cats generally requires substantial
provided by an operating microscope. Ureteral calculi may be visible 
 on inspection of the ureter or palpable along the length of the
ureter (Fig. 36-20). Once the location of the calculus is identified,
the affected segment of ureter is isolated using silastic material 
proximally and distally (Fig. 36-21). In addition to decreasing
urine flow into the surgical field, this preparation prevents
spontaneous retrograde movement of ureteroliths.s Care is taken 
when manipulating the ureter so as not to disrupt the blood supply
 or inadvertently traumatize the ureter. A longitudinal incision is
made in the dilated ureter just proximal to the obstruction. In some
cases, because the calculus is embedded within the ureteral wall.
the incision is made directly over the calculus (Figs 36-22A,B and 
Hg. 36-23A). Following removal, a piece of suture material can be
 ansua ol als Auoioalan aul wouy Allersip pue Allewlxod passed
ureteral patency. The ureterotomy incision is closed with either
simple interrupted sutures or a continuous suture pattern using
monofilament suture material (FHg. 36-23B). Absorbable material is
B
C
preferred so that the suture does not act as a nidus for new stone
Figure 36-23 (A) Diagram of obstructive ureteral calculi. (B) Longitudinal
formation. Recently, a novel approach using endoscopic assistance 
to retrieve a ureteral calculus lodged 4 cm distal to the renal pelvis
incision to remove calculi. (c) Closure of the longitudinal ureterotomy 
was described.91 Removal of the calculus through a hole made in
using a simple continuous suture pattern.
the renal capsule avoided complications identified following 
pe ats roaan aur wo aeeal bunui abans eaan
stricture.
neoureterocystostomy technique may be used, depending upon the
 Box 36-7 Ureteral surgical stenting
specifc circumstances. A specific disadvantage of the intravesicular
technique is the excessive swelling of the bladder wall that occurs
Retrograde technique
as a result of everting the lumen of the bladder to facilitate the
To perform the retrograde technique, a ventral cystotomy is
anastomosis.24
performed and the ureteral orifices are located. An angled
 For cats with an intact ureteral papilla that can be preserved for
hydrophilic guidewire is advanced through the ureterovesicular 
re-implantation, neoureterocystostomy can be performed using the
junction (UvJ) and up the distal ureter. An open ended ureteral
aq si anuan siul y anuan uoiuiu eed reaan
 catheter is then advanced over the wire into the ureter and the
 described for cats undergoing renal transplantation. Advantages of
hydrophilic guidewire temporarily removed. Fluoroscopy can be
this technique include the technical ease of suturing the ureteral
used to identify the location of the catheter within the ureter. A
papilla since it is larger than the transected distal ureter alone and
retrograde ureteropyelogram is then performed under fluoroscopic
sutures can be placed several millimeters away from the ureteral
guidance to identify any stones, filling defects or other lesions. The
stoma. The risk of granulation tissue formation and subsequent
catheter is left in place for 5 minutes to allow for passive ureteral 
stricture is potentially less since sutures do not directly enter the
dilation. Following the ureteropyelogram, the guidewire is then 
ureteral lumen, and the risk of ureteral avulsion is reduced with a
readvanced up the ureter and two loops of the guidewire are
complete two-layer closure. Finally, there is less potential for vesi-
placed in the renal pelvis. The catheter is removed and an indwelling 
double pigtail ureteral stent is passed over the guidewire until one 
 coureteral reflux since the normal anatomy of the ureteral papilla is
curl is in the renal pelvis. The other curl is pushed into the urinary
preserved.
bladder.
 Following neoureterocystostomy, cats should be monitored closely
for potential complications including obstruction of the ureter from
Antegrade technique
swelling or inflammation, torsion, or stricture, leakage of urine from
To perform the antegrade technique, a renal access needle or 22G 
dehiscence of the anastomosis site, cystolith formation due to the
IV catheter is used in conjunction with ultrasound or fluoroscopy to
presence of intraluminal sutures, pyelonephritis due to ascending
 perform a percutaneous or surgical pyelocentesis. A contrast study 
infection, and vesicoureteral reflux due to loss of an effective valve
 Aeuun aut oui pased amapine yydopay e pue pawaojad s!
mechanism at the implantation site. Diagnostic tests including
bladder and then out the urethra. This wire ats as a safety wire so
serum creatinine levels, renal and bladder ultrasonography, intra-
that access is not lost.93 A catheter is then placed retrograde over
venous or percutaneous pyelography, and cystography should be
the wire into the ureter. A second guidewire is then placed in a
performed as necessary if any of the above complications are sus-
 pected. Some degree of renal pelvic or ureteral dilation is commonly
'a puonas aul laao uoysey apeoan e u! paneid uaul s luais
observed after ureteroneocystostomy, but should resolve within
several weeks.
415
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 36-8 Neoureterocystotomy - Intravesicular technique
To perform the intravesicular technique, a ventral midline cystotomy 
 is performed. A mosquito hemostat is placed through the apex of the
 bladder and then the end of the ureter is grasped and brought into 
 the bladder lumen. Some surgeons prefer to remove a 3-4 mm 
diameter section of mucosa from the desired area on the internal 
surface of the bladder prior to placing the hemostat. The bladder is
everted and the distal end of the ureter is excised. If necessary.
excessive periureteral fat is removed. The end of the ureter is then
spatulated a distance of 0.5-0.75 cm using straight microvascular
 scissors (Fig. 36-24). The ureteral mucosa is sutured to the bladder
mucosa using either 8/0 nylon or 8/0 polyglactin in a simple
interrupted pattern (Fig. 36-25). The first and most important suture 
 is placed at the proximal end of the ureteral incision (point of the "V").
It is important that no periureteral fat is exposed once suturing is 
 complete as this can lead to adhesions and granuloma formation,
 potentially resulting in a ureteral obstruction. To aid in identifying and 
 maintaining the lumen of the ureter during suturing. a piece of 5/0 
se aaas ot uaunl aut u! paneld ag uen aunins auadoudkjod lo uou 
 a stent and to check for ureteral patency. Following completion of 
the anastomosis, the bladder is inverted and closed routinely.
7
Figure 36-25 The ureteral mucosa is sutured in an interrupted pattern
to the bladder mucosa using simple interrupted sutures of either 8/0
once suturing is complete as this can lead to adhesions and granuloma
formation, potentially resulting in a ureteral obstruction. Once
completed, the bladder is then closed routinely. (Courtesy of Dr Dan
Degner.)
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Postoperative care
Postoperative care is tailored for each individual patient, but typically
includes the administration of a balanced electrolyte solution until
the patient is eating and drinking. Fluid diuresis is advocated after
esaeuy ueuy iouaaaid on ien eun iadn augo Aains
(A)
is usually provided by opioids and with the judicious use of non-
steroidals only in patients with normal renal function. Urination
should be carefully monitored and urine samples assessed for macro-
and microscopic hematuria (see Chapter 4).
 Patients that have had a ureterotomy performed should be evalu-
ated periodically following surgery since nephroliths have the ability
to migrate into the ureter and cause subsequent obstructions. For
further information see Chapters 3 and 4.
COMPLICATIONS
C
Complications seen after upper urinary tract surgery include micro-
Figure 36-24 (A) A ventral cystotomy is performed. A mosquito
scopic and macroscopic hematuria which can result in ureteral or
hemostat is used to make a hole at the apex of the bladder and then the
urethral obstruction from blood clots. Ureteral surgery carries the risk
 end of the ureter is grasped and brought directly into the bladder lumen.
of urinary leakage from the surgical site resulting in uroabdomen or
 Tunneling of the ureter through the bladder wall is not performed.
(B) The crushed end of the ureter is excised and the end of the ureter
lateral. Surgery on the kidney, though not detrimental in experimental
spatulated using straight microvascular scissors. (c} Simple interrupted 
studies, may cause further renal compromise in clinical cases which
 sutures are placed between bladder mucosa and the ureteral wall.
416
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
Box 36-9 Neoureterocystotomy - Extravesicular technique
 Box 36-10 Neoureterocystotomy - Ureteral papilla
 implantation technique
 In the extravesicular technique, a 1 cm incision is made on the ventral 
surface of the bladder through the seromuscular layer allowing the 
 Using an operating microscope, the ureter is dissected from
mucosa to bulge through the incision.56 A smaller incision (3-4 mm) is
 retroperitoneal attachments. The seromuscularis around the ureteral 
made through the mucosal layer of the bladder at the caudal aspect of
 papilla including a 1-2 mm cuff of bladder wall is incised with
the seromuscular incision (Fig. 36-26). The distal end of the ureter is 
 microdissecting scissors until the mucosa begins to bulge from the 
buis anbuuat ensaaeui au lot pagsap Asnoaad se paedad 
lumen (Hg. 36-27A). The mucosa is then incised around the papilla,
8/0 nylon or &/0 vicryl. ureteral mucosa is sutured to bladder mucosa.
taking care not to injure the ipsilateral or contralateral ureteral 
The proximal and distal sutures are placed first. Once the ureteral 
 stoma. After resecting the ureteral papilla, the defect in the bladder
 anastomosis is complete, the seromuscular layer is apposed in a simple 
is closed in either one or two layers or dealt with as appropriate if
interrupted pattern over the ureter with 4/0 absorbable suture.
the surrounding bladder is to be included in a partial cystectomy or 
other procedure (Hg. 36-27B). A 4 mm full thickness, circular incision 
is made in the desired area on the external surface of the bladder
 for re-implantation of the ureter. The ureteral papilla and cuff of 
 bladder wall is then re-implanted using an extravesicular technique
(Hg. 36-27C). The papilla is sutured to the bladder in 2 layers
(mucosa to mucosa and seromuscularis to seromuscularis) using a
 simple continuous suture pattern with 8/0 absorbable suture material
(Hg. 36-27D).
A
?
D
 Figure 36-27 Ureteral papilla implantation technique. (A) Isolation
A
 of the distal ureter and ureteral papilla including a 2-3 mm cuff of 
 bladder wall (dashed line). (B) Ciosure of the seromuscularis layer of 
the bladder using a simple continuous pattern. (c) Anastomosis of 
the ureteral papilla to the apex of the bladder. The mucosa of the
ureteral papilla is being sutured to the mucosa of the bladder using 
 a simple continuous pattern, and (D) completed anastomosis of the 
Ureteral papilla. (Redrawn from Hardie Rl, et al. Ureteral papilla implantation
as a technique for neoureterocystostomy in cats. Vet 5urg 2005;34:393-398.
With permission from John Wiley & Sons.)
YYY
B
Figure 36-26 Extravesicular technique for ureteroneocystostomy.
(A} A 1 cm incision is made on the ventral surface of the bladder
 through the seromuscular layer allowing the mucosa to bulge through
 the incision. A smaller incision (3-4 mm) is made through the mucosal
layer of the bladder at the caudal aspect of the seromuscular incision.
 The distal end of the ureter is spatulated and the ureteral mucosa is
jeisip pue jewlxoud aul uou 0/g buisn esosnu jappeig ot paanins 
sutures are placed first. (B) The seromuscular layer is closed over the
ureter in a simple interrupted suture pattern.
417
Section
5
The Abdomen
Evaluation of a potential recipient
Box 36-11 Neoureterocystotomy - Renal descensus
and cystonephropexy
Appropriate screening is performed by the referring veterinarian in
conjunction with the transplant surgeon to decrease the incidence of
Although uncommon, ureteroneocystostomy can be performed when
only the proximal third of the ureter is available for anastomosis. If 
gical intervention is recommended in cats with early decompensated
tension along the suture line remains a concern, a renal descensus 
and a cystonephropexy can be performed (Fig. 36-28). To perform 
tions of decompensation may include continued weight loss and
this technique, the kidney is mobilized from its retroperitoneal
worsening ofthe azotemia and anemia in the face of medical manage-
attachments and moved caudally. The renal capsule can then be 
Alesjup aie zeyi saeppue auos ieu anou ot zueuodu si ll zuau
sutured to an incision made in the adjacent body wall using four to
stable can rapidly deteriorate and die without prior evidence that
paxy ag uen lappe aul auadodod o ro sanins paidnaui x
decompensation was present.
canially to the body wall or to the tendon of the psoas muscle
 Both physical and biochemical parameters need to be evaluated
(psoas hitch) and a nephrocystopexy performed using 3/0 to 4/0
absorbable or non-absorbable sutures to relieve tension on the
 carefully in order to determine if a cat is suitable for transplantation.
ureteral anastomosis or re-implantation site.97
The degree of azotemia, anemia, urine specific gravity, and age do not
 determine, by themselves, a suitable patient for transplantation, but
both age and the degree of azotemia have been associated with sur-
vival. In one study, cats older than l0 years of age were found to have
an increase in mortality, particularly during the frst six months fol-
lowing surgery. 104 In a second study, median survival decreased when
comparing cats less than five years of age (median 1423 days) with
cats between the ages of five and 10 (613 days) and those greater than
10 years of age (150 days). Additionall, the degree of azotemia prior
to surgery was found to be a risk factor. In one study, cats with a Cr
>10 and an increased BUN were more likely to suffer mortality prior
to discharge.101 In a second study, the level of azotemia significantly
increased the risk of neurologic complications in the perioperative
period.104 Finally, weight and preoperative blood pressure (BP) have
also been shown to influence overall survival.11
Current evaluation involves a complete blood count/chemistry/
blood type and cross-match/thyroid evaluation, evaluation
of
the urinary tract (urinalysis, urine culture, urine protein:Cr ratio.
abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultrasound), evaluation for
cardiovascular disease (thoracic radiography, electrocardiography.
echocardiography, BP), and screening for infectious disease (feline
leukemia vinus (FeLV)/feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV), Toxo-
plasma titer (IgG and IgM)).
Figure 36-28 Renal descensus and cystonephropexy.
Evaluation of a potential donor
Donor cats accepted into the program are between one and three
years of age and in excellent health. Standard evaluation includes a
serum chemistry profle, complete blood count and blood type, uri-
nalysis and culture FeLV and FIV testing, and a toxoplasmosis titer
have pre-existing renal damage. Careful postoperative monitoring of
(IgG and IgM).
 renal function is advocated in these cases.
Additionally, CT angiography is performed on all donors to evaluate
the renal vasculature as well as evaluate the renal parenchyma for any
abnormalities. This technique has allowed us to identify patients
RENAL TRANSPLANTATION
unsuitable for donation prior to surgery including patients with mul-
tiple renal arteries bilaterally as well as renal infarcts. A suitable home
 Renal transplantation continues to remain a viable treatment option
is found for any donor that fails the screening process. Donors that
for cats in both acute and chronic renal failure. It is not performed
 pass the screening process are adopted by the family of the recipient
throughout the world for a variety of reasons including: ethical con-
and followed for the rest of their lives. In a study of 16 donors that
-sui paeiads e ioy iuauaai aun 'ouop aul oi sueiai sa
were followed between 24 and 67 months postoperatively to evaluate
plant team and the necessity for specialized equipment and experience
the long-term effects of performing a unilateral nephrectomy
in
sey jo iaqunu e ot alqeinque uaaq sey asns Aiainsiu u
healthy cats, 15/16 cats were clinically normal and serum creatinine
including the development of microsurgical techniques for the feline
concentrations for these cats remained within the reference range. One
patient, the ability to use an allograft from an unrelated or related
cat was diagnosed with chronic renal insufficiency 52 months follow-
 donor, and a better understanding of the immune response to foreign
ing surgery.105
tissue and the introduction of the drug ciclosporin for immunosup-
[euan uosanh ieui asou aie aiaul yanouv ool-sa Adeiaul anissaid
Preoperative treatment
transplantation as a treatment option for renal failure in cats, the
procedure appears to prolong survival time as well as quality of life
Preoperative medical management will vary depending on the stabil-
compared to the medical management of the disease.
ity of the patient. The recipient is typically placed on intravenous fluid
418
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
therapy at 1.5-2 times the daily maintenance requirements. Depend-
ing on the stability ofthe cat, an attempt is made to correct the anemia
using either packed red cells or whole blood transfusions prior to or
atthe time of surgery. The frst unit that is administered is a unit that
had been previously collected from the cross-match compatible donor
cat (see Chapter 5). Additionally, if the cat is hypertensive, the calcium 
channel blocker amlodipine (0.625 mg/cat PO q24h) may be indi-
cated prior to surgery. Gastrointestinal protectants and phosphate
binders are given if deemed necessary and if the patient is anorectic.
a nasogastric or esophagostomy tube may be placed to administer
nutritional support.
 Two protocols currently exist for immunosuppression of the feline
renal transplant recipient The protocol currently used by the author
 includes a combination of the calcineurin inhibitor, ciclosporin (CsA)
and the glucocorticoid, prednisolone These drugs are used together
for their synergistic effects. Because of the small dose of ciclosporin
Figure 36-29 Transplantation of the renal allograft onto the recipient's
often required in cats, an oral liquid formulation Neoral ( 100 mg/mL)
abdominal aorta and vena cava. The renal artery in anastomosed 
is used so that the dose can be titrated for each individual cat.
end-to-side to the aorta using 8/0 nylon and the renal vein is
Ciclosporin is started 24-96 hours prior to transplantation and is
 anastomosed end-to-side to the vena cava using 7/0 silk. (Redrawn from
administered at a dose of 1-4 mg/kg PO q12h depending on the
Slatter D. Textbook of smalf animal surgery. 3rd eo. W.8. Saunders, with permissicn
patient's appetite. A 12-hour whole blood trough concentration is
from EI/sevier, 2003.)
obtained the day before surgery to adjust the oral dose for surgery. A
target 12-hour trough concentration of 300-500 ng/mL prior to
surgery using the technique of high-pressure liquid chromatography
exposure. In the current surgical technique used by the author, the
suuou au otauo ioy paueueu s! faaal sulst'leos ayt s! (ldh)
 renal artery is anastomosed end-to-side to the caudal aorta (proximal
loy Tu/su 0sz Ajaneuuxoudde oi paiadei uaut st pue Aagins suimoloy
to the caudal mesenteric artery), and the renal vein is anastomosed
maintenance therapy. Prednisolone administration is begun the
end-to-side to the caudal vena cava [Fig. 36-29).108 Partial occlusion
morning of surgery and started at a dose range of 0.5-1 mg/kg q12h 
clamps are used to obstruct blood flow in both the aorta and the
orally for the first three months and then tapered to q24h. Another
 caudal vena cava. Using the previously made templates from the donor
option for immunosuppression allows for once a day administration
vessels, windows are created in both the aorta and vena cava that
of medication. With this protocol, ketoconazole ( 10 mg/kg PO q24h)
match the size of the renal artery and vein, respectively. An aortotomy
clamp is used to create the hole in the aorta and adventitial scissors
ketoconazole is added to the immunosuppressive protocol, CsA and
 are used to create an oval defect in the vena cava. Both aorta and vena
prednisolone are administered once a day and CsA doses are adjusted
cava are flushed with a heparinized saline solution. Two sutures of
 am u t  aq a n a o
8/0 nylon are placed at the cranial and caudal aspect of the aortotomy
trough levels.
site. Following the second mannitol infusion in the donor, the graft
is harvested and flushed with a phosphate-buffered sucrose preserva-
Renal transplantation surgery
tion solution. The end of the renal artery is dilated and any excess
adventitia that is present on the end of the renal artery is excised.
The donor cat is brought into the surgical suite approximately 30-45
 The renal artery is anastomosed to the aorta using 8/0 nylon in two
-and aq ue kaup iouop au ieu os juaidiai aul ol iod sanu
 rows of simple continuous sutures; one on the medial aspect and one
pared for the nephrectomy. At the time of the incision, the donor cat
 on the lateral aspect of the artery. The renal vein is anastomosed to
is given a dose of mannitol (0.25 g/kg IV over 15 minutes). Mannitol
the vena cava using 7/0 silk. A back wall technique is used first to
helps to minimize renal arterial spasms, improve renal blood flow and
suture the portion of the renal vein closest to the renal artery. The
protect against injury during the warm ischemia period.
anastomosis is completed once the second side of the vein is sutured
The CT angiography that was performed on the donor prior to
using a continuous pattern. The venous clamp is removed frst and
anesthesia provides important information regarding the renal vascu-
then the arterial clamp. A small amount of hemorrhage often occurs
lature Although many renal arteries bifurcate close to the kidney, a
and is controlled with pressure. Any significant leaks may need to
minimal length of 0.5 cm of single artery is necessary for the arterial
be repaired with the placement of additional single interrupted
anastomosis. Because of the longer renal vein, the left kidney is pre-
sutures. Occasionally, renal arterial spasming can occur following
ferred over the right kidney. If two renal veins are present, the smaller
release of the vascular clamps. The application of topical lidocaine,
vein can be sacrificed. It is important to identify where the ureteral
chlorpromazine or acepromazine has been advocated to address this
vein drains to make sure that the renal vein that it drains into is not
problem. 10? Once the arterial and venous anastomoses are complete,
  s o pne are u pue ae iei a aes 
(g-oe xog aas) paad si Auoisosoauoaain e
and adventitia as possible and the ureter is dissected free to the point
 Prior to closure, if not previously performed, a biopsy of one of the
where it joins the bladder. Templates are made of both the artery and
 native kidneys is taken. An esophagostomy tube is placed if nutritional
vein to determine the size of the venotomy and aortotomy to be per-
support is deemed necessary. Finally, the allograft is pexied to the
m Auayau au eae euan pue ee s uaar au u pay
abdominal wall. This is performed by incising the adjacent body wall
be performed when the recipient is prepared to receive the kidney. An
and then the incised edge is sutured to the renal capsule using six
additional dose of mannitol (1.0 g/kg IV) is given to the donor cat
interrupted sutures of 4/0 polypropylene The native kidneys are
fifteen minutes prior to nephrecto my.
usually left in situ to act as a reserve if graft function is delayed (Fig.
An operating microscope is used for the majority of the recipient
36-30). If necessary, one or both of the native kidneys can be removed
surgery. Following a full abdominal exploratory, the colon and ileum
 at the time of surgery (in cases of severe polycystic kidney disease) or
are tacked to the body wall using 3/0 chromic gut to aid in surgical
 at a later time if warranted.
419
Section
151
The Abdomen
every three to four days and adjusted accordingly. The prednisolone
dose is continued as previously described (0.5-1 mg/kg PO ql2h).
Voided urine is colleted daily to assess urine specific gravity. If surgery
is successful, azotemia typically resolves and the cat clinically improves
within the frst 24-72 hours following surgery. Cats are discharged
from the hospital when graft function appears adequate and
ciclosporin blood levels are stable.
Long-term management and complications
Patients should be evaluated by their veterinarian once a week for the
first six to eight weeks initially, and then extended to monthly intervals
depending on the animal's stability. During each exam, clinical patho-
logical evaluation including a renal panel, packed cell volume, total
protein, a ciclosporin level and a urinalysis if a free-catch urine sample
is available is performed. Body weight and BP are also monitored
regularly. A complete blood count and senum chemistry panel is per-
formed every three to four months and an echocardiography per-
Figure 36-30 Image of the allograft and the native kidney. The native
formed every six to 12 months if the patient had been diagnosed with
kidneys are usually left in situ to act as a reserve if graft function is
delayed.
underlying cardiac disease prior to transplantation.
Postoperative care and perioperative
complications
Postoperative care
Complications include those related to the allograft and those associ-
 Postoperative care is tailored for each individual patient but typically
ated with chronic immunosuppressive therapy. Renal complications
includes the administration of a balanced electrolyte solution until
following transplantation have included vascular pedical complica-
the patient is eating and drinking. blood products as needed, and
tions, acute and chronic rejection, CaOx nephrosis, ureteral complica-
antibiotic therapy (cefazolin, 22 mg/kg IV q8h), which is continued
tions including retroperitoneal fibrosis, delayed graft function,
as oral antibiotic therapy following discharge (clavamox, 62.5 mg PO
hemolytic uremic syndrome, and allograft rupture. Complications
ql2h) until the feeding tube is removed. If the cat is T gondii positive,
 secondary to chronic immunosuppressive therapy include the devel-
clindamycin (25 mg PO q12h) is administered and continued for the
opment of infections (including opportunistic infections), diabetes
assspa uaaq se udaaiasd eauga
mellitus (DM), and neoplasia. Based on both published and unpub-
at our facility using either hydromorphone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM or SQ
lished reports, 70-92% of cats have been discharged following
q4-6h), buprenorphine (0.005-0.02 mg/kg V q4-6h), methadone
surgery, with median survival times ranging from 360-613 days.95,101.10
(0.15-0.3 mg/kg IV q4-6h), or a constant rate infusion of butorpha-
Current information suggests that survival times continue to improve.
nol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg/h). The packed cell volume, total protein, electro-
Continued clinical experience with short and long-term management
lytes, blood glucose and acid-base status is initially evaluated two to
as well as the ability to identify specific risk factors both pre and
three times daily and then depending on the stability of the cat. A
 postoperatively will hopefully continue to improve long-term outcome
renal panel is checked every 24-48 hrs and a ciclosporin level checked
in these patients.
REFERENCES
1.
 Barrett R, Kneller S. Feline kidney
signs, pathophysiology. Davis: Covel
10.
 Baines E. Practical contrast radiography-
 mensuration. Acta Radiol Supp
Park Vet. Co.; 1981. p. 484.
Urogenital studies. In Pract 2005;27:
1972;319:279-380.
G.
 Shiroma JT, Gabriel JK, Carter RL, et al.
466-73.
2.
 Lee R, Leowijuk C. Normal parameters 
Effect of reproductive status on feline
11.
 Fletcher TF. Applied anatomy and
in abdominal radiology of the dog and 
renal size. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 physiology of the lower urinary tract.
cat. J Small Anim Pract 1982;23:251-69.
1999;40:242-5.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
3.
Walter P, Feeney D, Johnston G, et al.
7. Marais J. Cortical microvasculature of
1996;26:181-95.
 Feline renal ultrasonography:
the feline kidney. Acta Anat 1987;130:
12. Christie BA. Collateral arterial blood
quantitative analysis of imaged anatomy.
127-31.
supply to the normal and ischemic
Am J Vet Res 1987:48:596-9.
 8. Christie BA. Anatomy of the urinary
anine kidney. Am J Vet Res 1980;41:
4.
 Owens J. The genitourinary system.
 system. In: Slatter D, editor. Textbook of
1519-25.
In: Biery D, editor. Radiographic
small animal surgery. vol. 2. 3rd ed.
13. Bjorling DE. Traumatic injuries of the
interpretation for the small animal
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2003.
urogenital system. Symposium on
dinician. St. Louis: Ralston Purina Co.:
p. 1558-74.
urogenital surgery. Vet Clin North Am
1982. p. 185-92.
 Caceres AV, Zwingenberger AL, Aronson
Small Anim Pract 1984;14:6161-76.
 Biers D. Upper urinary tract. In: O'Brien
LR, et al. Characterization of normal
14. Mingledorff wE. Experimental study of
T, editor. Radiographic diagnosis of
feline vascular anatomy with dual phase
 the blood supply of the distal ureter
abdominal disorders in the dog and cat:
CT angiography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
with reference to cutaneous
radiographic interpretation, clinical
2008;49:350-6.
ureterostomy. J Urol 1964;92:424-8.
420
Kidney and ureter
Chapter
9E
15. Hardie EM, Kyles AE. Management of
bilateral ureter transection in a cat. J Am
47.
Brodsky SL, Zimskind PD, Dure-Smith P
ureteral obstruction. Vet Clin North Am
Vet Med Assoc 2000;217:1862-5.
Lewis PL. Effects of crush and
Small Anim Pract 2004;34:989-1010.
32. Zaid MS, Berent AC, Weisse C, et al.
devascularizing injuries to the proximal
16.B
Elbadawi A, Schenk EA. Innervation of
Feline ureteral strictures: 10 cases
ureter. An experimental study. Invest 
the abdominopelvic ureter in the cat.
[2007-2009). J Vet Intern Med 2011;25:
Urol 1977;14:361-5.
Am I Anat 1969;126:103-20.
222-9.
48.F
 Bellah JR. Diagnosis and management of
17.[
 DiBartola SP. Clinical approach and
 33. Ragni RA, Fews D. Ureteral obstruction
urinary tract trauma. Symposium on Soft
 Jaboratory evaluation of renal disease.
and hydronephrosis in a cat associated
Tissue Surgery, Palmerton North, Christ
In: Ettinger S), Feldman EC, editors.
with retroperitoneal infarction. J Feline
Church, New Zealand, 30th-31st
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine.
Med Surg 2007;10:259-63.
October 1999.
vol. 2. 7th ed. St Louis, MO: WB
34.
 Zotti A, Poser H, Chiavegato D.
49.
 Bjorling DE, Christie BA. Ureters. In:
Saunders: 2010. p. 1955-69.
Asymptomatic double ureteral stricture
Slatter D, editor. Textbook of small 
18. Jaffe RB, Middleton AW. Whitaker test:
in an 8-month-old Maine Coon cat: an
animal surgery. vol. 2. 2nd ed.
differentiation of obstructive from
 imaging-based case report. J Feline Med
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1995.
non-obstructive uropathy. AJR Am J
Surg 2004;6:371-5.
p. 1443-50.
 Roentgenol 1980:134:9-15.
35.
Leib MS, Allen TA, Konde Ll, et al.
50.
Wilson DR. Renal function during and
19.
 Pfister RC, Papanicolaou N, Yoder IC.
Bilateral hydronephrosis attributable to
following obstruction. Annu Rev Med
The dilated ureter Semin Roentgenol
bilateral ureteral fibrosis in a cat. J Am
1977;28:329-39.
1986;21:224-35.
Vet Med Assoc 1988;192:795-7.
51.
Wilson DR. Nephron functional
 20. Nyland TG, Mattoon IS, Wisner ER.
 36. Kyles AE, Stone EA, Gookin J, et al
heterogeneity in the postobstructive
Ultrasonography of the urinary tract.
Diagnosis and surgical management of
kidney. Kidney Int 1975;7:19-26.
In: Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, editors.
obstructive ureteral calculi in cats:11
 52. Worth AJ, Tomlin SC. Post-traumatic
Veterinary diagnostic ultrasound.
cases (1993-1996). I Am Vet Med Assoc
paraureteral urinoma in a cat. J Small
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1995.
1998;213:1150-6.
Anim Pract 2004;45:413-16.
p. 95-125.
37.
Adams LG, Williams Jr JC, McAteer JA,
53.
 Moores AP, Bell AM, Costello M.
21.
Rivers Bl, walter PA, Polzin DJ.
et al. In vitro evaluation of canine and
Urinoma (para-ureteral pseudocyst)] as a
Ultrasonographic-guided, percutaneous
feline calcium oxalate urolith fragility via
 consequence of trauma in a cat. J Small
 antegrade pyelography: technique and
 shock wave lithotripsy. I Am Vet Med
Anim Pract 2002;43:213-16.
dinical application in the dog and cat.
Assoc 2005;66:1651-4.
54.
 Bacon Nl, Anderson DM, Baines EA,
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1997;33:61-8.
38. Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al.
White RAs. Post-traumatic para-ureteral
22.
Heuter KJ. Excretory Urography. Clin
Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic.
urinoma (uriniferous pseudocyst) in a
Tech Small Anim Pract 2005;20:
and ultrasonography abnormalities in
cat. Vet Comp Orthot Traumatol
39-45.
cats with ureteral calculi:163 cases
2002;15:123-6.
23. Adin CA, Herrgesell El, Nyland TG, et al.
(1984-2002). I Am Vet Med Assoc
55.
Ochoa VB, DiBartola SP, Chew Dl, et al.
 Antegrade pyelography for suspected
2005;226:932-6.
Perinephric pseudocysts in the cat: a
ureteral obstruction in cats: ll cases 
39. Carter WO, Hawkins EC, Morrison WB.
retrospective study and review of the
[1995-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Feline nephrolithiasis: eight cases 
literature. J Vet Intern Med 1999;13:
2003;222:1576-81.
[1984-1989). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
47-55.
24.
Cannon AB, Westropp IL, Ruby AL, Kass 
1993;247-56.
56.
Beck JA, Bellenger CR, Lamb WA, et al.
PH. Evaluation of trends in urolith
40. Ross Sl, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C.
 Perirenal pseudocysts in 2G cats. Aust Vet
composition in cats: 5,230 cases
et al. A case-control study of the effects
1 2000;78:166-71.
(1985-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 of nephrolithiasis in cats with chronic
57.
 Inns JH. Treatment of perinephric
2007;231(4):570-6.
kidney disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 pseudocyst by omental drainage. Aust
25. Thumchai R, Lulich J, Osborne C, et al.
2007;230:1854-9.
Vet Pract 1997;27:174-7.
Epizootiologic evaluation of urolithiasis
41.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al.
58.
Worth AJ, Tomlin SC. Post-traumatic 
in cats: 3,498 cases [1982-1992). J Am
 Management and outcome of cats with
paraureteral urinoma in a cat. J Small
Vet Med Assoc 1996;208:547-9.
ureteral calculi:153 cases (1984-2002)
Anim Pract 2004;45:413-16.
26. Westropp JL. Current trends in feline
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:937-44.
59.(
 Geel JK. Perinephric extravasation of 
urolithiasis: what do we see and where
42.
 Coburn M. Genitourinary trauma. In:
urine with pseudocyst formation in a
do we see them? In: The North American
 Feliciano DV, Mattox KL, Moore EE.
cat. I S Afr Vet Assoc 1986;57:33-4.
veterinary conference, Orlando, FL, USA;
editors. Trauma. Gth ed. New York, NY:
Lemire TD, Read wK. Macroscopic and
2007. p. 714-16.
McGraw-Hill; 2008. p. 789-825.
 microscopic characterization of a
27. Westropp IL, Ruby AL, Bailiff N, et al.
 43. Thornhill JA, Cechner PE. Traumatic
uriniferous perirenal pseudocyst in a
Dried solidifed blood calculi in cats.
injuries to the kidney, ureter, bladder
domestic short hair cat. Vet Path 
J Vet Intern Med 2005;20:828-34.
 and urethra. Symposium on emergency
1998;35:68-70
 28. North DC. Hydronephrosis and
medicine. Vet Clin North Am Small
61.
 Crow SE. Urinary tract neoplasms in
hydroureter in a kitten - a case report.
Anim Pract 1981;11:157-69.
dogs and cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract
J Small Anim Pract 1978;19:237-40.
44. Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ.
Vet 1985;7:607-18.
29.
 Prasad MC, Mohan K. Hydronephrosis
Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
62.
Hammer AS, Larue S. In: Ettinger SJ.
in the cat. Indian Vet I 1968;45:107-8.
(1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
editor. Textbook of veterinary internal
30.
 Speakman CF, Pechman RD, D'Andrea
1998;34:315-24
medicine. Philadelphia, PA: WB
GH. Aortic thrombosis and unilateral 
45.
Selcer, BA. Urinary tract trauma
Saunders; 1995. p. 1788-96.
hydronephrosis associated with
associated with pelvic trauma. J Am
63.
Mooney SC, Hayes AA, Matus RE,
leiomyosarcoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med
Anim Hosp Assoc 1982;19:785-93.
MacEwen EG. Renal lymphoma in cats:
Assoc 1983:182:62-3.
46. Weisse C, Aronson LR, Drobatz K.
28 cases [1977-1984). J Am Vet Med
31. Nwadike BS, Wilson LP, Stone EA. Use 
Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases.
Assoc 1987;191:1473-7.
 of bilateral temporary nephrostomy
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2002;38:
64. Wellman ML, Hammer AS, DiBartola SP.
catheters for emergency treatment of
188-92.
 et al. Lymphoma involving large
421
Section
5
The Abdomen
granular lymphocytes in cats: 1l cases
Vet Clin North America small animal
96. Rawlings CA, Bjorling DE, Christie BA.
(1982-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
practice 1987;17:663-96.
Kidneys. In: Slatter D, editor. Textbook
1992;201:1265-9.
81.
Holt PE, Gibbs C. Congenital urinary
of small animal surgery, 3rd ed. vol. 2.
65.
Osborne CA, Johnson KH, Kurtz HJ.
incontinence in cats: a review of 19
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2003.
Hanlon GF. Renal lymphoma in the dog
cases. Vet Rec 1992;130:437-42.
p. 1606-19.
and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1971;158:
 82. Vaden SL, Levine JF, Lees GE. Renal
97.
Gregory CR, Gourley IM, Taylor Nl, et al.
2058-70.
biopsy: a retrospective study of methods
Preliminary results of clinical renal
66. Henry Cl, Turnquist SE, Smith A, et al.
and complications in 283 dogs and
allograft transplantation in the dog and
 Primary renal tumours in cats: 19 cases
65 cats. J Vet Intern Med 2005;19:
cat. J Vet Intern Med 1987;1:53-60.
(1992-1998). J Feline Med Surg
794-801.
98. Gregory CR, Gourley IM. Organ 
1999:1:165-70
 83. Nwadike BS, Wilson LP, Stone EA. Use
 transplantation in clinical veterinary
Yamazoe Kl, Ohashi F, Kadosawa T, et al.
 of bilateral temporary nephrostomy
 practice. In: Slatter DH, editor. Textbook
Computed tomography on renal masses
catheters for emergency treatment of
of small animal surgery. Philadelphia PA:
in dogs and cats. I Vet Med Sci 1994;56:
 bilateral ureter transection in a cat. J Am
WB Saunders: 1993. p. 95-100.
813-16.
Vet Med Assoc 2000;217:1862-5.
99.
 Gregory CR. Renal transplantation. In:
68.
Gabor LJ, Malik R, Canfeld PJ.
84. Labato MA. Peritoneal dialysis in
 Bojrab Ml, editor. Current techniques 
Cinical and anatomical features of
 emergency and critical care medicine.
in small animal surgery. 4th ed.
lymphosarcoma in 118 cats. Aust Vet J
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2000;
 Baltimore: williams and wilkins; 1998.
1998;76:725-32
15:126-35.
p. 434-43.
69.
Klein MK, Cockerell GL, Harris CK, et al.
85.
 Cooper RL, Labato MA. Peritoneal
100.
 Schmiedt CW, Holzman G, Schwarz T.
Canine primary renal neoplasms: a
 dialysis in cats with acute kidney injury
 et al. Survival, complications and
retrospective review of 54 cases. J Am
22 cases (2001-2006). J Vet Intern Med
 analysis of risk factors after renal
Anim Hosp Assoc 1988;24:443-52.
2011;25:14-19.
 transplantation in cats. Vet Surg
70.
 Ghantous SN, Crawford J. Double 
86. Dorval P Boysen SR. Management of
2008;37:683-95.
ureters with ureteral ectopia in a
acute failure in cats using peritoneal
101.
Gregory CR, Bernsteen L. Organ
 domestic shorthair cat. J Am Anim Hosp
 dialysis: a retrospective study of six
 transplantation in clinical veterinary
Assoc 2006;42:462-6.
cases (2003-2007). I Feline Med Surg
 practice. In: Slatter DH, editor. Textbook 
71.
 D'lppoloti P, Nicoli S, Zatelli A.
2009;11:107-15.
 Of small animal surgery Philadelphia:
 Proximal ureteral ectopia causing
87.
King MD, Waldron DR, Barber DL, et al.
WB Saunders; 2000. p. 122-36.
hydronephrosis in a kitten. J Feline Med
 Effect of nephrotomy on renal function
102.
 Mathews KG. Renal transplantation in 
and Surg 2006;8:420-3.
 and morphology in normal cats. Vet Surg
 the management of chronic renal failure.
72. Steffey MA, Brockman Dl. Congenital 
2006;35:749-58.
 In: August J, editor. Consultation in
 ectopic ureters in a continent male dog
88.
Bolliger C, Walshaw R, Kruger JM, et al.
 feline intemal medicine. 4th ed.
and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:
 Evaluation of the effects of nephrotomy
 Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001.
1607-10.
on renal function in clinically normal
p. 319-27.
73. Rutgers C, Chew DJ, Burt JK. Bilateral
cats. Am J Vet Res 2005;66:1400-7.
103.
 Adin CA, Gregory CR, Kyles AE, Cowgill
 ectopic ureters in a female cat without
89.
 Bellah JR. Wound healing in the urinary
L. Diagnostic predictors and survival
urinary incontinence. J Am Vet Med
tract. Sem Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
 after renal transplantation in cats. Vet
Assoc 1984;184:1394-5.
1989;4:294-303.
Surg 2001;30:515-21.
74. Smith CW, Burke TJ, Froehlich P, Wright
 90. Dalby AM, Adams LG, Salisbury SK,
104. Lirtzman RA, Gregory CR. Long-term 
WH. Bilateral ureteral ectopia in a male
 et al. Spontaneous retrograde movement
renal and hematologic effects of
cat with urinary incontinence. I Am Vet
 of ureteroliths in two dogs and fve cats.
uninephrectomy in healthy feline kidney
Med Assoc 1983;182:172-3.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2006;229:1118-21.
donors. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:
75. Biewnega Wl, Rothuizen J, Voorhout G.
91.
 Kuntz CA. Retrieval of ureteral calculus
1044-7.
 Ectopic ureters in the cat - a report of
 using a new method of endoscopic
105.
Bernsteen L, Gregory CR, Kyles AE, et al.
two cases. J Small Anim Pract 1978;19:
 assistance in a cat. Aust Vet J 2005;83:
 Renal transplantation in cats. Clin Tech
531-7.
480-2.
 Small Anim Pract 2000;15:40-5.
76. Bebko RL, Prier JE, Biery DN. Ectopic
 92. Fossum TW. Surgery of the kidney and
106.
Katayama M, McAnulty JF. Renal
ureters in a male cat. J Am Vet Med
ureter In: Fossum Tw, editor. Small
transplantation in cats: techniques.
Assoc 1977:171:738-40.
 animal surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO:
 complications, and immunosuppression.
Grauer GF, Freeman LF, Nelson AW.
Mosby; 2002. p. 549-71.
Compend 2002;24:874.
 Urinary incontinence associated with an
93.
 Berent AC. Ureteral obstructions in dogs
107.
 McAnulty JF, Lensmeyer GL. The effects
ectopic ureter in a female cat. J Am Vet
 and cats: a review of traditional and new
of ketoconazole on the pharmacokinetics
Med Assoc 1983;182:707-8.
 interventional diagnostic and therapeutic
of cyclosporine A in cats. Vet Surg
78. Burbidge HM, Jones BR, Mora MT.
options. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2011;21:
1999:28:448-55.
Ectopic ureter in a male cat. N Z Vet J
86-103.
108. Bernsteen L, Gregory CR, Pollard RE,
1989:37:123-5.
94. Mehl ML, Kyles AE, Pollard R, et al.
et al. Comparison of two surgical
79. Lawler DF, Evans RH. Urinary tract
Comparison of 3 techniques for
techniques for renal transplantation in
 disease in cats. Water balance studies,
ureteroneocystostomy in cats. Vet Surg
cats. Vet Surg 1999;28:417-20.
urolith and crystal analyses, and
2005;34:114-19.
109.
 Aronson LR. Renal transplantation,
necropsy findings. Vet Clin North Am
95. Hardie RJ, Schmiedt C, Phillips L, et al.
unpublished manuscript, 2011.
Small Anim Pract 1984;14:537-53.
 Ureteral papilla implantation as a
110.
 Mathews KG, Gregory CR. Renal
80. Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lawler DF, et al.
 technique for neoureterocystostomy in
transplants in cats: 66 cases [1987-1996].
Urologic disorders of immature cats.
cats. Vet Surg 2005;34:393-8.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:1432-6.
422
[37]
Chapter
Bladder
J.P. Little, R.J. Hardie
 Bladder surgery is commonly performed in the cat for many condi-
ayuo ieiuain au Aq punoq iappeiq aui jo padse iesiop au uo eaie
tions, the most common being cystic calculi. Other indications for
caudally and the ureteral openings cranially (Fig. 37-1). The main
bladder surgery include trauma, neoplasia, urachal diverticula, and
vascular supply arises from the caudal vesicle artery which originates
ectopic ureters. The bladder generally heals rapidly, but knowledge of
from the vaginal or prostatic artery, which are branches ofthe internal
anatomy and adherence to meticulous surgical technique are impor-
pudendal artery. The paired caudal vesicle arteries enter the bladder
tant to reduce morbidity particularly when the bladder is compro-
at the neck and course both ventrally and dorsally to anastomose with
mised from disease This chapter covers the fundamental aspects of
the contralateral vessels. The nervous supply to the bladder consists
bladder surgery including anatomy, general surgical considerations.
of both autonomic and somatic innervation. Autonomic control is
 diagnostic procedures, surgical diseases, surgical techniques, postop-
mediated via the sympathetic (hypogastric nerve) and parasympa-
erative care, and complications.
thetic (pelvic nerve) nervous systems and the somatic control is medi-
ated via the pudendal nerves. The lymphatics of the feline bladder
drain into the hypogastric and lumbar lymph nodes.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
Dreter
The feline urinary bladder is a hollow, distensible organ that may be
ovoid or teardrop-shaped, depending on the volume of urine it con-
tains. The layers of the bladder wall include the mucosa, submucosa.
muscularis, and serosa. The mucosal layer is made up of transitional
epithelium that is irregularly folded when the bladder is empty, but
capable of significant expansion as the bladder distends with urine.
The submucosa serves as the holding layer of the bladder and is com-
posed of loose connective tissue and collagen. The muscular layer is
comprised of irregularly shaped, interwoven bundles of smooth
muscle and the serosa is made up of a thin layer of fbrous connective
tissue.
 Unlike the canine bladder, the feline bladder remains consistently
Body
craniad to the pubis regardless of its degree of distension. The bladder
is located ventral to the descending colon, with the ductus deferens
or uterine body contacting the dorsal surface in intact males and
females, respectively. The bladder is attached to the caudal abdominal
are continuous with the uterine broad ligaments and contain the
round ligaments of the bladder, which are fetal remnants of the
umbilical arteries. A third median vesical fold arises from the ventral
Trigon
abdominal wall and contains the vestigial fetal urachus. The bladder
Neck
consists of two distinct anatomic areas, the neck and the body. The
body comprises the majority of the bladder, and its most cranial
aspect is the apex. The neck contains the trigone, which is a triangular 
Figure 37-1 Bladder anatomy.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00037-8
423
Section
5
The Abdomen
 Double contrast cystography aids in detection of bladder wall
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
lesions and radiolucent calculi, which appear as intraluminal flling
defects when outlined by the contrast material (Fig. 37-3). It is
performed by infusing 1 mL of aqueous organic iodinated contrast
Diagnostic procedures
solution through a urethral catheter, followed by infusion of air or
Evaluation of suspected bladder disease generally starts with a
CO2 to further distend the bladder. If a positive contrast cystogram is
minimum database, including urinalysis, complete blood count,
to be performed, the bladder should be emptied before moderately
serum chemistry panel, and aerobic culture and sensitivity of a urine
distending it with contrast solution. Positive contrast cystography is
sample.
useful for detecting bladder location, rupture or leaks, and urachal
diverticula (Fig. 37-4).
Radiography
Ultrasonography
Survey radiography of the bladder is useful for general evaluation of
the size, shape, presence of radiopaque calculi, or other abnormalities
Utrasonography is a valuable tool for diagnosing various diseases or
of the bladder (Fig. 37-2). If additional information is required fol-
 conditions of the bladder including wall thickening or inflammation.
lowing survey radiographs, contrast procedures may be indicated. If
pue aneoiei yiog (s-ze su) suois pue 'siidoau io sass
contrast radiography is performed on an elective basis, overnight
radiolucent calculi as small as 2 mm in diameter can routinely be
fasting and a cleansing enema should be performed to aid in the
diagnosed with ultrasound. The ability to detect calculi or assess the
detection of subtle urinary tract abnormalities by limiting the amount
size and location of a mass is influenced by the degree of bladder
of ingesta and gas in the small intestine and colon that may obscure
distension, and accuracy can be improved by infusing physiologic
the bladder and urethra. The following contrast procedures comple-
saline into the bladder to separate the walls and better isolate specific
ment each other, and they should be done in the order outlined below
lesions. However, ultrasonography is not as sensitive as survey radiog
if it is likely that multiple procedures will be performed as part of the
raphy for determining the exact size number, and possible composi-
diagnostic workup. However, all ofthese contrast procedures are rarely
tion of radiopaque calculi.
 indicated for a single case.
 Pneumocystography can be useful for evaluating the bladder for
Cystoscopy
wall thickness, radiopaque calculi, and diverticula. Pneumocystogra-
phy can be performed with infusion of air or CO into the bladder
Cystoscopy is an excellent diagnostic tool that allows for direct visu-
via a urethral catheter after the bladder has been emptied to prevent
alization of various lesions, as well as sampling, using a biopsy instnu-
any residual urine from creating the appearance of an artificially thick-
    a r s]  r 
ened bladder wall. Full distension of the feline bladder is generally
performed in male and female cats using small diameter flexible or
achieved with 15-45 mL, and can be detected with digital palpation.
rigid cystoscopes, respectively. Examination of the lumen of the
In many cases, partial distension of the bladder is suffcient for evalu-
urethra and bladder can be accomplished for diagnosis of lesions such
ation and may be more useful for demonstrating small urachal diver-
 as tumors, polyps, inflammation, mucosal tears, calculi, and ectopic
ticula that are not apparent with full distension.2
ureters. In many cats, it can be diffcult or impossible to pass a biopsy
Figure 37-3 Lateral fluoroscopic image of a double contrast cystogram
Figure 37-2 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a cat with emphysematous
aun jo padse lea aui uo paap buy ans aui an ie e jo
cystitis.
bladder lumen as indicated by the asterisk.
424
Bladder
Chapter
LE
 Figure 37-6 Lateral abdominal radiograph of a cat with multiple
radiop aque cystic calculi.
calcium oxalate comprised 55% of feline uroliths, whereas struvite
Figure 37-4 Lateral fluoroscopic image of a positive contrast cystogram
 made up 33%.° Since 2002, struvite uroliths have increased again and
of a cat.
 are now more common than calcium oxalate in the US, with the more
recent decrease in calcium oxalate being most likely due to further
CHI
reformulation of commercial diets.° In Canada, analyses of over
68
11 000 cystoliths submitted from 1998-2008 revealed a different dis-
DRRO
tribution, with calcium oxalate being slightly more prevalent than
struvite.? Overall, struvite and calcium oxalate comprised 92% of
feline cystolith submissions. Male domestic cats were 1.4 times more
likely to develop calcium oxalate versus struvite cystoliths, whereas
females were 1.3 times more likely to develop struvite versus calcium
oxalate cystoliths.? Other cystoliths that have been reported in cats
include calcium phosphate, xanthine, silica, cysteine, sodium pyro-
phosphate, and dried solidifed blood calculi Interestingly, 85% of
Cystoliths from Egyptian Mau cats were urate.?
While there is currently no effective method to dissolve calcium
 Oxalate cystoliths, dietary management is instrumental in preventing
 Or reducing recurrence. Administering oral citrate and feeding a non-
calcium, oxalate, and sodium minimizes cystolith formation. In con-
+ L 1.00 cm
UrinaryBladder
trast, medical dissolution of struvite cystoliths in cats can be very
Figure 37-5 Ultrasound image of the bladder in a cat with a 1 cm
effective. Most sterile struvite cystoliths will dissolve within four weeks
diameter intraluminal mass as indicated by the crosses.
when feeding an acidifying, high-moisture diet with reduced magne-
sium.? Because sterile struvite cystoliths can be successfully managed
instrument simultaneously with the cystoscope and, therefore, if 
with medical therapy, it is important to determine cystolith composi-
tion prior to instituting therapy. Urine sediment examination for crys-
samples ofthe bladder are desired, the cystoscope can be used to guide
talluria, urine pH, and radiographic appearance of cystoliths provides
 percutaneous fine needle aspiration of specific lesions.5
valuable information for predicting the composition. Dissolution
diets should be fed for one month past radiographic resolution of
cystoliths. Infected struvite cystoliths require substantially longer
SURGICAL DISEASES
dietary and antimicrobial therapy for dissolution. Once dissolution is
achieved, cats should remain on a urolith preventative diet for life.
Calculi
 Physical removal of cystoliths leads to a rapid resolution of clinical
signs, defnitive diagnosis of cystolith composition, and reduced
 The composition of feline uroliths has evolved during the past thirty
risk of urethral obstruction. Removal options include voiding hydro-
years (Fig. 37-6). Struvite uroliths were very common in the early
 pulsion, cystoscopic basket retrieval, laser lithotripsy, cystotomy (see
1980s, while calcium oxalate was much more rare, comprising only
Box 37-1), laparoscopic-assisted cystotomy, and laparoscopic-assisted
2% of uroliths submitted to the University of Minnesota Urolith
cystoscopy. Regardless of the removal method, postoperative imaging
Center. Since that time, reformulation of commercial diets is thought
should be performed to document removal of all cystoliths. Voiding
to have altered the distribution of urolith composition and by 2002
urohydropulsion is generally effective for stones with diameters
425
Section
5
The Abdomen
<3 mm in females and <l mm in males.1 It is also more likely to be
effective for smooth, rather than irregularly marginated stones.
General anesthesia is recommended for hydropulsion, with the main
contraindications being stones that are too large to pass through the
urethra, recent bladder surgery, and active urinary tract infections. If
infection is present, the increased pressure on the bladder wall can
 potentially lead to vesicoureteral reflux of urine and pyelonephritis.
For this reason, prophylactic antibiotics are recommended for five
days following the procedure.
 Cystoscopic basket retrieval can be used to remove cystoliths smaller
than the diameter of the distended urethra.This technique is generally
limited to females, or males with a perineal urethrostomy. When
cystoliths larger than the diameter of the urethra are present, cysto-
scopic laser lithotripsy with a holmium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet
laser can be used to fragment the cystoliths.!l Laser lithotripsy has
aiel uaum taamou isie ui anana pue ayes aq ol umous uaan
numbers or sizes of cystoliths are present, the time necessary to
remove all cystoliths makes surgical intervention a more efficient
method of removal. Complications with cystotomy are rare and
several minimally invasive approaches to surgical removal are avail-
able and are discussed later.
Figure 37-7 Lateral positive contrast cystogram of a cat demonstrating
Trauma
intra-abdominal leakage of contrast media due to a ruptured bladder.
(Courtesy of the University of Cambridge.)
Bladder rupture most commonly occurs following blunt trauma, but
 an also result from other types of penetrating trauma, unalleviated
neoplasia, although any lower urinary tract sign may be encountered.
urethral obstruction, or iatrogenically from catheterization or bladder
Between 57 and 75% of cats have positive urine cultures at the time
expression.12 Traumatic ruptures occur most frequently at the apex and
of diagnosis,15.1 therefore, urine culture should be performed in cats
may be associated with pelvic fractures, although the condition is not
suspected of having bladder neoplasia, and therapy instituted based
recognized to the same extent as in dogs. A ruptured bladder does not
 on antimicrobial susceptibility testing. No correlation has been shown
necessarily prevent normal urination, thus making it diffcult to diag-
between feline bladder cancer and positive feline leukemia status. 16
nose based on clinical signs alone. Similarly, the presence of a palpa-
 Definitive diagnosis can occasionally be made from cytologic exam-
ble bladder does not eliminate the possibility of rupture since 20%
ination of samples obtained from urine sediment, traumatic catheteri-
of cats with a ruptured bladder had a palpable bladder on abdominal
zation, or percutaneous fne needle aspirates. However, cytologic
s apeia paimdn e ym se uoy Pimy ieauoad z'uoedied
diagnosis is often complicated by the presence of reactive transitional
usually serosanguinous, and does not always resemble urine. Conse-
epithelial cells, which can be impossible to differentiate from neoplas-
quently, biochemical analysis of fluid for creatinine and potassium
tic cells, making cytologic examination of urine sediment diagnostic
levels, in addition to routine cytology, protein level, and cel counts.
 only 30% of the time.17 Percutaneous aspiration of bladder masses is
are essential. In a study of 26 cats with uroperitoneum, the mean
controversial and should be done with caution due to the risk of
serum-to-abdominal fluid ratio for creatinine was 1:2 (range, 1:1.1
seeding the abdomen or body wall with neoplastic cel. Other diag.
to 1:4.1). Similarly, the mean senum-to-abdominal fluid ratio for
nostic techniques should be attempted first, since implantation of
potassium was 1 : 1.9 (range, 1: 1.2 to 1 :2.4).12 While the serum-to-
neoplastic cells following needle aspirate of the bladder has been
abdominal fluid creatinine and potassium ratios may be lower in cats
reported in the cat. In humans, it is reported to occur in 1 in 10 000
than dogs, they remain clinically useful for diagnosis of uroperito-
cases.15,18 Approximately 20% of cats have evidence of metastatic
neum. The location of a suspected urinary tract rupture should be
disease at the time of diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma.15 There-
confirmed with contrast imaging such as an excretory urogram, posi-
fore, staging for both local and distant metastasis with ultrasound,
tive contrast cystourethrogram, or cystoscopy (Fig. 37-7). Surgical cor-
thoracic radiography, or CT is important prior to surgical intervention.
rection of bladder rupture is rarely an emergency and care should be
Rectal examination should also be performed to detect evidence of
taken to stabilize concurrent injuries and correct any azotemia or
urethral extension or sublumbar lymph node involvement. To obtain
hyperkalemia prior to anesthesia. For small tears or punctures, main-
a definitive diagnosis, histologic examination of cystoscopic or surgi-
taining the bladder in a decompressed state with an indwelling cath-
cal biopsy samples of the tumor (and regional lymph nodes) is
eter for seven to ten days is generally suffcient time for small defects
recommended.
 in the bladder wall to heal and has been used successfully in both cats
Carcinoma is the most common urinary bladder cancer. In a review
pue juaussasse lensia alnbai sieal isou iaamoh trel'sueuny pue
of 27 cats with bladder neoplasia, 15 were diagnosed as carcinoma,
debridement, and surgical exploration and repair is indicated if any
five were sarcoma, five were benign leiomyomas or fibromas, and two
doubt exists as to the extent of the injury.
were lymphoma. Transitional cell carcinoma accounted for 30% of all
neoplasms.1 In a study of 23 cats with bladder neoplasia examined
at two American universities between 1990 and 2004, 20 were diag-
Neoplasia
sium asaui jo %os iaao st'euouiies [an [euosuen ym pasou
 Neoplasia of the bladder is relatively rare in cats and is nearly always
were located in an area other than the trigone (Fig. 37-8). Similarly.
in another study, tumors were more commonly located on the ventral
65-75% of all cases,15.1 and a predisposition for older cats exists, with
aspect or apex.
-euah st'sieo 0z jo Apnis aaoadso1ai e ui sieaA Z'sI jo ase ueipa e
Treatment of bladder neoplasia depends upon the location, the
turia is the most common clinical sign associated with bladder
extent of involvement the histopathologic diagnosis, and thepresence
426
Bladder
Chapter
E
Macroscopic diverticula may be entirely intramural or may extend
 beyond the bladder serosa and be extramural. Contrast radiography
revealed evidence of diverticula in 22% of cats with feline lower
urinary tract disease.2 Interestingly, serial contrast radiography dem-
onstrated resolution of some diverticula as quickly as 19 days after
successful treatment of feline lower urinary tract disease This supports
the theory that diverticula are a sequela to, and not the cause of, lower
urinary tract disease Additionally, the majority of young cats with
lower urinary tract disease do not have positive urine cultures, indicat-
ing that acquired urachal diverticula are not important predisposing
causes to infection. In cats with lower urinary tract disease and urachal
diverticula, efforts should focus on eliminating the cause of inflam-
米
mation, obstruction, or cystoliths. Urachal diverticula should be reas-
sessed two to four weeks after resolution of the lower urinary tract
disease for evidence of persistence It is postulated that macroscopic
diverticula may resolve with production of connective tissue at the site
of previous inflammation.21 However, diverticula may prevent eradica-
tion of infection-associated cystoliths, and in such cases cystotomy
with diverticulectomy should be considered. Furthermore, diverti-
culectomy may be indicated in cats that have undergone perineal
urethrostomy to eliminate a potential source of recurrent urinary tract
Figure 37-8 Intraoperative photo of the bladder in a cat with a
infections.
transitional cell carcinoma involving the cranioventral aspect of the apex
as indicated by the asterisk.
Ectopic ureters
of metastasis. When the trigone is not involved and metastases are not
 Ectopic ureter is a congenital condition where one or both ureters fail
detected, partial cystectomy (see Box 37-3) can be considered. Prior
to migrate normally in utero and thus do not empty into the trigone
to partial cystectomy, the ureters and urethra should be carefully
 of the bladder, often resulting in urinary incontinence and persistent 
examined for evidence of adjacent neoplastic growth, and local lymph 
 urinary tract infection. Suspicion for ectopic ureters should be high if
nodes should be biopsied to rule out regional metastasis. During
urinary incontinence has been present since birth. Ectopic ureters can
surgical removal, a l-2 cm tumor-free margin should be attempted
be either extramural or intramural depending upon the course the
whenever possible. The maximum amount of bladder that can be
ureter takes when bypassing the trigone. With extramural ectopic
resected and still maintain normal bladder function postoperatively
ureters, the ureter completely bypasses the bladder before opening
is approximately 75%. With extensive bladder resection, an indwelling
 distally into the urethra or vagina. With intramural ectopic ureters, the
 -sp au  aaios assa aq Au iaaue iean
ureter enters the bladder wall in the normal location, but then tunnels
distally within the bladder wall before opening into the urethra or
bladder wall will stretch over several months until normal function is
vagina. To the author's knowledge, intramural ectopic ureters have not
regained. When the tumor involves the trigone, total cystectomy with
 been reported in the cat. In a review of 31 feline ectopic ureters, all
ureteral transplantation may be considered; however, due to the
were extramural, with 28 emptying into the urethra, and three into
overall poor prognosis and quality of life, urinary diversion is gener-
the vagina.22 Diagnosis is made with intravenous urography, intrave-
ally not recommended. With any surgical manipulation of the bladder.
nous urography combined with CT, or cystoscopy. In 23 cats with
iatrogenic metastasis is possible; therefore instruments and gloves
ectopic ureters, no breed or sex predilection was reported, with 13
should be changed prior to closure Early diagnosis and surgical treat-
having unilateral and ten having bilateral ectopia.22 As ectopic ureters
ment of neoplasia may lead to an improved prognosis, but an overall
are usually extramural in the cat, treatment generally involves transec.
guarded prognosis should be given due to high metastatic and local
 tion and re-implantation rather than intramural diversion. If minimal
recurrence rates. The median progression-free interval in one study
ureteral dilation is present, an operating microscope is recommended
for ureteral re-implantation. Surgery is generally curative, and the
documented to be 89 days, with a range of 6l to 1545 days.
-uos yanouie 'uoeuedu-ai jeaan sumoloy poos si sisousoid
following partial cystectomy and adjunctive therapy for transitional
current pyelonephritis and hydroureter may be present and require
cell carcinoma.15
additional treatment. Potential complications after ureteral implanta-
tion include urine leakage, stricture of the neoureterocystostomy site.
Urachal diverticula
persistent incontinence, or cystolith formation. A single case of urinary
incontinence secondary to double ectopic ureters has been described
Urachal diverticula occur when the urachus located at the bladder
sinso ieun kieuoue leiuauon aiei e aie siaan aiqnod sz'ie aui u
apex fails to close after birth, creating an area for possible urine accu-
when two ureteric buds originate from the mesonephric duct of a
mulation. Urachal diverticula can be congenital or more commonly.
duplex kidney. Neoureterocystostomy is described in Chapter 36.
acquired. Congenital macroscopic diverticula allow urine and bacteria
to persist in the lumen of the diverticulum and predispose cats to
recurrent urinary tract infection. If urinary tract infection persists or
recurs in the face of appropriate antibiotic therapy, diverticulectomy
GENERAL SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
should be considered.20 Acquired diverticula occur in older adult cats 
with inflammation of the lower urinary tract in response to persistent
The bladder is an organ that heals rapidly and is capable of regaining
increased intraluminal bladder pressure, where microscopic urachal
100% of normal tensile strength within 21 days. However, despite this
diverticula are thought to develop into macroscopic diverticula.21
biologic advantage, a key principle of bladder surgery is gentle tissue
427
Section
5
The Abdomen
handling to minimize swelling and inflammation that could delay
healing or compromise the integrity of the closure. Whenever possi-
ble, stay sutures should be used to manipulate the bladder to mini-
mize unnecessary direct handling of the tissues. Due to its vascular
supply, the bladder tends to bleed liberally when incised; however.
most hemorrhage arises from the capillary level and therefore decreases
significantly after several minutes. For more substantial bleeders, hem-
 orrhage can be controlled with judicious use of electrocautery. When
suturing the bladder, it is important to use absorbable suture material
to reduce the risk of the suture acting as a nidus for cystolith forma-
tion. Analysis of 303 recurrent cystoliths in cats revealed that 4% were
suture associated.24 Bacterial cystitis is common with many urinary
tract diseases including cystoliths, diverticula, ectopic ureters, and
neoplasia, and therefore should be ruled out with urine culture and
 sensitivity as part of the diagnostic workup.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Cystotomy
Cystotomy (Box 37-1) may be indicated for cystic calculi removal,
bladder wall or mass biopsy (Fig. 37-9), bladder mucosa culture, and
ureteral catheterization or stent placement.
The popularity of minimally invasive surgical techniques for cysto-
lith removal is increasing. Laparoscopic-assisted cystotomy, also called
sn usu ue ynn paad s uu snaud
large enough for cystolith removal. Briefly, a laparoscopic port
is placed on the caudal ventral abdominal midline just cranial to
the umbilicus. A second port is placed over the ventral aspect of the
bladder with laparoscopic guidance. Using the second port, the
-un hod aul 'sdaioy yosqea pidossoiedel yiim padsei si iappei
sion is lengthened, the bladder is exteriorized, and stay sutures are
 placed in the bladder wall. A stab incision is made into the bladder.
and cystoliths are removed with graspers. Once all the cystoliths are
removed, the bladder is flushed and closed as previously described.
pnsisse-oiossoiedel cn ieuis Kdossoiss paisise-oidossoiedel
o a i an ins is A e si 
be applicable for cystolith retrieval in cats and is done with smaller
B
Aisnoiaaid se paneid aie suod sidossoiedel sa lappelq aui u suoisiu
described and the bladder is grasped, exteriorized, and stabilized with
Figure 37-9 A 10-year-old female domestic short-haired cat with a
s e yn d si adosos  2' oe  'ss 
bladder tumor. (A) Sponges are packed around the bladder and stay
cystotomy incision in the cranioventral aspect of the bladder. The
sutures are placed in the ventral bladder apex. (B) A cystotomy was
cystoscope is used to remove urine and instill saline before inspecting
the bladder and urethra for calculi. Once identified, calculi are immo-
(Courtesy of the University of Cambrioge.)
bilized with the cystoscope, and then a second stab incision is made
in the bladder for introduction of a grasping instrument for cystolith
Use of a low-profle cystostomy tube has been reported in one cat
retrieval. Following retrieval, the bladder and urethra can be cysto-
and is an option to reduce the risk of tube dislodgement, eliminate
scopically explored to ensure removal of all cystoliths.
the need for cumbersome bandages, improve mobility, and improve
aseptic care of the distal tube.2? There are several commercially avail-
Tube cystostomy
able low-profle gastrostomy tubes that have been used as cystostomy
tubes in small animals.22 Alternatively, a mushroom-tipped catheter
Tube cystostomy (Box 37-2) is an effective option for temporary or
can be used as described above, but then trimmed so that only 1-3 cm
 permanent diversion of urine for management of lower urinary tract
extends beyond the skin surface An anti-reflux valve is then placed
injury or obstruction. Temporary cystostomy is indicated for the man-
 on the tube and attached by a hinged clip. Low-profle cystostomy
agement of urethral obstruction from trauma, urolithiasis, inflamma-
tubes may also be placed through a mature stoma created by a previ-
tion, or strictures. Urinary diversion via tube cystostomy has been
ously placed tube and may be a good option if long-term use is
demonstrated to permit rapid healing of the urethra within 7-14 days
deemed necessary.
 and is an alternative to indwelling urethral catheterization.2α Perma-
 nent cystostomy may be indicated for neurogenic bladder dysfunction 
has been reported in six cats.30 The procedure is performed with the
cat in lateral recumbency, which is particularly useful for obstructed
altermative for urinary tract drainage in cats that might otherwise
cats that are poor anesthetic candidates due to metabolic derange-
require extensive surgery or euthanasia.
ments from postrenal azotemia. The bladder is palpated, and an
428
Bladder
Chapter
37
 Box 37-1 Cystotomy
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency and the ventral abdomen is
suction tip. Metzenbaum scissors are then used to extend the bladder
clipped and aseptically prepared. If intraoperative placement or
incision for approximately 3-4 cm until adequate exposure is 
manipulation of a urethral catheter is anticipated, the perineal region
achieved. During cystolith removal, careful palpation of the bladder
sann lelapeg ll Abupione padep pue paedaad ag ose pinous
neck and proximal urethra is helpful to prevent calculi from being 
 are to be obtained during surgery, prophylactic antibiotics should be 
accidentally forced into the urethra. In addition, catheterization 
withheld until urine or tissue samples are collected. A caudal ventral
(antegrade and ideally retrograde) and flushing of the urethra is
midline laparotomy is made starting 1-2 cm caudal to the umbilicus 
essential to ensure all calculi and sediment are removed or flushed 
pue pazioaxa Auae s! lappeia aul 'sind aul oi buipuaxa pue
through the urethra (Fig. 37-11).
 packed off from abdominal contents with moistened laparotomy 
There are many options for closing the bladder depending on the
sponges. Full thickness stay sutures of 3/0 monofilament suture on a
thickness and integrity of the wall and the location of the cystotomy
taper needle are placed on either side of the proposed longitudinal
incision relative to the urethra. A one or two-layer closure using a
cystotomy site (Fig. 37-10). The cystotomy incision should be made in 
rapidly absorbable 3/0 or 4/0 monofilament suture (poliglecaprone
a relatively avascular area on the ventral aspect of the bladder apex.
25. Glycomer 631) on a fine taper needle is generally acceptable.
A stab incision is made into the bladder with a number 11 or number
If the bladder wall is normal, a single layer closure using a simple 
15 scalpel blade and the bladder contents are suctioned with a Poole 
esonwgns aut buie od sonu! uaned aanins bulau! lo snonuuon
as the holding layer is generally sufficient. A simple continuous
appositional pattern, if properly performed, does not usually require
additional support.25 If the bladder wall is inflamed or thickened, a 
:es anenbape ue aaupe ot Aessanau ag Aew aunsop lakel-oml
however, inverting sutures can be difficult to place when the bladder
wall is thickened and less compliant. The first layer is completed 
using a simple continuous pattern in the mucosa/submucosa.
followed by a simple continuous or continuous inverting (Cushing 
or Lembert) pattern in the seromuscularis layer. Alternatively, the 
inverting layer can be performed in an interrupted fashion to allow 
for more variability in the spacing of the 'bites' and the degree of 
inversion.
Following closure, the bladder may be leak tested by instilling
sterile saline into the lumen and applying gentle pressure. The stay
sutures are then removed and the abdomen is closed routinely. For
cats with radiopaque cystoliths. postoperative radiographs should 
be made to document the removal of all calculi. Residual cystoliths 
were detected in the lower urinary tract of 20% of cats following
cystotomy in one veterinary teaching hospital.26 After surgery, cats 
should be monitored closely to determine that they are able to
Figure 37-10 Stay sutures are placed in the bladder prior to making
 adequately pass urine. Hematuria is common for the first 24-48
 the cystostomy incision in the ventral bladder wall.
hours; however, urethral catheterization is usually unnecessary.
oblique 2-3 cm skin incision is made in the inguinal region directly
 over the bladder. The subcutaneous tissue and aponeurosis of the
 external abdominal oblique are incised, and a grid approach through
the internal abdominal oblique and transversus abdominus muscles
is performed. Once the abdomen is entered, the bladder is stabilized
with stay sutures and the tube is placed through a purse-string suture.
The technique is performed as described (see Box 37-2),. with the
exception that the tube exits the abdomen through the same incision
-rodiou Aq pauoad si Axadois au pue yoeodde au oy pasn
ing bladder wall into the closure of the abdominal musculature.
 The cystostomy tube should be drained every six to eight hours, or
attached to a closed collection system. Gloves should be worn when
handling the tube and antiseptic cleaning of the tube and exit site with
dilute chlorhexidine or tris-EDTA is recommended. Tubes should be
left in place for a minimum of 14 days to ensure adequate adhesion
formation between the bladder and body wall to minimize the risk
of uroperitoneum after removal.3l Removal of a Foley catheter is
accomplished by deflating the ballon and then applying gentle trac-
tion until the tube is pulled through the body wall. Removal of a
am uoin ssisi aou saan aai paornu
simultaneously stabilizing the abdominal wall with the opposite
Figure 37-11 Intraoperative photo of a ventral cystotomy in a cat,
hand. If necessary, a blunt stylette can be placed through the lumen
demonstrating antegrade flushing of the bladder and urethra using a
of the tube to extend and narrow the mushroom tip, decreasing the
3.5 French red rubber catheter and syringe.
force required to pull the tube through the abdominal wall. Following
429
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 37-2 Tube cystostomy
A caudal ventral midline laparotomy is performed. The bladder is 
exteriorized and packed-off with sterile laparotomy sponges. A
 suitable location for the cystostomy tube placement is chosen on the 
ventrolateral abdominal wall. A hemostat is used to bluntly tunnel
through the abdominal musculature and subcutaneous tissue, exiting
the skin lateral to the laparotomy incision. A Foley or mushroom-
tipped catheter is then drawn into the abdomen through the tunnel
with the hemostats. A purse-string suture is preplaced in the 
ventrolateral apex of the bladder wall with monofilament absorbable
suture. A stab incision is made in the bladder wall in the center of
 the purse-string suture. The catheter is then placed in the bladder,
 inflated if applicable, and the purse-string suture is tightened around 
the tube (Fig. 37-12A). The bladder is then filled with saline via the
 aunins buus-asand aut punoue abeyeal lot passasse pue aqnt
 aesod osui saunins aul (azl-e bh) agni aui oi suanelpe saanins 
 partial thickness 'bites' of the bladder wall and transversus
Figure 37-13 Oblique abdominal radiograph of a cat demonstrating
 subcutaneous leakage of contrast media after being injected through the
abdominus muscle. Omentum may be wrapped around the cystopexy
site. The laparotomy incision is closed routinely and the cystostomy
cystostomy tube
tube is fixed to the skin with a finger trap suture.
tube) can generally be replaced through the existing stoma. The
tube should be replaced immediately to avoid interference from gran-
ulation tissue that rapidly flls the stoma once the tube is no longer
 present. The prevalence of urinary tract infection is high, with nearly
 all animals having evidence of nosocomial infection after cystostomy
tube removal.28,31 Urine culture is recommended after tube removal
and administration of antibiotic therapy instituted based on culture
and susceptibility results. Fecal contaminants are the most commonly
isolated organisms and may form a bioflm on the tube, increasing
the risk of recurrent infections. However prophylactic antibiotics are
generally contraindicated due to the potential for development of
multi-drug resistant bacteria, and antimicrobials should only be used
to treat documented infections. Other less significant complications
may include fistula formation, irritation or inflammation around the
tube, and intermittent hematuria. The use of silicone catheters may
reduce the incidence of stoma irritation. Cystostomy tubes have been
maintained in some cats for several years, although deterioration of
the tube usually requires replacement through the established stoma
A
 plished under heavy sedation or a short general anesthetic.
Partial cystectomy
Partial cystectomy (Box 37-3) may be indicated in cats with bladder
tumors or trauma that does not extensively involve the bladder neck
auo yo suaxa a supieaai sisixa Auaun jl uiai auon io
involvement, an excretory urogram, contrast cystogram, ultrasound,
 contrast CT, or cystoscopy should be performed to better assess the
extent of the lesion and to screen for secondary hydroureter.
B
Figure 37-12 Tube cystostomy. (A) The tube is shown after being
passed through the abdominal wall and the purse-string suture into
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
the bladder lumen. (B) Two of the four cystopexy sutures are shown
between the bladder wall and abdominal wall.
After most urinary bladder procedures, urination should be moni-
tored closely to ensure the cat is able to void without excessive
stranguria, dysuria, or signs of complete obstruction. Intravenous
cystostomy tube removal, the stoma may leak for one to four days 
fluids are generally recommended postoperatively to promote diuresis
until granulation tissue gradually closes the stoma.
and aid in flushing residual blood clots from the bladder. Hematuria,
 The most common complications with cystostomy tubes include
stranguria, and dysuria may occur after surgery, but should gradually
urine leakage, urinary tract infection, and tube dislodgement (Fig.
improve over several days. If bladder decompression is critical or if
laeus Aqissod inq) mau e 'juaapoisip aqm yo sas ul (ei-5
there are concerns for outflow obstruction due to excessive swelling
430
Bladder
Chapter
37
 Box 37-3 Partial cystectomy
A ventral midline laparotomy is performed. Prior to partial cystectomy.
of the ureter(s) can be performed and the ureter re-implanted (see
thorough examination of the abdomen should be performed to assess
Chapter 36) in the remaining healthy portion of the bladder. The 
for regional lymph node metastasis, ureteral involvement, or bladder 
bladder is closed as described previously: however, inverting patterns
au woe yo paed uaui s! lappea aul asoiduon aaneinsea
should be performed with care near ureteral orifices or the urethra to
 uaaaid oi sabuods Awoioedel islow yhm Aen leulwopge
minimize the risk of mechanical obstruction. Prior to closure of the 
uoneol sowni aul uawopge aut jo buipaas owni pue uoeuiweuon
abdominal wall, instruments and gloves should be changed to
is identified by gentle palpation, and a stab incision is made into the
minimize the risk of iatrogenic metastasis. If more than 50% of the
bladder wall i-2 cm away from the mass, taking care to avoid the
ureteral papilla. To increase the likelihood of complete excision a
the bladder decompressed. Up to 75% of the bladder may be
1-2 cm margin around the entire mass should be attempted (Fig.
resected, with return to near normal function within three months.20
37-14). If the mass extends to one or both ureteral papilla, resection
Patching of large defects
 During radical cystectomy, serosal patching utilizing the
antimesenteric surface of a loop of jejunum can be implemented to 
augment closure of the bladder defect. The jejunum is sutured to the
bladder wall in a simple interrupted pattern using non-absorbable 
3/0 or 4/0 suture material. The sutures are placed through the 
submucosa of the jejunum and bladder, avoiding knots that enter
the bladder lumen. The serosa of the jejunum provides a surface for
migrating urothelium to fill the defect and has been reported to occur
within 30 days.20 The use of porcine small intestine and urinary
bladder submucosa in sheet form has also been described for
replacement of portions of the bladder wall after partial cystectomy in
dogs. pigs. and rabbits with relative success and may have merit as an
option for cats 3z-3s For this technique, a sheet of submucosa material 
llem lappeiq ayt ot paanins uaul pue azis aneludoudde aul ot ino s!
using a simple continuous pattern to create a watertight seal. In an
experimental study involving rabbits, gross and histologic examination
 Figure 37-14 A 1-2 cm margin of normal bladder around the entire
of the bladder augmented with porcine small intestine submucosa 
mass is removed if possible to increase the likelihood of complete 
revealed it to be almost indistinguishable from the normal bladder
excision.
after 12 months.36
or inflammation of the urethra, an indwelling urinary catheter
Hematuria, pollakiuria, stranguria, and dysuria are not uncommon
attached to a closed collection system can be placed at the time of
 after surgical manipulation of the bladder, but should improve or
surgery and maintained until it is anticipated that the cat is able to
 resolve after several days. Persistence of any or all ofthese signs would
void normally. If necessary, empirical antibiotic therapy can be con-
be an indication of a potential complication that should be further
tinued after surgery and then changed if necessary, based upon the
investigated to rule out problems such as persistent cystic calculi.
bacterial culture and sensitivity taken at the time of surgery.
hematomas, urethral swelling, or active urinary tract infection.
Outflow obstruction of the bladder may occur due to excessive swell -
ing or inversion of the wall during closure requiring temporary ure-
thral catheterization. To minimize the risk for these complications,
COMPLICATIONS
use of an inverting pattern when closing the bladder near the urethra
Or ureteral papilla should be avoided. To reduce the likelihood of
suture-induced cystolith formation, use of rapidly absorbable syn-
upon the specific procedure performed but generally include dehis-
thetic suture material is recommended and ideally sutures should not
cence and leakage, persistent hematuria, pollakiuria, or stranguria,
 penetrate the lumen of the bladder. Finally, although not an immedi-
transient incontinence due to reduced bladder capacity, outfow
ate postoperative complication, seeding of the abdominal wall has
obstruction due to excessive swelling or blood clots, persistent or
ins paip io uoese apaau auy snoaueiad aye paoda uaa
recurrent cystoliths, local recurrence or metastasis of tumors, and
cal manipulation of bladder tumors and the risk of such an event
stricture or obstruction of the ureters or urethra if involved.
should be considered during diagnostic and treatment procedures.
REFERENCES
1. Johnston GR, Osborne CA, Jessen CR,
Part I. Techniques, normal radiographic
4. Messer JS, Chew Dl, Mcloughlin MA.
et al. Effects of urinary bladder distension 
anatomy, and artifacts. Compend
Cystoscopy: Techniques and clinical
on location of the urinary bladder and
Continuing Educ 1982;4:823-35.
 applications. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
urethra of healthy dogs and cats. Am J Vet
3.
Voros K, Wladar S, Marsi A, et al.
2005;20:52-64.
Research 1986;47:404-15.
 Ultrasonographic study of feline lower
5.
 McCarthy T. Veterinary endoscopy for
2. Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Osborne CA.
urinary tract diseases: 32 cases. Acta Vet
the small animal practitioner. St Louis:
Urethrography and cystography in cats
Hung 1997;45:387-95.
Elsevier; 2005.
431
Section
5
The Abdomen
6. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Kruger JM, et al.
16. Schwartz PD, Greene RW, Patnaik RK.
urolithiasis. Vet Clin Small Anim
Analysis of 451,891 canine uroliths, feline
 Urinary bladder tumors in the cat: a
2008;39:79-91
 uroliths, and feline urethral plugs from
review of 27 cases. I Am Anim Hosp
27.
 Rawlings CA. Resection of inflammatory
1981 to 2007: perspectives from the
Assoc 1985;21:237-45.
polyps in dogs using laparoscopic-assisted
Minnesota urolith center Vet Clin Small
17.
Henry Cj. Management of transitional
cystoscopy. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Anim 2008;39:183-97.
cell carcinoma. Vet Clin Small Anim 
2007;43:342-6.
7.
 Houston DM, Moore AEP. Canine and
2003;33:597-613.
28.1
Williams JM, White RAS. Tube cystostomy
feline urolithiasis: examination of over
18.
 Smith EH. Complications of percutaneous 
in the dog and cat. J Small Anim Pract
50,000 urolith submissions to the
abdominal fine-needle biopsy review.
1991;32:598-602.
Canadian Veterinary Urolith Centre
Radiology 1991;178:253-8.
29.
Stifler KS, Stevenson MM, Cornell KK.
from 1998 to 2008. Can Vet J 2009;50:
19.
 Schwartz PD, willer PD. Urinary bladder
et al. Clinical use of low-profle
1263-8.
neoplasia in the dog and cat. Prob Vet
cystostomy tubes in four dogs and
8. Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP.
Med 1989;1:128-40.
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;223:
et al. Association between dietary factors 
20. Wilson GP, Dill RS, Goodman RZ. The
325-9.
and calcium oxalate and magnesium
relationship of urachal defects in the
30.
 Bray JP, Doyle RS, Burton CA. Minimally
ammonium phosphate urolithiasis in
feline urinary bladder to feline urologic
invasive inguinal approach for tube
 cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;219:
syndrome. In Proceedings 7i"h Kal Kan
cystostomy. Vet Surg 2009;38:411 -16.
1228-37.
Symposium. Vernon, California: Kal Kan
31.
Beck AL, Grierson JM, Ogden DM, et al.
9. Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Forrester D, et al.
Foods Inc.: 1983. p. 125-9.
 Outcome of and complications associated
Paradigm changes in the role of nutrition
21.
 Osborne CA, Johnston GR, Kruger JM,
with tube cystostomy in dogs and cats: 76
for the management of canine and feline 
et al. Etiopathogenesis and biological 
cases [1995-2006). j Am Vet Med Assoc 
urolithiasis. Vet Clin Small Anim 
behavior of feline vesicourachal
2007;230:1184-9.
2008;39:127-41.
diverticula: Don't just do something
32.
 Record RD, Hillegonds D, Simmons C,
10.
.Langston C, Gisselman K, Palma D, et al.
- stand there. Vet Clin Small Anim
et al. In vivo degradation of 14C-labeled
Methods of urolith removal. Compend
1987;17:697 -733.
small intestinal submucosa (SIS) when
Continuing Educ 2010;32(6):E1-7.
 Holt PE, Gibbs C. Congenital urinary
used for urinary bladder repair.
 11.Adams LG. Lithotripsy using shock waves 
incontinence in cats: a review of 19 cases.
Biomaterials 2001;19:2653-9.
and lasers. 24th Annu ACVIM Forum
Vet Rec 1992:130:437-42.
33.
Caione P Capozza N, Zavaglia D, et al.
2006:439-41.
23.
 Ghantous SN, Crawford J. Double ureters
In vivo bladder regeneration using small
12.
.Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ.
with ureteral ectopia in a domestic
intestinal submucosa: experimental
Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
shorthair cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
study. Pediatric Surg Int 2008;7:593-9.
(1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2006;42:462-6.
34.
Badylak SF, Kropp B, McPherson T, et al.
1998;34:315-24.
24.
Appel SL, Lefebvre SL, Houston DM, et al.
 Small intestine submucosa: a rapidly
13.
 Osborne CA, Sanderson SL, Lulich JP.
Evaluation of risk factors associated with
resorbed bioscaffolds for augmentation
Medical management of iatrogenic
suture-nidus cystoliths in dogs and cats:
cystoplasty in a dog model. Tissue Eng
rents in the wall of the feline urinary
176 cases [1999-2006). J Am Vet Med
1998;4:379-87.
bladder. Vet Clin Small Anim 
Assoc 2008;233:1889-95.
85.
Boruch AV, Nieponice A, Qureshi IR, et al.
1996;26:551
25.
 Thieman-Mankin KM, Ellison GW.
Constructive remodeling of biologic 
14. Gomez RG, Ceballos L, Coburn M, et al.
Jeyapaul C), et al. Comparison of 
scaffolds is dependent on early exposure
Consensus statement on bladder injuries.
short-term complication rates between
to physiologic bladder flling in a canine
BJU Int 2004;94:27-32.
dogs and cats undergoing appositional
model. J of Surg Research 2010;161:
15. wilson HM, Chun R, Larson VS, et al.
single-layer or inverting double-layer
217-25.
Clinical signs, treatments, and outcome
cystotomy closure: 144 Cases [1993-
36. Ayyildiz A, Akgul KT, Huri E, et al. Use
in cats with transitional cell carcinoma
2010). I Am Vet Med Assoc 2012;240:
 of porcine small intestine submucosa in
of the urinary bladder: 20 cases 
65-8.
 bladder augmentation in rabbit: Long-
[1990-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
26.
 Lulich JP, Osborne CA. Changing
 term histological outcome. ANZ I Surg.
2007;231:101-6.
paradigms in the diagnosis of
2008;78:82-6.
432
38l
apter
Urethra
J.F. Ladlow
Feline lower urinary tract disease is common and in male cats can
Embryologically, the prostatic urethra is equivalent to the female
result in urethral obstruction. Relief of obstruction and repair of iatro-
urethra, the pelvic portion of the urogenital sinus forms the membra-
 genic ruptures or strictures resulting from urinary catheterization are
nous portion, and the penile urethra is derived from the phallic
two of the most common causes for urethral surgery in the cat. Trauma
 portion of the sinus.
 and neoplasia are other less common conditions that are treated surgi-
 The prostate and the bulbourethral glands are accessory sex glands
cally. Surgical options for the urethra consist of urinary diversion with
that are situated dorsolaterally to the urethra. The prostate is located
at the level of the acetabulae and the bulbourethral glands empty
repair.
dorsally into the postprostatic urethra at the ischial arch; their entry
marks the start of the penile urethra.
 The preprostatic urethra consists of epithelium, submucosa, and
SURGICAL ANATOMY
three layers of smooth muscle, which are continuous with the detrusor
muscle at the vesicourethral junction. At the prostate, the muscle
changes from smooth to striated fibers. The postprostatic urethra
The urethra extends from the trigone of the bladder to the urethral 
has circumferentially orientated striated muscle fibers, the urethralis
meatus or orifice.
muscle which corresponds to the external urethral sphincter. This
contributes to resting urethral tone but also contains fast twitch fibers
Female urethra
that are capable of responding to sudden changes in vesicular pressure
and thus maintaining continence during coughing or sudden move-
 uuna ue woy pay si eian aey au aleonoq
ment.? The muscle mass increases just caudally to the bulbourethral
between the bladder and the urogenital sinus. The urethra is posi-
glands with the insertion of the ischiocavernosus muscles ventrally
tioned between the pelvic floor and the vagina and it empties into a
and the bulbocavernosus muscles dorsally. The penile urethra has
groove on the ventral floor of the vestibule at the external urethral
longitudinally orientated muscle fbers ventrally but not dorsally:
orifice.
ijnosea Aiuiy Aq papunons si eiuan aul eaie siu ul 'anamou
The cranial two-thirds of the female urethra is covered by detrusor
aul s alesiop snsouaaes shdios autpue anssi aaoauuos shouaeo
fibers, connective tissue, and smooth muscle which comprises the
 epithelium of the male urethra is mainly transitional with stratified
internal urethral sphincter; the caudal third of the urethra is initially
squamous epithelium near the urethral orifice.4
encircled by striated urethralis muscle, which comprises the external
The male urethra is approximately 8.5-10.5 cm long? and the
urethral sphincter. In the caudal urethra, the urethralis muscle expands 
dimensions of each part are shown in Figure 38-1. The urethral cir-
dorsally and encircles both the vagina and urethra. The urethral
cumference is not affected by castration although fibrocyte density
smooth muscle contains circular fibers which act as a sphincter and
increases with castration.4
longitudinal fibers that contract to dilate the urethra. The epithelium
changes from transitional to stratifed squamous in the caudal quarter
Blood supply
of the urethra.
 In the female, the urethral blood supply is via the vaginal arteries from
Male urethra
the urogenital artery.
 In the male, the prostatic artery (from the internal pudendal artery)
 The male cat has an elongated bladder neck or preprostatic urethra, a
 supplies the prostatic and membranous urethra along with branches
short wider prostatic section, a postprostatic or pelvic section, and the 
from the urethral artery, which extends to the cavernous tissue and
distal penile urethra that narrows significantly at the glans (Fig. 38-1).
distal urethra.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00038-X
Section
5
The Abdomen
Bladder
URETHRA
Preprostatic
Prostatic
200
:Postprostatic
O"H
Bulbourethra
100
Penile
1:23
4:5
617
:Profile length;(cm)
Figure 38-1 Diagram of the male feline urethra
:Smooth
: Striated
Bladder
:muscle
: muscle
1
sphincter
sphincter
Innervation
 Normal micturition requires a brainstem reflex and can be initiated
Pre
Post
 Or suppressed consciously. The striated urethralis muscle is innervated
prostatic prostatic
Penile
by the pudendal nerve, arising from segments S1-S3. The pelvic plexus
leppela
urethra
urethra
urethra
is located bilaterally on the lateral surface of the parietal peritoneum 
200 PRE-
-seoday aua eia andui sauieduas sey su pue Aaes slad auisuu
tric plexus and parasympathetic input via the pelvic nerve
The
hypogastric nerve originates from L2-L5 and stimulation of the sym-
100
urethral sphincter, and inhibits parasympathetic synapses in the pelvic
 plexus. The pelvic nerve originates from S1-S3 and stimulates detrusor
6
contraction.
200POST-
Prostate
Striated
Functional anatomy
muscle
100-
 The functional anatomy of the feline urethra has been studied experi-
Penis
 mentally by urethral pressure profle measurements.&5 Urethral tone
results from the interaction of the smooth muscle, striated skeletal
muscle, fibroelastic and vascular tissue. The smooth muscle offers
B
Distance,cm
most resistance to urine leakage in the non-voiding animal. The exter-
 nal urethral sphincter is maintained at a low tone but activates with
Figure 38-2 (A) Urethral pressure profile of the female cat. (B) Urethral
sudden increases in intra-abdominal or intravesicular pressure rises.
pressure profile of the male cat. (A}) From Gregory CR, Willis NH.
Electromyographic and urethral pressure evaluations: Assessment of urethral
 The external urethral sphincter tone increases in response to fluid flow
function in female and ovariohysterectomized female cats. American Journal of
along the urethra or distension of the urethra.
Veterinary Research 1986;47:1472, with permission; [8] from Gregory CR. et al.
 In the female, the maximal urethral closure pressure is predomi-
Electromyographic and urethral pressure proflometry: Assessment of urethral
nantly in the distal third of the urethra at the level of the urethralis
jo jeunor veyaw seo u Auosoyan jeauyad aje pue aojag uoouny
muscle* (Fig. 38-2A). Interestingly, unlike in the dog, there have been
Veterinary Research 1984;45:2062-5. 1984. http:/favmajcumals.avma. org//oi.ajvr
 no significant differences found in the urethral pressure profles of
with permission.)
 intact and ovariectomized females.
qead annssaid e leaaai sanyoid annssaid jenqian aul ale aul ul
at the prostatic and early postprostatic urethra followed by high-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
pressure peaks in the bulbourethral and penile areas that usually
have the maximal urethral closure pressure (Fig. 38-2B). The prostatic
and postprostatic pressure peaks arise at the level of the urethralis
The details regarding whether the cat has been urinating normally are
muscle and the external urethral sphincter whilst the penile increase
not always easy to ascertain in a cat, particularly if it has access to the
in urethral pressure results from the small diameter of the penile
outdoors. Early signs of urinary tract disease and obstruction may be
urethra.
missed and veterinary attention only sought when the cat is showing
434
Lrethra
Chapter
88
Figure 38-3 A four-year-old male neutered domestic short-hair cat
presented with recurrent lower urinary tract obstruction. A retrograde 
to the penile urethra that would contraindicate perineal urethrostomy. No
Figure 38-4 Retrograde vaginourethrogram in a female cat with a
narrowing is present in this cat.
normal urethra and ruptured bladder.
systemic signs. A careful physical examination including gentle
catheterization, stay sutures placed in the prepuce allow an assistant
abdominal palpation for the urinary bladder and inspection of the
to gently extend the penile urethra. If urine leakage occurs prior to
penis and vulva should be performed as routine.
distension of the urethra a balloon catheter can be used with the
balloon gently inflated until resistance is felt.
 It is not necessary to distend the bladder prior to urethrography and
Diagnostic imaging
 prior bladder distension may actually obscure normal anatomy.
 The urethral crest is a midline dorsal ridge of tissue that protrudes
A combination of imaging modalities are used to evaluate the
into the urethra. It is seen as a linear midline radiopacity after contrast
urethra.
studies. In the bladder the urethral crest branches into two columns
that lead into one of the two ureteric papillae.
Radiography
 In the male urethra, particularly in cats with feline lower urinary
disease, a narrowing of the pelvic urethra is sometimes seen (Fig.
Urogenital radiographic studies, including contrast studies, are used
san e aq Au pue suaden yoos 'emas e si si (5-g5
to evaluate the integrity and diameter of the urethra. Prior to perform-
 of prostatic compression, urethritis, or muscular spasm. It can
ing these radiographic studies, it is desirable that large intestinal
be eliminated by antegrade urethrography or higher volume retro-
content is minimal, which can be difficult to achieve in cats. Sodium
 grade urethrography and should not be confused with a urethral
citrate micro-enemas (Micralax, Micolette, Relaxit) should be used
stricture.'
both on the evening prior to the investigation and on the morning of
the investigation. The cat should be fasted overnight. If the colon is
 stillimpacted with feces, it is worth performing a warm water cleans-
Ultrasound
ing enema under anesthesia prior to radiography in order to achieve
Although not traditionally thought of as a useful imaging modality
optimal results. For good quality radiographs, deep sedation or
for the urethra, the integrity of the proximal urethra can be assessed
ultrasonographically. It is also useful for evaluating periurethral urine
cystogram is the best radiographic technique for evaluation of the
 leakage and intra- and extraluminal urethral masses.
urethra (Fig. 38-3). Urogenital radiographic studies, including con-
 trast studies are described in chapter 8.
Cystoscopy
 Female urethral catheterization is usually easier than the male and
is aided by pulling the vulval lips caudally and then advancing a well
This is a useful technique in the cat that can aid in diagnosing urethral
lubricated 4 or 5 French balloon catheter along the ventral wall of the
 masses, calculi strictures, and tears. In the female (or male following
vagina (Fig. 38-4).
perineal urethrostomy) biopsies can be taken using an endoscope
 In the male cat, a 3.5 or 4 French catheter is appropriate. The urethra
with an instrument channel. Transurethral cystoscopy can be per-
should initially be gently extended caudally and dorsally during cath-
formed in the male cat using a flexible endoscope or prepubic percu-
n Aeun iam ym sas ul adorsouan pue aosos snoau
has a natural V-shaped configuration (see Fig. 9-19A,B). The catheter
disease, inflammation of the urethra and bladder wall can result in
should be well lubricated with sterile petroleum jelly and advanced
microtears of the mucosa and hemorrhage, which can obscure the
gently 1-2 cm into the urethra. If diffculties are encountered during
examination. Cystoscopy is described in detail in Chapter 8.
435
Section
151
The Abdomen
(10-20%), and urolithiasis (10-20%).8-1l Cats at most risk of FLUTD
are kept indoors, male, overweight, and fed on dried diets. 12 Bacterial
which prevents concentration of the urine.13 Clinical signs of FLUTD
 include inappropriate urination, stranguria, hematuria, dysuria, and
pollakiuria progressing to include various systemic signs (pain, brady-
cardia, depression, and vomiting) with complete obstruction. Males
have a much higher risk of blocking. The diagnostic approach depends
 On the frequency and severity of episodes but should include urine
analysis and culture even on first presentation. Obstructed cats require
or anesthesia. Risk factors for mortality include hypocalcemia and
hyperkalemia.12
Many cases of FLUTD can be treated medically without resorting to
surgery: however, recurrence rates after an episode of urethral obstruc-
tion are in the range of 30-40%, with obstruction rates being higher
A
for urethral plugs.12 A 2002 multiple center study in North America
popad iaa-oz e u auoisiuan ieauad u uonpai go e paodan
from 1980-1999.1 This decrease in surgical management of FLUTD
may reflect an improverment in medical treatment of the condition.
However, if a cat has regular recurrence of urethral obstruction despite
appropriate medical management, a perineal obstruction should be
considered. In certain cases (e.g., if the owner is regularly away over-
night) surgery can be considered earlier.
 In cats with urolithiasis it is preferable to retropulse calculi into the
bladder and perform a cystotomy rather than operate on the urethra.
If the calculus is firmly lodged, and a retrograde urethrogram confirms
the obstruction, a temporary cystostomy tube can be placed to allow
urinary diversion or repeat cystocentesis can be used. Retropulsion can
be attempted again after a few days of treatment with anti-inflammatory
medication and urethral relaxants. Alternatively, a perineal urethros-
tomy can be performed to relieve the obstruction once the cat is sys-
temically stable.
 In a study of 43 cats with urethral obstruction, 26% died or were
euthanized because of their disease. Perineal urethrostomy was per-
formed in 22% of cats and resulted in resolution of clinical signs in
50% of cases.14 Cats that had a perineal urethrostomy were half as
likely to be euthanized due to their disease although this was a rela-
tively small study. It is important to counsel owners, however, that if
surgery is performed for obstructive cases of FLUTD the disease will
still be present and further medical treatment may be required
although re-obstruction is less likely to occur.
 Other complications reported following perineal urethrostomy
include urinary tract infection, stricture formation, periurethral urine
extravasation, and stoma dehiscence. The incidence of postoperative
B
urinary tract infection is reported to be from 23-50%.15-18 The range
in results may be due to the fact that the infections are often asymp-
Figure 38-5 (A) Lateral and (B) ventrodorsal retrograde urethrogram of
tomatic and self-limiting, though in chronic cases struvite urolithiasis
a male cat following relief of feline lower urinary tract disease (FLuTD)
can result.19
obstruction showing a gradual symmetrical narrowing of the pelvic
urethra due to urethritis.
Urethral trauma
 Urethral trauma may occur after blunt or penetrating injuries but is
most commonly seen in males after traumatic urethral catheterization
SURGICAL DISEASES
in cases of obstructed FLUTD.20.21 With iatrogenic catheter damage the
frequent sites for damage are the distal penile urethra and the ischial
Most surgical diseases of the urethra in cats are related to feline lower
arch. Damage at thelevel of the distal penile urethra (Fig. 38-6) is due
urinary tract obstruction or trauma.
to inadequate caudal straightening of the penile urethra prior to cath-
eterization or an inadequately sedated or anesthetized cat. Damage at
Feline lower urinary tract obstruction
the ischial arch (Fig. 38-7) is likely due to a combination of the caudal
traction on the penile urethra being maintained whilst the catheter is
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) encompasses urethral plugs
entering the postprostatic pelvic urethra and traumatic catheters, par-
(20-50%), feline interstitial cystitis (20-50%). bacterial cystitis
ticularly those with a stylet still in place. With an obstructed cat
436
Lrethra
Chapter
88
Figure 38-6 Retrograde urethrogram showing rupture of the distal
penile urethra secondary to traumatic urethral catheterization in a 
four-year-old domestic short-haired cat with obstructive FLUTD.
A
Figure 38-7 Retrograde urethrogram of a ruptured urethra at the
ischial arch demonstrating perforation of the colon by the catheter and
Figure 38-8 (A) Skin slough secondary to a caudal urethral rupture and
subsequent colonogram in a six-year-old domestic long-haired cat with
extravasation of urine around the tail base in a 10-month-old domestic
obstructive FLUTD.
short-haired cat that had a road traffic accident. (B) Retrograde
urethrogram demonstrating this urethral rupture, with the contrast
spreading around the tail base.
hydropulsion via a urethral catheter rather than the catheter itself
should be used to relieve the obstruction. Clinical signs of urethral
rupture are listed in Box 38-1.
 Box 38-1 Clinical signs of urethral rupture
Cases of penile or postprostatic urethral rupture will often have
urine leakage into the perineum and the dorsum around the tail base.
Dysuria or anuria
If a fluctuant swelling is evident in these areas in a cat where there is
Hematuria
a possibility of urethral rupture the fluid should be drained with
 Perineal swelling and bruising 
uis juaaid on uiep uons paso leus e jo juauaeid io uoneise
necrosis22.23 (Fig. 38-8). If the urethral rupture is further proximal, the
 Skin necrosis, sloughing and cellulitis due to extravasation of urine in
 the subcutaneous tissue which is extremely irritating
urine will leak into the abdomen, resulting in uroabdomen and a
Dehydration
urinary tract infection present.
Uremia
The ability to urinate normally or pass a urinary catheter into the
 Depressed mentation
bladder does not exclude a urethral tear. Diagnosis is confirmed by
imaging, including positive contrast urethrocystography. If contrast is 
[eed e eiyjan au uoy sueseaenxa pue iappelq aul u yoq uas
checked prior to sedation or anesthesia to rule out hyperkalemia,
rupture is present If no contrast agent is seen in the bladder the
hyponatremia, hypochloremia, metabolic acidosis, or azotemia. If
rupture can be partial or complete.24 Ultrasound examination may be
uroabdomen is present, abdominocentesis with biochemical analysis
useful to determine disruption of the proximal urethra and bladder
of the peritoneal fluid will support the diagnosis if the peritoneal
neck. Biochemical analysis of blood, including electrolytes, should be
Creatinine urea or potassium levels are higher than serum levels.25
Section
5
The Abdomen
Treatment options for urethral rupture include urinary diversion,
 primary repair, or proximal urethrostomy. Small lacerations will gen-
erally heal in three to five days with urinary diversion using an ind-
welling urethral catheter or cystostomy tube Larger lacerations will
heal if a strip of uroepithelium remains intact but strictures may result.
 In cases where catheterization is diffcult, normograde placement of
 a catheter via a small cystostomy followed by placement of a guidewire
aids retrograde placement of the urethral catheter.24 An indwelling
catheter is required for up to three weeks depending on the size of
the tear.
 The extent of damage may be diffcult to assess by a retrograde
urethrogram and surgical exploration of the urethra is sometimes
advisable to gauge the size of the deficit, particularly if there is exces-
sive contrast leakage on a urethrogram. In cases that have suffered a
road traffc accident, the urethra can be damaged ventrally, presum.
a an sasn a ul sind aun ise us  i
Figure 38-9 Hypoplastic urethra in a four-month-old British short-hair
damage can be considerable and stricture is likely with conservative
kitten with vaginal aplasia and entry of the uterine horns into the dorsal 
bladder wall
management.
Most lesions of the penile urethra in cats are treated by a perineal
urethrostomy.20 Complete transection of the more proximal urethra
Hypoplastic urethra
is treated by urethral resection and anastomosis, which carries the risk
of stricture formation, or a prepubic urethrostomy if the damage is
Hypoplastic urethra is seen in female cats that usually have a history
severe A vaginourethoplasty has recently been reported in a female
 of incontinence from birth. Diagnosis is by retrograde urethrogram;
s e u pansai a ean d ejo i aud iae i
the urethra is exceptionally short, with the bladder neck seeming to
ture.2 Prognosis is worse for cats with multiple traumatic injuries.20
extend to the external urethral meatus (Fig. 38-9). Most reported cases
Complications which may occur after urethral rupture include stric-
also have vaginal aplasia, with termination of the uterine horns in the
tures, incontinence, and urethrocutaneous fistulas.
dorsal bladder wall.34
 Treatment consists of elongating the urethra using a cystoplasty.
formed by making two V-shaped flaps in the ventral aspect of the
Urethral tumors
bladder, with the point of the V at the caudal extent of an incision in
the proximal urethra. The two flaps are sutured together, forming a
Urethral tumors are rare and more commonly seen in males than
pouch whilst the remaining ventral bladder wall is closed to make a
females. Affected cats tend to present later in life than those affected
tube. In this manner the bladder neck is tubed into a pseudo urethra.
with FLUTD and often have a lean body condition. Presenting clinical
signs include dysuria, hematuria, inappetence, constipation, and
The bladder flaps are created to preserve bladder volume and are
 optional, as bladder volume will return to a normal value in three
weight loss. Cases reported in the literature include a transitional cell
and ovaries should be resected during the surgery to avoid bladder
Prostatic tumors (usually carcinomas) are rare in the cat but can cause
-Boid iood e Aue aleauaa sou ean ez'uonnsqo leuea
diverticuli.
In a case series of eight cats with urethral hypoplasia that were
nosis and due to their rarity effectiveness of treatment protocols is
treated surgically, clinical signs resolved in three cats and improved in
diffcult to assess. Chemotherapeutic protocols including piroxicam,
the remaining five cats.35 Medical treatment in the form of phenylpro-
doxonubicin, and cyclophosphamide have been reported for urethral
transitional cell carcinomas,3 but the few cases reported have had
 panolamine has not been evaluated in cats.
poor survival times. A case report of surgical excision of a transitional
cell carinoma followed by radiotherapy on recurrence had a survival
time of over a year.27 Self-expanding metallic stents have been used in
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS AND
cases of urethral carcinoma but the survival times have been disap-
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
 pointing due to tumor occlusion of the stents.31.32
Systemic effects
Urethrorectal fistulas
In cats with obstructive disease, possible urine leakage or chronic
Urethrorectal fstulas are rarely reported, usually congenital and may
disease, routine hematology and biochemistry blood profiles
be associated with atresia ani (see Chapter 30).33 Clinical signs include
should be performed to rule out azotemia, electrolyte abnormalities,
simultaneous urination from the urethra and anus, dribbling of feces
dehydration, or anemia which requires correction prior to general
from the vagina, and recurrent urinary tract infection. Traumatic ure-
n paai aq ae uisa Aruun i iaeu aas) eisaisaue
throrectal and vaginorectal fistulas can occur after trauma, including
allow stabilization, which depending on the status of the patient, may
urethral catheterization. Diagnosis is made via a positive contrast
consist of cystocentesis, cystostomy tube (see Chapter 37), or urethral
retrograde urethrogram.
catheterization.
Treatment is by identification and ligation of the fistula followed
by removal of the tract. If possible, the tract should be visualized and
Healing
catheterized to aid dissection. If perforation of the rectum occurs
during urethral catheterization, conservative treatment with an in-
 Superficial mucosal defects heal rapidly in about seven days with an
dwelling urethral catheter and antibiotic cover can be a successful
initial urothelial proliferation during the lag phase although the
management regime.
deeper layers and corpus spongiosum can take three to five weeks to
438
Lrethra
Chapter
88
Antibiotics
 Another consideration prior to surgery is the presence of urinary tract
infection (UTI). Urine samples (preferably obtained via cystocentesis)
should be submitted for routine analysis and culture prior to any
elective surgery and any infection pretreated with an appropriate anti-
biotic for two to four weeks. To ensure the UTI has resolved, a cysto-
centesis culture should be repeated a week after antibiotic treatment
has finished. Often urethral surgery is not elective If the urine has not
been cultured prior to surgery a sample should be obtained and sub-
mitted at surgery to determine if postoperative antibiotics are required.
Urethral surgery is considered 'clean-contaminated’ so perioperative
antibiotics are indicated. The antibiotic chosen should be effective
against the usual feline UTls, which are often fecal contaminants, such
as Escherichia coli, Streptococcus spp, Staphylococcus spp. and Entero-
bacter faecalis. First-line antibiotics that are often recommended
include amoxicillin and trimethoprim/sulfonamide.
 In cases of urinary diversion with a cystostomy or urethral catheter,
the cat should not be placed on antibiotics whilst the catheter is in
Figure 38-10 A urethral catheter is maintained comfortably in this cat
situ (unless there is a separate nidus of infection or risk of sepsis) and
with a urethral rupture with the use of a spiral extension set attached to 
the tip of the catheter should be cultured after removal. At this stage
the tail.
any UTI can be treated appropriately without the risk of favoring
resistant microbes.
healing and results in fbrosis and contracture leading to stricture
formation. If the urethra is more severely damaged, regeneration is
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
possible providing a strip of urothelium one-third of the diameter
remains.* In cases with complete urethral transection, the severed
an eauuad aul st Aains ienuan paoad Auana isou au
mucosa retracts due to muscular contraction of the edges, and peri-
throstomy. Other urethral surgical procedures, including more proxi-
urethral tissues can cover the urothelium, resulting in fbrous tissue
mal urethrostomies, resection anastomosis, and primary repair, are
 performed less frequently.
either in the form of a urethral catheter or a cystostomy tube. The
 In cats, the preferred place for a urethrostomy is at the perineum,
catheter can be maintained up to three weeks if required. Polyvinyl or
which involves suturing the wider postprostatic pelvic urethra to the
silicon catheters are preferred to polypropylene catheters, which have
skin or preputial mucosa. Prepubic (also sometimes termed antepu-
been shown to cause a microscopically detectable urethritis, which
bic), transpubic or subpubic urethrostomy are salvage procedures.
may be severe.3 Both cystostomy and urethral catheters should be
connected to closed collection urine systems to avoid nosocomial
Perineal urethrostomy
infections. In the rare cat that does not tolerate a closed collection
system the catheters can be bunged and emptied every four to six
 Perineal urethrostomy is performed for rare cases of FLUTD in which
hours via the bung, using an aseptic technique The manipulation of
the obstructed calculi cannot be moved or in recurrent severe cases of
the perineal area this requires is often resented more than the closed
 obstructive FLUTD that have had appropriate medical treatment.
collection urine bag. An alternative is to attach the urethral catheter
Other indications for perineal urethrostomy include stricture Or
to a curly giving set (Fig. 38-10). This is then wrapped around the tail
 trauma of the penile urethra (often post catheterization) or, uncom-
before being connected to the urine collction bag, which prevents
monly, for neoplasia in this region. As cats with LUTD may have
any pressure being applied to the perineum on movement After
trauma after repeated catheterization it is advisable to perform a ret-
primary repair or resection and anastomosis, a positive contrast
rograde urethrogram and ensure the lesion is caudal to the bulboure-
urethrogram at seven days is indicated to evaluate the integrity of
thral glands prior to surgery. The rationale of the surgery is to remove
the repair.
 the narrow penile urethra and create a stoma in the wider postpros-
tatic/pelvic urethra.
Handling and suture material
 In the modifed perineal urethrostomy the urethral mucosa is
sutured to the preputial mucosa. This technique was first described by
The urothelium is delicate and tissue handling should be gentle,
Christensen in 19643? and more recently modifed slightly by Yeh &
with the use of stay sutures where possible for manipulation and
Chin in 2000.40 In the author's experience, it results in less postopera-
non-traumatic DeBakey forceps. The urethra bleeds readily, though
tive discomfort and a better cosmetic appearance (Fig. 38-1l). This
this can usually be controlled with gentle pressure from swabs and
technique may also decrease UTls as the mucosal barrier is preserved.
cold saline.
As the anastomosis site is within the subcutaneous tissue, any self-
 Due to the rapidity of healing of the mucosa it is only necessary to
traumatization of the wound is not as damaging as with the tradi-
use a monoflament suture material that retains tensile strength for 
tional technique and thus the cats can be safely discharged once they
two to three weeks. This is preferable so rapid resorption of the suture
are urinating well. The traditional technique was described by Wilson
material occurs and avoids the suture material forming a calculytic
& Harris in 19714l and it differs in that the urethral mucosa is sutured
nidus. Suitable suture materials include polydiaxanone glycomer 631,
directly to the skin (Box 38-2).
polyglycolic acid, polyglyconate and poliglecaprone (for smaller
 Postoperative care includes the use of shredded paper rather than
defects). A suitable sized suture for most urethral surgery is 1.0-1.5 M.
cat litter and a buster collar that should be left in place until the stoma
439
Section
151
The Abdomen
A
B
C
D
Figure 38-11 Modified perineal urethrostomy in a six-year-male neutered domestic short-haired cat. (A) Prepuce inverted after removal of penile
urethra. (B) Preputial mucosa anastomosed to pelvic urethra. (C) Immediate postoperative appearance of modified perineal urethrostomy. (D) Four
months post modified perineal urethrostomy surgery
 Box 38-2 Perineal urethrostomy
 The cat is positioned in sternal recumbency with the hind limbs
muscles (these can be ligated or transected by using electrosurgery).
 extended over the edge of the table and the tail tied over the body.
Transect the muscles near the ischium to avoid damaging the
The perineum and caudal proximal hind limbs are clipped and 
 branches of the pudendal nerves and to decrease hemorrhage.
 aseptically prepared. A purse-string suture is placed in the anus,
 So to avoid damaging these structures dissection in this area 
 carefully avoiding the anal sacs. A urinary catheter is placed if possible 
 should be maintained close to the urethra.
 to aid manipulation of the penis.
 Expose the bulbourethral glands (paired pea-like structures on the 
dorsal aspect of the urethra) proximal and cranial to the severed 
 Modified technique using preputial mucosa3940
muscles. Elevate and remove the retractor penis muscle to the level 
A triangular-shaped section of skin is removed from between the anus
 of the bulbourethral glands. Make a longitudinal incision into the 
 and prepuce (if the cat is entire a castration is performed at this stage)
urethra using a number 11 blade, which is aided by the placement
(Fig. 38-12A). Identify the penis and dissect it free from the connective 
 of a urethral catheter, and extend the incision with scissors to the 
au re sad aun wouj esonu lendad aul areedas Anjaey anss
bulbourethral glands. Curve the incision around the ventral wall of 
fornix using iris scissors or a number 11 blade (Fig. 38-12B). The fornix
the urethra and resect the distal half of the penile urethra. The 
is identified by placing a hemostat into the prepuce. Pull the penis out 
diameter of the urethra at this point should be such that the boxlock
of the prepuce leaving a tube of preputial mucosa (Hg. 38-12C)
of a pair of Kelly hemostat forceps can pass through.
Reflect the penis dorsolaterally and dissect the subcutaneous tissue
 Incise the ventral wall of the preputial tube in order to spatulate
ventrally and laterally, towards the ischial arch. Sever the ventr al penile
the mucosa (Fg. 38-12D). Suture the dorsal aspect of the preputial
ligament. Transect the ischiocavernosus muscles and ischiourethralis
mucosa to the dorsal edge of the incised penile urethral mucosa and 
440
Lrethra
Chapter
88
Box 38-2 Continued
anastomose the preputial mucosa to the pelvic urethra using 4/0 or
Make a longitudinal incision into the urethra using a number
1.5 M monofilament suture material (Fig. 38-12E). Use simple
 11 blade, which is aided by the placement of a urethral catheter,
interrupted sutures or two simple continuous sutures. Close the 
and extend the incision with iris scissors. Extend the incision to 
subcutaneous tissues routinely and place skin sutures or an intradermal 
approximately 1 cm beyond the bulbourethral glands. The diameter
suture to close the wound (Fg. 38-12F).
of the urethra at this point should be such that the boxlock of a pair 
of Kelly hemostat forceps will pass through (Fig. 38-13).
Traditional Wilson and Harris technique41
Suture the urethral mucosa to skin with 4/0 1.5 M monofilament 
'suad pue andad unons au pune uosu! ledia ue aen
saanins snonuiuon aldwis lo paidnaui aldwis ag uen asaut raanins
leaving at least 1 cm of skin between the anus and the proximal extent 
 Place the most proximal sutures first at a 45° angle. Suture the 
 of the incision. Follow the above technique to dissect the urethra to
 proximal two-thirds of the urethra to the skin and resect the distal
the level of the bulbourethral glands.
third (Fig. 38-14).
?
D
A
B
（+)
F
au woy euiaun aluad aut jo uoassia () andaid aul laui ol paeaala Auah pue rey aui yonoui uoassp punig aa paleaaan s! euiain
 prepuce, leaving a tube of preputial mucosa. (D) Resection of the distal penile urethra and spatulation of the dorsal aspect of the urethra to
the level of the bulbourethral glands and of the ventral aspect of the preputial tube in order to increase the diameter of the anastomosis.
(E} Urethropreputial anastomosis that will be positioned in the subcutaneous tissue. (F) Postoperative appearance.
has healed. Non-absorbable sutures should be removed around 14
informed that the cat has had surgery (give the owner discharge
days postoperatively; this usually requires sedation.
instructions with the technique clearly described) to avoid the unfor-
A urethral catheter should be avoided as it may result in more
tunate scenario of a veterinary surgeon attempting to prolapse the
stricture formation.
 penis after this surgery.
 In the case of the modified perineal urethrostomy, the long-term
 If a UTI has been diagnosed, appropriate antibiotics should be used
cosmetic result is similar to a normal cat (Fig. 38-llC). The owner
for two to four weeks post surgery. A cystocentesis culture is indicated a
should be advised that all future veterinary surgeons should be
week after finishing the antibiotics to ensure the infection has resolved.
441
Section
151
The Abdomen
A
A
B
Figure 38-13 Traditional perineal urethrostomy. (A} Urethra at the
Figure 38-14 (A) Stricture six months after a traditional perineal
resection site proximal to the level of the bulbourethral glands; it should 
urethrostomy in a six-year-old domestic short-haired cat. (B) Two days
be possible to gently insert the boxlock of a small pair of hemostats.
after revision of the perineal urethrostomy; sufficient urethra was
(B) Immediate postoperative appearance after traditional perineal 
available to create a washboard.
urethrostomy.
Complications after perineal urethrostomy
 generally about a 25-50% incidence of UTI after traditional perineal
urethrostomy.12. 4.45
A number of complications are reported post perineal urethrostomy
and these should be discussed with the owner prior to surgery.
Stricture formation
 This usually results from the stoma being positioned in the proximal
Urinary tract infection
penile rather than distal postprostatic pelvic urethra; this is due to
A number of factors may contribute to an increased incidence of UTI
inadequate mobilization of the penile urethra, often with failure to
 post perineal urethrostomy. The anatomical alteration of the urethral
transect the ischiocavernosus and ischiourethralis muscles. Other
meatus decreases the distance between the anus and the urethral
causes of stricture include: tension on the mucosa and skin; postop-
 stoma and compromises the urethral mucosal barrier The underlying
erative subcutaneous urine leakage and subsequent granulation tissue
uropathy present may also increase the risk of infection. Many cats
formation; traumatization of the stoma; and the use of indwelling
have reduced striated urethral sphincter function post surgery, which
urethral catheters post surgery.46
decreases urethral closure pressures, although this can be temporary. 16
 In cases of stricture formation, the perineal urethrostomy should be
This decrease in urethral pressure occurs whether minimal sharp or
revised (Fig. 38-14). An elliptical incision is used to remove the stric-
extensive blunt ventral pelvic dissection is used,42 reinforcing the
tured stoma and the urethra is further mobilized by careful dissection,
importance of avoiding trauma dorsal to the urethra during the
which is primarily ventral. The dorsal urethra is then incised in order
surgery.43 In cats that maintained low urethral pressures post surgery.
to create a new stoma. The surgeon should be prepared to perform a
the infection rate was over 50% compared to less than 20% in cats
transpubic/subpubic urethrostomy if required, though revision sur-
where the urethral pressures returned to the normal ranges.44 There is
geries are usually successful.47
442
Lrethra
Chapter
88
Postoperative urine leakage
Postoperative urine leakage into the subcutaneous tissue can result
from poor skin-mucosal apposition, excessive tension at the surgical
site due to inadequate ventral dissection, or pre-existing mucosal
damage. Clinical signs include severe bruising and sensitivity of the
perineal area and hind limbs and marked pain during and after
urination. The urine extravasation can result in excessive granulation
tissue at the stoma site with risk of stricture, or in severe cases, dehis-
cence of the stoma and sloughing of the surrounding skin. In severe
cases urinary diversion with a cystostomy tube may be warranted
performed in the frst surgery, the perineal urethrostomy should be
revised.
 The author has seen two cats with damaged, friable urethral tissue
develop urine leakage in the subcutaneous tissue after modified peri-
neal urethrostomy. This urine leakage resolved after an indwelling
Foley urethral catheter was used for three days and no further com-
 plications were reported.
Hemorrhage
A
Hemorrhage during the surgery results from sectioning of the ischio-
cavernosus muscles or when the cavernosus tissue is cut on the inci
sion into the urethra. This can usually be controlled with pressure
and abates as the mucosa is sutured. Postoperative hemorrhage is
usually mild unless there is traumatization of the wound. Any clots
that appear to occlude the stoma should be gently removed under
sedation.
Urinary incontinence
usually temporary.1 This may be due to excessive dorsal dissection
of the pelvic plexus and pudendal nerve during the surgery or due
to bladder damage during an obstructive episode. Rectal prolapse,
perineal hernia, and urethrorectal fistulas are rarely reported
complications. 15.48
Although the list of potential complications following perineal ure-
throstomies is extensive, the majority of cats have a good quality of
life postoperatively and owners who are satisfied with the tech-
nique.18.21 if performed by a competent surgeon the incidence of com-
B
 plications is generally low.
Figure 38-15 (A) Immediate postoperative appearance of prepubic
Urethrostomy in a six-year-old male neutered cat. (B) Two months
 Prepubic urethrostomy
 postoper ative appearance.
The prepubic urethrostomy is a salvage procedure used mainly in cats
after urethral trauma/stricture or failed perineal urethrostomy (Fig.
38-15). In the prepubic urethrostomy (Box 38-3) the urethra is
exposed through the abdominal wall cranial to the pubis. It is impor-
tant to ensure that the urethra is not kinked or twisted during the
Transpelvic urethrostomy
surgery and to maintain as much urethral length as possible to avoid
incontinence.
The transpelvic urethrostomy uses the postprostatic pelvic urethra,
The improved continence seen when longer lengths of urethra are
which is exteriorized caudally after removing a section of the ischial
-and aut jo uoeypou sqndsuen/siqndqns au o pal sey pauieial
bone (Box 38-4).51
pubic urethrostomy, where the urethral stoma is positioned at the
 In a series of 19 male cats that underwent transpelvic urethrostomy
level of the postprostatic pelvic urethra, either by removing a section 
there was one case of temporary urinary incontinence and one case
 of the ischial bone or performing a pubic osteotomy.
of stricture although the presence of UTI was not assessed for all cases
Results after prepubic urethrostomy are unpredictable with a
and three cats had peristomal or leg urine staining.51
number of complications seen, including urinary incontinence, sub-
 The subpubic urethrostomy was devised as a solution for a failed
cutaneous leakage of urine stricture of the urethrostomy, recurrent
 perineal urethrostomy and designed so that the urethrostomy is suf
UTIs, and urine-scald dermatitis. In two case series of 32 and 16 cats
ficiently caudal to avoid the inguinal fat pads and the increased length
that underwent prepubic urethrostomy, around one-third underwent
avoids incontinence In this technique, the postprostatic urethra is
os'suesuos ieis io anuauuosui areun o anp eiseuina
visualized by a pubic osteotomy and after transection cranial to the
and owner satisfaction in the remaining cats was not high.
stricture, tunneled into a subpubic subcutaneous position where the
443
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 38-3 Prepubic urethrostomy
Box 38-5 Urethral resection and anastomosis
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency and clipped and aseptically
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and a midline celiotomy
 prepared for a caudal celiotomy.
performed.
A ventral celiotomy is made from the umbilicus to the pubis.
Intrapelvic damage requires either a pubic symphysiotomy or 
 Using blunt dissection the urethra is mobilized (using as little
bilateral pubic and ischial osteotomies, which create a pubic flap.
ped peisip iso aui eues sd aui se et se (aissod se uoas
that is replaced after the repair. Pubic symphysiotomy usually 
 of the healthy urethra is ligated and the urethra transected just
provides adequate exposure (2-3 cm) with the use of self-retaining 
canial to the ligature. A urinary catheter is placed. The urethra is
retractors such as pediatric Finochietto rib retractors or Gelpi
exteriorized through the caudal celiotomy incision using stay sutures 
retractors and is a simple procedure with low morbidity (Fg. 38-17).
 Or umbilical tape for manipulation, ensuring the urethra is not kinked
After exposure of the damaged urethra, the urethral ends require 
 as it passes through the linea alba.
identification. In cases with marked trauma where this may be
 A partial thickness suture is placed through the urethra as it exits
the linea alba. This is to secure the urethra in place and protect the 
after a limited cystostomy. The urethral ends should be debrided for
urethral stoma.
at least 1-2 mm to expose the mucosa but debridement may need 
The celiotomy is closed routinely (see Chapter 25). The end of the
to be more extensive and should continue until the tissue appears 
Jo laawei aul asea ui ot buunins oi loud pateinieds s! euaan 
viable. Incising the urethral ends at an angle increases the diameter
the stoma (Fig. 38-16). The urethral mucosa is sutured to the skin
of the anastomosis. The urethra is repaired using simple interrupted 
 with 1.5-1 M monofilament suture material using either a simple
or continuous monofilament full thickness sutures over a urethral
interrupted or simple continuous suture pattern. The subcutaneous 
catheter, being careful to appose mucosa to mucosa. It is important 
tissue and skin is closed in a routine manner.
to avoid tension on the anastomosis and thus the urethra should 
be mobilized if necessary. If there is concern about the repair, a
 snpan lo lore anigo jeusaiui aul se yans dell apsnu buoddns
abdominis can be used to augment the repair.
A urethral catheter or cystostomy tube should be used for urinary
diversion for five to seven days postoperatively after resection
anastomosis to decrease stricture formation.53
Figure 38-16 Diagram of a prepubic urethrostomy.
 Box 38-4 Transpelvic urethrostomy
 The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency. The ventral abdomen and 
 pelvis is clipped from the umbilicus to the perineum and aseptically
prepared.
 An elliptical incision is made around the scrotum and prepuce and
continued up to the cranial border of the pubis. If the cat is an entire 
Figure 38-17 Pelvic symphysiotomy has been performed in this cat to
 male a routine castration should be performed at this stage.
allow access to the pelvic urethra.
 The penis is undermined ventrally and the caudal and ventral
 pubis exposed by blunt dissection.
stoma is made The pubic flap is then repositioned. This technique
 The adductor, gracilis and external obturator muscles are elevated
 bilaterally to expose a 1.2-1.5 cm by 1.4-1.6 cm section of the
was reported with success in a case report.52
 ventral pubis. This section of the pubis is removed with rongeurs to
expose the postprostatic urethra.
Urethral resection/anastomosis
 The urethra is transected at the level of the bulbourethral glands
 and a urinary catheter placed (this can be placed at the start of the
Urethral resection and anastomosis (Box 38-5) is indicated for cases
 procedure if preferred via a cystostomy). The ventral wall of the 
of trauma, stricture, and rarely for neoplasia.
urethra is incised to create a urethrotomy which is 10-12 mm long 
 In a canine study, there were no significant differences in urethral
 and the urethral mucosa everted and sutured to the skin to create a
healing after urethral resection and anastomosis whether urine diver-
new stoma. The skin incision around the stoma site is closed 
sion was performed via a urethrostomy catheter, cystostomy catheter,
routinely.
decreased the inflammation following urethral injury.55 After removal
444
Urethra
Chapter
88
A
B
Figure 38-18 (A) Ruptured postprostatic pelvic urethra in a four-year-old male (neutered) domestic short-haired cat following a road traffic accident.
(B} Six week postoperative check after primary repair. (Courtesy of Sue Gregory)
 of the catheter, the tip should be submitted for bacterial culture and
analgesia for many of the techniques described. Diuresis is advisable
any UTIs treated according to the results.
to fush the urinary tract and dilute macroscopic hemorrhage. Urina-
tion should be carefully monitored and any dysuria and stranguria
noted. If a urinary catheter is in place it should be emptied using an
Primary repair
aseptic technique and the volume of urine recorded. It is preferable
Primary repair of the urethra (Fig. 38-18) is possible in some cases of
not to give antibiotics whilst a urinary catheter is in place as this may
urethral rupture or partial rupture though it is challenging due to the
encourage bacterial resistance. Instead, the end of the catheter should
small size of the feline urethra, and its benefit over alignment and
 be cultured after removal and an appropriate course of antibiotics
secondary healing with a urethral catheter is uncertain.24 Urinary
 prescribed depending on the culture results. As a common complica-
diversion should be used after primary repair for five to 2l days
tion with urethral catheters and cystostomy catheters is accidental
depending on the extent of the defect and the quality of the repair.20
dislodgement, the catheters should be securely attached to the cat and
Repeat positive contrast urethrography can be used at weekly intervals
a buster collar used if necessary.
to assess the integrity ofthe repair. The most serious complication that
 After perineal, transpubic, and prepubic urethrostomies, shredded
is seen after primary repair is stricture formation. Strictures will cause
paper shouldbe used in the litter tray rather than cat litter and a buster
clinical signs in dogs once they occlude over 60% of the urethral
 collar should be used until the stoma has healed. The stoma should
lumen.5s Due to the decreased luminal wall ratio in the cat, dysuria
be inspected daily and any blood clots that could cause obstruction
is likely to be seen with less severe strictures. Fascia lata autografts
gently dislodged with a moist sterile cotton bud.
[eain ledan on siop u aleiuaadxa Ayssanns pasn uaaq aay
defects56 and in human surgery acellular matrix and buccal and
bladder mucosal grafts are used. There are no reports of grafts being
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
used in the cat.
Urethral stents
Complications which may occur after urethral surgery include urine
leakage from the surgical site, strictures, incontinence, infection, and
Urethral stents have been used in cases of neoplastic obstruction and
urethrocutaneous fistulas.
Postoperative urine leakage into the subcutaneous tissue or
balloon-expandable nitinol or platinol stents. In the case reports of
abdomen can result from poor skin-mucosal or mucosal-mucosal
neoplastic obstruction (urothelial carcinoma) the stents were pallia-
apposition, excessive tension at the surgical site, or pre-existing
tive with one and two month survival times, respectively30.31 In the
mucosal damage. Clinical signs may include severe bruising and sen-
inflammatory case report the stricture was situated in the postprostatic
pue suunp ued payieu 'squll puy pue zaie ieauad aujo Aias
after urination, or development of a uroabdomen. The urine extrava-
stent under fluoroscopic guidance with a seven month follow up.5?
sation can result in excessive granulation tissue at a stoma site with
Complications seen in dogs after stent placement include luminal
risk of stricture or, in severe cases, dehiscence ofthe stoma and slough-
re-stenosis by epithelial hyperplasia, re-obstruction due to mucosal
ing of the surrounding skin. In severe cases, urinary diversion with a
swelling or blood clots, and urinary incontinence.5s,.5? There is little
cystostomy tube may be warranted whilst the stoma heals. Stricture
information on urethral stents in cats.
formation results from excessive tension on an anastomosis, pre-
existing mucosal damage, failure to appose mucosa to mucosa, or
poor surgical technique. Chronic strictures which cause obstruction
may require revision or stenting.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Urinary incontinence occurs from excessive dorsal dissection
around the urethra or too short a length of urethra being retained.
Postoperative urination often causes discomfort due to the exposure
Most cases due to dissection are temporary and resolve within a matter
of tissues to acidic urine and analgesia, usually in the form of opiates.
of days. The incidence of UTI after urethral surgery in cats is unclear
can ease this pain. Epidural injections of local anesthetics
plus
or minus preservative-free morphine can also produce excellent
of FLUTD which may mask a UTI. In male cats, decreasing the length
445
Section
5
The Abdomen
of the urethra and creating proximal stomas will compromise the
The most commonly performed urethral surgery is the perineal
urethral defense mechanisms and is likely to result in an increased
urethrostomy. Though a number of complications are reported fol-
incidence of UTIis. It is sensible to routinely monitor cats that have
lowing this surgery, the majority of cats have a good quality of life
undergone urethrostomy and submit urine cultures yearly even if
asymptomatic.
result.21,24
REFERENCES
1. Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WF.
14. Gerber B, Eichenberger S, Reusch CE.
procedure for management of traumatic
Morphometry of the female feline
Guarded long-term prognosis in male cats
urethral rupture in a cat. J Feline Med 
urethra. J Urol 1983;129:190-2.
with urethral obstruction. ↓ Feline Med
Surg 2011;13:768-71.
2.
 Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WF.
Surg 2008;10:16-23.
27.
Takagi S, Kadosawa T, Ishiguro T, et al.
Morphometry of the male feline pelvic
15. Gregory CR, Vasseur PB. Long term
Urethral transitional cell carcinoma in a
urethra. J Urol 1983;129:186-9.
xamination of cats with perineal
cat. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:504-6.
3.
.Wang B, Bhadra N, Grill WM. Functional 
urethrostomy. Vet Surg 1983;12:210-12.
28.
Swalec KM, Smeak DD, Baker AL.
 anatomy of the male feline urethra:
16. Gregory CR, Holliday TA, Vasseur PB.
Urethral leiomyoma in a cat. J Am Vet
morphological and physiological
 et al. Electromyographic and urethral
Med Assoc 1989;195(7):961-2.
correlations. J Urol 1999;161:654-9.
pressure proflometry: Assessment of
29.
Caney SMA, Holt PE, Day Ml, et al.
4.
Herron MA. The effect of prepubertal
urethral function before and after perineal
Prostatic carcinoma in two cats. J Small
castration on the penile urethra of the cat.
urethrostomy in cats. Am J Vet Res
Anim Pract 1998;39:140-3.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1972;160:208-11.
1984;45:2062-5.
30.
Wilson HM, Chun R, Larson VS, et al.
5.
. Sackman JE, Sims MH. Use of fne-wire
17. Osborne CA, Caywood DD, Johnston GR,
Clinical signs, treatments, and outcome
electrodes for electromyographic
et al. Perineal urethrostomy versus dietary
in cats with transitional cell carcinoma
evaluation of the external urethral
 management in prevention of recurrent 
of the urinary bladder: 20 cases
sphincter during urethral pressure
lower urinary tract disease. J Small Anim
[1990-2004). 1 Am Vet Med Assoc
proflometry in male cats. Am J Vet Res
Pract 1991;32:296-305.
2007;231:101-6.
1991;52:314-16.
18.
Bass M, Howard J, Gerber B, Messmer M.
31.
Newman RG, Mehler Sl, Kitchell BE, Beal
Gregory CR, willits NH.
Retrospective study of indications for and
MW. Use of a balloon-expandable
Electromyographic and urethral
outcome of perineal urethrostomy in cats.
metallic stent to relieve malignant
 pressure evaluations: assessment
J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:227-31.
wethral obstruction in a cat. J Am Vet
of urethral function in female and
19. Osborne CA, Caywood DD, Johnston GR,
Med Ass0c 2009;234:236-9.
ovariohysterectomized female cats. Am ↓
et al. Feline perineal urethrostomy: a
32.
Christensen Nl, Culvenor I, Langova V.
Vet Res 1986;47:1472-5.
 potential cause of feline lower urinary
Fluoroscopic stent placement for the relief
7.
 Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Osborne CA.
tract disease. Vet Clin North Am Small
of malignant urethral obstruction in a cat.
Urethrography and cystography in cats.
Anim Pract 1996;26:535-49.
Aust Vet J 2010;88:478-82.
Part 1. Techniques, normal radiographic
20.
 Anderson RB, Aronson LR, Drobatz KJ.
33.1
Van den Broek AHM, Else RW, Hunter
anatomy, and artefacts. Compend Contin
Atilla A. Prognostic factors for successful
MS. Atresia ani and urethrorectal fstula
Educ Pract Vet 1982;4:823-35.
outcome following urethral rupture in
in a kitten. J Small Anim Pract 1988;29:
8.
. Saevic BK, Trangerud C, Ottesen N, et al.
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
91-4.
Causes of lower urinary tract disease
2006;42:136-46.
34.
Holt PE, Gibbs C. Congenital urinary
in Norwegian cats. I Feline Med Surg
21.
 Corgozinho KB, de Souza Hl, Pereira AN.
incontinence in cats: a review of 19 cases.
2011;13:410-17.
et al. Catheter-induced urethral trauma in
Vet Rec 1992:130:437-42.
9.
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Goyal SM, et al.
cats with urethral obstruction. J Feline
35.
Holt PE. Surgical management of
 Clinical evaluation of cats with lower
Med Surg 2007;9:481-6.
congenital urethral sphincter mechanism
urinary tract disease. I Am Vet Med Assoc
22.
 Holt PE. Hindlimb skin loss associated
incompetence in eight female cats and a
1991;199:211-16
with urethral rupture in two cats. J Small
bitch. Vet Surg 1993;22:98-104.
10.
.Gerber B, Boretti FS, Kley S, et al.
Anim Pract 1989;30:406-9.
86.
 McRoberts JW, Ragde H. The severed
Evaluation of clinical signs and causes of
23. Clarke BS, Findji L. Bilateral caudal
anine posterior urethra: a study of
Jower urinary tract disease in European 
superficial epigastric skin flap and
two distinct methods of repair. J Uro]
cats. J Small Anim Pract 2005;46:571-7.
 perineal urethrostomy for wound
1970;104:724-9.
11.
 Eggertsdottir AV, Lund HS, Krontveit R.
reconstruction secondary to traumatic
37.
Weaver RG, Schulte IW. Experimental and
Sorum H. Bacteriuria in cats with feline
urethral rupture in a cat. Vet Comp
clinical studies of urethral regeneration.
lower urinary tract disease: a clinical study
Orthop Traumatol 2011;24:142-5.
Surg Gynecol Obstet 1962:115:729-36.
of 134 cases in Norway. I Feline Med Surg
24. Meige F, Sarrau S, Autefage A.
38.
Lees GE, Osborne CA, Stevens JB,
2007;9:458-65.
Management of traumatic urethral rupture
Ward GE. Adverse effects caused by
12. Segev G, Livne H, Ranen E, Lavy E.
 in 11 cats using primary alignment with a
polypropylene and polyvinyl feline
 Urethral obstruction in cats: predisposing
urethral catheter. Veterinary Comparative
urinary catheters. Am J Vet Res
factors, clinical, clinicopathological 
 Orthopaedics and Traumatology
1980;41(11):1836-40.
characteristics and prognosis. J Feline Med
2008;21:76-84.
89.
 Christensen NR. Preputial urethrostomy
Surg 2011;13:101-8.
25. Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ.
in the male cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
13.
Lekcharoensuk C, Osborne CA, Lulich JP.
Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases
1964;145:903-8.
Evaluation of trends in frequency of
[1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
40.
 Yeh LH, Chin SC. Modifed perineal
urethrostomy for treatment of urethral
1998;34:315-24.
urethrostomy using preputial mucosa in
 obstruction in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
26.
Halfacree Zl, Tivers MS, Brockman DJ.
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216(7):
2002;221[(4):502-5.
Vaginourethroplasty as a salvage
1092-5.
446
Lrethra
Chapter
88
41. Wilson GP, Harrison JW. Perineal
male cats. J Am Anim Hosp 1981:17:
 comparison of three techniques. Vet Surg
urethrostomy in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
427-33.
1987:16:175-82
1971;159:1789-93.
47. Phillips H, Holt DE. Surgical revision 
54. Cooley Al, Waldron DR, Smith MM, et al.
42. Sackman JE, Sims MH, Krahwinkel DJ.
 of the urethal stoma following perineal
The effects of indwelling transurethral
 Urodynamic evaluation of lower urinary
urethrostomy in 11 cats [1998-2004].
catheterization and tube cystostomy on 
tract function in cats after perineal
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42:218-22.
urethral anastomoses in dogs. J Am Anim
urethrostomy with minimal and extensive
48.
Welches CS, Scavelli TD, Aronsohn MG.
Hosp Assoc 1999;35:341-7.
dissection. Vet Surg 1991;20:55-60.
 Matthiesen DT. Perineal hernia in the cat:
 55. Singh M, Blandy JP. The pathology of
43. Gregory CR, Vasseur PB.
a retrospective study of 40 cases. J Am
urethral stricture. J Urol 1976;115:
 Electromyographic and urethral pressure
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992;28:431-8.
673-6.
 proflometry: long-term assessment
49. Mendham JH. A description and
 56. Atalan G, Cihan M, Sozmen M, Ozaydin
of urethral function after perineal
 waluation of antepubic urethrostomy in 
I. Repair of urethral defects using fascia
urethrostomy in cats. Am J Vet Res
the male cat. J Small Anim Pract 1970;11:
lata autografts in dogs. Vet Surg 2005;34:
1984;45:131 8-21.
709-21.
514-18.
44. Griffon DW, Gregory CR, Kitchell RL.
 50. Baines SJ, Rennie S, White RS. Prepubic
57.
. Choi R, Lee S, Hyun C. Urethral stenting
 Preservation of striated-muscle urethral
urethrostomy: A long-term study in 16
in a cat with refractory obstructive feline
sphincter function with use of a surgical
cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:107-14.
lower urinary tract disease. J Vet Med Sci
 technique for perineal urethrostomy in
 Bernarde A, Viguier E. Transpelvic
2009;71(9):1255-9.
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989;194(8):
urethrostomy in 1l cats using an ischial
58.
.Weisse C, Berent A, Todd K, et al.
1057-60.
 ostectomy. Vet Surg. 2004;33:246-52.
Evaluation of palliative stenting for
45. Griffon Dw, Gregory CR. Prevalence of
52.
 Ellison GW, Lewis DBF. Subpubic
management of malignant urethral
 bacterial urinary tract infection affer
 urethrostomy to salvage a failed perineal
 obstructions in dogs. J Am Vet Med AssoC
 perineal urethrostomy in cats. J Am Vet
urethrostomy in a cat. Comp Cont Educ
2006;229:226-34.
Med Assoc 1992;200:681-4.
Pract Vet 1989;11:946-51.
59. Latal D, Mraz J, Zerhau P, et al. Nitinol 
46. Smith CW, Schiller AG, Smith AR, et al.
53.
Layton CE, Ferguson HR, Cook JE, Guffy
urethral stents: long-term results in dogs.
Effects of indwelling urinary catheters in
 MM. Intrapelvic urethral anastomosis. A
Urol Res 1994;22:295-300.
447
39]
Chapter
Male genital tract
E.J. Friend
Conditions of the male feline genital tract are rare, but include crypt-
replaced further caudally by increasing amounts of striated muscle.2
orchidism and neoplasia of the testicles, intersex abnormalities of the
This has signifcance when pharmacologic control of urethral relaxa-
penis, and rare reports of neoplasia of the testes. Urethral conditions
by contrast are very common in the cat and these are covered in detail
gop aul un ueul pazieen Asea aio si ieu (maua lia
in Chapter 38.
because of the narrow urethral lumen.
 The bulbourethral glands are paired, pea-size pale yellow glands
situated dorsolateral to the postprostatic urethra (Fig. 39-2). Paired
ischiocavernosus/ischiourethralis muscles are present just distal to
SURGICAL ANATOMY
these glands and are highly vascular. Running along the dorsal surface
of the penis at this level is the retractor penis muscle (Fig. 39-3), which
The male genital tract of the cat is comprised of similar components
is sometimes firmly attached to the penis, and on the ventral surface
to the canine genital tract,' but with some specific differences. The
there is the ventral penile ligament (Fig. 39-4).
scrotum is covered with hair and situated just ventral to the anus, and
the penis is directed caudally and the preputial orifce is positioned
more dorsally than it is in the dog. The prepuce is comparatively short,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
and with a narrow preputial orifice that makes extrusion of the penis
very diffcult in the conscious cat.
 The urethral orifce is small and present on the tapered tip of the
Clinical signs of genital tract disorders in the male cat commonly
glans. It can become obscured in some clinical situations that cause
include dysuria and/or hematuria, or they are related to testosterone
inflammation (such as obstructive disorders associated with feline
 and include inappropriate urination and malodorous urine Investiga-
lower urinary tract disease). The entire adult cat has numerous short
tions include taking a complete history from the owner; a thorough
horny spines on the glans part of the penis that are often noted but 
have no clinical significance (Fig. 39-1).
The vas deferens from each testis courses caudally and ventrally after
leaving the scrotum and enters the abdominal cavity via the inguinal
ring on the ipsilateral side. Once inside the abdomen, the vas loops
around and enters the urethra in the region of the prostate.
In the cat, there is a short length (3-5 cm) of preprostatic urethra.2
The prostatic urethra is 1.5-1.9 cm in length; the postprostatic urethra
Jo jed (1saguol pue) isapim aul st siqnd iepnes aul jo uoigai aul ul
the feline male urethra.
As it passes further caudally and courses over the end of the pubis.
the urethra bends ventrally, before leveling off at the tip of the penis.
This bend means that catheterization is best performed while pulling
the penis gently caudally and dorsally, which tends to straighten the
urethra. The distal urethra is the narrowest part and is therefore a
common site for obstruction.
The preprostatic urethral wall contains three layers of smooth
Figure 39-1 Penis extruded from the prepuce demonstrating horny
aq   d a un res a  a
spines of the intact male cat.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00039-1
449
Section
|51
The Abdomen
Figure 39-2 Dissection of the urethra during perineal urethrostomy.
Figure 39-4 Penis reflected dorsally to expose the ventral penile
The paired bulbourethral glands are visible just proximal to the incised
ligament (arrow).
ischiocavernosus muscles.
 Figure 39-3 Retractor penis muscle identified (arrow) during perineal
urethrostomy dissection.
Figure 39-5 Testicles removed from a cryptorchid cat. The right testicle
in the picture was inguinal; it is small and poorly developed. If there is 
any doubt it should be submitted for histopathologic evaluation for
physical examination; hormone assay after gonadotrophin stimula-
definitive confirmation that it is a testicle. (Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
tion; and diagnostic imaging (in particular abdominal ultrasound and
 contrast urethrography). A diagnosis should ideally be made before
Cryptorchidism
exploratory surgery.
 This is the most common congenital disorder, that accounted for 1.7% 
 of male cats presenting for neutering in one case series, and 1.3% of
SURGICAL DISORDERS OF THE SCROTUM
cats in another. The testicle may be located anywhere along its embry-
onic pathway, from the region of the kidney to the internal inguinal
AND TESTIS
ring (abdominal) or from the external inguinal ring to the base of the
scrotum (inguinal). If both testes are affected, one study suggested an
Congenital disorders of the scrotum and testis are uncommon, and if 
abdominal location was more likely, but an inguinal location would
 present are often associated with disorders of other parts of the uro-
appear to be more common overall.
genital tract Aplasia of the testes has been described,3 along with
 iu un  p aq  sis i
other anomalies such as a urethral-scrotal fistula and non-fused
from the testicle (mainly inappropriate urination and malodorous
scrotal pouches. Monorchism occurred in 0.1% of cats presenting for
routine neutering in one case series.° Acquired conditions of the testis
is usually by history taking and physical examination. Identifying
are uncommon in clinical practice because most cats are castrated at
the location, however, can be difficult. In some cases, the testicle
a young age. There are a few reports of neoplasia in the literature.7-?
 pzasae ar u eae ru a u iid aea aq u
450
Male genital tract
Chapter
6E
If the individual has a large inguinal fat reserve, however, this can
Acquired diseases of the penis are uncommon, and more often
be diffcult, especially as the testicle is sometimes small and poorly
sjuad aui olsyiads suiaq ueul ayel eiyan aujo saseasp ot aeial
developed (Fig. 39-5).1
Further diagnostic tests can be performed, but represent something
restoring urethral function to allow urination. Preputial skin can
of a dilemma, as an experienced surgeon is usually able to locate the
develop neoplasms of the same type as any area of skin.
retained testis using good surgical principles alone. Utrasound exami-
aul pue uauopqe aui jo yioq 'rojeiado pasuanadxa ue Aq uoeu
inguinal area, may be helpful to locate the testicle. Testosterone assay
SURGICAL DISORDERS OF THE PROSTATE
following stimulation by human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
may be useful in some cases to confrm the presence of testicular
Diseases of the accessory sex glands are very rarely seen, probably due
tissue; reference ranges are not applicable as there is so much variation
 Ployinoy ot -omi e Alliauag inq 's[enpiAipui uaamjaq pue aunl iaan
to routine early castration in this species. There are several single case
reports of prostatic diseases. Neoplastic transformation of a retained
increase post-stimulation is expected if active testicular tissue is
testis led to prostatic squamous metaplasia and prostatitis in one
present. The presence of spines on the glans penis is often highly sug-
reported case, causing signs of obstructive dysuria.′ An entire cat with
 gestive of the presence of active testicular tissue.
chronic prostatitis presented with urinary incontinence and a palpable
caudal abdominal mass in another case report.15 The author has heard
Neoplasia
of an anecdotal report of prostatitis in a middle-aged pure breed stud
-a pue Aau sque pad o papisa ym '
Neoplasia of the testis is rare in the cat and there are few examples in 
tomy. A prostatic abscess has been described in a neutered six-year-old
poun lan ieiau apnu paodai sadi iounn ameia a
cat that presented with vomiting and constipation which resolved
Sertoli cell tumora and teratoma,? although it would be reasonable to
with surgical drainage and omentalization.1 A five-year-old Ragdoll
assume that malignant transformation of any cell type present in the
cat was affected with a prostatic cyst. The cat presented with a history
testis could occur. Two of the reports are of neoplasia occurring in
of frequent urination, cystitis, and a large caudal abdominal fluid-
ueusie on sasodsipaid stu iasans a uium 'sasan pauiia
aq pinous juaed aui jo uoeniea yanoioul sop aul u saop i! se
filled mass. A retrograde urethrogram demonstrated a small commu-
nication of the urethra with a cyst at the colliculus seminalis.
made when a testicular tumor is suspected, with staging of the tumor
being of paramount importance. Left and right lateral chest radio-
Exploratory surgery found the cyst to be prostatic in origin and it was
resected. The urethral communication at the colliculus seminalis was
graphs should be taken, and abdominal ultrasound used to examine
the sublumbar lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. The surgery required
oversewn and the cat made a full recovery with only temporary incon-
for most histological types is simple castration (i.e, excisional biopsy)
tinence in the immediate postoperative period (Fig. 39-6).
 There are occasional reports in the literature of primary neoplasia
although removing the scrotal skin is recommended if the testicle is
 of the prostate gland in the cat, again causing clinical signs of obstruc-
adherent to the overlying tissue. It is impossible to assess prognosis 
tive dysuria and hematuria.17-18 Prostatectomy and prepubic urethros-
 given the few cases reported.
d  r i a u pd ssns aq su a
-sns 'sases iauo aut le ul iood sem auono aul a ioum sesoid
gesting the prognosis may be the same as it is in the dog.1?
SURGICAL DISORDERS OF THE PENIS
AND PREPUCE
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Congenital conditions of the penis and prepuce are occasionally seen 
The commonest surgical procedure performed on the male genital
in the cat There are reports in the literature of hypospadias, 2 phimo-
tract is castration, which is often an elective procedure in a healthy
s'siaprosp xasiaiut pue sl'sis
Hypospadia is a failure of embryonic fusion of the embryonic folds,
leaving a defect in the ventral tissue of the penis and urethra; it has
been reported as a cause of chronic cystitis in a pure breed cat.12 Phi-
mosis is the inability to extrude the penis beyond the preputial orifice,
and has been reported as a congenital defect causing hematuria and
pollakiuria in a domestic short-hair cat;3 stranguria and pollakiuria
were reported as the most common clinical signs in a series of ten cats
with phimosis. Clinical signs resolved when surgery was performed to
widen the preputial orifice. 14 Intersex diseases have also been uncom-
suis ieiu ou gumous ie paaiq aind e asen auo ui paodan auou
had a genital cleft rather than a true prepuce or vulva, with a large
clitoris with horny spines similar to those on a normal penis. There
were no chromosomal abnormalities found and so a diagnosis of
aul yo aseasip ieiuasuos aue ul taeu sem usoiudeuauopnasd
urogenital tract, surgical intervention is indicated only if functional
-au ei aeun ot uosodsipaid io eunsp se yons 'snsan aseas
tions. The extent of the disease often means that surgical intervention 
is diffcult and may not bring much benefit for the animal.
with incontinence and preputial swelling: postmortem examination
revealed the presence of chronic pyelonephritis and prostatitis.15
bladder is on the left in the surgeon's fingers. (Courresy of Davina Anderson.)
451
Section
5
The Abdomen
animal. Surgery procedures for penile problems are covered in
three weeks.20 It may also reduce the likelihood of acquiring feline
Chapter 38.
immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Castration (Box 39-1) is usually performed before the onset of
sexual maturity, at approximately 6 months of age. There seems to be
Castration
 no adverse effect on general development, with the possible exception
Population control is an obvious reason for neutering. but many
of delayed closure of growth plates. In a series of non-traumatic
 Owners elect to have their cats castrated in order to avoid the undesir-
femoral capital physeal fractures in adult cats, 14 of 16 cats had been
able characteristics of fighting, roaming, and urine malodor/spraying.
neutered at less than 6 months of age." Looking at the whole popula-
Behavioral modification after castration is reliable and swift in cats,
tion, however castration probably prevents more diseases than it
 s a e   u   
causes, as well as improving welfare by population control.
Box 39-1 Castration
The cat is anesthetized and placed in right lateral recumbency (for
Three different techniques can now be used to ligate the blood
aowan ot paxpnid lo paddp s! wniouns aul (suoabans papueu-lybu
vessels:
painban pou ae sadeap lenibins paedaad klleiidase pue seu 
 The vas and blood vessels can be ligated either all together or
Si aaut h os 'isy aoan oi algeajaid ag e aisat pb aul
separately, preferably using synthetic multifilament absorbable 
hemorrhage it does not interfere with visualization of the left.
suture material
The testicle is tensed up against the scrotal skin, which is incised 
11.
 The vas deferens can be separated from the testicle, usually at the 
dorsoventrally with a number 15 scalpel blade (Fg. 39-7A).
level of the tail of the epididymis (Fig. 39-7F). A square knot can 
The skin is thin and there is minimal subcutaneous tissue. The 
then be tied between the vas deferens and the vascular supply
testicle can then be exteriorized by further gentle squeezing of the 
(still attached to the testicle) (Fg. 39-7G)
scrotum (Fig. 39-7B).
ii. A knot can be created using forceps. The combined vascular 
 An 'open' technique is used by most, and so the scalpel is used to
supply and vas deferens is looped around a pair of curved 
gently incise (also dorsoventrally) through the vaginal tunic (Fig. 39-7C).
mosquito forceps (Hg. 39-7H). The tips of the forceps are then
The vaginal tunic has been incised to the left of the picture and the 
padseab s! senyAjddns lenoseA aul pue Kjersip juiod oi pauanl
testicle is being extruded.
in the tips of the forceps next to the testicle (Fig. 39-7l,J). The
Care is taken not to incise the tunica albuginea, the tough covering
testicle is removed, and the knot lying over the forceps is pushed 
 of the testicle itself, as minor hemorhage results. The ligament of the 
proximally up the vascular supply/vas (Fg 39-6K) unti it is separate
tail of the epididymis should then be separated by tearing it from the
from the forceps (Hg. 39-7L)
overlying tunica (Fig. 39-7D). The vas and vascular supply are seen to
 The knot is then allowed to retract back into the scrotum.
 the left of the figure.
 The epididymis, vas deferens (right of picture) and testicular vascular
supply (left of picture) can now be seen (Fig. 39-7E).
A)
B
C
Diunt jeuibe (o) wnions bulzaanbs Aa pazioaxa si apsal aul (a) apeia jadlens e ylm wniouns asui (v) len e jo uoe asey -be aanb
 carefully excised and testicle extruded.
452
Male genital tract
Chapter
68
Box 39-1 Continued
D
E
G
H
K
L
Figure 39-7, Continued (D) The ligament of the tail of epididymis separated from tunic. (E) The epididymis, vas deferens (right of picture) and 
testicular vascular supply (left of picture) can now be seen. (f) The vas deferens can be separated from the testicle, usually at the level of the tail of 
the epididymis. (G) A square knot can then be tied between the vas deferens and the vascular supply (still attached to the testicle), (H) or a knot 
Jo sdi aul (ll sdanoj oinbsou paaun jo lied e punoue padool s! sualajap sea pue Aiddns yeinosea pauigquon aul sdaoy buisn patean ag ue
the forceps are then turned to point distally (towards the testicle). (J) The vascular supply/vas is grasped in the tips of the forceps next to the 
testicle. (k) The testicle is removed, and the knot lying over the forceps is pushed proximally up the vascular supply/vas. (L) The knot is separated 
from the forceps and allowed to retract back into the scrotum.
453
Section
5
The Abdomen
Box 39-2 Surgical technique for cryptorchidism
 The animal is placed in dorsal recumbency and the ventral abdomen is
Abdominal testicle
clipped and prepared for aseptic surgery from the xiphisternum to the 
If the testicle cannot be palpated in the inguinum, or ultrasound 
prepuce.
demonstrates the testicle is intra-abdominal, a caudal exploratory
 Inguinal testicle
celiotomy should be performed. Abdominally retained testicles can 
also be removed using minimally invasive surgical techniques,11.21 but 
 If the testicle can be palpated in the inguinal area, or it has been
found to be inguinal on ultrasound examination, a parasagittal incision
the principles of finding the testicle remain the same. If a celiotomy is
performed, a single stay suture of 3/0 monofilament suture (e.g..
can be made over the ipsilateral inguinum. It is worth noting that in 
polypropylene) should be placed in the cranial pole of the bladder
cases of unilateral cryptorchidism, it is not always possible to decide
and the bladder should be retracted cranially. Cotton-tipped swabs
whether the descended testicle is on the left or right side. In these
can be used to carefully dissect any fat away from the ventral and 
cases, a longer midline skin incision can be made and the wound 
retracted to examine first one side and then the other (Fg. 39-8).
lateral bladder neck, if required. As the bladder is retracted ventrally
 Blunt dissection through the commonly large inguinal fat pad is used 
and cranially, the vasa can be identified as they enter the region of
Aaui alaum ot pamolloy ag uaui uen asaul (e-be by) arensoid aun
to identify the testicle; gentle surgical technique is recommended as
wound complications such as seroma are common. Care should be 
 originate from the testicle(s). If the vas is found to leave the abdomen
taken to avoid traumatizing the large caudal superficial epigastric
via the inguinal ring. the inguinum can be explored via an extension 
peay pue buu leuinbui aut yonoui abhaua jeyt uian pue Aiaie
of the celiotomy skin incision or through a small separate inguinal 
incision (Fig. 39-10). Gentle traction on the intra-abdominal portion 
αanially. If the testicle cannot be found, the external inguinal ring
of the vas will help locate the testicle. Once found, the testicle can be
should be identified and the vas deferens followed as it emerges from
removed as described earlier.
the ring. Once the testicle is identified, the vas and testicular vessels 
can be ligated with 3/0 absorbable multifilament suture material (such 
 as polyglactin 910) and removed. Dead space should be minimized and 
the skin closed routinely.
Figure 39-8 Cryptorchid cat. An inguinal testicle was identified through
the midline approach. Note the extensive inguinal fat pad that makes
 palpating the testicle challenging.
Figure 39-9 Both vasa deferens (*) can be found as they enter the
urethra in the region of the prostate. Note the ureters as they enter the
bladder in the region of the trigone (V) and the large deposit of fat in
the periurethral region.
 If the testicle has not descended and the animal is cryptorchid then
further investigations may be required and a thorough examination
must be performed preoperatively. The surgeon should be prepared
to do inguinal or abdominal surgery as necessary (Box 39-2).
'uoensm guuoad uaum sanss aul ui nouy no amei asool e 0
 particularly when performed by inexperienced surgeons or on older
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
cats. If hemorrhage does occur, most cases can be managed conserva-
tively with direct pressure of the surgical site with cold compresses.
Complications after castration are very rare and are usually non-
Sedation is usually required to perform this. A clotting disorder should
paoad uonuny suo roy sisan Aroieoqel pue 'paapisuo aq
454
Male genital tract
Chapter
6E
where appropriate (see Chapter 3). If the hemorrhage persists, then
surgical exploration of the site should be considered, the vessels
should be clamped and ligated with absorbable suture material.
Colonic obstruction was reported several weeks after castration in one
cat, and was thought to be due to fibrosis around the vas deferens
after it retracted into the abdomen post surgery. The area of scarring
was successfully excised in this case.22
Anecdotally, cats appear to have a tendency to gain weight after
castration, and this is consistent with experimental evidence The
weight gain after castration was associated with decreased energy
poy paseanu ym pue sssns aeuuad auo un auadxa
intake in another. 24 Estradiol declines after castration and if it is then
supplemented by injection, there is a reduction in the expected
increase in food intake.25
Figure 39-10 A cryptorchid cat with no palpable testicle in the
inguinum. An abdominal approach was made and the vas deferens
was traced back from the urethra into the inguinal canal. A very small
inguinal testicle was then located through a separate inguinal incision 
(eh uor jo Asauno) (5-6e by ui umous ae saplisat yiog)
REFERENCES
1. Ellenport CR. Urogenital system. In:
10. McNicholas WT. Spontaneous femoral
19. Tursi M, Costa T, Valenza F, Aresu L.
Getty R, Editor. Sisson and Grossman's
capital physeal fractures in adult cats: 26
Adenocarcinoma of the disseminated
the anatomy of the domestic animals.
cases [1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc
prostate in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
5th ed. Chapter 53, 1975. p. 1580-4.
2002;221:1731-6.
2008;10:600-2.
2. Wang B, Bhadra N, Grill WM. Functional
11.
 Birchard Sl, Nappier M. Cryptorchidism.
20. Hart BL, Barrett RE. Effects of castration
anatomy of the male feline urethra:
Compend Contin Educ Vet 2008;30:
in fghting, roaming and urine spraying in
morphological and physiological
325-36.
adult male cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
correlations. J Urol 1999;161:654-9.
12.
 King GJ, Johnson EH. Hypospadias in
1963;163:290-2
3. Hakala JE. Reproductive tract anomalies
a Himalayan cat. J Small Anim Pract 
21.
Vannozzi I, Benetti C, Rota A.
in 2 male cats. Mod Vet Pract
2000;41:508-10.
Laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy in a cat.
1984;65:629.
13.
 Bright SR, Mellanby RJ. Congenital
I Feline Med Surg 2002;4:201-3.
 4. Foster SE. Congenital urethral anomaly in
phimosis in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
22.
..Demetriou JL, Welsh EM. Colonic
a kitten. J Feline Med Surg 1999;1:61-4.
2004;6:367-70.
 obstruction in an adult cat following
 5. Bredal WP, Thoresen Sl, Kvellestad A,
14.
 May LR, Hauptman JG. Phimosis in cats:
 open castration. Vet Rec 2000;147:
Lindblad K. Male pseudohermaphroditism
10 cases [2000-2008). J Am Anim Hosp
165-6.
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 1997;38:
Assoc 2009;45:277-83.
23.
.Martin L, Siliart B, Dumon H, et al.
21-4.
15.
 Pointer E, Murray C. Chronic prostatitis.
leptin, body fat content and energy
6. Millis DL, Hauptman JG, Johnson CA.
cystitis, pyelonephritis and
expenditure in intact and gonadectomized
Cryptorchidism and monorchism in cats:
balanoposthitis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
adult cats: a preliminary study J Anim 
25 cases [1980-1989). 1 Am Vet Med
Assoc 2011;47[4):258-61.
Physiol Anim Nutr 2001;85:195-9.
Assoc 1992;200:1128-30.
16.
Mordecai A, Liptak JM, Hofstede T,
24. Kanchuk ML, Backus RC, Calvert CC.
 7. Tucker AR, Smith JR. Prostatic squamous
et al. Prostatic abscess in a neutered
et al. weight gain in gonadectomized
metaplasia in a cat with interstitial cell
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008;44:
normal and lipoprotein lipase-deficient 
neoplasia in a retained testis. Vet Pathol
90-4.
 male domestic cats results from increased
2008;45:905-9
17.
Caney SM, Holt PE, Day Ml, et al.
 food intake and not decreased energy
 8. Miller MA, Hartnett SE, Ramos-Vara JA.
Prostatic carcinoma in two cats. J Small
expenditure. I Nutr 2003;133:
Interstitial cell tumour and Sertoli cell 
Animal Pract 1998;39:140-3.
1866-74.
tumour in the testis of a cat. Vet Pathol
18.
 Zambelli D, Cunto M, Raccagni R, et al.
25. Backus R. Plasma oestrogen changes in
2007;44:394-7.
Successful surgical treatment of a prostatic
 adult male cats after orchiectomy.
9.
.Miyoshi N, Yasuda N, Kamimura Y, et al.
biphasic tumour (sarcomatoid carcinoma)
body-weight gain and low-dosage
Teratoma in a feline unilateral cryptorchid
in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12(2):
oestradiol administration. Brit J Nutr
testis. Vet Pathol 2001;38:729-30.
161-5.
2011;106(Suppl 1):S15-8.
455
[40l
Chapter
Female genital tract
S.J. Langley-Hobbs
The most common surgical procedure performed on the female
 The ovarian blood supply is from the ovarian artery, which branches
genital tract is ovariohysterectomy. The high prevalence of this surgery
directly off the aorta. The right ovarian vein drains into the caudal
in some countries ensures a low number of unwanted pregnancies and
vena cava and the left ovarian vein drains into the left renal vein. The
 diseases associated with the female reproductive tract such as pyo-
 ovarian lymphatics drain into the lumbar lymph nodes. The uterus is
metra and mammary gland neoplasia. In breeding queens and entire
supplied by anastomosing branches of the ovarian artery and the
females conditions of the uterus such as uterine torsion and cesarean
may require surgery.
Suspe
ensoryligament of ovary
SURGICAL ANATOMY
\Broad
Mesosalpinx
The female reproductive tract consists of the ovaries, oviducts, uterus.
ligarment
-Ovary
vagina, urogenital sinus, and vulva (Fig. 40-1). The ovaries lie caudal
to the kidneys. They are small oval bodies about 1 cm in length.' The
Proper
left ovary is usually more caudal than the right one, in keeping with
ligament of
Mesometrium
the position of the kidneys. The ovaries are supported by a part of the
ovary
broad ligament, the mesovarium. A narrow tube, the oviduct, with a
funnel shape infundibulum, encircles the ovary. The oviduct ascends
along the infundibular side of the ovary, bends over its cranial end
Round-
and descends along the opposite side where at the caudal end of the
ligament
ovary it joins the utenus. The ovary is held to the horn of the uterus
by the proper ligament, a part of the broad ligament that extends
Right horn of uterus
cranially as the suspensory ligament to insert on the middle part of
Left horn of uterus
the last one or two ribs. The horn of the uterus is supported by a part
of the broad ligament known as the mesometrium. There is also a
round ligament, a thickening in the edge of a peritoneal fold, which
Body of uterus 
derives from the broad ligament. The round ligament extends from
the cranial end of the uterine horn and runs caudally to the internal
inguinal ring. The right and left horns of the uterus join medially to
Region of cervix
form the body of the utenus. This lies ventral to the colon and rectum
and dorsal to the bladder. It extends into the cranial end of the pelvis
Vagina
au 'eded uauid e suy euia au oiui spalid i aam
cervix.
The vagina extends dorsal to the pelvic symphysis to just cranial to
Vulva
the caudal border of the ischiatic symphysis where it receives the
urethra from the urinary bladder. The remainder of the tube from this
point caudally is the vestibule or urogenital sinus. It extends to the
External opening, which lies just ventral to the anus. The external
Figure 40-1 The feline reproductive tract. (From Crouch /E. (1969) Text Atas
opening of the urogenital sinus forms the vulva.
of Cat Anatomy Philadelohia: Lea & Febiger.)
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00040-8
457
Section
5
The Abdomen
uterine artery: the latter is a branch of the vaginal artery which
arises from the internal pudendal artery. Uterine lymphatics drain
to the hypogastric and lumbar lymph nodes. The blood supply to
the vagina, urethra, and vestibule is provided by the vaginal artery.
which arises from the internal pudendal artery. The vulval blood
supply is provided by branches of the external pudendal artery. The
lymphatics of the vagina and vestibule drain into the internal iliac
lymph nodes and the vulval lymphatics drain to the superficial iliac
lymph nodes.
REPRODUCTIVE CYCLE
Cats are a seasonal polyestrus species and induced ovulators. The
Figure 40-2 Two fetal feline skulls are visible on the abdominal
average age of puberty is variable, but usually starts when the cat
radiograph of this pregnant cat, which therefore must be at least 36-45
days into gestation.
reaches 2.3-2.5 kg in weight and is between six and nine months of
age. Breeds like the Siamese or Burmese appear to be more preco-
cious, reaching puberty at lower weights and younger ages than breeds
like the Persian, which may not have their frst estrous cycle until 18
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE OVARIES
months of age. However, the main influencing factor is day length:
increasing hours of daylight usually stimulate estrous cycles. In the
Disease of the ovary is uncommon in the cat. Conditions include
absence of pregnancy or false pregnancy cats will show repeated
agenesis or hypoplasia, cysts, neoplasia, and retained ovarian
estrous cycles every two to three weeks throughout the spring, summer.
remnants; the latter are likely to be due to surgical error. Some condi-
and autumn.
ovariohysterectomy.
Congenital ovarian abnormalities
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Ovarian agenesis is rare and results in permanent anestrus and infertil-
ity. Small ovarian remnants containing fibrous tissue may be identi-
A full history should be taken with particular focus on neuter status.
fied at laparotomy or laparoscopy.
stage of cycling, hormonal treatment received, history of pregnancies
-idaiouaud pue uaanh aul ul paodai uaaq sey eiseidoday ueueao
and evidence of abnormal behavior.
 The physical examination should look for signs of vulval abnor-
chromosomal abnormalities.
malities such as enlargement or discharge and abdominal palpation
is performed for uterine enlargement Mammary glands are examined
Ovarian cysts
for general enlargement or focal masses (see Chapter 2l). Vaginal
smear evaluation is less useful in queens for determining stage of
Ovarian cysts are common and their frequency increases with age.°
estrus for breeding management, particularly as the act of carrying out
There are two main types: follicular cysts that arise from mature or
the procedure can affect the cycle. Hematological and biochemical
atretic follicles, and other cysts not of ovarian origin. True follicular
analysis of blood for evidence of sepsis or other systemic abnormali-
cysts are associated with hyperestrogenism if cells lining the cyst
 ties with conditions such as pyometra is indicated and hormone levels
secrete estrogen? and may be associated with exaggerated sexual
are assayed in cases of retained ovarian remnant syndrome and poten-
behavior and prolonged estrus. Administration of progestagen may
tially cystic ovaries.
inhibit the luteinizing hormone surge necessary to induce ovulation
and may cause formation of follicular cysts. Other cysts, not of
ovarian origin, are remnants of mesonephric and rete tubules.? These
Diagnostic imaging
cysts are endocrinologically inactive and do not produce clinical signs.
The cysts may be detected incidentally at ovariectomy (Fig. 40-3).
Radiography is of fairly limited value for the female genital tract
investigation, but it may show uterine enlargement Occasionally.
basis of clinical signs, measurement of plasma estrogen concentra-
sutures at ovarian vessels or the uterine body may mineralize and
tions or demonstration of persistent cornification of vaginal epithelial
therefore be radiopaque Fetuses are visible between 36 and 45 days
cells.8 Large cysts may be detected by ultrasound. Human chorionic
and a skull count will give the fetal number (Fig. 40-2).
gonadotrophin (hCG) may be administered to induce ovulation and
 Utrasonography is of more use for investigation of organ size,
thereby treat the cyst but in most cases ovariectomy or the use of
aeasaui ol pasn aq ue l pimy jo aouasaid aui pue aimxal anssn
 progestagens to suppress the clinical signs is necessary.
the ovaries and uterus for masses or fluid accumulation. It is also
useful to confirm pregnancy, but is less helpful in differentiating
Ovarian tumors
between hydrometra, mucometra, pyometra, and hemometra. Ultra
sound analysis of uterine fluid is unreliable in determining cellular
Tumors of the ovary are classified on the basis of their cell of origin
  si a   i   e ' a
as epithelial, germ cell, or sex cord stromal and all types have been
signs, results of examination, and laboratory analyses.
esonueig aie suaanb ui uaas sadi juanbany isou aul 'ren au ul uaas
458
Female genital tract
Chapter
40
Figure 40-3 An ovarian follicle (arrow) identified as an incidental finding
at ovariohysterectomy.
Figure 40-4 Unicornuate uterus in a stray female cat. An
cell tumors, which can metastasise.? In the largest review of 22 ovarian
ovariohysterectomy performed through a flank incision had to be
tumors, a single cat had bilateral cystadenomas of epithelial origin,
converted to a midline incision due to failure to locate the contralateral
seven animals had dysgerminomas or teratomas that are germ cell
uterine horn. The ovary is arrowed (black) and there is a structure
tumors, and 14 animals had granulosa cell tumors and interstitial
resembling a round ligament (white arrow) in the mesometrium but no
gland tumors, which are neoplasms of sex cord stromal origin.? Four
uterine horn identifiable.
of the cats with granulosa cell tumors had clinical evidence of hormo-
nal disturbance. Cats may have signs of persistent estrus, cystic
unicornuate uterus (33 cats) (Fig. 40-4), segmental agenesis of one
 endometrial hyperplasia, and bilaterally symmetrical alopecia.0
uterine horn (15 cats), and uterine horn hypoplasia (one cat). These
Kaql se Auoioiedel Aioieioldxa ie payiuap! Aluo uao aie suoisal
Ovarian remnant syndrome
rarely cause clinical signs. Queens may still be fertile if the lesion is
unilateral.
Onset of estrus (lordosis, rolling, posturing, excessive vocalization)
after gonadectomy is a complication related to a retained ovarian
affected cats in which the kidneys were also evaluated. Identification
remnant. It is more common after ovariohysterectomy than ovariec-
 of uterine developmental anomalies in dogs and cats should trigger
tomy as the incision made for the former technique is more caudal
evaluation of both kidneys and both ovaries because ipsilateral renal
and access to the ovaries is more diffcult. One unproven theory is that
agenesis is common, but both ovaries are likely to be present and
 there are accessory ovaries that may be small and located in the proper
should be removed during ovariohysterectomy.
ligament of the ovary; once the normal ovary has been removed these
accessory structures may become functional." It is also possible for
dropped ovarian tissue to become functional, 12 although all the cases
Uterine tumors
reported in the literature have had residual ovarian tissue at one or
Most cats affected with uterine neoplasia are intact and are middle
both pedicles.1 Ultrasound is useful for diagnosis and may reveal a
aged or older.18
 cystic structure caudal to the kidney. The diagnosis is also supported
 Malignant endometrial adenocarcinoma is the most common
by hormonal assays. In the queen, resting serum progesterone values
 endometrial uterine tumor; mixed Mullerian tumors [adenosarcoma)
are of little value unless the queen has been bred or induced to ovulate
sun uaiuaq apiui sioum leaonn a paodan uaaq osie aaey
after showing signs of estrus.14 An alternative method of diagnosis is
such as leiomyomas and malignant leiomyosarcomas. Other more
to perform a hormonal stimulation test. In the queen during the
unusual uterine neoplasms or neoplastic-like lesions include lympho-
sarcoma, adenomyosis (refers to the presence of endometrium within
at this time the queen can be readily stimulated to ovulate by the
 the myometrium) and endometrial polyps.
administration  of exogenous gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
Uterine neoplasia may be associated with infertility, pyometra, a
(GnRH) or hCG. Elevated plasma progesterone concentrations one
persistent hemorrhagic vulvar discharge and straining, and abdominal
week after such treatment should confrm the presence of ovarian
Or pelvic masses. Ovariohysterectomy (see Box 40-1) is the treatment
st Aaaes iauoad aui jo uoeodxa yanaoui e Aans i st anssn
of choice. Prognosis for endometrial adenocarcinoma is guarded. In
 one retrospective study 50% of adenocarcinomas had metastasized at
the peritoneal walls. The ovarian remnants are usually found adjacent
laguol ioy paaians sies luia a jo ino oml Auo pue uoeuasai
to the previously ligated pedicle.16
than five months.18
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE UTERUS
and pyometra
Congenital anomalies of the uterus
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra (CEH-P) complex is
the most frequent and important endometrial disorder in cats and
Suspected congenital anomalies of the utenus were identifed in 0.09%
is a sequel to progesterone simulation of the endometrium, and
[49/53 258) of female cats.17 Uterine anomalies identified included
[euaoue io ot euaoeq ieugen Aq uoayui auan supuase
459
Section
5
The Abdomen
 Box 40-1 Ovariohysterectomy
Midline ovariohysterectomy
clamp (closest to the cervix). Clamps may cut rather than crush a
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and hair is clipped from 
friable or engorged uterus and cause transection before ligature
 ranial to the xiphoid to caudal to the pubis between the nipples. The 
 placement so ligatures can be placed directly without the use of
 bladder should be expressed to make locating the uterus easier and to 
clamps if preferred.
decrease the chance of iatrogenic bladder damage.
 One or two ligatures are placed encircling the whole uterine body.
 The distance between the umbilicus and the pubis is divided
just proximal to the cervix. Alternatively, one encircling and one 
into three and a 2-2.5 cm midline incision through the skin and 
transfixing ligature can be used;69 use of a transfixing ligature (Fig
subcutaneous tissue is made in the middle third. in kittens less than 
40-5c) is particularly recommended in larger cats or in a cat with a
12 weeks of age the incision is situated more caudally, approximately 
very vascular uterus. The uterus is transected between the hemostats 
two-thirds the distance from the umbilicus to the pubis.
by use of a scalpel. The uterus and ovaries are now free and can be
The linea alba is tented with Adson rat-toothed forceps and a small
laid aside after opening the ovarian bursa and checking the entire
incision made with a scalpel blade, which is extended cranially and 
ovary has been removed. The uterine body is carefully released and 
 caudally keeping to the midline. The uterus is found either by digital 
Aeun au buajan Aa lo lim leuuope jesop au jo uoedlied 
prior to closure. The ventral linea alba is closed using an absorbable
bladder and locating the uterine horns and body, which lie dorsal to
suture material of 2M gauge (polydioxanone, polyglactin 910,
this. The uterus is gently exteriorized with fingers or an oophorectomy
polysorb, maxon or poliglecaprone) in a simple continuous pattern.
 hook. One horn of the uterus is then followed cranially to locate the
The subcutaneous tissue may be closed with a simple continuous 
 Ovary. The suspensory ligament is broken down or stretched as
suture of absorbable suture material such as 2M poliglecaprone or
necessary by blunt dissection or by tearing between thumb and first
ue no saunins paidnanui aidwis uou z yhm us aut pue ursoude
finger. A hole is made in the mesovarium and two hemostats are 
intradermal suture.
aul ot leshop wo l Alatewlxoudde apipad uelero aul ssope paneid 
Alternatively, an ultrasonic scalpel, vascular sealer, or hemostatic
ovary (Fig. 40-5A). Alternatively, a three-hemostat technique can be 
clips or staples can be used for vessel ligation.
used, with the most proximal ligature placed in the crush of the most 
Flank ovariohysterectomy
 proximal clamp (furthest from the ovary) but this is not usually 
The cat is placed in right lateral recumbency and legs extended 
necessary in cats. A ligature of 1.5-2M absorbable suture material
caudally with ties. The position for the incision is identified by
(polyglactin 910 or polysorb) is placed proximal to the hemostats (or in 
visualizing an equilateral triangle with vertices at the greater
the crush if using a third hemostat) across the ovarian artery and vein 
trochanter, wing of the ilium, and the centre point of the incision?o
(Fig. 40-5A). One or two encircling ligatures are placed; two may be 
(Hg. 40-6). The skin, subcutaneous fat, external aponeuroses, internal
 preferable in an older, larger cat or one in estrus. The ovarian pedicle is 
 ae wnauoiad pue 'sapsnu anbiqo jeuiwopqe ashaasueal pue
divided between the hemostats by cutting with a scalpel or twisting 
aul shaa apsnu aui buole uoauip jeaua ot jesiop e u! pasui
aul (Aueao aul ol jsasop auo aul) reisoway lersip aul uo bund pue
uterus is identified and exteriorized (the incision may need to be
pe pasean Aae aad ueeo au pue pazaxa s ae
extended if this is difficult) and ligatures placed as above. The muscle
checked for bleeding. It is important that the ovarian stump is checked 
layers can be sutured individually or in a single layer for maximum 
for bleeding after tension has been released as tension on ovarian
strength of closure.
vessels will often prevent hemorrhage, and ligatures that appear tight 
Ovariectomy
while the stump is under tension may slip after tension is released. The 
 procedure is repeated for the opposite ovary.
 The technique for ovariohysterectomy is initially followed but the 
 The broad ligaments and round ligaments are bluntly dissected and 
incision is made more cranially at the umbilicus. After ligation of the 
 separated to exteriorize the uterine horns. Two hemostats are placed
ovarian pedicle two clamps are placed on the proximal uterine horn 
across the uterine horns at the level of or just proximal to the cervix.
close to the ovary (Fig. 40-7) and a ligature placed distal to this.
Alternatively, a three-hemostat technique can be used (Fg. 40-5B)
The ovary is removed after cutting between the hemostats. Closure 
 with the most proximal ligature placed in the crush of the most distal 
continues as described above.
B
C
Figure 40-5 (A) The ovarian pedicle is double clamped and the vascular pedicle ligated proximal to the proximal clamp. (B) The uterine body is
 triple clamped. (c) The distal clamp on the uterine body is removed and a transfixation ligature placed in the crush created by the temporary clamp
 placement. A second encircling ligature is placed around the uterine body.
460
Female genital tract
Chapter
40
 Box 40-1 Continued
Figure 40-6 Landmarks for the flank incision for ovariohysterectomy.
Figure 40-7 Two hemostatic clamps are placed on the proximal
jewixod aui jo uoiebll on loud Aieao aul oi asop Apog aulan
uterine horn and ovariectomy.
contamination. It is more common in older cats2.22 and is uncommon
(Fig. 40-8), abdominal distension, dehydration, a palpable utenus,
in winter when queens are acyclic. Approximately half the cases are
iaa aq isu ae ieai s'seupuy isauun aul aie eixaiad pue
seen in unmated queens, which is unusual as there should be no luteal
cised when palpating the abdomen in order not to rupture the uterus.
Aisnauus anenn Au suaanh inq 'siee asa u asu
Animals should be assessed for dehydration, electrolyte imbalance,
d-hao yim guuasaid suaan oz jo Apms auo ul gueu inoum
anemia, azotemia, hypo- or hyperglycemia, sepsis, hepatic damage.
all affected cats were in diestrus.23 The prevalence of CEH-P in entire
cardiac dysrhythmias, and clotting abnormalities. Intravenous fluids
female cats increases with age, and most cases of pyometra or
are mandatory and since the commonest acid-base abnormality is
endometritis in cats are associated with retained corpora lutea.2
metabolic acidosis then Lactated Ringers is the most appropriate
Endogenous ovarian steroid hormones and their derivatives, espe-
choice. The most common bacteria isolated are Escherichia coli, with
cially progestogens used to control or suppress estrus, may enhance
 staphylococci and streptococci other common isolates; cephalosporins
CEH-P and mammary tumor genesis in cats. The risk of CEH-P is
are good frst choice antimicrobials.
variable and related to the particular progestogen administered, route
of administration, amount, frequency and duration of treatment.
Imaging
Megestrol acetate tablets were used as an estrus suppressing agent in 
244 cats in Norway in 1974. A weekly dose of 2.5 mg megestrol
A combination of ultrasonography, radiography, hematology, and
acetate was given for at least 30 weeks. One cat developed pyometra
clinical examination is used to confrm the diagnosis. An enlarged
after three years of treatment with the preparation.24 One queen devel.
ae ead dus assie panae ie ui us sem san
oped CEH-P, ovarian cysts, mammary adenoma, fbrosarcoma and
as a fluid-filled mass between the bladder or urethra and colon and
cystic-papillary adenocarcinoma after continual administration of
is always associated with a retained ovarian remnant, which may be
identified on ultrasonography as a small cystic structure caudal to one
uterine changes were seen in prepubertally ovariectomized cats after
or both kidneys.
administration of only six weeks of oral megestrol acetate.?6 In another
ovariectomized cat, pyometra developed at three years of age, the cat
had been treated with proligestone for a dermatologic condition for
Treatment
two years prior to this disease developing.27
 In general, a closed pyometra should be treated as soon as possible
with antibiosis and fluid therapy, and ovariohysterectomy once stable
(see Box 40-1). Both medical management and flushing the utenus via
Clinical signs and investigations
a laparotomy have been tried with some success.2.30
The most common signs noted by owners include vaginal discharge.
anorexia, and lethargy.28 The malodorous vaginal discharge usually
Prognosis
makes diagnosis easy, although the queen will often fastidiously clean
 In one study 8% of cats died or were euthanized due to a variety of
discharge appearing.
causes including sepsis and bacterial peritonitis secondary to rupture
 of the uterus, liver disease, non-regenerative anemia, and anorexia. A
the uterine wall, due to endometrial hyperplasia with glandular dilata-
ruptured uterus carries a poor prognosis, with more than 50% of cases
tion, and no or minimal clinical signs. In later cases vaginal discharge
(four of seven cats) dying in one series.28
461
Section
[51
The Abdomen
Figure 40-9 Uterine horn torsion in an 11-year-old cat with pyometra.
There was a 90o° torsion of the left uterine horn along the longitudinal
axis. Ovariohysterectomy was performed without correction of the
torsion. (Courtesy of Benito De La Puerta.)
of uterine torsion in a cat has been reported?5 and disseminated
paxieu ol anp aseo auo ul papadsns sem uoeingeos ieinoseaeiu
prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time.41 Intensive
supportive care is recommended for affected cats (see Chapter 3).
Oten the diagnosis is only made at laparotomy, in which case a
prompt hysterotomy, for rapid removal of fetuses when present, fol-
lowed by ovariohysterectomy (see Box 40-1), should be performed.
The torsion should not be corrected, as release of toxins can be fatal.
B
Uterine prolapse or eversion
Figure 40-8 (A) Vulval discharge in a 6-year-old cat with an open
Postparturient prolapse or eversion of the uterus can occur in cats.45
 pyometra. (B) The uterus is found to be enlarged with thickened uterine
The everted uterus can be removed in situ by exposure and ligation of
walls at surgery.
blood vessels through a vaginal incision. But unless tissues are grossly
oedematous or traumatized then it is better performed at laparatomy
after the eversion is reduced by gentle traction.
Uterine torsion
Dystocia
 Uterine torsion is defined as a twisting of the uterus or uterine horn
 perpendicular to its long axis.31 There are several reports of uterine
 The average gestation length in the cat is 63-65 days but it can vary
torsion in pregnant cats in the literature31-42 and torsion of a uterine
from 59-70 days. Dystocia has been reported in 5.8% of 2928 litters
involving 735 queens.4 Pedigree cats were at a significantly higher risk
(Fig. 40-9). Torsion can vary from 90-900°, usually involving one
than cats of mixed breeding and dolichocephalic and brachycephalic
horn of the uterine body in near-full term pregnancies 31.32
breeds were found to have a significantly higher level of dystocia than
e nou pue siean inoy oi suuou gi uoy ae u auei se paia
mesocephalic breeds.
of these are multiparous queens. A history of normal delivery 24-48
 Dystocia can be due to maternal factors such as inadequacies of the
hours earlier is a common finding. Clinical signs vary with duration
birth canal or uterine torsion or a deficiency of expulsive force47 (Table
and degree of torsion and include acute depression, restlessness, ano-
40-1). Expulsive deficiency such as primary uterine inertia4α is a
rexia, vomiting. and vaginal discharge (bloody mucoid or serosan-
common cause of dystocia in polytocous species. It is thought to be
guineous). Cats may crouch and strain as if in labor or as if trying to
aul si eiaul aepuosas t'suaanh ul eioiskp jo gg'ze ioy aiqisuodsa
urinate or defecate. Uterine torsions of 180° may persist for days or
inertia of exhaustion and is essentially a result rather than a cause of
weeks without clinical signs until labor ensues.31
dystocia; for example it may be secondary to obstruction by a very
 A precise diagnosis of uterine torsion as a cause of an obstructive
large fetus. Sometimes in the queen, normal parturition will com-
dystocia is diffcult, even with good quality imaging techniques.
mence, but after the birth of a few kittens it will then cease even if
Affected cats can require intensive pre- and postoperative care; bio-
 Ad se on paan uaaq s siu o ou i ar
chemical abnormalities can include hyperkalemia, hyponatremia.
inertia and is responsible for about 23% of dystocia cases in the cat.47
anemia, and azotemia.41.43 Fatal hemorrhage as a complication
The differentiation of this from secondary inertia can be diffcult The
462
Female genital tract
Chapter
40
Iana pue ueaio ue jo ainso io auasqe au s eiselde io eisay
Table 40-1 Frequency of causes of dystocia in queens47
 and vaginal atresia may occur separately or simultaneously. Small
labia with or without stenosis of the vestibule are observed in the
Cause of dystocia
Number of cases
 Percentage
former, while stenosis of the vagina is also observed in the latter.52.53
Maternal
Neoplasia of the vagina and vulva
Uterine prolapse
.
0.6
 Neoplasia of the vagina or vulva in the cat is rare A case of lympho-
 Uterine strangulation
1
0.6
sarcoma and a vulvar leiomyosarcoma have been reported. The cat
Narrow birth canal
8
5.2
with a vulvar leiomyosarcoma had a history of vulvar swelling, bleed.
(fetomaternal disproportion)
ing, and stranguria. The mass was located at the ventral commissure
94
 of the vulva; it was resected but recurred two months later when the
Uterine inertia
60.6
cat was euthanized shortly after a second surgery.54
 Subtotal
104
67.0
Fetal
 Faulty disposition
24
15.5
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
FOR SURGERY
 Fetal congenital defects
12
7.7
 Fetomaternal disproportion
3
1.9
Neutering
Fetal death
7
4.5
Age to neuter
 Subtotal
46
29.6
Other causes
 There are three age categories that are usually considered when decid-
5
3.2
ing when to neuter a cat. These are early age prepubertal cats, tradi-
Total
155
8'66
tional age prepubertal cats, or after puberty The main advantages of
 prepubertal neutering are prevention of unwanted pregnancy and a
marked reduction in the risk of mammary neoplasia.
Early age prepubertal gonadectomy (6-14 weeks)
underlying cause should be corrected, such as removal of a fetus, and
Early age prepubertal gonadectomy is defined as surgical sterilization
normal parturition may then commence. Calcium borogluconate and
of immature animals aged from 6-14 weeks. Several studies have
Oxytocin can also be tried.48
looked at early age versus traditional age prepubertal neutering,556
Only about a quarter of dystocia cases can be managed successfully
and the results of these studies are summarized in Table 40-2. The
non-surgically46.49
main advantage of early age prepubertal gonadectomy for charitable
If calcium borogluconate or oxytocin therapy is not successful, or
Organization or shelters is that it can be done before rehoming, ensur-
if the litter is very large or small (a single kitten), or there is an iden-
ing that cats are neutered and thereby reducing pet overpopulation.
tifiable obstruction or uterine torsion then a cesarean operation is
indicated. An early decision to perform a cesarean or hysterotomy
Traditional age prepubertal neutering (5-7 months)
should be made as the fetuses will soon die, or may already be dead.48
months), cats are more mature so the potential for anesthetic compli-
Extrauterine fetuses
cations such as hypoglycemia, hypothermia, or delayed recovery due
to slow metabolism of drugs is less. As cats have completed the major-
Occasional instances of extrauterine fetuses have been recorded.50,51
ity of the long bone growth, effects on bones will be less. Behavior is
These probably result from uterine rupture during pregnancy, possibly
less likely to be affected in the older cat with a more established
associated with uterine torsion rather than from an ectopic pregnancy.
character. The disadvantage is that the cat may already have started
The presence of fetuses in the peritoneal cavity as a result of uterine
cycling, pregnancy is already possible, and the utenus is more active
rupture is usually of little consequence and affected animals can
 and hemorrhage is more likely during surgery.
survive indefnitely without surgery, the fetal remnants becoming
encapsulated by the omentum or mesentery.51
Effect of neutering on mammary neoplasia
The age of spaying has been shown to have an effect on the develop-
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE VAGINA
 ment of mammary gland carcinoma in cats. Queens gonadectomized
 prior to six months of age had a 91% reduction in risk of developing
AND VULVA
 rd paes asu sies eu m paio eisedoau Ar
 one year had an 86% reduction in risk."1 Spaying cats after two years
Vaginal hypoplasia/atresia
 of age had minimal effect on mammary tumor development. Another
study showed that intact cats were seven times overrepresented in a
In vaginal hypoplasia there is abnormal development of the vagina,
 population of cats diagnosed with mammary tumors.
which may result in retention of uterine fluid and cause endometrial
-ed si i! ieu yonu os aieip Aeu shan au Aiajui pue sasueup
Timing of surgery
pable or abnormalities are visible on ultrasound. In rare cases, simple
vaginal bands or strictures can be broken down, allowing normal
The ideal stage of the estrous cycle at which to perform gonadectomy
coitus.
Aue anuaadxa oi umouy iou si uaanb au inq sgop ul snonsaue si
463
Section
5
The Abdomen
Table 40-2 Advantages and disadvantages of early age
Table 40-3 Advantages and disadvantages of neutering
(6-14 week) prepubertal ovariohysterectomy
female cats
Advantages
Disadvantages
Advantages
Disadvantages
Can be done before adoption,
A 30% decrease in basal
Decrease or absence of:
Irreversible if ownerschange
ensuring that adopted animals do
metabolic rate
Pregnancy
their mind
get neutered
Minor swelling of abdominal
 Pregnancy-related diseases 
Generic risks of surgery:
 Less invasive and less traumatic
incision 55.56
Parturition-related diseases 
Hemorrhage
surgery as uterus very small and
 Delay in closure of growth 
Mammary gland disease
 Retained ovarian remnant
inactivess.s6
platess
Uterine disease
Ureteral obstruction
 No increase in incidence of physical
Mild decrease in diameter of
 Progesterone-related disease 
resulting from inadvertent 
 or behavioral problems for at least 
prepubic urethra in the 
Estrogen-related disease
ligation
a three year period following
female cata 59
Ovarian disease
Ureterovaginal fistula 
neuterings7
Cats 'neutered' prior to
Decreased roaming
Granuloma of ovarian
Reduced risk of asthma, gingivitis
5 months have an
Less hypervocalization and a more 
 or uterine pedicle
and hyperactivity if neutered 
increase in shyness to 
relaxed attitude
- non-absorbable suture
before 5.5 months of age5s
strangers60
material
Behavioral abnormalities, e.g.
No clinical significance was found to be
associated with this.
laziness
 Obesity with its inherent risks
specific problems in relation to the stage of the estrous cycle in which
complication rates of ovariectomy and ovariectomy were no different,
she is gonadectomized.63
although similar studies have not been reported in cats. Hysterectomy
alone should not be performed as ovaries may become cystic and
animals are still attractive to males.3
Anesthesia
 Ovariohysterectomy and ovariectomy are usually elective procedures
and routine anesthesia is employed; special care with regards to
Feline ovariohysterectomy
hypoglycemia, hypothermia, and anesthesia must be taken if neuter-
 ing at a young age (eg. 6-14 week old kittens).64 See Chapter 2 for
The most common indication for feline ovariohysterectomy (Box
40-1) is as an elective procedure in a healthy animal to prevent preg-
more information.
nancy. There are potential advantages and disadvantages to neutering
female cats (Table 40-3). Other indications for ovariohysterectomy
Cesarean
include pyometra, cesarean, uterine prolapse, neoplasia, trauma,
rupture, infarction and neutering during pregnancy.
-eiisuo ieiads aie aiaul ueais ig paneaid suaq siue u
 In cats, the ovaries are relatively easy to retract from the abdomen
tions prior to surgery. The queens should be oxygenated prior to
but the uterine body is harder to exteriorize and the cervix is not
induction, and it is recommended to use rapidly metabolized or
clearly visible. The uterus can be located with an oophorectomy or
 reversible agents for anesthesia so the fetuses are not unduly affected 
 spay hook (see Chapter 13) or finger. Some find that the omentum
 by the anesthetic agents. For information on anesthesia for cesareans
can be easier to engage with a spay hook than the broad ligament so
see Chapter 2
Pinous syooy Aeds guesnuy aq ue ie ayi ui yooy Aeds e jo asn
When positioning for surgery the head should be elevated slightly
not be used if the animal has a pyometra or gravid uterus as they can
to reduce pressure on the diaphragm by the enlarged abdominal
cause damage to the friable tissues, and can also damage the spleen
contents and also tilted slightly to one side but not so much to make
 Or omentum. The ureters may be located in the broad ligament near
 surgery and localization of the linea alba more diffcult.
the cervical region,thereforeto avoid damaging theureters theuterine
body should be ligated just below the bifurcation. When performing
surgery in early age prepubertal animals (6-14 week old kittens), any
bleeding during surgery should be meticulously controlled; fragile
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
 pediatric tissues require gentle handling as they are liable to tear.
Cats can be neutered or spayed via a midline or flank approach.
Surgical gonadectomy refers to the removal of the gonads under
Complications with the two techniques are similar° except more
 general anesthesia. In the female, gonadectomy (spaying) is generally
swelling, wound tenderness, and drainage may occur after flank spay.7
performed by removing both ovaries (ovariectomy) or both ovaries
Flank ovariohysterectomy (Box 40-1) may be preferable in cats with
and uterus (ovariohysterectomy) by a midline or flank abdominal
aqissd se suepe io eiseaday snoeuouapeoqy Areuue
approach. Laparoscopy has also been used for ovariectomy and ovari-
advantages of the flank approach are avoidance of evisceration, less
ohysterectomy'5 (see Chapter 24). Whether to remove the ovary and
surgical trauma and shorter surgical time Complications include dis-
Ag suuaan Auu ioy euap e si saen au isng io snan
coloration or darkening of oriental cats' fur when it regrows after
removing both ovaries and utenus all reproductive tissue is removed
clipping* and more diffculty in locating the uterus, particularly for
and no further problems can be encountered. It may not, however, be 
the inexperienced surgeons. It is more problematic to neuter a preg-
necessary to remove the utenus as once the ovaries are removed the
  a ue  yu e ynon  nuu
uterus will quickly atrophy. Pyometra or endometrial hyperplasia
enlarge the incision if an ovarian or uterine pedicle is dropped, ifthere
should not occur in an ovariectomized animal. In dogs. the
are congenital anomalies, or there is bleeding to control.
464
Female genital tract
Chapter
40
 Box 40-2 Pyometra
 Box 40-3 Cesarean by hysterotomy
wo paddp aa pinous uawopge aut Aabans lof uoieedaid ul
Speed of surgery is important to prevent fetal hypoxia.
canial to the xiphoid to caudal to the pubis to enable removal
pue paddip ag pnous uauopge ayi Aabans ot uoeedad ul
of the enlarged uterus. Great care should be exercized when
prepped from cranial to the xiphoid to caudal to the pubis. The cat
entering the abdomen through the linea alba not to perforate the
is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the table tilted so the
uterus. The uterus is more friable than normal, with an increased
abdominal contents are not compressing the diaphragm (Fig.
risk of rupture; thus a long incision is made so the uterus can be 
40-10A). A long celiotomy incision is made to expose the whole
lifted out carefully without the need for pulling which could cause
uterus. The linea alba is often thin and stretched so great care is 
rupture.
needed not to damage the gravid uterus. One or both uterine
 After exteriorizing the uterus, it is packed off from the remainder
horns are exteriorized (Fig. 40-10B) and packed off to prevent 
 of the abdomen with laparotomy swabs to avoid spillage of
contamination of the abdomen with fetal fluid. The uterus is incised 
contents into the abdomen if inadvertent rupturing occurs. An
in a relatively avascular area on the ventral surface of the uterine
 Ovariohysterectomy is performed as described in Box 40-1. The 
 body, taking care not to lacerate the fetuses. The incision is extended
suspensory ligaments are often stretched and do not need breaking
with scissors. The fetuses within the uterine body are removed first
 pue ienosea ahou ief ag ot Aalls! suawebil peog aui umop
and then remaining fetuses are 'milked-down' to the same incision.
should be bunch ligated. The uterine pedicdle is transected at the level
sassaa legwn sad io peay aul Aa paipuey isag ae suaniy aul
of the proximal vagina with absorbable suture material. The uterine
are clamped 2 cm from the ventral abdominal wall of the kitten and 
body should not be oversewn, which may increase the chance of
lueisisse ue ol passed uaul ane sualiy aul Alersip palaaas pion aul
 granuloma formation, but if it is thought to be contaminated then
for resuscitation. If there are two remaining kittens within tips of 
pinous uawopge aul buusnly lage l! laao paneid ag uen wnuao
opposite uterine horns, bilateral cornual incisions are indicated rather
be lavaged with copious volumes of warm saline prior to routine
than a single uterine body incision.
 abdominal closure.
 After each kitten is delivered the associated placenta should be 
removed by gentle traction or by gentle squeezing of the uterine wall
and twisting of the cord. Those that are firmly adherent should be 
left in position since forceful removal will result in hemorrhage.
Ovariectomy
Such placentas will be expelled by uterine involution supplemented 
by exogenous oxytocin administr ation after termination of the 
Ovariectomy (Box 40-1) is potentially a quicker surgery requiring
procedure. Both uterine horns up to the ovaries and the uterine body
a shorted anesthetic, shorter surgical incision, and is less invasive
are carefully inspected to ensure all kittens have been removed. Any
Overall. As long as both ovaries are removed in entirety then the uterus
Aipiden pinous snlain aul pauledal s! snain aul ot abewep ssoub
should atrophy and hormonally related disease such as pyometra
begin to contract and involute.
should not occur. Contraindications are older animals with uterine
The uterine incision is closed using either an inverting continuous 
disease such as pyometra or tumors.
pattern such as a Cushing or Lembert or an appositional pattern with
absorbable suture material such as 2M poliglecaprone, caprosyn,
polyglactin 910 or polysorb.
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
The celiotomy is closed routinely. An intradermal suture may be
and pyometra
 preferable for skin closure to avoid interference of skin sutures by
suckling kittens.
The uterus is often enlarged, friable, and vascular so some additional
Gravid (en bloc) ovariohysterectomy
care and precautions should be taken when performing an ovariohys-
 aad pue eieiau ieaua is yim ii e rg aai
 If elective ovariohysterectomy is planned then an en bloc removal
(Box 40-2; see Fig. 40-5).
of the ovaries and uterus can be done first. After the uterus and
ovaries are exposed the broad ligament is broken down. The
ovarian pedicles and uterine body are double or triple clamped and 
Ovarian remnants and stump pyometra
transected. The whole gravid uterus is then passed in an aseptic
manner to a team of assistants who will open the uterus and revive
Surgery should be performed through a midline celiotomy and the
the kittens.
 kidneys, by reflecting the mesoduodenum or mesocolon, respectively.
peritoneal walls should be inspected, as these are also commonly
paiei aisnoiaaid punoie anssil lenpisau yiu aue pue sans panae
 pedicle sites resected.16
 Excised ovarian tissue should be submitted for microscopic exami-
(Box 40-3) is performed more frequently than hysterotomy except in
uooasai samban i uaul juasand osie si eaad dums e jl 'uoiu
 pedigree cats. Unless the cat is intended for further breeding, gravid
after removal of the ovarian remnant The ureters should be identified
 ovariohysterectomy (Box 40-1) may be preferable to hysterotomy and
 prior to resection of the pyometra as these are often located immedi-
is well tolerated. Gravid or en bloc ovariohysterectomy involves ovari-
ately dorsal to the stump. The uterine stump is dissected free from
 ohysterectomy before hysterotomy and removal of the neonates. In
surrounding tissues, ligated, transected, and removed. Non-resectable
 One study 26 cats had this procedure performed.71 Intraoperative com-
stumps can be opened and omentalized (see Chapter 19).
 plications were limited to one cat that bled excessively during surgery
and was later found to have a clotting disorder. Postoperative compli-
Cesarean
cations included anemia that required blood transfusion in three cats,
and death in one cat. The rate of neonatal survival was 42% for cats,
Precise indications for hysterotomy or cesarean are not well docu-
which was similar to that documented by previous studies of medical
mented and gravid ovariohysterectomy through a midline incision
and surgical management of dystocia.71
465
Section
151
The Abdomen
A
B
Figure 40-10 Cesarean in a cat with one large dead fetus. (A) The cat is positioned with the head and thorax elevated above the abdomen to relieve 
pressure on the diaphragm and therefore limit lung compression. (B) Care must be taken on entering the abdomen not to damage the uterine wall.
(C) An en bloc ovariohysterectomy is being performed with the first ovarian pedicle being clamped prior to being cut.
and monitoring for deterioration. See Chapter 3 for further informa-
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
tion on postoperative mana gement.
After elective ovariohysterectomy routine postoperative care is per-
formed including provision of analgesia, and keeping the animal in
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
a warm quiet environment where it can be monitored for any post-
 Operative complications. The use of a Buster collar may be indicated
to prevent self-trauma and interference or premature suture removal.
Inclusion of a ureter in the vaginal stump ligature or ovarian
For early age neutering in particular, kittens should be offered food
pedicle ligature is a serious though rare complication. It is usually
shortly after standing to minimize hypoglycemia. Dextrose adminis-
unilateral and results in renal enlargement and hydronephrosis. If
tration can be considered if recovery is slow or prolonged.55
diagnosis is rapid and the ligature removed then some recovery
of renal function may occur. Otherwise, function in that kidney
will be lost and ureteronephrectomy is usually recommended (see
Cesarean
Chapter 36).
If a stump pyometra is diagnosed in an animal following
After retrieval, the kittens are briskly rubbed to stimulate respiration,
neutering, an ovarian remnant has been left behind and should be
and amniotic fluid suctioned from nares and nasopharynx. Naloxone
identified and removed. In one report the main presenting sign
drops under the tongue will reverse opioids. Dopram may stimulate
of a cat with a stump pyometra was abdominal straining.72 The
respiration in apneic neonates. The umbilical vein can be used for
enlarged uterine stump had caused rectal compression. The stump
injections if required.
was drained and removed and a small ovarian fragment was removed
 After completion of the surgery the abdominal skin should be
from the right side. Intestinal strangulation has been reported when
cleaned to remove antiseptics and debris before neonates are allowed
intestines passed through a mesenteric tear following an elective
with the queen. The mother and kittens are placed in an incubator to
Ovariohysterectomy.73
keep them warm. Neonates should be allwed to nurse as soon as
-do aqissod e si suoiad uonas ueaiesan in eiaod iaa
 possible to ensure colostrum intake. If the queen is not yet lactating
cation, particularly if the uterus ruptures or if there are necrotic or
then the kittens may need to be given a proprietary milk replacement
decaying fetuses present Adhesions may occur after cesareans, which
product.
may interfere with subsequent exteriorization of the uterus if future
 The queen should be monitored postoperatively for hypothermia.
cesareans are required.
hypotension, hypocalcemia, neonatal rejection, and agalactia. Any
vulval hemorrhage is also monitored as delayed uterine involution
can result in severe life-threatening hemorrhage.
Hemorrhage
One of the commonest complications after ovariohysterectomy is
Pyometra
hemorrhage due to ligature failure This is more likely to occur if the
surgeon is inexperienced, the animal is obese, and the uterus is vas-
Following ovariohysterectomy for pyometra cats will need intensive
cular. If ovarian pedicles or the uterine body are inadvertently dropped
supportive care, ensuring adequate hydration, treatment for sepsis,
during a midline approach the incision can be extended to allow
466
Female genital tract
Chapter
40
Box 40-4 A dropped ovarian stump
 Box 40-5 A dropped uterine stump
If an ovarian stump is dropped, extend the midline incision cranially 
If the uterine stump is dropped or the uterus tears after clamping
to the xiphoid. The cat's head should be lowered 10° thus removing
aun paay siand aul ot Aepnen uoispui aupiw aul puaxa uaui
most of the abdominal contents into the cranial abdomen. If the 
urinary bladder caudally. The uterine stump is found on the dorsal
right vessels have been dropped the mesoduodenum is used to 
aspect of the urethra just caudal to the neck of the bladder. Care is 
pack viscera to the left of the abdomen. If the left vessels have been 
taken not to clamp the ureters or urethra, which are located at the 
0l sjuajuon jeulwuopqe aul yped ol pasn s! uolonosaw aul paddoup
trigone of the bladder. Excessive traction on the bladder can also
the right. The area at the caudal aspect of the kidney should be
damage the ureters. The stump is re-ligated.
checked. Applying gentle traction to the broad ligament will help
identify vessels. Ligatures should be placed on any sites where
hemorrhage is identified. Ensure the ureters are not mistakenly
ligated.
After hysterotomy hemorrhage may occur after forcible separation
of placentae. This hemorrhage can be life threatening and should not
be ignored. Oxytocin injection should be repeated or administered if 
 not already given. Animals may need blood transfusion or hysterec-
tomy if severe anemia occurs or the bleeding due to subinvolution of
retrieval and ligation (Boxes 40-4 and 40-5). If surgery was performed
the uterus does not abate within 8-10 weeks.
slassa upaaqaaai o alqisodaq Au l 'uosui yue e yna
ayl jo juaaeua iae no uoisiu aes al qanon uoea 1oy
Weight gain
incision, particularly in thin cats. Alternatively, consideration should
be given to closing the abdominal flank incision and performing a
 Neutering is a commonly associated risk factor for obesity.73-78 Cats
midline incision if abdominal hemorrhage is evident. If bleeding
s Aianeuixidde ue oi anp zuiam Apoq aseaui ot punoy aiam
occurs due to a loose ligature and this is not recognized or addressed
at surgery then affected animals will be slow to recover, with signs of
Thus, 313.6 x ideal body weight (kg) (0.67) kJ is proposed for the
hypovolemic shock such as tachycardia, tachypnoea, pale mucous
aeid ul og'sie znpe paeds jo juauanai iaua aueuauiu
membranes, a weak pulse, and a prolonged CRT. Ultrasound examina-
this means that ad libitum feeding of cats once neutered is not recom-
tion can be useful to determine if there is a build-up of abdominal
 mended, portion size should be reduced, and regular weighing recom-
fluid. If the cat is showing signs of hypovolemic shock, repeat surgery
mended.7α Many adverse sequelae of obesity exist, including diabetes,
through a midline incision should be performed after stabilization. A
where obesity and neutering have been found to be predisposing
blood transfusion may be required (see Chapter 5).
factors for the disease.7
 REFERENCES
 Crouch jE. Text-Atlas of cat anatomy.
acetate in a queen. J Feline Med Surg
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1969. p. 177.
2009;11:518-21.
1991;21:501-7.
2. Verstegen JP. Physiology and
8.
England G. Genital surgery in the bitch
15.
 England GC. Confrmation of ovarian
endocrinology of reproduction in female
and queen. In: Noakes DE, Parkinson TJ.
remnant syndrome in the queen 
cats. In: England G, Von Heimendahl A.
England GCW, editors. Veterinary
using hCG administration. Vet Rec
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
reproduction and obstetrics. Edinburgh:
1997;141[12):309-10.
feline reproduction and neonatology. 2nd
Saunders Elsevier; 2009. p. 367-80.
16.
Heffelfnger D). Ovarian remnant in a
ed. Gloucs: BSAVA Publications; 2010.
9.
Gelberg HB, McEntee K. Feline ovarian
2-year-old queen. Can Vet J 2006;47:
p. 11-16.
neoplasms. Vet Pathol 1985;22:572-6.
165-7.
3. Matton JS, Nyland TG. Ovaries and
10.
 Barrett RE, Theilen GH. Neoplasms of
17. Mclntyre RL, Levy IK, Roberts JF, Reep RL.
Uterus. In: Small animal diagnostic
the canine and feline reproductive tracts.
Developmental uterine anomalies
ultrasound. 2nd ed. Philadelphia
In: Kirk Rw, editor. Current veterinary
in cats and dogs undergoing elective
Saunders Co; 2002. p. 231-49.
 therapy: small animal practice. th ed.
Owariohysterectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc
4. Schmidt PM. Feline breeding
WB Saunders Philadelphia; 1977.
2010;237:542-6.
management. Vet Clin North Am Small
p. 1263-7.
18.
. Miller MA, Ramos-Vara JA, Dickerson MF.
Anim Pract 1986;16:435-51.
11.
Ball RL, Birchard Sl, May LR, et al.
et al. Uterine neoplasia in 13 cats. J Vet
5. Herron MA. Infertility from noninfectious
Owarian remnant syndrome in dogs and
Diagn Invest 2003;15:515-22.
causes. In: Morrow DA, editor Current
cats: 21 cases [2000-2007). J Am Vet Med
19. Dow C. Experimental uterine infection in
veterinary therapy in theriogenology. 2nd
Assoc 2010;236:548-53.
the domestic cat. J Comp Path 1962a;72:
 ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1986.
12.
DeNardo GA, Becker K, Brown NO.
303-7.
p. 829-34.
 Dobbins S. Ovarian remnant syndrome:
 Dow C. The cystic hyperplasia- pyometra
6.
. Johnston SD, Kustriz MVR, Olson PN.
revascularization of free-floating ovarian
complex in the cat. Vet Rec 1962;74:
Disorders of the mammary glands
tissue in the feline abdominal cavity. I Am
141-6.
of Queens. Canine and feline
Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:290-6.
21.
Lein DH, Concannon Pw. Infertility and
theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
13.
 Miller DM. Ovarian remnant syndrome
fertility treatments and management in
Saunders, 2001. p. 474-6.
in dogs and cats: 46 cases [1988-1992)-
the queen and tomcat. In: Kirk Rw.
7. Keskin A, Yilmazbas G, Yilmaz R, et al.
J Vet Diagn Invest 1995;7:572-4.
editor. Current veterinary therapy: small
Pathological abnormalities after long-term
14.
Wallace MS. The ovarian remnant
animal practice. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
administration of medroxyprogesterone
 syndrome in the bitch and queen. Vet
WB Saunders; 1983. p. 936-42.
467
Section
5
The Abdomen
22. Potter K, Hancock DH, Gallina AM.
41. Ridyard AE, Welsh EA, Gunn-Moore DA.
58.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN. The
 Clinical and pathologic features of
Successful treatment of uterine torsion in
effect of prepuberal and postpuberal
endometrial hyperplasia, pyometra, and
a cat with severe metabolic and
gonadectomy on radial physeal closure in 
endometritis in cats: 79 cases [1980-5).
haemostatic complications. J Feline Med
male and female domestic cats. Vet Radiol
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1991;198:1427-31.
Surg 2000;2:115-19.
Ultrasound 1997;38:42-7.
23.
Misirlioglu D, Nak D, Ozyigit MO, et al.
42.
 Thilagar S, Yew YC, Dhaliwal GK, et al.
59.
 Root MV, Johnston SD, Johnston GR,
HER-2/neu (c-erbB-2] oncoprotein in
Uterine horn torsion in a pregnant cat.
Olson PN. The effect of prepubertal and
hyperplastic endometrial polyps detected
Vet Rec 2005;157:558-60.
postpubertal gonadectomy on penile
in two cats. J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:
43. Stanley SW, Pacchiana PD. Uterine torsion 
extrusion and urethral diameter in the
885-8.
and metabolic abnormalities in a cat
domestic cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
with a pyometra. Can Vet J 2008;49:
1996;37:363-6.
24. Oen EO. The oral administration of
 megestrol acetate to postpone oestrus in
398-400.
60.
 Spain CV, Scarlett JIM, Houpt KA.
cats. Nord Vet Med 1977;29:287-91.
44.
 De La Puerta B, McMahon LA, Moores A.
Long-term risks and benefts of early age
25.
.Keskin A, Yilmazbas G, Yilmaz R, et al.
Uterine horn torsion in a non-gravid cat.
 gonadectomy in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Pathological abnormalities after long-term
I Feline Med Surg 2008;10:395-7.
2004;224:372-9.
administration of medroxyprogesterone
45.
 England G. Infertility and subfertility in
61.
Overley B, Shofer FS, Goldschmidt MH,
acetate in a queen. J Feline Med Surg
the bitch and queen. In: Noakes DE.
et al. Association between
2009;11:518-21
Parkinson T), England GCW, editors.
owarihysterectomy and feline mammary
26. Bellenger CR, Chen JC. Effect of megestrol
Veterinary reproduction and obstetrics.
arcinoma. J Vet Int Med 2005;19:560-3.
acetate on the endometrium of the
Edinburgh: Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
62.
 Misdorp W, Romijn A, Hart AA. Feline 
prepubertally ovariectomised kitten.
p. 639-70.
mammary tumors: a case-control study
Res Vet Sci 1990;48:112-18.
46.
 Gunn-Moore DA, Thrusfeld MV. Feline
of hormonal factors. Anticancer Res
27.
 van Haaften B. Pyometra in an
dystocia: prevalence and association with
1991:11:1793-8.
ovariectomized cat following treatment
canial conformation and breed. Vet Rec
63.
 Romagnoli S, Sontas H. Prevention of 
with proligestone. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd
1995;136:350-3.
breeding in the female. In: England G.
1989;114:383-7.
47.
 Ekstrand C, Linde-Forsberg C. Causes of
Von Heimendahl A, editors. BSAVA
28.
Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO.
dystocia in queens. J Small Anim Pract 
manual of canine and feline reproduction
Bradley RL. Pyometra in cats: 183 cases
1994;35:459-64
and neonatology. 2nd ed. Gloucs: BSAVA
[1979-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Noakes D. Maternal dystocia: causes and
Publications; 2010. p. 23-33.
1987:191:1130-2.
 treatment. In: Noakes DE, Parkinson TJ.
64.J
 Joyce A, Yates D. Help stop teenage 
Nak D, Nak Y Tuna B. Follow-up
England GCW, editors. Veterinary
pregnancy. Early-age neutering in cats.
29.
examinations after medical treatment of
reproduction and obstetrics. Edinburgh:
J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:3-10.
 pyometra in cats with the progesterone-
Saunders Elsevier; 2009. p. 232-46.
65.
 Van Nimwegen SA, Kirpensteijn J.
antagonist aglepristone. J Feline Med Surg
49.
Linde- Forsberg C, Eneroth A. Parturition.
laparoscopic ovariectomy in cats:
2009:11:499- 502.
 In: Simpson GM, England GCW, Harvey 
comparison of laser and bipolar
30. Davidson AP, Feldman EC, Nelson RW.
M, editors. Manual of small animal
electrocoagulation. I Feline Med Surg
Treatment of pyometra in cats, using
 reproduction and neonatology.
2007;9:397-403.
prostaglandin F2 alpha: 21 cases
Cheltenham: BSAVA Publications; 1998.
66.
Coe R), Grint Nl, Tivers MS, et al.
(1982-1990). 1 Am Vet Med Assoc
p. 127-42.
 Comparison of flank and midline
1992;200:825-8
50.
 Linzell jL. An extra-uterine foetus in the
approaches to the ovariohysterectomy
31.
Biller DS, Haibel GK. Torsion of the
cat. Vet Rec 1951;63:223-5.
of cats. Vet Rec 2006;159:309-13.
uterus in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
51.
 Rosset E, Galet C, Buff S. A case report of
67.
Grint N J, Murison PJ, Coe RJ, Waterman
1987:191:1128-9.
an ectopic fetus in a cat. J Feline Med
Pearson AE. Assessment of the influence
32. Young RC, Hiscock RH. Torsion of the
Surg 2011;13:610-13.
of surgical technique on postoperative
52.
 Saperstein G, Harris S, Leipold HW.
 pain and wound tenderness in cats
uterus in a cat. Vet Rec 1963;75:872.
 Congenital defects in domestic cats. Feline
following ovariohysterectomy. I Feline
33.
 Sharma HN. Uterine torsion in a cat.
Pract 1976;6:18-43.
Med Surg 2006;8:15-21.
Indian Vet I 1964;41:421-5.
53. Nomura K, Koreeda T, Kawata M,
68.
Gorelick J. Discoloration of exotic cats
34.
 Singer A. Torsion of the uterus in a cat.
 Shiraishi Y. Vaginal atresia with transverse
hair following flank ovariohysterectomy.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1960;137:290.
septum in a cat. I Vet Med Sci 1997;59:
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1974;69:943-6.
35. Pankhurst JW. A case of torsion of the
1045-8.
69.
Hedlund Cs. Mammary neoplasia. In:
uterus in the pregnant cat with fatal
Fossum T, editor. Small animal surgery 3e.
hemorrhage. Vet Rec 1961;73:1269.
54.
 Firat I, Haktanir-Yatkin D, Sontas BH.
 Ekici H. Vulvar leiomyosarcoma in a cat.
St Louis: Mosby Elsevier; 2007.
36.
 Kudale ML, Wadia DS. Jambagi SN.
I Feline Med Surg 2007;9:435-8.
p. 729-47.
Torsion of uterus in a cat: a case report.
55.
Aronsohn MG, Fagella AM. Surgical
70.
 Feathers Dl. Locating site of incision for
Indian Vet J 1972;49:1148-9.
technique for neutering 6- to 14-week-old
flank approach to feline OVH. Vet Med
 37. Jolivet MR. Uterine torsion in a pregnant 
kittens. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;202:
Small Anim Clin 1974;69:1069.
cat. Mod Vet Pract 1987;68:240.
53-5.
71.
Robbins MA, Mullen HS. En bloc
38. Mclntire IW, Waugh SL. Uterine torsion in
56.
 Howe LM. Short term results and
ovariohysterectomy as a treatment for
a cat. Fel Pract 1987;11:41-2.
 complications of prepubertal
dystocia in dogs and cats. Vet Surg
39.
 Freeman L. Feline uterine torsion.
gonadectomy in cats and dogs. I Am Vet
1994;23:48-52.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
Med Assoc 1997;211:57-62.
72.
Rota A, Pregel P, Cannizzo FT, et al.
1988;10:1078-82.
57.
Howe LM, Slater MR, Boothe Hw, et al.
Unusual case of uterine stump pyometra
40.
 Montgomery RD, Saidla JE, Milton JL.
 Long-term outcome of gonadectomy
in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:
 Feline uterine horn torsion: a case report
performed at an early age or traditional
448-50.
and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp
age in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
73.
Kuan SY, Ticehurst K, Hoffmann KL, et al.
Assoc 1989;25:189-90.
2000;217:1661-5.
Intestinal strangulation after elective
468
 Female genital tract
Chapter
40
 Ovariohysterectomy. J Feline Med Surg
76. Belsito KR, Vester BM, Keel T, et al.
 on bodyweight, composition and
2010;12:325-9.
Impact of ovariohysterectomy and food
 condition score in cats following
74. Mitsuhashi Y, Chamberlin AJ, Bigley KE,
intake on body composition, physical
owariohysterectomy. J Small Anim Pract
 Bauer JE. Maintenance energy requirement
 activity, and adipose gene expression
2001;42:433-8.
determination of cats after spaying. Br J
 in cats. J Anim Sci 2009;87;594-602.
79. Rand JS, Fleeman LM, Farrow HA, et al.
Nutr 2011;106:S135-8.
77.
 Flynn MF, Hardie EM, Armstrong PJ.
Canine and feline diabetes mellitus:
75. Alexander LG, Salt C, Thomas G,
 Effect of ovariohysterectomy on 
nature or nurture? J Nutr 2004;134:
 Butterwick R. Effects of neutering on
maintenance energy requirement in cats.
S2072-80.
food intake, body weight and body
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1996;209:1572-81.
composition in growing female kittens.
78.
Harper EJ, Stack DM, Watson TD.
B J Nutr 2011;106:S19-23.
 Moxham G. Effects of feeding regimens
469
Section
J.L. Demetriou, S.J. Langley-Hobbs
Thorax
Thoracic surgery in the cat is considered to be advanced surgery. Prac-
particularly the anesthestic management, are important additional
tices should have resources and personnel confident in performing
considerations.
intermittent positive pressure ventilation in cats when considering a
 In the second section of this part of the book the chapters focus on
thoracotomy, in addition to the capability of providing appropriate
cardiorespiratory surgery. In the frst chapter, surgical management of
pre- and postoperative care Cats are prone to pleural conditions.
tracheal and bronchial conditions is described. Cats with respiratory
many of which may be managed medically after drainage and place-
disease are often not diagnosed until the condition is far advanced as
 ment of a thoracic drain, but in some instances surgical intervention
 some of the clinical signs such as exercise intolerance can be over-
is required, eg. in cases of chylothorax or pyothorax that are unre-
 looked or may not be clearly evident. Tracheal avulsion or rupture is
sponsive to medical management.
a condition seen in cats that can cause overt clinical signs several
 In the frst section of this part of the book the chapters cover the
 weeks after its occurrence. Surgical correction is usually successful with
region of the pleural cavity, with the frst two chapters covering the
good technique if careful attention is paid to the anesthetic manage-
basics of thoracotomy and thoracoscopy in the cat. In subsequent
 ment The surgeon performing lung lobectomy is advised to read the
chapters specifc conditions of the pleural cavity and thoracic wall
chapter on thoracotomy frst, prior to the chapter specifically related
are discussed and their surgical management described. Trauma to the
to conditions of the lung. The fnal chapter in the book describes
thoracic wall in cats (from vehicles, dog bites or gunshot) is common
diseases and surgical management of conditions of the heart. Although
and resulting wounds may necessitate thoracic wall reconstruction. In
the final chapter, conditions of the diaphragm are covered, the most
 Organ, descriptions of some of the more frequently encountered
 common of which is diaphragmatic rupture. The management of this
cardiac conditions are included eg. management of a patent
 condition usually involves a celiotomy but as the thoracic cavity is
ductus arteriosus, pericardectomy, and placement of an epicardial
Kains pioeioul jo spadse uaun Aains suunp uado Aiaaae 
pacemaker.
Thoracic surgery and the thoracic wall
pter
Thoracotomy
A.L. Moores
Cats with thoracic disease may present with a range of clinical signs.
thoracocentesis) should never be delayed but should be undertaken
depending upon the organ system involved and the pathophysiology
in such a way as to minimize handling or restraint Indicators of
of the disease Individual disease processes are covered in subsequent 
impending respiratory crisis are listed in Box 4l-1.
chapters.
-iaap diau ai uosa ja uai aun jo uasqo iai
Surgical intervention may be necessary for the management of a
mine the type of thoracic disease present (Table 41-2). For example,
number of thoracic diseases in cats. Access to gas and fluid can be
 pleural disease may result in short shallow respiration, whereas upper
obtained by thoracocentesis or thoracostomy drain placement. Inter-
respiratory obstruction is more likely to result in a long deep inspira-
costal thoracotomy allows access to a limited area of one hemithorax
 tory pattern. Thoracic auscultation also provides highly valuable addi-
and is well tolerated. Median sternotomy is more invasive but allows
tional information. Firstly, a basic assessment of whether or not there 
surgical access to the entire thoracic cavity.
are audible breath sounds needs to be made and if breath sounds are
absent, locating where the sounds are missing can rapidly help in
identifying the type of pathology present. The use of gentle percussion
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO THE CAT WITH
 must also always accompany auscultation to help identify fluid lines
in cases of, for example pyothorax. If breath sounds are auscultatable,
IMPAIRED RESPIRATORY FUNCTION
then assessing whether they are appropriate for the respiratory effort
of the patient is the next step. In a normal cat, breath sounds are quiet
but audible, and they naturally become louder as respiratory rate
with clinical signs attributable to thoracic disease. Hyperpnea and
tachypnea (Table 4l-1) are common physical examination fndings.
does not normally generate abnormal breath sounds, so the identifica-
Cats may often compensate for impaired respiratory function by
tion of crackles or wheezes indicates the presence of pulmonary
becoming less active and owners may not notice clinical signs until
 pathology and should always be investigated. It is also important to
they are severe. Cats are therefore more likely to be severely affected
distinguish abnormal lower respiratory tract sounds from referred
at frst presentation than dogs with the same disease. Observation
aseasip peil Aioieidsal iaddn Aq pasneo asiou Aemile 1addn
of the cat prior to physical examination should recognize those
 Prior to any diagnostic or therapeutic intervention, and certainly
cats that are at risk of respiratory embarrassment during physical
prior to anesthesia, pre-oxygenation is recommended to improve
examination. When necessary, measures to prevent a respiratory crisis
oxygen delivery to tissues in patients with compromised respiratory
se yons suouaaiaiul osie inq hoddns uasixo gupiaoid se qons)
aul sapiaoid 1oieqnoul 1o ase uasAxo ue isum (i-it Bu) uoouny
a a       
available and do not allow concurrent physical examination. The
Table 41-1 Definitions of common terms used to describe
 changes in breathing patterns
Box 41-1 Indicators of an impending respiratory crisis
Term
Definition
in cats
 Dyspnea
 Subjective experience of breathing discomfort 
Failure to find a comfortable position
Hyperpnea
 Fast and/or deep breathing
 Paradoxical abdominal movement 
Tachypnea
Increased breathing rate, usually shallow
 Open mouth breathing
Hyperventilation
 Increased breathing that causes COz loss
Cyanosis
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00041-X
473
Section
6
Thorax
Table 41-2 Classification pathologic respiratory patterns
Box 41-2 Thoracocentesis
Disease examples
In most cats, thoracocentesis can be performed with the cat sitting or
Respiratory pattern
in sternal recumbency with minimal restraint. Following clipping and 
Prolonged inspiratory phase ±
Upper respiratory tract disease,
aseptic preparation of the lateral thoracic wall, a 19-22G butterfly 
 stridor 
e.g.. laryngeal obstruction,
needle attached to a syringe via a three-way tap is introduced at a
tracheal obstruction/stenosis
should be positioned immediately adjacent to the cranial aspect of 
Expiratory effort, crackles on
Pulmonary disease, e.g..
inhalation pneumonia
the rib to avoid the intercostal neurovascular bundle on the caudal 
auscultation
ue uaui algejieae jou s! aipaau Ayang e l qlu aul jo padse
Short shallow respiration, decreased
 Pleural disease with effusion,
intravenous catheter or a hypodermic needle can be used. If the 
lung sounds on auscultation,
e.g..,pyothorax
presence of air is suspected the needle can be inserted in the dorsal
hyporesonant percussion
third of the thoracic cavity: if fluid is suspected the needle can be 
inserted in the ventral third, but care must be taken to avoid the
Wheezing on auscultation
Lower airway disease, e.g..
internal thoracic artery which lies ventral and deep to the
feline bronchial disease
costochondral junctions. If the nature of pleural disease is unknown 
the needle is generally placed halfway down the thoracic cavity. It is
preferable to have three people present; one to monitor the cat and 
administer oxygen, a second to drain the chest via an extension tube.
whilst the third holds the needle to assess the point at which the
lungs are felt on the needle tip. thereby signaling the time to stop
drainage. In practice it is possible for one person to drain the chest 
with just a single assistant, especially in cats, where the needle is less 
likely to be displaced from the thorax during respiratory excursions
sien isou ui wnunseipaw aajduon e jo anuasge aul shop ui ueui
means that drainage of air or fluid from both hemithoraces can
usually be achieved with unilateral thoracocentesis. However, trial
subis jenuip y! paueiiem s! apis le ateleuos aui uo sisaluanoneioul
do not improve significantly following unilateral drainage, particularly
in cases where loculation of fluid may be present (e.g., pyothorax).
Any pleural fluid should be placed into an EDTA tube in addition to
direct smears being made for cytology. and into a plain tube for 
bacteriologic culture and sensitivity testing (Fg. 41-3).
Figure 41-1 Cat with an air gun pellet injury to the thorax. The cat is 
pue buiddp buunp ysew e ei uoeuabixo euawalddns buniana
cleaning of the wound. (@ Aison Moores.)
 practitioner may have to rely on mask or flow-by techniques, which
 only provide a minimal increase in fractional inspired oxygen com-
 pared to room air. Cats may fnd restraint, supplemental oxygenation.
and diagnostic techniques distressing, leading to an increase in oxygen
consumption and risk of further respiratory distres. Careful, contin-
ual assessment is therefore vital to ensure that attempted stabilization
methods do not worsen the clinical status of the patient.
The choice of diagnostic test is determined by history and physical
examination findings. If a pleural effusion is suspected, thoracocente-
sis should be performed, preferably after a brief ultrasound scan to
confrm the presence of pleural fluid (Box 4l-2, Fig. 41-2). Thoraco-
Figure 41-2 Thoracocentesis being performed in a kitten with pleural
centesis can be both diagnostic and therapeutic and is often safer to
fluid. (@ Davina Anderson.)
 perform than radiography, which may require manual or chemical
restraint.
undertaken following evacuation of pleural fluid or air and with
Diagnostic imaging for thoracic disease
minimal stress. In many circumstances a single dorsoventral radio-
graph may be sufficient to make a preliminary diagnosis, and it can
 Thoracic radiography can provide extremely useful information on the
be followed by a complete imaging study under sedation or anesthesia
cusal pathology of thoracic diseases (see Chapter 8), and should be
when the cat is more stable (Fig. 4l-4). Thoracic radiography will
474
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
BDPlasti
Figure 41-3 Pleural fluid from the kitten in Figure 41-2 has been placed 
into EDTA for cytology and a plain tube for bacteriologic culture and
sensitivity. (@ Davina Anderson.)
Figure 41-5 Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of a mediastinal
mass in an anesthetized cat. Note the use of a heat/moisture exchanger
(Thermovent). (@ Alison Moores.)
indicate the presence or absence of pathology within thethoracic wall,
lungs, and mediastinum, but it may be diffcult to differentiate soft
tissue structures and determine the exact location of disease. Utra-
sonography is extremely useful for imaging patients that have pleural
effusions, mediastinal disease, and lung lobe consolidation and in
patients with mass lesions. Both ultrasound and computed tomogra-
phy (CT) can be used to obtain fine needle aspirates and needle core
biopsies, which can be submitted for cytology. histopathology, and
 bacteriologic/fungal culture and sensitivity (Fig. 41-5). The three-
dimensional imaging techniques, especially CT, have made a signif-
cant impact on managing feline thoracic disease (Figs 41-6 and 41-7).
CT is more sensitive in detecting metastatic pulmonary disease than
A
radiography and localization of thoracic disease makes surgical plan-
ning and choice of thoracotomy approach easier. Due to the more
accurate lesion localization afforded, more animals are likely to
undergo lateral thoracotomy than median sternotomy if CT is
available.
PREPARATION FOR THORACIC SURGERY
Before surgery is ever undertaken, it is vital to recognize the cases in
which appropriate medical management of the disease before surgery
is likely to improve clinical parameters (eg., allowing time for pul.
monary contusions to improve following trauma) and in such cases
this should always be performed. Likewise the attending clinician
should also recognize cases in which rapid surgical intervention is
required as soon as the cat is cardiovascularly stable or as stable as
B
can be achieved (e.g. clinically significant intrathoracic hemorrhage
following trauma).
Figure 41-4 (A) Lateral and (B) dorsoventral radiographs of the cat
 Depending upon the disease process for which thoracotomy is
shown in Figure 41-1. A radiolucent tract is seen where the air gun
 being performed, cats may have an American Society of Anesthesiolo-
uo us aul lapun paddois sey l! pue hybi aui uo pananua sey lallad
gists (ASA) score varying from ASA 2-3 [a patient with mild to severe
the left side of the thorax. There is massive heterogenous subcutaneous 
emphysema in the soft tissues circumferentially around the thoracic
systemic disease, e.g- patent ductus arteriosus) to ASA 5 (a moribund
abeuouay snoaueinogns paneposse isabns saiggng ae llews ne
 patient in whom surgery is performed in desperation due to the life-
Interpretation of the lung parenchyma is difficult due to superimposition
threatening nature of their disease). Extreme care must be taken to try
of subcutaneous emphysema. Cystic lesions in the right caudal lobe
to prevent deterioration of clinical parameters during induction and
are consistent with penetration by the pellet; these lesions usually heal
maintenance of anesthesia. As previously described, a period of pre-
rapidly and were not seen on subsequent radiographs. (@ Alison Moores.)
 Oxygenation (e.g., five minutes) can be beneficial in most cases.
475
Section
[61
Thorax
A
B
Figure 41-6 CT images of a cat that had presented with increased respiratory sounds and coughing. Two CT studies are shown (A) before and
pneumothorax. It is more marked on the left, with a collapsed lung lobe ventrally and air surrounding a left caudal lung lobe mass. There is moderate 
air present in the dorsal right hemithorax. (B) After drainage there is significant reduction in pleural air present, with increased expansion of the right 
middle, accessory and left cranial lung lobes. There is mediastinal shift of the left caudal lung lobe containing the mass and no air within this lung
lobe. (@ Alison Moores.)
A
B
Figure 41-7 CT images of a cat that presented with a chronic cough. (A) Cross-sectional image of the cranial thorax showing a generalized.
heterogenous, alveolar/bronchial infiltrate of the cranial part of the left cranial lung lobe, with a concurrent ill-defined nodular soft tissue infiltrate. On
the right there is a nodular soft tissue lesion ventrally. (B) Cross-sectional image of the caudal thorax showing an ill-defined left caudal lung lobe soft
I snoand au u uas se aeui anssi os enpou pue aeu euuogoae snouaboaay jo uieu pauapll ais aun y sse anss
by cytology or histopathology. (@ Aison Moores.)
 The correct choice of which premedicant and induction agent to
Thoracotomy can lead to significant fluid and heat loss, and this
use is vital, to allow the induction of anesthesia with minimum stress,
a 'azis Ao les sau on anp seo un huaan Aeiaa aq u
whilst avoiding excessive respiratory or cardiac depression. Intrave-
the need for regular monitoring of the patient's core body tempera-
nous induction, establishing a patent airway, and being able to venti-
ture. Warming methods, such as the use of warm fluids, bubble wrap
late if necessary, are all instrumental to safe induction of anesthesia.
application to extremities, warm air heating systems (e.g., Bair Hugger.
Intraoperative monitoring is also extremely important and should
3M), low fresh gas flows, and heat/moisture exchangers (e.g.. Ther-
include serial monitoring of heart and respiratory rate, pulse oximetry.
movent) should all be considered and utilized whenever necessary.
capnography, ECG, and core body temperature. Mechanical ventila-
Keeping anesthetic and surgical times to a minimum can be very
tion is required during thoracotomy, and also in laparotomies where 
Sl iiey pue us al jo gumiam aaissanxa pue piesai siun ul inydiau
 the diaphragm is not intact, as opening the pleural space very signif-
avoided during preoperative preparation and thoracic lavage.
@ntly restricts effective natural ventilation. Mechanical ventilation
es sl Aiagins [nyssasons ol sioioey suuull ioleu aul jo auo
may also be required prior to surgery when the underlying disease
 patient size, but it is aided by the use of fine instruments. Additional
 prevents effective chest excursions. Mechanical ventilators are easily
xog ul paisil aie aains oieioun ioy imydiay aq lm ieui suausui
applied to cats (Fig. 4l-8), but careful manual ventilation is also
41-3 (and see Chapter 13). These include vascular clamps for the
acceptable. Care must be taken not to apply too much pressure during
uond a s ns 'siassa ar  aou jo jou
ventilation as this can cause lung damage.
artery, as well as diathermy for hemorrhage from smaller vessels.
476
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
Table 41-3 Intercostal approach for selected thoracic
procedures
 Procedure or organ
Intercostal approach
Vascular anomaly (PDA, PRAA)a
Left 4 
 Pericardium
Left or right 5
Trachea/carina
5
Cranial lung lobectomy
4-5
Middle lung lobectomy
Right 5
Caudal lung lobectomy
5-6
Cranial esophagus
Left 3-4, Right 3-5
Caudal esophagus
Left or right 7-9
 Thoracic duct
Left 8-10 
PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PRAA, persistent right aortic arch.
Figure 41-8 Mechanical ventilator. (@ Alison Moores: The Nurfielo 200
Pinom losoiod lesidai e pue 'paoidua si eisatieue iepoun
Ventilator is produceo by Pen/on Lto, Abingdon, UK.)
include perioperative systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), opiates (eg. methadone fentanyl), and intercostal or
regional sternal local anesthesia, followed by postoperative NSAIDs,
opiates (e.g., methadone, buprenorphine), and interpleural local
Box 41-3 Useful instruments and implants for thoracic
anesthesia for the duration of use of a thoracostomy tube (see
surgery in cats
Chapter 2).
 Self-retaining retractors, e.g.. Gelpi. Finochietto
Lateral or intercostal thoracotomy
DeBakey tissue forceps
Right-angled forceps for dissection, e.g.. Mixter
 Intercostal thoracotomy (Box 41-4) allows access to approximately
Vascular clamps, e.g.. Satinsky
one-third of the ipsilateral hemithorax for treatment of vascular
 Chest drains and adapters
anomalies, pulmonary disease (lung lobectomy) and esophageal, tra-
cheal or mediastinal disease. Rib resection thoracotomy has not been
 specifcally described for cats but can be used to increase exposure via
 a lateral thoracotomy.
 Intercostal thoracotomy can usually be performed faster in cats than
Use of surgical stapling devices (see Chapter l0) is less frequent
than in the dog, due in part to difculty in placing large stapling units
dogs due to the smaller average incision length, thinner muscles, and
into the chest Staples can be used for lobar or partial lung lobectomy.
which is described in Chapter 47. Appropriate clamps should be avail
dorsi muscle in particular. Determining where to make the incision is
able for placement on major blood vessels in the event of hemorrhage,
dependent on the indication for surgery and the location of the lesion
(Table 41-3). For those organs that traverse the length of the thoracic
which can be rapid and potentially fatal should it occur.
cavity, eg. esophagus or trachea, radiography or CT should be used
to help determine the appropriate intercostal space for maximal
exposure.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
 To approach the thoracic cavity, the latissimus dorsi muscle can
either be divided or retracted dorsally. With the latter technique the
latissimus dorsi can more effectively be used to help provide an air-
Thoracotomy and thoracoscopy are performed to access the thoracic
cavity for treatment (and/or diagnosis) of thoracic wall disease (eg..
tight seal during closure and may result in less pain postoperatively.
However, retraction of this muscle may result in a more limited tho-
thoracic bite wounds), pleural space disease (e.g. pyothorax, chylo-
thorax), pulmonary disease (e.g, neoplasia, abscess), mediastinal
racic exposure compared with incision, which might be a disadvan-
disease (e.g., thymoma), tracheal, and esophageal disease The inci-
 tage in certain cases. Additionally, retraction is more difficult in cases
dence of thoracotomy is less in cats than dog in referral centers4
where there is no surgical assistant.
although this may reflect fewer feline referrals rather than a lower
incidence of surgical thoracic diseases in cats.
Median sternotomy
se aq ad pa si e ies  a as
required to the thorax. Lateral thoracotomy is suffcient if access to a
Median sternotomy (Box 4l-5) was frst reported in cats in 1996 and
limited and specifc area of a hemithorax is required, but for complete 
described as a technically demanding procedure. Median sternotomy
offers excellent exposure of both hemithoraces, with access to
thoracotomies) is indicated. Transdiaphragmatic access to the thorax
the lungs, heart, and mediastinum. It is also the approach of choice
is discussed in Chapter 45.
where the location of intrathoracic disease cannot be determined,
477
Section
6
Thorax
 Box 41-4 Intercostal thoracotomy
 Following anesthesia, cats are placed in lateral recumbency. Hair is 
It may be difficult to incise the intercostal muscles without
clipped from the lateral aspect of the thorax from the dorsal to ventral
 penetrating the parietal pleura, but pleural incision must be
midline, lateral cervical region, proximal thoracic limb, and lateral
performed with care to avoid damage to underlying structures, e.g.
 aspect of the cranial abdomen. The thoracic limbs are pulled and
e loj uoieuaa dois ot juapnud ag Aew ll 'ssew jeuseipaw lo bun]
secured cranially. A sandbag placed under the thorax increases
few seconds during initial pleural penetration, after which the lungs 
exposure by elevating the operative hemithorax and provides improved
should retract from the thoracic wall and subsequent lung damage is
opening of the thoracotomy incision by widening the intercostal spaces
unlikely. Moistened 10 cm × 10 cm swabs or laparotomy swabs are 
ayl yo pua ayi re ie ayl lapun woy paouai ag uen 1l (ve-lt by)
placed over the wound edges for protection. Thoracic exposure is
thoracic procedure to aid in closing the thoracotomy incision. Sandbags 
obtained by replacing the Gelpi retractors between the ribs or by
used as positioning aids should not interfere with the placement of air
using small Finochietto rib retractors or abdominal retractors (Fig.
warming devices.
41-9G-l). The incision is lengthened dorsally and/or ventrally as 
 An incision is made over the predetermined intercostal space (see 
necessary to increase exposure. Care is taken not to tear tissues
Table 41-3). The location of the initial skin incision is found by
 during thoracic wall retraction.
counting from the 13ih rib cranially. As it is possible for cats to have
A thoracostomy tube (see Boxes 41-6, 41-7 and 41-8) may be
 more or less than the normal 13 ribs, this should be confirmed before 
Joj ose pue paiedp!ue s! uojpnpoud pinly lo Ale bulobuo j! pasn
surgery by counting ribs on the preoperative radiographs or CT.
postoperative monitoring for complications that may result in air or
 Following a skin incision from the dorsal thorax to the costochondral 
fluid production. Thoracotomy closure has been described using
junction (Fig. 41-9B), a combination of sharp and blunt dissection is 
interrupted circumcostal sutures of polydioxanone (PDs Il, Ethicon) or
 used to separate the subcutaneous tissue and incise the cutaneous 
polyglactin 910 (vicryl. Ethicon),4 although the author prefers the
trunci muscle. Small blood vessels are coagulated and Gelpi retractors
former due to its prolonged tensile strength. Sutures are preplaced
 are placed in the wound. The latissimus dorsi muscle is sharply incised
with care with the blunt end of the needle passed through the 
 or retracted dorsally as described above (Fig. 41-9c,D). Re-confirmation
intercostal space in close proximity to the rib in order to minimize
of the correct intercostal space can be made by counting caudally from
nerve entrapment and damage to the intercostal vessels (Fig.
the cranial ribs, from underneath the latissimus dorsi muscle and 
41-10A). An assistant can apply tension to the central sutures to
thoracic limb, for cranial approaches, and counting from the 13ih rib 
approximate the ribs as the surgeon ties the other sutures in turn 
for caudal approaches. Additionally, the fifth rib can be identified by 
(Fg. 41-10B). Alternatively. sutures can be held with a pair of
the caudal insertion of the scalenus muscle or the cranial origin of the
Galibans forceps during knot tying (see Chapter 13). Overlapping of
external abdominal oblique muscles. Either is usually transected to
adjacent ribs is avoided, although this does not seem to be a clinical
improve ventral exposure. The serratus ventralis muscdle in the dorsal
problem if it occurs. The serratus ventralis and scalenus muscles
 part of the wound is separated between individual bellies, small blood
are closed in one layer (Fig. 41-10c). The thoracic cavity is usually
by) pauoilsodan aie shopeiian idlay pue paeinbeon aie siassan
sealed at this stage, so drainage via the thoracostomy tube or
41-9E). The external and internal intercostal muscles are incised
thoracocentesis can be performed to allow the cat to be weaned
midway between the ribs, with the incision continuing as far dorsal 
from ventilation. There is subsequent closure of the latissimus dorsi
and ventral as necessary for adequate exposure (Fg. 41-9F). The dorsal
and cutaneous trunci muscles, subcutaneous fascia (using a
incision is limited by the tubercle of the ribs and the ventral limit by the 
continuous suture pattern), and finally skin closure, followed by
internal thoracic vasculature located ventral to the costochondral
repeated drainage of the thoracic cavity (Fig. 41-10D,E).
 junction. Care is taken to avoid the neurovascular bundle on the
caudal aspect of the rib and a smaller vessel on the cranial aspect.
B
Figure 41-9 Left fifth intercostal thoracotomy. (A) Positioning of the cat in lateral recumbency with a sandbag under the thorax. (B) Initial skin
incision.
478
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
D
F
E
G
H
Figure 41-9, Continued (C) Sharp incision of the latissimus dorsi muscle using Metzenbaum scissors. (D) The latissimus dorsi muscle has been 
transected along half of its length. This can be extended dorsally as necessary for exposure of the thoracic cavity. (E} The serratus ventralis muscle has 
been separated between two of its bellies and retracted to expose the external intercostal muscle. (F) The external and internal intercostal muscles 
and pleura have been incised to expose the thoracic cavity. (G) Swabs are placed over the wound edges before placing Finochietto rib retractors. The
latissimus dorsi muscle is retracted dorsally. (H) Alternatively, one or two pairs of Gelpi retractors can be used for rib retraction. In this case the cat is 
is positioned on the bronchus proximal to the affected lung lobe.
479
Section
6
Thorax
[oisua-aanun yo juaape aul yiim uoon sal st siu ynoue
 complete sternotomy, defined as complete sectioning of all sternebrae
 imaging procedures. Diffculty in accessing dorsal structures is not as
 including the manubrium and xiphoid, leaving the xiphoid cartilage
leaA-inoy e iaao sie auin sop pazis asriane aul ul se pasunouond
intact. Some surgeons will also section the xiphoid cartilage. One cat
uauean au iy Aans puamapun iauan ieaai ai e ie poad
of mediastinal masses (three cats), cor triatrium dexter, a pulmonary
brium and up to four sternebrae.
mass, a suspected esophageal stricture, chylothorax, pleural effusion
 Disadvantages of this procedure compared to intercostal thoracot-
 and segmental tracheal stenosis (one of each).3 All but one cat had a
 omy include prolonged surgical time and technical difficulty.
Thoracostomy tubes
 Thoracostomy tubes are used to remove fluid or air from the thoracic
cavity, due to an underlying disease process or following surgery
(Boxes 41-6, 41-7 and 41-8, Fig. 41-13) It is the author's opinion that
thoracostomy tubes are less well tolerated in cats than dogs, and may
be associated with pain and depression. There is a recent report
describing the use of small-bore wire-guided chest drains applied
using a Seldinger technique.? This offers a viable and safe alternative
to the commonly used trocar tubes and is even able to drain purulent
material if used in conjunction with thoracic lavage.
 Following completion of a thoracic surgical procedure, there will be 
residual air within the thoracic cavity and there may be the risk of
ongoing air or fluid production due to the underlying disease. For
-io3 'ga sassol suioguo aq ot paioadxa jou si aiaul araum sase asou
rection of a vascular anomaly or repair of a diaphragmatic defect,
thoracocentesis may be suffcient to remove residual air from the
thorax after a thoracic seal is achieved by wound closure. Where
-uos leiuaiod yns ig uoiuou io paiadxa aie sassol buioguo
cations required, a thoracostomy tube is inserted prior to thoracic
closure (see Boxes 41-6, 4l-7 and 41-8).
Tubes placed in dogs and cats after lateral thoracotomy were main-
tained for longer in animals with pre-existing pleural, mediastinal or
Figure 41-9, Continued (l) Abdominal retractors can be used during 
tapmis auo ul satleoue ienosea yim asoul ueul aseasip Areuomind
intercostal thoracotomy. Silk ligatures are being placed for removal of a 
Tubes were maintained in the nine cats surviving surgery for a median
lung lobe. (A-H @ Alison Moores; @ Davina Anoerson.)
of 12 hours (range 20 minutes to three days;4 unpublished data).
A
D
E
Figure 41-10 Closure of a left fifth intercostal thoracotomy. (A) Sutures have been preplaced circumcostally taking care to avoid intercostal vessels
(B} Circumcostal sutures are tied taking care not to overlap the ribs. (C) Closure of the serratus ventralis and scalenus muscles. (D) Closure of the
latissimus dorsi muscle. (E) Closure of the skin. Note the progressive securing of a small-bore catheter which has been performed by an assistant 
during thoracotomy closure. (@ Alison Moores.)
480
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
Box 41-5 Median sternotomy
 Following anesthesia cats are placed in dorsal recumbency. Hair is 
risk fracture. Care is taken on entering the thoracic cavity, especially 
clipped from the ventr al and lateral aspects of the thorax as well as the 
where there is a ventral mass such as a thymoma, to avoid 
ventral cervical region, proximal thoracic limbs, and cranial abdomen.
hemorrhage or tissue damage.
Sufficient hair is removed from the lateral thorax to allow placement 
 Exposure of the thoracic cavity can be achieved using small 
of thoracostomy tube(s). Routine skin preparation is performed. The
Finochietto rib retractors, although Gelpi or handheld retractors 
cat is maintained in dorsal recumbency with the thoracic limbs pulled 
can be used more easily than in dogs (Hg. 41-11B,C and Fig. 41-12).
canially. Sandbags used as positioning aids should not interfere with
The wound edge is protected with moistened swabs. In small cats, a
 air warming devices where used
10 cm x 10 cm swab is opened out and layered under the retractors.
 Median sternotomy in the cat involves a midline ventral thoracic 
In larger cats laparotomy swabs can be used without hindering
incision through the skin and subcutaneous tissue, from cranial to the
exposure.
manubrium to caudal to the xiphoid for complete median sternotomy.
ansop
Unipolar electrocautery can be used to divide the pectoral muscles on 
the midline to expose the sternebrae,3 although a suitable alternative 
A thoracostomy tube is placed as some ongoing air or fluid 
ejodig lo lejodouow jo asn Aq pamollof uoispu! dleus aq pinom 
production is anticipated (see Boxes 41-6, 41-7 and 41-8). Closure 
electrocautery to control hemorrhage. The use of electrocautery to
of sternotomy wounds is described using preplaced 3.5M sutures
make a groove in the midline of the sternebrae prior to sternebrae 
of polypropylene (Prolene, Ethicon) in a figure-of-eight pattern,3
 separation using an oscillating saw has been described (Fig. 41-11A).3
although this author has also used polydioxanone (PDs Il, Ethicon)
The author prefers use of a scalpel blade to mark the sternebrae
or equivalent sutures. Studies of wire closure of sternotomy in 
incision as it offers better control of the saw on the narrow bones.
dogs show figure-of-eight patterns cause the least displacement 
 Alternatives to an oscillating saw include a sternal saw or use of a
of sternebrae at high loads; no such studies exist in the cat.
hammer and osteotome, or liston bone cutters. Use of a hammer
Reapposition of the pectoral muscles must be accurately
and osteotome is often avoided in dogs due to the large volume of
aul laron ol pue punom aul jo ansop tubi-le apioud ol pawuoyad
hemorrhage from the bones, but this is less of a problem in cats.
large knots associated with using large gauge sutures for sternebral
 Sternebrae division in cats must be performed with a high degree of
closure. Suture options include polydioxanone (PDs Il, Ethicon) or
precision. The bones are very narrow, such that deviation of the saw or
polyglactin 910 (Vicryl. Ethicon), although the author prefers the
osteotome from the midline is likely to lead to fracture through the
former as it has prolonged tensile strength. Following pectoral muscle
lateral aspect of the sternebrae. whilst this does not tend to cause
 abeuieap Aaes ypesoun 'eas ubii-aie ue jo uoiean pue uoisodde
problems with healing in the author's experience, it is best avoided.
aant Auoisone loul el lo sisaluanoneiout Aa paaalupe ag uen
 Similarly, excessive retraction of a partial sternotomy incision is likely to
drainage where present. Evacuation of the thoracic cavity is required
cause sternebral fracture; if increased exposure is required it would be
to allow spontaneous breathing and weaning from the ventilator if 
ueun lauiey Aoiouais uepau aalduon e oi lauon on suapnad
used. Closure of the subcutis and skin is routine.
B
Figure 41-11 Median sternotomy for resection of thymoma. (A) Use of an oscillating saw for sternal osteotomy. (B) Cut edge of the sternebrae after
median sternotomy. Note the position of the Gelpi retractors retracting the pectoral muscles.
481
Section
[61
Thorax
 Figure 41-13 A cat with bilateral large-bore thoracostomy tubes for the 
treatment of pyothorax. The tubes are held closed with a plastic gate 
C1
clamp and an adapter, three-way tap and bungs secure the end of the
tube; the three-way tap and bung are changed daily. There is also an
Figure 41-11, Continued (C) Gelpi retractors have been repositioned
esophageal feeding tube. When left unsupervised the cat must wear an
for retraction of the sternebrae. (A-C, @ Davina Anderson.)
Elizabethan collar. (@ Alfison Moores.)
Box 41-7 Placement of a large-bore trocar
thoracostomy tube
eisauisaue io uoiepas eay sainban Alle lauae zuawaneid agnl
except in moribund cats. The cat is placed in lateral recumbency and 
the lateral thorax is cliped and aseptically prepared. The tube is 
placed using aseptic technique.
 A skin incision is made over the ninth to tenth intercostal space.
The trocar is passed through the skin incision and pushed through 
the underlying subcutaneous fascia and latissimus dorsi muscle. The
tube is then tunneled cranially by one or two intercostal spaces,
stopping on the cranial aspect of the rib to avoid the neurovascular
bundle on the caudal aspect of the rib.
The tube is then held perpendicular to the skin and gripped firmly 
with one hand adjacent to the thoracic wall to avoid complete 
penetration of the thorax whilst pushing firmly on the end of the
tube to penetrate the intercostal muscles and pleura. This may be 
Figure 41-12 In another cat, a complete median sternotomy and 
difficult in the cat due to thoracic wall compliance. The tube is
retraction with Finochietto retractors provides wide exposure of the
advanced over the trocar, which is then removed. The tube is directed 
thoracic cavity. (@ Alson Moores.)
cranially to approximately the second intercostal space. Placement is 
Uiys ol paunoas s! agnl aul pue pinly yo ale jo uojieuidse Aa payoaun
with a friction suture.
 Box 41-6 Thoracostomy tube placement during
lo pasnipe s! agnt aul uolisod wayuos ot uaei s! yde sbopen v
thoracic surgery
replaced as necessary, only if this can be done without breaking
aseptic technique. If aseptic technique has not been maintained 
during radiography the tube cannot be advanced into the chest and 
The tube is usually inserted via a skin incision over the dorsal third
if the tube were not in an appropriate position a new tube would 
 of the tenth to eleventh intercostal space, under the latissimus dorsi 
then have to be placed.
muscle and into the thoracic cavity at the seventh to eighth intercostal
The tube entry site is covered with a dressing and the tube
 space. Tube placement is often more ventral if placed during 
protected with a bandage or netting vest (see Chapter 4). The cat is 
 sternotomy for practical reasons. The tube is inserted cranial to the rib
monitored at all times when the drain is in place. The use of an
to avoid damaging neurovascular structures on the caudal aspect of
 Elizabethan collar should always be considered to prevent the cat
the rib. The tube is advanced to the second intercostal space under 
damaging or removing the tube.
direct visualization from the thoracotomy incision and secured to the
skin by a friction (finger trap) suture. An adapter, three-way tap.
s! aqni aul aqni ayl ol padde axe dwep ajeb lews pue 'sbung 
left open until an air-tight seal is obtained on the thoracotomy! 
 sternotomy incision to avoid tension pneumothorax formation.
482
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
Traditionally, tubes were maintained until air and/or fluid production
was <2 mL/kg/day. Whilst a recent paper suggests that tubes can be
Small-bore wire-guided chest drain placement
removed when fluid production is higher than this, only ten cats (of
Placement of small-bore wire-guided drains (see Box 4l-8) is easier
which only two were postsurgical patients) were included in the study
to perform than wide-bore tubes and can easily be performed even
 population.8 No tube complications were noted in the nine postsurgi-
by newly qualified veterinarians.? There are few complications with
cal cats described by the author, whilst the aforementioned study
insertion and tubes are well tolerated. They can be placed as an alter-
reported premature removal (three of 26) and discharge around the
native to needle thoracocentesis in those cats that object to thoraco-
tube (one of 26).8
centesis or if pleural fluid is difficult to drain with a needle. Sedation 
Box 41-8 Placement of a small-bore (14G, 20 cm) wire-guided chest drain
The cat is placed in lateral or sternal recumbency and the lateral thorax
of air or fluid. The catheter is secured to the skin through the 
is clipped and aseptically prepared. The tube is placed using aseptic
catheter suture holes using nylon (Fig. 41-10E). Excess tubing is
technique
 secured with a friction suture if necessary.
 An optional skin incision is made over the ninth intercostal space.
The tube entry site is covered with a dressing and the tube
The introducer catheter is inserted through the thoracic wall directly
protected with a bandage or netting vest (see Chapter 4). A
into the pleural space or after tunneling subcutaneously by one or two 
se paneidan lo paisnipe s! l 'uolisod wujuon ol uaxel s! ydesboipey
intercostal spaces in a cranial direction (Fig. 41-14A) Entry along the
necessary only if this can be done without breaking aseptic
caudal aspect of the rib is avoided to prevent damage to the intercostal
 buunp pauieuiew uaag rou sey anbuypat yjidase fl anbuupal
neurovascular bundle. The introducer is advanced over the stylet, which
radiography the tube cannot be advanced into the chest and if the
is then removed (Fg. 41-14B). The J-guidewire is threaded through the
tube were not in an appropriate position a new tube would have to
introducer by 10 m in a cranioventral direction (Fig. 41-14C) and the
be placed.
 a (tli h) a ae  pi s a !
aul aneid ui si uep au uau sawil lle ie paouow s! en au
tube is advanced over the guidewire into the cranial pleural space and 
use of an Elizabethan collar should always be considered to prevent 
the wire is removed (Fig. 41-14E-G). Placement is checked by aspiration
the cat damaging or removing the tube.
A
R
C
D
Figure 41-14 Placement of a small-bore wire-guided chest drain during thoracotomy. (A) An introducer catheter is inserted into the thoracic cavity.
(B) The introducer is advanced over the stylet. The stylet is removed. (C) A guidewire is placed through the catheter and advanced into the thoracic
cavity. (D) The catheter is removed leaving the wire in the thoracic cavity.
483
 Section
[61
Thorax
E
F
G
H
Figure 41-14, Continued (E-G) The small-bore tube is advanced over the wire into the cranial thoracic cavity. (H) The wire is removed and the tube
can be secured to the thoracic wall. (@ Alison Moores.)
with ketamine/midazolam or ketamine/butorphanol is usually
suffcient.?
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 poad aaieiadoisod aul ui Arssanau aq Aeu uoeuaxo guioguo
and can be provided using the same methods previously described
(Fig. 4l-15). Suction of the airway may be necessary to remove fluid
(e.g., blood, pus), depending upon the surgical procedure performed
(Fig. 41-16).
 Cats may have thoracostomy tubes placed as part of the thoracic
surgery: tube maintenance and care will play an important and sig-
nificant part of the postoperative care. Postoperative nursing care
 including thoracostomy tube care is described in Chapter 4.
 Thoracic surgery is painful and provision should be made for con-
tinuation of analgesia postoperatively. In addition to systemic analge-
sia, regional anesthesia can be provided with local anesthetic injections
 Figure 41-15 How-by oxygen is provided during recovery from
(Chapter 2). Intrapleural analgesia that produces ipsilateral somatic
blocks of multiple thoracic dermatomes provides analgesia for up to
anesthesia. (@ Alison Moores.)
12 hours. Epidural analgesia can also be used to provide analgesia for
thoracic surgery.? Infusion of analgesia into the thoracic cavity can be
dorsally instead of incising it; this has not been investigated in
animals. Closure of the thoracotomy should be performed by encir-
temic pain relief is continued unless specifically contra-indicated (see
cling the ribs, with the blunt end of the needle passed through the
Chapter 2). When performing thoracic wall surgery in people, it has
intercostal space, in close proximity to the rib in order to minimize
been suggested that there is less postoperative pain after performing
nerve entrapment. It is important not to over-tighten the sutures to
a muscle sparing approach by retracting the latissimus dorsi muscle
avoid subluxation of the ribs with subsequent pain.10
484
Thoracotomy
Chapter
41
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
 Survival to discharge of 85% was reported in 4l cats undergoing tho-
racic surgery, although the thoracic approaches were not reported and
most cats were treated for diaphragmatic rupture, which is often clas-
ains peioun ueun lauie Aains leuopqe se pais
Intercostal thoracotomy
Of thirteen cats treated via an intercostal thoracotomy, nine survived
to discharge (62%) and four were euthanized during surgery due to
the underlying diseases.4 Survival to discharge was significantly lower
in cats than in dogs, older animals, and cats and dogs with neoplastic
disease rather than non-neoplastic disease. There was no difference in
the overall incidence of short-term complications between species,
although complications attributed to the intercostal thoracotomy
did not occur in cats (Moores, unpublished data) compared to com-
plications such as seroma and excessive wound inflammation in
Figure 41-16 Suction of the airways may be necessary if there is fluid
28/70 dogs.
within the trachea, e.g.. blood and pus. (@ Alison Moores.)
Median sternotomy
Animals with indwelling thoracostomy tubes are monitored con-
tinuously, an Elizabethan collar is utilized and the drain is kept
 In a short case-series there were no complications associated with
covered with dressings to prevent patient interference and inadvertent
median sternotomy thoracotomy,? although the severity of the under-
 removal. The tube is kept covered with a sterile dressing and a bandage
 lying disease processes led to intraoperative euthanasia in three cats
to minimize environmental contamination. Personnel handling the
 and early postoperative death of one cat. These authors also suggest
tube must wash their hands appropriately, wear gloves, and use a new
that, with the use of regional local and parenteral analgesia, the pro-
 syringe each time the tube is drained to avoid contamination. Three-
 cedure is not associated with excessive postoperative pain as has previ-
way taps and clamps on the end of tubing are changed daily.
ously been suggested.
REFERENCES
1.
 Kaestner S. Anesthesia. In: Montavon PM,
thoracotomy in dogs and cats. J Small
8. Marques Al, Tattersall J, Shaw Dl, Welsh
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
Anim Pract 2007;48[12):695-8.
E. Retrospective analysis of the
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
5. Kaestner S. Analgesia. In: Montavon PM.
relationship between time of
disease. Elsevier Edinburgh; 2009a.
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ, editors. Feline
thoracostomy drain removal and
p. 177-98.
orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
discharge time. J Small Anim Pract
.Bellenger CR, Hunt GB, Goldsmid SE.
disease. Elsevier Edinburgh; 2009b.
2009;50(4):162-6.
Pearson MR. Outcomes of thoracic
p. 199-205.
9.
Pavlidou K, Papazoglou L, Savvas I,
 surgery in dogs and cats. Aust Vet J
6. Davis KM, Roe SC, Mathews KG, Mente
Kazakos G. Analgesia for small animal
1996;74(1):25-30.
PL. Median sternotomy closure in dogs:
 thoracic surgery. Compend Contin Educ
3. Burton CA, White RN. Review of the
a mechanical comparison of technique
Vet 2009;9:432-6.
technique and complications of median
stability. Vet Surg 2006;35(3):271-7.
10.
 Rooney MB, Mehl M, Monnet E.
sternotomy in the dog and cat. J Small 
 7. Valtolina C, Adamantos S. Evaluation of
Intercostal thoracotomy closure:
Anim Pract 1996;37(11):516-22.
 small-bore wire-guided chest drains for
transcostal sutures as a less painful
4. Moores AL, Halfacree Z), Baines SJ,
management of pleural space disease.
alternative to circumcostal suture
Lipscomb Vl. Indications, outcomes
JSmall Anim Pract 2009;50[6):
placement. Vet Surg 2004;33:
and complications following lateral
290-7.
209-13.
485
42
1
napter
Thoracoscopy
S.A. van Nimwegen, J. Kirpensteijn
There are limited descriptions of the use of thoracoscopy in cats for
surgery in humans, both canine and feline minimally invasive
 surgery is likely to be increasingly applied in the near future. More-
included in general texts based mainly on canine and human litera-
 over the majority of advantages of minimally invasive surgery that
[un asieds Aian s! uoeuoyul leinpasoid oyioads inq s-'aim
have been described for humans are increasingly reported in veteri-
recently however, the same was true for feline laparoscopic procedures
s ae  r ) a  s s 
(see Chapter 24), and there is no convincing reason not to assume
average body size of cats compared to dogs requires dedicated equip-
that similar advantages of minimally invasive thoracic procedures
ment and skills, which may more often result in veterinary surgeons
applyto cats as they do to humans including neonates of< 1 kg body
initially investing in minimally invasive surgery for canines rather
weight) and dogs. This chapter covers the principles of thoracoscopy
than felines. This applies in particular to thoracoscopy, because the
in cats and describes selected surgical procedures.
thorax does not expand as much as the abdominal wall does upon
insufflation for laparoscopy, making the average feline thorax consid-
 erably smaller than an average canine thorax. The basic surgical prin-
 ciples of laparoscopic surgery also apply to thoracoscopic surgery (see
BACKGROUND
Chapter 24).
Minimally invasive access to the thoracic cavity for thoracoscopic
exploration and observation of intrathoracic tissues, biopsy of abnor-
ANESTHESIA
mal structures, or intrathoracic surgical procedures, also referred to as
video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). has several advantages over
conventional open thoracic procedures. Thoracotomy is associated
 Anesthesia for thoracoscopy is essentially the same as for thoracotomy
with considerable intra- and postoperative pain, discomfort, and con-
 positive pressure ventilation (IPpV). Extensive monitoring of physio-
a thoracoscopic approacha.? and there is also evidence to suggest the
logic parameters during thoracoscopy should be mandatory. In con-
same applies to dogs." Other advantages are the magnifed and
trast to laparoscopy, insufflation of the thoracic cavity is usually not
detailed view of intrathoracic tissues and the increased access to deep
needed and not recommended because it carries the risk of significant
regions, which actually allows a more extensive and complete expo-
hemodynamic compromise. Left hemithorax CO-insufflation using
sure of the thoracic cavity compared to open approaches. The number
2-5 mmHg intrathoracic pressures resulted in significant hemody-
of applications of thoracoscopic surgery in dogs is rapidly increasing.
namic compromise in dogs15,16 and is therefore advised to be used
and procedures such as the creation of a pericardial window or partial
with great caution and with as low as possible pressure for as short as
pericardectomy,112 or thoracic duct ligation1314 are becoming the
 possible intervals.
standard of care nowadays in several specialized institutions.
. In
 In cats, such measurements have not been performed and intratho-
contrast, data on thoracoscopic surgery in cats is lacking. The number 
racic insufflation should probably be discouraged. If established
of possible thoracoscopic procedures in both dogs and cats is merely
 pneumothorax (after trocar placement) and altered ventilation set-
related to the surgeon's experience and skills and the willingness
tings (eg., increasing ventilation rate and decreasing tidal volume) do
and creativity to convert these into an expanding range of VATS pro-
not provide suffcient space for thoracoscopy, selective single-lung
cedures. Companion animal minimally invasive surgery lags behind
ventilation may improve the working space in one hemithorax, with
its human counterpart, which is primarily related to the associated
 less severe hemodynamic changes compared to intrathoracic insuffla-
costs of investment in equipment and surgical training. Nevertheless,
oeiou ueuny u padde Aluouuon si uoeiuaa gunl-auo z'uo 
considering the recent but revolutionary history of minimally invasive 
 scopic surgery and is considered a safe technique in dogs.18 Again.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00042-1
487
Section
6
Thorax
sl uone pue se ul paieasaaul uaq iou aey sanhiuuoal qons
indicated. Single-lung ventilation can be established through selective
Box 42-1 Establishing thoracoscopic entry portals
endobronchial intubation  or selective  endobronchial blockade.
Double lumen endobronchial tubes are too big for use in cats. Because
Lateral recumbancy
 of the relatively short distance between the branches of lobar bronchi
Blunt mini-dissection approach for primary intercostal trocar
Aeu snuouoiq uans uieu e ui paseld uooeq io jno Aue c'sie u
placement: A small skin incision is made (slightly larger than the
Occlude branching bronchi, preventing ventilation ofthe cranial lung
trocar diameter), the thoracic wall muscles are bluntly dissected and
region using an endobronchial tube especially on the right side.20
the parietal pleura is perforated with dissection forceps (mosquito.
Endobronchial blockade combined with ventilation through an
baby mixters, or Kelly forceps). By opening the pleura, air
endotracheal tube is commonly used in human pediatric thoracos-
automatically flows into the thoracic cavity and the lungs fall away
from the thoracic wall (pneumothorax). At this stage, a blunt trocar
copy and may provide a more reliable solution to one-lung ventilation
 or threaded cannula can be inserted. Subsequent trocars are placed 
in cats.21 However, selective endobronchial intubation or blockade is
esonlatui aul pioae ot suellodui s! l anuepinb pidonsoe soul lapun
diffcult to perform in cats, usually requiring endoscopic guidance
arteries running along the caudal border of each rib.
using a flexible pediatric endoscope, and is not without risks. Fortu-
 Direct primary intercostat trocar insertion: A technique that is often
nately, diagnostic thoracoscopy and most thoracoscopic procedures
used for primary trocar insertion is blunt perforation of the thoracic
can be performed without single-lung ventilation.47.11322 At the
wall through an initial small skin incision using a threaded cannula 
authors' institution, thoracoscopic procedures in cats (and dogs)
with a O rigid scope inserted to visualize perforation of the thoracic
are performed commonly without single-lung ventilation. When
wall and pleura. After perforation of the pleura, air enters through
required, surgical space can be increased by decreasing tidal volume
the cannula into the thorax.
 in combination with an increase in ventilation rate manual retraction 
of lung lobes away from the location of interest, and occasionally
 Dorsal recumbency
alternating brief periods of apnea in combination with periods of
increased ventilation. Close cooperation and communication between
placement is the standard entry point in dorsal recumbency. A small
the anesthetic and surgery teams is of major importance for thoraco-
skin incision is made to the right or left of the xiphoid process just 
scopic procedures.
caudal to the costal arch (e.g. for thoracoscopic pericardectomy, see
Fig. 42-6). The threaded cannula is inserted with the endoscope
mounted for visual control and gently 'screwed' through the 
abdominal wall and diaphragm (Hg. 42-1), slightly ventrally into the
EQUIPMENT, ENTRY TECHNIQUE
ipsilateral hemithorax. Both the left and right hemithorax can be 
AND CLOSURE
Mopui e buean laje lelod elawen pioudixeyed e buisn paloidxa
in an avascular part of the mediastinum. In cats the mediastinum is 
The equipment for thoracoscopic surgery is essentially the same as for
often very thin and not filled with fat, making selective perforation 
relatively easy.
laparoscopic surgery and is described in Chapter 24. It is even more
essential in feline thoracoscopy than laparoscopy to use pediatric
equipment. Trocars for thoracoscopy do not need valves or rubber
washers because air should be able to enter and exit during ventilatory
movements of the lungs. Dedicated thoracoscopic trocars (rigid
or flexible) may be used, with blunt obturators. The same set of
INDICATIONS
laparoscopic instruments can, however, also be used for thoracoscopy.
The authors prefer to use threaded cannulas (most commonly the
 Thoracoscopy can be performed as a diagnostic technique or surgical
threaded laparoscopic cannulas) because of their controlled insertion,
Paau au aeaqo ue il yum u ase ue u paeui sia yeie
blunt tip. and frm grip in the thoracic wall (see Chapter 24). The
for a thoracotomy or enhance a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure,
part containing the internal valve and washer can be disconnected
 provided that the surgeon has an adequate level of VATS skills. In the
and removed, which also reduces cannula weight. Threaded cannulas
are also very useful for initial entry into the thorax. The standard
thoracoscopic entry point in lateral recumbency is in the 6th-gth
may even preventa secondthoracotomy.4 Furthermore, VATS includes
intercostal space (ICS), midway between the costochondral junction
both complete thoracoscopic and thoracoscopic-assisted procedures.
and the epaxial muscles.23 For a specifc lesion, however, an entry
Thoracoscopy is contraindicated in patients with severe cardiorespira-
point is selected which is a short distance away from it, to allow tri-
tory problems that cannot compensate for the respiratory changes
 angulation of the instruments and camera to the location of interest.
inficted by pneumothorax, such as severe cardiomyopathy or general-
For specific procedures, portal locations may differ depending on the
ized lung disease requiring full utilization of tidal volume.
size of the cat, to enable a triangulated approach. Several techniques
can be used to establish pneumothorax and insert the primary trocar
(Box 42-1).
THORACOSCOPIC PROCEDURES
 Five millimeter or larger diameter instruments may be used through
larger cannulas or directly through small intercostal incisions. In
the case of a tumor resection or large biopsy, the use of a dedicated
Exploration and biopsy of
extraction bag or fnger of a surgical glove for the removal of tissue
intrathoracic tissues
samples suspected to be malignant may prevent port site metastasis.
In many procedures, a thoracic drain is placed before closure. A drain
Thoracoscopic exploration can be performed for visualization and
is placed in a routine manner, tunneling through 3-4 cm subautane-
biopsy of tissues, such as lymph nodes, mediastinum, lungs. " pericar-
 ous tissue before penetrating the thoracic wall under thoracoscopic
dium, and mass lesions? (Fig. 42-2); for identifcation of underlying
causes of pleural effusion? or spontaneous pneumothorax; and to
their size.
evaluate or diagnose abnormalities found with diagnostic imaging
488
Thoracoscopy
Chapter
42
Tymus
Esophagus
A
Mediastinum
B
Figure 42-2 Images of thoracoscopic exploration of the left hemithorax
of a cat with a persistent right aortic arch (PRAA). (A} Cranial view of the
pue ( apou ydu leuiseau pbeua 'snwun y unuisea
pasnen unuseiu jueage aui jo ma esaoa (a) snbeudosa pane
by a dilated esophagus due to PRAA.
paraxiphoid camera portal with the patient in dorsal recumbency is
 most convenient. For exploration of one specifc hemithorax, access
to thoracic structures is enhanced with the patient in lateral recum-
bency. Biopsies of mass lesions, lymph nodes, and other non-
respiratory tissues can be performed using biopsy cup forceps (Fig.
42-5; see also Chapter 24).
Biopsy of lung tissue can be performed using a pre-tied loop or
extracorporeal tied ligature The edge of a lung lobe to be biopsied is
au 'dooi pan-aid au ynanu iadse oidosspua a ym padsee
ligature is tied, ensuring that enough tissue is distal to the ligature to
be able to cut a representative biopsy using scissors while enough
tissue remains holding the ligature. Larger biopsies or partial lung
lobectomy can be performed in a thoracoscopic-assisted approach, by
 exteriorizing the lung lobe through an enlarged portal and performing
stapler, without retracting the ribs. Endoscopic GIA staplers or linear
 stapler/cutters measure at least 10-12 mm in diameter and the small-
est staple cartridge length is 30 mm, which requires at least 45-50 mm
 of space to be opened inside the thoracic cavity. Therefore, endoscopic
linear staplers are too big to be used in thoracoscopic procedures in
cats, but may be used in a thoracoscopic-assisted approach with
enlargement of one portal to a keyhole thoracotomy to insert and
Figure 42-1 (A) Endoscopic image during blunt perforation of muscle
open the stapler with minimal rib retraction. A lateral approach with
and fascial layers using a threaded cannula. (B) Pediatric threaded 
cannula (3.9 mm inner diameter, centimeter scale included).
the patient in lateral recumbency is required for partial or complete
lung lobectomy. For cases involving the caudal lung lobe, the dorsal
 pulmonary ligament is transected using scissors and/or electrosurgery
techniques, such as CT, ultrasound, or MRI (Fig. 42-3). Furthermore,
instruments.
ns aiseau aru aaid u sanad pasisse-osoeio
 Partial lobectomies in cats may also be performed using vessel
such as thoracoscopic exploration in cases of thoracic trauma, avoid-
 sealer/divider devices, such as Ligasure, because these instruments can
ing the need for additional thoracotomies or contralateral thoracot-
securely seal bronchi of at least 2 mm in diameter?5 and have been
omy (Fig. 42-4). For exploration of both thoracic compartments, a
used successfully for pulmonary wedge resections in humans? and
489
Section
[61
Thorax
endng
Mediastinum
A
Left cranial lung lobe 
Lung
C
au o enad aui u suosal euouelau seiseau peadsapim ylm ien e ui uod eaen pioudixeied e ynoyi Adosoeoui Aoeoidx e-zt aun
lungs and mediastinum. Images show the lungs and mediastinum of the left hemithorax. CT images showed marked bronchial changes and thickened
pleurae and mediastinum, but not the typical signs of pulmonary metastasis.
ternum
CLL
vledia
Sternum
Rib
CLL
diastinal fat
A
B
Lung
C
Figure 42-4 Thoracoscopic-assisted exploration of the thoracic cavity in a cat with multiple bite wounds and extensive perforative trauma of the
 caudal thorax and abdomen (in an open transdiaphragmatic approach to the thorax, cat in dorsal recumbency). Although extensive caudal thoracic
wall trauma was present, intrathoracic trauma was limited to a single small distal lesion in the caudal part of the left cranial lung lobe (CLL), a torn
mediastinum, subpleural hemorrhage (at the sternum), and self-limiting hemothorax.
Sternum
Rib
IN
A
B
G
Figure 42-5 Cup forceps biopsy of a mediastinal mass. (A) a cranial sternal lymph node near the left cupula (middle). and a diffusely thickened
parietal pleura (B). Notice the thin (normal part of) mediastinum (left): cat in dorsal recumbency (C).
Partial pericardectomy
using a vessel sealer and are usually sutured intracorporally in human
 The creation of a pericardial window may be indicated in cats with
cardiac tamponade as a result of pericardial effusion. Partial, sub-
a thoracoscopic-assisted approach is generally advised in cats. When
 phrenic (subtotal) pericardectomy may be indicated in cases of con-
biopsying lungs for suspected malignancies, the hilar and sternal
strictive pericarditis or pericardial fbrosis (such as fbrosing pleuritis
lymph nodes should also be inspected and biopsied as required.
from prolonged existence of pleural effusion, infectious pericarditis.
490
Thoracoscopy
Chapter
42
Or neoplasia). Partial pericardectomy (Box 42-2) may be combined
with thoracic duct ligation for treatment of idiopathic chylothorax in
 Box 42-2 Partial pericardectomy
cats with subsequent fbrosing pleuritis.4.31
A left-paraxiphoid entry with the cat in dorsal recumbency is
preferred for creation of a pericardial window or subtotal 
Thoracic duct ligation
pericardectomy. After establishment of pneumothorax and entry with
the endoscope (see Box 42-1), a left-sided ventral intercostal portal is
Jo ped se paad si (e-t xo) (ia) uoe inp oeou
made under thoracoscopic guidance in the 5ih-gh intercostal space 
a treatment strategy in cats with chronic idiopathic chylothorax
mediastinum is incised using scissors, electrosurgery, or vessel sealer?
improve outcome in cases with pericardial fbrosis.24,31 Apart from
divider (Ligasure), exposing the heart and right thoracic cavity.
being minimally invasive a VATS approach improves visualization of
A third instrument portal can be made either in a left or right
the thoracic duct.° In combination with pericardectomy, the VATS
intercostal position (Fig. 42-6). The thorax is inspected and the
procedure may even prevent the need for two thoracotomies because
 phrenic nerves located. If the pericardium was not punctured 
a single open intercostal approach commonly does not allow ade-
under ultrasound guidance before surgery, it is punctured under
quate exposure of both the thoracic duct and pericardium for surgery.
thoracoscopic guidance using a Veress needle or making a small
Prior to surgery, it is helpful to visualize the thoracic duct using
incision. After emptying. the ventral pericardium can be more easily 
contrast CT or X-ray lymphangiography. Contrast fluid may be injected
 grabbed using grasping forceps and pulled away from the heart and
into a mesenteric lymph vessel, which may, however, be difficult to
then cut using scissors or a vessel sealer/divider. After establishing an
cannulate in cats.31 Other options are injection into a mesenteric
initial opening in the pericardium, a vessel sealer /divider or bipolar 
lymph node or a popliteal lymph node 34.35 Percutaneous ultrasound-
forceps and scissors are used to create a pericardial window of at 
ul iyssans sem uooalun iseuon apou qdal saiasa papig
woy Aeme Aens ol uaxei ag isnw aien jeanr danaweip wn e iseal
aesaau oi Aagns iae paieadai aq ue Adeioueudul gs'sao
the phrenic nerves. If a subtotal pericardectomy is performed, the 
complete closure of the thoracic duct. During surgery, identification
 pericardial excision is made more cranially, dorsally. and caudally.
of thoracic duct branches can be greatly improved using a contrast
close to the phrenic nerves. Repositioning the endoscope in the 
au uo uosxa au buad aot Aessau s! xesouuy lua 
fluid such as methylene blue injected in a mesenteric lymph vessel or
 right side.2.33 The excised tissue is removed through one of the 
lymph node.31,37 In dogs, popliteal lymph node injection with meth-
 portals, which can be enlarged if necessary. A routine thoracic
ylene blue was less successful compared to injection into a mesenteric
exploration is performed before placing a thoracic drain and closing
lymph node.37 Such studies have not been performed in cats. However.
the portals.
identification of the thoracic duct may still be impaired because of
chronic changes of the pleura and en-bloc ligation of all structures
dorsal to the aorta and ventral to the sympathetic trunk may be
necessary.
Additional procedures, such as thoracic omentalization, have not
been proven to be of significant advantage.38,33 Pleurodesis may be
used in refractory cases of pleural effusion in humans. However, insuf-
shes u Aaens uaean sn uodns ot sisixa eiep leu iuaiy
[and dogs).31.40 The effectiveness of pleurodesis procedures is likely
species-specifc, considering the much more favorable results in
pathic chylothorax, ablation of the cisterna chyli in addition to TDL
may improve outcome.4.45 The safety and efficacy of this treatment
has not been investigated in cats.
Other procedures
Other VATS procedures that may be performed in cats in selected cases
by experienced surgeons include the treatment of a persistent right
aortic arch, occlusion of a patent ductus arteriosus, excision of pul-
monary or other intrathoracic or mediastinal mass lesions, and treat-
ment of diaphragmatic hermiation.
COMPLICATIONS
Complications of VATS may be associated with pneumothorax, surgi-
cal technique, and the use of gas insufflation. Complications of
increased intrathoracic pressures were discussed earlier in the chapter.
but it is important to note that the effects of insufflating the thoracic
cavity are much more severe compared to insufflation of the abdomen
Figure 42-6 Portal positions for thoracoscopic pericardectomy in 
dorsal recumbency with paraxiphoid entry. , Camera; ●, instruments.
risk of complications such as damage to blood vessels and intratho-
 Possible variations in positions are depicted in gray.
racic organs. It is therefore not recommended to use blind insertion
491
 Section
6
Thorax
Box 42-3 Thoracic duct ligation
TDL is performed through a left lateral approach with the cat in right
lateral or sternal recumbency. The authors prefer the latter. The
aeds jensoatul unol pue un aul uaamag Aempwu s! jeod eawen
and two instrument portals are made in the dorsal third of the 8h or
5he1s uoassia (2-2t by) zer5aeds (eiso2a1u! ull 10 u0l pue u6
by opening the mediastinum ventrolateral to the aorta. Blunt
dissection is performed dorsally across the aortic surface, ventral to
 the thoracic duct and its branches until the right hemithoracic space
is entered. Contrast studies may help visualize the duct. Dissection is 
 performed dorsal to the thoracic duct, just ventral to the sympathetic
trunk. The thoracic duct, or the dissected tissue containing it, can 
pinous saupueag pnp ypelout algissod ilv paddip io paieb!l aq uaul
be clipped, using a 5 mm endoscopic clip applicator. However, even 
5 mm clips may be too large to be effective in cats.3 Coagulation of
the tissue using bipolar forceps or a vessel sealer-divider may also be
performed but may be less reliable because of the thin lymph vessel 
wall and poor visualization of the duct. When applied, great care
must be taken to ensure proper coagulation and to prevent
 iatrogenic laceration of the thin wall of the thoracic duct because of
tissue sticking to the device after coagulation is performed. Thoracic
S! uoinpoid pins llun Alaaiie ladoisod panuiuon s! abeuiep
significantly decreased.
Figure 42-7 Portal positions for a VATS approach to the feline thoracic
duct with the patient in right lateral or sternal recumbency. , Camera;
● instruments. Possible variations in positions are depicted in gray.
of sharp objects for initial entry (i.e, Veress needle and sharp trocar).
and anesthetists, proper anesthetic monitoring, and the ability to
 Biopsy sites and trocar sites should be inspeted for hemorrhage.
aziuuu iauagot lm papaau ji yoeoidde uado ue on uaauos Apea
 Bipolar instruments are advised to prevent and control hemorrhage.
the chance for complications. Peri- and postoperative care is not essen-
Vascular clips are used in delicate areas (close to important nerves and
tially different from thoracotomy patients and is primarily dependent
major vessels to the heart and lungs). The use of monopolar devices
on the patient's health status and procedure performed. Postoperative
is not recommended because of the increased chance of unintended
thoracic drainage is indicated with most thoracic surgical procedures.
distal or collateral effects, especially in the thoracic cavity with its thin
 The main differences between thoracoscopy and thoracotomy are
  nr u ss e sau n u s
reduced pain and morbidity, faster overall recovery, and shorter inten-
rience and dedicated surgical technique, teamwork between surgeons
 sive care unit and hospital stays.
REFERENCES
1. Kovak JR, Ludwig LL, Bergman Pl, et al.
Burke RP, Jacobs JP, Cheng W, et al.
Dupre GP, Corlouer JP, Bouvy B.
Use of thoracoscopy to determine the
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
Thoracoscopic pericardectomy performed
etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and 
for patent ductus arteriosus in low birth
without pulmonary exclusion in 9 dogs.
cats: 18 cases [1998-2001). I Am Vet Med
weight neonates and infants. Pediatrics
Vet Surg 2001;30:21-7.
Assoc 2002;221:990-4.
1999;104:227-30.
12.J
Jackson J, Richter KP, Launer DP.
2.
Meeking SA, Prittie J, Barton L.
Paul S, Altorki NK, Sheng S, et al.
Thoracoscopic partial pericardiectomy
Myasthenia gravis associated with thymic
 Thoracoscopic lobectomy is associated
in 13 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1999;13:
neoplasia in a cat. J Vet Em Crit Care
with lower morbidity than open 
529-33.
2008;18:177-83.
lobectomy: a propensity-matched
13.
Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Biller DS.
3.
Cohn LA, Norris CR, Hawkins EC, et al.
 analysis from the STs database. J Thorac
Olsen D. Thoracoscopic visualization
Identification and characterization of an
Cardiovasc Surg 2010;139:366-78.
and ligation of the thoracic duct in dogs.
idiopathic pulmonary fbrosis-like
9.
 Meyer DM, Herbert MA, Sobhani NC.
Vet Surg 2002;31:138-46.
condition in cats. J Vet Intern Med
et al. Comparative clinical outcomes
14.
Allman DA, Radlinsky MG, Ralph AG,
2004;18:632-41.
of thymectomy for myasthenia gravis
Rawlings CA. Thoracoscopic thoracic duct
4.
 Schmiedt C. Small animal exploratory
performed by extended transsternal and
ligation and thoracoscopic pericardectomy
thoracoscopy. Vet Clin North Am Small
minimally invasive approaches. Ann 
 for treatment of chylothorax in dogs.
Anim Pract 2009;39:953-64.
Thorac Surg 2009;87:385-90; discussion
Vet Surg 2010;39:21 -7.
5.
. Monnet E Interventional thoracoscopy in
90-1.
15.
Daly CM, Swalec-Tobias K, Tobias AH,
small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small
Walsh Pl, Remedios AM, Ferguson JF.
 Ehrhart N. Cardiopulmonary effects of
Anim Pract 2009;39:965-75.
[eed uado snsiaa sidossoeioui [e 1a
intrathoracic insufflation in dogs. J Am
6. McCarthy TC. Diagnostic thoracoscopy.
pericardectomy in dogs: comparison
Anim Hosp Assoc 2002;38:515-20.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 1999:14:
of postoperative pain and morbidity.
16.
 Polis I, Gasthuys F, Gielen I, et al. The
213-19.
Vet Surg 1999;28:472-9.
 effects of intrathoracic pressure during
492
Thoracoscopy
42
continuous two-lung ventilation for
26. Kovacs O, Szanto Z, Krasznai G, Herr G.
36. Johnson EG, Wisner ER, Kyles A, et al.
 thoracoscopy on the cardiorespiratory
Comparing bipolar electrothermal device
Computed tomographic lymphography
parameters in sevoflurane anaesthetized
 and endostapler in endoscopic lung
 of the thoracic duct by mesenteric lymph
dogs. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin
wedge resection. Interact Cardiovasc
node injection. Vet Surg 2009;38:
Med 2002;49:113-20.
Thorac Surg 2009;9:11 -14.
361-7.
17. Brock H, Rieger R, Gabriel C, et al.
27.
 Sakuragi T, Okazaki Y, Mitsuoka M, et al.
37.
.Enwiller TM, Radlinsky MG, Mason DE.
Haemodynamic changes during
 The utility of a reusable bipolar sealing
Roush JK. Popliteal and mesenteric lymph
thoracoscopic surgery: the effects of 
 instrument, BiClamp((R)), for pulmonary
 node injection with methylene blue for
 one-lung ventilation compared with
resection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
 coloration of the thoracic duct in dogs.
carbon dioxide insuflation. Anaesthesia
2008;34:505-9.
Vet Surg 2003;32:359-64.
2000;55:10-16.
28. Rothenberg SS. First decade's experience
38.
.Bussadori R, Provera A, Martano M, et al.
18.
.Kudnig ST, Monnet E, Riquelme M, et al.
with thoracoscopic lobectomy in infants
Peural omentalisation with en bloc
Effect of one-lung ventilation on oxygen
and children. J Pediatr Surg 2008;43:
ligation of the thoracic duct and
delivery in anesthetized dogs with an 
40-4.
pericardiectomy for idiopathic
open thoracic cavity. Am I Vet Res
29.
Albanese CT, Sydorak RM, Tsao K, Lee H.
chylothorax in nine dogs and four
2003;64:443-8.
 Thoracoscopic lobectomy for prenatally
cats. Vet J 2011;188:234-6.
19.
. Caccamo R, Twedt DC, Buracco P
diagnosed Jung lesions. Pediatr Surg
39.
. Stewart K, Padgett S. Chylothorax 
McKiernan BC. Endoscopic bronchial
2003;38:553-5.
treated via thoracic duct ligation and
 anatomy in the cat. J Feline Med Surg
30.
Lansdowne IL, Monnet E, Twedt DC.
 omentalization. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2007;9:140-9.
Dernell ws. Thoracoscopic lung
2010;46:312-17.
20. Bailey JE, Pablo LS. Anesthetic and
lobectomy for treatment of lung tumors
40. Fossum Tw, Forrester SD, Swenson CL,
physiologic considerations for veterinary
in dogs. Vet Surg 2005;34:530-5.
et al. Chylothorax in cats: 37 cases
endosurgery In: Freeman Ll, editor.
 Fossum Tw. Chylothorax in cats: is there
(1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Veterinary endosurgery St. Louis: Mosby:
a role for surgery? I Feline Med Surg
1991;198:672-8.
1999. p. 24-43.
2001;3:73-9.
41.
Colt HG, Russack V, Chiu Y, et al. A
21.
Hammer GB, Fitzmaurice BG, Brodsky JB.
32.
 Radlinsky M. Rigid endoscopy:
comparison of thoracoscopic talc
Methods for single-lung ventilation
 thoracoscopy. In: Lhermette P, Sobel D.
insuflation, slurry, and mechanical 
in pediatric patients. Anesth Analg
 editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
abrasion pleurodesis. Chest 1997;111:
1999;89:1426-9.
feline endoscopy and endosurgery.
442-8.
22.
 Radlinsky MG. Complications and need
Gloucester: BSAVA; 2008. p. 175-87.
42.
 Jerram RM, Fossum Tw, Berridge BR.
for conversion from thoracoscopy to
33.
 McCarthy TC, Monnet E. Diagnostic and
et al. The efficacy of mechanical abrasion
thoracotomy in small animals. Vet Clin
operative thoracoscopy. In: McCarthy TC.
and talc slurry as methods of pleurodesis
North Am Small Anim Pract 2009;39:
editor. Veterinary endoscopy for the small
 in normal dogs. Vet Surg 1999;28:
977-84.
 animal practitioner. St. Louis: Saunders:
322-32.
23. Potter L, Hendrickson DA. Therapeutic
2005. p. 229-78.
43.
Westaby S. Principles and practice of 
video-assisted thoracic surgery.
34.
 Naganobu K, Ohigashi Y, Akiyoshi T.
thoracic drainage. Oxford Textbook of
In: Freeman L], editor. Veterinary
 et al. Lymphography of the thoracic duct
Surgery, chapter 41.11. 2nd ed. Oxford
endosurgery. St. Louis: Mosby: 1999.
by percutaneous injection of iohexol 
University Press; 2002.
p. 169-87.
into the popliteal lymph node of dogs:
44. Hayashi K, Sicard G, Gellasch K, et al.
24. Fossum TW, Mertens MM, Miller MW,
 Experimental study and clinical
Cisterna chyli ablation with thoracic
et al. Thoracic duct ligation and
 application. Vet Surg 2006;35:
duct ligation for chylothorax: results 
 pericardectomy for treatment of
377-81.
in eight dogs. Vet Surg 2005;34:
idiopathic chylothorax. J Vet Intern Med
35. Millward IR, Kirberger RM, Thompson 
519-23.
2004;18:307-10.
PN. Comparative popliteal and 
45.
. McAnulty JF Prospective comparison of
25. Santini M, Vicidomini G, Baldi A, et al.
mesenteric computed tomography
cisterna chyli ablation to pericardectomy
 Use of an electrothermal bipolar tissue
lymphangiography of the canine thoracic
for treatment of spontaneously occurring
sealing system in lung surgery. Eur ↓
duct. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2011;52:
idiopathic chylothorax in the dog.
Cardiothorac Surg 2006;29:226-30.
295-301.
Vet Surg 2011;40:926-34.
[43]
Chapter
Thoracic wall
G. Gradner
Cats can incur serious traumatic thoracic wall conditions after road
 surfaces of ribs 2 to 10. The serratus dorsalis caudalis arises by a broad
traffc accidents, falls, and dog bites. Congenital conditions are
 aponeurosis from the thoracolumbar fascia and extends cranioven-
encountered, such as pectus excavatum, and dependent on the sever-
trally to the caudal border of the llth, 12th, 13th, and occasionally, the
ity, these may benefit from surgical correction. Neoplastic diseases in
10th rib. The scalenus muscle originates at the 4th and 5th cervical ver-
the cat, such as fibrosarcoma and osteosarcoma may also involve the
tebra to insert at the 5th rib and forms a surgical landmark for thora-
thoracic wall and this chapter aims to cover the surgical management
cotomy (see Fig. 43-1). The superfcial pectoral muscles originate at
of these varying conditions.
the cranial end of the sternum and insert at the greater tubercle of the
 humerus. The pectoralis profundus is a broad muscle extending
 between the sternum and the minor tubercle of the humenus.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 The external abdominal oblique muscle covers the ventral part of
the lateral thoracic wall and the lateral abdominal wall. The costal
part arises from the 4 to the 12h rib; the lumbar part originates from
Bony skeleton
the last rib and the thoracolumbar fascia to extend caudally. The
transverse thoracic muscle lies on the inner surface ofthe stermum and
The bony structure of the feline thorax consists of 13 thoracic verte-
sternal costal cartilages. When a lateral thoracotomy is performed, this
brae, 13 pairs of ribs, and nine sternebrae. The frst nine ribs articulate 
muscle is a landmark for the internal thoracic artery. Sectioning of this
with the sternum and are called sternal ribs; the last four are called
artery should be avoided.
asternal ribs. Each rib articulates with the corresponding vertebra at
the synovial costovertebral joints. The distal part of the rib continues
as the costal cartilage to connect with the sternum. The costal carti-
Vasculature
lages of the loth, 11 and 12th ribs unite to form the costal arch. The
The internal thoracic artery originates from the left and right subcla-
cartilages of the last pair of ribs end freely; these ribs are often termed
vian artery and passes under the transverse thoracic muscle to run
floating ribs: The sternum consists of eight sternebrae beginning
caudally to form the cranial epigastric artery. The intercostal arteries
cranially with the manubrium and ending caudally with the xiphoid
and veins originate from the aorta and azygos vein; they then course
cartilage of the xiphoid process. The intercostal space is filled with the
ventrally along the caudal border of the rib to anastomose with the
internal and external intercostal muscles' (Fig. 43-1).
intermal thoracic artery and vein. The intercostal nerves arise from the
ventral branches of the thoracic nerves that run with the intercostal
Musculature
arteries and veins. Collateral branches of the main intercostal vessels
and nerves can be found on the cranial border of the rib.2
The latissimus dorsi is a triangular muscle that originates at the
spinous processes of the last thoracic and frst lumbar vertebrae,
extending in a cranioventral direction to insert on the humerus. When
the muscle contracts the thoracic limb is retracted caudally, but exci-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
sion or incision of the muscle does not seem to cause lamenes. This
muscle is important for reconstructive surgery of the thoracic wall. The
Clinical signs and history
serratus ventralis muscle extends from the caudal margin of the frst
eight ribs to the medial surface of the scapula. The serratus dorsalis
Cats with thoracic wall problems generally present in two main ways.
muscle is divided into two parts. The serratus dorsalis cranialis arises
They may present with obvious visible thoracic deformity (e.g. pectus
via a broad aponeurosis from the superfcial leaf of the thoracolumbar
excavatum or neoplastic masses) or abnormal thoracic movements
fascia and inserts with serrations on the cranial borders and the lateral
(eg, flail chest), usually with minimal or no sigms of impedance to
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00043-3
495
Section
[6]
Thorax
serratus dorsalis
planning and margin evaluation of intrathoracic and thoracic wall 
serratus dorsalis
 serratus ventralis (cut)
caudalis
saiauasne eu san su up sau augo juau siou
cranialis
to blur. By inducing a transient apnea the anesthetist can prevent this
artifact. Ultrasound may be useful to evaluate the characteristics of a
Scalenus dorsalis
thoracic wall mass and to take ultrasound-guided biopsies. Tru-Cut
linternal oblique
biopsies, punch biopsies and trephine biopsies of the bone often
-ad aq u asa issau jl 'eisausaue ieaua io uepas ana
scalenus medius-
transversus
formed under CT guidance.4
abdominis
external intercostals
Anesthesia and analgesia
Facilities for intubation and an anesthetist familiar with intermittent
positive pressure ventilation of patients should be available (see
ectus abdominis
sn pue aioede uoesan ai anpai snauisae iso  iaideu
 Figure 43-1 Musculature of the lateral thoracic wall
should be taken into consideration for patients with pneumothorax,
 pulmonary edema, pulmonary contusion, pleural effusion, and pneu-
monia, with appropriate management before anesthesia.
 Thoracic surgery is painful and therefore analgesia, preferably
the internal thoracic organs. Alternatively, animals are presented
used in a multimodal approach, should be provided pre-, intra-
 because of the secondary consequences of the thoracic wall conditions
and postoperatively not only to reduce pain but also to minimize
or trauma with resultant thoracic organ dysfunction causing clinical
the overall dose requirement for anesthetics intraoperatively and to
signs such as dyspnea, tachypnea or hypoxia.
 obtain optimal ventilation of the lung. Pain can be minimized by an
atraumatic surgical approach, retraction rather than incision of the
Preoperative evaluation and stabilization of
latissimus dorsi muscle and careful placement of the sutures used to
trauma patients
secure the ribs or stermebrae in apposition. Multimodal analgesic
techniques such as local, epidural or interpleural nerve blocks or
sme pnous lem seio au on Aans aaisixa suai sie
infusions should also be considered in the preoperative plan (see
have a complete clinical examination (including a full neurologic and
Chapters 2 and 41).
orthopedic examination), biochemical and hematologic analysis of
blood, electrolyte levels measured, and urine analysis in order to fully
 evaluate the extent of the injuries and identify co-morbidities.
 Thoracic trauma patients should be evaluated for breathing diffcul-
SURGICAL DISEASES
ties and treated for shock. A significant pneumothorax or a pleural
effusion that is causing respiratory compromise should be drained
Surgical diseases of the thoracic wall include congenital conditions
(see Chapter 41, Box 41-2) prior to taking radiographs. An intravenous
such as pectus excavatum, traumatic lesions such as fail chest,
catheter should be placed for administration of fluids. Administering
penetrating bite wounds, and neoplasia. Many injuries or diseases
fluids at shock rates must be balanced against the potential to cause
will require surgical intervention and a concurrent thoracotomy
further respiratory compromise if fluid overload occurs with the
may be inevitable. For further information on thoracotomy see
Chapter 41.
reported in up to 50% of animals with thoracic trauma and are a
aasj unesnsan aunion piy paul iy uoeu ieuid
Pectus excavatum
Chapter l). Acute traumatic and neoplastic thoracic wall conditions
are usually painful; analgesic dnugs should be administered.
Pectus excavatum (PE) is a dorsoventral narrowing and inward concave
deformation of the caudal sternum and associated costal cartilages. It
Diagnostic imaging
usually extends caudally from around the 5th/6th rib and is most severe
at the level of the loth thoracic vertebra. Depending on the severity of
 In trauma patients, a total body radiograph can be obtained to gain
the malformation it can lead to both displacement of the heart and
a preliminary overview of the injuries. Different studies show widely
lung compression.
varying rates of thoracic injuries in the feline trauma patient of
The clinical signs of pectus excavatum can range from mild or
l1 -90%. Stress, multiple injuries, and the critical nature of the patient
absent, to severe. Those associated with more severe defects are growth
often only allow single view radiographs to be taken initially. The
retardation, exercise intolerance tachypnea, cyanosis, weight loss, and
safest view to do frst is the dorsoventral view as this avoids the
vomiting. Restricted ventilation, paradoxical movement of the deform-
patient having to lie on its side and the potential for compromise
ity during inspiration, and chronic alveolar collapse can contribute to
to lung expansion that this would cause The orthogonal view can
exercise intolerance and hypoxemia by impairing gas exchange Com-
be done at a later stage when the animal is stable and sedated
pression of the heart and kinking of great vessels can lead to heart
 Or anesthetized. To evaluate for metastases or primary neoplasia, a
murmurs or cardiac arrhythmias, but concurrent congenital defects are
right and left-sided laterolateral view and a dorsoventral view are
also possible and should be ruled out before surgery.
recommended.
The etiology is poorly understood. Shortening ofthe central tendon
 Computed tomography (CT) is useful for evaluating intrathoracic
of the diaphragm, abnormal intrauterine pressure, thickening of the
disease processes and for preoperative planning for reconstructive
substernal ligament or of the musculature of the cranial portion of
surgery involving the thoracic wall. Tumor margins can be highlighted
the diaphragm, failure of osteogenesis or chondrogenesis, arrested
with contrast media and pre- or postoperative radiation therapies can
sternal development, and rachitic influences have all been implicated.
be planned. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful for investi-
 Multiple animals in some litters have been affected, so breeding from
gating soft tissues and is used in human medicine for preoperative
 affected or related animals is not recommended.5
496
Thoracic wall
Chapter
43
Box 43-1 Thoracic measurements and thoracic indices
 Table 43-1 Indices used to characterize pectus excavatum in cats
 of pectus excavatum
Frontosagittal index
Vertebral index
Frontosagittal index (Fsl) is the ratio of the thoracic width at T10 as
auan aul wouy anuers aul pue ydebopen avag e uo paunseau
 Normal
0.7-1.3
12.6-18.8
of the ventral surface of T10 or vertebrae overlying the deformity 
and the nearest point on the sternum as measured on a lateral 
 Mild PE
2.0
>9.0
radiograph.
Moderate PE
2.0-3.0
6.0-9.0
Vertebral index (vl) is defined as the ratio of the distance from 
the center of the dorsal surface of the vertebral body overlying the
Severe PE
>3.0
<6.0
deformity to the nearest point of the sternum and the DV diameter
 of the centrum of the same vertebra.
Minimum thoracic height is defined as the distance between the 
ventral surface of the vertebral body and dorsal surface of the
sternum at the site of maximal deviation.6
The prognosis depends on the severity of concomitant lung injuries:
it worsens with cardiac dysrhythmias, the need for mechanical ventila-
tion, and concurrent injuries.
Flail chest
Dog bite injuries are the most common causes of flail chest in cats,
followed by blunt trauma. A flail chest results from a segmental frac-
ture and/or dislocation of two or more adjacent ribs. The section
 of unstable ribs moves paradoxically during respiration. During inspi-
ration the fail segment collapses inward; during expiration it moves
 outward. Air is shunted from the lung under the flail segment to the
opposite hemithorax (Fig. 43-3).
 The diagnosis is made by visualization of the unstable flail segment.
The concurrent lung trauma and pain will often cause dyspnea and
tachypnea. Lung contusions result in decreased bronchovesicular
sounds; decreased or hyper-resonant lung sounds are found with
pneumothorax. In some cases subcutaneous emphysema is found.
Thoracic radiography and CT will show the rib fractures.
 Stabilization of the patient is the main priority, and this involves
securing a patent airway, assessing for adequate ventilation, and estab-
lishing oxygenation. If pulse oximetry shows an oxygen saturation of
less than 92% at a Fi02 of 21%, supplemental oxygen is needed by
Figure 43-2 Pectus excavatum in a three-year-old cat. Note the narrow
face mask, oxygen cage or a nasopharyngeal or nasotracheal oxygen
distance between the xiphoid and the caudal thoracic vertebrae leading
tube could be inserted. Endotracheal intubation may be necessary if
to compression of the thoracic organs. Concurrent congenital defects are
the saturation cannot be kept above 92%.7 Electrocardiography (ECG)
 possible and have to be ruled out before surgery.
may identify cardiac dysrhythmias although they may not be present
until 12 to 48 hours after injury. Pain management should be initiated
at this time If possible, the patient should be placed in lateral recum-
bency: to inhibit paradoxical movement the flail segment should be
The diagnosis of pectus excavatum can be established by palpation 
 down. Reduced volume resuscitation (see Chapter 1) is implemented
of the thorax and by thoracic radiographs. The deformity can be
to avoid pulmonary edema.?
assessed objectively by measuring the frontosagittal and vertebral
The prognosis for a cat with flail chest depends on the severity of
indices on thoracic radiographs and by assessment of the minimum
'aqioaey si sisousoid au sase Piu ul 'saunlui sunl iueiouo
thoracic height. Several thoracic measurements need to be taken
which are then used to calculate the frontosagittal index and the ver-
Prognosis worsens with cardiac dysrhythmias, the need for mechani-
tebral index and the minimal thoracic height (Box 43-1, Fig. 43-2).
cal ventilation, and concurrent injuries. In a clinical study, the out-
These values characterize the severity of pectus excavatum in cats
comes of 24 cases of flail chests were compared (21 dogs and three
(Table 43-1). The deviation of the sternum can cause rotation and
cats): nine flail chests were surgically stabilized and 15 were not sta-
displacement of the heart as well as compression of blood vessels and
 bilized. There was no significant difference in hospitalization time or
lung lobes. Cats with high values are more likely to have impaired
outcome.
ventilation or ECG changes.
The need for surgical intervention (see Box 43-2), or the ability to
Crushing injuries and bite wounds
treat the condition conservatively is dependent on the severity and
presence of clinical signs. Surgical treatment of a moderate pectus
 Types of crushing injuries include perforating and non-perforating
Excavatum depends on the clinical findings; a severe pectus excavatum
bite wounds and other incidents where a compressive injury occurs
is likely to require surgical treatment if the condition of the patient
to the thorax, eg., an object falling on to the cat. Dog bite wounds
allows it. Mild pectus excavatum is often an incidental fnding with
involving the chest wall are the most common crush injury to the
no clinical relevance.
feline thoracic wall. Most cats sustain severe damage to the chest wall,
497
Section
6
Thorax
(A)
B
Figure 43-3 Schematic drawings showing the air movement with flail chest. (A) During inspiration the negative pressure causes movement of the flail
 segment into the thorax. (B} During expiration air from the unaffected hemithorax pushes the flail segment outward.
A
B
Figure 43-4 Advanced imaging is helpful in presurgical planning and to estimate the extent and depth of the tumor. (A) Contrast enhanced
(8. Courtesy of the University of Cambridge.)
with devitalized muscle tissue fractured ribs and sternebrae, pneu-
Neoplasia
u aeep us ya aaap au aep ueio ieua pue xio
be misleading: major internal organ injury may be present despite the
recognized acute or chronic visible swelling at the affected site Three-
After a cnush injury, devitalized tissues and senum accumulation
view radiographs can lead to a presumptive diagnosis of thoracic wall
provide a good medium for growing inoculated bacteria. Puncture
-oiso io sisioaiso 'su nss os e yim ss u aeiasa 'on
bite wounds by cats do not cause crushing injuries but they enclose
 proliferation, and can be useful for exclusion of metastasis. Additional
 diagnostics valuable for presurgical planning include contrast CT, MRI
the thorax causing pyothorax (see Chapter 44).
 Or scintigraphy." These advanced imaging modalities can be used to
 A thorough clinical examination that also rules out further injury
evaluate the invasiveness of the tumor (Fig. 43-4) and to assess for
sites is recommended. Twenty five percent of bite wounds involve
metastasis.
multiple parts of the body." Radiography, CT, and ultrasound are cur-
 It is diffcult to distinguish inflammatory or reactive bone prolifera-
rently the most useful diagnostic imaging modalities. In cases of
tion from neoplasia solely on cytologic examination from fine needle
thoracic wall injury, it is advisable to check for rib fractures, lung
aspirates. 12 The definitive diagnosis can usually be obtained with his-
contusions, spinal injuries, pneumothorax, and hemothorax. Open 
topathologic examination of biopsies using a Jamshidi biopsy needle.
and closed pneumothoraces should be differentiated.
With soft tissue neoplasia, Tru-Cut or wedge biopsies are often
 In a study of 185 dogs and ll cats that underwent thoracotomy (of
required for diagnosis. In cases with anemia, e.g. due to presurgical
which 35% of dogs and 36% of cats sustained a dog bite injury) there
radiation therapy. a blood transfusion might be necessary before
 e A xa y  y a A e 5
 surgery (see Chapter 5). Inappetence or increased nutritional demands
mortality without surgery in those patients treated for bite wounds.
may have to be addressed before surgery (see Chapter 4). In cases with
 This has to be interpreted with caution because animals undergoing
adhesion formation between thoracic structures, such as lung or peri-
thoracotomy presented with more severe injuries necessitating surgi-
cardium, the attached organ should be removed en bloc with the
cal intervention.
underlying neoplasm.
498
Thoracic wall
Chapter
43
Osteosarcoma
Primary bone tumors of the thoracic wall are uncommon in cats [4.9
per l00o00 cases).13 No breed or gender predisposition was found
with osteosarcomas in cats. The average age was l0.l years, ranging
from one to 17 years.14
 Osteosarcomas in cats behave differently to those in dogs: the meta-
static rate was found to be only l0%, therefore local destruction seems
to be more of a concern than metastasis with feline osteosarcomas.15
When metastasis occurs, it is usually to the lungs. The skull is most
commonly affected; however, osteosarcomas have also been diag-
nosed infrequently in the ribs and sternebrae of the cat. 14 In one report
 of 78 cats with osteosarcomas, 54% were located axially and only one
Osteosarcoma was located on a rib.14
The median survival time of seven cats with axial osteosarcomas
treated surgically was 13 months versus 22.2 months for cats with
appendicular osteosarcomas treated with amputation, which may
indicate a worse prognosis for thoracic wall osteosarcomas, likely to
be due to the inability to achieve wide resections of the lesion.14
Chondrosarcoma
The characteristics and biologic behavior of chondrosarcoma in cats
are not well defined. An incidence rate of 2% of chondrosarcoma in
vaccine-associated sarcomas was found in an immunohistochemical
study. Twenty of 67 cats [30% of the cases) with chondrosarcoma
Figure 43-5 Feline osteochondromatosis in an 11-month-old cat. This
showed involvement of subcutaneous sites and of these l0% were in
dorsoventral radiograph shows right-sided involvement of the 12ih and
the thoracic region.1 In two ofthese cats (3%), the tumor affected the
13ih rib. Differentials were osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma, which 
were excluded by the results of Jamshidi needle biopsy.
sternum and/or ribs.
The median survival time for cats with chondrosarcoma is difficult
[eiei io uonndue aiaum e' paodan uaaq aiaiei seui se pipaid ol
 surgery is possible, recurrence and metastasis are low.
Mast cell tumor
Feline osteochondromatosis
tumor; they account for approximately 20% of feline cutaneous
Osteochondromatosis in cats accounts for approximately 20% of
tumors in the Us. 15 There are two cutaneous forms of mast cell tumors
primary bone tumors. Most cats are young (two to four years
in cats: the mastocytic form, which is the most common one, and the
old) when the exostosis is discovered. Sites of skeletal involvement
histiocytic (atypical) form. The latter occurs in cats under the age of
are the rib cage scapulae, vertebral column, skull, pelvis, and limbs
four and it generally regresses spontaneously.
(Fig. 43-5).
The prognosis for a mast cell tumor depends on the histologic
Feline osteochondromatosis lesions show progressive enlargement
 grade Multiple lesions of the pleomorphic phenotype with high KIT
and continuous growth throughout the cat's life Viral particles causing
immunoreactivity score, which is a mast cell growth factor receptor,
feline leukemia or transmissible feline sarcoma have consistently been
and high mitotic and Ki67 indices correlate with an unfavorable
found in the neoplastic cartilage:; detection of such viral particles is a
 outcome Therefore, immunohistochemical staining is an important
prerequisite for diagnosing this disease. The tendency for malignant
so lan ise yo juan iad Auaml st'sisouoid e sunu ioy das
 transformation into an osteosarcoma or a chondrosarcoma is an indi-
show malignant behavior. Local recurrence rates of 0-24% after surgi-
cation for removal of the feline osteochondroma.18
cal excision have been reported.22 A more aggressive approach for
histologically anaplastic mastocytic tumors may be necessary. The
histiocytic form may regress spontaneously.
Fbrosarcoma (FsA)
Fibrosarcomas are one of the most common feline subcutaneous
 neoplasms. They are locally aggressive tumors with a moderate meta-
SURGERY FOR THORACIC WALL CONDITIONS
static rate of up to 22.5% and a local recurrence rate as high as 67%.19
Complete excision has been shown to improve survival rate and
 Surgery of the thoracic wall always requires special instrumentation
could also be considered (see Chapter 15). Vaccine-associated sarco-
because a 'simple' wound exploration might result in an open tho-
mas can involve the thoracic wall and this condition is covered in
racic wall. Instruments that may be useful to include in a kit are
detail in Chapter 22.
listed in Table 43-2. When performing thoracic wall surgery in cats,
The only factor found to influence the length of disease-free inter-
it is often more practical to suture the drape onto the skin in order
vals of cats with thoracic wall fbrosarcoma was whether margins of
to avoid interference with the towel clamps. A thoracotomy may
tissue obtained at the time of surgery contained tumor cells. Surgery
paiedad aq ot paau sisauisaue pue (it ianeu aas) Aiessaoau aa
alone is seldom curative and radiation therapy is mandatory for
to perform intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IppV) (see
disease control.2 Recurrence rates range from 31% to 55%.21
Chapter 2).
499
Section
6
Thorax
Table 43-2 An instrument kit for thoracic wall surgery
Box 43-2 External splinting with percutaneous
circumsternal sutures
 Soft tissue instruments
Quantity
This technique is used in kittens less than four months old. The kitten
 Bard Parker handle No 3
1
is placed in dorsal recumbency and a U-shaped splint is modeled out
Bowl for warmed flushing solution
of a thermoplastic casting material at a slightly greater width than 
the sternum. Four to six pairs of holes are made in the splint. While
 Swabs with radiodense marker
10
the splint is left to harden, sutures are placed around the sternum, 
Backhaus towel clamps
10
preferably incorporating the costal cartilage (45° angle) to reduce the 
risk of suture pulling through the soft sternal bone (Fig. 43-6). The
 Mayo scissors
1
splint is padded and the sutures are passed through the predrilled 
holes. Large 2/0 monofilament absorbable (e.g. polydioxanone) or
Wire cutting scissors
T
non-absorbable (e.g.. polypropylene) suture material is recommended.
 Metzenbaum scissors
1
'say pall ane saunins lepnen isou aul pue paneid-aid aue sanins aul
The splint is left in place for 10-21 days. Intraoperative complications 
Mayo-Hegar needle holder
7
of this technique are penetration of heart, lung or internal thoracic
Adson Brown forceps
2
vessels; postoperative complications include suture abscesses, mild 
superficial dermatitis, and skin abrasions. Because of rapid growth 
 DeB akey forceps
1
g paisnlpe aq ol paau Aew azis juuds aul
 Halstead mosquito forceps straight
5
 Halstead mosquito forceps bent
5
Special thoracic instruments
Gelpi retractor
1
 Small Finochietto retractor
1
 Beckmann retractor
1
Warm Ringer's solution
 Poole suction tip and suction
1
Polydioxanone
 Polyglecaprone 25, Polyglactin 910, Polyglycol acid
Thoracic drain
1
Monopolar or bipolar cautery
1
Cotton swabs, sterile
1
Periosteal elevator
1
Bone cutting forceps (Liston)
1
Pectus excavatum
Surgical intervention may be necessary for pectus excavatum when the
defect is considerable and associated with clinical signs. The condition
aun uo juapuadap 'uonasai auoq io guuds ieuaxa Aq panean s!
age of the cat. In animals younger than 4 months of age, where the
Figure 43-6 Diagram llustrating external splint on the ventral thorax
sternum is compliant and non-ossified, the treatment of choice is an
with percutaneous circumsternal sutures placed at a 45° angle 
external splint with percutaneously placed circumsternal sutures (Box
between the ribs.
43-2). The goal of this treatment is to pull the sternum outward and
 maintain this position while the sternum matures and becomes non-
 compliant in the corrected position.
was performed. After a midline skin incision the superficial and deep
 In a case report of a Siamese kitten of five months of age, the flat-
pectoralis muscles and the rectus abdominis muscles were elevated
tened shape deformity was corrected by a l.5 mm Kirschner pin
and the stermum, with the adjacent ribs, was removed using a rongeur,
taking care not to lacerate the internal thoracic artery. The remaining
manubrium in a cranial to caudal direction. From the manubrium the 
ribs and intercostal muscles were apposed with a large monofilament
 pin was inserted into the second, third, and fourth sternebrae to align
suture in an interrupted or horizontal mattress suture pattern. Place-
and reduce the deformity. The abrupt depression deformity was cor-
ment of a thoracostomy tube, closure of the thoracic wall, and a light
rected with an external splint through the 4th, 5th, and 6th intersterne-
support wrap completed the surgical procedure.20 A total or partial
bral cartilages.24
 sternectomy is feasible in small animals. A wedge ostectomy of the
 For animals older than four months, and thus with less mobile
sternum combined with an external splint has also been described.
sternebrae, a variety of different techniques have been reported. In one
With cats older than four months it may be advisable to use a more
report a total resection of the sternum and the associated cartilages
stable internal splint.23
500
Thoracic wall
Chapter
43
The use of internal splinting to realign a non-compliant sternum in
a cat with pectus excavatum was described in a five-month-old domes-
Box 43-3 Surgical stabilization of a flail chest
tic short-hair kitten. At the maximal point of deformity a small section
For external stabilization of a flail chest strong plastic material, e.g.
of the 5th to 8th ribs was removed without destroying the periosteum
 On the costectomy site At the chondral junction between the 4th and
from a buster collar, a wire coat hanger, or aluminium rods is 
molded to conform to the thoracic wall and 2/0 to 0 suture material 
the 5th sternebra, a wedge-shaped piece of cartilage was removed, with
(e.g. nylon) is passed using a large curved needle around the 
the base of the wedge positioned ventrally. A 2 mm veterinary cuttable
affected ribs and then through the plastic splint in predrilled holes or
 plate, contoured at the rostral end to accommodate the normal dorsal
around the wire of the hanger. The circumcostal sutures are passed 
deviation of the cranial portion of the sternum covered the length of
at two sites, one ventrally and one dorsally, to avoid a pivot point of 
the entire sternum and was fixed with 2/0 polydioxanone suture mate-
aul pue uys aul uaamiag paldde s! buipped awos juawbas llell aul
rial around the sternebrae, ribs, and through plate holes. Three months
 splint. The splint should be extended cranially and caudally over the 
later the plate was removed.17
unaffected ribs to help stabilize the flail segment (Fig. 43-7). Internal
stabilization, consisting of interfragmentary wire and suture
Postoperative care
aidinu 'spajap ypesout abiel ioy painban ag Aeu 'uonewixodde
unstable rib fractures, or for an open pneumothorax.
Depending on the treatment chosen, the kitten must be monitored
closely for breathing diffculties during the frst 24 hours and oxygen
must be provided as needed. Bandages placed too tighty or placed
pue asai uaa aq oi ssai u eisasae ia
should therefore be applied with great care Feeding per os or via a
feeding tube is introduced as soon as the animal is fully awake.
Flail chest
Several techniques for stabilization of a flail chest (Box 43-3) have
been introduced, but attention has been focused on the underlying
pulmonary injuries as a cause of respiratory dysfunction. Stabilization
of the flail segment is often not required and is not commonly per-
formed but is still recommended if either a thoracotomy is needed to
address associated injuries, if rib fractures may cause further injury, or
if conservative medical management is ineffective.
Postoperative management
Figure 43-7 External splinting of a flail chest. To develop a flail chest
Continued conservative treatment consists of oxygen supplementa-
at least two neighbouring ribs must be broken both proximally and
tion, rest, hydration, and nutrition. Pain management is mandatory:
 distally. These floating ribs can be stabilized against the thoracic wall
prophylactic antibiotics are only necessary if there are signs of bron-
 with an external plastic splint or with part of a metal coat hanger.
chopneumonia or concurrent injuries such as bite wounds. Recum-
bent cats should be turned every four to six hours. A thoracotomy tube
to eliminate pneumothorax may be necessary.
Monitoring consists of measuring the oxygen saturation every two
bandage and air should be removed from the interpleural space via
to four hours initially. Arterial blood gas analysis should be performed
thoracocentesis. The use of a sterile swab secured on the thorax with
every 12 to 24 hours, dependent on the patient's recovery. ECG moni-
cling film has proven to be useful. The animal has to be closely moni-
toring. blood pressure and urinary output are evaluated. External
tored to avoid a tension pneumothorax. In cats with severe lung
splints are left for two to four weeks after callus formation is detected
 contusions and atelectasis, surgery should be postponed until suff-
Or the fail segment is stabilized. Bandaging the thorax is contraindi-
cient recovery has occurred from these injuries and the anesthetic risk
cated and may further compromise ventilation. Diuretics are not rec-
has been minimized. In the presence of lung contusions, fuid should
ommended for treating pulmonary contusions unless fluid overload
be administered cautiously (see Chapter 2). Analgesia, oxygen, and
and pulmonary edema are present. Corticosteroids are contraindi-
antibiotics should be administered.
cated because they predispose to pneumonia.
After stabilization, judicious surgical debridement to remove any
devitalizedfatandmuscleaswellascopiouslavageisrecommended.20-32
Bite wounds
Before lavage, tissue samples from the wound bed are taken for culture
iy xeioaud uada ue jo auasand au u sunsn aasuas pu
In cases of bite wounds, exploratory surgery is always indicated.25-27
pressure flushing should be avoided in order to avoid introducing
Intrathoracic injuries caused by penetrating or crushing teeth are often
infected material into the chest.
not visible, making surgical exploration necessary. The elastic skin can
When treating a bite wound with possible tearing of the intercostal
follow the movement of the jaws, often leaving just small teeth marks 
musculature, the surgeon and the anesthetist have to be prepared for
while the muscles and organs underneath may be severely damaged.
a thoracotomy and the possibility of lung lacerations, bronchial, and/
This is called the iceberg-effect, because on the surface of water only
Or tracheal injuries.28 All devitalized tissue must be removed and local
the smallest part of the iceberg is seen. No standard protocol is avail.
muscle flaps, such as the latissimus dorsi muscle, may be needed to
able for the treatment of bite wounds in dogs and cats. Thoracotomy
close thoracic wall defects. Broken ribs are generally not repaired and
is recommended in more severe cases where penetrating wounds are
are normally left in situ. However, in cases with lacerated lung lobes
apparent or internal organs have been damaged.28 With an open
a total or partial lung lobectomy may be necessary and the adjacent
 pneumothorax the wound should be covered with a sterile occlusive
up isau y nlu iauiny pioae on paaoau aq u qu paey
501
Section
6
Thorax
should be placed after debridement when entering the chest or when
exit close to the wound margins because of the risk of tumors seeding
severe pneumothorax is present.
into the surrounding tissue.
Postoperative management
Antibiotic treatment in bite wound victims is highly controversial
THORACIC WALL RECONSTRUCTION
 both in the veterinary and human medical literature. The efficacy of
 prophylactic antibiotics in significantly reducing the incidence of post-
 The most common indication for thoracic wall reconstruction is after
leut pey ayt ot anp aq Aeu stu uaoidun st suonaju punom alq
en bloc resection of a thoracic wall neoplasm. Other possible indica-
no single antimicrobial agent has been demonstrated to be effective
tions are severe thoracic wall trauma, chronic infections of the thoracic
 against most of the potential pathogens. In a study the most common
wall, and severe congenital defects involving the thoracic wall. Recon-
aerobes identifed were: Pasteurella spp., Streptococcus spp. Staphylococ-
piau pue xeiouounaud juaaid on ieas iuie ue sannban uons
Cus spp.33 The most common anaerobes identified were: Fusobacterium
repair to prevent excessive paradoxical movement.
spp. and Bacteroides spp.*4 Ampicillin and either fluorquinolone or
aminoglycoside antibiotics are recommended. In cases of confirmed
Autogenous techniques
wound infection, re-culturing is advisable to monitor efficacy of
treatment.35
Latissimus dorsi muscle
With severe soft tissue trauma, the risk of systemic inflammatory
 The latissimus dorsi muscle can be used as a muscle flap or myocuta-
response syndrome (SIRS) and sepsis increases. Patients in this 'at risk'
 group should be in an intensive care unit with optimal systemic and
anbiuupat snouagoine pasn Aquouuos isou aul si l! pue dey snoau
nutritional support.
for closure and reconstruction of chest wall defects (Box 43-5). This
Bone neoplasia
 Box 43-5 Latissimus dorsi muscle flap
 Reconstruction of the thoracic wall (Box 43-4) is often necessary after
en bloc resection of masses. Surprisingly large portions of thoracic
The flap is created by identifying the origins and insertions of the 
wall can be removed as long as an airtight seal can be obtained after
latissimus dorsi muscdle (Hg. 43-8). This triangular muscle has its base
uq sey (isiy aui sunu squ xis oi dn jo ieaomy 'uoisxa
 sassanoud snouids aul yl pateposse epsey lesiopoqwnl aul buoje
reported in dogs without increased risk of ventilatory complications.36
of the lumbar and last seven or eight thoracic vertebrae and its 
When fewer than five ribs are removed, prosthetic mesh and either
insertion on the teres tuberosity of the humerus. The dorsal border
 autogenous muscle or omental pedicle flap can be used alone or in
runs from the acromion to the head of the 13ih rib and the ventral
combination.37 Additional rigid support to prevent paradoxical move-
border is either the ventral border of the muscle or the incised edge 
ment may be necessary if more than five ribs are removed; however.
of the latissimus dorsi that has been removed.36 Some intercostal
branches supply the muscle and may have to be cauterized for 
reconstruction without the use of foreign material is preferred in
transposition of the flap
 oncologic surgery.
 Preoperative measurements have to be taken before creation of
Seroma formation has been reported in up to 50% of the patients
the flap: the length of the flap decreases the more the flap is
 and a closed suction drain should be placed.* Drains should always
Jo lapiog aut ot lepnen ing 'uowone aut jo zybiay aul ty pateio
the triceps muscle a slight depression can be felt; this is where the
thoracodorsal artery arises. For the dorsal flap border an oblique line
is drawn from the acromion to the head of the 13h rib. The ventral 
 Box 43-4 Thoracic wall resection for neoplasia
border is defined by the skin fold, which extends to the lower third 
of the humerus and runs parallel to the dorsal line. The caudal
With a sterile surgical marker pen, the extent of surgical resection 
margin of the flap is the 13ih rib. This muscle can be exposed 
required should be marked 2-4 cm radiallyfrom the outlined edge of
aleed apew ae suoispu! lo ypeoudde jenibans Auewd aut yonoul
the gross tumor. Instruments should not breach these margins. The
to the muscle fibers. The intercostal arteries supplying the dorsal part 
deep margin must extend at least one (preferably two) intact fascial
of the muscle have to be cauterized or ligated when the flap is raised
plane(s) below the tumor. In cases with a mass involving the lateral
after freeing the dorsal, caudal, and ventral borders.
thoracic wall, a full depth body wall resection may be required to 
achieve clean margins. Because of retraction of the loose skin in 
cats, tacking sutures to connect the deep margin to the skin are
recommended to maintain orientation.
The skin covering the tumor is incised and retracted and muscles
S! xesoui aul aunsop lof paseds ae wseidoau aul a papeau! lou 
entered through an unaffected intercostal space and the tumor 
extension can be estimated intraoperatively by palpation and also
by thoracoscopic techniques. Surgical treatment involves complete 
resection of the affected ribs with proximal and distal disarticulation
and removal of adjacent ribs to obtain a 2-3 cm margin. The use of
 rib cutters 2-3 cm from the tumor margins has also been described.
latissimus dorsi muscle
Disarticulation may be better for osteosarcomas because of the risk 
of intramedullary extension of the tumor. The adjacent arteries and 
veins are cauterized or ligated. Adhesions between the thoracic
wall and underlying organs may require lung lobectomy or
Figure 43-8 Superficial musculature of the cat showing the latissimus
pericardectomy.
dorsi musdle.
502
Thoracic wall
Chapter
43
flap is based on the thoracodorsal artery arising at the caudal depres-
Omentum
sion of the shoulder (see Chapter 19).
An omental flap can be used in combination with muscular flaps (Fig.
43-10) or to cover synthetic mesh that has been used over thoracic
Diaphragmatic advancement
wall defects, The omentum provides lymphatic drainage. blood
supply, minimizes mesh-induced pleuritis, and provides an airtight
Advancement of the diaphragm is a very useful technique for closure
seal. Creation of an omental flap is described in Chapter 19.
of caudal thoracic defects involving the 9th to the 13th ribs. Normal
function can be restored by advancement of the diaphragm and
fxing it to the remaining rib or muscular fascia.1α If more than four
Autologous or synthetic reconstruction
ribs have to be removed, expansion of the caudal lung lobe may be
Polypropylene mesh
compromised and therefore its removal should be considered3?
(Fig. 43-9).
 A polypropylene mesh is most commonly used for reconstruction of
large defects in small animal surgery (see Chapter 10). The mesh is
 Deep pectoral muscle flap
cut slightly larger than necessary as the edge is folded to achieve a
double thickness margin of approximately 1 cm around the entire
pue leiu al jo usonan ioy psn aq ues dey asn s
periphery of the prosthesis41 (Fig. 43-1l). The cut edge should be
ventral thoracic wall and is based on the lateral thoracic and external
external to the body cavity to prevent contact of the sharp edges with
thoracic artery (Box 43-6).
the lung or other organs. Alternatively, the mesh may be folded in half
Figure 43-9 Reconstruction of the right caudal thoracic wall after 
Figure 43-10 Thoracic reconstruction. Reinforcement of the caudal
removal of a tumor involving the last four ribs. The diaphragm is moved
thoracic wall wound with a double layer of omentum before it is closed
cranially and secured with encircling sutures on the giuh rib and with
with muscular flaps. The omentum is fixed with pre-placed simple
simple continuous sutures to the internal and external intercostal 
interrupted sutures.
muscles. It can be advanced as far cranially as the &uh rib; if more cranial
advancement is required then lobectomy of the caudal lung lobe may be
necessary.
Box 43-6 Deep pectoral muscle flap
This muscle has its origin at the sternebrae and has its insertion on 
the lesser tubercle of the humerus with an aponeurosis to the greater
 tubercle. The lateral thoracic artery and external thoracic artery enter 
jeuaui aun woy Aiddns pooa leuaubas e Ajeuen apsnu aul
thoracic artery enters the muscle along the sternum. This flap can 
either be divided along the long sternal origin of the muscle or on
the insertion on the humerus with division of the lateral and external
thoracic arteries.40 This flap is limited cranially by the superficial
pectoral muscle. By cutting the muscle from the greater and lesser
tubercle of the humerus it can be rotated cranially and dorsally.
Based on the segmental branches of the internal thoracic artery.
defects across the midline on the contralateral side can be covered.
The deep pectoral muscle is incised along the sternum but the cranial
 Figure 43-11 Polypropylene mesh can be used in a double layer or the
portion of the sternal attachment and as many branches of the
edge can be folded over by one centimeter to improve the suture
internal thoracic artery as possible should be preserved.
holding properties and to have rounded smoother margins towards the
inner organs.
E0S
Section
6
Thorax
to uniformly double the thickness present at the defect The mesh
Complications increase the longer a thoracic drain is left in,4 so it
is sutured under slight tension and a monoflament suture such
should be removed once it has ceased to be useful. To treat persistent
 as polypropylene, polydioxanone, or polyethylene is used. Simple
pneumothorax, continuous rather than intermittent suction may be
interrupted or mattress sutures are applied. Soft tissue coverage is
a u uuadap isxa suno ieaaas xua ean on pana
achieved by undermining and transposing the local musculature, sub-
severity of hemorrhage including fluid replacement, administration of
cutaneous tissue, and skin. Seroma formation can be prevented with
whole blood, autotransfusion of blood, and reoperating to address
active drains and may be less common with concurrent usage of the
the source of hemorrhage.
omentum. Omentum can be elongated and used as a double sheet
Hypoventilation leads to respiratory acidosis. Causes include anes-
to cover the mesh (see above and Chapter 19). Polypropylene mesh
thetic drugs, pneumo- or hemothorax, tight thoracic bandages, and
is infiltrated uniformly with fibrous tissue to a 3-4 mm thickness at
 a si oed an uu pu si u '
six weeks post implantation. The monoflament properties of the
50 mm Hg. Supplemental oxygen is sometimes indicated after thoracic
polypropylene prevent bacteria from being trapped by the fibers of
auieu raalins iae Aessanau Aianei si joddns Aoieiua Aagins
the mesh.42
 Buunp Adeiau ainssad Aoiendxa-pua aiisod orh w 5 jo anueu
thoracotomy decreases the degree of hypoxemia secondary to alveolar
collapse during surgery.
Small intestinal submucosa (Sls)
A bandage placed under anesthesia or sedation is contraindicated
Small intestinal submucosa is used for reconstruction of abdominal
and can lead to severe respiratory distress when the thorax expands
wall deficits, enhancement of tendons and reconstruction of inner
a uaum pae aq u au  y oad aa au u
Organs.4 In human medicine, it is also used for chest wall reconstruc-
animal is fully awake, to protect the wound and the drain.37
tion. There are no reports of its use for thoracic wall reconstruction in
cats but it has potential for use in this situation.
COMPLICATIONS
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Most common complications are seroma formation, recurrence of the
resected neoplasia, emphysema, pleural effusion, peripheral edema,
Pmeumothorax, hemothorax, pulmonary edema, hypoventilation,
hypothermia, circulatory shock, acid-base disorders, and oliguria may
are preferred for thoracic wall reconstruction over foreign material
arise after thoracic wall surgery. Placement of a thoracostomy tube
jou st rou aui ieun sisixa Aissod aui uaum Aeioadsa (ysa)
before closure is always indicated when the thorax is entered. The
completely resected.
thoracostomy tube should remain open until the thoracic wall is
After autogenous reconstruction of chest wall defects, partial or
closed to prevent tension pneumothorax. After surgery, the pleural
complete muscle flap failure can occur and this can be a cause of
space is evacuated hourly to test for the presence of air or blood
seroma. Therefore, the cause of the seroma should be investigated if
s an u   g asd   e 
it does not resolve spontaneously.
REFERENCES
Hunt GB. Thoracic wall anatomy and
levels in flat chests and pectus excavatum
12. Stockhaus C, Teske E. Klinische Erfahrung
surgical approaches. In: Bockman DJ,
in neonatal Burmese kittens. Vet Record
mit der zytologischen Diagnostik
Hold DE, editors. BSAVA manual of
1997;141:566-70.
beim Hund. Schweizer Archive fur
anine and feline head, neck and thoracic
7.
 Abato E, Byers CG. Flail chest. Standards
Tierheilkunde 2002;143:233-40.
surgery. 1st ed. Gloucester: British
of care 2009;9:1-7.
13.
 Dernell ws. Tumours of the skeletal
Veterinary Association; 2005. p. 135-48.
8.
Hahn KA, Endicott MM, King GK.
system. In: Dobson IM, Lascell BDX,
 2. Hermanson JW, Evans HE. The muscular
Harris-King FD. Evaluation of
editors. BSAVA manual of canine and
system. In: Evans HE, editor Miller's
radiotherapy alone or in combination
feline oncology. 2nd ed. Gloucester:
anatomy of the dog. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
with doxorubicin chemotherapy for the
BSAVA; 2003. p. 179-96.
Sauders Company: 1993. p. 303.
treatment of cats with incompletely
14.
Kessler M, Tassani-Prell M, von Bomhard
3. Zulauf D, Kaser Hotz B, Hassig M, et al.
excised soft tissue sarcomas: 71 cases
D, Matis U. Das Osteosarkom der Katze:
 Radiographic examination and outcome
[1998-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
epidemiologische, klinische und
in consecutive feline trauma patients.
2007;231:742-5.
rontgenologische Befunde bei 78 Tieren
Vet Comp Orthopaed Traumatol 2008;1:
9.
Olson D, Renberg W, Hauptman JG, et al.
(1990-1995) Tierarztl Prax 1997;25:
36-40.
Clinical Management of Flail Chest in
275-283.
4. Davis KM, Hardie EM, Lascelles BDLX,
Dogs and Cats: A retrospective study of
15.
 Sabattini S, Bettini G. Prognostic value 
Hansen B. Feline Fibrosarcoma:
24 cases [1989-1999). J Am Anim Hosp
of histologic and immunohistochemical
perioperative management. Comp Contin
Assoc 2002;38:315-20.
features in feline cutaneous mast cell 
Ed Vet 2007;12:712-37.
10.
 Kolata RJ, Kraut NH, Johnston DE.
tumors. Vet Pathol 2010;47[4):
5.0
 Orton CE. Thoracic wall. In: Slatter D,
Patterns of trauma in urban dogs and
643-53.
editor. Textbook of small animal surgery.
cats: A study of 1000 cases. J Am Vet Med
16. Nieto A, Sanchez MA, Martinez E, Rollan 
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.
Assoc 1974;164:499-502.
E. Immunohistochemical expression of
p. 381.
11.
Rosetti E, Bertolini G, Zotti A.
p53, fbroblast growth factor-b, and
6.
.Sturgess CP, Waters L, Gruffydd-Jones TJ.
Multilobular tumour of bone of the
 transforming growth factor-α in feline
et al. An investigation into the association
thoracic wall in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
vaccine associated sarcomas. Vet Pathol
between whole blood and tissue taurine
2007;9:254-7.
2003;40:651-8.
504
Thoracic wall
43
17. Risselada M, de Rooster H, Liuti T, et al.
37 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:
36. Liptak JM, Dernell ws, Rizzo SA, et al.
Use of internal splinting to realign a
453-60.
Reconstruction of chest wall defects after
noncompliant sternum in a cat with
26. Scheepens ETF, Peeters ME, Eplattenier 
rib tumor resection: A comparison of
pectus excavatum. I Am Vet Med Assoc
HFL, Kirpensteijn J. Thoracic bite trauma
autogenous, prosthetic, and composite 
2006;228:1047-52.
 in dogs: A comparison of clinical and
techniques in 44 dogs. Vet Surg 2008;37:
18. Gradner G, Weissenbock H, Kneissl S.
radiological parameters with surgical
479-87.
et al. Use of latissimus dorsi and
results. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:
37.
. Orton EC. Body cavities and hernias.
 abdominal external oblique muscle for
721-6.
thoracic wall. In: Slatter D, editor.
reconstruction of a thoracic wall defect in
 Shamir MH, Leisner S, Klement E, et al.
Texbook of small animal surgery.
27.
 a cat with feline osteochondromatosis.
Dog bite wounds in dogs and cats: a
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003.
J Feline Med Surg 2008;10:88-94.
retrospective study in 196 cases. J Vet
p. 373-87.
19.
. Cronin K, Page RL, Spodnick G, et al.
Med Assoc 2002;49:107-12.
38.
.Bowman KLT, Birchard SJ, Bright RM.
Radiation therapy and surgery for
 Zook EG, Miller M, Van Beek AL, Wavek
Complications associated with the
28.
fbrosarcoma in 33 cats. Vet Radiol
P. Successful treatment protocol for 
implantation of polypropylene mesh in
Ultrasound 1998;39:51-6.
cnine fang injuries. J Trauma 1980;20:
dogs and cats: a retrospective study of
20. Hershey AE, Sorenmo KU, Hendrick MJ,
21 cases (1984-1996). J Am Anim Hosp
243-7.
et al. Prognosis for presumed feline
Assoc 1998;34:225-33.
29.
 Davidson EB. Managing bite wounds in
vaccine associated sarcoma after excision:
dogs and cats - part I. Comp Contin Ed
39.
. Aronson M. Diaphragmatic advancement
61 cases [1986-1996). 1 Am Vet Med
Vet 1998;20:811 -20.
for defects of the caudal thoracic wall in
Assoc 2000;216(1):58-61.
the dog. Vet Surg 1984;13:26-8.
30.
 Davidson EB. Managing bite wounds in 
21.
Cohen M, Wright JC, Brawner WR, et al.
dogs and cats - part Il. Comp Contin Ed
40. Baines S. Pedicle muscle flaps. In:
Use of surgery and electron beam
Williams J, Moores A, editors. BSAVA
Vet 1998;20:974-90.
irradiation, with or without
manual of canine and feline wound
chemotherapy, for treatment of vaccine-
31.
 Shahar R, Shamir M, Johnston DE. A
management and reconstruction.
associated sarcomas in cats: 78 cases
technique for management of bite
2nd ed. Gloucester: BSAVA; 2010.
[1996-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
wounds of the thoracic wall in small 
p. 159-200.
2001;219(11):1582-9.
dogs. Vet Surg 1997;26:45-50.
41. Bright RM. Reconstruction of thoracic wall
. Thamm DH, Vail DM. Mast cell tumors. In:
32.
 Scheepens ETF, Peeters ME, L'Eplattenier
22.
 defects using Marlex mesh. J Am Anim
Withrow S, Vail DM, editors. Small animal
HF, Kirpensteijn J. Thoracic bite trauma
Hosp Assoc 1981;17:415-20.
clinical oncology. 4th ed. Philadelphia:
in dogs: a comparison of clinical and
42.
 Usher FC, Gannon JP. Marlex mesh, a
WB Saunders; 2007. p. 402-21.
 radiological parameters with surgical
new plastic mesh for replacing tissue
23. Shires PK, Waldron DR, Payne J. Pectus 
results. J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:
 defects. Am Med Assoc Arch Surg
excavatum by percutaneous suturing
712-26.
1959:78:131-7
and temporary external coaptation in a
33. Cowell K, Penwick C. Dog bite wounds: A
43.
 Badylak SF. Small intestinal submucosa:
 kitten. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;194:
 study of 93 cases. Comp Contin Ed Vet
A biomaterial conducive to smart tissue
1065-7.
1989;11:313-20.
remodelling. In: Bell E, editor. Tissue
24. Crigel MH, Moissonnier P. Pectus
34.
.Talan DA, Citron DM, Abrahamian FM.
engineering: Current prospectives.
excavatum surgically repaired using
 et al. Bacteriologic analysis of infected 
Cambridge, AM: Burkhause; 1993.
sternum alignment and splint techniques
dog and cat bites. N Eng I Med 1999;340:
p. 179-89.
in a young cat. J Small Anim Pract
85-92.
44.
Tattersal IA, Welsh E. Factors influencing
2005;46:352-6.
35.
Goldstein El, Richwald GA. Human and
 the short-term outcome following
25. Holt DE, Griffin GM. Dog bite wounds:
animal bite wounds. Am Fam Phys
 thoracic surgery in 98 dogs. J Small Anim
bacteriology and treatment outcome in
1995;36:101-9.
Pract 2006;47(12):715-20.
505
44
Chapter
Pleura
A.L. Moores
Pleural diseases are a significant cause of respiratory distress in cats
and while life-threatening if severe, they can often be managed suc-
cessfully. Thirty years ago, all cats with pleural fluid due to thymic
lymphosarcoma or pulmonary carcinoma were immediately eutha-
nized according to one study.' Now, advancements in diagnostic pro-
cedures, critical care management, surgical techniques, and adjunctive
P
therapies mean that most pleural diseases have a better outcome.
PPC
SURGICAL ANATOMY
AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The pleura is a serous membrane that lines the mediastinum, pericar-
 dium, diaphragm and thoracic wall (parietal pleural), and the lungs
(visceral or pulmonary pleura) (Fig. 44-1). A fold of pleura encloses
(A)
the caudal vena cava. The left and right pleural cavities are potential
spaces in normal cats, containing a small volume of serous fluid for
lubrication. The mediastinal pleura is often incomplete, allowing
communication between the pleural cavities. The blood supply to the
parietal pleura is from the arteries of the thoracic wall, i.e., the inter-
costal, diaphragmatic, and pericardial arteries. The pulmonary and
bronchial circulation supplies the visceral pleura. The pulmonary liga-
ments are fairly avascular.
Pe
Lymphatic drainage from the thoracic wall and pleura is to the
cranial sternal and cranial mediastinal lymph nodes.
The cisterna chyli in cats is bipartite, arising ventral to the last tho-
VPC
racic to third lumbar vertebrae lying both dorsal and ventral to the
aorta and in close association with the crura of the diaphragm. The
PPC
thoracic duct, which actually comprises multiple collateral ducts,
uo sheil pioe au ynoiu sassed pue luo eaisi aun oy sase
the left dorsal aspect of the aorta, before entering the left jugular vein.
?
or pleural capillary hydrostatic pressure (e.g, congestive heart failure).
Figure 44-1 Pleural anatomy. P, parietal pleura; Pl, pleural cavity:
a decrease in plasma oncotic pressure (eg. hypoalbuminemia).
P Pc, parietal pericardium; Pe, pericardial cavity: V . visceral pleura;
increased capillary permeability (eg. inflammation), or lymphatic
V Pc, visceral pericardium.
obstruction. More simply, the rate of fluid production into the pleural
space is greater than the rate of fluid drainage from it. Hemorrhagic
effusions may occur due to bleeding from vessel erosion (e.g.. neopla-
sia, infection), trauma or coagulopathy.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00044-5
507
Section
6
Thorax
intervention in pleural diseases causing air or fluid production,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND
 ry  o si a s  ae a 
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
conditions.
Clinical signs and physical examination
Diagnostic imaging
While pleural disease in cats will have the same clinical effects as in
Radiography is often not performed until after thoracocentesis. Move-
dogs, the symptoms are often less apparent due to the differences in
ment artifacts are a significant problem and may limit the film's
physical activity, and as such, owners will usually not notice the early
diagnostic quality. Other imaging modalities, eg, ultrasonography.
'ssop ul paioaap aq Aeu ieul uoeidsa pue ioiaeuaq ui sague
may be preferred or used concurrently. Radiography can identify
Signs are often not detected until the disease is in the advanced stages
pleural fluid and air, with the dorsoventral view the most useful for
'sisouei pue 'uuieaiq ynou uado 'ssansip Aoieidsan susne pue
detection of small volumes of air or fluid (Figs 44-2 and 44-3). Ven-
Indeed, one study reported that breathing abnormalities were not
 trodorsal radiography is avoided as it can lead to marked respiratory
noted by 40% of owners with dyspneic cats.2
 The clinical signs of pleural disease most often reflect the presence
 of fluid, air or soft tissue in the pleural space, with the most common
signs relating to incomplete lung expansion. The respiratory pattern
is usually short and shallow, in contrast to that seen with many other
diseases of the respiratory tract. However, as with other respiratory
conditions, cats with pleural disease may choose to limit their move-
ment and often adopt a position that aids more effective breathing
(usually a sternal position), with or without elbow abduction. Para-
doxical abdominal effort can occur with severe disease. Depending on
the degree of respiratory compromise, cats may also have other clinical
signs including reduced appetite, anorexia and weight los, lethargy.
and depression.
 In one study of 73 cats with pleural fluid, the main presenting
(%9e] ssauyeam/ieyial '(g9] eaudupet/eaudsp aiam stuieduo
inappetence/weight loss (27%), dysphagia/regurgitation (12%), and
cough (12%). Physical examination findings included dyspnea (59%).
muffled cardiac and breath sounds (41%), tachypnea (38%). poor
panpai (%gl) eixaad “(%iz) euayody (%ee) uomuos Apoq
(A
thoracic compressibility (14%), and tachycardia (8%).
 In light of the fragile nature of many of these patients, the first part
of the examination of a dyspneic cat should just involve careful obser-
[eiaua sie auo juaussasse ue pue uaed Aroeidsai auljo uoea
condition, taking care to minimize stress and handling. If necessary.
oxygen support should be provided before any physical examination
is undertaken. Careful auscultation should then be performed to elu-
cidate whether or not there is a reduction/absence of normal lung
sounds and if so, in which areas of the thorax such deficits are present.
Gentle percussion over all the lung fields can also be extremely useful,
with dull, hyporesonant or absent sounds being suggestive of pleural
fluid or a large mass lesion, in which case these abnormalities are
likely to be in the dependent part of the thorax. Hyper-resonance is
indicative of a pneumothorax and this is most likely to be heard in
the dorsal part of the thorax (see Chapter 41, Table 41-2).
Emergency management
The reason it is so important to avoid stress during the initial handling
of the cat is because it can increase respiratory effort and, in severely
ill cats, this can even lead to respiratory arrest. If used, supplementa-
tion of oxygen can be provided via facemask, flow-by technique
10 (aey au suaaos iou inq oi aso uashxo aun suansiunupe)
B
1oy smone aes uaskxo uy ases uasixo ue ul ies au sueid kq
careful observation without direct handling but does not easily
Figure 44-2 (A) Lateral and (B}) dorsoventral (DV) radiographs of
the thorax. A small volume pleural effusion is evident in the lateral
allow diagnostic and therapeutic techniques to be performed. Thora-
radiograph (arrows). In the DV radiograph, a mediastinal shift of the
cocentesis (ideally ultrasound-guided) should be performed early on
cardiac silhouette is present. The right lung lobes are collapsed causing
in markedly dyspneic cats before any procedure other than oxygena-
tion, including the placement of an intravenous catheter, as the stress
 The most likely cause is a right lateral recumbent position for some
of handling for catheter placement may be suffcient to cause respira-
length of time before the DV radiograph was taken. A small amount of
tory arrest. Thoracocentesis is often the most important therapeutic
 pleural effusion cannot be excluded on this radiograph
508
Pleura
Chapter
44
Figure 44-3 Lateral radiograph of the thorax showing a large volume
pleural effusion.
Figure 44-4 Ultrasound images showing bilateral pleural effusion. The
(e) ed buos su p ean see e ene
distress by causing collapse of the dorsal part of the lungs. Underlying
Laboratory analysis and etiology
causes of large volume pleural fluid cannot often be identified radio-
 graphically prior to thoracocentesis as fluid obscures soft tisue struc-
Serum biochemistry, hematology and FIV/FeLV testing should be per-
tures. Radiography is, however, useful for evaluating underlying
formed to rule out concurrent disease. Heartworm antibody testing is
diseases after fluid has been removed and can also be used to assess
 performed in areas where the disease is endemic.
the completeness ofthoracocentesis. Due to superimposition of medi-
 Pus, blood, and chyle generally have a characteristic gross appear-
ance, but laboratory testing is always necessary to confrm the diag-
astinal masses may be difficult to detect radiographically although
nosis. Pleural fluid analysis should include cell count, cytology.
there may be widening of the mediastinum. Large masses can usually
aerobic and anaerobic bacteriological and fungal culture. Transudates
be easily identified.
and exudates can be accurately differentiated, with pleural fluid lactate
Ultrasound is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice to identify
dehydrogenase concentration and pleural fluid/serum total protein
the presence of pleural fluid and has the advantage that it can be
ratio being reported as the most the reliable parameters (sensitivity of
100% and 91% and specificity of 100%, respectively). However, addi-
further respiratory difficulties (Fig. 44-4). Ultrasound also facilitates
 tional parameters such as the pleural fluid/serum cholesterol ratio and
guided thoracocentesis of small volumes of fluid and identification of
serum/effusion cholesterol gradient can also help in classifying the
possible underlying causes, eg. abscess Utrasound is an excellent
effusion if necessary.?
way to assess mediastinal masses and is a simple method to aid pro-
Tables 44-1 and 44-2 show the incidence and underlying causes of
curement of cells or tissue by aspiration or needle core biopsy tech-
 pleural fluid submitted to a laboratory for analysis.? No underlying
niques. It can also be a useful way to assess the progression of
 cause was identified in 23% of cats. As expected, FIP affected predomi-
treatment, as a cadaver study of estimation of fluid volume showed a
nantly young cats and neoplastic conditions, other than thymic lym-
good correlation with absolute volume,4 making it an effective method
phoma, older cats.
for comparing sequential fluid volumes. Ultrasound is less useful in
 Simultaneous pleural and peritoneal effusion is most common in
the presence of air as the ultrasound waves are reflected at the soft
dogs and cats with neoplastic and cardiovascular diseases and non-
tissue-air interface.
neoplastic liver disease It develops most rapidly in those with infec-
Advanced imaging techniques can offer the most information
ynouie 'sieaued pue suoiad aoue snaid go sasnes shon
on pleural disease. Computed tomography scans are generally sig-
the description in the literature does not differentiate dogs and cats.?
nificantly faster to perform than MRI and movement of the thorax
The prognosis of double effusions is grave as it is usually an indication
is a particular problem with MRl, resulting in distracting artefacts
of severe disease.
(see Chapter 8). There will inevitably be some movement blur
during computed tomography (CT). as there is for radiography
Thoracoscopy
and MRl, but this can be minimized by hyperventilation prior to
scanning during the expiratory pause CT allows effective visualiza-
ssa e sete aui ui paquap uaaq sey (t iandeuo aas) Adossoseioul
tion of the entire thoracic cavity for assessment of the volume of
invasive technique than thoracotomy to examine the thoracic cavity
fluid/air, possible underlying causes, and other concurrent mediasti-
nal diseases (see Chapter 8). The CT findings in normal cats and
challenging in the face of a pleural effusion and full thoracic drainage
those with pleural, pulmonary, and mediastinal diseases have been
is required before thoracoscopy is performed, to enable maximum
described.5.G
visualization of the pleural cavity.
509
Section
6
Thorax
Table 44-1 Types of pleural effusion and potential underlying
Table 44-2 Underlying causes of pleural effusion based on
causes of each type of effusion?
pleural fluid analysis (n = 82 cats)3
Effusion
Incidence
Examples of underlying
Underlying disease
Incidence (%)
(%)
causes
Pyothorax
18
Chylous
31
Idiopathic 
 Mediastinal lymphoma
17
Cardiac disease
 Mediastinal mass
 Feline infectious peritonitis
10
Dirofilariasis
Pericardial effusion
Trauma
10
Lung lobe torsion 
 Pulmonary neoplasia
6
Congenital thoracic duct anomaly
Pulmonary disease
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
6
Trauma
Unspecified mediastinal mass
5
 Neoplastic
21
Mesothelioma
 Pulmonary thromboemboli
1
Metastatic malignant melanoma
 Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma
Pericardioperitoneal hernia 
1
Septic exudate
Puncture wound
Heartworm disease
15
1
Pyothorax
Lung lobe abscess
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Intrabronchial plant material
Unknown
Foreign body granuloma 
23
 Perforating esophageal disease
latrogenic
Modified
13
Heart failure
transudate
Lung lobe torsion
 Neoplasia
 Diaphragmatic rupture
 Pancreatitis
 Non-septic
11
 Feline infectious peritonitis
purulent exudate
Blood
10
Trauma
PCV/TP > 50%
Coagulopathy
 peripheral blood
 Blood vessel erosion by neoplasia
 or inflammation
 Dirofil ariasis
 Pulmonary fat embolization
Transudate
 Pulmonary tumor
Acquired heart disease
Congenital PPDH
Thymic lymphosarcoma
3.83cm
Diaphragmatic rupture
 Perinephric pseudocyst
Miscellaneous
Urine
Figure 44-5 Ultrasound image showing multiple fluid-filled cavities
Bile
(arrows) consistent with pulmonary abscessation.
Eosinophilic, e.g., aleurostrongylosis
originally thought these came from the oral cavity following a cat bite,
or the environment by direct penetration of thethoracic wall. However.
in one large study only 14% of cats had a history of a bite or other
traumal and the inciting cause often remains undetected. It has been
-naudeied s! (gs) asnes uouuo isou au ieu paisagans Auaa
SURGICAL DISEASES
monic spread of infection after colonization and invasion of lung
tissue by oropharyngeal flora.^ Postmortem studies of cats with pyot-
Pyothorax
horax showed underlying causes in less than half of cases and these
included: lung lobe abscesses (Fig. 44-5), puncture wounds, intra-
Pyothorax is an inflammatory disease of the pleural space caused by
bronchial plant material, and foreign body granuloma. latrogenic
inoculation of the pleural space with microorganisms. Cats with pyo-
thorax may be younger than the general hospital population and more
cocentesis or surgery.
likely to come from multi-cat households and there is no sex predis-
 A positive bacterial culture was obtained in 96% of cats clinically
 position. The causative organism is usually a bacterium and it was
suspected to have pyothorax, of which 89% were obligate anaerobes.
510
Pleura
Chapter
44
 Table 44-3 Bacterial isolates from cases of feline pyothorax10.12
uoeujwexa jesisAyd pue subis jesiup iesidai t-tt aigel
findings in cats with pyothorax2 10.15
Bacteria
Incidence (%)
dinical signs
Incidence (%)
Aerobic
 Decreased appetite/anorexia 
21-83
Pasteurella
13-39
Lethargy
36-80
Unidentified non-enteric bacteria
5
Dyspnea 
Actinomyces spp.
59-79
4-15
Hypersalivation
18
Other
5
Weight loss 
14-36
Anaerobic
Cough
26
Clostridium
0-48
Vomiting
15
Bacteroides spp.
19-20
Pain
13
 Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
17
 Ocular/nasal discharge
9
Fusobacterium spp.
14-21
 Physical examination findings
Porphyromonas spp.
10
Increased respiratory effort 
81-94
Prevotella spp.
8
 Abnormal lung sounds
97
Other
16
 Abnormal mucous membrane color
97
 Negative culture
4
Poor pulse quality
68
Mental dullness
96
Forty-four per cent of these cats had a mixture of facultative bacteria
 Dehydr ation
7-93
and obligate anaerobes and an average of 2.1 obligate anaerobic and
1.2 aerobic bacterial species were isolated per cat. Table 44-3 shows
Poor body condition
37-67
the bacterial isolates from feline cases of pyothorax from two studies.
Tachycardia
 Of the facultative bacteria isolated, most were non-enteric (especially
21-64
Pyrexia
29-50
a s al g a a  'un a am ( g 
Hypothermia
15
Pasteurella species were sensitive to those antibiotics they were tested
against. Eight percent of cats with pyothorax had Actinomyces species
 Muffled heart sounds
14-37
isolated, which is usually considered to be associated with grass awns
in dogs, but there appears to be less of an association in cats. Almost
a quarter of cats are reported to have unusual causative organisms
pleural fluid cytology (91% compared with 68% dogs with positive
isolated including Candida albicans, Salmonella, Cryptococcus, Rhodococ-
bacterial culture).212 Failure to demonstrate bacteria cytologically
may be related to recent antibiotic administration or inappropriate
Typical clinical signs and physical examination fndings are shown 
techniques. Fluid samples should be submitted for aerobic and anaer-
in Table 44-4. In one study 30% of cats had a current or recent history
obic bacteriologic and fungal culture and antimicrobial sensitivity
of upper respiratory tract infection.2 Dehydration in most cats and
 testing to identify causative organisms and provide the appropriate
poor body condition in up to two-thirds suggest the disease is not
 treatment.
 Feline pyothorax is usually treated medically as a first-line approach.
Asuauoq uas uo sasueu st'saep ot ot dn sem leaai ot sui
 Intravenous fluid therapy is instituted to correct dehydration and
and hematology included hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hypocal-
electrolyte abnormalities, and thoracocentesis is performed to relieve
cemia, hypoalbuminemia, high aspartate aminotransferase activity.
dyspnea and obtain a fluid sample prior to antibiotic administration.
high total bilirubin concentration, elevated mean white blood cell and
 Results of bacterial studies recommend that initial antibiotics be
neutrophil counts, presence of band neutrophils, and anemia210.15,16
directed against both anaerobic bacteria (eg., ampicillin, amoxicillin-
Hypersalivation and a lower heart rate were significantly related to
clavulanic acid, clindamycin or metronidazole) and facultative bacte-
mortality, as was cholesterol and lower white blood cell count.10
ria (e.g., ceftizoxime)."0 These drugs have good pleural penetration
and low toxicity. Although amikacin and gentamicin have good activ-
were diagnosed with sepsis or systemic inflammatory response
ity against E. coli and other Enterobacteriaceae, their poor pleural
syndrome. 10
penetration and the low incidence of Enterobacteriaceae in feline
Radiography was used for the diagnosis of pleural fluid in all
 pyothorax limits their usefulness as a frst-line antibiotic, although
0se Apns auo u1 0t pue 'uoisna [eiaie p1y %68-9 onzsa5e
retrospective case series show that veterinarians have been prescribing
had evidence of concurrent pneumonia.
them clinically. " Obligate anaerobic bacteria are inherently resistant
Abnormalities of color, texture, and odor will be noted on gross
to aminoglycosides and quinolones and there may be inhibition of
sanian aepnxa ue jo sisouep aaiuyap au inq sadues pi
trimethoprim-sulfonamide by inhibitors within the exudate.12 The
pleural fluid analysis including cell counts and cytologic identification
ans aanasonan paustqnd e ui soiaue pasn Auouo isou
of degenerate neutrophils with or without the presence of intracellular
() ug e) uie aam shnsa a uuad
bacteria. Cats are more likely than dogs to have bacteria identifed on
metronidazole (42%). the cephalosporins [23%). enrofloxaxin
511
Section
6
Thorax
aimu yim panea aiam sies ison o (%zl) uauepu pue (%g1)
The surgical approach in cases of feline pyothorax would usually be
classes of drugs but further information on specifc combinations was
guided by diagnostic imaging results If a specifc lesion is identified
jo uoeinp ueau e ym 'pauoioid si asn soiquv o paodai iou
(e.g. lung lobe abscess) then a lateral thoracotomy is indicated. For
30-50 days.2 15
 non-specific causes or multiple lesions then a median sternotomy is
 Thoracostomy tube use has been related to increased survival.10
selected to access the entire chest for thorough exploration.
 Bilateral tube use has been recommended for bilateral effusion.2 The 
use of routine lavage in feline pyothorax is controversial; however, the
Chylothorax
 isotonic saline or compound sodium lactate, with the occasional addi-
Chylothorax is the pathological accumulation of chyle in the pleural
Aeu aseael ieui pansie siouine aul siz'uounjos snoiqnue ue jo uon
 se  q x  s
decrease the time that tubes need to be maintained, thus reducing
ligation of the cranial vena cava although it is interesting to note that
 tube-associated pain, risk of nosocomial infection and hospitalization 
resolution of the chylothorax was noted in some cases, presumably
times. Cats have been successfully treated with small-bore wire-guided
due to the development of collateral lymphatic circulation in the
chest tubes placed by a Seldinger technique, which can usually be
thorax and abdomen.1 However, in the clinical situation the majority
placed with the cat sedated rather than anesthetized.1'7 Lavage was
of cases of chylothorax are idiopathic in nature. It is obviously impor-
performed two to six times daily and none of the tubes became
tant to rule out the presence of underlying diseases that can cause
 Occluded, suggesting that they can be successfully used and potentially
leakage of chyle from the thoracic duct, either due to increased pres-
reduce the morbidity associated with the large-bore tubes.
sure in the thoracic duct or interference with chyle flow through the
 Indications for surgery include failure of medical therapy or iden-
duct (Fig. 44-6). Right-sided heart failure does not commonly cause
tification of an obvious surgical cause such as an abscess on diagnostic
chylothorax in cats. Chylothorax is occasionally caused by traumatic
imaging (see Fig. 44-5). It appears that the requirement for surgery
disruption of the thoracic duct following trauma or as a surgical
following medical management is low; of 35 cats that underwent
complication eg, transection of the left brachicephalic vein.20
thoracic lavage and survived the placement of drains in one study.
 Reported causes of chylothorax in the cat are listed in Box 44-1.
 only one cat required thoracotomy.2.15
Pure bred cats are reported to be more commonly affected with
 In the largest case series of pyothorax in cats, 26% of cases were
chylothorax. l The mean age of presentation is reported to be six years
euthanized without treatment, due to either financial constraints or a
(range six months to 14 years) with older cats being more likely to
Jo sino t uim paip %ll iauiny e pue 'sisouoid paaiaad iood
develop chylothorax, which may be related to its association with
presentation.0 Overall, 66% of cats that were treated survived, with
neoplasia. There is no reported sex predisposition.! The presenting
78% survival of those still alive 24 hours after admission. Of those
complaint and physical examination findings include dyspnea (84%)
cats available for follow up. only one (5%) had disease recurrence.
and coughing (30%).
 Better survival rates were reported in studies where thoracostomy
 Chylous fluid is typically white but is ofen pink due to the presence
tubes were placed in all patients and thoracic lavage was performed
of erythrocytes. However, it is vital to confirm whether or not any
(77-93%).215
suspected chylous fluid is truly chyle by performing a biochemical
Figure 44-6 Schematic showing the
pathophysiology of chylothorax
Thoracic duct 
Lymphangiectasia
 ldiopathic
auitflow
Vena cava
Trauma
thrombosis
Chyle leakage
Surgery
Neoplasia
Cranial VC
 Heartworm 
pressure
4
Heart
 Mediastinal
dsease?
Cardiac and pericardial disease
512
Pleura
Chapter
44
Box 44-1 Causes of chylothorax in the cat
Heart disease
 a. Cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, restrictive and unclassified)
either idiopathic or secondary to thyrotoxicosis
 b. Congenital cardiac disease (such as tetralogy of Fallot, tricuspid 
UNG
or mitral valve dysplasia) resulting in congestive heart failure
Dirofilariasis (in endemic areas)
 Pericardial disease (causing pericardial effusion or restrictive
pericarditis)
Venous obstruction 
 Thrombosis of the cranial vena cava (e.g. as a complication of a
jugular catheter)
Cryptococcal mediastinal granuloma (precaval syndrome)
 Cranial mediastinal mass
 Mediastinal lymphosarcoma
Thymoma 
Figure 44-7 Ultrasound image of a consolidated lung lobe surrounded
 Lymphangiosarcoma
by hyperechoic pleural effusion. Failure of the lung to re-expand after
Lung lobe torsion 
sid asuo isabns e aeuiep i
 Pulmonary neoplasia 
Trauma 
Congenital thoracic duct anomalies e.g. lack of continuity of the 
thoracic duct
analysis on the effusion. True chyle has a cholesterol to triglyceride
ratio of <1 with significantly greater triglyceride in pleural fluid than
serum. Cytology classically reveals predominantly a mixture of small
and large lymphocytes, with increasing numbers of neutrophils, mac-
rophages and mesothelial cells seen in chronic cases. Cytology and
bacteriologic culture must be performed to rule out concurrent pyot-
horax, especially in cats that have had repeated thoracocentesis. Once
the effusion has been confirmed to be truly chylous in nature, inves-
tigation of any potential underlying causes should focus on careful
imaging evaluation of the thorax and particularly the heart.
Most cases resulting from trauma or surgical complications will
usually resolve with intermittentthoracocentesis. Medical or surgical
 management of specifc underlying causes may also lead to resolution
of the effusion. However, cats managed with long-term periodic tho-
racocentesis may develop complications including iatrogenic pyotho-
rax or fibrosing pleuritis.
Figure 44-8 Conscious CT image (cat in dorsal recumbancy) showing
Medical management of idiopathic chylothorax can be attempted
cortication of the lung lobes and thickening of the pleura, consistent 
 with constrictive pleuritis.
low fat diet, and an oral benzopyrone i.e., rutin. This approach occa-
sionally leads to complete or partial resolution of the effusion but the 
-san kiaunau aq iouue os peuapa Areuound pue xeouounaud
success rates are low. As a result ofthe limited efficacy of this treatment
-onpoid pimy shoauo-uou suoguo aaeq Aeu sies auos papuauuo
surgery is usually recommended for cats with idiopathic chylothorax
tion after thoracic duct ligation. Pericardectomy is recommended if it
failing to show signifcant improvement after 14 days of medical
 has not already been performed.2
therapy. Surgical management of cats with chylothorax is discussed
below.
Mediastinal masses
Constrictive (or restrictive) pleuritis was associated with chylotho-
rax in ten of 15 of cats in one study.2 In another study the chronic
Mediastinal masses are uncommon in the cat.25 However, they are an
presence of chylous fluid led to moderate to severe fibrosing pleuritis
important cause of disease, with signs that can be attributed to the
Sui sae jo au ue u nsa a uum zs'se uano aay u
pleural cavity as they can cause dyspnea, coughing (either due to direct
lobes to re-expand after removal of fluid. Constrictive pleuritis has
compression of lungs or the presence of pleural fluid), lethargy, and
also been associated with other pleural effusions, e.g., FIp23 Ongoing
weight loss. More specific physical examination findings may include
respiratory distress may be evident and the condition carries a guarded
reduced compressibility of the cranial thorax and caval syndrome due
prognosis. Diagnostic imaging shows atelectic lung lobes with rounded
An q u euudu u pue euuu yq iey ey au on
edges (Figs 44-7 and 44-8).21 Decortication has been described to
large (>10 cm) at the time of diagnosis.25 The presence of a secondary
remove fbrous tissue from lung parenchyma and allow pulmonary
 pleural effusion can make the diagnosis, especially by radiography.
expansion, but this procedure has also been associated with
difficult, thereby increasing the challenge to the clinician.
513
Section
[61
Thorax
LEFT
Figure 44-9 Ultrasound image showing anechoic pleural effusion (arrow)
and a large heterogeneous cranial mediastinal mass (red arrow).
 Table 44-5 Causes of thymic pathology in 30 cats25
Figure 44-10 Computed tomography image showing a cavitary mass
(arrow) in the right cranial hemithorax.
Cause
Incidence (%)
Thymoma
63
Thymic hyperplasia
17
Squamous cell carcinoma has been reported arising from thymomas.2
Thymic branchial cyst formation or cystic change
Thymoma generally affects older cats than those with lymphoma and
Congenital thymic hypoplasia
3
is not usually associated with FeLV infection. Thymomas are usually
biologically benign and tend to be non-invasive and non-metastatic,
Thymic hemorrhage
3
with a low mitotic rate. Staging in people and dogs is based on inva-
Thymic amyloidosis
siveness rather than histopathologic features but this has not yet been
related to prognosis in cats.28 In one study, of 1ll tumors in nine cats
pue juaaupe-uou/paneinsdeua aiam inoy '(sauanan aam omi)
seven adherent to the pericardium and pleura.2α Of the latter, four
pue paqusap uaaq sey Adeau uoeiped panensdesua Aood aram
 Differential diagnoses of mediastinal masses in cats include: thymic
while complete responses were rare, median survival approached
lymphoma, thymoma (which may be solid or cystic), thymic hyper-
two years, so it may have a role to play in the therapy of invasive
 plasia, other cystic lesions (from the thymic branchial or pharyngeal
ens sa uiemaun aq ot paodai si adeiauouau ca'euoua
 management of thymomas is described and discussed below.
and idiopathic cysts), and thymolipoma. The causes of thymic pathol.
aqel] sauoipuss sseldoaueied ul ansai Aeu sasseu sjuu
ogy reported in 30 cats are listed in Table 44-5.
 44-6) that may resolve after mass resection.30
The diagnosis of a mediastinal mass relies predominantly on
 The prognosis for lymphangiomas, multilocular thymic cysts, and
imaging. Radiology is usually suffcient but more information
 cystic thymomas managed surgically can be excellent.35
about local invasion and metastatic disease can be obtained using
ultrasound and computed tomography (Figs 44-9 and 44-10).
Pneumothorax
However, cytologic or histopathologic assessment is required for a
definitive diagnosis.
Traumatic pneumothorax may occur due to discontinuity of the tho-
 '  n    s  
racic wall or intrathoracic structures following trauma (Box 44-2).
shes Bunon ui stuasaid Aleiauag i sa'sgop u uaas puanl aul jo asiaaai
Spontaneous pneumothorax (the accumulation of pleural air in the
and in one study four out of eight cats tested were positive for FeLV
absence of trauma) is less common in cats than dogs.36
infection. It frequently spreads locally (lung, pericardium, and body
'uisna lemad iog ieui on ieuis st uoeuasand ieiu au
wall) and metastasizes. Thymic lymphoma is not a surgical disease
However, development of tension pneumothorax, in which a massive
but is generally considered to respond well to chemotherapy or
accumulation of air in the pleural space due to skin or soft tissue
radiotherapy.
acting as a one-way valve for the entry of air, may rapidly lead to
Thymoma is a tumor of thymic epithelial cells with benign lym-
circulatory and respiratory arrest. Radiography can be used to diag-
 phoid proliferation. The predominance of epithelial or lymphoid cells
nose pneumothorax (see Chapter 8), but computed tomography is
may vary between thymomas and can sometimes make differentiation
often required to identify and localize potential underlying causes.
from lymphoma diffcult, especially on cytology. Cystic lesions may
There are several reports of iatrogenic pneumothorax, including
be present and in one report cholesterol-rich fluid was isolated.26
Creation of a bronchopleural fistula after thoracocentesis, 7 bronchial
514
Pleura
Chapter
44
Table 44-6 Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with thymic tumors
Paraneoplastic syndromes and conditions
Pathophysiology
dinical signs
related to thyroid disease
 Skin diseases including: Basement membrane immune
Histopathologic evidence of a cell-poor
Non-pruritic scaling dermatits
complex deposition; superficial necrolytic dermatitis; 
hydropic interface dermatitis of the
 pemphigus foliaceus; exfoliative dermatitisz5s
surface and follicular epithelium
 Myasthenia gravis31
Autoantibodies to the acetylcholine
Dysphagia/regurgitation (megaesophagus)
receptor
Reduced ocular reflexes
Neck ventroflexion, weakness
Polymyositis including myocarditis1, 32
Muscle weakness, difficulty swallowing
Hypercalcemia33
Production of parathyroid hormone-like 
 Polyuria/polydypsia, clinical signs of
substances
urolithiasis or urinary tract infection,
Granulocytopenia34
Immune-mediated destruction of 
peripheral granulocytes 
Box 44-2 Causes of traumatic and
spontaneous pneumothorax
Traumatic pneumothorax
Open - disruption of the neck or thoracic wall:
Bite wounds (see Chapter 43), gunshot wounds, shearing injuries,
laceration from rib fractures
latrogenic - thoracotomy dehiscence
Closed - leakage from internal structures:
Trachea, e.g.. foreign body
 Esophagus, e.g. foreign body (see Chapter 27)
 Alveoli and small airways, e.g., blunt trauma
Cystic thymoma
latrogenic, e.g. lung disease following thoracocentesis or drain
placement, thoracic disc fenestr ation, venepuncture 
 Anesthesia, e.g. iatrogenic endotracheal tube-related injury (see 
Chapter 46) or positive-pressure ventilation 
Figure 44-11 A six month old male kitten presented after a road traffic
Spontaneous pneumothorax
accident with dyspneia and tachypnea due to a traumatic hemothorax.
 Primary pneumothorax: pulmonary bullae
 Secondary pneumothorax (sequel to underlying lung disease):
 etiology, pneumothorax occurred due to underlying lung disease, such
Parasitic infection - Dirofftaria immitis. Aefurostrongylus abstrusus
as inflammatory airway disease, neoplasia, heartworm infection, pul-
Feline asthma (small airway disease)
monary abscess and lungworm infection. Many cats were managed
Eosinophilic small airway inflammation
successfully with specific therapy for their primary lung disease and
needle thoracocentesis in some cases, without the need for surgery.
Cats therefore seem to have a better prognosis with medical therapy
than dogs.42 Pulmonary bulla formation was described in conjunction
rupture during handling of a kitten for venepuncture, and during
with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, which may represent an underly-
anesthesia (possible causes including tracheal disruption, barotrauma
ing cause.3 Areas of emphysema can be removed by partial lung
Or a closed pop-offvalve while using high oxygen flows).40
Traumatic pneumothorax and pneumothorax due to an underlying
lesions will cause recurrence of pneumothorax the author would leave
disease, eg. small airway disease or parasitic disease, are managed
 extensive lesions in situ if surgical resection is not feasible at the time
initially by thoracocentesis, with thoracostomy tube placement used
of surgery.
in persistent cases. Resolution typically occurs following healing of
the damaged tissue. In one report two cats with small airway disease
Hemothorax
were treated by thoracocentesis followed by medical management of
the underlying disease. The authors suggested the use of more aggres-
 Hemothorax is diagnosed if the packed cell volume of pleural fluid is
sive medical management should the pneumothorax recur but caution 
aun sas pa po ia go i e un ae
that surgical resection may not prevent leakage from another diseased
trauma (Fig. 44-ll), cardiopulmonary resuscitation, clotting dis-
portion of lung in the future.41 A recent report of 35 cats with spon-
orders, blood vessel wall invasion (inflammation, neoplasia), Diro-
taneous pneumothorax showed that in cats with an established
flaria immitis infestation and pulmonary fat embolization.343 Fluid
515
Section
6
Thorax
resuscitation and use of blood products may be necessary following
 major hemorrhage, and surgical intervention may be required to iden-
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
tify and control the source of hemorrhage.
There are a limited number of surgical techniques that are performed
Neoplastic effusion
for pleural disease and these will be described below. In Chapter 41,
the techniques of thoracocentesis, thoracic drain placement, and tho-
Neoplastic effusion is a rare cause of pleural effusion in the cat.
racotomy are described. To date, a surgical procedure to treat chylo-
However, possible underlying neoplasms include mesothelioma, pul.
thorax successfully in all cats remains elusive. Options include thoracic
monary carcinoma, metastatic malignant melanoma and dissemi-
duct ligation (see Box 44-4), pericardectomy (see Chapter 48), and
nated histiocytic sarcoma. Diagnosis is by identifying neoplastic cells
omentalization (see Box 44-2 and Chapter 19).
on cytology although it can be diffcult to differentiate reactive and
neoplastic mesothelial cells. Histopathology and, if necessary or pos-
sible, immunohistochemistry on samples collected by ultrasound-
Thoracic duct ligation
guided biopsy. thoracoscopy or thoracotomy should provide
a
Lymphangiography performed prior to thoracic duct ligation is
definitive diagnosis. Gross inspection of the pleural and pericardial
generally recommended and has been reported to demonstrate
surfaces usually demonstrates nodular lesions but because the disease
lymphangiectasia in most cats, although some have normal
may be microscopic it is recommended that biopsies should be taken
from all cats with pleural effusion undergoing thoracoscopy or thora-
Thoracic duct ligation alone, performed via a left 8th to loth inter-
cotomy. Thoracic omentalization has been described in a cat with
costal thoracotomy, has a reported success rate of up to 53%, with the
refractory neoplastic pleural effusion that required frequent thoraco-
os aq on paodan uaaq sey se 'ueioqii Aeiul t'sisi
cardectomy was proposed as some animals also have marked thicken-
eoaunosau paunsaid iean on pasn uaaq sey gop aul un iyssi
a ou aup au apadu u ie uned au jo su
although the survival time was only 120 days in the single case
venous circulation. Pericardectomy can be achieved via a second tho-
reported.45
racotomy at the left 5th intercostal space or, alternatively, median
sternotomy may be performed to facilitate concurrent thoracic duct
 go  t r s  e s
thorax was seen in eight of ten cats undergoing thoracic duct ligation
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
- au sai asan yo aos ui ynoue aiinad pue
dures were performed during two separate surgeries (Box 44-3).47
Preparation of a cat for thoracotomy and the thoractomy procedure
 It should be noted that identification of the thoracic duct branches
are described in detail in Chapter 4l. Anesthesia considerations for a
is extremely challenging in cats and in the aforementioned study the
cat undergoing thoracic surgery are covered in Chapter 2. The lym-
authors suggested their high success rate could be attributed to
phangiography procedures that are often recommended prior to and
 post thoracic duct ligation are described below.
is no reported correlation between chronicity of chylothorax and
success of surgery or for the extent of fibrosing pleuritis in those cats
s uei inp seiu aiaum sase asoul id z'uasid sii aiaum
Lymphangiography
failed, repeat thoracotomy to attempt further ligation may be of
Mesenteric
benefit. Although it has not been assessed in many cats, pleural omen-
talization does not seem to improve success rates and is not necessar-
-ou au ja uoi aid paad si Aydeoiueudma ouauasan
ily recommended at initial surgery,49.50 the reason being that the
racic duct to aid its identifcation and post ligation to assess the
 omental lymphatic vessels ultimately drain into the chysterna chyli
success of the procedure.4 Oil or cream is administered per os within
and thoracic duct so this procedure may have little impact on the
the 12 hours prior to surgery to enhance identification of the lym-
volume of fluid produced. Despite the lack of evidence for efficacy.
phatic vessels. The cat is positioned in right lateral recumbency to
perform a left paracostal incision. A mesenteric lymphatic vessel is
surgery is required and there is one report of resolution of chylothorax
catheterized distal to a mesenteric lymph node. A water-soluble iodi-
when omentalization was the sole procedure performed.51 Omentali-
 nated contrast agent is then injected and fluoroscopy or radiography
zation may not, however, prevent the development of fibrosing or
is performed. Methylene blue can also be given via the lymphatic
 sisapaid ue uu ean sd au
vessel to help identify the thoracic duct and toxicosis has not been
been described with little success."l A pleural port has been described
reported.
allowing drainage using a 7-French fenestrated tube in the pleural
Mesenteric lymphangiography can be difficult to perform due to the
cavity via a subcutaneous hub surgically placed over the dorsolateral
small size of lymphatic vessels and care must be taken to minimize
abdominal epaxial musculature. A Huber needle is inserted into the
leakage of contrast from the catheter site during post-duct ligation
hub for intermittent thoracic drainage (Box 44-4).52
lymphangiography. Furthermore, it may be difficult to demonstrate
that all lymphatic vessels have been ligated.
Box 44-3 Aims of surgical treatment of chylothorax
Popliteal
An alternative is percutaneous CT lymphography with ultrasound.
Thoracic duct: ligation: promotes the formation of new
guided administration of iohexol into the popliteal lymph node, fol-
 lymphaticovenous anastomoses 5-14 days after surgery.
lowed by immediate helical CT acquisition, which allows reliable
Pericardectomy: improves passage of chyle across the
delineation of the thoracic duct after CT scanning.47 For popliteal
lymphaticovenous junction
lymphangiography. 1.5 mL of iohexol (300 mg/mL) is injected into
Omentalization: absorption of chyle from the pleural space
the popliteal lymph node.
516
Pleura
Chapter
44
 Box 44-4 Management of chylothorax2.53
Thoracic duct ligation
s! jen aui Ayde boibueydui leadod / aianuasau bumollo
positioned in right lateral recumbency and a left 8uh to 1ouh intercostal 
thoracotomy performed. The more caudal the incision the more likely 
 it is that all branches of the thoracic duct will be ligated but the 
aeds jeisonlaiu! uol aul ueul jepne laulany ag jou pinous uospu!
 or it may impede upon the diaphragm. It is important to note that
this surgery is undertaken on the contralateral side to dogs due to
differences in thoracic duct anatomy. Following the thoracotomy an 
en bloc ligation is performed on all structures dorsal to the aorta and 
ventral to the thoracic vertebrae using non-absorbable suture (e.g.
individual thoracic duct branches. Post-ligation lymphangiography
is then performed.
Pericardectomy
This can be performed either via the same incision or a separate 5h
intercostal thoracotomy on the left side (for detailed description of 
Figure 44-12 Median sternotomy for resection of a thymoma (arrow)
pericardectomy see Chapter 48).
Omentalization
This would usually be performed through the same intercostal
incision as the thoracic duct ligation and then a further
 diaphragmatic incision is made to retrieve the omentum from the 
greater curvature of the stomach (see Chapter 19). Note that there
is no evidence supporting the routine use of omentalization for the 
treatment of chylothorax.
Box 44.5 Thymoma resection
 Thymomas are typically removed via a median sternotomy (see
Chapter 41). Care must be taken performing the sternotomy.
including the placement of retractors and opening of the thoracic
cavity, in case there is sternal involvement of the mass. Careful initial 
visual inspection of the pericardium, blood vessels (particularly the 
 cranial vena cava and internal thoracic arteries) and pleura is essential 
to establish whether or not there is invasion into these tissues before
dissection is started. Then, where possible, the mass is removed 
Figure 44-13 The cat in Figure 44-12 after successful resection of a
by a combination of sharp and blunt dissection, taking care not to 
thymoma. Subtotal pericardectomy has been performed due to adhesions
damage the other thoracic structures. Bipolar or monopolar cautery 
 of the thymoma to the pericardium.
and suction is essential for this procedure as hemorrhage may be 
profuse. Pericardectomy (see Chapter 48) can also be performed if
incidental finding, there was no evidence of respiratory disease and
there is pericardial invasion. If there invasion of the venous system,
all cats remained asymptomatic up to three years later.54 However,
e.g. the vena cavae, venotomy can be performed to remove a tumor
 cysts that are causing clinical signs should be removed.
thrombus.
 Eight of nine cats with thymomas survived surgery and lived for a
 As these masses are generally slow growing. it is acceptable to
 mean of five years with one- and three-year survival rates of 89% and
74%, respectively. In a second study, ten of 12 cats survived surgery
intent, to minimize complications in removing very invasive masses.,
 o s ss s  g is u e 
as complete excision is rarely achievable.
surgery should be performed if the thymoma cannot be removed due
 to invasiveness but complications associated with this include signif-
cant hemorrhage Post-thymectomy myasthenia gravis has been
reported.5s.56
Thymectomy
Thymomas are generally removed via median sternotomy although it
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
is important to note that intercostal thoracotomy is possible in
selected cases (Box 44.5. Figs 44-12 and 44-13).28 while asympto-
-ns aidoad ui 'uasan ieins paau ou op sis ieuseiau se
After thoracotomy, thoracocentesis, and thoracic drain placement, it
cal resection is often performed to differentiate cysts from neoplastic
-sod on ueoidde Aeudiosip-nu e ym sies apiaoid on ieuassa st
disease which is difficult without histopathology. In a report describ-
operative care and the reader is directed to Chapters 2 to 4 for details
ing eight of nine cats diagnosed with a mediastinal cyst as an
of this very important subject.
517
Section
6
Thorax
pericardectomy compared with thoracic duct ligation alone although
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
further work is required in this area to fully establish the most effective
 treatment ofthis condition in cats. Fibrosing pleuritis has been associ-
 There are two specific feline studies that discuss outcomes of pyotho-
ated with chylothorax in up to 67% of cats in one study2l and carries
aaeu pue pouad uonezendsoy ieui au aiains ieul sie ouze
a guarded prognosis. Cats with chylothorax managed with long-term
-oni sunu suoeduos doaap Aeu sisauanoeiou soad
to have a good outcome, with 66-95% of cases treated successfully.
genic pyothorax or fibrosing pleuritis.
 Recurrence rates also appear to be low in this species.
The prognosis of traumatic pneumothorax in the cat is dependent
sh suina ieauoad pue enald snaueus o sisouid au
on the severity and concurrent injuries; however, most will resolve
poor due to their association with neoplastic and advanced stage
cardiovascular and liver disease.
pneumothorax in the cat also appears good when they are treated
Studies have suggested that there is a better outcome in cats when
conservatively.
chylothorax is treated with thoracic duct ligation in combination with
REFERENCES
1. Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Flecknell PA. The
11. Fossum Tw, Forrester SD, Swenson CL,
(1983-1991). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
prognosis and treatment related to
et al. Chylothorax in cats: 37 cases
1994;30:70-7.
the gross appearance and laboratory
[1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc
22.B
 Fossum Tw, Mertens MM, Miller MW.
characteristics of pathological thoracic
1991;198(4):672-8.
et al. Thoracic duct ligation and
fluids in the cat. J Small Anim Pract
12. Walker AL, Jang SS, Hirsh DC. Bacteria
pericardectomy for treatment of
1978;19:315-28.
associated with pyothorax of dogs and
idiopathic chylothorax. J Vet Intern Med
2. Barrs VR, Allan GS, Martin P, et al. Feline
cats: 98 cases [1989-1998). J Am Vet Med
2004;18:307-10.
pyothorax: a retrospective study of 27
Assoc 2000;21 6:3 59-63.
23.
Stevenson RG, Tilt SE, Purdy JG. Case
cases in Australia Feline Med Surg
13. McCaw D, Franklin R, Fales W, et al.
report. Feline infectious peritonitis and
2005;7:211-22.
 Pyothorax caused by Candida albicans in
pleurisy Can Vet I 1971;12:97-9.
 3. Davies C, Forrester SD. Pleural effusion in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;185(3):
24.
 Fossum Tw, Evering wN, Miller MW.
cats: 82 cases [1987 to 1995). I Small 
311-12.
et al. Severe bilateral fbrosing pleuritis
Anim Pract 1996;37:217-24.
 Sherding RG. Diseases of the pleural
associated with chronic chylothorax in 
4.
 Shimali J, Cripps Pl, Newitt AL.
avity. In: Sherding RG, editor. The Cat:
five cats and two dogs. I Am Vet Med 
Sonographic pleural fluid volume
Diseases and clinical management.
Assoc 1992;201:317-24
estimation in cats. J Feline Med Surg
Vol. 1. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill
25.
Day Ml. Review of thymic pathology in
2010;12:113-16.
Livingstone; 1994. p. 1063-71.
30 cats and 36 dogs. J Small Anim Pract
5. Samii VF, Biller DS, Koblik PD. Normal
15.
Demetriou IL, Foale RD, Ladlow l, et al.
1997;38(9):393-403.
cross-sectional anatomy of the feline 
Canine and feline pyothorax: a
26.
Galloway PE, Barr Fl, Holt PE, et al. Cystic
thorax and abdomen: comparison of
retrospective study of 50 cases in the
thymoma in a cat with cholesterol-rich
computed tomography and cadaver
UK and lreland. J Small Anim Pract 
fluid and an unusual ultrasonographic
anatomy. Vet Radioj Liltrasound 
2002;43:388-94.
appearance. J Small Anim Pract 1997;38:
1998;39:504-11:
16.
 Ottenjann M, Weingart C, Arndt G, Kohn
220-4.
6. Henninger W. Use of computed
 B. Characterization of the anemia of
27.
Carpenter JL, Valentine BA. Squamous
tomography in the diseased feline thorax.
inflammatory disease in cats with
cell carcinoma arising in two feline
J Small Anim Pract 2003;44:56-64.
 abscesses, pyothorax, or fat necrosis.
thymomas. Vet Pathol 1992;29:541-3.
.Zoia A, Slater LA, Heller I, et al. A new
J Vet Intern Med 2006;20:1143-50.
7.
28.
Zitz JC, Birchard SJ, Couto GC, et al.
 approach to pleural effusion in cats:
17.
Valtolina C, Adamantos S. Evaluation of
 Results of excision of thymoma in cats
markers for distinguishing transudates
small-bore wire-guided chest drains for
and dogs: 20 cases [1984-2005). I Am Vet
from exudates. J Feline Med Surg
 management of pleural space disease.
Med Assoc 2008;232(8):11 86-92.
2009;11:847- 55.
J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:290-7.
29.
 Smith AN, Wright JC, Brawner WR Jr.
 8. Steyn PF, Wittum TE. Radiographic.
18.
 Blalock A, Cunningham RS, Robinson CS.
et al. Radiation therapy in the treatment
epidemiologic, and clinical aspects of
Experimental production of chylothorax
of canine and feline thymomas: a
simultaneous pleural and peritoneal
by occlusion of the superior vena cava.
retrospective study (1985-1999). J Am
effusions in dogs and cats: 48 cases
Ann Surg 1936;104:359-64. 212:
Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:489-96.
(1982-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc
652-7.
30.
 Forster-Van Hijfte MA, Curtis CF, White
1993;202:307-12.
19.
Meincke JE, Hobbie WV JIr, Barto LR.
 RN. Resolution of exfoliative dermatitis 
9.
Kovak JR, Ludwig LL, Bergman Pl, et al.
Traumatic chylothorax with associated
and Malassezia pachydermatis overgrowth
Use of thoracoscopy to determine the
diaphragmatic hernias in the cat. J Am
in a cat after surgical thymoma resection.
etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and 
Vet Med Assoc 1969;155:15-20.
J Small Anim Pract 1997;38:451-4.
cats: 18 cases [1998-2001). J Am Vet Med
20.
Greenberg MJ, Weisse CW. Spontaneous
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Cook JR Jr, Lantz GC.
Assoc 2002;221:990-4.
 resolution of iatrogenic chylothorax in a
Acquired myasthenia gravis in a cat
10. Waddell LS, Brady CA, Drobatz KJ.
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2005;226:1667-
with thymoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Risk factors, prognostic indicators, and
70, 1659.
1990;196(8):1291-3.
outcome of pyothorax in cats: 80 cases
21.
 Suess Ir, RP, Flanders JA, Beck KA,
32.
Carpenter IL, Holzworth J. Thymoma in 
[1986-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Earmest-Koons K. Constrictive pleuritis
11 cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1982;181(3):
2002;221:819-24.
in cats with chylothorax: 10 cases
248-51.
518
Pleura
Chapter
44
33. Savary KC, Price GS, Vaden SL.
41.
White HL, Rozanski EA, Tidwell AS, et al.
and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;188:
 Hypercalcemia in cats: a retrospective
 Spontaneous pneumothorax in two cats 
49-51.
study of 71 cases [1991-1997]. J Vet 
with small airway disease. J Am Vet Med
49. Bussadori R, Provera A, Martano M, et al.
 Intern Med 2000;14:184-9.
Assoc 2003;222:1547, 1573-5.
Peural omentalisation with en bloc 
34. Fidel JL, Pargass IS, Dark MJ, Holmes SP.
42.
Mooney ET, Rozanski EA, King RG, Sharp
ligation of the thoracic duct and
Granulocytopenia associated with
CR. Spontaneous pneumothorax in 35
 pericardiectomy for idiopathic
thymoma in a domestic shorthaired cat. ↓
cats (2001-2010). J Feline Med Surg
 chylothorax in nine dogs and four cats.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2008;44:210-17.
2012;14:384-91.
Vet J 2011;188:234-6.
35. Malik R, Gabor L, Hunt GB, et al. Benign
43.
 Sierra E Rodriguez F, Herraez P, et al.
 50. Stewart K, Padgett S. Chylothorax 
cranial mediastinal lesions in three cats.
Post-traumatic fat embolism causing
 treated via thoracic duct ligation and
Aust Vet I 1997;75:183-7.
haemothorax in a cat. Vet Rec
omentalization. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
36. Milne ME, McCowan C, Landon BP.
2007;161(5):170-2.
2010;46:312-17.
Spontaneous feline pneumothorax caused
44.
 Talavera J, Agut A, Fernandez Del Palacio
51. Lafond E, Weirich WE, Salisbury SK.
 by ruptured pulmonary bullae associated
J, et al. Thoracic omentalization for 
Omentalization of the thorax for 
with possible bronchopulmonary
long-term management of neoplastic
treatment of idiopathic chylothorax with
dysplasia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 pleural effusion in a cat. J Am Vet Med
constrictive pleuritis in a cat. J Am Anim
2010;46:138-42.
Assoc 2009;234:1299-302.
Hosp Assoc 2002;38:74-8.
37. Fife WD, Cote E. What is your diagnosis?
45.
 Sparkes A, Murphy S, McConnell F, et al.
52.
. Brooks AC, Hardie RJ. Use of the Pleural
 Pleural effusion, pneumothorax, lung col.
 Palliative intracavitary carboplatin
Port device for management of pleural
lapse and bronchopleural fstula in a cat.
therapy in a cat with suspected pleural
effusion in six dogs and four cats. Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:1215-16.
mesothelioma. I Feline Med Surg 2005;7:
Surg 2011;40:935-41.
38. Godfrey DR. Bronchial rupture and fatal
313-16.
53.
.Fossum Tw, Birchard Sl, Arnold PA.
tension pneumothorax following routine
46. Kerpsack SJ, Mcloughlin MA, Birchard SJ.
Mesenteric lymphography and ligation
venipuncture in a kitten. J Am Anim Hosp
 et al. Evaluation of mesenteric
 of the thoracic duct in a cat with
Assoc 1997;33:260-3.
 Jymphangiography and thoracic duct
chylothorax. J Am Vet Med Assoc
39. Brown DC, Holt D. Subcutaneous 
ligation in cats with chylothorax: 19 cases
1985;187(10):1036-7.
emphysema, pneumothorax.
(1987-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc
 54. Zekas Ll, Adams MW. Cranial mediastinal
pneumomediastinum, and
1994;205:711-15.
 cysts in 9 cats. Veterinary Radiology &
 pneumopericardium associated with
47. Lee N, Won S, Choi M, et al. Thoracic
Ultrasound 2002;43(5):413-18.
positive-pressure ventilation in a cat.
 duct lymphography in cats by popliteal
55.
.Gores BR, Berg I, Carpenter IL, et al.
j Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:997-9.
 Jymph node iohexol injection. Vet
 Surgical treatment of thymoma in cats: 12
Evans AT. Anesthesia case of the month.
Radiol Ultrasound 201i. [Epub ahead
40.
cases [1987-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and
of print]
1994;204:1782-5.
subcutaneous emphysema in a cat due
48.
 Fossum Tw, Jacobs RM, Birchard SJ.
 56. Singh A, Boston SE, Poma R. Thymoma-
to barotrauma after equipment failure
Evaluation of cholesterol and triglyceride
associated exfoliative dermatitis with
during anesthesia. J Am Vet Med Assoc
concentrations in differentiating chylous
post-thymectomy myasthenia gravis in a
1998;212:30-2.
 and nonchylous pleural effusions in dogs
cat. Can Vet I 2010;51(7):757-60.
519
45
Chapter
Diaphragm
D.A. Yoo!
Traumatic diaphragmatic ruptures are common in cats and are
life-threatening injuries that generally require prompt surgical atten-
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
tion. Other forms of congenital and acquired diaphragmatic defects
There are several forms of diaphragmatic defect. Pleuroperitoneal
the diagnosis and surgical management of diaphragmatic defects
defects are common and usually acquired following trauma. They
in the cat.
allow communication of the pleural and peritoneal cavities (Fig)
45-2). Peritoneopericardial hernias (PPDHs) are uncommon congeni-
tal defects caused by failure of formation of the diaphragm and
 pericardium. They allow the pericardial and peritoneal spaces to
SURGICAL ANATOMY
communicate but the pleural cavities remain intact (Fig. 45-2). Sliding
hiatal hernias occasionally develop. enabling cranial displacement of
The diaphragm is a musculotendinous sheet with a strong central
the terminal esophagus and gastric fundus through the esophageal
hiatus into the mediastinum (Fig. 45-3). The severity of signs associ-
tendon anchored to the costal arch and vertebrae by the stermal, costal.
and lumbar muscles (Fig. 45-1).12 The paired lumbar muscles form
ated with these defects varies between individuals but surgery is gener-
the diaphragmatic crura that originate from the ventral aspect of the
ally indicated.
third and fourth lumbar vertebrae and run forward to form the central
portion of the dorsal diaphragm.? The paired costal and unpaired
Clinical signs
sternal muscles anchor the central tendon to the costal arch and
xiphisternum.l2
waeioy ieaen aul s'wgenqdep aul ul samade aaiul aie aiau
ries and these may be of more consequence at initial presentation than
aade ieuaa isou aui si ll eaes euaa epne aujo aeed sme
the diaphragm injury. Clinical signs are usually related to respiratory
and is located in the central tendon to the right of midline.? The
compromise with tachypnea and/or dyspnea. In chronic cases the
esophageal hiatus is located on the midline dorsal to the caval
signs may be more attributable to compression of the gastrointestinal
foramen. The esophagus and paired vagal nerves pass through it.? The
tract in the thoracic cavity.
aortic hiatus is the most dorsal aperture It is located between the left
and right diaphragmatic crura and is bordered dorsally by the lumbar
Diagnostic imaging
vertebrae. The aorta, the azygous and hemiazygous veins, and the
lumbar cistern of the thoracic duct pass through this. The splanchnic
A diagnosis of diaphragmatic disease is usually made from plain
aul uaamiaq ueuep aun sson osie uneuo pnauieds pue saau
 radiography or abdominal ultrasound but contrast radiography or CT
lateral part of each cnus and the 13th rib.3
is sometimes necessary. Loss of the diaphragmatic contour is found
The phrenicoabdominal arteries (branches of the abdominal aorta)
consistently in most cases but is not specific and can be associated
give rise to the phrenic arteries that divide across the base of the crura.
with other pleural diseases such as pleural effusion. The presence of
run ventrally down the central tendon and supply the costal and
 portions of the gastrointestinal tract within the thoracic cavity, recog-
sternal diaphragmatic muscles.4 These vessels anastomose with the
nized by luminal gas, ingesta or barium, is characteristic of the condi-
intercostal arteries of the costal arch.4 The left and right phrenic nerves
tion. Parenchymatous organs may also be delineated running forward
supply motor innervation to the diaphragm.
from the abdomen into the thorax.6.7 The cardiac silhouette and lungs
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00045-7
521
Section
6
Thorax
Ch
Caval 
foramen
Esophageal
hiatus
A
Aortic hiatus
Figure 45-1 Diagram of diaphragmatic anatomy viewed from the
abdominal (concave) surface with the animal positioned in dorsal 
recumbency (mimicking the presentation at surgery). CA, costal arch;
CM, costal muscles (left and right); CT, central tendon; LC, left crus;
RC, right crus; SM, sternal muscle (unpaired);: V, 4lh lumbar vertebra;
X, xiphisternum
are often displaced cranially or dorsally.7 Pleural effusions can mask
many of the characteristic radiographic features and repeating radio-
graphic studies following thoracocentesis can help to resolve key fea-
tures enabling a diagnosis to be confrmed.
SURGICAL DISEASES
Congenital pleuroperitoneal hernias
Figure 45-2 Schematics of pleuroperitoneal and peritoneopericardial
hernias (PPDHs). (A) Intact diaphragm and thoracic wall from
Congenital pleuroperitoneal hernias are thought to account for less
dorsoventral projection. (B) Pleuroperitoneal hernia with intestinal
than l0% of pleuroperitoneal defects in cats.?10 There are only a
handful of confrmed cases that have been classified as congenital
herniation into the thorax. (C} PPDH with liver herniated into the
pericardial sac causing cardiac displacement; note that the pleural cavities
because of the presence of a hernial sacll15 or because of the early
are intact. D, diaphragm; H, heart; I, intestine; L, lung: Li, liver; M,
 Onset of signs.1 Congenital defects can affect most areas of the dia-
mediastinum; Pl, pleural cavity: Ps, pericardial sac.
phragm with involvement of the central tendon,1314 the sternal
muscle,12 most of the left side of the diaphragm including the left
crusl and the right crusll.15 being reported. Liver and falciform fat are
most commonly herniated, although two cases have contained the
majority of the abdominal viscera.14.16 Some cats have presented with
Acquired pleuroperitoneal ruptures
signs of dyspnea at an early age.1 Others have been diagnosed with
The majority of pleuroperitoneal defects (over 85%) are acquired
wrelated diseases12,13,15 or during abdominal surgery14 and the oldest
traumatic ruptures.?? These are usually caused by blunt abdominal
reported age at diagnosis was ll years.13
trauma and are associated with immediate herniation of abdominal
 In humans, congenital pleuroperitoneal hernias are thought to have 
 organs because of the sudden increase in intra-abdominal pressure.2.22
Vehicular trauma is the commonest cause, but falls and dog attacks
-ip asnpul ue suasoieial yanoule tlsl'ssop u! pasodoid uaaq osje
are also reported.23-25 Occasionally, diaphragmatic ruptures are caused
 esis of congenital pleuroperitoneal hernias in the cat is unknown but
 not herniate immediately and the ruptures may only become clinically
it is prudent to advise against breeding from affected animals.
apparentsome time after the initial injury.There is a single case report
 The investigation and management of congenital pleuroperitoneal
hernias is identical to that of acquired pleuroperitoneal ruptures.
defect, cutaneous asthenia, in a cat.26
522
Diaphragm
Chapter
45
 Uterine herniation and bile leakage are reported in the dog but have
not been reported in the cat to date.30,334,39-41
adnu seueiuei um pasoup se jo juaiad uaas-aod
have a history of witnessed trauma and most of the remainder have
clinical findings suggestive of recent trauma.24 The diagnosis is usually
reached within seven days of the original trauma. Almost one-quarter
of patients have concurrent injuries including fractured ribs, fractured
limbs or other external abdominal wall ruptures.24 In patients diag-
A
nosed within a few days of trauma, the commonest presenting signs
of patients have signs of gastrointestinal dysfunction such as vomiting
and, in some of these cases, these are the only clinical signs of
se qns uoeaisaaui Aelap ieql sugis pyiads-uou aaey io eunen bu
aas ap si siou au um u suaed seual  eiaioe
weeks following trauma are more likely to present with signs of gas-
trointestinal dysfunction (50% of cases) and dyspnea is less prevalent
[38% of cases).42 Additional common clinical fndings include muffed
lung and heart sounds and hyporesonant thoracic percussion. Often,
borborygmi can be heard in the thoracic cavity indicating herniation
of portions of the gastrointestinal tract.  Abdominal palpation may
?
 reveal a comparatively empty abdomen or apparent loss of key organs.
such as the spleen, that have been displaced. Occasionally, pleuroperi-
Figure 45-3 Schematics of sliding hiatal hernia (lateral projection)
toneal ruptures are identified as incidental fndings with no overt
(A} before herniation. (B) during herniation. The gastroesophageal
clinical signs.42
junction and proximal fundus slide in and out of the mediastinum
 The diagnosis of pleuroperitoneal rupture is usually confrmed
through the esophageal hiatus. Dotted line: gastroesophageal junction;
using plain radiography or abdominal ultrasound but contrast radi-
B, gastric body: F gastric fundus; O, esophagus; P, pylorus.
diagnostic radiographic features (Fig. 45-4). Loss ofthe diaphragmatic
contour is found consistently in most cases but is not specific and can
be associated with other pleural diseases such as pleural effusion.7
au unoiu sieat aus aie sadnu oeuiudeip seune iso
The presence of portions of the gastrointestinal tract within the
 sternal and costal muscles.327.28 Four percent of cases have multiple
thoracic cavity, recognized by luminal gas, ingesta or barium, is char-
ruptures.3 Some ruptures involve the central tendon but the crura are
acteristic of the condition.7 Parenchymatous organs may also be
E sl anmdnu uouuos isou aul oz'samdn Alaiei pue suons Aia
 delineated running forward from the abdomen into the thorax.d7
unilateral costal muscle tear in the ventral diaphragm below the
The cardiac silhouette and lungs are often displaced cranially or
level of the esophageal hiatus.3.27.28 Sixty percent of tears are circum-
dorsally.78 Pleural effusions can mask many of the characteristic
ferential with muscle tearing parallel to the rib or avulsing from it
radiographic features and repeating radiographic studies following
completely.28 Radial tears and combined radial and circumferential
sisoueip e suqeua 'saimeay aay aaosau oi diay ues sisauanoeio
tears also occur.28
to be confrmed.
 Indicators of diaphragmatic rupture may also be seen on abdominal
small intestine, stomach, spleen, omentum, and pancreas also fre-
radiographs. Cranial displacement of the gastric axis is associated with
quently become herniated.310.30 Rarely, kidney, colon or cecum are
liver herniation (see Fig. 45-6A).7 Gastrointestinal contrast studies
involved.10,30-34 Right-sided hernias tend to contain liver, small intes-
 delineate fluid-filled intestinal loops within the thorax although these
tines, and pancreas and left-sided hermias tend to contain stomach,
are usually not required to confrm a diagnosis (Fig. 45-5).6.7 Positive
spleen, and small intestine.28
 Pleuroperitoneal defects usually lead to respiratory compromise
integrity (Box 45-1).6.15
due to compression of lung by herniated organs and poor diaphrag-
 The diaphragm is diffcult to visualize with ultrasound unless
abdominal or pleural fluid is present but transhepatic and intercostal
dation following venous congestion of herniated liver lobes and the
uosniad-uoeuan czzzs eaudsip au on ainqnuos ues uosna
thorax.44 It is important to distinguish herniated liver lobe from con-
mismatches occur in the collapsed areas of lung222 and concurrent
 solidated lung and from mirror artifact.4.45
 pulmonary contusion, pneumothorax, fractured ribs or flail chest may
Most cases with congenital or acquired pleuroperitoneal defects are
also contributeto respiratory compromise225
managed surgically following a short period of stabilization.
 In addition to dyspnea, injury of herniated organs may lead to
clinical signs. Displaced, twisted liver lobes become congested,
Congenital peritoneopericardial hernia
ischemic, and friable22 and displaced portions of the gastrointestinal
tract may become obstructed or devitalized.2? Displacement or com-
 PPDH is considered to be a congenital condition in the cat although
 pression ofthe hepatobiliary tree has been associated with obstructive
jaundice.3 Herniation of part or all ofthe stomach may lead to gastric
normal development, the pericardial cavity separates from the
dilatation and volvulus (GDV).37 This may cause obstructive shock,
common pleuroperitoneal cavity before the pleural and peritoneal
gastric necrosis, and severe respiratory compromise due to compres-
aul s'suadoiaaap sunp ieg sassanoid omi asaul jl aeiedas saan
sion of lung by the dilated stomach.3 Rarely, perforation and rupture
pericardium and ventral diaphragm fuse to form a stoma in the central
diaphragm immediately dorsal to the xiphisternum. In some cases.
523
Section
[61
Thorax
A
Figure 45-5 Thoracic radiograph of a cat with a pleuroperitoneal rupture
following an upper gastrointestinal contrast study: contrast delineates the
lumen of intestinal loops within the thorax.
 Box 45-1 Positive contrast peritoneopraphy
 5! uoiban jerlqwn aul pue paziauisaue io patepas s! jualied aul
clipped and aseptically prepared to allow contrast to be injected into
the abdomen by paracentesis. A site is selected for needle insertion 
1 cm to the right of midline in front of the umbilicus. Palpate the 
abdomen to locate underlying viscera such as the spleen or bladder
before injection. Introduce a short 23G needle through the 
abdominal wall attached to a syringe containing a suitable volume of 
low-osmolar, non-ionic contrast agent (e.g. 2 mL/kg iohexol at
300 mg/mL [Omnipaque, Nycomed Amersham]). Warming the 
contrast agent to body temperature will reduce discomfort associated 
with injection. Before injection, aspirate to ensure that abdominal 
viscera have not been penetrated. A small amount of blood may be 
aspirated into the hub of the syringe. If larger volumes of blood,.
urine or intestinal contents are aspirated, withdraw the needle. Inject
contrast into the peritoneal cavity. If resistance is met during 
injection, withdraw the needle and start again. Leave the patient for
two to five minutes before radiographing the thorax and abdomen to
give time for contrast to distribute. Gentle balloting of the abdomen 
may facilitate contrast distribution. If contrast passes in front of the 
B
diaphragm into the thorax, this is diagnostic for the presence of a
diaphragmatic defect. However, false negative results may occur if 
Figure 45-4 Thoracic radiographs of cat with a pleuroperitoneal rupture.
omentum or other viscera block the diaphragmatic defect. Contrast
(A}) Lateral view: the ventral diaphragmatic contour is obliterated. A
can also be injected into the retroperitoneal space in fat animals, in 
aul eubeude a buisaaen uas s! (uaids) uo snoeuuae
which case it will not redistribute far from the site of injection.
into the thorax (arrow). (B) Dorsoventral view: the left diaphragmatic 
contour is obliterated, there is left-sided pleural effusion and the heart is 
displaced towards the right. (With kind permission of the lmage Archives of
R(D)SV5, University of Eolinburgh.)
PPDH shares many of the clinical features of pleuroperitoneal
hernias including muffing and displacement of the cardiac apex
the caudal sternebrae and cranial linea alba may also be malformed
producing concurrent ventral body wall hernias, sternal defects or
ventral abdominal wall hernias (located cranial to the umbilicus) or
pectus excavatum.46.48.49
 sternal defects are occasionally palpable and increase suspicion of
PPDH may remain clinically silent for some time before causing
PPDH.47.42 Rarely, signs of cardiac tamponade occur (open-mouth
clinical signs and the median age at diagnosis is over four years.46
 breathing. lethargy, weak femoral pulses, distended jugular veins.
Respiratory and gastrointestinal dysfunction are reported with equal
tachycardia).50-52
-nad wuoy hade ysmsusip ie sasuaiap sdeopei Aay au
 of large volumes of herniated organs or the development of intraperi-
roperitoneal defects are that the herniated organs are centered around
cardial cysts from incarcerated hepatobiliary tissue, omentum or fal-
 the heart causing mediastinal widening and that the diaphragmatic
ciform fat.so-52 Forty percent of cases have no clinical signs, with PPDH
contour is preserved on ventrodorsal views bilaterally although
diagnosed as an incidental finding.46.47.49
the cupula of the diaphragm is effaced (Fig. 45-6).° PPDH may be
524
Diaphragm
Chapter
45
A
Figure 45-7 Thoracic radiograph of a cat with a sliding hiatal hernia that
presented for dyspnea with herniation of the fundus into the mediastinal
 ypel aul oi anp asen sut ui aw awos loj pakelap sem sisoubela aneds
of gastrointestinal signs and the dynamic nature of the hernia preventing
earlier radiographic diagnosis.
Hiatal hernia
 Hernias affecting the esophageal hiatus of the cat are rare. The most
frequently reported is the sliding hiatal hernia that allows dynamic
displacement of the terminal abdominal esophagus, gastric cardia.
-iau aul cui smeiy ieaseqdosa aui yanoiun snpuny leuixond pue
astinum.53 Sliding hiatal hernias may be congenital or traumatic.54
Traumatic hernias occur due to blunt abdominal trauma or due
hernias and ruptures may also extend into the esophageal hiatus.12
Sliding hiatal hernias lead to dysfunction of the lower esophageal
sphincter and reflux of gastric contents into the distal esophagus
causing reflux esophagitis, megaesophagus, and aspiration pneumo-
B
and the onset of signs has highlighted the possibility that some
Figure 45-6 Thoracic radiographs of a cat with a PPDH. (A) Lateral
asymptomatic congenital hernias may become symptomatic only
jo uoissadui aui buai pabieua sheadde ahanouis yeipien aul man
after anesthesia-induced reflux of material into the esophagus.54
pue anssil hos Aa panena s! wbeude aul jo endno aul Aiebauopie
ts'(%6s) sases isou ul usis sunuasaid noleu ayl sl uonenbingay
there is increased contact between the diaphragm and pericardium.
Dyspnea is reported in only 7% of cases.54 Occasionally hiatal hernias
Forward displacement of the gastric axis due to liver herniation can
are diagnosed as incidental fndings during investigation of other
also be seen (apparent microhepatica). (B) Dorsoventral view: the 
diseases.54
cupula of the diaphragm is effaced by soft tissue (arrowheads) but
 Confirming the diagnosis of sliding hiatal hernia can be diffcult as
the diaphragmatic line is otherwise intact, distinguishing PPDH from
the hernia is dynamic and may contain no abdominal organs at
pleuroperitoneal hernia (compare to Figure 45-4B). (With kind permission of
the time of investigation. Plain radiography may demonstrate a soft
the Image Archives of R(D)sVs, University of Edinburgh.)
tissue density or a hollow viscus in the caudal dorsal thorax causing
mediastinal widening (Fig. 45-7).54 Non-specific findings include
Audeisopei isenuo ts'eiuounaud uoneidse pue sngeydosaraau
mistaken for generalized cardiomegaly or pericardial effusion radio-
increases the specificity of these studies as rugal folds may be deline-
graphically but cardiac ultrasound can distinguish between these
ated in the herniated gastric fundus within the thorax.54 Fluoroscopic
conditions.
sunp snpuny au jo ueiuay suup aesuuap Au sans
PPDH has been successfully managed both conservatively and sur-
swallowing and endoscopy may demonstrate distal esophagitis sug-
gically.4 The decision of whether or not to operate can be difficult as
gestive of a reflux disorder. 54 Occasionally, displacement of the fundus
 some patients present with non-specific signs that may be caused by
through the esophageal cardia can be identifed using endoscopy to
Other diseases or have the hernia identifed as an incidental fnding.
confirm the diagnosis.54
Conservative management can be considered in asymptomatic
Asymptomatic cases probably do not warrant specific therapy.
 patients but surveillance for deterioration is required.4 Surgical repair
Medical therapy to manage reflux esophagitis (antacid therapy and the
of the hernia is recommended in animals that have symptoms associ-
use of prokinetic agents including cisapride and metoclopramide)
ated with organ herniation.46
in combination with weight loss has been described but may be
525
Section
6
Thorax
insufficient to control signs.53,54. Surgery (combined herniorrhaphy.
aul ui aiei ssasons isayaiy a seu (xadonse pue Kxadoseydoa
long-term management of the condition.53.5
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
Timing of surgery
The timing of surgery is dependent on the severity of clinical signs
and degree of organ compromise. PPDHs and hiatal hernias may not
cause life-threatening signs and are often repaired as elective proce-
dures.46,54 Pleuroperitoneal defects are more likely to cause dyspnea
and require urgent correction but most cases will still benefit from a
 period of stabilization prior to surgery. One of the major advances in
the management of pleuroperitoneal ruptures was the realization that
survival rates improved following 12 to 24 hours of stabilization.30
Survival rates have remained high recently despite earlier surgical
intervention. This may reflect earlier recognition of the condition and
Figure 45-8 Intraoperative view of a cat with a chronic pleuroperitoneal
advances in the management of shock and anesthesia.23 It is still rec-
rupture of 12 months' duration with herniation of the small intestine and
ommended that patients receive at least a short period of preoperative
omentum. The hernia could not be reduced from an abdominal approach
 stabilization unless there are specific indications to proceed immedi-
ae uzs aad yo s a a as n a
approach to the abdominal and thoracic cavities is shown (head to right).
fluid resuscitation, pain relief cage rest and oxygen supplementation.
Following reduction of the hernia, two liver lobes appear fibrotic and 
distorted (asterisks). Repair of this defect was complicated as it extended
into the caval foramen (arrowhead shows caudal vena cava). (image
with large pleural effusions or pneumothorax.
courtesy of E.M. We/sh with permssion.)
 Indications to proceed rapidly to surgery without further stabili-
au 'aie anonns asap uoiap uaed apnun uoe
presence of the stomach within the thoracic cavity (which may
reduction of hernia contents and remove the falciform ligament and
develop into GDV), and evidence of organ rupture or uncontrolled
fat to improve visualization.2.30
hemorrhage.27
 Some authors have recommended an intercostal thoracotomy
approach as this enables the diaphragm to be repaired from the
convex surface and thoracic adhesions can be disrupted.5? However.
Anesthesia
the side of the hernia must be accurately identifed preoperatively and
Anesthesia for patients with diaphragmatic defects (see Chapter 2)
there is no facility for evaluating the contralateral hemi-diaphragm for
carries additional risks compared to other abdominal surgeries. Pneu-
additional injuries or for fully evaluating abdominal organs for injury
mothorax develops intraoperatively when pleuroperitoneal defects are
following reduction of the hernia.* The transthoracic approach across
repaired and may also develop during PPDH and hiatal hernia repairs.
the 9th intercostal spaces has also been described as it gives better
-saiduos iauuny sasnes Aragins ioy Auaqunnan lesiop ul guruoisod
access to the diaphragm but this approach offers little advantage and
sion of the lungs and displacement of the heart, exacerbating cardio-
several disadvantages compared to ventral midline celiotomy. * Neither
vascular and respiratory compromise.3 The time between induction
thoracic approach is recommended routinely.
of anesthesia and reduction of the hernia should be as short as pos-
sible.28 If tolerated, pre-clip and pre-oxygenate the patient before
Pleuroperitoneal repair
inducing anesthesia. Use intravenous agents to achieve rapid induc-
tion of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation. Be prepared to start
Primary repair of the muscular tear or avulsion will be suffcient to
intermittent positive pressure ventilation as soon as the patient is
treat most affected cats (Box 45-2). Some large diaphragmatic defects
l on uaopqe au oi uoelan ui xeioui aul aeaa osza paneqmu
cannot be reconstructed easily. Large costal defects can be repaired by
lung compression by herniated organs before the hernia is reduced.30
 moving the point of reattachment of the diaphragm forwards as far
as the 9th rib, obliterating the costodiaphragmatic recess. Synthetic
meshes (eg., polypropylene) have been used to successfully repair
large diaphragmatic defects in dogs and could also be used in cats.61
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
A double layer of porcine small intestinal submucosa has been used
o au st'ua e u oaa serde iu e iedai oi
Surgical approach
sheet forms a biological scaffold that is replaced by host tissues within
a few weeks.62 This will not restrict subsequent growth of the dia-
The standard approach for the repair of all diaphragmatic defects is a
uaanoy uai-suo asne iou lm pue smoia zuaed aun se useud
ventral midline abdominal celiotomy.10.47 This approach enables the
body reaction, both problems encountered with synthetic meshes in
entire diaphragm and abdominal contents to be thoroughly assessed.
uaseos aul taamoh s'st'sie ul anuealai aaey Aeu ieyl sueuny
It can also be extended by median sternotomy to manage thoracic
sheets are weaker than synthetic meshes initially and the feline case
adhesions, for example, in patients with chronic pleuroperitoneal
report, although documenting successful resolution of signs, described
defects (Fig. 45-8).342 The prepared surgical feld should include
al o paa se as slea ae go uoa ie
the ventral thorax to enable the incision to be extended cranially if
transverse abdominis muscle have also been used to repair diaphrag-
required.42 Elevate the thorax in relation to the abdomen to aid
matic defects.64.65 The flap is made by incising the peritoneum and
526
Diaphragm
Chapter
45
Box 45-2 Primary diaphragmatic (pleuroperitoneal) repair
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and clipped and prepared 
from the costal arch leaving no lateral muscle remnant to suture to.
for aseptic surgery. A wide clip extending from caudal to the pubis to
To repair these defects the avulsed muscle is anchored to the ribs at 
the cranial aspect of the thorax is recommended in case the incision 
the point of detachment using circumcostal sutures (Fig. 45-9B).58
 needs to be extended into the thorax
After repair of the diaphragmatic defect, residual air in the thorax
 can be removed intraoperatively by needle thoracocentesis through
ligament and fat are removed to improve visualization. During surgery.
either the diaphragm or an intercostal space (Hg. 45-10) 3.2359
most diaphragmatic defects are easily identified but the liver and
jsaup aul laiua isnwu ing paneld aq osje Aew sagni Awuoisone loul
stomach should be retracted to enable the caval foramen, central
through an intercostal space and not through the defect in the 
tendon, and the dorsal diaphragm lateral to the crura to be checked
xesoui au woy ae ladxa oi shuni jo uosuedxa panioy wbesude
for defects. Once the defect is identified, the hernia is reduced by
before tying the final suture must be avoided as it is associated
applying gentle traction to herniated omentum, small intestine,
with a high fatal complication rate through the development of
stomach or spleen, and finally the displaced liver lobes are repositioned.
re-expansion pulmonary edema.230.60
Traction should not be applied directly to the liver lobes as they may be 
yooy ot pasn ag Aew juawnuisu! lo labuly e os alge!t pue paisabuon
under the liver lobe within the thorax and gently lift and push it back
into the abdomen.30 If the hernia/rupture cannot be reduced, it may
be necessary to enlarge the defect by incising the hernial ring.30 The
incision is made from the edge of the defect running ventrally
towards the costal arch or sternum as this area is most accessible for
repair. Rarely. adhesions form between the herniated organs and the
diaphragm or thoracic organs.28.30 Diaphragmatic adhesions can be 
managed by gentle dissection but intrathoracic adhesions may require
extension of the incision by median sternotomy and lung lobectomy
 or other intrathoracic procedures.42
 It is critical to ensure that all sutures engage healthy tissue during
herniorrhaphy and that the repair is not under tension. If the edges 
of the hernial ring appear unhealthy or devitalized, they are sharply
excised until a bleeding surface is achieved. Most defects can be
closed easily by direct apposition of the edges using simple 
appositional interupted or continuous suture patterns but care is 
taken not to restrict the caval foramen if the hernia extends into this
(A)
B
pue aneid oi laisea ane sulaned snonuijuos ajdwis s(g-st by) eane
enable tension to be evenly distributed along the suture line.
Figure 45-9 Diagrams of suture placement during hernia repair. (A) Mid
Synthetic monofilament absorbable suture material that retains
costal, sternal, and central tendon ruptures are repaired by apposing the
strength adequately to allow repair of tendon and muscle (e.g..
edges of the defects. Note that the suture line is started dorsally in the 
polydioxanone ll) is recommended. Start suturing at the dorsal (least
least accessible portion of the diaphragm. (B) Avulsion of the diaphragm
accessible) portion of the defect and continue ventrally into the more 
from the costal arch is repaired by anchoring the diaphragm to the costal
accessible area (Fig. 45-9A).3 Sometimes, the costal muscles avulse
arch using circumcostal sutures.
transverse abdominis muscle to create a muscle pedicle with its base
along the costal arch.65 The flap is elevated into the diaphragmatic
defect with the peritoneal surface facing the thorax. It has the advan-
tages of not causing foreign body reactions and adapting to the growth
of the patient.
Displacement of part or all of the stomach during diaphragmatic
-iaw aiimai shuaed paav s'ies aui ul aa oi peal ue aidn
lize the patient If this is not possible, gastrocentesis may be performed
through an intercostal space,30 Gastropexy to prevent recurrence of
 GDV has been performed in some cases following gastric reposition-
ing but, to date, recurrent GDV has not been reported in the cat fol-
lowing diaphragmatic rupture repair so it is uncertain whether or not
this additional procedure is warranted.37
PPDH repair
PPDH repair follows the same principles as pleuroperitoneal hernior-
rhaphy (Box 45-2) and is usually straightforward.47.49 Although adhe-
sions between the herniated organs and pericardium are occasionally
Figure 45-10 Intraoperative view of needle thoracocentesis through the
diaphragm to establish negative pressure in the thorax after hernia repair.
527
Section
[61
Thorax
A
B
 Figure 45-11 Intraoperative views during PPDH repair. A ventral midline celiotomy incision has been made and the falciform fat has been excised to 
improve exposure. (A) The heart (asterisk) can be seen through the PPDH following reduction of herniated liver lobes. (B) The defect is closed by
apposing the edges using a continuous suture pattern starting dorsally.
 Box 45-3 Sliding hiatal hernia repair
pasedaid pue paddip pue Aouaqwnoan jeshop u! pauolsod s! jen aul
this dissection if the mediastinal pleura is penetrated. A lubricated 
for aseptic surgery. A wide clip extending from caudal to the pubis to
stomach tube (e.g.. 26 French) is passed along the esophagus and
the cranial aspect of the thorax is recommended in case the incision
into the stomach to act as a guide during partial closure of the 
 needs to be extended into the thorax. A ventral midline abdominal 
jeulwal aut lnd ol padde s! uojpeul lepney snje!y leabeudosa
portion of the esophagus into the abdomen. Starting ventrally, the 
to improve visualization. Following reduction of the hernia, the
esophageal hiatus is partially closed using a series of simple
 peritoneum is bluntly dissected as it reflects from the gastric cardia 
interrupted polypropylene sutures and bites of the ventral esophageal
aul asodxa lw s!ul sniey leabeydosa aul te wbenudep aul ouo 
 aul loupue ol saanins oml isel aul u! patelod lonui ane apsnu 
underlying fascia and ventral branch of the vagal nerve (Fg. 45-12A)
esophagus in its new position. The stomach tube prevents excessive
The dissection is confined to the ventral half of the circumference of 
closure of the hiatus to avoid impairing esophageal emptying. Finally.
the esophageal hiatus to avoid damaging the dorsal vagal branch and
a left-sided gastropexy (incisional or tube) is performed between the 
 continued for a short distance between the esophageal wall and pleura 
 gastric fundus and left body wall to maintain slight caudal traction on
to mobilize the terminal esophagus and enable it to be drawn back
the esophageal cardia (Fig. 45-12C).
 into the abdomen (Fg. 45-12B). Pneumothorax may develop during 
Op
Dissection
Gp
GB
A
B
?
Figure 45-12 Diagram of sliding hiatal hernia repair. (A) Bluntly dissect around the ventral two-thirds of the esophageal wall as it passes through
the esophageal hiatus. (B) Apply caudal traction (arrow) to pull the terminal esophagus into the abdominal cavity. (c) Partly close the esophageal 
hiatus, incorporating the muscular wall of the esophagus in the last two sutures to anchor it in position and perform a left-sided gastropexy to
prevent excessive reduction in the size of the hiatus (dotted line indicates presence of stomach tube). E, terminal esophagus; F. gastric fundus; 
GB, gastric body: GC, gastric cardia; Gp. gastropexy: V, ventral branch of the vagus.
528
Diaphragm
Chapter
45
encountered and must be dissected,46.47 adhesions to the epicardium
have not been reported. Following reduction of the defect, the hernia
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
is repaired by direct apposition of the edges of the hernial ring (Fig.
45-11). The pericardium does not need to be dissected from the dia-
PPDH is associated with a 14% postoperative mortality rate.46 The
phragm at the edge of the ring and should be left undisturbed to
 prognosis for cats with traumatic pleuroperitoneal ruptures is good,
reduce the risk of pleural complications.5l Air is evacuated from the
with up to 92% of cases surviving at least until discharge.5 The prog-
pericardium by pericardiocentesis through the diaphragm before
abdominal closure. If there are concurrent sternal or abdominal wall
to be worse but a comparatively recent report suggests that the survival
defects, these are repaired at the same time. Sternal defects can be
rate is similar (86%).42
apposed using cerclage wire in a similar fashion to closure of median
 Most complications that are fatal occur within 24 hours of surgery
sternotomy incisions.
asndon Arodsn au oi anp ieiey aie suondon aun pue
that they cause.0.28.425 Re-expansion pulmonary edema is a major
Sliding hiatal hernia repair
cause of dyspnea and develops within 24 hours of surgery. This syn-
drome is seen following forced re-expansion of collapsed lungs and
Sliding hiatal hernia repair has two components, partial closure of the
is usually fatal.°0 However, the risk of developing this syndrome is
hernia ring and leff-sided gastropexy (Box 45-3).54,56
greatly reduced by ensuring that the lungs are never forcibly over-
inflated during hernia repair.3 Other causes of dyspnea postoperatively
include pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and pulmonary contusion.
Some patients have contraction of the abdominal wall due to the
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
reduced volume of abdominal contents associated with chronic her-
 niation of abdominal organs into the thorax. This may complicate
ans si umy saup an s aeu sieu
hernia repair as the abdominal wall may be difficult to close following
because of residual pneumothorax, concurrent thoracic injuries,
 return ofherniated organs to the abdomen. Excessive intra-abdominal
re-expansion pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, or recurrence of the
 pressure can restrict diaphragmatic movement postoperatively and
hernia. Cats should be monitored carefully for dyspnea for at least 24
lead to vascular injury to abdominal organs that may prove life threat.
hours following surgery and should be investigated if signs occur.
 ening. Splenectomy or partial hepatectomy may be necessary to facili-
Patients should be exercise restricted for ten days following surgery
tatedosure.27 Otheruncommon complicationsincludemegaesophagus,
and receive analgesia as required.
regurgitation, and reherniation.324,57,66
REFERENCES
 Sieck GC, Roy RR, Powell P, et al. Muscle
8
Marolf A, Kraft S, Lowry I, et al.
16.
 Keep IM. Congenital diaphragmatic
 fber type distribution and architecture
Radiographic diagnosis-right kidney
hernia in a cat. Aust Vet ) 1950;26(8):
of the cat diaphragm. J Appl Physiol 
herniation in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
193-6.
1983;55:1386-92.
2002;43(3):237-40.
17. Pober BR, Russell MK, Ackerman KG.
2. Hermanson JW, Evans HE. The muscular
9. al-Nakeeb SM. Canine and feline
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
system. In: Evans HE, editor. Miller's
 traumatic diaphragmatic hernias.
owerview. GeneReviews (Internet) 2006
anatomy of the dog. 3rd ed.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1971;159:
2010 Mar 16 (cited 2010 20 August);
 Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders; 1993.
1422-7.
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
p. 258-384.
10.
Wilson GP 3rd, Newton CD, Burt JK.
-gov/books/NBK1359/
3.
.Wilson Ill GP 3rd, Hayes HM Jr.
A review of 116 diaphragmatic hernias
18.
Feldman DB, Bree MM, Cohen BJ.
Diaphragmatic hernia in the dog and cat:
in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia in
 a 25-year overview. Semin Vet Med Surg
1971;159:1142-5.
neonatal dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
(Small Anim) 1986;1:318-26.
11.
 Mann FA, Aronson E. Surgical correction
1968;153:942-4.
4.
.Evans HE. The heart and arteries. In:
of a true congenital pleuroperitoneal
19.
Valentine BA, Cooper Bl, Dietze AE.
Evans HE, editor. Miller's anatomy of
diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. J Am Anim
Noden DM. Canine congenital
the dog. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W. B.
Hosp Assoc 199l;27:501 -7.
diaphragmatic hernia. I Vet Intern Med
 Saunders; 1993. p. 586-681.
12.
Cariou MP, Shihab N, Kenny P, Baines SJ.
1988;2:109-12.
 5. Noden MD, de Lahunta A. Respiratory 
 Surgical management of an incidentally
20. Clugston RD, Greer ll. Diaphragm
system and partitioning of body cavities.
 diagnosed true pleuroperitoneal hernia
development and congenital
 In: Stamathis G, editor. The embryology
in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:
diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Pediatr Surg
of domestic animals - developmental
873-7.
2007:16:94-100.
mechanisms and malformations.
13.
Voges AK, Bertrand S, Hill RC, et al. True
21.
Ragni RA, Hotston Moore A.
Baltimore: Williams & wilkins; 1985.
diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. Vet Radiol
 Diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats 
p. 279-91.
Utrasound 1997;38:116-19.
part 1: diagnosis. UK Vet 2007;12(2):22-9.
6. Williams J, Leveille R, Myer CW. Imaging
14.
 Briscoe G. Hermia through the central
22.
Worth AJ, Machon RG. Traumatic
 modalities used to confim diaphragmatic
tendon of the diaphragm (cat). J Anat
diaphragmatic herniation:
hernia in small animals. Comp Cont Ed
1928;62(Pt 2):224-6.
 pathophysiology and management. Comp
Pract Vet 1998;20(11 ):1199-209.
 Parry A. Positive contrast peritoneography
Cont Educ Pract Vet 2005;27:178-91.
 7. Sullivan M, Lee R. Radiological features of
 in the diagnosis of a pleuroperitoneal
23.
Gibson TW, Brisson BA, Sears W.
 80 cases of diaphragmatic rupture. / Small
diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. J Feline
Perioperative survival rates after surgery
Anim Pract 1989;30(12):561-6.
Med Surg 2010;12:141-3.
for diaphragmatic hernia in dogs and cats:
529
Section
6
Thorax
92 cases [1990-2002). J Am Vet Med
38. Meincke JE, Hobbie WV Jr, Barto LR
53. Sivacolundhu RK, Read RA, Marchevsky
Assoc 2005;227:105-9.
Traumatic chylothorax with associated
AM. Hiatal hernia controversies - a review
24. Schmiedt CW, Tobias KM, Stevenson MA.
diaphragmatic hernias in the cat. J Am
of pathophysiology and treatment
Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia in cats:
Vet Med Assoc 1969;155(1):15-20.
options. Aust Vet J 2002;80(1-2):
34 cases [1991-2001). J Am Vet Med
39.
Lin JL, Lee CS, Chen PW, et al.
48-53.
Assoc 2003;222(9):1237-40.
Complications during labour in a
54.
Lorinson D, Bright RM. Long-term
25. Vnuk D, Pirkic B, Maticic D, et al. Feline
chihuahua due to diaphragmatic hernia.
outcome of medical and surgical
high-rise syndrome: 119 cases [1998-
Vet Rec 2007;161(3):103-4.
treatment of hiatal hernias in dogs and
2001). J Feline Med Surg 2004;6(5):
40.
 Bellenger CR, Trim C, Summer-Smith G.
cats: 27 cases [1978-1996). 1Am Vet Med
305-12.
Ble pleuritis in a dog. I Small Anim Pract
Assoc 1998;213:381-4.
26.
Benitah N, Matousek IL, Barnes RF, et al.
1975;16(9):575-7.
55.
Arndt JW, Marks SL, Kneller SK. What is 
Diaphragmatic and perineal hernias
41.
 Donald CE, Lee R, Sullivan M.
your diagnosis? Hiatal hernia due to
associated with cutaneous asthenia in a
Diaphragmatic rupture and biliary tract
jaryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. J Am
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;224(5):
damage. J Small Anim Pract 1985;26:
Vet Med Assoc 2006;228(5):693-4.
706-9. 698.
61-6.
56. Prymak C, Saunders HM, Washabau RJ.
27.
 Burton C, white R. Surgical approach to a
 Minihan AC, Berg J, Evans KL. Chronic 
Hiatal hernia repair by restoration and
ruptured diaphragm in the cat. In Pract
diaphragmatic hernia in 34 dogs and 16
stabilization of normal anatomy. An
1997:19:298-305.
cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004;40[1):
evaluation in four dogs and one cat. Vet
28.
Garson HL, Dodman NH, Baker GJ.
51-63.
Surg 1989;18(5):386-91.
Diaphragmatic hernia. Analysis of ffty-six
43. Andreoni AA, Voss K. Reconstruction of
57.
 Stokhof AA. Diagnosis and treatment
cases in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract
a large diaphragmatic defect in a kitten
of acquired diaphragmatic hernia by
1980;21:469-81.
using small intestinal submucosa (SIS),
thoracotomy in 49 dogs and 72 cats.
29.
Hunt GB, Johnson KA. Diaphragmatic.
J Feline Med Surg 2009;11(12):1019-22.
Vet Q 1986;8(3):177-83.
pericardial, and hiatal hernia. In: Slatter
44.
 Spattini G, Rossi F, Vignoli M, Lamb
58.B
 Fossum Tw. Surgery of the lower
DH, editor. Textbook of small animal
CR. Ulse of ultrasound to diagnose
respiratory system: pleural cavity and
surgery. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats.
diaphragm. In: Fossum TW, editor. Small
2003. p. 471-87.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44[2):
animal surgery. St Louis: Mosby Elsevier:
30.
 Sullivan M, Reid J. Management of 60
226-30.
2007. p. 896-929.
cases of diaphragmatic rupture. J Small
45.
 Reichle JK, Wisner ER. Non-cardiac
59.
 Bellenger CR, Hunt GB, Goldsmid SE,
Anim Pract 1990;31:425-30.
thoracic ultrasound in 75 feline and
Pearson MR. Outcomes of thoracic
31.
Katic N, Bartolomaeus E, Bohler A, Dupre 
anine patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
surgery in dogs and cats. Aust Vet J
G. Traumatic diaphragmatic rupture in
2000;41(2):154-62.
1996;74[1):25-30.
a cat with partial kidney displacement
46.
Reimer SB, Kyles AE, Filipowicz DE,
60. Stampley AR, Waldron DR. Reexpansion
into the thorax. J Small Anim Pract
Gregory CR. Long-term outcome of cats
pulmonary edema after surgery to repair
2007;48(12):705-8.
treated conservatively or surgically for
a diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. J Am Vet
32.
. Stork CK, Hamaide Al, Schwedes C, et al.
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
Med Assoc 1993;203(12):1699-701.
Hemiurothorax following diaphragmatic
hermia: 66 cases [1987-2002). J Am
61.
Bowman KL, Birchard SJ, Bright RM.
hermia and kidney prolapse in a cat.
Vet Med Assoc 2004;224:728-32.
 Complications associated with the
J Feline Med Surg 2003;5(2):91-6.
47.
 Neiger R. Peritoneopericardial
implantation of polypropylene mesh in
33
Bellenger CR, Milstein M, McDonell W.
diaphragmatic hernia in cats. Comp
dogs and cats: a retrospective study of
Herniation of gravid uterus into the
Cont Ed Pract Vet 1996;18(5):461-79.
21 cases (1984-1996). J Am Anim Hosp
thorax of a dog. Mod Vet Pract
48.
 Reina A, Vidania E, Soriano P, et al.
Assoc 1998;34(3):225-33.
1975;56(8):553-5.
 Traumatic intrapericardial diaphragmatic
62.
 Brown CN, Finch JG. Which mesh for
Sullivan IL, Puckett JR, Sevedge JP.
hernia: case report and literature review.
hernia repair? Ann R Coll Surg Engl
34.
Ruptured diaphragm with herniation of
Injury 2001;32(2):153-6.
2010;92[4):272-8.
the gravid uterus and abdominal viscera.
49.
Wallace J, Mullen HS, Lesser MB. A
63.
 Smith Ml, Paran TS, Quinn F Corbally
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1969;155(6):
technique for surgical correction of
MT. The SlS extracellular matrix scaffold-
941-2.
peritoneal pericardial diaphragmatic
preliminary results of use in congenital
Kraje Bl, Kraje AC, Rohrbach BW, et al.
hernia in dogs and cats. JAm Anim Hosp
35.
diaphragmatic hernia [CDH) repair.
Intrathoracic and concurrent orthopedic
Assoc 1992;28:503-10.
Pediatr Surg Int 2004;20[11-12):
injury associated with traumatic rib
50.
Liptak JM, Bissett SA, Allan GS, et al.
859-62.
fracture in cats: 75 cases [1980-1998).
Hepatic cysts incarcerated in a
64.
 Furneaux Rw, Hudson MD. Autogenous
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216(1):51-4.
 peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
muscle flap repair of a diaphragmatic
36.
. Cornell KK, Jakovljevic S, Waters Dl, et al.
hermia. J Feline Med Surg 2002;4(2):
hernia. Feline Pract 1976;6(1):20-4.
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction secondary
123-5.
65.
Helphrey ML. Abdominal flap graft for
to diaphragmatic hernia in two cats. J Am
51.
 Scruggs SM, Bright JM. Chronic cardiac
repair of chronic diaphragmatic hernia
Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29(6):502-7.
 tamponade in a cat caused by an
in the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc
37.
 Formaggini L, Schmidt K, De Lorenzi D.
intrapericardial biliary cyst. J Feline Med
1982;181(8):791 -3.
Gastric dilatation-volvulus associated
Surg 2010; 12[4):338-40.
66.
 Joseph R, Kuzi S, Lavy E, Aroch I.
with diaphragmatic hernia in three cats:
52.
Less RD, Bright JM, Orton EC.
Transient megaoesophagus and
clinical presentation, surgical treatment
Intrapericardial cyst causing cardiac
oesophagitis following diaphragmatic
and presumptive aetiology. I Feline Med
tamponade in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
 rupture repair in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
Surg 2008;10(2):198-201.
Assoc 2000;36(2):115-19.
2008;10(3):284-90.
530
Cardiorespiratory
46
pter
Trachea and bronchus
E. Hardie
 Tracheal problems in cats can be lifethreatening. Surgical intervention
Trachealis muscle
may be required for removal of foreign bodies or focal masses. Tra-
cheal avulsion has a good success rate after surgical repair with the
Mucous membrane
Adventitia
right preparation ofthe patient, the surgical team, and anesthetist. The
with glands
small size of the cat's trachea and the propensity to produce thick
secretions contribute to blockage of the lumen, tracheotomy tubes,
and tracheostomy incisions. A tracheotomy should not be done in
cats unless there are facilities to provide continuous monitoring post-
 operatively, and even then the morbidity is high. This chapter will
review the anatomy, clinical signs, and imaging of the different tra-
 cheal disorders in cats, and give details on how to perform surgery for
these conditions.
Tracheal cartilage
Figure 46-1 Cross-section of the feline trachea. The muscle attaches on
the outside of the cartilage ring and the ring only has a very narrow
defect dorsally.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
the left dorsolateral or left lateral aspect in the caudal neck. The recur-
The trachea extends from the cricoid cartilage to the carina. The
rent laryngeal nerves are on the dorsolateral aspects of the trachea.
normal cat trachea ranges from 7-10 mm in diameter' and has 38-43
The thyroid and parathyroid glands are on the lateral aspects of the
tracheal cartilages. These cartilage rings are composed of hyaline
trachea in the cranial neck (Fig. 46-2).
cartilage and are incomplete for a short distance dorsally. The dorsal
As the trachea passes through the thoracic inlet and into the medi-
space is flled with loose connective tissue covered by the trachealis
astinum, it passes dorsal to the jugular veins, which join to become
muscle, which attaches to the external surface of the tracheal rings.3
the cranial vena cava. Within the thorax, the aortic arch, left subcla-
Adjacent cartilage rings are joined by fibroelastic annular ligaments.
vian artery and brachiocephalic trunk lie on the left aspect of the
which fuse with the perichondrium. The inner surface of the trachea
 trachea. The right subclavian artery and right vagus nerve are directly
lateral to the trachea. The azygos vein crosses the right side of the
The tissue at the dorsal aspect of the trachea (muscle, connective
trachea cranial to the carina. The esophagus moves from the left aspect
tissue, submucosa, and mucosa) is commonly referred to as the dorsal
 of the trachea to dorsal as it approaches the carina. The trachea bifur-
tracheal membrane (Fig. 46-1).
cates into the main stem bronchi between the pulmonary arteries and
The blood supply to the trachea is segmental, coming from the
veins. The main stem bronchi in the cat are short, quickly branching
cranial thyroid, caudal thyroid, and the bronchoesophageal arteries.
into lower level bronchi.
The vascular pedicles are on the lateral aspects of the trachea. Venous
drainage occurs through the thyroid, internal jugular, and broncho-
esophageal veins. Sympathetic innervation is from the sympathetic
trunk, while parasympathetic innervation is from the recurrent laryn-
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND
geal nerve.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
 The cervical trachea lies dorsal and medial to the sternohyoideus
and stermothyroideus muscles. It is ventral to the longus colli and 
longus capitus muscles. The carotid sheaths are dorsal to the trachea
 The major surgical conditions of the feline trachea are tracheal disrup-
in the cranial half of the neck and lateral to the trachea in the caudal
tion due to trauma or intubation, tracheal collapse, and tracheal
 half of the neck. The esophagus is dorsal in the cranial neck and is on
 obstruction due to foreign bodies, masses or stenosis.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00046-9
531
Section
6
Thorax
 Supreme intercostal a.
It. costocervical trunk
It. Sth intercostal a.
Trachea branches
Thyroid
Trachea
HAU
ct. thyroid a.
Aortic a
It subclavian a.
rt. common
Caudal thyroid a.
carotid
(variable)
Brachiocephalic a.
 Figure 46-2 The blood supply to the feline trachea.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs of tracheal disease are those of respiratory distress:
/ue 'sisoue 'oga Aroiedsai pasaui iei Aroteisai pasaul
Or open-mouth breathing. If the integrity of the trachea is compro-
mised, subcutaneous emphysema may be observed. Other clinical
ance, self-limitation of vigorous movement, and a distinct preference
for a sternal position. Patients with chronic disease may experience
 anorexia and weight loss.
Emergency management
 Emergency stabilization of the patient involves administering oxygen
by facemask or placing the cat in an oxygen-rich environment, and
administering sedation (eg., acepromazine, butorphanol), if indi-
 cated. An indwelling intravenous catheter is placed so that the cat can
be quickly anesthetized if there is a need to control respiration. Cor-
ticosteroids are administered if airway swelling is suspected. In severe
cases, intubation may be needed. Tracheostomy should be avoided
Figure 46-3 Lateral radiograph of a cat, showing foreign body within
unless absolutely necessary, due to the cat's propensity to produce
the lumen of the trachea. (lmage @ Michael Tivers, reprinted with kind
large quantities of mucus that easily plug the narrow tracheostomy
permission.)
tubes that fit in the feline trachea.
Diagnostic imaging
 Radiographs ofthe neck and thorax often yield a diagnosis and should
be performed before other diagnostic tests. If the equipment to take
 a standing lateral radiograph is present, the cat can be maintained in
a sternal position while the radiographs are obtained. Alradiographs
for tracheal measurements should be taken with the cat in a sternal
 position. For additional lateral views then the cat is repositioned for 
a minimal amount of time to enable each radiograph to be taken. In
bency and a facemask or flow-by technique is used to administer
oxygen.
Radiographic signs are dependent on the lesion. If obstruction is
Figure 46-4 Lateral radiograph of a cat, showing tracheal narowing at
 present, the foreign body or mass may be observed in the lumen of
the thoracic inlet.
the trachea (Fig. 46-3). Stenosis or extratracheal compressive masses
will cause a narrowing of the tracheal lumen. Tracheal collapse may
be difficult to recognize without fluoroscopy, but narrowing of the
location of the rupture, subcutaneous emphysema, air trapping in
cervical trachea along the affected segment should be observed on
 muscle and fascial planes, pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax
radiographs taken during inspiration (Fig. 46-4). The diameter of the
may be observed (Fig. 46-5).
cervical trachea of normal cats is 18-20% of the diameter of the tho-
The level of tracheal obstruction will influence the pulmonary
racic inlet on lateral radiographs, depending on breed. Acute rupture
radiographic changes. Extrathoracic tracheal obstruction may result
will result in air outside the tracheal lumen. Depending on the
in poorly inflated lung fields, a high and domed diaphragm, or
532
Trachea and bronchus
Chapter
46
Box 46-1 Tracheal masses in the cat
Neoplastic13-29
Lymphoma/lymphosarcoma (11 cats)
Adenocarcinoma (seven cats)
Squamous cell carcinoma (three cats)
Carcinoma (two cats)
Seromucinous carcinoma (one cat)
Neuroendocrine carcinoma (one cat)
Histiocytic sarcoma (one cat)
Adenoma (one cat)
 Non-neoplastic1930-34
Myiasis due to Cuterebra larvae (four cats)
Figure 46-5 Lateral radiograph of a cat, showing subcutaneous
Lymphocytic/plasmacytic inflammation (two cats)
emphysema and pneumomediastinum due to iatrogenic tracheal rupture.
Granuloma due to mycobacterial infection (one cat)
Zygomycosis (one cat)
pulmonary edema. Intrathoracic tracheal obstruction may result in
 Polyp (one cat)
hyperlucent lung fields, prominent pulmonary vasculature and a flat-
tened diaphragm due to over-expansion of the lungs and air trapping.
Tracheal endoscopy may be needed to fully characterize a lesion.
case series described successful removal of tracheal foreign bodies
but requires general anesthesia. If compromise of the integrity of the
from ten cats using grasping forceps with a length of 58.7 cm from
trachea is suspeted, great care must be taken not to worsen the condi-
the tip to the handle.7 The forceps were placed, then the object was
tion during intubation. Ideally, the cat is pre-oxygenated by facemask
 grasped and withdrawn, under fuoroscopic guidance. Two of these
or flow-by. anesthesia is induced and maintained using injectable
cases involved repeated unsuccessful attempts to remove the foreign
anesthetic agents, and oxygen is administered using a facemask or an
body under endoscopic guidance, followed by successful use of the
endotracheal tube placed cranial to the lesion. If needed, a small
fluoroscopically guided forceps. The particular forceps used was of a
endotracheal tube or a small-bore catheter may be passed distal to the
custom design, but long-handled grasping forceps are common in
lesion before and after scoping. if adequate oxygenation cannot be
minimally invasive surgery packs.
maintained by other means. If neoplasia is suspected, cytology and
 Once the object has been removed, tracheoscopy/bronchoscopy
biopsy samples are obtained as needed to identify and stage the
should be performed to ensure that the inhaled object(s) was com-
tumor. The surgeon should be prepared to correct the lesion immedi-
pletely removed and that there was no iatrogenic damage of the
ately following the scoping procedure.
trachea. If the foreign body cannot be removed or if smaller foreign
objects are observed in the bronchi, beyond the reach of any endo-
 scopic forceps, the object[(s) may be removed using tracheotomy.
SURGICAL DISEASES
Tracheal masses
Foreign bodies
 Tracheal masses are less common than laryngeal masses in the cat,
but do occur Neoplasia is most common (Box 46-1).
 Tracheal foreign bodies reported in cats include grass awns, tree 
From the literature, the age attime of diagnosis of neoplastic masses
needles, a twig, bark, wood mulch, gravel, small stones, teeth, bones,
ranged from two to 18 years, with all cats, except one with squamous
siun on pasodsipaid aq Aeu sies sunoh s'uid Aiajes e pue 'alnq e
cell carcinoma, being over six years of age, with a median age of 9.5
condition in that six of 12 cats in the largest published case series were
years.14.22 Affected breeds included domestic short-haired (DSH).
18 months or younger. The duration of observed clinical signs ranges
domestic long-haired (DLH), Siamese, Himalayan, and Persian cats.
from one to 2l days. Unless they are very small, eg., tree needles.8
 Non-neoplastic masses are less common than neoplastic conditions
foreign bodies tend to lodge at or immediately cranial to the tracheal
(Box 46-1). Cats with myiasis were one to two years of age, while the
bifurcation, rather than in the bronchi, presumably due to the small
other non-neoplastic masses were found in older cats. The masses
diameter of the feline trachea and bronchi. Plain radiographs are
were observed as focal sof tissue opacities within the trachea, focal
usually sufficient for diagnosis. Many objects are radio-opaque and
annular thickening of the trachea or focal narrowing of the trachea on
those that are not will be highlighted as a soft tissue density sur-
radiographs. Tracheoscopy allowed direct observation of masses (Fig.
saoq uiang aaan oi pan spoua ie ieaen Aq papunon
46-6), removal of one of four Cuterebra larvae, and tissue removal for
include removal using endoscopic guidance,” removal using fluoro-
diagnostic purposes and/or debulking of the obstruction. Histology
scopic guidance, and surgical removal.10 Non-surgical removal is pre-
provided defnitive diagnosis, but cytology was less reliable, most
ferred because of the need for a thoracotomy to approach the carina.
notably when lymphocytic/plasmacytic inflammation was found.
Endoscopic removal involves visualization of the foreign body
 Subsequent histologic examination found neoplasia in some of these
using a rigid or flexible endoscope The foreign body is grasped with
instances.
forceps or enclosed in a snare Small objects may be grasped
 Treatment of tumors differed according to tumor type. Treatment
with forceps passed through the biopsy channel of the scope, but
 of lymphoma/lymphosarcoma with surgical resection/anastomosis.
larger forceps must be carefully passed alongside the scope Balloons
radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy resulted in disease-free inter-
have been passed beyond the foreign body under endoscopic or fluor-
Oscopic guidance, inflated, and then pulled towards the larynx.l.12 A
complete removal of adenocarcinomas has resulted in long-term
EES
Section
[61
Thorax
Figure 46-6 Intraluminal tracheal mass viewed through an endoscope.
Figure 46-7 Lateral radiograph of a cat, showing the pseudoairway
associated with tracheal avulsion. (lmage @ Rober White, reprinted with kind
 survival, while partial removal has resulted in disease-free intervals up
permission.)
t0 one year.13,1a12,22 Tracheal stenting relieved respiratory distress due
to tracheal stenosis, but progression of carcinoma within the lung
-an anuya ez'syaam xis u ssansp Aioesai juanai u pansal
Lmlul
ment of tracheal seromucinous, squamous cell or neuroendocrine
carcinoma has not been described. Surgical removal of a Cuterebra
's arr u asas paosa uoisiun aiue e yno e
but one cat developed tracheal collapse in the region of the trache-
 ai u m  au iala se xis 
of other causes six months after excisional biopsy of the tracheal
lesion and a course of appropriate antibiotic therapy.* Excisional
biopsy of the tracheal polyp using the endoscopic biopsy forceps
resulted in resolution of clinical signs for four months, after which
the cat was lost to follow up.32
Tracheal avulsion
Tracheal avulsion is a traumatic lesion, thought to be caused by
sudden hyperextension of the neck while the carina remains in a fixed
position.35-4 Separation of the tracheal wall usually occurs just cranial
Figure 46-8 Dorsal view of a cadaveric cat trachea, showing the dorsal
to the carina. Depending on the degree of disruption, signs of respira-
tory distres will be present immediately or will be delayed. In cats
with delayed clinical signs, the tissues surrounding the intrathoracic
suis pu 'ans e u  an uu 2rn
the affected tracheal segment worsens with time Long-term resolution
-dnusip uappns ui sinsan uoou iauuny uaum Aiuo juanedde aoa
of clinical signs was documented in 18 of 20 cats treated with immedi-
tion of the remaining tissues or stenosis develops at the ends of the
ate repair or resection/anastomosis of the affected tracheal segment
pseudotrachea, causing severe air trapping in the lung. Tracheal avul-
shes omL ot-zs Aabins iae siean uaaas ot suuou aay ioy pamolloy pue
sion typically occurs in young adult cats with a history of known or
did not survive the surgical procedure.
presumed trauma, with times to presentation being one to 28 days
after the traumatic episode The onset of respiratory distress is often
latrogenic tracheal rupture
sudden and severe.
 If the animal is examined at the time of the injury and signs of
latrogenic injury to the dorsal tracheal membrane may occur in cats
respiratory distress are not present, radiographic findings associated
with tracheal avulsion may easily be missed. These signs include sepa-
reported injuries are associated with dental procedures and appear to
ration of tracheal rings, focal tracheal narrowing, and the presence of
 be secondary to endotracheal tube cuff over-inflation. Most ruptures
air outside the trachea. Radiographic fndings in cats exhibiting respi-
 Occur at the thoracic inlet, the site at which the endotracheal tube cuff
ratory distress include obviously separated tracheal rings with an asso-
ciated gas-flled diverticulum or dilated pseudotrachea (Fig. 46-7),
a hiui ym paeiss uaq au sn ai yay anssand
stenosis of the tracheal lumen at the junctions of normal and avulsed
average volume of air required for endotracheal cuff inflation resulting
tracheal tissue, pneumomediastinum, and over-inflation/hyperlu-
in an air-tight seal in the normal cat trachea is 1.6 mL. Studies in cat
cency of the lung felds associated with air trapping.
cadavers determined that inflation volumes over 6 mL resulted in
Resolution of clinical signs with conservative therapy has been
au ya uounl au ie sieat ieau aam saiu au 'amu ieaue
reported in one cat, but most cats with this condition need resection
dorsal tracheal membrane and the tracheal cartilage (Fig. 46-8). The
of the affected segment because the degree of stenosis at the ends of
mediastinum remained intact when rupture occurred.
534
Trachea and bronchus
Chapter
46
The predominant clinical signs in cats with tracheal rupture were
subcutaneous emphysema (37/38 reported cases), dyspnea (11/38
85/5) A1eyal (sas ge/9) Bu1yno (sas g5/8) eixa1oue (sas5
cases), and respiratory stridor (4/38 cases).14144 Clinical signs were
noted four hours to 14 days after the anesthetic episode Subcutaneous
u sase ah/g u suasand aiam unuseipaonaud pue euasaqdua
which thoracic radiographs were obtained (see Fig. 46-5). The tear in
the dorsal membrane was observed in 9/ll cases in which tracheos-
ase auo ul Asdoioau uo pauyuoo sem pue pasn sem Adon
Of the 38 reported cases, one died while being radiographed. Con-
cge rest, and antibiotic therapy when indicated, was successful in 22
cases. Time to resolution of clinical signs ranged from 24 hours to five
conservative therapy underwent surgical treatment Of these cases, five
of 15 died as a result of intraoperative or postoperative complications
and ten recovered (although one cat required temporary postoperative
ventilator support).
Tracheal collapse
Tracheal collapse has been reported in nine cats.27,45-48 Clinical signs
reported in these cats included intermittent dyspnea, which worsened
with exertion, episodes of severe respiratory distress requiring oxygen
therapy, coughing. cyanosis, and syncope. Cats with upper airway
obstruction had stertor, stridor, ora loud purring noise during inspir
Figure 46-9 Intraoperative photograph of tracheal resection-
tion. On physical examination, the affected trachea was easily com-
anastomosis, showing placement of the endotracheal tube in distal
pressed and palpation elicited a cough. Narrowing of the affected
 segment and use of simple interrupted sutures for alignment and
tracheal segment was observed on lateral radiographs obtained during
traction.
inspiration. On bronchoscopy or fluoroscopy, dynamic narrowing of 
the affected trachea occurred on inspiration.
performed. Because each anesthetic recovery is risky in patients with
Five cats with cranial upper airway obstruction (congenital cranial
respiratory compromise, invasive diagnostic procedures and surgical
cervical tracheal stenosis, laryngeal mass, nasal lymphoma, nasal
treatment are ideally planned for one anesthetic episode If tracheal
adenocarcinoma, histiocytic sarcoma) had secondary collapse of the
wall compromise is suspected, preparations should be made for treat-
cervical trachea just cranial to the thoracic inlet.45.46 The tracheal col-
lapse resolved with removal of the obstruction (chemotherapy of the
ment of sudden development of pneumothorax during the anesthetic
episode.50
nasal lymphoma and removal of the laryngeal mass) in two cats. Two
 The cat is pre-oxygenated prior to induction of anesthesia. Anesthe-
cats with dynamic tracheal collapse secondary to previous intubation 
 sia is best induced and maintained using injectable anesthetics, in
Or tracheal surgery were successfully treated with tracheal stenting.27
which case the endotracheal tube is used solely to support respiratory
 One case of cervical tracheal collapse secondary to suspected trauma
was successfully treated in a four-year-old Siamese cat using a spiral
function. The endotracheal tube is usually placed cranial to the lesion
ring prosthesis.48 One case of primary cervical tracheal collapse in a
to avoid injury. Endoscopic guidance has been used for precise distal
 placement of an endotracheal tube in a case involving a carinal tear.4
seven-year-old DSH was successfully treated with prosthetic tracheal
Tracheal surgery is considered to be contaminated and prophylactic
rings.47
antibiotics should be administered prior to the start of surgery.
 During the surgical procedure, the anesthetist and the surgeon work
Bronchoesophageal fistula
lo] saqnt [eauenopua auans suisn Kemie au uieuieu on iauasa
Bronchoesophageal fistula is a rarely reported cause of chronic cough
smaller tubes and catheters) passed into the distal airway, as needed.
and vomiting in young cats.4? A congenital cause was suspected in the
 Unless the surgery is at the carina, the orally placed endotracheal tube
Jo Aoisy ou ym sie sunon aiam Aaui asneaq sase paodai o
can be passed distal to the surgery site once the obstruction is removed
Or the defect is located. If a tear is present at the carina, it may be
an esophageal foreign body. On radiographs, a large soft tissue mass
necessary to alternate oxygenation using a sterile small tube passed
in the left caudal hemi-thorax was observed. At surgery, the mass was
through the surgery site (Fig. 46-9) and periods of apnea, during
found to be an abscess communicating with the lumen of the esopha-
which the surgeon works. Once tracheal surgery is complete, the
gus. Lobectomy of the affected lung lobe, with repair of the esophageal
defect, successfully resolved disease.
endotracheal tube is placed cranial to the lesion, to avoid compromise
of the surgery site during extubation.
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Anesthetic considerations
Approaches to the trachea
The anesthesia and surgery teams must communicate and cooperate
As the approach to the trachea is lesion dependent the surgeon
Buq si Aains aum uouny Aosan uiu on A
should make every effort to clearly identify the location of the lesion
535
Section
6
Thorax
Box 46-2 Approach to the cervical trachea
Box 46-4 Tracheal resection and reconstruction
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the head extended
A surgical approach is made to the trachea depending on the site of
and the forelimbs pulled caudally and tied back. A sandbag placed
 paned si agnl leauneopua panoun uy paoan aa ol uoisal aui
under the neck may be used to elevate the trachea. A ventral midline 
through the larynx and the tip of the tube is located cranial to
cervical incision is made extending from the larynx to the manubrium.
the proposed cranial extent of the site of resection. Intermittent 
The sternohyoideus and sternothyroideus muscles are separated or
positive pressure ventilation through this tube is used to maintain
cut in a lengthwise direction (the muscles spiral more in the cat than 
oxygenation. The tracheal section to be excised is identified. Once
in the dog. often preventing complete exposure using only blunt
the caudal site of resection is identified, the surgeon should have 
dissection). Carefully placed small Weitlaner retractors are used to
available a sterile cuffed endotracheal tube of the appropriate size.
hold the muscles laterally. The trachea is directly below the muscles.
The trachea is severed and the endotracheal tube is placed into the
 Dissection of the lateral aspects of the trachea should be limited and 
caudal segment. The cuff is inflated and oxygenation is maintained 
performed with care, to avoid damage to the recurrent laryngeal 
using this tube (see Hg. 46-9). If the incision is close to the carina.
 nerves and the tracheal blood supply. Traction sutures placed around 
a tube small enough to be wedged into a mainstem bronchus may
the ventral aspect of the tracheal rings can be used to gently roll the
be needed to maintain oxygenation. Alternatively, the surgeon can 
dorsal aspect of the trachea into the view of the surgeon. If exposure
intermittently occlude the tracheal opening while oxygen is delivered
to the trachea in the thoracic inlet is needed, the incision is extended 
through a needle placed directly through the bronchial wall.
over the thoracic midline and the first three sternebrae are split. Care
The site of the cranial resection is identified and severed. Three
must be taken to clearly identify and protect the jugular veins as they
or four simple interrupted sutures of 4/0 monofilament absorbable 
 pass ventral to the trachea and join to form the cranial vena cava
yea jo shuu jeaupen aul punoe paneid-aid ane elaneu anns
segment (Fig. 46-9). These sutures are used to manipulate and align
the tracheal segments. They allow the trachea to be 'rolled' to allow
exposure of the left side, which is opposite the surgeon. Additional 
simple interrupted sutures are placed around or through the rings 
Box 46-3 Approach to the thoracic trachea
and are used to suture the defect in the dorsal tracheal membrane.
Depending on the location of the anastomosis, the orally placed 
While ventral midline approaches to the thoracic trachea have been
endotracheal tube can be advanced past the defect and the distal
described, the preferred approach is a standard or modified right 
tube withdrawn early in the process, or the distal tube/needle can be
lateral 3d-4ihintercostal space thoracotomy (see Chapter 41). Once
used until the last portion of the defect is closed. Once the defect is
the thorax is open, the right cranial lung is packed caudally using wet
closed, the endotracheal tube is withdrawn cranial to the suture line 
gauze sponges. The trachea, esophagus, cranial vena cava, vagus
and the suture line is checked for any air leaks by placing saline on
nerve, recurrent laryngeal nerves, and azygos vein are identified 
the area and observing for air bubbles during positive pressure
as they are encountered. The vessels and nerves are retracted as 
ventil ation.
needed, using soft loop retractors. The azygos vein may be ligated 
 and cut, if necessary. Traction sutures placed around tracheal rings 
Uieb uen uoabans aul jeul os eaupeyl aul areindiuew ol pasn ae
 access to all aspects of the trachea.
used to retrieve foreign bodies or to perform excisional biopsies
 Appropriate nerve blocks, infusion of peri-incisional tissues with 
through a limited tracheal approach. If a 360° circumferential inci-
 bupivacaine, and/or placement and use of a wound infusion
-1l e ol res saoiq uoeiado aul 'suasaid si uoeael no uois
catheters1 to administer bupivicaine help reduce pain and anxiety
cheal resection-anastomosis. The incision is closed using simple
during the postoperative period. A thoracic drainage tube (see
interrupted 4/0 absorbable monoflament sutures placed through or
Chapter 41) is placed prior to closure of the body wall incisions if the
around the adjacent tracheal rings.
Ol sanou tz-zl ioy pauienuiew s! agnt sul pasodxa sem Aiaen isau
 If traumatic laceration or rupture has created a lengthwise defect in
 assure that no further air leakage occurs.
the trachea, repair depends on whether the dorsal tracheal membrane
 Or the tracheal rings are affected. The dorsal tracheal membrane is
sutured using simple interrupted sutures or a continuous suture, using
4/0 or 5/0 monoflament absorbable suture material. If a lengthwise
-iad ioy suaunsul ieigins (e-9t pue z-9t saxog) Aagins on iod
jo sans pauau adus uasad st su iauea ynii
forming tracheal surgery in cats need to be delicate Many surgeons
4/0 monoflament suture are placed around or through the rings on
use a microsurgical pack supplemented with a few general surgery
either side of the cut If a long defect is present, the surgeon should
instruments. The use of magnification is recommended. Use of trac-
consider placing prosthetic tracheal rings to support the trachea
tion sutures for retraction helps to keep the small surgical feld free of
during healing. Care must be taken to ensure that no suture entering
instruments and fingers.
  aq ieauenopua ue seua io saiund ua ieuen a
 present.
Tracheotomy or bronchotomy
 Incisions into the trachea are made between adjacent tracheal rings.
Tracheal resection and reconstruction
A carinal tracheotomy can be used to access the lumen of the main
Tracheal resection (Box 46-4) is performed for tracheal masses or
stem bronchi. Traction sutures may be placed around the rings to hold
stenosis. The amount of trachea that can safely be removed has not
aua uo shu yioq pnoie paeid sains am 'uao uoisun au
been identifed in the cat, but successful removal of four rings has
side of the opening allow the surgeon to rapidly close the incision
been reported.24 The author has removed five rings of the cervical
during ventilation, which may make passing a tube into the distal
trachea in a cat with a tracheal granuloma, without the need to place
segment(s) unnecessary. Ideally, the incision should not extend more
the neck in ventroflexion during healing. In cases of tracheal avulsion,
than two-thirds around the ventral aspect of the trachea. If needed,
the unaffected rings at either end of the avulsion will be separated
sterile endoscopic or minimally invasive surgery instruments can be
by the pseudotrachea.
536
Trachea and bronchus
Chapter
46
Box 46-5 Temporary tracheostomy
To perform temporary tracheostomy, a ventral cervical midline
approach is used. The skin is incised from the level of the cricoid 
cartilage 2-3 cm caudally. The sternohyoideus muscles are separated 
to expose the trachea. A ventral incision is made between tracheal 
rings anywhere from tracheal ring 2-5. Long suture loops are placed
around the rings on either side of the incision. The incision is pulled 
 open using the loops and a pediatric tracheostomy tube is placed.
The muscles and skin are partially closed around the opening.
 Disinfectant ointment is placed on the tissues around the opening.
The opening is covered with a sterile gauze swab that has been split 
to fit around the tube. Umbilical tapes are tied to wings of the tube
and then tied around the neck. The suture loops are maintained so 
that the tracheal opening can easily be accessed in the event of tube
disl odgement.
Tracheostomy
Figure 46-10 Tracheostomy tubes suitable for cats do not have inner
Temporary tracheostomy
cannulas. A 3 mm tracheostomy tube (left) with connector for an
endotracheal tube; 4 mm tracheosotomy tube (right) with no connector.
Temporary tracheostomy (Box 46-5) is performed to provide an
airway for a cat with a life-threatening upper airway obstruction. In a
study of 23 cats treated with temporary tracheostomy, 13 had laryn-
 Box 46-6 Permanent tracheostomy
laddn pey aay pue Aemuie iaddn aul oh eunen pey aay 'sasseu jeas
airway swelling.52 Major complications (complete tube occlusion with
 Prior to performing the procedure, the cat is placed in a normal 
mucus or tube dislodgement) occurred in ten cats, while minor com-
standing position and the neck is carefully palpated to assess if loose
plications (partial tube obstruction, hyperthermia, pneumomediasti-
skin surrounding the planned stoma will occlude the opening. If so,
num, subcutaneous emphysema, edema at the tracheostomy site,
the surgeon must plan to excise the excess skin. Once anesthetized.
Horner syndrome, iatrogenic laryngeal paralysis, cough, vomiting
the cat is placed in dorsal recumbency and a ventral midline skin
incision is made over the cranial trachea. The sternohyoideus muscles
 The tubes remained in place for oneto ll days, with a median of three
are separated and sutured together dorsal to the trachea, using 
days. These results suggest that while temporary tracheostomy can be
horizontal mattress sutures. A rectangular cut is made in the ventral
life-saving, major complications should be anticipated and the cat
one-third of the trachea for a length of 3-4 rings. The outer tracheal
should be closely monitored. Interestingly. in a study of 35 cats
tissues are dissected from the mucosa, if possible, resulting in a 
with laryngeal disease performed at another institution, none of the
pasui si esonu aul esonuu Ag Auo paaaon albuean lesuaa
leu susasans Kuonsoauoen Aienoduan ym paeueu aiam sie
along the ventral midline, folded over the edges of the cut tracheal
 rings, and sutured to the adjacent skin using simple interrupted 
alternative methods of managing upper airway obstruction are often
sutures of 4/0 monofilament non-absorbable suture material. The 
effective.53
cranial and caudal tissues are closed routinely from side to side. The 
Tubes of the appropriate size for cats do not have an inner cannula
cut edge of the skin at the cranial and caudal aspects of the stoma is
(Fig. 46-10) and must be cleaned and suctioned on a regular schedule.
sutured to the cut edge of the stoma. Excess skin is excised as
needed.
of complications, 24 hour surveillance is critical to the successful use
of temporary tracheostomy in cats. Placing a spare tracheostomy
tube injectable anesthetic drugs cotton tip applicators, and a suction
tip next to the cage saves time in the event of tube occlusion or
the stoma and seven cats were euthanized three to 420 days (median
dislodgement.
35 days) after surgery, mainly due to progression of neoplasia. Cats
with inflammatory laryngeal disease were seven times more likely to
die after the procedure than cats with other diseases, presumably
 Permanent tracheostomy
because mucus production was more pronounced in these cats. Two
Permanent tracheostomy is used when upper airway obstruction
cats with resolved upper airway obstruction were alive three months
cannot be resolved (Box 46-6). However, it is a fairly risky procedure.
and five years after surgery.
Overall, 46% of cats in two studies of permanent tracheostomy died
 In a separate study, of seven cats with permanent tracheostomy
of stomal or airway obstruction shortly after the procedure was per-
performed as treatment for neoplasia or granulomatous laryngeal
formed.52.54 The procedure was most successful in cats without airway
disease, all cats were discharged from the hospital.52 Two cats died due
inflammation, particularly if the primary disease could be resolved.
to obstruction of the stoma two and 42 days after discharge one cat
 In a study of 2l cats, permanent tracheostomy was performed as a
died of unknown causes 182 days after discharge, three cats were
treatment for neoplasia (eight cats), inflammation of the larynx (five
 euthanized at seven to 28l days due to progression of disease and one
cats), laryngeal paralysis/collapse (four cats), trauma (three cats) and
cat with granulomatous disease was alive 4.5 years after discharge.
laryngeal mass of unknown cause (one cat).54 Fourteen cats had
To prevent occlusion of the stoma with mucous plugs, routine
dyspnea shortly after surgery (mainly due to mucous plugs), and six
humidification is needed for at least eight weeks after the procedure
cats died while still in the hospital. From the ffteen cats that were
is performed. If secretions are thick and crusty, nebulization may be
discharged, five cats died within two months due to obstruction of
needed as often as every two to four hours. A clean suction catheter
537
Section
[61
Thorax
 Box 46-7 Tracheal stenting
Extraluminal
A routine approach to the cervical trachea is used. The recurrent 
laryngeal nerves are identified and protected. If a spiral prosthesis is 
 chosen, a small dissection is made on one side of the trachea at 
the cranial aspect of the length to be supported. The prosthesis is
introduced into the defect and 'spiralled' caudally, using minimal 
dissection as needed to advance through the peritracheal tissues.
 Every attempt is made to preserve the tracheal vessels. If prosthetic
tracheal rings are chosen, a small lateral peritracheal dissection is
made at each site of ring placement and a curved hemostat is passed 
dorsally around the trachea, grasping the end of the C-shaped ring.
The ring is positioned with the opening on the ventral aspect of the
ypea ul yede ww g-s Aanewlxoudde paneid ane shuy eaupen
aldwis buisn eaupeul aul ol paunoas s! sisauisoud aut 'anueisu!
interrupted non-absorbable 4/0 sutures placed on the ventral, lateral,
and dorsal aspects of the trachea. Each suture is placed around a
aeipui se aue guau eauen lesop au yhnoui io buu leauen
Figure 46-11 Lateral radiograph of a cat, showing a tracheal stent in
The ends of the suture may be left long until the end of the
place.
jeaupeul u! isisse o saunins uojpeul se pasn pue aunpanoid
manipulation. Care must be taken to use an endotracheal tube
without a cuff or to move the cuff out of the way while suturing.
Closure is routine.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Intraluminal
Prior to placement, the cat is placed under anesthesia and the
uos Aioieidsai anoe ioy ysu ie aie Aagins [eauoei guogiapun ste
endotracheal tube is positioned just caudal to the larynx. Using a
promise even after surgery. The patient should be recovered in an
radio-opaque marker of known length to determine magnification,
oxygen cage to reduce the work of breathing. Once respiratory rate
the maximal diameter of the trachea is measured while positive
 pressure ventilation (20 cm of HzO) is maintained. The measurement
and effort are within normal limits in the oxygen cage, the cat is
is corrected for magnification and a self-expanding nitinol stent (see 
pue aei Aoieian jl 'eo uaxo au ui ine uooi on pauosue
Chapter 10) that is 10-15% wider than the maximal diameter, and is
effort remain normal, the cat is moved to a regular cage with continu-
at least 2 cm longer than the narrowed tracheal segment, is chosen.
ing 24 hour surveillance. Respiratory rate and effort are recorded on
A bronchoscopic adapter is attached to the endotracheal tube and
a regular basis, as they may alert the surgeon to developing complica-
the stent delivery system is placed through the endotracheal tube 
tions. Because minimal airway swelling or mucus production can
and into the trachea under fluoroscopic guidance. The stent is
result in acute obstruction, a plan must be devised ahead of time to
 positioned across the narrowed region and care is taken to make
handle this complication. Anesthetic dnugs, endotracheal or tracheos-
 sure that the stent is distal to the endotracheal tube (preventing
tomy tubes, suction catheters and any other needed equipment should
deployment of the stent within the tube). There may be advantages
be stored within easy reach ofthe cage. Corticosteroids may be admin-
to stenting the whole trachea, rather than just the narrowed area, to
istered to control airway swelling. Antibiotics are given if ongoing
avoid the risk of recurrent collapse beyond the limits of the stent.
infection is anticipated. Antitussives may be used to control coughing.
The stent is deployed slowly by withdrawing the outer sheath of the 
Analgesics will allow the cat to breathe more comfortably, encourag-
delivery system under fluoroscopic guidance. The stent can be 
ing deep breaths.
re-constrained and repositioned up until 70% has been deployed.
Careful training of the owner is critical to the success of the surgery.
Once the stent is fully deployed, the delivery system is slowly 
 The owner should be trained to recognize and report subtle signs of
withdrawn. Both lateral (Hg. 46-11) and ventrodorsal radiographs are
respiratory distress. There must be a workable plan for exercise restric-
taken to record the site of stent placement.
tion. Owners bringing home cats with healing tracheostomies must
be prepared for 24 hour surveillance for signs of respiratory distress,
as well as humidifcation and nebulization chores. They must be
should always be at hand. In the hospital, suctioning should be used
properly instructed on airway suctioning and stomal cleaning. Even
Bhu ozI moaqaq pinoqs ainssaid uons pue aessaau uaym aluo
 after the tracheostomies have healed, the cats are at risk of obstruction
At home, owners should be taught how to use a catheter and syringe
due to stenosis of the opening and ongoing formation of mucous
to suction the trachea in the event of an emergency. Stomal cleaning
plugs.
should be limited to gentle removal of occluding crusts using saline-
 moistened cotton tip applicators or gauze.
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
Tracheal Stenting
 Both extraluminal and intraluminal stents (see Chapter 10) have been
Complications associated with tracheostomy are detailed above.
used in cats (Box 46-7). Extraluminal stents have been used to treat
Potential complications associated with other tracheal surgeries
collapse of the cervical trachea to the level of the thoracic inlet.47.48
include inability to oxygenate the patient during surgery, airway
 Intraluminal stents have been used to treat tracheal collapse secondary
obstruction associated with swelling or mucus production, dehis-
to endotracheal tube or surgical injury, as well as tracheal obstruction
cence (leading to pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax), tracheal
secondary to neoplasia (see Box 46-7).27
 stenosis, tracheal collapse, tracheal necrosis, and laryngeal paralysis.
8E5
Trachea and bronchus
Chapter
46
Reported complications in the immediate postoperative period are
postoperative swelling, excessive mucus production, pneumothorax
no reports of postsurgical tracheal necrosis or symptomatic postsurgi-
cal tracheal stenosis in the cat.
sis have been reported, one associated with prosthetic tracheal ring
 Potential complications of intraluminal tracheal stenting include
placement47 and the other with tracheal resection-anastomosis.37
 migration, stent collapse or breakage, collapse in an unstented region,
 One of these cats had no obvious clinical signs and one developed
coughing, formation of exces granulation within the trachea, pneu-
exercise-related respiratory distress and stridor two months after
momediastinum, pneumonia, acute death, and progression of neo-
surgery, which responded to conservative therapy. Tracheal collapse
plastic disease. Coughing and progression of neoplastic disease have
has been reported six years after tracheotomy for Cuterebra
been reported in cats.27 Restenting in cases where collapse has occurred
larva removal.27 Recurrence or progression of neoplastic disease.
'papuauoan Aleiaua nou si uoiean panuasun ue u
REFERENCES
1. Hardie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD,
13. Beaumont PR. Intratracheal neoplasia in
26.
 Gock R Primary pulmonary adenomas
et al. Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases
two cats. J Small Anim Pract 1982;23:
 of the feline. lowa State University
[1983-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 
29-35.
Veterinarian 1961;23:155-6.
1999;21 4:508-12.
14. Brown MR, Rogers KS. Primary tracheal
27. Qulp WT, Weisse C, Cole SG, Solomon
 2. Light GS. Respiratory System. In: Hudson
tumors in dogs and cats. Compendium
JA. Intraluminal tracheal stenting for
LC, Hamilton WP, editors. Atlas of feline
on Continuing Education for the
treatment of tracheal narrowing in
 anatomy for veterinarians. Philadelphia:
Practicing Veterinarian 2003;25:
three cats. Vet Surg 2007;36:
W.B. Saunders: 1993.
854-9.
107-13.
3. Nickel R, Schummer A, Seiferle A, et al.
15.
 Brown MR, Rogers KS, Mansell KJ, Barton
Bell R, Philbey AW, Martineau H, et al.
The Viscera of the Domestic Mammals.
C. Primary intratracheal lymphosarcoma
Dynamic tracheal collapse associated with
1st English Edition ed. New York: Verlag
in four cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a cat.
Paul Parey-Springer-Velag: 1973.
2003;39:468-72
J Small Anim Pract 2006;47:461-4.
4. Roach W, Krahwinkel D. Obstructive
16.
Cain GR, Manley P. Tracheal
29.
Veith LA. Squamous cell carcinoma of
lesions and traumatic injuries of the
adenocarcinoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med
the trachea in a cat. Feline Pract 1974;4:
canine and feline tracheas. Compend
Assoc 1983;182:614-16
30-2.
Contin Educ Vet 2009;31:86-93.
17.
 Carlisle CH, Biery DN, Thrall DE. Tracheal
30.
Bordelon JIT, Newcomb BT, Rochat MC.
 5. Samii VF, Biller DS, Koblik PD. Normal.
and laryngeal tumors in the dog and cat:
Surgical removal of a Cuterebra larva
cross-sectional anatomy of the feline
literature review and 13 additional
from the cervical trachea of a cat. J Am
thorax and abdomen: comparison of
 patients. Vet Radiol 1991;32:229-35.
Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45:52-4.
computed tomography and cadaver 
18.
 Evers P, Sukhiani HR, Sumner-Smith G,
31.
Dvorak LD, Bay ID, Crouch DT, Corwin
anatomy. Vet Radioi Ultrasound
 Binnington A. Tracheal adenocarcinoma
RM. Successful treatment of intratracheal
1998;39:504-11.
in two domestic shorthaired cats. J Small 
alterebrosis in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
6. Hammond G, Geary M, Coleman E.
Anim Pract 1994;35:217-20.
Assoc 2000;36:304-8.
Gunn-Moore D. Radiographic
19.
.Jakubiak M), Siedlecki CT, Zenger E, et al.
32.
 Sheaffer KA, Dillon AR. Obstructive
 measurements of the trachea in domestic
Laryngeal, laryngotracheal, and tracheal
 tracheal mass due to an inflammatory
shorthair and Persian cats. J Feline Med
masses in cats: 27 cases [1998-2003].
polyp in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Surg. 2011;13:881-4.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2005;41:
1996;32:431-4
7. Tivers MS, Moore AH. Tracheal foreign
310-16.
33.
.De Lorenzi D, Solano-Gallego L. Tracheal
bodies in the cat and the use of
20.
Kim DY, Kim JR, Taylor HW, Lee YS.
 granuloma because of infection with a
fluoroscopy for removal: 12 cases. J Small]
Primary extranodal lymphosarcoma of
novel mycobacterial species in an old
Anim Pract 2006;47:155-9.
the trachea in a cat. j Vet Med Sci
FIV-positive cat. J Small Anim Pract
 8. Dimski DS. Tracheal obstruction caused
1996;58:703-6.
2009;50:143-6.
by tree needles in a cat. J Am Vet Med
21.
Lobetti RG, Williams MC. Anaplastic
 34. Snyder KD, Spaulding K, Edwards J.
Assoc 1991;199:477-8.
tracheal squamous cell carcinoma in a
Imaging diagnosis - tracheobronchial
9
 Jones BD, Roudebush P. The use of
cat. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1992;63:132-3.
zygomycosis in a cat.Vet Radiol
fberoptic endoscopy in the diagnosis and
22.
Neer TM, Zeman D. Tracheal 
Ultrasound 2010;51:617-20.
treatment of tracheobronchial foreign
 adenocarcinoma in a cat and review of
35. Burton C. Surgical diseases of the 
 bodies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1984;20:
the literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 trachea in the dog and cat. In Pract
497-504.
1987;23:377 -80.
2003;25:514-27.
10.
.Eyster GE, Evans AT, O'Handley P, Steffes J.
23.
Rossi G, Magi GE, Tarantino C, et al.
36.
. White RN, Oakley MR. Left principal 
 Surgical removal of a foreign body from
Tracheobronchial neuroendocrine
bronchus rupture in a cat. J Small Anim
the tracheal bifurcation of a cat. J Am 
crcinoma in a cat. J Comp Patho]
Pract 2001;42:495-8.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1976;12:481-3.
2007:137:165-8.
87.
.White RN, Burton CA. Surgical
11.
 Pratschke KM, Hughes IM, Guerin SR,
 Schneider PR, Smith CW, Feller DL.
 management of intrathoracic tracheal
Bellenger CR. Foley catheter technique for
Histiocytic lymphosarcoma of the
avulsion in cats: long-term results in 9
removal of a tracheal foreign body in a
trachea in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
consecutive cases. Vet Surg 2000;29:
cat. Vet Rec 1999;144:181-2.
1979:14:485-7.
430-5.
12. Goodnight ME, Scansen BA, Kidder AC,
25.
 Zimmermann U, Muller F, Pfleghaar S.
88.
.Griffths LG, Sullivan M, Lerche P.
et al. Use of a unique method for removal
 Tracheal neoplasms of differing origin in
Intrathoracic tracheal avulsion and
of a foreign body from the trachea of a
two cats. / Zwei Falle von histogenetisch
pseudodiverticulum following
 cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2010;237:
unterschiedlichen Trachealtumoren bei
pneumomediastinum in a cat. Vet Rec
689-94.
Katzen. Kleintierpraxis 1992;37:409-12.
1998;1 42:693-6.
655
Section
6
Thorax
39. White RN, Milner HR. Intrathoracic
laceration repair. Vet Anaesth Analg
retrieval of a tracheal foreign body
tracheal avulsion in three cats. J Small 
2004;31:227 -30.
from a cat. J S Afr Vet Assoc 2006;77:
Anim Pract 1995;36:343-7.
45. Fujita M, Miura H, Yasuda D, et al.
45-50.
40. Lawrence DT, Lang I, Culvenor J, et al.
Tracheal narrowing secondary to airway
51.
Davis KM, Hardie EM, Lascelles BD,
Intrathoracic tracheal rupture. J Feline
obstruction in two cats. J Small Anim 
Hansen B. Feline fbrosarcoma:
Med Surg 1999:1:43-51.
Pract 2004;45:29-31.
perioperative management. Compend
 46. Hendricks JC, O'Brien JA. Tracheal
Contin Educ Vet 2007;29:716-20,
41. Bhandal J, Kuzma A. Tracheal rupture in a 
cat: diagnosis by computed tomography.
collapse in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
722-729 passim.
Can Vet J 2008;49:595-7.
1985;187:418-19.
52.
Guenther-Yenke CL, Rozanski EA.
47.
 Mims HL, Hancock RB, Leib MS, Waldron 
Tracheostomy in cats: 23 cases [1998-
42. Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E.
DR. Primary tracheal collapse in a cat.
2006). I Feline Med Surg 2007;9:
Pernell RT. Tracheal rupture associated
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2008:44:149-53.
451-7.
with intubation in cats: 20 cases
48. Foley RH, Krarup A. Prosthetic repair of
53.
Taylor SS, Harvey AM, Barr Fl, et al.
(1996-1998). I Am Vet Med Assoc
tracheal collapse in a dyspneic cat. Feline
2000;216:1592-5.
Laryngeal disease in cats: a retrospective
Pract 1991;19:16-21.
study of 35 cases. J Feline Med Surg 
43. McMillan FD. latrogenic tracheal stenosis 
49.
 Muir P, Bjorling DE. Successful surgical
2009:11:954-62.
in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
treatment of a broncho-oesophageal fistula
54. Stepnik MW, Mehl ML, Hardie EM, et al.
1985;21:747-50.
in a cat. Vet Record 1994;134:475-6.
 Outcome of permanent tracheostomy for
44. Kastner SB, Grundmann S, Bettschart-
50.
 Zambelli AB. Pneumomediastinum,
treatment of upper airway obstruction in 
Wolfensberger R. Unstable endobronchial
 pneumothorax and pneumoretro-
cats: 21 cases [1990-2007). I Am Vet Med
intubation in a cat undergoing tracheal
 peritoneum following endoscopic
Assoc 2009;234:638-43.
540
47
napter
Lung
A.L. Moores
 Diffuse lung disease in cats is rarely treated surgically. However, cats
Innervation
with certain discrete or lobular lung diseases may respond well to
surgical management. Recent advances in diagnostic imaging have led
The innervation of the lungs is autonomic. Bronchiolar constriction
to the improvement of diagnosis and localization of lung disease, and
occurs with parasympathetic stimulation of bronchiolar smooth
access to the thoracic cavity is easily achieved by intercostal thora-
muscle via the vagus nerves. There is also a parasympathetic supply
cotomy for individual lung lobectomy or pneumonectomy where
 to the bronchioles and alveoli. Sympathetic stimulation via the vagus
appropriate. Median sternotomy may be required for bilateral lung
and stellate cardiac nerves (the right and left pulmonary plexuses)
surgery or for exploratory thoracotomy, but it is more technically chal
leads to bronchiolar dilatation. The pulmonary plexuses also carry
lenging than the intercostal approach. Thoracoscopy can also be used
sensory fibers from the lung parenchyma and vasculature.
Aioieioqel ioy saldues anssi uieiqo pue saunl aul ssasse ol se u!
interpretation.
Regional lymph nodes
Lymphatic drainage from the lungs is to the left, right, and medial
tracheobronchial lymph nodes lying to the left, right, and caudal to
SURGICAL ANATOMY
aul oi si aeueip juanhasqns Kaadsan 'uoesny ieayoenl a
Cranial mediastinal lymph nodes ventral or medial to the trachea at
The lungs expand to fill most of the thoracic cavity. The smaller left
the level of the first two ribs.
lung is divided into cranial and caudal lobes by interlobular fissures,
with the left cranial lobe having a further partial division into cranial
and caudal parts. The right lung is divided into cranial, middle, caudal,
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND
and accessory lobes (Fig. 47-1) and the hilus of the accessory lung
lobe passes dorsal to the caudal vena cava to sit medial to the plica
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
vena cava. Laterally the lungs are bordered by the thoracic wall and
caudally by the diaphragm, separated by the pleura and the pleural
Clinical signs
space. Cranially the lungs are adjacent to the thymus when it is promi-
nent in the younger cat.
Cats with pulmonary disease do not commonly present with obvious
signs of respiratory distress unless the condition is at an advanced
stage Early clinical signs may be vague and non-specific and not
Blood supply
pathognomonic for a particular disease. Clinical signs specifcally
aul eia sl agueupxa seg ioy sguml ayl oi klddns pooiq leuoouny au
relating to the respiratory tract include dyspnea, wheezing, tachypnea,
pulmonary arteries, which arise from the right ventricular outflow
coughing, epistaxis, and hemoptysis.
tract The blood then returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary
veins. The pulmonary arteries lie dorsal and lateral to the bronchi
Diagnostic imaging
while the veins are ventral and medial. The terminal alveoli have a
dense capillary bed to facilitate gas exchange. The nutritional blood
A full radiographic assessment of the lungs should ideally include
ase uium sjasan iuouoiq aut Aq papiaoid si ssunt aui on Aiddnss
left and right lateral projections. However, if the patient is unstable it
from the thoracic aorta.
is important that emergency procedures (eg. thoracocentesis) are
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00047-0
541
Section
6
Thorax
RIGHT
LEFT
ranialpart
CRANIAL
CRANIAL
caudal part
MIDDLE
CAUDAL
CAUDAL
ACCESSORY
Figure 47-2 Conscious computed tomographic image (cat in dorsal 
Figure 47-1 Schematic diagram illustrating the anatomy of the feline
recumbency) showing cortication of the lung lobes and thickening of the
Iung.
pleura. (@ Aison Moores.)
 performed prior to radiography as the stress of handling and position-
ing for radiography could precipitate respiratory arrest Inflated views
taken under anesthesia are always preferable if possible as this pro-
vides additional information, such as a higher likelihood of identify-
ing the presence of small primary or metastatic nodules. However.
sedation and/or anesthesia are only advisable in patients who are
clinically stable. If the patient is dyspneic a single dorsoventral radio-
graph may be the only possible view obtainable in the initial stages
 of assesment. However, it is always important to note that one limita-
tion of radiography is that it is not always possible to correctly identify
the anatomical location of disease or the primary disease focus (eg..
bronchial, interstitial, alveolar).
Advanced imaging techniques such as ultrasound, computed tom-
ography (CT), and scintigraphy may identify abnormalities not visible
on radiography (e.g., lung metastases) and may also further facilitate
surgical planning e.g., by identifying affected lung lobes to guide surgi-
 Some abnormalities may be seen with ultrasound, such as consoli-
dation, atelectesis, and pulmonary masses.2 However, the technical
Figure 47-3 Transverse CT image of a conscious cat positioned in a
difficulties of ultrasound of the lungs caused by the inability of ultra-
 custom-made Perspex box. Blurring of the images is caused by
sound waves to pass through air limit its usefulness to lesions located
movement of the cat during the scanning procedure. (@ Alison Moores.)
in an entire lung lobe or at the periphery of lung lobes adjacent to
the thoracic wall.3.4
Box 47-1 Advantages of computed tomography over
CT is the preferred imaging modality for pulmonary disease and the
thoracic radiography2
CT findings in normal cats and those with pleural, pulmonary, and
mediastinal diseases have been well described (Box 47-1).2.5,6 CT can
Not affected by pleural effusion
 be successfully performed without chemical restraint in cats by using
a positioning device, but it is more usual to perform CT under seda-
Eliminates superimposition of lung
tion or general anesthesia. There will inevitably be some movement
Can differentiate pleural, pulmonary, mediastinal, and thoracic wall 
 opacities
blur during CT as there is for radiography and MRI, but this can be
Can differentiate lung patterns, e.g., mass lesion, consolidation,
minimized by hyperventilation prior to scanning and then undertak-
ing the scan during the expiratory pause [Figs 47-2 and 47-3).° Aspira-
 bronchopneumonia, atelectesis
Can differentiate diseases, e.g., consolidation, lung lobe torsion,
tion of any pleural fluid or air that may be present prior to CT will
improve pulmonary parenchymal visualization by allowing increased
infarction, bronchiectasis 
lung infation, while the administration of intravenous contrast
Samples can be obtained by aspiration or needle core biopsy under
agents can also improve the detection of pulmonary lesions.78 CT
CT guidance
 provided additional correct diagnoses in 28% of cats undergoing con-
 Allows more accurate surgical planning
scious CT compared to conscious radiography, as well as further addi-
Most accurate imaging technique for the recognition of lymph node
tional information in 74% of cats. Overall, 40% of cats undergoing
and pulmonary metastatic disease
both techniques had a significant different disease or prognosis fol-
Can identify fluid within mass lesions, e.g. abscess, necrotic neoplasia
lowing CT imaging (Box 47-2).
542
Lung
Chapter
47
obscuring and hindering identification of other cells, and the inability
Box 47-2 Differential diagnoses for common radiographic
Aueu 'uoie ul 'aimaie Aemie o uoeian ut sas azheue o
and computed tomographic patterns of lung disease2$
different underlying diseases, including neoplasia and septic or non-
septic inflammation can all lead to neutrophilic inflammation being
 Solid radio-opaque pulmonary mass
present, thereby sometimes making it difficult to make a definitive
Primary neoplasia
diagnosis by cytology alone. Hemosiderosis on tracheal wash samples
 Metastatic neoplasia
laua Aq pauieqo pimy Auy zt gupuy syads-uou e inq uowmos st
Abscess/foreign body
BAL or tracheal wash techniques should always be submitted for
Granuloma including fungal granuloma (e.g. aspergillosis)
culture, although there may not be a correlation between culture
results from BAL and lung tissue obtained by biopsy if aspiration of
Cyst
oral and pharyngeal bacteria into the lower airways has occurred
 Infarction
duringthe sampling procedure, so every care should be taken to avoid
Localized hemorrhage/hematoma
this if possible.!
Localized pneumonia 
Where radiography and cytology from BAL fail to establish a diag-
 Diaphragmatic hernia with incarceration of abdominal contents 
nosis, obtaining a biopsy for histologic analysis may be useful. Trans-
e.g., liver
thoracic fine needle aspiration can be performed blindly after a lesion
Ectopic hepatic parenchyma
has been identified on diagnostic imaging or, more preferably, using
Cavitary masses
aspiration can either be performed conscious or with sedation,4 but
Granuloma
auisaue ao uoepas dap saneiissarau ainparaid asdoiq e suyeapun
 Abscess/foreign body
sia. Aspirates can certainly help differentiate neoplastic from non-
Cavitary infarcts
 neoplastic disease and therefore guide clinical decision making, but
 Primary neoplasia
biopsy is often required to determine exact tumor types. A solid tissue
 Metastatic neoplasia
sample is also more likely to be diagnostic for diseases affecting
Parasitic disease, e.g.. Paragonimus spp.
pulmonary architecture, eg., fbrosis, emphysema, bronchiectasis.2
Contraindications for obtaining biopsies include coagulopathies, pul 
 Multiple pulmonary masses
nd pue 'uouny Areuound pasiduos Aiaraaas 'selinq aeuo
 Primary pulmonary neoplasia
monary hypertension.4 Potential complications encountered after a
-aouay Aieuound io xeiouiounaud apnpui ainpasoid Asdona
 Primary neoplasia with pulmonary metastasis
 Multiple different primary neoplasms
aojaq piegai siui ul siaumo jasunos on juejiodul s! l! pue sls'zeui
Metastatic neoplasia from a non-pulmonary location
such a procedure is performed.
 In most instances, obtaining a tissue sample for histology requires
 Disseminated pulmonary patterns
- 'e     a  
 Primary neoplasia
 coscopy in the cat is considered a less invasive technique than thora-
 Metastatic neoplasia
cotomy for examining the thoracic cavity and obtaining tissue
 Pneumonia
for histologic evaluation?l and should always be considered (see
Chapter 42).
Hemorrhage
Edema
Granuloma
Fibrosis
SURGICAL DISEASES
 Pulmonary consolidation
Primary pulmonary neoplasia
Pneumonia
Infarction
 Primary pulmonary neoplasia is rare in cats, with a reported annual
Contusion
incidence in one study of 2.2 per 100 000 cats,22 while a further study
 Primary neoplasia
reported an incidence of pulmonary neoplasia of 0.38% of cats exam-
 Lung lobe torsion
ined at necropsy.23 Affected cats are generally middle to old-aged and
tumor development is independent of feline immunodeficiency virus
Note: infection is rare outside endemic areas in Asia and Africa.
 Or feline leukemia vinus infection.24 No predisposing causes of feline
pulmonary neoplasia have been identified.24 Most tumors encoun-
tered are malignant and of epithelial origin (98-100%), of which
adenocarcinomas are the most common (85-100%).0.12.25 Adenocar-
cinomas are not easily differentiated by topographic nomenclature
Biopsy and laboratory analysis
(bronchial versus bronchiolar versus bronchioloalveolar) due to the
extent of disease at diagnosis, and some are classifed as adenosqua-
Fluid obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) should always be
mous carcinomas if there is significant squamous differentiation.26
examined cytologically for evidence of neoplastic or inflammatory
It is therefore more common to describe them as differentiated or
 cells and for evidence of active infection but samples are more likely
undifferentiated, which is more useful clinically as it relates to prog-
to be diagnostic for neoplastic disease when there are large lesions
 nosis.10 Undifferentiated adenocarcinomas appear to occur most com-
involving central rather than peripheral lung.1 The limitations of BAL
monly (43-69%) and are more invasive and metastatic than the less
include failure to sample a representative area of disease, low cellular-
ity, the diffculty sometimes encountered differentiating neoplasia
thelial malignancies such as anaplastic carcinoma and squamous cell
from epithelial hyperplasia, the presence of marked inflammation
carcinoma appear to be less common, while sarcomas and benign
543
Section
6
Thorax
Box 47-3 Pulmonary tumors reported in
Table 47-1 Reported clinical signs of 86 cats with pulmonary
neoplasia25.28
Malignant
Related to the respiratory tract
Epithelial 
Dyspnea 
40%
Adenocarcinoma?, comprising:
Wheezing
40%
 Differentiated adenocarcinomas: bronchogenic, bronchial, and
 bronchial gland adenocarcinoma; bronchioalveolar carcinoma;
Tachypnea
30%
squamous/adenosquamous carcinoma 
Coughing
27%
 Undifferentiated adenocarcinomab
 Alveolar-cell carcinoma (anaplastic small-cell and large-cell types, and
Hemoptysis 
1%
 adenomatosis type)
Non-specific clinical signs
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Weight loss
 Anaplastic carcinoma
47%
Carcinosarcoma
Lethargy 
40%
Non-epithelial
Decreased appetite
30%
 Sarcoma, e.g.. pulmonary intravascular hemangiosarcoma,
Ataxia
21%
fibrosarcoma; spindle cell sarcoma with elements of cartilage and 
bone
Vomiting. regurgitation
19%
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Lameness
12-25%
 Malignant fibrous histiocytoma 
Diarrhea
9%
Benign
 Polyuria/polydipsia
3%
Adenoma
 Chondromatous hamartoma
Most common. Due to advanced disease at the time of diagnosis.
adenocarcinomas are not easily differentiated by topographical nomenclature.
bHigher incidence than in dogs.
E jo yodai e uaaq sey aiaun ieuoiiy 's-zt xog ul paistl aie sim
mediastinal mass in a cat, which was consistent with bronchogenic
adenocarcinoma. The author suggested that it originated from an
accessory embryonic lung.2?
The reported clinical signs of cats with pulmonary neoplasia
are summarized in Table 47-1. Interestingly, respiratory signs are
Figure 47-4 Transverse CT image of the thorax showing the presence of
lameness was the only presenting complaint Lameness may occur
 a mass in the accessory lung lobe just ventral to the caudal vena cava
from metastatic spread to the digits, appendicular bones or skeletal
(arrow). Differential diagnoses include primary neoplasm and abscess
jo usl ydiso sdoay a arou io ss
(@ Afison Moores.)
the esophagus may cause gastrointestinal signs such as vomiting or
regurgitation.24.27
 Significant changes on senum biochemistry and hematology are
cavitated (0-22%) or calcified (6-12%) (Fig. 47-6).12.27 When com-
uusual25 Paraneoplastic conditions are occasionally recognized,
 paring three large studies of feline primary pulmonary tumors, the
including hypercalcemia, thrombocytopenia and leukocytosis, and
radiographic presentations are found to vary (Table 47-2)12,25.27 with
au pue supuy siudeiopei au uaamiaq uoeiosse paziuosai ou
Such paraneoplastic syndromes may resolve after tumor excision,41
-oujnd ym sies 9g jo 6z uum ui apns iauuiny e ul szzl'adA 1oum
but specific further medical management is still required in some
nary neoplasia had radiographs taken, 53 cats had single or multiple
cases.
masses and the remaining cats had a pleural effusion. The 86 cats
subsequently had a postmortem or surgery and 40 cats were found to
Imaging
have a single well-circumscribed mass, 37 had lobar consolidation
(Fig. 47-7), and nine had multiple masses.25 Further postmortem
When diagnosing pulmonary neoplasia via radiography, a variety and
studies have shown that multiple lung lobes are often affected in cats
sometimes a combination of patterns may be present including a solid
with a diffuse radiographic pattern and radiography may fail to iden-
 circumscribed mass, lobar consolidation, a nodular interstitial pattern,
tify single or multiple masses subsequently found on direct visualiza-
Or a diffuse alveolar/reticulonodular pattern (Figs 47-4 and 47-5).12
tion of the lungs.
12,27
Solitary masses tend to be well circumscribed whereas multiple masses
When evaluating the most common location for primary pulmo-
are usually more poorly circumscribed.12 Mass lesions may also be
 nary neoplasia, one study showed an approximately even distribution
544
Lung
Chapter
47
Figure 47-5 Transverse CT image showing a mixed infiltrate. (@ Alison 
Moores.)
Figure 47-7 A consolidated lung lobe seen via an intercostal
thoracotomy. Histopathology of the lobe demonstrated a moderately
differentiated adenocarcinoma. (@ Alison Moores.)
of pulmonary tumors between left unilateral, right unilateral and
bilateral disease, but another study reported a low incidence of bilat-
eral disease2wever it desappeathatthcaallnglb
more commonly affected than the cranial lobes. 0.12.27 Squamous cell
 carcinomas and bronchioloalveolar carcinomas are reported to prima-
rily affect the middle and peripheral parts of the lungs whereas focal
Figure 47-6 Transverse CT image of the thorax of a cat. Rounded area
adenocarcinomas may occur throughout any region of the lung lobe.12
of dense alveolar infiltration with centr ally located gas-filled cavity.
Reported incidences of pleural effusion and lymphadenomegaly also
Differential diagnoses include primary neoplasm with cavitation and
abscess. (@ Alison Moores.)
 parenchyma mimics lung neoplasia on radiography.* Further compli-
o A eiedoau auond in ie an u ase u un
similar radiographically and histopathologically to fibrotic interstitial
lung disease and both diseases may exist concurrently.4 Radiography
Table 47-2 Radiographic presentation of cats with primary
pulmonary neoplasia 2.27.2
 may fail to detect neoplasia, either because it is not recognized or the
radiographic changes are misinterpreted, and therefore it is not pos-
 sible to ascertain estimates for false positive or false negative diagnoses
Radiographic description 
Incidence
 based on radiographic studies alone. 12
 Solid, circumscribed mass
39 %
Ultrasonography can detect pulmonary masses that contact the tho-
23%
racic wall, but the interposition of air in normal lung tissue will
 Lobar consolidation
 preclude visualization of many mass lesions. Ultrasonography can be
 Diffuse alveolar or reticulo-nodular pattern
33%
useful for assessing regional lymph nodes but CT allows more accurate
Multiple diffuse nodules/nodular interstitial patterna
45 %
localization of masses and detection of smaller macroscopic disease
than radiography.2
 Multiple small circumscribed nodules 
15 %
 Normal
8%
Cytology
 Pleural effusion
49 %
 Cytology is a useful diagnostic tool for pulmonary neoplasia l0.25 and
士± solitary mass - 44.
samples can be obtained by transthoracic or transbronchial aspiration
 Multiple radiographic findings were present in some cats.28
 or by bronchial brushing. A correct diagnosis was obtained in 80-86%
 of the cats in which samples were obtained by blind or guided fine
545
Section
6
Thorax
needle aspiration through the thoracic wall and assessed cytologi-
Treatment options
cally.10.2s However, as needle tract implantation of neoplastic cells
 on the thoracic wall after ultrasound-guided fne needle aspiration
The majority of cats presented with pulmonary neoplasia (75%) had
inoperable disease due to extensive primary disease or metastatic
of a pulmonary adenocarcinoma has been reported,45 care should
spread.28 In a retrospective study of 86 cats with primary pulmonary
be taken to consider this possibility whenever fine needle aspirates
neoplasia, two died and 63 (76%) were euthanized shortly after initial
are planned.
 Cytology can also be useful in the assessment of pleural fluid or
examination.25 However, a single pulmonary neoplasm in the absence
of metastatic disease can be treated by lung lobectomy, usually via
BAL fluid for malignant cells, but as their presence is variable the
an intercostal thoracotomy (Fig. 47-7). It is important to note that if
adhesions are present then removal of multiple lobes may be neces-
as sarcomas do not typically exfoliate well, the diagnostic value of
sary to ensure a compartmental resection is achieved. The median
-ouies ioy ieu ueql ssal aq ae seoies ioy nvg e io pim leimaid
survival time in a series of 2l cats with pulmonary carcinomas, mostly
mas.' False positive diagnosis of neoplasia on BAL cytology has been
with a single solitary lesion, was ll5 days, with death or euthanasia
reported only rarely in cats with inflammatory disease, but care should
related to metastatic disease.1 Cats with moderately differentiated
always be taken with interpretation in the presence of marked inflam-
tumors had an increased probability of survival compared with those
mation.' Immunohistochemistry of biopsy samples can be used to
characterize the cell of origin.1.24 Inflammation and hemosiderosis is
with poorly differentiated tumors (median 698 vs 75 days, respec-
tively), whereas clinical fndings and the specifc tumor histologic
common in BAL samples from cats with confirmed or suspected pul-
type did not influence survival..2s Although not examined statisti-
monary neoplasia (100 and 79%, respectively).17
cally, cats without tracheobronchial lymphadenomegaly appeared to
Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture and fungal culture should
have a longer survival time than those without lymph node enlarge-
always be performed to rule out pulmonary abscess as a differential
ment (median 412 vs 73 days).10 The prognosis for cats with more
diagnosis or to recognize concurrent infection associated with a
diffuse lesions or lung consolidation is not known but in one study
 neoplasm.17.46
half of the cats examined at necropsy showed local invasion of parietal
 pleura, mediastinum, esophagus, pericardium, and the diaphragm.27
Metastasis
Adhesions to local structures, including the thoracic vertebral bodies,
diaphragm, and other lung lobes may also occur43,5 and this possibil-
Aeuond Aed qim sie jo oz on dn ul punoy aie sasisan
neoplasia at the time of diagnosis. 0,12.25 Tumors will most commonly
ity must always be considered when planning the surgical resection
of a mass.
:sapou ydual ieuoiaan au pue anss Areuound iauno oi aziseisnau
hilar lymphadenopathy has been reported to be seen radiographically
 Cats with metastatic digital carcinoma, all treated by digit amputa-
in 5-29% cats at thetime of diagnosis of pulmonary neoplasia.0.12.25.27
's o Auo ja uoeuasand u au ieaians uipa e pey 'un
even though some tumors were histopathologically well differenti-
However, metastatic lesions may not be detected on thoracic radiog-
raphy 24.27 and furthermore it is important to note that lymphadeno-
ated. Although histopathologic analysis of the resected digits is a
method for obtaining a diagnosis for the pulmonary tumor, surgery
megaly is not always due to metastatic disease even if a primary tumor
is unlikely to be curative and so may not be indicated.40 The short
is identifed.1 In a study of 86 cats, metastatic lesions were identified
survival and absence of respiratory clinical signs suggest that thora-
 in 76% of the patients, with metastasis to the bronchial lymph nodes
 cotomy will not improve survival.40
occuring in 45% of the cats, to the pleural cavity in 30%, and to
It has been suggested that adjunctive chemotherapy is required to
extrathoracic sites in 16%.25 However, as described previously, the
reduce local recurrence and metastasis of pulmonary neoplasia,52 but
accuracy of radiography for the diagnosis of pleural metastasis and
lymph node involvement in one study was 70% and 62%, respec-
no effective protocols have been established5’ and there are currently
tively,12 and CT is generally considered to be more sensitive than
treated by pneumonectomy and mitoxantrone survived for 34
radiography for detecting pulmonary metastatic disease.?
months.54 In a study of 18 feline pulmonary carcinomas and adeno-
Digital bone, muscle, and skin are reported sites of metastasis for
 bronchogenic adenocarcinomas and these metastatic lesions account
squamous carcinomas evaluated immunohistochemically, all tumors
expressed one or more proteins associated with multidrnug resistance
for nearly 90% of all feline digital carcinomas.24.40 In one study
to chemotherapy agents, including doxorubicin, vincristine, and cis-
describing digital metastasis, the cats presented with lameness rather
Z-xo s'tuaa on asuon rod e un inan A youm 'ued
than with clinical evidence of respiratory disease A third of the cats
had multiple digital involvement either on the same or multiple feet,
inhibitors are also unlikely to be beneficial due to the absence of
 COX-2 expression seen in eight pulmonary adenocarcinomas assessed
with 75% affecting the weight bearing digits.40 Unlike humans, meta-
se uodo ue nou si adeann ued s suauosuoun aq
Tamoh ott'stuio! ieaueieud son ue sies ui souie ses
so ioay o anp aq saaos u ssaua aiei ynoe
-ipei woy Asoouied jueyiuais oliapun pinom anss gunl [eou
aul 'sase yons ui 'pue eiseldoau Aieuouind on Aiepuoras Ayiedo
tion exposure.56
lameness and radiographic changes identified within the bone may
resolve with excision of the primary mass.34
 Pulmonary metastatic neoplasia
 Tumor embolization of the brachial and femoral arteries, resulting
in lameness or ischemic neuromyopathy, has been described47.48
The lungs are the most common site for metastatic disease.1 It is also
 There are also occasional reports of tumor metastasis to the posterior
important to recognize the fact that metastatic disease may sometimes
segment of the eye, often in conjunction with digital metastases, with
 represent the first evidence of primary neoplastic disease. 1 The typical
optz'loum au jo saadaid aisauue susaasns Asoouedos
radiographic or CT fndings of pulmonary metastatic disease in cats
Posterior segment analysis should therefore be an important part of
have been well reported. A study of 25 cats showed most had inter-
the physical examination. Numerous other sites of metastasis of pul-
stitial nodules (eight well defined, ten ill defined); seven cats had
monary neoplasia have been reported including intrathoracic struc-
diffuse pulmonary patterns, of which some had concurrent alveolar
tures (diaphragm, parietalpleura, mediastinum, heart andesophagus).
 consolidation, ill-defined interstitial nodules, and/or pleural effusion
abdominal organs (liver, spleen, kidney, intestines, bladder, pancreas,
(Figs 47-8 to 47-11).57 Diffuse or ill-defined disease is more common
than well-circumscribed nodules, especially for metastatic mammary
546
Lung
Chapter
47
A
RNING:Hist
Figure 47-8 Rounded area of dense alveolar infiltration (arrow).
Changes may be consistent with primary or secondary neoplasia
as well as inflammatory disease. (@ Alison Moores.)
Figure 47-9 Metastatic nodule (arrow) in the left caudal lung lobe
shown on a transverse CT image. Partial volume artifact is causing partial
superimpositioning of the diaphragm and this nodule. (@ Alison Moores.)
B
neoplasia and other tumors of epithelial origin, probably due to
(za) suoisal Aeuond iso s'uanss seqdu aul ea siseisia
Figure 47-10 Left lateral (A) and dorsoventral (B) radiographs
 are generalized57 but metastatic nodules tend to be in the middle or
showing multiple well defined soft tissue nodules (arrows) throughout
peripheral portions of lung and typically consist of several large
masses and a number of smaller masses, which are generally smaller
disease. (@ Alison Moores.)
is rarely described, which is in contrast to that described in primary
neoplasms.13
Primary and metastatic mass lesions are not reliably visualized
thoracotomy to allow biopsy samples to be collected. Metastatectomy
radiographically until they are 0.6-1 cm in diameter, when they rep-
may be appropriate for single or small pulmonary metastatic masses
Jo suoisal ieul paisasns uaaq seu ll g'aseasip pasueape juasan
secondary to primary tumors with a low metastatic rate, slow progres-
0.3-0.5 cm are the absolute lower limit for radiographic identifica-
 sion of disease, and long median survival, but such cases need to be
tion5° because it can be difficult to differentiate metastatic disease
assessed and staged carefully.
from other pulmonary diseases resulting in a similar radiographic
pattern (eg. pneumonia, hemorrhage, or edema).57 Unrelated neo-
Lung lobe torsion
sue u noo Ae sassu aeuomnd snseldoau-uou io osid
with concurrent neoplastic disease at another location,5? underlining
Lung lobe torsion is rare in cats but when it occurs, as is the case in
the fact that pulmonary masses may not necessarily represent meta-
dogs, the right cranial and right middle lobes are reported to be the
static disease. Therefore, in order to ensure an accurate diagnosis is
always reached, consideration should be given to undertaking
ously,606 but most reported cases have an underlying respiratory
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of consolidated areas of lung
diseaseidentifed or suggested, eg.. feline asthma,4 orit may beassoci-
Or nodular lesions.57 If cytology proves to be inadequate, it may in 
ated with pleural effusion, including chylothorax. The torsion is con-
some circumstances be appropriate to undertake thoracoscopy or
sidered to be the primary disease if the effusion resolves after lung
547
Section
[61
Thorax
M
Figure 47-12 Transverse CT image of the thorax of a cat. Rounded area
A
of dense alveolar infiltration (red arrow) with centrally located gas-filled
cavity (orange arrow) represented a lung abscess. (@ Alison Moores.)
intercostal thoracotomy and it is important to note that the lung
should be removed without derotating it to limit release of inflamma-
tory mediators into the systemic circulation."l Although there are only
a few case reports in the literature, the prognosis is considered to be
good, assuming there is no underlying effusion.
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary thromboembolism is a medical condition, but it may
Occur as a complication in cats with surgical disease. Fat embolization
 of the lung can ocur as a rare complication of orthopedic surgery and
may be fatal.66
 Pulmonary thromboembolism is the term applied when there is
obstruction to flow within the pulmonary vasculature by a thrombus
Or embolus. Possible underlying causes include cardiac disease
and neoplasia.7 Thrombi typically form in the right side of the
 m uun un no a pe s   h
arterial thromboembolism.67 Affected cats often have marked respira-
R
tory distress, that is non-responsive to oxygen and progresses to res-
piratory failure.° The radiographic changes described in these cases
include pulmonary vessel abnormalities, peripheral lung lucency, atel-
ectesis, and pleural effusion.67 CT has been described to identify the
thrombus and characterize blood flow.? However the condition is
B
diagnosed, the prognosis is poor with reported fatality rates of
72-100%.67
Figure 47-11 (A) Lateral and (B) dorsoventral radiographs of the thorax
huhu yuas aui ui (smoe) aedo anssl os jo anpou e buimous
intercostal space, just lateral to the cardiac silhouette (dorsoventral view)
Pulmonary abscesses, granulomas
and between the carina and the aorta (lateral view). (@ Alison Moores.)
and foreign bodies
Pulmonary abscesses are uncommon in cats but potential underlying
causes include trauma, foreign material, neoplasia, parasitic infection,
lobectomy, whereas it is considered a sequela if the identifed effusion 
 o eosssq trssonud ao qua aau
does not resolve. Both scenarios have been reported in cats 665
body (grass awn) inhalation most frequently affect the right and
 The clinical signs of lobar torsion include respiratory diffculty.
left caudal and accessory lung lobes (Figs 47-12 and 74-13).71
lethargy and epistaxis.6 Diagnostic techniques useful in such cases
Primary abscesses without a causal foreign body are typically treated
include radiography, ultrasonography, CT, and bronchoscopy&60.62.63
0l gupeal aimdnu Aeu Aau paieanun yal se Kuoioaqol Bunl Aq
and it is recommended that a combination of these is used when the 
pyothorax.
diagnosis is difficult to make, especially on radiography. Typical radio-
d       e 
 graphic fndings include pleural effusion, dorsal displacement of the
aspergillosis have concurrent viral, endoparasitic, or endocrine dis-
trachea, twisting of the carina, an inability to visualize the affected
eases, which may make them susceptible to infection.ll Clinical signs
bronchus, increased lung lobe opacity, and a vesicular lung pattern
include lethargy, depression, and gastrointestinal signs but pleural
(gas bubbles)." A recent report describes the diagnosis by virtual
effusions are an uncommon finding." Due to the poor response rates
ue eia Auoaqon Sunl si uaa s'i sussn Adosououonq
most cases of pulmonary aspergillosis are diagnosed on postmortem
548
Lung
Chapter
47
A
Figure 47-14 Transverse CT image of the thorax showing lobar
emphysema of the right caudal lung lobe (arrow). (@ Alison Moores.)
displacement of fracture ends. It may result in pneumothorax
and hemorrhage. Mild cases can be managed with intermittent thora-
uasixo pue Adeiau piny se yons quaunean aoddns pue sisauanon
supplementation. Surgery is indicated if the pneumothorax does not
resolve or if there is extensive hemorrhage. Severe cases may lead to
'uouaaaul leains pidei sase yons u pue xeiouiounaud uoisual
often with lung lobectomy, may be necessary.
Pulmonary bulla and pneumothorax
of pulmonary origin
Based on information in dogs with primary spontaneous pneumotho-
rax, it was thought that medical treatment of this condition would be
B
associated with a high rate of recurrence. A recent study reports that
Figure 47-13 Lung lobe of a cat. (A) A large swelling contained
(B) purulent material and a grass awn. (@ Alison Moores.)
be treated successfully with non-surgical therapies and appeared to
have a better prognosis than previously extrapolated from canine
Examination, but in one case report an extensive pulmonary abscess
studies.76 Pulmonary bullae formation is rare in cats. It has been
papis-yal Aq paiean Aiyssasons sem smaiumf sntodsy Aq pasne
described in conjunction with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, which
pneumonectomy and itraconazole; however, there was no evidence
 may representthe underlying cause.77 Persistent pneumothorax in cats
of disseminated disease.1l Other reported fungal granulomas in cat
aq Pinos Adeaul ieipau ci aaisuodsanun aenq Aeuound yim
lungs include Paecilomyces lilacinus and Cadophialophora bantiana.
treated by lobectomy of affected lobe[s), usually via a median ster-
which were successfully treated by lung lobectomy and adjuvant
notomy unless there is a specifc indication for intercostal thoracot-
itraconazole.72.73
 omy (Fig. 47-14). Areas of emphysema can be removed by partial lung
lobectomy but as there is no evidence that emphysematous lesions
will cause recurrence of pneumothorax the author would leave exten-
Pneumonia
sive lesions in situ if surgical resection is not feasible.
Lung lobectomy is rarely necessary for the treatment of pneumonia in 
aq Aeu Aagins 'aaamoh p Adeiaul ieipau on puodsan isou se sie
necessary to remove a nidus of infection in focal pneumonia or to
PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
allow collection of lung tissue for culture and histopathology to aid
Cats with lung disease should be carefully assessed prior to anesthesia.
Lung laceration
Thoracocentesis should be performed prior to sedation or anesthesia
in all cats with known or presumed pleural space disease to remove
Lung laceration can occur as a complication of needle thoracocentesis
any pleural effusion or air that may compromise respiration while
or thoracostomy tube placement. It can be minimized by using small-
bore wire-guided chest drains rather than trocar style drains.?37 Lacera-
 prior to induction is beneficial and recommended (Fig. 47-15). Selec-
tion may also be caused by trauma, e.g. blunt thoracic trauma,
penetrating thoracic injury, bite wounds, or rib fractures with medial 
will depend on the ANA score of the cat and the underlying disease,78
549
Section
[61
Thorax
-san yim sie ioy papuauonan iou Aleiauan si uonpul yse inq
piratory disease Multimodal analgesia is preferred and for thoracot-
omy would typically include the use of systemic opiates and regional
local anesthetic techniques. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
(IPPV), either via a mechanical ventilator or manually via the anes-
thetic breathing bag. is required whenever the thoracic cavity is
opened. IPpV may also be beneficial before surgery in cats with pleural
-aias unm insso ue euaxody ot suipeal aqn leaupeopua au jo
tions from the respiratory tract, such as pus from a pulmonary abscess.
If such obstruction occurs, the endotracheal tube should be replaced
and the airway suctioned (Fig. 47-16).7l For further information on
anesthesia of cats undergoing thoracic surgery see Chapter 2 and
Chapter 4.
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
Figure 47-15 Oxygen is provided both prior to and on recovery from
AND TECHNIQUES
anesthesia. (@ Alison Moores.)
A cat with lung disease may benefit from biopsy of the affected lung
tissue to assist in obtaining a definitive diagnosis. However, biopsy is
not always necessary and, where possible, definitive diagnoses should
be reached in a minimally invasive manner. If the decision is made
that a cat is a candidate for more extensive surgery then the choice of
aseasip aui jo jaa au uo suapuadap st uoad oi aains yoium
and the choices of technique available, which include partial and
 complete lung lobectomy or pneumonectomy.
Lung biopsy and aspiration
Biopsy of lung tissue (Box 47-4) can be performed via intercostal
thoracotomy, median sternotomy, keyhole thoracotomy, or thoracos-
copy (see Chapter 42).
A
Box 47-4 Lung biopsy
Fine needle aspirate
Aspiration can be performed under ultrasound guidance or at
surgery. Technique for aspiration is similar to other tissues, writh
introduction of a small gauge needle into the lung followed by 
gentle aspiration. The lung should be examined for air leakage during 
surgery or it can be assessed via ultrasonography.
Biopsy
A keyhole intercostal thoracotomy incision is useful for generalized 
interstitial disease. The site of intercostal thoracotomy is chosen 
dependent on the lung lobe affected (see Chapter 41). The lung lobe
0l pau pue paneid lalders vl e pazlolaixa Auab s! paisdoig ag o1
apply a double or triple row of staggered staples, depending upon 
the size of stapler chosen. Ligatures can also be placed to obtain a
biopsy in the same manner as for partial lung lobectomy if staples
B
are not available (see Box 47-5).
Samples collected should be submitted for fungal, aerobic and 
Figure 47-16 (A) A Thermovent filled with purulent material that had 
 anaerobic bacterial culture, and sensitivity testing and histopathology
 also caused partial obstruction of the endotracheal tube causing 
as appropriate
hypoxemia. (B) The airway is suctioned. (@ Alison Moores.)
550
Lung
Chapter
47
Box 47-5 Lung lobectomy
The thoracotomy incision is made at the appropriate intercostal
Sutured lung lobectomy
space according to the lung lobe affected (see Chapter 41). The
Blood vessels and bronchi can be ligated individually with suture
diseased lung lobe(s) are examined to confirm which lobe(s) are
material or en bloc.1 It is easier to obtain a wider margin of normal
affected.
tissue at the hilus of the lung lobe with ligation than stapling.
Adjacent lung lobes may need to be retracted to allow access
wo paassip uaag aey slassan pooia pue lyououg aut y Allenadsa 
to the affected lobe, which can simply be achieved using a
each other. This is important where disease involves the bronchus or 
moistened swab. Care should be taken to avoid reduced ventilation 
hilus of the lung rather than the middle or periphery of the lung. The
 and hypoxemia and the retracted lung lobe may have to be returned 
bronchi can be carefully dissected from the blood vessels using blunt 
juaweb Aeuowind aul snsno syt pinous uoisod jewsou sl! ol
dissection (Hg. 47-19A) but care must be taken to avoid sharp
between the caudal edge of the hilus and the mediastinal pleura
dissection or penetration of blood vessels during blunt dissection.
must be transected for caudal lung lobectomy to be performed.
Such dissection may be difficult or impossible if there is severe 
which can be difficult for large lung lesions (Fig. 47-18A). The disease
inflammatory or neoplastic disease around the hilus as there may be
 process and the size and location of the lesion within the lobe will
adhesions to local structures and an increased local blood supply.
dictate whether it is easier to perform lung lobectomy with the
Following dissection of the bronchi and vessels, a double ligature of a
lung lobe remaining in the thoracic cavity or after exteriorization
monofilament absorbable or non-absorbable suture with high tensile 
through the thoracotomy (Fig. 47-18B). Care should be taken during 
strength, for example 1.5-2M polydioxanone or polypropylene, is
manipulation not to rupture the lung. damage surrounding structures,
placed proximally around both the artery and vein (Fig. 47-19B). Care 
 compromise venous return to the heart, or apply undue pressure to
the heart.
aul pue syunun Aeuowind yal lo jubiu aul pioae oi uayei ag isnu
vessels supplying other lobes. A third suture is placed at least 5 mm
Stapled lung lobectomy
distally. although occasionally the presence of a large lung mass
dictates that this distance must be less, and the vessels are transected
Stapling is generally performed using a vascular thoracoabdominal
between the proximal and distal sutures. Appropriate vascular clamps
stapler (TA 30 V), which places a triple staggered row of 3.5 mm 
(see Chapter 13) should be readily available to clamp bleeding vessels
titanium staples. The stapler is placed transversely across the lobar
should there be a technical error with suture placement, before
bronchus and pulmonary artery/vein supplying the affected lung lobe
reapplication of sutures proximal to the clamp is attempted. The
without the need for them to be dissected from each other (Fig.
bronchus is similarly ligated and transected if there is no cartilage
47-18C). In some situations, for example where disease affects the
present. If the bronchus is transected in the cartilaginous portion it 
hilus of the lung, a combination of ligatures and sutures may be the
can either be simply ligated or it may be oversewn using a similar
easiest way to achieve lung lobectomy. It is acceptable for some lung
uuew yeis e ui pawoad si uoasan pog ui eae anns
tissue to be included in the stapler and this may be necessary in some 
but the artery, vein, and bronchus are ligated together, usually with a
cases where there is not a clear separation of lung lobes by the
larger gauge (2-3M) suture material as described above. It should be 
interlobular fissures. Care is taken to ensure that no additional tissue,
noted that there may be communication between the pulmonary
such as mediastinum or adjacent pulmonary blood vessels, has become 
parenchymal tissues at adjacent lung lobes, due to incomplete 
incorporated into the stapler before the stapler is closed and fired.
interlobular fissures. These can be ligated before transection.
A large clamp is placed across the lung lobe distal to the staple to
 Samples should be submitted for fungal, aerobic, and anaerobic
prevent spillage of blood or abnormal tissue or cells from the resected
se Abojoyiedois!y pue bulisat Aia!lsuas pue aunino lelapeg
lobe and it is particularly important to avoid contamination of the 
appropriate.
 thoracic cavity with blood or exudate from a pulmonary tumor. The
lung lobe is transected using a scalpel blade (or scissors) distal to the
Closure
stapler using the stapler itself as a guide (Fig. 47-18D). The stapler is
 Prior to thoracic closure following partial or complete lung lobectomy
removed and the bronchus and blood vessels examined for complete
or pneumonectomy, the sutures or staples are checked for security 
firing of the staple line (Fig. 47-18E). Failure of some or all or the
and then the hilus should be flooded with warm sterile saline to look
staples to fire can result in brisk arterial or venous hemorrhage, so
for air leaks (Hg. 47-20). Additional sutures or staples are then placed
appropriate vascular clamps should be readily available to clamp
as necessary before a chest drain is placed, the saline suctioned, a
 bleeding vessels prior to ligating them. However, it is not necessary to
swab count performed, and the thoracotomy incision closed (see 
oversew the staple line.
Chapter 41).
caudal and accessory lobes (Fig. 47-17: see Chapter 41). Complete
Lung lobectomy
examination of the whole hemithorax is limited via an intercostal
Lung lobectomy is indicated for single lesions such as foreign bodies
approach, as although most of the ipsilateral lung lobes can be exam-
not removable via bronchoscopy pulmonary abscesses, single pulmo-
ined, access to the mediastinum is limited and there is almost no visu-
nary neoplasms, or metastases. Lung lobectomy (Box 47-5) is usually
alization of the contralateral hemithorax. Median sternotomy for lung
performed via a thoracotomy (see Chapter 4l) although thorascopic-
 lobectomy is required when all the lung lobes must be individually
assisted lung lobectomy (see Chapter 42) is also possible.
examined to look for underlying pathology or if lobes from both
Lobectomy of a single lung lobe or multiple lobes within a hemith-
hemithoraces need resection. Access to the hilus is more diffcult via
orax is most easily performed by intercostal thoracotomy, at the fifth 
median sternotomy but it is easier to reduce adhesions and assess
intercostal space for cranial and middle lobes and the sixth space for
invasion of local structures. Closure of the hilar blood vessels and
551
Section
|61
Thorax
10 uoeai Aq paaaiuoe aq ue Auoiaqol aunl aialdos ioy luouoig
the use of surgical staples.7.a0 While the use of stapling is considered
to be a faster method of ligation than individually ligating bronchi
and blood vessels, it may not be any faster than en bloc ligation. The
author prefers ligation in small cats where placement of the stapler is
aaun saueisui asaui ui se ia oeiou aul ou ssaoe aq pa
may actually be little difference in the time taken to ligate using
sutures and application of a stapler. Staplers are also more expensive
than sutures.
 It is important to assess at surgery whether disease affects part or
 all of the lung. and specifically whether it involves the hilus, as this
can affect the ability to remove a lobe using staples and may influence
outcome of the underlying disease, e.g., neoplasia. Disease of the mid
 or peripheral parts of lung may be amenable to partial lung lobectomy
[Box 47-6).1
which can also be performed via thoracoscopy (see
Chapter 42).
Pneumonectomy
woy anss sun le jo uooasai au sl (z-zf xog) Aoioauounaud
 one hemithorax.7? It has been described in cats with chronic pyotho-
-naud papis-ubid te'eiuounaud pue is'ts'eiseidoau Aeuouind as'xe1
successfully reported in the cat, despite initial reservations that this
would not be tolerated in small animals.7.8a1 Care must be taken when 
considering pneumonectomy to ensure that the remaining lung lobes
are healthy enough to support respiratory functions.
Figure 47-17 Left sixth intercostal thoracotomy for lung lobectomy.
Small Finochietto rib retractors and a handheld retractor aid visualization
but complete examination of the left hemithorax is not possible. There is
easy access to the hilus for lung lobectomy. (@ Alison Moores.)
A
B
Figure 47-18 (A) The pulmonary ligament is shown between the caudal edge of the hilus and the mediastinal pleura. It must be transected to allow
caudal lung lobectomy. (B) Exteriorization of a lung lobe prior to lung lobectomy.
552
Lung
Chapter
47
C
D
Figure 47-18, Continued (C) A vascular thoracoabdominal stapler is
placed transversely across the lobar bronchus and pulmonary artery and 
vein supplying the affected lung lobe. (D) A large clamp is placed across 
the lung lobe distal to the stapler to prevent spillage of blood or
abnormal tissue or cells from the resected lobe. The lung lobe is
transected using a scalpel blade distal to the stapler using the stapler
E
itself as a guide. (E) The stapler is removed and the bronchus and blood 
vessels examined for complete firing of the staple line. (@ Alison Moores.)
 Complications associated with lung lobectomy include pneumo-
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND COMPLICATIONS
thorax, hemorrhage (from hilar blood vessels or disruption of pleural
adhesions) and damage to local structures (e.g., diaphragm, adjacent
The postoperative care of patients undergoing pulmonary surgery is
 pulmonary vessels, heart),74,70.80 Disruption of a staple line can result
in pneumothorax and hemothorax and may be due to placing too
 -eiaduan Apoq aios ul doip e ui sunsai ssol ieay azis leus iiaul o
 much tissue within the staple thus preventing normal fring, failure of
ture after open thoracotomy is common, so every effort should be
 the staples to fre, or residual disease at the staple line.80
 made to prevent this during and afer surgery. Close monitoring in a
 Reported complications after thorascopic lung biopsy in dogs and
u sa aue ie os pan si ae ai ai ai
cats include hypoxemia, pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage, and
 parameters are noted quickly. For further more detailed information
wound healing complications.'
on the postoperative monitoring of these patients the reader is referred
 Damage to the bronchus or pulmonary vessels during high partial
to Chapters 3, 4, and 41.
lung lobectomy may necessitate complete lung lobectomy.
553
Section
|61
Thorax
A
B
 Figure 47-19 Lung lobectomy using ligatures. (A) Dissection around a pulmonary blood vessel. (B) Ligatures have been placed on the pulmonary
vessels prior to transection. (@ Alison Moores.)
 Box 47-6 Partial lung lobectomy
 Partial lung lobectomy may be performed for disease within the
distal two-thirds of a lung lobe. It is an alternative to complete lung 
lobectomy and is useful to preserve lung tissue where there is disease
distally in multiple lung lobes e.g. bullae, metastatic tumors. It is
ueui saldeis yi Auopagol bunl lelled waojad oi aisea Allenuuat
by suturing. A thoracoabdominal stapler is placed across the lung 
lobe proximal to the lesion. The TA 30 vascular staple may not be 
 suitable due to the short length of the staple lines. Staples with 
heights of 3.5 mm or 4.8 mm are selected depending upon the
 thickness of the lung parenchyma; 3.5 mm staples are most 
 commonly used. Care is taken to ensure that no additional tissue,
 such as mediastinum or adjacent lung. has become incorporated 
into the stapler before it is closed and fired. A large clamp is placed 
across the lung lobe distal to the stapler to prevent spillage of blood 
 Or abnormal tissue or cells from the resected lobe and it is particularly
important to avoid contamination of the thoracic cavity with blood or 
 buisn papasueul s! aqol bunl aul yowni Aueuowind e wouy ajepnxa
 Figure 47-20 Following lung lobectomy, the hilus is flooded with warm
a scalpel blade (or scissors) distal to the stapler, using the stapler 
sterile saline to look for air leaks. (@ Afison Moores.)
 itself as a guide. The stapler is removed and the lung examined for 
 complete firing of the staple line. Failure of some of all or the staples 
Box 47-7 Pneumonectomy
 to fire can result in arterial or venous hemorhage or air leakage,
 s0 appropriate vascular clamps should be readily available 
loy pagiasap se pawiojad s! Auopauounaud ot ypeoudde aul
to clamp bleeding vessels prior to ligating them or reapplying a
lung lobectomy (see Box 47-5), but all affected lung lobes of one
stapler.It is not necessary to oversew the staple line. Small areas of 
hemithorax are resected. Lung lobes can be removed individually
 hemorrhage or air leakage can be controlled using ligatures or small
 or en mass more proximally, with ligation and transection of the 
 staples.
right or left main stem bronchus and lobar pulmonary artery/vein.
 Partial lung lobectomy using sutures can be performed by placing 
Alternatively, staples may be used. If it is difficult to access the lung 
 a continuous overlapping suture pattern of 1.5M polydioxanone
hilus due to the extent of lung disease, it may be preferable to clamp 
 Or polypropylene or other suitable suture 0.5 cm proximal to the
the hilus and transect the lung lobes distally before ligating the
yonoua ybil ag pinous aunins au bunl jo ais uopasuen pasodoud 
bronchi and blood vessels. Care should be taken that the clamp does 
to achieve hemostasis and pneumostasis. Crushing forceps are
not become dislodged before the blood vessels have been ligated. A
 applied distal to the suture line and the lung is transected between
5 mm cuff of artery and vein should be left distal to the ligatures to
the clamp and the suture. A simple continuous suture of the same 
minimize the risk of the suture falling off. The end of the bronchus is 
material is placed along the free lung edge distal to the overlapping
usually oversewn. The type of staple or suture material and size to 
sutures.
use is described in Box 47-5.
554
Lung
Chapter
47
shunt and inhibiting complete oxygen saturation. Compensatory
PROGNOSIS
mechanisms in remaining lung occur after lung lobectomy to increase
residual lung volume and total lung capacity.7.a1 In studies of normal
The prognosis following lung lobectomy depends upon the underly-
dogs, where less than 50% of lung is removed, compensation occurs
ing cause. Most cats tolerate thoracotomy and lung lobectomy well
by recruitment of existing mechanisms, such as remodeling the
alveolar-capillary network.?1 Where more than 50% of lung tissue is
unless there is severe underlying disease. Indeed, respiratory function
in cats is often improved if the diseased lung has been acting as a
removed, there is also regenerative growth of remaining lung tissue.?1
REFERENCES
1. Norris CR, Griffey SM, Sami VF, et al.
14. White JD, Tisdall PL, Norris JM, Malik R.
25. Hahn KA, McEntee MF. Primary lung
Thoracic radiography, BAL cytopathology.
 Diaphragmatic hernia in a cat mimicking
tumors in cats: 86 cases [1979-1994].
and pulmonary parenchymal
a pulmonary mass. J Feline Med Surg
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1997;211:1257-60.
histopathology: a comparison of
2003;5(3):197-201.
26.
. Moulton JE, von Tscharner C, Schneider
diagnostic results in 1l cats. J Am Anim
15.
Rossi F, Vignoli M, Sarli G, et al. Unusual
R. Classification of lung carcinomas in 
Hosp Assoc 2002;38(4):337-45.
 radiographic appearance of lung
the dog and cat. Vet Pathol 1981;18:
2.
. Schwarz LA, Tidwell AS. Alternative 
crcinoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
513-28.
imaging of the lung. Clin Tech Small
2003;44:273-6.
27.
Barr F Gruffydd-Jones T, Brown P, et al.
Anim Pract 1999;14:187-206.
16.
 Madewell BR, Theilen GH. Tumors of
Primary lung tumors in cats. I Small Anim 
3. Reichle JK, Wisner ER. Non-cardiac
 the respiratory tract and thorax. Ini
Pract 1987;28:1115-25.
thoracic ultrasound in 75 feline and
Madewell BR, Theilen GH, editors.
28.
.Mehlhaff Cl, Mooney S. Primary
canine patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 
Veterinary cancer medicine. 2nd ed.
pulmonary neoplasia in the dog and cat.
2000;41(2):154-62.
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1987.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
.Wood EF, O'Brien RT, Young KM.
p. 535-65.
4.
1985;15:1061-7.
Ultrasound-guided fne-needle aspiration
17. DeHeer HL, McManus P. Frequency and
29.
.Gionfriddo JR, Fix As, Niyo Y, et al.
of focal parenchymal lesions of the lung
 severity of tracheal wash hemosiderosis
Ocular manifestations of a metastatic
in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med
and association with underlying disease
 pulmonary adenocarcinoma in a cat. J
1998;12:338-42.
in 96 cats: 2002-2003. Vet Clin Pathol
Am Vet Med Assoc 1990;197(3):372-4.
5.
.Samii VF, Biller DS, Koblik PD. Normal
2005;34:17-22.
30.
Dhaliwal RS, Kufuor-Mensah E. Metastatic
cross-sectional anatomy of the feline
18.
 McMillan MC, Kleine LJ, Carpenter JL.
squamous cell carcinoma in a cat. J Feline 
thorax and abdomen: comparison of
 Fuoroscopically guided percutaneous
Med Surg 2007;9:61-6.
CT and cadaver anatomy. Vet Radiol
fne-needle aspiration biopsy of thoracic
31.
 Drolet R, Phaneuf JB. Pulmonary
Ultrasound 1998;39:504-11.
lesions in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol
chondromatous hamartoma in a
6.
.Henninger W. Use of CT in the diseased
1988;29:194-7.
young cat. Vet Rec 1983;113:541-2.
feline thorax. J Small Anim Pract
19.
 Zekas Ll, Crawford IT, O'Brien RT.
Ghisleni G, Grieco V, Mazzotti M, et al.
2003;44:56-64.
Computed tomography-guided fne-
Pulmonary carcinosarcoma in a cat. J Vet 
7. Oliveira CR, Mitchell MA, O'Brien RT.
needle aspirate and tissue-core biopsy of
 intrathoracic lesions in thirty dogs and
Diagn Invest 2003;15(2):170-3.
Thoracic computed tomography in feline
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005;46:
83.
Goodwin J-K, Lawrence DT, Bellah JR,
 patients without use of chemical restraint.
200-4.
et al. A large solitary pulmonary
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2011;52[4):368-76.
fbrosarcoma in a cat. J Am Anim
20.
Norris CR, Samii VF. Clinical,
 8. Schultz RM, Zwingenberger A.
Hosp Assoc 1991;27:327-30.
Radiographic, computed tomographic.
radiographic and pathologic features of
bronchiectasis in cats: 12 cases [1987-
34.
Grierson JM, Burton CA, Brearley MJ.
and ultrasonographic fndings with
1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:
Hypertrophic osteopathy secondary to
migrating intrathoracic grass awns in
pulmonary sarcoma in a cat. Vet Comp
530-4.
dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 
Oncol 2003;1:227-31.
2008;49(3):249-55.
21.
Kovak JR, Ludwig LL, Bergman Pl, et al.
35.
Pool RR, Mantos ll, Bodle JE, et al.
Use of thoracoscopy to determine the 
9. Dhaliwal RS, Lacey JK. Ectopic hepatic
etiology of pleural effusion in dogs and
Primary lung carcinoma with skeletal
parenchyma attached to the diaphragm:
cats: 18 cases [1998-2001). I Am Vet Med
metastases in the cat. Feline Pract
simulating a pulmonary mass in a cat.
Assoc 2002;221:990-4.
1974;4:36-41
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2009;45(1):
22.
 Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Schneider R, et al.
86.
.Scott-Moncrieff JC, Elliott GS, Radoveky
39-42.
Survey of Animal Neoplasms in Alameda
A, Blevins WE. Pulmonary squamous 
10. Hahn KA, McEntee MF. Prognosis factors 
 and Contra Costa Counties, California. ll.
cell carcinoma with multiple digital
for survival in cats after removal of a
Cancer morbidity in dogs and cats from
metastases in a cat. J Sm Anim Pract
primary lung tumor: 21 cases [1979-
Alameda County. I Nat Cancer Inst
1989;30:696-9.
1994). Vet Surg 1998;27:307-11.
1968;40:307-18.
37.
Valtolina C, Adamantos S. Evaluation of 
11.
Hazell KL, Swift IM, Sullivan N. Successful
23. Moulton JE. Tumors of the respiratory
small-bore wire-guided chest drains for
 treatment of pulmonary aspergillosis in a
system. In: Moulton JE, editor. Tumors
management of pleural space disease.
cat. Aust Vet J 2011;89:101-4.
in domestic animals. 2nd ed. Berkeley:
I Sm Anim Pract 2009;50:290-7.
12. Koblik, PD. Radiographic appearance of
University of California press; 1978.
38. Yamagami T, Nomura K, Fujita M,
primary lung tumors in cats. Veterinary
p. 216-30.
et al. Pulmonary intravascular 
Radiology 1986;27:66-73.
24.
 Petterino C, Guazzi P, Ferro S, Castagnaro
hemangiosarcoma in a cat. J Vet Med Sci
13.
Miles KG. A review of primary lung
 M. Bronchogenic adenocarcinoma in a
2006;68:731-3.
tumors in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol
cat: an unusual case of metastasis to the
39.
. Moore AS, Middleton Dl. Pulmonary
Ultrasound 1988;29:122-8.
skin. Vet Clin Pathol 2005;34:401-4.
adenocarcinoma in three cats with
555
Section
6
Thorax
non-respiratory signs only. I Sm Anim
resistance to anti-cancer drugs in canine
67.
Norris CR, Griffey SM, Samii VF.
Pract 1982;23:501-9, 14.
and feline primary pulmonary carcinoma.
Pulmonary thromboembolism in cats: 29
40. Gottfried SD, Popovitch CA, Goldschmidt
J Vet Med Sci 2010;72:665-8.
cases [1987-1997]. I Am Vet Med Assoc
MH, Schelling C. Metastatic digital 
53
 Richard WN, Guillermo CC. Lung
1999;215:1650-4.
carcinoma in the cat: a retrospective study
tumors. In: Nelson Rw, Couto CG.
 Schermerhorn T, Pembleton-Corbett
 of 36 cats [1992-1998). J Am Anim Hosp
 editors. Small animal internal medicine.
JR, Kornreich B. Pulmonary 
Assoc 2000;36:501-9.
3rd ed. Missouri: Mosby; 2005.
thromboembolism in cats. J Vet
41.
 Schoen K, Block G, Newell SM, Coronado
p. 317-19.
Intern Med 2004;18:533-5.
 GS. Hypercalcemia of malignancy in a cat
54.
Clements DN, Hogan AM, Cave TA.
69.
Hylands R. Pulmonary
with bronchogenic adenocarcinoma. J Am
Treatment of a well differentiated
thromboembolism. Can Vet J
Anim Hosp Assoc 2010;46:265-7.
pulmonary adenocarcinoma in a cat
2006;47:385-6, 388.
42.
 Anderson TE, Legendre AM, McEntee MM.
by pneumonectomy and adjuvant
70.
Crisp MS, Birchard SJ, Lawrence AE.
 Probable hypercalcemia of malignancy in
 mitoxantrone chemotherapy. J Feline Med
 Fingeroth J. Pulmonary abscess caused by
a cat with bronchogenic adenocarcinoma.
Surg 2004;6:199-205.
a Mycoplasma sp in a cat. I Am Vet Med
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2000;36:52-5.
55.
Beam SL, Rassnick KM, Moore AS.
Assoc 1987;191 :340-2.
 Dole RS, MacPhail CM, Lappin MR.
 McDonough SP. An immunohistochemical
71.
Wegner K, Pablo L. Anesthesia case of the
43.
Paraneoplastic leukocytosis with mature
study of cyclooxygenase-2 expression in
month. Pulmonary abscess formation.
neutrophilia in a cat with pulmonary
various feline neoplasms. Vet Pathol
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:850-3.
squamous cell carcinoma. J Feline Med
2003;40:496-500.
72.
Evans N, Gunew M, Marshall R, et al.
Surg 2004;6:391-5.
56.
Withrow S). Lung cancer. In: withrow SJ.
Focal pulmonary granuloma caused by
44. Cohn LA, Norris CR, Hawkins EC, et al.
MacEwan EG, editors. Small animal
Cadophialophora bantiana in a domestic
Identification and characterization of
dinical oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
short haired cat. Med Mycol 2011;49:
an idiopathic pulmonary fbrosis-like
WB Saunders CO; 2001. p. 361-70.
194-7.
condition in cats. J Vet Intern Med
 57. Forrest LJ, Graybush CA. Radiographic 
73.
 Pawloski DR, Brunker JD, Singh K, Sutton
2004;18:632-41.
 patterns of pulmonary metastasis in 25
DA. Pulmonary Paecilomyces lilacinus
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1998;39:
Infection in a Cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
45. Vignoli M, Rossi F, Chierici C, et al.
4-8.
2010;46(3):197-202.
Needle tract implantation after fne
 needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of
58.
Suter PF, Carrig CB, O'Brien TR, Koller D.
74.
 Murphy ST, Mathews KG, Ellison GW.
transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary
Radiographic recognition of primary and
Bellah jR. Pulmonary lobectomy in the
 bladder and adenocarcinoma of the lung.
metastatic pulmonary neoplasms of
management of pneumonia in fve cats.
 Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2007;149:
dogs and cats. I Am Vet Radio 1974;15:
J Small Anim Pract 1997;38[4):159-62.
314-18.
3-25.
75.
Valentine BA, Blue JT, Zimmer JF.
 Forman MA, Johnson LR, Jang S, Foley JE.
Nafe LA, Hayes AA, Patnaik AK.
et al. Pulmonary lymphomatoid
46.
59.
 Mammary tumors and unassociated
granulomatosis in a cat. J Vet Diagn
Lower respiratory tract infection due to
Invest 2000;12:465-7.
Capnocytophaga cynodegmi in a cat with
pulmonary masses in two cats. J Am Vet 
pulmonary carcinoma. I Feline Med Surg
Med Assoc 1979;175:1194-5.
76.
 Mooney ET, Rozanski EA, King RG, Sharp
2005;7:227-31.
d'Anjou MA, Tidwell AS, Hecht S.
CR. Spontaneous pneumothorax in 35
G0.
cats [2001-2010). 1 Feline Med Surg
47. Ibarrola P, German Al, Stell Al, et al.
Radiographic diagnosis of lung lobe
2012;14(6):384-91.
 Appendicular arterial tumor embolization
torsion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2005:46:
77.
 Milne ME, McCowan C, Landon BP.
in two cats with pulmonary carcinoma.
478-84.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2004;225:1065-9.
Spontaneous feline pneumothorax caused
61.
 Mclane MJ, Buote Nl. Lung lobe torsion
1048-9.
associated with chylothorax in a cat.
by ruptured pulmonary bullae associated
with possible bronchopulmonary
 48. Sykes JE. Ischemic neuromyopathy due
J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:135-8.
dysplasia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 to peripheral arterial embolization of an
62.
 Brown NO, Zontine Wl. Lung lobe
2010;46(2):138-42.
adenocarcinoma in a cat. J Feline Med
torsion in the cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
78.
 Kaestner S. Anesthesia. In: Montavon PM,
Surg 2003;5:353-6.
1976;17:219-23.
Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, editors. Feline
49. Cassotis Nl, Dubielzig RR, Gilger BC,
63.
Millard RP, Myers IR, Novo RE.
 orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal
 Davidson MG. Angioinvasive pulmonary
Spontaneous lung lobe torsion in a cat.
disease. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2009.
carcinoma with posterior segment
J Vet Intern Med 2008;22:671-3.
p. 177-98.
metastasis in four cats. Vet Ophthalmol
64.
 Dye TL, Teague HD, Poundstone ML.
Crawford AH, Halfacree Zl, Lee KC.
1999;2:125-31.
Lung lobe torsion in a cat with chronic
 Brockman Dj. Clinical outcome following
50.
Hamilton HB, Severin GA, Nold J.
feline asthma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
pneumonectomy for management of
Pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma with
1998;34:493-5.
chronic pyothorax in four cats. J Feline
intraocular metastasis in a cat. I Am Vet 
65.
 Kerpsack SK, Mclouglin MA, Graves TK,
Med Surg 2011;13:762-7.
Med Ass0c 1984;185:307-9.
et al. Chylothorax associated with lung
80.
LaRue SM, Withrow Sl, Wykes PM. Lung
51.
Byers CG, Tumulty IW, Stefanacci JD.
lobe torsion and a peritoneopericardial
resection using surgical staples in dogs
What Is Your Diagnosis? Journal of the 
diaphragmatic hernia in a cat. I Am Anim
and cats. Vet Surg 1987:16:
American Veterinary Medical Association
Hosp Assoc 1994;30:351-4.
238-40.
2006;228:1341-2.
G6.
 Schwarz T, Crawford PE, Owen MR, et al.
81.
Liptak IM, Monnet E, Dernell wS, et al.
52.
.Hifumi T, Miyoshi N, Kawaguchi H, et al.
 Fatal pulmonary fat embolism during
Pneumonectomy: four case studies and a
Immunohistochemical detection of
humeral fracture repair in a cat. J Small
comparative review. J Small Anim Pract 
proteins associated with multidrug
Anim Pract 2001;42:195-8.
2004;45:441-7.
556
48
pter
Heart
R.Burrow
Heart disease is common in cats but there are few feline cardiac condi-
pulmonary arteries. The fibrous pericardium attaches to the distal
saae sn iaied 'ssaul jo esiins panea aie ie su
fourth of the pulmonary trunk and the terminal portion of the pul-
(PDA) and symptomatic, medically unresponsive bradycardias are the
 monary trunk can be examined without opening the pericardium.
-uo yog ans peipie suoad ioy suoeipun sanbay isou
 The left atrium and ventricle form the caudodorsal part of the heart.
tions are rare in cats.
The left atrium forms the left dorsocaudal part of the base of the
The commonest cardiac surgical procedure performed in cats is
heart The left atrial appendage is a cranial extension ofthe left atrium.
subtotal pericardectomy; the commonest indication for performing
It is located caudal to the pulmonary trunk and lies along the right
this procedure is chylothorax, which has a number of potential under-
Aeuound aul Aq ll uoy paieiedas pue oi lepne aepuadde lee
lying causes, only one of which is cardiac disease.
trunk. Blood enters the left atrium from the pulmonary veins, which
The basic requirements for anesthesia and postoperative care for
asny aeu suiaa Areuound ienpiaipui aun aadse esiop sii oiu uado
cats undergoing cardiac surgeries, and many of the potential postop-
but usually remain separate and enter the left atrium separately. The
erative complications are as for patients undergoing sternotomy or
left ventricle is cone shaped and its apex forms the apex of the heart.
thoracotomy for other reasons. Specific postoperative requirements
oui aaa poe aui yanonr auan gal aun oy paiaa si pooa
will depend on the underlying disease and the patient's clinical status.
the aorta, near the center of the heart base. The initial part ofthe aorta.
In this chapter the most commonly performed surgical cardiac proce-
the ascending portion, is mainly located within the pericardium. It
dures are discussed.
 continues for a short distance cranially before passing dorsocaudally
and to the left by forming a U-bend, the aortic arch. Two great vessels
leave the aortic arch to supply the head, neck, and thoracic limbs: the
brachiocephalic trunk and the left subclavian artery. The ligamentum
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 arteriosum, the connective tissue remnant of the fetal ductus arterio-
0l sassed pue yumu Aieuound aui jo uoneinyq aui ieau sase 'sns
There is little variability in normal thoracic conformation and heart
the aorta. The aorta then continues caudally as the descending aorta.
shape between cat breeds. Thenormal felineheartis slender in appear-
The right and left vagus nerves pass caudally in the dorsal medias-
ance on a lateral thoracic radiograph and it appears more horizontal
tinal pleura. The left vagus nerve passes over the ligamentum arterio-
in its orientation within the thorax than in the dog; with increasing
sum, and is a landmark used during the surgical treatment of PDA.
age this can become more marked.! The heart lies within the medi-
 The left recurrent laryngeal nerve leaves the left vagus nerve just cranial
astinum in the mid thorax, approximately between the 3rd and 6th
to the ductus and it passes around the caudal aspect of the ductus.
intercostal spaces.
The pericardium forms a double layered sac that surrounds the
The right atrium and ventricle form the craniodorsal part of the
 heart the initial portion of the ascending aorta, pulmonary trunk,
heart. The right atrium receives blood from the cranial and caudal
termination of the vena cavae, and the pulmonary veins. It attaches
vena cavae, and from the coronary vessels via the coronary sinus. The
near/at the base of the heart to the aortic arch, pulmonary trunk, left
right atrial appendage arises from the cranial aspect ofthe right atrium
atrium at the level of the pulmonary veins and dorsal to the interatrial
and extends ventrally. The right ventricle is arciform in cross section:
 groove on the right side. The outer fbrous layer is termed the parietal
it lies cranial and ventral to the left ventricle. Blood is ejected from
 pericardium, the inner serous membrane the visceral pericardium,
the right ventricle through the pulmonic valve into the pulmonary
which is adherent to the epicardium. At its apex the pericardium is
 trunk. The initial part of the pulmonary trunk is within the pericar-
continued as a flattened band, the caudoventral mediastinal reflection,
dium, the ventral, lateral and caudal surfaces are covered by serous
which attaches to the ventral part of the muscular insertion of the
pericardium, and this portion of the pulmonary trunk is usually
diaphragm. The right and left phrenic nerves run across the dorsal
masked by fat. The pulmonary trunk contacts the aorta along its entire
third of the pericardium and must be identified and preserved during
medial surface The pulmonary trunk divides into the right and left 
pericardectomy. Paired pericardiophrenic blood vessels from the
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00048-2
557
Section
6
Thorax
internal thoracic arteries run with the phrenic nerves. Pericardial
veterinary literature so it is difficult to make conclusions about the
blood vessels, also arising from the internal thoracic arteries, run
presentation, investigative findings., and the outcome with medical or
within the pericardium passing in a caudoventral direction. With
 surgical treatment. This contrasts with dogs, where PDA is one of the
 pericardial disease or pericardial and/or pleural effusion the pericar.
more commonly diagnosed congenital heart diseases5 and it is well
dium can become thickened and these vessels will become more
documented.
prominent.
 Most dogs are diagnosed as puppies, whilst the condition is asymp-
tomatic, by auscultation of a pathognomic continuous murmur. It is
suggested that the situation may be similar in cats, and certainly the
majority of cats reported with PDAs are less than one year of age.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
However, in an abstract reporting 2l cases of PDAs in cats approxi-
apueuan aun inq inunu snonuuon e peu spui-oml Aianeu
Specific investigations will depend on the patient's history, clinical
were described to have systolic murmurs and approximately only
signs, fndings on clinical examination, and differential diagnoses but 
One-third of the cats in the study were asymptomatic at presentation.
will usually include a minimum of hematology, serum biochemistry.
Their presenting complaints included abnormal respiration, exercise
and thoracic radiography. Specifc blood tests to assess for infections
intolerance/lethargy, stunted growth, and poor weight gain.?
such as feline coronavinus, leukemia, and immunodeficiency viruses
The murmur is well described in dogs: it may be accompanied by
may be indicated. For investigation of suspected cardiac disease elec-
a thrill felt at the heart base, and by hyperkinetic pulses. The point of
trocardiography (ECG), echocardiography and, uncommonly, angiog-
maximal intensity ofthe murmur lies over the main pulmonary artery
raphy are indicated. Pleural and/or pericardial effusions should be
at the dorsocranial heart base and may radiate cranially to the thoracic
sampled for biochemistry, cytology. and bacterial and/or fungal
inlet and to the right heart base It is suggested that in cats the con-
culture as appropriate. Blood coagulation screen should be performed
tinuous murmur of a PDA may be best heard slightly more ventrally
if a hemorrhagic effusion is identified. Advanced imaging of the
than this typical location in dogs. Femoral pulses may be more diff-
"a) sases uiaeudaidde aq Aeu Aydeioot panduos suisn xeio
cult to assess in cats;: hyperkinetic pulses may be noted.
chylothorax or other pleural effusions) where intrathoracic neoplasia
is a differential diagnosis.
Diagnosis
 Thoracic radiographic changes are variable and will depend on the
size of the PDA and any consequential left-sided heart failure. Cardi
SURGICAL DISEASES
omegaly, shifting of the cardiac apex to the left, a ductus aneurysmal
bump, and pulmonary over-circulation are all common radiographic
Patent ductus arteriosus
fndings. If the patient presents in left-sided heart failure, pulmonary
venous congestion and pulmonary edema will be present.
The ductus arteriosus carries blood from the pulmonary artery to the
 Diagnosis is usually confirmed with echocardiography using a right
aorta in the fetus. Within hours ofthe birth the ductus normally closes
parasternal short axis or left parasternal cranial window (Fig. 48-1).
 in response to an increase in the oxygen tension of the blood; failure
Initially, there may be no changes in chamber size or myocardial
of closure allows continual shunting of blood between the left and
night sides of the heart. After birth, the blood pressure in the pulmo-
may result in dilatation oftheleftatrium, aorta, and main pulmonary
-dl saseanu anssaid pooq uaiss aui pue sanpai Aiae Aieu
artery and dilatation and hypertrophy oftheleft ventricle, all recogniz
cally this pressure differential is such that blood shunts continuously
able on echocardiography (Fig. 48-2). Left ventricular systolic function
through the cardiac cycle, from the higher pressure aorta to the lower
may become impaired. If a left-to-right shunting PDA is identified,
pressure pulmonary artery (i.e., left to right shunting) if the ductus
Doppler studies can be performed and will show characteristic high
remains patent. The secondary changes that occur with increased
velocity turbulent flow from the aorta, through the ductus and into
blood flowing in the pulmonary artery are pulmonary over-circulation,
the main pulmonary artery (Fig. 48-3). This PDA peak velocity will
left atrial dilatation, left ventricular dilatation with eccentric hypertro-
phy, dilatation of the aortic arch to the level of the origin of the PDA,
and dilatation of the pulmonary trunk. As a consequence of the left
to right shunting and let-sided volume overload, left-sided congestive
heart failure (CHF) commonly develops. The size of the shunt will
determine volume of blood shunting. which in turn determines the
onset and severity of secondary consequences. As a sequel to the
increased blood flow in the pulmonary vessels, resistance to blood
flow and pulmonary hypertension can develop. If the pulmonary arte-
rial pressure is greater than the aortic pressure for some or all of the
cardiac cycle, blood flow through the PDA will reverse. Blood will then
flow from the pulmonary artery into the aorta (i.e., right to left shunt-
ing). Right to left shunting can also occur from birth, and usually
 Occurs when the ductus is large and tubular without narrowing at the
 pulmonary ostium, and this may reflect retention of fetal pulmonary
is rarely reported in cats,23 although itis suggested that it is more likely
Had aul jo juanean iesgins t'sgop ueui sies u au iaao donaaap o
165
Figure 48-1 Right parasternal short axis view of the heart in a cat with a
PDA is a rarely diagnosed congenital heart disease in the cat,
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). This image was taken at the level of the
aenuel ysug au ul paodan uouo sul jo sase ma yrm
pulmonary artery and shows the PDA. (Courtesy Dr Jo Dukes-McEwan.)
558
Heart
Chapter
48
decrease if pulmonary pressures increase, prior to exceeding systemic
Aeuound aeaiaq Au aseaiap suieu aou 'iaaamoh sanssand
hypertension as a consequence of the pulmonary over-circulation and
uisuaaday Areuud piu au aalosan aeu vad au jo anso
when assessed after surgery. Mild increase of velocity in the left ven-
tricular outflow tract and mild aortic and pulmonic insuffciency may
also be recognized. Mitral regurgitation is secondary to the lef-sided
dilation and may be significant.
 Thorough echocardiography should be performed in cats because
concurrent, but unspecified, congenital heart defects may be present;
these were found in 29% of cats in one study.
 If the diagnosis of suspected PDA cannot be confirmed by echocar-
diography. or the presence of other congenital heart anomalies is
suspected, cardiac catheterization and angiocardiography may be
helpful, but this investigative procedure is rarely required to confrm
diagnosis of PDA.
A
 ECG is non-specific it usually shows tall R waves and wide P waves
due to atrial enlargement Arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation,
supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias, and ventricular premature
complexes may be present.
Treatment
Patients with CHF and pulmonary edema at the time of diagnosis
should be treated for several days with furosemide and angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors before proceeding to anesthesia
and surgery. In patients that are older at the time of diagnosis, with a
small PDA, conservative management may be appropriate, although
generally surgery is still recommended.
Pericardial disease
Congenital pericardial diseases are infrequently diagnosed and most
HR
have an excellent prognosis with surgical treatment. The most common
Figure 48-2 A cat with a left-to-right shunting patent ductus arteriosus
eaenudei ieipieadoauoad si sie pue saop ur uouon
(PDA). (A) Aortic M-mode image showing marked left atrial dilatation 
hernia (PPDH); it is more common in cats (see Chapter 45).
relative to the size of the aorta. (B) M-mode image of the left ventricle
showing left ventricular dilatation, relative wall thinning and impaired 
Intrapericardial cysts
systolic function. (Courtesy Dr Jo Dukes-McEwan.)
true cysts but encapsulated adipose tissue or organizing cystic hemato-
mas. The cyst may be attached to the apex of the pericardium by a
o uauo pauaq suu hadd e j ase Ae aau aia
falciform fat closes before birth, trapping the fat within the pericardial
sac Cystic changes of herniated and incarcerated liver tissue may also
 Occur in association with PPDH in cats. Intrapericardial cysts cause
clinical signs either directly associated with their presence, or due to
an associated effusion causing cardiac tamponade. Diagnosis can
usually be made by radiography (Fig. 48-4) and/or ultrasound exami-
nation of the cranial abdomen and heart. Treatment is by subtotal
J aiad pue] is aul yo iaoan (t-tt xog aas] Aoiaiead
 present), and repair of the PPDH (Chapter 45, 45.4.3) if present.
Congenital pericardial defects are very rare. Clinical signs may
develop if the size of the defect is such that a portion of the heart can
herniate through the defect, as cardiac function will then be compro-
 mised. This condition is treated by subtotal pericardectomy.
Pericardial effusion
GR
The commonest acquired pericardial disease in both cats and dogs is
Figure 48-3 Right parasternal short axis view of the heart in a cat with a
pericardial effusion (PE), but the incidence, presentation and underly-
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). This image was taken at the level of the 
ing causes have differences between these species. Clinically signifi-
pulmonary artery with color flow Doppler showing turbulent flow across
cant PE is very uncommon in cats, and this species rarely presents with
the PDA. (Courtesy Dr Jo Dukes-McEwan.)
cardiac tamponade In both species PEs remain asymptomatic if the
559
Section
[61
Thorax
Figure 48-4 Lateral thoracic radiograph of a young. anesthetised cat
silhouette is markedly enlarged and silhouettes with the diaphragm. The
distal intrathoracic trachea is displaced dorsally over the cranial border of
the cardiac silhouette.
 Box 48-1 Possible causes of pericardial effusion in cats
 Congestive heart failure (various cardiac pathologies including 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy, pulmonic
stenosis)
 Feline infectious peritonitis 
 Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
 Cardiac neoplasia (e.g., lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma)
 Heart base tumors
Pericardial tumor (e.g.. mesothelioma)
 Systemic inflammation and infection 
Uremia
Coagulopathies (e.g. warfarin toxicity, disseminated intravascular
 coagulation)
B
R
Trauma
Figure 48-5 (A) Dorsoventral and (B) lateral thoracic radiographs of
Intrapericardiac cyst 
a cat with a pericardial effusion. There is a smmall volume of pleural
 Bacterial pericarditis 
fluid. The underlying heart disease in this cat was severe hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy. (Courresy Dr Jo Dukes-McEwan.)
effusion is small and the pericardium remains slightly compliant, or
in dogs with CHE The other most frequent underlying cause of PE in
if a larger effusion accumulates slowly allowing the pericardial sac to
cats is feline infectious peritonitis. The commonest causes of PE in
accommodate to some extent Cardiac tamponade results when the
 dogs are idiopathic hemorrhagic pericardial effusion (IPHE), which is
amount of fluid (or cyst/mass) reaches a volume such that it exerts a
unreported in the cat, and cardiac-related neoplasia. In dogs, heman-
 pressure equal to or greater than normal cardiac diastolic pressures.
giosarcoma, usually ofthe right side of the heart, is the most common
The heart is compressed externally and cannot fll effectively during
neoplastic cause of PE, aortic body tumors also occur with some fre-
diastole Right ventricular flling is reduced first, and may progress
quency, mesotheliomas occur less commonly, and other tumors are
 to compromise left ventricular filling and cardiac output. Systemic
also reported. These tumors are rarely diagnosed as a cause of PE in
venous pressure and capillary hydrostatic pressure increase whilst
cats; lymphoma is the most common underlying tumor associated
cardiac output is reduced. Cats with cardiac tamponade usually
with the effusion.
 develop pleural effusion and present with tachypnea and increased
 The classic radiographic appearance of PE is general cardiomegaly
respiratory effort.
(globoid heart) and sharp borders to the cardiac silhouette (Fig. 48-5).
 PE in cats is most commonly part of a more generalized disease
If the PE has accumulated rapidly without time for adaptation, cardiac
(Box 48-1). Myocardial disease is the commonest underlying cause.15
tamponade may occur without the classic radiographic signs being
Small volume clinically insignificant PEs have been reported in
 present Pleural efusion is usually present in cats with significant PE
approximately 45% of cats with CHF 16.17 while PEs are rarely reported
and may partly obscure the cardiac silhouette.
560
Heart
Chapter
48
2004Feb10
Box 48-2 Pericardiocentesis
 Pericardiocentesis is performed in the conscious cat if this is tolerated.,
otherwise sedation is used if required for patient restraint. The cat 
may be positioned in lateral or sternal recumbency. depending
on clinician preference and the tolerance of the patient.
 Pericardiocentesis can be performed through a right or left lateral
 approach. ECG monitoring should be performed throughout the
 procedure. The landmark for pericardiocentesis is found by palpation
of the point of maximal intensity of the heart beat; this is typically 
 the ventral 6h-7uh intercostal space and is confirmed using 
pue Auabuns loy pauedaud pue paddip s! eaue aul Aydeabouoseun
local anesthetic can be instilled into the skin, subcutaneous tissues.
intercostal muscles, and pleura at the site of proposed catheter entry
through the chest wall. Pericardiocentesis is performed as a sterile 
 procedure using aseptic technique. A tiny stab incision is made in
yui 5z 5at-9l e pue uoiasui laauien jo suiod aun re us au
over the needle catheter is introduced through the chest wall in a
255271:40:29
direction aimed towards the opposite scapula. Extra holes can be cut 
Figure 48-6 Echocardiogram of a cat with a heart base mass and an
 in the catheter near the tip to increase the efficiency of drainage.
associated pericardial effusion (PE). (Courtesy Dr Jo Dukes-McEwan.)
The catheter is slowly introduced through the chest wall and through
the pericardium. If the tip of the catheter can be felt touching the
surface of the heart and/or the patient develops arrhythmias, the 
Catheter should be withdrawn several millimeters before being
redirected. Once sanguinous fluid is seen in the hub of the catheter.
or the catheter is identified within the pericardial sac if performing 
A definitive diagnosis of PE is made by echocardiography, which
the entire procedure under ultrasonographic guidance, the needle is
allows cardiac disease or mass lesions to be excluded. The pericardial
removed and the catheter is connected to a piece of extension 
fluid is seen as an anechoic/slightly anechoic circular region surround-
tubing and a 20-50 mL syringe. The catheter is advanced several
more millimeters into the pericardial sac and fluid is aspirated. To
cardium. Although an uncommon cause of PE in cats, mass lesions
confirm that the fluid is not being withdrawn from a blood vessel or
affecting the heart may be seen on ultrasound examination. A thor-
the heart, the fluid can be observed for one to two minutes for the 
ough examination of the heart should be performed prior to pericar-
presence of clotting. PE will not clot, whilst blood collected from 
diocentesis because masses are most likely to be identified whilst
the heart or a blood vessel will clot. Once the catheter is within the 
surrounded by fluid (Fig. 48-6).
pericardial sac the pericardial fluid is drained. Ultrasonography should
 ECG findings in the dog can include reduced amplitude QRS com-
 be performed to confirm removal of the effusion. At the completion 
 plexes, electrical alternans and ST segment depression, but low voltage
of pericardiocentesis the catheter can be withdrawn.
QRS complexes are normal in cats.
Cardiac tamponade should be treated immediately by pericar-
diocentesis (Box 48-2). Any pleural effusion should also be drained.
Cats with significant PE may benefit from subtotal pericardectomy
Constrictive pericardial disease
(see Box 48-4).
Rarely, the visceral and/or parietal pericardial thickening can restrict
ventricular filling in the absence of a PE, resulting in constrictive
Chylothorax and fibrosing pericarditis
pericarditis. In some cases a small PE may be present, which would
Fibrosing pleuritis (see Chapter 44) can develop secondary to any
be insuffcient to cause cardiac tamponade if the pericardial changes
prolonged hemorrhagic, exudative, or chylous effusion. In these cir-
were absent, a situation that is called constrictive-effusive pericarditis.
cumstances the pericardium is subject to the same environment and
This condition is rarely diagnosed in cats, but it has been reported in
is also likely to become thickened and less compliant and there
a cat with dilated cardiomyopathy.20 It is uncommon in dogs: underly-
isapou e uana sanssaind snouan ui aseaioui enuanbasuo e aq aeu
ing causes have included IPHE, intrapericardial foreign body, chronic
increase could cause the formation of extra lymphatics in the cranial
 septic pericarditis, and traumatic pericardial hemorrhage Diagnosis
-u ' e s a n  s as o
an be diffcult, and is easier if a small volume of PE is present. Tho-
compliant pericardium may contribute to the development of chylo-
racic radiographs may show mild to moderate cardiomegaly, pleural
thorax, and conversely chylothorax may cause pericardial thickening
effusion, and distension of the caudal vena cava. Echocardiography
or fbrosing pericarditis. The actual role that the pericardium has in
may demonstrate suggestive changes such as flattening of the leff
the development of and progression of chylothorax is unknown but
ventricular free wall in diastole and abnormal septal motion. Invasive
pericardectomy, in combination with thoracic duct ligation with or
hemodynamic studies to measure central venous pressure changes
without thoracic omentalization, has been shown in several small case 
 may be needed to confirm the diagnosis.
-xiide ui aseasip au jo uonosa jyssasns e aaue o saas
 Treatment is subtotal pericardectomy (see Box 48-4). The surgery is
mately 75-80% cats.18.19 Subtotal pericardectomy (see Box 48-4) has
[eaed aul Auo ji poog aono aul pue 'amay suoesnduos 'iaisea
1 xeiouioiu jo juaea aios aul se sieo aos un inyssains uaag
 pericardium is involved. If the visceral pericardium (epicardium) is
has also been suggested that it may be used to treat and/or prevent
also involved, and is fused to the parietal layer, subtotal pericardec-
the serosanguinous effusions that occasionally occur in some patients
tomy is a more diffcult and traumatic procedure. Stripping of this
layer can result in severe hemorrhage from the myocardium, tachyar-
these apparent benefits of pericardectomy.
rythmias, and pulmonary thromboembolism postoperatively.
561
Section
6
Thorax
Symptomatic bradycardia of cardiac origin
suspected, or has been identified involving both sides of the heart
base a median sternotomy may be the preferred approach.26 A median
Symptomatic bradyarrhymia is one of the indications for pacemaker
aul jo sapis uau pue yal au yioq o sae poos sai Aoiouas
implantation in cats. Affected cats may have signs of hypoperfusion,
heart and allows easier identification of both phrenic nerves at surgery.
and/or CHF and/or syncope or seizure-like episodes due to atrioven-
Thus, pericardectomy may be technically easier via median sternot-
tricular (AV) block and normokalemic atrial standstill. Bradyarrhyth-
omy. A median sternotomy also reduces the requirement for manipu-
 iou o a ue 'si u  u aie s
lation of the heart during surgery and thus reduces the likelihood of
u aesa isey iaian pe ais aey ue sie se 'sn
associated intraoperative arrhythmias and it allows exploration of
(90-120 beats per minute),2l unlike dogs.
both the right and left sides of the heart base if required.
 In dogs, electrodes are usually placed via a transvenous route, whilst
 When pericardectomy is performed as an adjunct to thoracic duct
in cats, generally, epicardial electrodes are placed using a surgical
aqissod Alensn s i xeiouio[aup jo juauean au oy (lal) uoel
to perform pericardectomy from an 8th, 9th or 1oth left intercostal tho-
more diffault, and complications such as thromboembolism and
(aoad si lah ium yniy yeidde aues aun 'al) Aoi
obstruction to venous return causing chylothorax occur more
If the access achieved from the caudal thoracotomies used for TDL is
commonly.22
inadequate for pericardectomy a separate 5th left intercostal thora-
A thorough history, clinical examination, and patient assessment
cotomy incision can be made.
are necessary to ensure that any non-cardiac disease is identifed and
 Pericardectomy can also be performed thorascopically (see Chapter
eliminated as a cause of the bradycardia.
42, Box 42-2).
Ue st araul 'eipieohpeiq aui asouaeip on Aiessanau sl Doa u
Access to the apex of the heart for epicardial pacemaker implanta-
absence of P waves and a slow supraventricular or ventricular
tion has been achieved via a 5th or 6th left or right lateral thoracotomy.
escape rhythm with persistent atrial standstill. High grade second
midline cranial celiotomy and caudal sternotomy, and a cranial
midline celiotomy and transdiaphragmatic approach.27-30 The latter
plexes, and usually does not respond to atropine Third degree AV
gives adequate access to the apex of the heart and is a less traumatic
block has a complete dissociation of P waves and QRS complexes,
procedure for the patient, avoiding some ofthe additional postopera-
there is a slow ventricular escape rhythm, and the arrhythmia is non-
tive management considerations and potential complications associ-
 responsive to atropine.
ated with thoracotomy and sternotomy.
PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNIQUES
It is essential to prepare thoroughly for cardiac and pericardial surgery.
Ligation of a patent ductus arteriosus
The correct instrumentation should be available for the surgeon (see
Chapter 13). The anesthesia technique selected, the ability to be able
It is widely accepted that prompt surgical treatment (Box 48-3) should
to continually monitor anesthesia and respond to changes, the need
be performed in young patients diagnosed with PDA to avoid the
for intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV), and the ability
development of CHF or pulmonary hypertension. There are two
to be able to provide appropriate levels of postoperative care are inte-
described methods of open PDA ligation: the conventional approach
(e pue Z siandeuo aas] Aiagins opeiou Aue jo ssaoons aul ol je1
and the Jackson-Henderson approach (Box 48-3).
 The use of a vascular clip to occlude a ductus has been reported in
a cat where safe dissection around the far wall of the ductus was con-
Surgical approaches to the heart.
sidered impossible? and more recently for PDA occlusion in dogs. 32.33
The heart and associated structures can be approached from intercos-
It appears to be a suitable alternative to suture ligation and avoids
tal thoracotomies (see Chapter 41, Box 41-4) and median sternotomy
"blind' dissection around the far side of the ductus.
(see Chapter 41, Box 41-5). The approach will depend on the proce-
The use of vascular occluding devices is extensively reported for
dure that is to be performed. Access to the apex of the heart for pace-
treatment of PDAs in dogs and has a similar rate of complications
maker lead implantation can also be achieved through a cranial
and outcome whilst avoiding an invasive surgical procedure. The
midline celiotomy combined with caudal median sternotomy or a
femoral artery is generally used for catheter introduction to place
the occluding device. This vessel is very small in cats, restricting
transdiaphragmatic incision.
Intercostal thoracotomies performed through the left 4th, 5th or 6th
the size of introducer or delivery catheter that can be placed and
intercostal spaces have all been reported to achieve good access for
several authors have suggested that feline PDAs are only amenable
surgical ligation of PDAs in cats.23,24 In dogs a 4 intercostal space is
to surgical ligation.34.35 Transvenous embolization with detachable
the recommended approach; in cats the 4 or 5th space is generally
coils has been reported for successful occlusion of PDAs in two
recommended25 due to the slightly more caudal location of the heart
cats using the femoral vein to gain vascular access, and this tech-
in this species.
nique may prove to be a good alternative to surgical closure of PDAs
in cats."6
Approach to the pericardium
Subtotal pericardectomy
Pericardectomy can be performed via several approaches. The fnal
decision will depend on the indication for surgery and surgeon prefer-
-iuad s Aains sioy uuad ioy uosan Aeud au l aa
eead pae i ieau sis ieiad redas
dectomy, a 5th left or right intercostal thoracotomy is recommended;
defects, with herniation of the heart, and chylothorax. Generally
excellent access is also obtained by median sternotomy. If a lateralized
subtotal pericardectomy (Box 48-4) is performed via a right or left
heart base mass is confirmed in a patient with a PE, the thoracotomy
5th intercostal thoracotomy although a median sternotomy can also
should be performed on the side of the mass. If a heart base mass is
be used.
562
Heart
Chapter
48
Box 48-3 Ligation of patent ductus arteriosus
 Box 48-4 Subtotal pericardectomy
A 4"h or 5'h left intercostal thoracotomy is made (see Box 41-4). The
 For subtotal pericardectomy the cat is positioned in lateral
left cranial lung lobe is refleted caudally using a saline soaked swab.
recumbency and a right or left 5ih intercostal thoracotomy performed 
The ductus is identified between the aorta positioned dorsally and the
aun wnipenad aut ui apeu s! uoisou! padeusl  (t-tt xog aas)
 pulmonary artery ventrally. If not immediately evident, the ductus 
base of the T extends from the apex of the heart, and the arms of 
should be easily identified by palpation, as obvious fremitus will be 
the T extend around the circumference of the heart just ventral to
present. The vagus nerve is identified as it runs over the ductus, and
the phrenic nerves. Stay sutures can be placed in the pericardium 
several stay sutures are placed in the mediastinal pleura above or
just ventral to the phrenic nerve to aid dissection and manipulation.
 below the vagus nerve. The mediastinal tissue is carefully incised and 
If the pericardium is thickened the pericardial vessels can be
au Aaaadsan leuaa lo Aliesop paean si arau snbea au
hypertrophied and hemorrhage from these vessels can be marked 
caudal aspect of the ductus is dissected using roght-angled forceps
so use of electrocautery applied to individual vessels, or in a cuttingy
(Mixter forceps), passed parallel to the transverse plane. Dissection 
coagulating mode, or use of a vessel sealing device prior to cutting 
may be entirely external to the pericardium, or extended so that the
the pericardium is recommended (see Chapter 13). The heart can 
 pericardium is opened, depending on the individual ductus anatomy.
gently be retracted by an assistant to aid access to the contralateral
The cranial aspect of the ductus is dissected with the tips of the 
side of the heart if performing pericardectomy via intercostal
forceps angles approximately 45° caudally. Dissection is continued 
caudally around the medial ductal wall; this must be performed with
Ae soduan pue seuuue asnen uen uoeinduew sul paaasaid
extreme care and patience to avoid damage to the vessels. A double
reduction in venous return and cardiac output. The caudoventral 
strand or loop of 3M or 4M silk is soaked in saline and knotted near
mediastinal reflection is ligated, or alternatively a vessel sealing device
one end. Once dissection around the medial aspect of the ductus is 
anssil s!yl pue siseisoway aralype ol aanpnuis s!yt ol padde ag uey
complete and the tips of the forceps can be seen at the caudal border
 is then divided.
 of the ductus, the knotted suture material is placed between the tips 
 After subtotal pericardectomy the excised pericardium is
of the forceps and is very carefully passed around the ductus by
jebuny loypue lellapeg pue 'sisajeue yibojouiedoisy ioy panwgns
 slowly withdrawing the forceps. The knot is then cut and removed.
culture if considered appropriate. The pleural cavity is lavaged with
sterile saline and the remaining pericardium is checked to ensure
Ligation
there is no ongoing hemorrhage. A thoracostomy tube is placed (see
The suture on the aortic side is tied first. As the PDA is ligated, in
Chapter 41) and closure of the thorax is routine. The thoracostomy
response to the pressure changes there may be a vagally mediated 
tube is drained on closure of the thorax, and again once the patient 
 se yans suabe yibaujoupiue ue os (ubis s,weyueig) epuenipeig
is positioned in sternal recumbency in recovery.
atropine should be available for administration in this event. It is
recommended that the ligature is tied slowly over several minutes to 
1! pue pall uaul s! apis puowind aul uo aunins aul xaljan s!yt pione
 jeul adoosouiais jeabeydosa ue busn uojeinosne Ag pawayuon s!
ebip uo sniuany ou ag mou pinous aaul paalosan sey anwanu au
Epicardial pacemaker implantation
palpation. Stay sutures and the swab retracting the left cranial lung 
lobe are removed and the thorax is lavaged with warm sterile saline.
Anesthesia can worsen bradycardias and it is thus recommended that
A thoracostomy tube is placed (see Box 41-6) and closure of the
thor ax is routine.
'paueu uaaq se aeuaned zuaueuad aue iun eisausaue iapun
 The Jackson-Henderson approach31
 Transthoracic pacing patches attached to an external pacer are useful
in small patients, although their use results in patient movement, but
The Jackson-Henderson approach is an alternate technique of PDA
ligation that avoids dissection of the medial aspect of the PDA. The
 neuromuscular blockade reduces this.
ductus is dissected on the cranial and caudal aspect as described 
 The author recommends a cranial midline celiotomy and transdia-
above. The mediastinal pleura is incised between the origin of the
phragmatic approach (Box 48-6). This gives good access whilst avoid-
left subclavian artery to the origin of the first intercostal artery dorsal
ing the invasiveness and potential complications of sternotomy Or
to the aorta and the connective tissues on the medial aspect of the 
intercostal thoracotomy. If access is inadequate, the celiotomy incision
 aorta at this level are bluntly dissected. A pair of right-angled forceps 
 can be extended to a caudal sternotomy.
is passed immediately cranial to the ductus and around the medial 
 Alternate approaches for epicardial pacemaker implantation include
aspect of the aorta so their tips can be seen dorsal to the aorta at
 modifying the transdiaphragmatic approach by extending the cranial
the site where the mediastinum has been dissected. A knotted loop
celiotomy by the addition of a caudal sternotomy or placement via a
of 3M or 4M silk is placed in the tips of the forceps and the forceps
 5th or 6th left or right thoracotomy A standard intercostal approach is
O1 lesiop wou sassed jelatew aanins aul reul os paaouan Auah aie
made and the epicardial lead is secured as described for a midline
ventral around the medial aspect of the aorta immediately cranial to 
celiotomy/transdiaphragmatic approach. The lead is exited through a
5! eloe aul jo padse jeipaw aul punoie uoipassip sul 'snpnp aul
 stab incision made in the intercostal muscles at an intercostal site one
repeated immediately caudal to the ductus, the free end of the
to two intercostal spaces caudal or cranial to the site of surgical entry
ae kaul se pue 'sdanioy aul jo sdil aul ou! passed elarew aunins
into the thorax. Several sites of generator placement have been
withdrawn the suture material is taken around the caudal aspect of
described including a subcutaneous site overlying the craniolateral
the ductus. Ligation then proceeds as described above.
abdomen, the caudal thorax, and with and without suture anchorage
to local structures such as an adjacent rib. A second incision may be
Total pericardectomy
eoidde ieisoiaiun ue buisn uaum ioieiauag au jueidi ol aessaau
for pacemaker placement An alternate site for generator placement
Although total pericardectomy (Box 48-5) may be appropriate in the
and anchorage if the latissimus dorsi was retracted dorsally rather
management of some neoplastic or infectious pericardial diseases, it
than incised during thoracotomy, is under this muscle adjacent to the
is very rarely indicated. It is a more challenging surgery with a greater
thoracotomy site (but not overlying it). The generator can then be
risk of serious complications than subtotal pericardectomy.
sutured to the extermal thoracic muscles.
563
Section
|61
Thorax
Box 48-5 Total pericardectomy
This surgery for total pericardectomy is performed with the cat in
dorsal recumbency via median sternotomy (see Box 41-5). The 
ul wnead aut sson aaul se paap ae saau pau
 are preserved by very careful dissection to free them from the 
 pericardium; fine ophthalmic surgical scissors may be helpful to
 perform this delicate dissection. The apex of the heart is gently
shifted to the right side of the thorax to aid access to the left heart 
base using the surgeon's or surgical assistant's fingers, or a malleable
retractor wrapped in a saline-moistened surgical sponge, and likewise
the apex is gently shifted to the left to improve access to the right 
side. The apex of the heart is gently moved in a cranial direction to
 access the caudal heart base. The anesthetist should be warned prior
peipues u! uojpnpan e u! lnsan uen Aaut se suojieindluew asaul ol
output or arrhythmias. Dissection should be temporarily halted to 
allow recovery (and adjustment of retraction if necessary) in the event
 of reduced cardiac output and/or arrhythmias. Saline-moistened 
aey Aaul anuo sanau puanud aut punoe paneid s! adet jenqun
away from the heart. The pericardium is incised/entered towards the
apex of the heart and any PE is removed by suction. The pericardium
 is then incised towards the heart base. Once nearing the base of the
heart, stay sutures are placed in the pericardium on either side of the
incision to allow retraction and aid exposure so that the great vessels
can clearly be identified and avoided. The pericardium is then
dissected circumferentially around the heart base, close to the great 
Figure 48-7 Intraoperative view during the approach for epicardial
vessels?6 leaving a small remaining 'rim' of pericardium (approximately
5 mm). Great care must be taken to avoid the heart base and great
electrode placement by a caudal celiotomy and transdiaphragmatic
approach. The liver and gall bladder are seen immediately caudal to the
 J! ewneul jewaui Ag lo 'uopassip dheus Ag paanlui bulag sjassan
diaphragm which has been incised and is being retracted by stay sutures
using electrocautery or a vessel sealing device to achieve hemostasis
to aid exposure.
 of the pericardial vessels.
 After total pericardectomy the excised pericardium is submitted
for histopathologic analysis, and bacterial and/or fungal culture if 
considered appropriate. The pleural cavity is lavaged with sterile
saline and the remaining rim of pericardium is checked to ensure 
 there is no ongoing hemorrhage. A thoracostomy tube is placed (see
 Chapter 41) and closure of the thorax is routine. The thoracostomy
 tube is drained on closure of the thorax, and again once the patient
is positioned in sternal recumbency in recovery. and thereafter as 
necessary.
 Box 48-6 Epicardial pacemaker implantation through a cranial celiotomy and transdiaphragmatic approach
An incision is made from the xiphoid and extending caudally up to
incision in the pericardium is small and herniation of the heart 
 the umbilicus. Self-retaining retractors are placed to facilitate access.
through this defect is impossible it can be left unsutured, otherwise 
si wbesudep aul Aabans arelne, ose Aew apespoig yeinosnuounan
it is repaired using 1.5M monofilament absorbable material placed in
incised at its midline attachment to the sternum or just to the left of 
a simple continuous pattern. The end of the lead is exited from the
 the midline. This incision is extended towards the central tendon. Stay
 thorax through a small stab incision through the diaphragm lateral
sutures are placed in the diaphragm on either side of the incision to 
to the incision made to enter the thorax, leaving a loop of epicardial 
allow retraction and aid exposure (Fig. 48-7). The apex of the heart is
lead within the pleural cavity to allow for cardiac and respiratory
readily identified, the pericardium is grasped at its apex using forceps 
movements, activity, etc. in the conscious patient and thus avoid 
and a 1-2 cm incision is made to allow access to the apex of the heart.
tension on the lead. The pulse generator is connected to the lead and 
Stay sutures can be placed in the pericardium on either side of the 
covered in a saline-soaked swab, or surrounded by abdominal tissues
paneid s! peal layewaned jeipuenida uv uoiieindiuew pie ol uoisou!
(e.g.. omentum) to activate the system (which is unipolar, requiring 
in an avascular area at the apex of the left ventricle using either a
contact with the body)
 Any external pacing is stopped and it is confirmed that the
directions) or a sutured electrode (Fig. 48-8) If using a sutured 
implanted system is achieving pacing as planned, and threshold tests
technique, the electrode is anchored to the heart with three or
awue boud aneudoudde ue y pateboaui ag uen anuepadui pue
Wz jo (pasn bulag apoupala jenpe aul uo buipuadap) sainins anoy
 The lead can be anchored with a suture to the diaphragm at its entry
 polypropylene: pre-placing the sutures before tying is helpful. If the
to the peritoneal cavity but if doing this care must be taken not to
564
Heart
Chapter
48
Box 48-6 Continued
damage the insulation layer of the lead. The diaphragmatic incision is 
abdomen to avoid tension on the fixation, as above. Any excess lead
closed routinely and the pleural cavity is evacuated via needle or
e sey loteiauah aui Allensn lote lauab aul punoue palon Alasool s!
 cannula drainage across the diaphragm.
small hole at an edge to allow it to be sutured and anchored to the 
 Alternatively, a thoracostomy tube can be placed. Some reports
local tissues. The incision in the internal abdominal oblique is closed 
describe leaving the pulse generator free within the abdomen, but 
using 2M or 3 M polydioxanone placed in a simple continuous 
generally it is recommended that the generator is anchored in a
 pattern. Abdominal closure is routine. A postoperative radiograph
'pocket' within the abdominal wall. A pocket just large enough 
 of the lateral and/or dorsoventral thorax/abdomen is taken prior
to accommodate the transducer is made in the left cranioventral
to recovery from anesthesia to confirm the electrode, lead, and
abdominal wall between the transversus abdominis and internal
pacemaker locations and to confirm that the lead is not kinked 
abdominal oblique muscles (Hg. 48-9). A loop of lead is left within the 
(Hg. 48-10).
B
Figure 48-8 Electrodes that can be used for pacemakers in cats. (A) A non-sutured screw-in electrode has been used in this cat, that is 'self' anchored
to the left ventricular wall at the apex. This postoperative radiograph also shows the transducer placed within the abdomen. Excess lead has been
coiled around the transducer. The lead and transducer are then tucked into a pocket made between the internal abdominal oblique and transverse 
abdominal muscles of the left body wall. (B) Epicardial electrode. This type of electrode is placed onto the left ventricle at its apex and is anchored to
the heart by sutures placed between holes in the end of the electrode and the left ventricular muscle. An additional suture is placed around the base
of the electrode through the left ventricular muscle, providing additional anchorage. (C) Epicardial electrode. This type has a barbed point that is
embedded into the left ventricular muscle at the apex; the electrode is then secured to the left ventricle by placing sutures through the holes in the
end of the electrode to the ventricular muscle. The circular white disk at the base of the electrode is removed prior to implantation.
D
n
Figure 48-9 A pocket is made in the left cranioventral abdominal wall
Figure 48-10 A postoperative radiograph is taken to confirm correct 
between the tranversus abdominis and internal abdominal oblique
electrode, lead, and pacemaker locations and to confirm that the lead is 
muscles for implantation of the pacemaker.
not kinked.
565
Section
6
Thorax
this occasion but second surgeries can be difficult due to scarring and
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
fibrosis at the surgical site. If hemorrhage is marked, a vascular oclu-
sion clamp (Satinsky) is applied to the aorta cranial to the ductus and
General postoperative considerations after heart surgery include mon-
 caudal to the brachycephalic and left subclavian arteries. This allows
itoring respiration (rate, effort), heart (arrhthymias, murmurs, rate),
 blood flow to continue to the head and heart Another vascular clamp
analgesic requirements, and management of the thoracostomy tube.
is placed across the aorta caudal to the ductus to prevent retrograde
Postoperative nursing after thoracic surgery and postoperative moni-
aortic hemorrhage. Hemorrhage from the ductus will now be from
toring are covered in Chapters 3 and 4.
the pulmonary artery, which is a lower pressure system so hemorrhage
should not be as severe Various techniques are suggested for resolving
intraoperative hemorrhage including vascular repair using 1M poly-
Thoracostomy tube
propylene if the tear can be identifed, ductal closure using poly-
The thoracostomy tube is drained immediately on closure of the
tetrafluoroethylene felt pledget buttressed mattress sutures, or ductal
division between clamps and oversewing of the ductal edges.
thorax and again once the patient is positioned in sternal recumbency
in recovery. The thoracostomy tube is maintained whilst there is a
 In dogs. surgical mortality of less than 2% is achievable by experi-
enced surgeons.37-3 There is inadequate information available in cats
significant volume of fluid being aspirated. For information about
when to remove the tube see Chapter 41. Minimal fluid and air pro-
to report an expected surgical outcome although the mortality rates
duction is expected following uneventful PDA ligation and the thora-
are higher than in dogs for the few feline cases reported to date.
Outcome in dogs is excellent, but residual shunting has been
hours of completion of surgery. Intravenous fluid therapy with crystal-
reported in over 20% of cases.40 Ductal division and oversewing of
loids is continued cautiously (2-4 mL/kg/hour) after heart surgery to
ductal ends prevents residual flow but is not recommended because
it is more diffcult than ligation and the risk of fatal intraoperative
avoid volume overload until patients are eating in recovery.
hemorrhage is not justifed against the potential benefts gained.
Other rare postoperative complications in dogs include rupture of
an aortic aneurysmal dilation with fatal hemorrhage recanalization
COIMPLICATIONSANDPROGNOSIS
 of the ductus with recurrent blood flow through the shunt, and bacte-
rial colonization of the ductus, none of which have been reported
uoj aauei ues Aans lepiead pue jeay iae suoneduon
in cats.
 minor and treatable to serious or even fatal, the most common includ-
ing hemorrhage. pain, arrythmias, and cardiac arrest.
Pericardectomy
Failure to seal/ligate pericardial blood vessels cut during pericardec-
Patent ductus arteriosus
tomy will result in postoperative hemorrhage and occasionally a
There is little data available in cats, but the anticipated potential
further surgery may be necessary to address this hemorrhage.
complications are those reported in dogs. The most serious, poten-
tially fatal intraoperative complication is rupture of the PDA, aorta or
Epicardial pacemaker
 pulmonary artery during dissection around the ductus. Small tears to
these vessels may be managed by the immediate application of digital
Complications associated specifically with epicardial pacemaker
 pressure, but continued dissection may result in further hemorrhage
implantation include displacement of the pacemaker electrode with
 as the tear in the damaged vessel may enlarge. A decision must be
accompanying loss of pacing. infection, seroma, and migration of the
made whether to continue with surgery, or abandon the procedure on
generator.
REFERENCES
1.
 Moon ML, Keene Bw, Lessard P, et al.
5.
 Patterson DF Canine congenital heart
editors. Textbook of veterinary internal
Age related changes in the feline cardiac
disease: epidemiology and etiological
medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB
silhouette. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
hypotheses. J Small Anim Pract 1971;12:
Saunders; 2000. p. 923-36.
1993;34:315-20.
263-87.
10.
Marion J, Schwartz A, Ettinger S, et al.
Jeraj K, Ogburn P, Lord PF, wilson JW.
G.
 Buchanan JW. Causes and prevalence
Pericardial effusion in a young dog.
Patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary
of cardiovascular disease. In: Kirk RW.
IAm Vet Med Assoc 1970;157:
hypertension in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 Bonagura JD, editors. Kirk's current
1055-63.
1978;172:1432-6.
veterinary therapy. Philadelphia: WB
11.
Sisson D, Thomas WP, Reed J, et al.
3.
Connolly Dl, Lamb CR, Boswood A.
Saunders; 1992. p. 647.
Intrapericardial cysts in the dog. I Vet Int
Right-to-left shunting patent ductus
7.
Hitchcock LS, Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD,
Med 1993;7:364-9.
arteriosus with pulmonary hypertension
 et al. Patent ductus arteriosus in cats:
12.
Simpson DJ, Hunt GB, Church DB, et al.
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2003;44:
21 cases. J Vet Int Med 2000;14:
Benign masses in the pericardium of 2
184-8.
338(abstract).
dogs. Aust Vet I 1999;77:225-59.
 4. Martin M, Dukes-McEwan J. Congenital
 8. Ware WA. The cardiovascular examination.
13.
Less RD, Bright JM, Orton EC.
heart disease. In: Luis Fuentes EV.
In: Cardiovascular disease in small animal
Intrapericardial cyst causing cardiac
Johnson LR, Dennis S, editors. BSAVA
medicine (2007). London: Manson
tamponade in a cat. I Am Anim Hosp 
Manual of canine and feline 
Publishing Ltd; 2007. p. 30.
Assoc 2000;36:115-19.
ardiorespiratory medicine. 2nd ed.
9. Miller MW, Sisson D. Pericardial
14.
Loureiro J, Burrow R, Dukes-McEwan J.
Gloucester: BSAVA; 2010. p. 239.
disorders. In: Ettinger Sl, Feldman EC,
Canine intrapericardial cyst - complicated
566
Heart
Chapter
48
surgical correction of an unusual cause of
 feline cardiorespiratory medicine.
arteriosus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 right heart failure. J Small Anim Pract
2nd ed. Gloucester: BSAVA; 2010. p. 183.
1979;15:55-8.
2009;50:492-7.
23. Cohen JS, Tilley LP, Liu S, et al. Patent
32. Boothe HW. Use of ligating clips for
15. Davidson Bl, Paling AC, Lahmers SL,
ductus arteriosus in five cats. J Am Anim
 patent ductus arteriosus surgery in small
Nelson OL. Disease association and 
Hosp Assoc 1975;11:95-101.
animals. Vet Rep 1989;2:6-9.
clinical assessment of the feline
24.
Jones CL, Buchanan JW. Patent ductus
33.
Borenstein N, Behr L, Chetboul V, et al.
 pericardial effusion. J Am Anim Hosp
 arteriosus: anatomy and surgery in a cat.
Minimally invasive patent ductus
Assoc 2008;44:5-9.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1981;179:364-9.
 arteriosus occlusion in 5 dogs. Vet Surg
16. Lui SK. Acquired cardiac lesions leading 
25.
 Orton CE. Cardiac surgery. In: Slatter D.
2004;33:309-13.
to congestive heart failure in the cat. Am J
 editor Textbook of small animal surgery.
 34. Stafford-Johnson M. Decision making in
Vet Res 1970;31:2071-88.
vol. 1. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
suspected congenital heart disease in cats 
17. Liu SK, Tashjian R), Patnaik AK.
2003. p. 958.
and dogs. In Pract 2006;28:538-43.
Congestive heart failure in the cat. J Am
26. Fossum TW. Surgery of the cardiovascular
35.
. MacDonald KA. Congenital heart disease
Vet Med Assoc 1970;156:1319-30.
 system. In: Small animal surgery.
of puppies and kittens. Vet Clin Small 
18. Fossum Tw, Mertens MM, Miller MW.
 3rd ed. Missouri: Mosby Elsevier; 2007.
Anim 2006;36:503-31.
et al. Thoracic duct ligation and
p. 805.
36. Schneider M, Hildebrandt N. Transvenous
pericardectomy for treatment of
27.
Bonagura JD, Helphrey ML, Muir ww.
embolization of the patent ductus 
idiopathic chylothorax. J Vet Int Med
Complications associated with permanent
arteriosus with detachable coils in 2 cats.
2004;18:307-10.
pacemaker implantation in the dog. I Am 
J Vet Int Med 2003;17:349-53.
19.
Bussadori R, Provera A, Martano M, et al.
Vet Med Assoc 1983;182:149-55.
37.
 Eyster GE, Eyster JT, Cords GB, Johnston J.
Pleural omentalisation with en bloc
28.
 Fingeroth JM, Birchard SJ.
Patent ductus arteriosus in the dog:
ligation of the thoracic duct and
 Transdiaphragmatic approach for
characteristics of occurrence and results of
pericardiectomy for idiopathic
permanent cardiac pacemaker
surgery in one hundred consecutive cases.
chylothorax in nine dogs and four cats.
implantation in dogs. Vet Surg
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1986;168:435-8.
Vet J 2011;188:234-6.
1986;15:329-33.
38. Buchanan JW. Patent ductus arteriosus.
20.
.Bunch SE, Bolton GR, Hornbuckle EW.
29. Fox PR, Matthiesen DT, Purse D,
Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim
Pericardial effusion with restrictive
 Brown NO. Ventral abdominal,
1994;9:168-76
pericarditis associated with congestive
 transdiaphragmatic approach for
39. Hunt GB, Simpson D), Beck JA, et al.
cardiomyopathy in a cat. J Am Anim
implantation of cardiac pacemakers in 
 Intra-operative haemorrhage during
Hosp Assoc 1981;17:739.
the dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;189:
patent ductus arteriosus ligation in dogs.
 21. Ware WA. Management of arrhythmias.
1303-8.
Vet Surg 2001;30:58-63.
In: Cardiovascular disease in small animal
30. Fox PR, Moise NS, Woodfeld JA, Darke
40. Stanley B), Luis-Fuentes V, Darke PG.
 medicine. London: Manson Publishing
 PG. Techniques and complications of 
Comparison of the incidence of residual
Ltd; 2007. p. 211.
 pacemaker implantation in four cats.
shunting between two surgical techniques
22. Dennis S. Antiarrhythmic therapies. In:
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1991;12:1742-53.
used for ligation of patent ductus 
Luis Fuentes EV, Johnson LR, Dennis S.
31.
 Jackson wF, Henderson RA. Ligature
arteriosus in the dog. Vet Surg 2003;32:
 editors. BSAVA Manual of canine and
placement in closure of patent ductus 
231-7.
567
Section
S.J. Langley-Hobbs, J.E Ladlow, J.L. Demetriou
The head and neck
The final part of the book covers surgery of the head and neck in the
The feline head is a site that is commonly affected by neoplasia and
cat. In the frst chapter, conditions affecting all the parts of the head
 therefore surgical management of neoplasia, including maxillectomy
that have not been covered in previous chapters are described, for
 and mandibulectomy and the resection of brain tumors, is discussed.
example salivary gland disease In subsequent chapters, conditions of
Although these may be advanced surgical procedures that would be
the throat area, including the pharynx and larynx are described. Some 
best performed at a specialist center, an understanding of what is
diseases will affect more than one organ or region: polyps are a
entailed is important to be able to discuss the most appropriate treat-
notable disease in cats that can affect the middle ear but also have
 ment options with owners of affected cats.
clinical signs that are attributable to a nasopharyngeal location.
 In the penultimate chapter of the book, management of eyelid and
Aural anatomy is consistent across most cat breeds so ear disease
 orbital disease is covered. There are already entire textbooks dedicated
attributable solely to conformational defects is not common. However.
to ocular disease in the cat and it was not the aim of this textbook to
 ear disease is still a signifcant problem in the cat and surgery in the 
fully cover surgical management of all eye disease in this chapter.
form of partial or complete aural resection can be curative for some
 Instead, some conditions that might be treated by a more general
conditions, most notably tumors. Surgery for nasal disease is most
 surgeon, as opposed to an ophthalmologist, are described, such as 
commonly performed for nasal planum tumors or chronic nasal
 eyelid surgery and enucleation.
disease associated with foreign bodies.
 The fnal chapter provides in-depth descriptions of brain surgery.
Thyroid disease in cats is common and surgery is one treatment
including pituitary gland resection for pituitary dependent hyper-
option to consider alongside medical management and radioactive
 adrenocorticism in the cat, a procedure that is currently being per-
iodine therapy In the chapter on the thyroid and parathyroid gland.
formed at specialist centers to successfully treat this condition.
decision making with regard to the best treatment for the individual
cat is covered.
49
oter
Head
S.J. Langley-Hobbs
A variety of conditions affect the feline head, some of which are
Tongue
common. If disease is located in an area that is readily visible to the
Owner (e.g., neoplasms or inflammatory conditions of the skin) then
The tongue is an integral and functional part of the oral cavity. It is
composed primarily of skeletal muscle. The body of the tongue is
early recognition and prompt treatment is possible. However, other
conditions that are located in regions that are not easily visible (eg.-
joined to the floor of the oral cavity by an oral fold called the frenu-
inside the mouth) are often only detected at a later stage when the cat
lum. The cat has multiple caudal-facing fliform papillae on the dorsal
becomes clinically affected: late diagnosis and the invasive nature of
surface of the tongue that assist with the prehension of food and water
some conditions of the head can influence the prognosis. In this
and they are also used for grooming.
chapter some general information will be given about head examina-
 The intrinsic muscles of the tongue consist of longitudinal, trans-
ads anu ym 'sasas uon an o aos pue suun 'uon
verse, and perpendicular fibres. The extrinsic muscles have an osseous
sections on the tongue, tonsils, salivary glands, chin, cheeks, and lips.
origin and radiate into the tongue, and they include the styloglossal.
 0 os siadeu) ued su u siadeuo iauo on paajai s! iapeai au
hypoglossal, and genioglossal muscles.2 The mylohyoid muscle sus-
 58) for detailed information on other organs or parts of the head.
ueodui si pue sapoq ieinqiuu aui uamiaq ansuoi aui spuad
for the induction of deglutition.
paid au wuoy aeud st anuon au o Aiddns ienosea au
lingual artery, supplemented by the paired sublingual artery and both
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 of these arteries arise from the linguofacial trunk. The innervation of
the tongue is from the lingual branch of the mandibular nerve, the
chorda tympani of the intermediofacial nerve, the glossopharyngeal
Lips, cheeks and mouth
nerve, and the vagal nerve. These nerves are individually responsible
The lips in the cat are small and relatively immobile compared to the 
for sensations such as pain, heat, and taste The hypogloal nerve is
dog. They form a large rima oris, with the upper and lower lips
responsible for motor function, and damage to this nerve will result
meeting at the commissure caudally. The lips consist of skin, muscle,
in paralysis of the tongue.
and mucosa and contain numerous small scattered salivary glands.
The cheeks form the buccal vestibule, which receives salivary secre-
Tonsils
tions from the parotid, molar, and zygomatic salivary glands. The hard
palate separates the oral and nasal cavities and is formed from the
The two palatine tonsils are located in the lateral pharyngeal walls and
incisive, maxillary, and palatine bones. The oral aspect of the hard
they consist of multiple subepithelial lymph nodules. They have effer-
palate is covered by thick mucosa with transverse folds (rugae) that
ent lymphatics only and their function is to provide an immunologic
are continuous with the gingiva rostrally, laterally, and the soft palate
barrier to protect the respiratory and alimentary systems. They are
caudally. The floor of the oral cavity is supported by paired mylohy-
located in a fossa, the medial wall of which is formed by a falciform
oideus muscles passing between the mandibular bodies. The ventral
fold from the soft palate the tonsilar fold.2
oral mucosa has two protuberances to either side of the lingual frenu-
lum known as sublingual caruncles, marking the opening of the man-
Salivary glands
dibular and sublingual salivary ducts.'
The tissues of the lips and cheek are supplied by the facial artery
Cats have five major salivary glands (parotid, mandibular, sublingual,
and infraorbital artery. The facial nerve provides motor innervation to
molar, and zygomatic) (Fig. 49-1);: the molar gland is absent in the
these structures and the trigeminal nerve sensory innervation.
dog and humans. The mandibular and sublingual glands empty by
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00049-4
571
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
VO
Figure 49-1 Diagram showing the salivary glands of the cat. M,
mandibular: Mo, molar: P parotid; SL, sublingual; Z,zygomatic.
-unsl eded uoon e on ixa a uium 'suaiss inp aneeas
gual caruncle) just lateral to the frenulum of the tongue.
 The parotid gland is the largest salivary gland. It lies ventral to the
Figure 49-2 Examination of the cat's mouth is facilitated by holding the
ear canal and it slightly overlaps the masseter muscle The posterior
puey lauo aut po launy ishy aun buisn pue puey auo ym apeas peay
to open the lower jaw.
facial vein enters its ventral border. The parotid duct leaves cranio-
ventrally, passes over the masseter muscle, and enters the mouth in a
small papilla opposite the most prominent cusp of the last premolar
tooth. Some accessory parotid gland tissue can be seen at the cranial
animal is stable, further examination of the head injuries can be
end of the duct just in front of the zygomatic gland.'
undertaken. For uncooperative cats this may need to be performed
The mandibular gland lies caudal to the masseter muscle and
under sedation or general anesthesia.
ventral to the parotid. The posterior facial vein crosses over the man-
dibular gland. The mandibular duct leaves the gland medially and
Clinical examination and signs
runs craniomedially in close association with the sublingual gland. It
 Clinical signs of oral injury or disease include hypersalivation, loss of
passes between the extrinsic muscles ofthe tongue and then continues
craniad against the oral mucosa, running parallel to the mandible to
appetite or fastidiousness, and diffculty in swallowing or prehending
open at the apex of the sublingual papilla, accompanied by the sub-
food. Affected animals may be in poor condition due to a reduced
lingual duct.
intake of food. Halitosis with or without hemorrhage from the mouth
 The sublingual gland is closely associated with the mandibular
 may also be reported.
 gland caudally. It extends cranially with the sublingual duct, running
A thorough examination of the head should involve a visual inspec-
in close association with the mandibular duct.
tion looking for asymmetry, swellings, ulceration, and trauma. The
 The molar gland lies between the mucosa ofthe lips and the orbicu-
mandibular salivary glands and the submandibular lymph nodes
laris oris muscle It is a triangular-shaped gland, wider caudally. It
sdil pue uuo aut oi Ainlul lmys aul ot lepnes isn! panedied aq pinoys
extends to a level between the frst premolar and the canine Molar
will usually be obvious to the observer, except perhaps in long-haired
ducts open directly through the mucosa into the oral cavity, with the
cats. The inside of the mouth can be inspected in amenable animals
saujuado aieiedas iauo li ot suaselpe io asoip su ionp ienqpueu
uup au sund pue siosiu iamoi aul uo iauy isny au supeid kq
may be present.
distally, keeping the thumb and middle finger of the other hand on
 The zygomatic gland is usually ovoid or pyramidal in shape and it
the lips just caudal to the canine teeth (Fig. 49-2). The hard palate
lies between the zygomatic arch in the lower part of the orbit in
should be inspected for signs of trauma or bruising. The dental arcades
contact with the ventral orbit. The ventral aspect of the gland rests
should be evaluated for tartar and broken or missing teeth. Trauma
against the mucosa ofthe mouth caudal to the molar teeth. The major
or disease of the rostral tongue should be easy to identify, but condi-
duct leaves the ventral part of the gland and enters the oral cavity
tions affecting the caudal portion can be missed. To aid visualization
through the mucosa about 3 mm caudal to the molar tooth. Minor
of the caudal part of the mouth it is useful to place a finger on the
ducts may also be present.
tongue to depress it. Normally, the tonsils in a cat are not visible;
however, with certain diseases the tonsils may protrude from the crypt
and show a change in size and appearance. Salivary gland conditions
can result in ranulas (Fig. 49-3). A finger can be used to press dorsally
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
in the intermandibular space causing displacement of the tongue so
that the subglossal area can be inspected. A common location of
Cats that have undergone trauma rather than those presenting for
 squamous cell carcinomas is in the sublingual area near to the frenu-
chronic or non-traumatic disease may have other life-threatening inju-
lum of the tongue.
ries that require immediate attention and it is therefore important that
 In older animals or those with suspected concurrent disease or
the reader is familiar with the preoperative assessment of these cases
 trauma, further investigations may be indicated, such as biochemical
(see Chapter 1). For example, a cat with an avulsed chin may also have
 and hematologic analysis of blood to help identify any abnormalities
concurrent mandibular or maxillary fractures or brain injury. Once the
that may require further management.
572
Head
Chapter
49
B
C
Figure 49-3 An 18-year-old cat presented with a three week history of progressive increase in difficulty eating and a mild pyrexia. There was a firm
intermandibular swelling and purulent material was aspirated from this mass. (A) On oral examination there was sublingual swelling and a ranula.
 suanele dil aui y Alaleadoaid paeid se aipaau  () (moe) Apog ubiaiot e ag oi paadsns ainns e paleaan uoeniea punosen (a)
the suspected foreign body to aid surgical exploration. (D) A grass seed was removed at surgery. (E) The ranula was marsupialized in an attempt to 
decrease its size. An esophagostomy tube was placed for postoperative feeding until the cat was able to prehend orally again.
Feline orofacial pain syndrome
episodic, typically unilateral discomfort with pain-free intervals. The
discomfort is apparently triggered, in many cases, by mouth move-
A condition known as feline orofacial pain syndrome (FOPs) has
ments. The majority of cases in this study had a history of mild oral
been described in one study.3 This is a pain disorder of cats relating
lesions and a small number of cases experienced their frst sign of
to behavioral signs of oral discomfort and tongue mutilation. The
discomfort during eruption of their permanent teeth. The degree of
condition primarily affects Burmese cats and is characterized by an
pain these cats express seems to be unrelated to the severity of oral
573
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
lesions and is therefore thought to be a neuropathic or anxiety-related
ranulas), and infections.5-8 Neoplasias affecting the mandible and
condition.
maxilla are discussed in detail in Chapter 55.
 In feline cases of oral pharyngeal neoplasia the tongue is the most
frequent tumor site followed by the gingiva. In a survey of 340 cats
Diagnostic imaging
with cutaneous neoplasia, the head was the most common site for
In cases of suspected neoplasia, a baseline check for metastases
basal cell tumors, mast cell tumors, and squamous cell carcinomas.?
should be performed and include three-view thoracic radiographs (see
The general characteristics of skin tumors are discussed in detail in
Chapter 9). Survey radiographs of the affected area of the head can
Chapter 20.
provide useful information about whetherunderlying bone is involved
and radiographs will be necessary in trauma cases to assess for the
Squamous cell carcinoma
 presence of fractures. Intraoral and oblique radiographs can be par-
Oral squamous cel carcinoma is a malignant tumor that may occur
ticularly useful as they avoid superimposition of bony structures.
More advanced imaging such as computed tomography or magnetic
sase se yns suoeis uean u paieipui aq eu ue aueuosa
metastasizes to ipsilateral regional lymph nodes, and rarely spreads
with neoplasia, prior to surgical planning or radiation therapy. Ultra-
to distant sites. Given the local invasiveness the prognosis for this
sonography can be useful for investigation of soft tissue inflammation
fast-growing, invasive tumor in cats is grave, so it is vital to identify
of the tongue and detection of foreign bodies (Fig. 49-3B) and it has
and treatthe condition early. The average reported duration of survival
been used in one study to help delineate soft tissue margins of lingual
after diagnosis of this tumor has been reported as two months. There
squamous cell carcinoma.4
is no sex or breed predisposition, although entire male cats were more
commonly affected in one study.* The gingiva, tongue, and sublingual
region are the most commonly reported sites of squamous cell
Biopsy
carcinoma.6.8
It can be diffcult to determine whether a lesion is neoplastic or
Mucosal ulceration, necrosis, and severe suppurative inflammation
are commonly associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma. There
inflammatory from the visual or radiographic appearance alone and
this is particularly the case for oral lesions in the cat where inflamma-
may also be mucosal swelling in the absence of ulceration, or animals 
tory lesions (eg.. hyperplastic gingival, eosinophilic granuloma
may be presented solely for chin enlargement. Gingival squamous cell
carcinoma often invades the underlying mandible or maxilla, leading
complex) are common and can be aggressive The primary lesion may
be initially evaluated by fine needle aspiration to provide a rapid
to severe and extensive tumor involvement of the bone in that area
preliminary cytological assessment Regional lymph nodes, whether
and marked osteolysis on radiographs. In addition to osteolysis, there
enlarged or not, need to be assessed via fine needle aspiration and
is commonly periosteal new bone formation and osseous metaplasia
 of tumor stroma detected on radiography and computed tomography
cytologic examination.
If sedation is required to obtain the aspirate, it is also recommended
(CT) evaluation.?
to consider taking a biopsy. A biopsy is crucial for obtaining a sample
Although several environmental risk factors have been recognized,
for histopathologic examination to enable an accurate diagnosis and
the cause of feline oral squamous cell carcinoma remains poorly
 plan appropriate treatment; biopsy of masses should be undertaken
defined Various potential contributing factors have been suggested
 prior to attempting surgical resection. It is important to obtain a deep
[Box 49-1).
sample as oral lesions are frequently infected, necrotic, or inflamed.
To date, no therapies or combinations of therapy have shown great
Large samples that include healthy tissue at the edge and also include
success in treating this tumor. Local and regional disease control is
deeper areas of the lesion will increase the diagnostic yield. Lesions
(ss ianeu aas) Auoisanqipueu se yons Aains ieog suauneaa
such as feline oral squamous cell carcinoma should never be biopsied
radiation therapy (see Chapter 15), or radiation therapy combined
through the skin but rather through an intraoral incision. An intraoral
  a a (e  s a 
biopsy prevents seeding of the tumor into the surrounding normal
modalities used. The one-year survival rate is generally less than 10%.
external tissues. These tissues may be required for local reconstruction
with a median survival time of approximately three months for most
after oral tumor excision and, thus, need to be preserved without
therapies. The overall poor survival times in cats with oral squamous
tumor contamination. For more details on different biopsy procedures
cell carcinoma may reflect the tumor's location and aggressive behav-
see Chapter 14
ior, as sublingual and maxillary tumors are rarely resectable, and also
the fact that this tumor is often diagnosed late in the course of the
st uoneol pue aaeis ioun s,juaed enpiaipul ue suissassy aseas
critical in advising an owner regarding possible treatment options and
likely outcome Early diagnosis followed by aggressive local treatment
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE HEAD
[eians aaondui oi Aem isaq aul s aie aaioddns aneudoidde pun
times. Recurrence despite aggressive surgical resection is common,
Many conditions around the head will not be confined to a single
 thus multimodality therapy appears to be indicated.
organ or area. Neoplasia, for example may primarily appear to affect
Aeu sugeu iauiny pue uonsadsu iaso inq sdil io uuo au
reveal invasion into the bone of the mandible or maxilla. For
further information on diseases of the different parts of the head the
Box 49-1 Potential contributing causes to feline
reader is referred to Chapters 50 to 58.
squamous cell carcinoma
Passive smoking
Neoplasia of the head
Flea control collars
Oral neoplasia overall is common in cats, accounting for 3-12% of
Flea shampoos (decreased risk)
all feline neoplasms.4 Differential diagnoses in cats with oral masses
Diet 
include dental disease, malignant tumors, benign abnormalities (eg..
574
Head
Chapter
49
Fbrosarcoma
inspection may be required to find a puncture hole or small scab.
pue azeueip [enuan ioy uoisaoid Aq iyssasns Alensn s juauea
Feline fbrosarcoma is one of the most common subcutaneous neo-
oe aie ieu sieuue u sase aaas aio ul 'snoique ieiaaid
plasms in cats and the second most common feline oral neoplasm in
systemically unwell (eg., with pyrexia, dehydration, etc.), more inten-
One survey of 37l cases. It is a locally aggressive tumor with a moder-
ate metastatic rate and high recurrence rates.10 Oral fibrosarcoma
sive treatment would be recommended with intravenous fluids, drain-
age, and flushing the abscess cavity in combination with systemic
affects cats of a wide age range, but with a median age of 10 years.5
The tumor is usually located in the gingiva or palate, arising from the
abscess that has formed rapidly causing local ischemia ofthe skin: the
submucosal stroma. It is locally infltrative and causes local destruc-
dead skin will slough or can be debrided as part of the management
tion of bone and muscle. Aggressive surgical excision is the treatment
(Fig. 49-4). These lesions are also very painful so analgesics should be
of choice, but unfortunately recurrence rate is high due to poor local
administered.Unless contraindicated, non-steroidalanti-inflammatory
disease control
drugs are recommended in these cases. Alternatively, opioids can be
administered to hospitalized patients.
Inflammatory disorders of the head
 Proliferative inflammatory eosinophilic granulomatosis is a common
disease of the head in cats and it may be localized to the skin, the
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE TONGUE
 mucocutaneous junctions or the oral cavity. The disease has three dif-
ferent manifestations: indolent ulcer, eosinophilic plaque, and eosi-
The feline tongue is particularly prone to trauma and foreign bodies
nophilic granuloma. The last mentioned form can affect the cheek,
due to its barbed nature. Neoplasms are occasionally diagnosed but
uouuos e aq ol 1eadde nou saop uied aneled aul pue anguol au
animals are often only presented at an advanced stage as these are
feature, but the nodular form in the oral cavity may make deglutition
most commonly sublingual so are easily missed in the early stage of
diffcult.
the disease. It is important to fully evaluate the tongue, examining
 The eosinophilic granuloma complex was reported in 17 related
 both the caudal aspect and sublingual area, to avoid missing foreign
Norwegian forest cats and the high prevalence of the disease in this 
bodies or masses.
 population is suggestive of a genetic background.l There may also be
a viral etiology. The lesions of acute feline calicivirus infection can
appear similar; they are of a transient vesiculo-ulcerative nature and
Tongue trauma
involve, to varying degrees, the palate, tongue gingiva, lips, nasal
Jlas jo zjnsal e se iauia ie ayl ul Ainjul ol auoid si anguo aul
philtrum, and oral fauces. Chronic ulceroproliferative faucitis is a
inflicted injury as the cat bites its own tongue during a traumatic
incident (Fig. 49-5) or from a foreign body such as a fishing hook
carriage.12
or needle and thread. Small lesions can be left to heal by second
 These lesions can be treated by medical management, surgical resec-
intention. More severe lacerations should be repaired using simple
tion alone or in combination with therapeutics.
interrupted sutures of absorbable suture material such as 2M poligle-
caprone or polyglyconate If a proportion of the tongue is lost due to
Abscessation
necrosis or trauma then intravenous fluids and provision for feeding
Abscesses around the head are common sequelae to cat fight or bite
injuries. The normal flora of the cat's mouth includes strains of hemo-
lytic staphylococci, β-hemolytic streptococci, Pasteurella multocida,
Escherichia coli, and fusiformsl3 so abscesses are often associated with
these bacteria. Affected animals may present with depression, diff-
culty eating, pyrexia, and obvious swelling. In early cases, careful
Figure 49-5 A five-year-old male domestic short-haired cat that
m e se aiaul ape e pe paas e ae paasa
Figure 49-4 A stray Ccat after debridement of an abscess. The overlying
thickness central wound on the tongue suspected to be secondary to the
skin was necrotic and required resection. A large deficit was present on
 aam anbuot aut jo suibyeu leael aul anbuot aui yonoui bua te
the cheek of the cat, that healed by second intention with appropriate
intact and no specific treatment was required aside from placement of a
wound management. (Courtesy of Tanya Mils.)
feeding tube to bypass the mouth while the laceration healed.
575
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
via a tube may be required in some cases until the cat is able to
delineate soft tissue margins of lingual SCC. Treatment can be
prehend food on its own. In dogs, resection of up to 50% of the
attempted by wide surgical excision, which may necessitate concurrent
tongue can be performed without major complications; however, con-
mandibulectomy, followed with radiation and chemotherapy. but
clusive evidence regarding the success of glossectomy in cats is una-
 prognosis is guarded (one year survival of <25%) as it is not often
vailable. Cats are generally less tolerant than dogs of procedures that
possible to achieve local control.17
affect their ability to eat (eg., mandibulectomies and maxillectomies)
so therefore their postoperative recovery from large glossectomies (up
 Inflammatory disease of the tongue
to 50%) is less predictable. In addition to difficulties in eating, the
 ability to groom, which is an important aspect of their behavior, will
also be severely compromised.
treated by medical management, surgical resection alone, or in com-
bination with therapeutics Laser-assted surgery had been reported
for one cat with a lesion involving the caudal tongue and pharynx.18
Foreign bodies
After surgery the cat recovered rapidly on steroids, and its condition
Gastrointestinal foreign bodies are relatively common in cats. Fastidi-
and quality of life improved greatly. Conventional surgery was not felt 
 ous grooming habits and the anatomy ofthe tongue with its backward
to be appropriate in this case because of the vascular nature of the
facing barbs makes expulsion of sticky foreign material difficult in the
tongue and pharynx.
cat. Thread and sewing needles are common gastrointestinal foreign
bodies and the thread is most commonly anchored at either the
Thyroglossal duct cyst
tongue or the pylorus - a thorough examination ofthe mouth, includ-
The thyroglossal duct is a tract that connects the foramen cecum at
ing the sublingual area, is necessary for the thread or a needle. 14 In a
the base of the tongue to the thyroid gland as the gland undergoes
review of 24 cats with gastrointestinal linear foreign bodies, 13 had
embryologic descent to the trachea. Thyroglossal cysts have been
the linear foreign bodies wrapped around either the base of the tongue
reported in two cats with cervical masses12.20 and they will be discussed
or in the sublingual area at presentation, but in six of these cats this
further in Chapter 53.
was missed at frst inspection.15 Cutting and the release of the foreign
body may be successful in some cats and can avoid the need for intes-
tinal surgery if clinical signs do not warrant immediate surgical inter-
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE
to hospitalize the cat and monitor it clinically, radiographically, and
SALIVARY GLANDS
hematalogically for any changes that may indicate the need for sub-
sequent surgical intervention'5 (see Chapter 29).
Salivary gland neoplasia, sialoadenitis, and mucoceles have all been
reported in cats.
Neoplasia of the tongue
Neoplasia of the salivary glands and duct
Reported lingual neoplasms in the cat include squamous cell carci-
noma,57 fbrosarcoma and lymphoma, 1 which represent the majority
 The predominant presenting sign for animals with salivary gland neo-
(approximately 24%) of all oral tumors in this species. The most
plasia is that of a mass being noted by the owner. Other common
common site of oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is in the sublin-
complaints included halitosis, dysphagia, and exophthalmia.2l Adeno-
gual area in the ventral portion of the tongue near the frenulum (Fig.
carcinoma is the most commonly reported tumor affecting the salivary
49 -6). Mucosal ulceration, necrosis, and severe suppurative inflamma-
gland in cats,5.21 with the mandibular and parotid glands most fre-
[u ym sies s auo ul os um suuy uoo ae uon
quently affected223 (Fig. 49-7). Metastasis is rare, but has been
SCC were younger (mean, 1ll.9 years) compared to cats with gingival
reported locally and distally to draining lymph nodes, liver, and lung.
SCC (mean, 13.6 years).? Ultrasonography may be used to help
as well as the spleen.24-26 Thirty cats with histopathologically con-
multi-institutional study.2l Siamese cats were over-represented, indi-
cating a possible breed predisposition.2 The median survival time for
thethirty cats in this study was 516 days.2 Other salivary gland tumors
are rarely reported in cats (Box 49-2).
 Adenocarcinoma has also been reported affecting the salivary duct
Jo oml pue 'sieak ei-uaaas uoy aee ul paguei sie aul os'sieo aay u!
the cats were Siamese. The minor salivary gland was involved in four
of the five cats. Two cats had local metastasis at the time of
diagnosis.
Necrotizing sialoadenitis
Necrotizing sialometaplasia is an ischemic disease of the salivary
glands. Unilateral swelling of mandibular salivary glands in two cats,
aged nine and seven years, was diagnosed as necrotizing sialometa-
representing 13% of salivary gland disease cases in a review of 85
cats.23 Unilateral mandibular salivary glands were affected in all 13
cases and males and females were equally represented.
 Histologic features are used to differentiate the disease from other
Figure 49-6 Lingual squamous cell carcinoma in a cat.
salivary gland lesions, particularly neoplasia, and they include lobular
576
Head
Chapter
49
A
Figure 49-7 Salivary adenocarcinoma affecting the right mandibular salivary gland in a nine-year-old male domestic short-haired cat. (A) A large mass
is visible on the caudolateral aspect of the jaw of the cat just ventral to the ear. (B) The salivary gland has been dissected and is shown just prior to
duct ligation to include some of the monostomatic parts of the sublingual glands that are closely associated. (C) A closed suction drain has been
placed at the end of surgery. (Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
found on visual and physical examination.4 The cat may present with
Box 49-2 Salivary gland tumors in the cat
dysphagia, exophthalmia, and dyspnea depending on which gland is
involved. Intermittent vomiting ptyalism, and lethargy have also been
Adenocarcinomas21
Aesaioiops oal unouaaie s enei el zpaoda
Sebaceous carcinoma27
distress may be present. Clinical signs largely depend on the location
Basal cell adenocarcinomasz8
and size of the mucocele Differential diagnoses include an abscess.
Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma29
neoplasia, a foreign body, and a granuloma.42
Salivary duct adenocarcinomas30
The diagnosis of salivary mucoceles involves aspiration of a thick,
Malignant mixed tumor/carcinosarcoma 3
stringy golden (or often dark pink due to the presence of erythrocytes)
Oncocytoma33
fluid with low cellularity from the mass. Staining ofthe aspirated fluid
with periodic acid Schiff stain will confirm the presence of saliva.
Sialography may be useful for identifying specific gland involvement
-ier sisai sugeut ssousep iao ruaiedde Aipeai pou si i uaum
Ography, ultrasonography, computed tomography) may help rule out
necrosis of salivary tissue, squamous metaplasia conforming to duct
other disease processes, such as a foreign object or involvement or
 and/or acinar outlines, preservation of salivary lobular morphology.
invasion of multiple tissues, but are unlikely to definitively identify a
and variable inflammation and granulation tissue.34 The treatment is 
salivary mucocele.
[yued krauaxa s aseasip au sop ul (moaq aas) uosixa ieiins
 Treatment options include draining the mucocele, marsupializa-
seM Apns auo ul pajodai sien oml aul ul Aiaains uouy Aiaonai inq
tion, and removing the involved gland. Drainage alone is likely to
result in recurrence unless the source of mucus is addressed. Marsu-
lesion seems likely. The prognosis following surgical excision appears
pialization, which involves excising an elliptical section of mucosa
favorable.
over the mucocele, draining the saliva, and apposing the mucosal
surface to underlying connective tissue, does not address the underly-
ing problem. Because of potential complications such as frequent
Salivary mucocele
recurrence and the fact that future surgical intervention would be dif-
 Salivary mucoceles are formed by the extravasation and accumulation
ficult, marsupialization is not the preferred procedure unless the
of saliva in tissues adjacent to a salivary gland. The accumulated saliva
primary problem can be identified and treated concurrently (see Fig.
incites an inflammatory response, leading to a walled-off accumula-
49-3). Thus, surgically excising the affected gland is the recommended
tion of mucoid fluid. Trauma can cause salivary mucoceles; however,
treatment in all cases (see below). In one series of seven cats with
 most cases are presumed to be idiopathic.
salivary mucoceles, with a follow up ranging from two months to 13
Salivary mucoceles are uncommon in cats although case reports
years, no signs of recurrence were seen in any of the cats after salivary
exist.35-41 All the salivary glands, except the molar gland, can be
 gland resection.42
affected and in one series of seven cats with this condition the sub-
 Three dogs and one cat were diagnosed at the University of Penn-
lingual gland was involved in five cases and the mucocele formed a
 sylvania Veterinary Hospital as having parotid salivary duct rupture
ranula in all of the cases.42
and fistula as a result of previous surgery. Sialography was used to
The mass is usually detected by careful physical examination.42 A
confrm the diagnosis. Two animals were treated by ligation, and two
unilateral fluctuant non-painful mass, close to the salivary glands,
. in
by anastomosis of the parotid duct. All four animals returned to
the sublingual or cervical area or on the buccal mucosal surface is
normal after treatment.
577
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE LIPS
AND CHEEK
Cleft lips
Cleft lips or harelips (cheiloschisis) can be unilateral or bilateral and
 are considered rare in the cat.44 They are congenital defects either seen
in isolation or in conjunction with cleft palate (see Chapter 56) and
aeia e jo soa aie aau t'd ian a buae alu
tendency in Siamese but teratogenic dnugs such as griseofulvin are also
aq ues aans svs,uouos sul yo sisauaoued au u paeu!
attempted in cases that have associated clinical signs such as recurrent 
infections, nasal discharge, oronasal fistulae.
Neoplasia
 Neoplastic lesions of the lips and cheek in the cat include squamous
cell sarcoma (Fig. 49-8), fbrosarcoma, neurofibroma, melanoma,
mast cell tumor, basal cell carcinoma, hemangiosarcoma, labial gran-
uloma, eosinophilic granuloma, labial ulcer, or rodent ulcer.$.47.43
 Some lesions of the lip may be amenable to resection and recon-
struction with local skin flaps or geometric closure techniques.42 The
Figure 49-8 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lip in an eight-year-old
angularis oris axial pattern dermal flap has been used for reconstruc-
female tortoiseshell (calico) and white cat.
tion of a large ventral chin and rostral lip wound in the cat.50
B
C
D
Figure 49-9 Basal cell carcinoma in a nine-year-old male domestic short-haired cat. (A,B) Several lesions were present on the mucocutaneous junction 
of the lip and chin. (c) The masses were excised by performing an eliptical excision with minimal margins of normal tissue. (D) The cat three weeks
postoperative; the excision site healed without complication.
578
Head
Chapter
49
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE CHIN
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE TONSIL
Conditions affecting the skin of the chin may have spread from the
Neoplasia of the tonsil
adjacent mandible, or the primary lesion in the chin may invade the
bone. For chin lesions localized to the skin (Fig. 49-9) the reader is
SCC was the commonest tonsilar tumor in a review of oral neoplasia
referred to Chapter 20 and for lesions with mandibular involvement
in cats (Fig. 49-1ll). Affected cats had mucosal ulceration, necrosis
see Chapter 55.
and severe suppurative inflammation. Tonsillar SCCs have a high rate
of metastasis to regional lymph nodes and distal organs and therefore
a very poor prognosis after local excision.Four cats with tonsillar SCC
Chin avulsion
and one cat with SCC affecting the cheek were given a combination
 of radiation and carboplatin chemotherapy. They had a mean survival
Mandibular fractures5l may be accompanied by skinning of the lower
jaw44 whereby the whole submental area becomes separated from the
of 724 days and the median had not been reached because of contin-
horizontal rami of the mandible (Fig. 49-10). The chin usually sepa-
ued survival of four cats.52
rates at the junction between the gum and the teeth so there is usually
insufficient tissue remaining on the mandible to ensure a secure repair
and sutures must be anchored to teeth or bone [see below).
Neoplasia
 an yo uuo aun guae punoy roum uoo iso au st oos
This tumor is usually locally aggressive and invades adjacent bone, so
radical excision will involve mandibulectomy (Chapter 55). Inflam-
matory or infectious lesions may be difficult to distinguish from neo-
plastic lesions so prior investigations including local and thoracic
radiography and biopsy of the mass and local lymph node aspiration
are recommended to enable diagnosis prior to the decision to perform
radical surgery.
Other tumors affecting the feline chin, including fibrosarcoma
and osteosarcoma, are discussed in Chapter 56, and skin tumors in
Chapter 20.
B
Figure 49-11 A three-year-old male neutered domestic short-haired cat
with a tonsillar lesion extending to the base of the tongue. The 
histopathologic diagnosis was of a marked pyogranulomatous reaction of
the right tonsil. (A) The large tonsillar mass was causing increased
respiratory noise and halitosis. (B) The mass was excised by a
combination of sharp and blunt dissection and with the use of
diathermy. Positioning the cat for intraoral surgery was facilitated by use
Figure 49-10 Chin degloving injury in a two-year-old male entire cat
of a custom-made device through which the canine teeth were placed.
579
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Lymphoma can affect the feline tonsils and is usually accompanied
by lymphadenopathy. Cervical lymphadenopathy, ipsi- or contralat-
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Ad ls a ym ua 'ui susnd u e si 'ie
cancers. Fine needle aspirates of these lymph nodes or excisional
Glossectomy
biopsy of the tonsil will confirm the diagnosis. In spite of being appar-
ently confned to the tonsil, this disease is considered systemic at
Removal of part of the tongue or partial glossectomy is performed to
diagnosis in more than 90% of patients.
treat small neoplasms or traumatic lesions affecting the tip or side
 Simple tonsillectomy is almost never curative but, when performed,
(Box 49-3). It is not known exactly how much of the tongue can be
it probably should be done bilaterally because of the high percentage
removed in the cat while preserving function, though in the dog up
of bilateral disease. Cervical lymphadenectomy, especially
to 50% can be effectively removed. It must be noted, however, that
large and fixed nodes, is rarely curative and should be considered
postoperative recovery may become more complicated with increasing
diagnostic only.
 volumes of resection. The tongue is very vascular so precautions must
 Other tumors, especially malignant melanoma, may also metasta-
be taken to prevent aspiration of blood. The cat may also be reluctant
size to the tonsil.
to eat postoperatively so placement of a feeding tube should be con-
sidered (see Chapter 12). Grooming will also be interfered with and
 provision should be made to attend to this.
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
Salivary gland resection
Several factors must be considered prior to oral surgery in the cat The
Salivary glands are resected if they are neoplastic, affected by necrotiz-
qdual sunul suoeasaau ysnoioyi pey aaey Pinoys juaed
ing sialoadenitis, or for definitive treatment of salivary mucoceles.
node and mass aspirates, radiography, and coagulation profiles where
Surgical treatment consists of removing the entire mandibular-
deemed appropriate. Blood typing or cross-matching should be con-
sublingual salivary chain on the affected side with marsupialization
sidered in cats where blood loss is anticipated (see Chapter 5).
if a ranula is present. In dogs, the mandibular and sublingual glands
Cats with oral masses can have complicated endotracheal intuba-
are intimately associated so both glands are removed together if
ladeuo aas] Auoisoauei uaaa ue woad cn juadimbg uo
disease affects one of the two glands. In cats, the two glands are sepa-
46), endotracheal tubes of multiple sizes, and suction should be avail-
rate so it may not be necessary to remove both glands; however, there
able at the time of induction and recovery from surgery.
is insuffcient literature published on this to determine whether resec-
 An appropriately sized mouth gag is useful for intraoral surgery to
tion of only the affected gland will be effective treatment. In a case
 maintain an open mouth and thereby facilitate access to the intraoral
series of seven cats with salivary mucoceles, five were treated surgically.
structures (see Fig. 49-12). There is a risk of aspiration of blood and
 Three had the entire mandibular-sublingual chain removed, and the
fluids during surgery so the pharyngeal area should be packed with a
sublingual chain alone was removed in one cat In all cats marsupiali-
swab or bandage.
zation, lancing, or resection of the mucocele was performed concur-
 Povidone iodine solution or 0.2% chlorhexidene solution is used
rent to surgical resection of the glands.42 The glands can be removed
for aseptic preparation of the oral cavity. Eye lubrication should be
with the cat positioned in dorsal or dorsolateral recumbency and both
used and care taken to prevent antiseptic solutions entering the eye.
techniques are described (Box 49 -4).
 If it is anticipated that the cat may have diffculty or reluctance to
Resection of the parotid and molar salivary glands is performed
 prehend food postoperatively then the cat should be prepared for a
less frequently but descriptions of the surgical techniques are pro-
feeding tube to be placed, with an adequate area of hair clipped and
vided in Boxes 49-5 and 49-6." There is one report in the literature
aas] ruauaeid aqn ioy panquasse pue panedand zuadinba au
of a feline zygomatic salivary cyst that was removed through
Chapter 12).
lateral orbitotomy and partial zygomatic arch resection (Box 49-7).
 Box 49-3 Glossectomy
The cat is positioned in sternal recumbency with the mouth held 
 open with a mouth gag.
Transverse glossectomy
Stay sutures are placed both in the rostral aspect of the tongue, that 
will be removed, and in the caudal part, that are to remain (Fig.
49-12). Horizontal mattress sutures are placed about 5 mm caudal to 
the incision line and about 3 mm apart using 3/0 polydioxanone. The
tongue is then incised cranial to this line of sutures. Mucosal surfaces
are then apposed with simple interrupted sutures.
Wedge glossectomy
A small margin of normal tissue should be removed from around the 
(A)
B
tumor. Simple interrupted sutures are pre-placed prior to tumor
excision (Hg. 49-13). The pre-placed sutures are tightened and 
Figure 49-12 Transverse glossectomy in the cat. (A) Stay sutures
additional sutures placed to appose the mucosal edges on the dorsal
facilitate manipulation of the tongue. (B) Pre-placed sutures reduce
and ventral tongue surfaces.
hemorrhage prior to placing additional sutures after resection of part 
of the tongue.
580
Head
Chapter
49
Box 49-3 Continued
A
B
C
 Figure 49-13 Partial wedge glossectomy. (A) Stay sutures are placed to help stabilize the tongue prior to resection of the mass. Pre-placed sutures
are placed across where the mass will be removed. (B) The pre-placed sutures are shown after mass resection. (c) The sutures are then tightened 
 and additional simple interrupted sutures placed to appose the ventral and dorsal mucosal surfaces.
 Box 49-4 Mandibular and sublingual sialadenectomy
 Dorsal recumbency53
Dorsolateral recumbency54
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. The incision starts just 
 The cat is positioned in dorsolateral recumbency with a small sandbag
caudal to the mandibular symphysis on the affected side and extends 
under the neck. A small incision is made directly over the salivary
caudally parallel to the mandibular ramus to a point caudal to the ear
gland. The platysma muscle is divided and the gland located dorsal to
aeoey on pasui si asnu ewsieid aul (vtl-6t by) jeues 
the lymph nodes. The thin capsule is incised and the glandular tissue 
identification of the external jugular bifurcation. The mandibular lymph 
grasped with an Allis tissue forceps or thumb forceps and retracted to
 nodes must be identified: they lie more ventral to the salivary gland at 
facilitate dissection. The branches of the great auricular artery and
this location (Fig. 49-14B). The mandibular gland sits just caudal to the
vein that enter the gland on the dorsomedial aspect are ligated.
ramus of the mandible at or cranial to this birfurcation of the external 
 Dissection is continued rostrally along the duct and sublingual glands 
 jugular vein and dorsal to the lymph nodes. Blunt dissection is
under the mandibular ramus.
 performed to expose the mandibular salivary gland. The thin salivary 
 The mylohyoideus muscle needs to be incised for best exposure of 
gland capsule is incised and bluntly dissected off the gland to allow 
yi pajeb! s! pnp aul anuau jenbu!l pue anss!l yeinpuejb jeuson aul
ligation of the great auricular artery and vein that lie medially (Fig.
se Alleison lef se paasueni pue auadoudAjod z do Ns'l '
49-14C). The gland complex is then retracted caudally to allow blunt 
possible in an attempt to remove all salivary tissue and particularly if 
dissection of the sublingual gland under (dorsal to) the digastricus
a ranula is present. If during dissection the duct tears rostral to the 
muscle (Fig. 49-14D). A hemostat is placed from rostral to caudal
planned ligation site then further dissection is not necessary to 
under the digastricus muscle. The salivary gland complex and ducts are
perform ligation. The aim is to remove all the salivary gland tissue or
gently pulled under the external jugular birfurcation and digastricus
the mandibular gland and sublingual gland complex.
muscle (Fig. 49-14E).
The digastric, mylohyoideus, and platysma muscles and the 
 The mylohyoideus muscle needs to be incised for best exposure of 
 salivary gland capsule and subcutaneous tissues are reapposed 
the rostral glandular tissue and lingual nerve. The duct is ligated with 
with an absorbable monofilament suture such as 1.5M 
se Aeyison sef se papasuen pue auadondklod z lo Ws'l 'l
poliglecaprone s3
 possible in an attempt to remove all salivary tissue and particularly if 
a ranula is present. If during dissection the duct tears rostral to the 
Marsupialization
planned ligation site then further dissection is not necessary to perform 
 This should be performed in conjunction with salivary gland resection.
ligation. The aim is to remove all the salivary gland tissue or the 
The ranula is incised at the most dependent or swollen aspect, taking
mandibular gland and sublingual gland complex.
uaul saunpnuis jelis Aue oi abewep pjuabouie! asnen oi jou aten
 The digastric, mylohyoideus, and platysma muscles and the salivary 
simple interupted sutures or a simple continuous pattern using small
gland capsule and subcutaneous tissues are reapposed with an
gauge absorbable suture (1.5-2M poliglecaprone) can be used for
absorbable monofilament suture such as 1.5M poliglecaprone.53
suturing the stoma (see Fig. 49-3)
581
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
A
D
Figure 49-14 Salivary gland resection demonstrated on a cat cadaver.
(A} The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency and the skin incision
extends parallel to the mandible from caudal to the symphysis to caudal
to the level of the ear canal. (B) The mandibular lymph nodes (arrows)
are visible in this cat just between and axial to the external jugular
birfurcation.(C The mandibular salivary gland was located by blunt
dissection just dorsal to the mandibular lymph node. (D) The gland is
carefully dissected out and the sublingual gland complex and duct are
E
clearly visible. (E) The glands and ducts are brought under the external
jugular vein to aid further rostral dissection.
Removal of the zygomatic salivary gland via a ventral transconjuncti-
temporal, omocervical, and caudal auricular flaps.4? Descriptions of
val approach is possible in dogs.
skin flaps used for facial reconstruction are provided in Chapter 19.
Facial reconstructive surgery
Chin avulsion repair
Reconstruction of facial defects can be very challenging. even in the 
 Surgical repair of chin avulsion can be prone to failure if the avulsive
hands of an experienced surgeon. Most defects can be repaired using
and contractive forces that are tending to pull the chin off the man-
local available tissues. Lip defects can be reconstructed using geomet-
dible are not taken into consideration. The gum is not a strong enough
ric closure techniques and advancement of local tissues. Forehead
tissue to provide suffcient holding power for sutures as the sutures
defects can be reconstructed using skin grafts, caudal auricular flaps.
have a tendency to cheese-wire through. To avoid this from happening
the sutures need to be anchored around structures like the canine
tension on eyelids and maintain the integrity of the facial nerve Cheek
teeth or small holes in the mandible if the canine teeth are missing
defects can be reconstructed using local advancement, superfcial
[Box 49-8).
582
Head
Chapter
49
Box 49-5 Parotid gland sialadenectomy55
The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency and the skin incised 
over the vertical ear canal to a point just dorsal to the mandibular
ramus. The thin platysma muscle is incised to expose the parotid 
salivary gland and the parotidoauricularis muscle. The muscle is 
incised and retracted ventrally. The caudal auricular vein is ligated 
and divided. The gland is dissected away from the underlying tissue
starting at the dorsal caudal aspect of the gland. Care must be
taken at the base of the ear canal due to the close proximity of the
facial nerve. At the craniodorsal aspect of the V-shaped gland the
superficial temporal vein is identified and ligated. Once the gland
has been dissected out the parotid duct is ligated and divided. The
parotidoauricularlis muscle is reapposed with cruciate or horizontal
mattress sutures followed by reapposition of the platysma muscle,.
subcutaneous tissue, and skin.
 Adhesions to adjacent structures can make dissection challenging.
Facial nerve paralysis and hemorrhage from the external carotid 
 vessels are possible complications of parotid gland resection.
 Box 49-6 Molar gland sialadenectomy
The cat is positioned in lateral or dorsal recumbency with a mouth
 gag in place. A longitudinal intraoral incision is made from caudal to
the angle of the mouth (angularis oris) to a point immediately cranial
to the masseter muscle. It is important not to lacerate the deep facial
vein, which courses along the cranial aspect of the masseter muscle.
The molar gland is visible immediately below the mucosal surface.
pue dieus jo uojeuiqwon e buisn Ag aauy papassip s! puejb aul
blunt dissection, and the associated vessels and duct are ligated.
The mucosa is closed routinely with absorbable sutures.
Box 49-7 Zygomatic gland sialadenectomy37
B
The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency. A lateral orbitotomy with 
partial zygomatic arch resection is performed. A skin incision is made 
along the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch immediately ventral to
the globe. The periosteum of the zygomatic arch is incised and the 
orbital fascia is reflected dorsally. and the masseter aponeurosis 
ventrally. The dorsal half of the zygomatic arch is removed for a
distance of 2 cm using an air-powered high speed burr or rongeurs.
1et letqlo aui oi daap paieol s! puejb Aueaies pliewoh/z aul 
ynu se buouan 'aany papassi pue Alleshop paaan s! puel aul
of the duct as possible.
The wound is closed with simple interrupted sutures of absorbable
suture material such as polyglactin 910 or poliglecaprone in the
periosteum, masseter aponeurosis, and orbital fascia. The skin is 
closed routinely.
Box 49-8 Chin avulsion repair (Fig. 49-15)
C
The lower lip is reflected and the surface is debrided. Non-absorbable
Figure 49-15 Avulsion of the chin. (A) Complete avulsion of the chin
sutures of 3M prolene or polydioxanone are passed through the skin 
in a 18-month-old tabby cat involved in a road traffic accident. The
around the canine tooth and sutured firmly around the canine tooth.
mandible is exposed and the wound is markedly contaminated and the
This is repeated on the opposite side. If the canine teeth are broken
 chin significantly distracted. (B) After initial clipping of hair and cleaning
then the lip should be secured to the mandible through predrilled 
of the wound a symphyseal separation is clearly visible. (c} The symphysis
holes.
cerclage wire.51
885
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Supportive care is critical during treatment of cats with oral
disease. These cats are often in pain. The use of analgesics should
be considered in all patients and particularly those with large
tumors, tumors that have ulcerated, painful metastatic lesions, Or
after trauma.
Adequate nutrition is also critical in supportive care. Cats may
be in a poor nutritional state because of their difficulty or inability
to eat The pre-emptive placement of an esophageal feeding tube
or gastrostomy tube may be necessary (see Chapter 12). If oral
feeding is possible then soft food that can be lapped should be
offered.
 An Elizabethan collar is often required after surgery has been per-
formed on or around the head to prevent self-trauma of the surgical
site Effective nursing care of cats after head surgery is an important
D
component of the recovery (see Chapter 4).
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
Incisional breakdown soon after surgery is not uncommon, particu-
larly after resection of oral masses. It is not always essential to resuture
these lesions as many will subsequently heal by second intention. The
oral cavity has a good blood supply so infection of the superficial
tissues is not common. Infection in the mandible can be problematic
and diffcult to resolve. Delayed hemorrhage can occur following oral
pue aieiad si guouo aaieiadoisod nyaien os 'uonasai sse
the judicious use of sedatives for the first 12 hours following surgery
 can help prevent this.
Anorexia following any oral surgery appears to be more
common in the cat compared with the dog. therefore the use of
assisted feeding. via pre-placed feeding tubes is often required.
Esophagostomy tubes are relatively easily placed and maintained (see
Figure 49-15, Continued (D) The avulsed skin is secured back in an
Chapter 12).
oseidoau Aueuu ioy aiqeqoid iusi e si sasse jo anuaar
the lower canine teeth. (E) Two days postoperative. There is significant
oral lesions as it is often not feasible to remove these lesions with
swelling and edema of the chin but the skin apposition has been
large margins. Fibrosarcoma and SCCs are tumors that are particularly
maintained and the skin appears warm and viable.
liable to recur at the site of previous resection. The use of adjunctive
therapies (eg. radiotherapy) should be considered for these neo-
plasms (see Chapter 15). The prognosis for the cat is dependent on
Box 49-9 Tonsillectomy
the type of tumor or disease, the size of the lesion, and whether it is
in a position that will allow resection with adequate margins of
 The cat is positioned in sternal recumbency with a mouth gag in
normal tissue to increase the chance of a complete excision. Details
place. The tonsil is grasped with Allis tissue forceps or curved 
 on the prognosis of different diseases are discussed above in the rel-
mosquito forceps and pulled out of its crypt. The base of the tonsil
evant sections.
is transected with a scalpel blade, sharp scissors, electrosurgery. or 
laser. Hemostasis is achieved with digital pressure, electrosurgery. or
Salivary gland surgery
Wz xo s'l ylm aseg aui ie uoeb!l aunban Aew showni abien lasel
absorbable suture material. After removal of the tonsil the crypt can
Damage to salivary ducts or glands can result in mucoceles or ranulas.
be closed with a simple interrupted or continuous suture pattern.56 
These may be temporary complications, particularly after radical
tumor excision; once the postsurgical inflammation has subsided
these will usually resolve spontaneously. If this is not the case, then
removal of the offending salivary gland may be necessary. Adhesions
Tonsillectomy
 of salivary glands to adjacent structures can make dissection challeng
ing. Nerves and blood vessels are often intimately associated with the
 Tonsillectomy (Box 49-9) is rarely indicated in the cat but in the rare
glands and their ducts, and damage to these structures is possible
instances of suspected neoplasia of the gland it may be performed
during dissection. Temporary or permanent nerve deficits can be the
for tonsil resection and to collect tissue for histopathologic analysis
result. Hemorrhage is also a distinct possibility if there are adhesions
(see Fig. 49-11).
to underlying or overlying blood vessels.
584
Head
Chapter
49
REFERENCES
1. Crouch JE. Text atlas of cat anatomy.
 oncology. 4th ed. Elsevier; 2007.
gand of a cat. J Feline Med Surg
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1969.
p. 455-510.
2008;10:188-91.
p. 131-40.
18.
Kovacs K, Jakab C, Szasz AM. Laser-
34. Brown Pl, Bradshaw JM, Sozmen M,
2. Konig HE, Liebich HG. Veterinary
assisted removal of a feline eosinophilic
Campbell RH. Feline necrotising
anatomy of domestic mammals. 3rd ed.
 granuloma from the back of the tongue.
sialometaplasia: a report of two cases.
Stuttgart: Schattauer; 2007. p. 661-76.
Acta Vet Hung 2009;57:417-26.
I Feline Med Surg 2004;6:279-81.
3. Rusbridge C, Heath S, Gunn-Moore DA,
19.
 Giles IT 3rd, Rochat MC, Snider TA.
35. Harrison ID, Garrett JR. An ultrastructural
et al. Feline orofacial pain syndrome
 Surgical management of a thyroglossal
and histochemical study of a naturally
[FOPS): a retrospective study of 113 cases.
duct cyst in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
occurring salivary mucocele in a cat.
J Feline Med Surg 2010;12(6):498-508.
2007;230:686-9.
J Comp Pathol 1975;85:411-16.
Epub 2010 May 6.
20.
Kallet AJ, Richter KP, Feldman EC, Brum
86.
 Rahal SC, Nunes AL, Teixeira CR, Cruz
4.
Solano M, Penninck DG. Ulltrasonography
DE. Primary hyperparathyroidism in cats:
ML. Salivary mucocele in a wild cat. Can
 of the canine, feline and equine tongue:
seven cases (1984-1989). 1 Am Vet Med
Vet J 2003;44:933-4.
normal fndings and case history reports
Assoc 1991; 199:1767-71.
37. Speakman Al, Baines Sl, Williams JM,
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 1996;37:206-13.
21.
Hammer A, Getzy D, Ogilvie G, et al.
Kelly DF. Zygomatic salivary cyst with
 5. Stebbins KE, Morse CC, Goldschmidt
Salivary gland neoplasia in the dog and
mucocele formation in a cat. J Small 
 MH. Feline oral neoplasia: a ten-year
cat: survival times and prognostic factors.
Anim Pract 1997;38:468-70.
survey. Vet Pathol 1989;26:121-8.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 2001;37:478-82.
38. Feinman JM. Pharyngeal mucocele and 
6. Vos JH, van der Gaag I. Canine and feline
22
 Carberry CA, Flanders JA, Harvey HJ, Ryan 
respiratory distress in a cat. J Am Vet Med
oral-pharyngeal tumours. J Vet Med Ser A
AM. Salivary gland tumors in dogs and
Assoc 1990;197:1179-80.
1987;34:420-7
cats: a literature and case review. J Am
39.
Wallace LJ, Guffy MM, Gray AP, Clifford
7. Brodey RS. Alimentary tract neoplasms in
Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;24:561-7.
JH. Anterior cervical sialocele (salivary
the cat: a clinicopathologic survey of 46
23.
 Spangler WL, Culbertson MR. Salivary
cyst) in a domestic cat. J Am Anim Hosp
cases. Am I Vet Res 1966;27:74-80.
gand disease in dogs and cats: 245 cases
Assoc 1972;8:74-8.
 8. Martin CK, Tannehill-Gregg SH, Wolfe 
(1985-1988). I Am Vet Med Assoc
40. Hawe RS. Parotid salivary sialocele in a
TD, Rosol TJ. Bone-invasive oral
1991;198:465-9.
cat. Feline Pract 1998;26:6-8.
squamous cell carcinoma in cats:
24.
Volmer C, Benal Y, Caplier L, et al.
41.
Rahal SC, Mamprim MJ, Caporali EH,
 pathology and expression of parathyroid
Atypical vimentin expression in a feline
et al. Temporomandibular joint ankylosis 
hormone-related protein. Vet Pathol
 salivary gland adenocarcinoma with
and salivary mucocele in a cat: case
2011:48;302-12.
widespread metastases. J Vet Med Sci
report. Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 2007;59:
9. Miller MA, Nelson SL, Turk JR, et al.
2009;71:1681-4.
140-4.
Cutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats.
25.
Mazzullo G, Sfacteria A, lanelli N, et al.
42. Kiefer KM, Davis GJ. Salivary mucoceles 
Veterinary Pathology 1991:28:389-95.
Carcinoma of the submandibular salivary
in cats: A retrospective study of seven
10. Davis KM, Hardie EM, Lascelles BD,
glands with multiple metastases in a cat.
 cases 2007: http://veterinarymedicine
Hansen B. Feline fbrosarcoma:
Vet Clin Pathol 2005;34:61-4.
.dvm360.com/vetmed/Medicine/
 perioperative management. Compend
26. Burek KA, Munn RJ, Madewell BR.
ArticleStandard/Article/detail/456165.
Contin Educ Vet 2007;29:712-29.
 Metastatic adenocarcinoma of a minor
43. Harvey C. Parotid salivary gland duct
11. Leistra WH, van Oost BA, willemse T.
salivary gland in a cat. Zentralbl
rupture and fistula in the dog and cat.
Non-pruritic granuloma in Norwegian
Veterinarmed A 1994;41:485-90
J Small Anim Pract 1977;18:163-8.
forest cats. Vet Rec 2005;156:575-7.
27.
 Sozmen M, Brown Pl, Eveson IW.
44.
 Prescott Cw. Some oral lesions in the cat.
12. Reubel GH, Hoffmann DE, Pedersen NC.
 Sebaceous carcinoma of the salivary gland
Aust Vet J 1971;47(2):41-5.
Acute and chronic faucitis of domestic
in a cat. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin 
45.
Loevy HT. Cytogenic analysis of Siamese 
cats. A feline calicivirus-induced disease.
Med 2002;49:425-7.
cats with cleft palate. J Dent Res
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
28. Sozmen M, Brown Pl, Eveson IW. Salivary
1974;53:453-6.
1992;22:1347-60.
gand basal cell adenocarcinoma: a report
46.
 Scott Fw, LaHunta A, Schultz RD, et al.
13.
. Smith JE. Symposium on diseases in cats
of cases in a cat and two dogs. J Vet Med
Teratogenesis in cats associated with
- Ill. Some pathogenic bacteria in cats 
A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 2003;50:
 griseofulvin therapy. Teratology
with special reference to their public
399-401.
1974;11:79.
health significance. J Smal Anim Pract
29.
 Sozmen M, Brown Pl, Eveson J, Scott HW
47. Miller MA, Ramos JA, Kreeger IM.
1964;5:517-24.
Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma of the
Qutaneous vascular neoplasia in ffteen
14. Felts JF, Fox PR, Burk RL. Thread and
salivary gland in two cats. Eur J Vet Pathol
cats: clinical, morphologic, and
sewing needles as gastrointestinal foreign
1998;4:93-6.
immunohistochemical studies. Vet Pathol
bodies in the cat: a review of 64 cases.
30.
 Sozmen M, Brown Pl, Eveson JW. Salivary
1992:29:329-36.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1984;184:56-9.
 duct carcinoma in five cats. I Comp
48.
. Levene A. Upper digestive tract neoplasia
15. Basher Aw, Fowler ID. Conservative versus 
Pathol 1999;121:311-19.
in the cat [A comparative study]. J
surgical management of gastrointestinal
31.
Kim H, Nakaichi M, Itamoto K, Taura Y.
Laryngol Otol 1984;98:1221-4.
linear foreign bodies in the cat. Vet Surg
 Malignant mixed tumor in the salivary
49.
 Degner DA. Facial reconstructive surgery.
1987:16:135-8.
 gand of a cat. I Vet Sci 2008;9:331-3.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2007;22[2):
16. Bound Nl, Priestnall SL, Caniou MP.
32.
 Carpenter IL, Bernstein M. Malignant
82-8.
Lingual and renal lymphoma in a cat.
mixed (pleomorphic) mandibular salivary
50.
Bradford M, Degner DA, Bhandal J. Use
J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:272-5.
gand tumors in a cat. J Am An Hosp
of the angularis oris cutaneous flap for
17. Withrow SJ Vail DM. Cancer of the
Assoc 1991;27:581-3.
 repair of a rostral mandibular skin
 gastrointestinal tract. In: Withrow S), Vail
33.
Brocks BA, Peeters ME, Kimpfler S.
defect in a cat. Vet Comp Orthop
DM, editors. Small animal clinical
 Oncocytoma in the mandibular salivary
Traumatol 2011;24:303-6.
585
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
51. Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, Grundmann S.
53. Ritter MJ, Stanley BS. Salivary glands.
and cat. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
Montavon PM. Mandible and maxilla. In:
In: Tobias KM, Johnston SA, editors.
1993. p. 88.
Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs SJ.
Veterinary surgery small animal. Missouri:
 56. Anderson GM. Soft tissues of the oral
editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
Elsevier; 2012. p. 1439-47.
cavity. In: Tobias KM, Johnston SA,
 musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
 54. Dunning D. Tongue, lips, cheeks, pharynx,
 editors. Veterinary surgery small animal.
Elsevier; 2009. p. 311-28.
 and salivary glands. In: Slatter D, editor.
Missouri: Elsevier; 2012. p. 1425-37.
52.B
 Fidel J, Lyons J. Tripp C et al. Treatment
Textbook of small animal surgery. 3rd ed.
of oral squamous cell carcinoma with 
Saunders; 2002. p. 553-61.
accelerated radiation therapy and
 55. Smith MM, Waldron DR. Approach to
concomitant carboplatin in cats. J Vet
 the parotid salivary gland. In: Atlas of
Intern Med 2011;25:504-10.
 approaches for general surgery of the dog
586
50l
hapter
S.J. Baines
Aural conditions in cats are common. Many of these have underlying
then flares to form the pinna. The helix is the edge of the pinna and
causes that will respond effectively to medical management, but in 
 e rm a e si xa a a an si es a
uodo juaueail Aieud aul se lauia paiesipul st Aiagins saseo auos
tubercle on the medial aspect of the auricular cartilage at the opening
Or due to failure to respond to other treatment regimens. The approach
 of the vertical canal. The tragus is the lateral rim of the opening to
to aural disease, the surgical diseases that affect the feline ear, and the 
the external ear canal. The antitragus is caudal to the tragus and sepa-
surgical management of these diseases will be discussed in the follow-
rated from it by the inter-tragic notch. The tragohelicine fissure lies
ing chapter.
between the tragus and helix. The funnel-shaped cavum conchae
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The ear is a sensory organ that receives and transforms the vibrations
perceived as sound into neural impulses conveyed to the brain.
The ear is composed of the pinna, external ear canal (comprising
vertical and horizontal ear canals), the middle ear, and the inner ear
(Fig. 50-1).
Pinna
The pinna is a broad skin-covered extension of the external ear canal
cartilages that helps to collect and localize the origin of sound waves.
AuC
It is also important in non-verbal communication between cats and
other animals, including humans. Ear position, in association with
other changes in facial expression, can convey feelings such as fear.
 anger, happiness, and curiosity.
 The size and shape of the pinna varies according to breed, although
AnC
less so in the cat than the dog. Most cats, except Scottish Folds, have
erect pinnae unless they are diseased. The pinna is triangular in
EAM
appearance with the base of the triangle attached to the head. It has
a relatively hairless and more glabrous rostralateral concave surface
and a haired caudomedial surface The auricular cartilage of the pinna
TM
is elastic with small perforations through which blood vessels pass.
Rupture of these blood vessels may lead to an aural hematoma.
An C = annular cartilage, AuC = auricular cartilage,
P = pinna, TM = tympanic membrane 
EAM= external acoustic meatus
External ear canal
ET-opening to eustachian tube
The external ear canal opening is formed by the auricular and scuti-
Figure 50-1 Diagram illustrating the anatomy of the feline ear. (Reorinted
form cartilages. The large auricular cartilage is cone shaped from its
w uoyss/wad y s Aas ew/u ews jo xooga (ooz) h ae/s wo
origin at the annular cartilage to the extermal auditory meatus, and it
Elsevier.)
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00050-0
587
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
forms the vertical canal and, along with the tragus, antitragus, and
antihelix, the external auditory meatus. As the auricular cartilage
approaches the horizontal canal it is replaced by the annular cartilage.
The annular cartilage ends just before the tympanic membrane
Jo uoisuaixa ue si ym 'sea Aroine ieuaxa shoasso au pue
RW
the temporal bone containing the cochlea and peripheral vestibular
[eaxa au pue einq uedui au ie spua eues sul smeiedde
TM
acoustic meatus.
 There are numerous muscles of the external ear canal and groups
 of muscles act to move the ear in particular directions. These groups
 are rostro-auricular, caudo-auricular and ventro-auricular. The inner-
vation of the external ear is provided by cervical and cranial nerves.
Sensory input is via the branches of the 2"d cervical nerve dorsally
BS-
(greater occipital nerve) and ventrally (transverse cervical and greater
auricular nerves) and the facial nerve and mandibular branch of the
 trigeminal nerve.
 Blood supply to the labyrinth is provided by the vertebral artery via
TC
its basilar branches and blood supply to the rest of the ear is from the
external carotid artery and its branches (caudal, intermediate, lateral,
medial, and deep auricular arteries) and the superficial temporal
artery via the rostral auricular artery. Blood is drained by satellite veins.
TC =tympanic cavity, BS = bony septum, TM = tympanic membrane,
The skin of the ear canal contains sebaceous glands, which produce
M = malleus,I = incus, S = stapes, OW = oval window, RW = round window,
an oily substance and ceruminous glands (modifed apocrine glands).,
CF = communicating fissure.
which secrete a milky white fluid that turns brown on exposure to air.
The combined product of these glands is cerumen. Cerumen, along
Figure 50-2 Diagram illustrating the feline tympanic bulla. (Reprinted from
with trapped debris, is carried away from the tympanic membrane by
 5latter DH (2003) Textbook of SmallAnimal Surgery 3e, with permssion from E/sevier.)
migration of the epithelial cells lining the canal. The functions of
cerumen are: to protect the ear canals and tympanic membrane by
annulus. If the tympanic membrane is perforated, it will heal by pro-
entrapping microorganisms and their products and mechanically
liferation of the fbrous layer, which results in a thickened, opaque
removing them; to keep the ear canals moist, allowing normal desq-
 membrane in contrast to the normal translucent structure.
uamation of the epithelium; to contribute to the barrier function of
The normal barrier function of the tympanic membrane is impaired
the epidermis; and to have an antibacterial action mediated via seba-
with acute inflammation and this may lead to transtympanic migra-
 ceous gland-derived fatty acids.
tion of bacteria with resulting otitis media, and absorption of topical
medication with resulting ototoxicity. With chronic inflammation, the
Middle ear
tympanic membrane becomes thickened and this is less of a concern.
-! payensopnasd e Aq paull Aae paly-ie ue sl iea aippiu au
 The tympanic membrane is part of the mechanism of hearing. Vibra-
ated columnar epithelium containing goblet cells, which is continu-
tions detected by the tympanic membrane are transmitted via the
ous with the pharynx via the Eustachian tube. It is separated from the
ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) to the vestibular (oval) window.
external ear canal by the tympanic membrane. There are mucus-
 The tympanic membrane slants downward and inward obliquely, so
 producing glands in the tympanic cavity, but not in the external ear
that it forms an angle of 30-45° with the floor ofthe horizontal canal.
 canal and thus if mucus is present in the horizontal ear canal, it must 
This may be a mechanism to allow a larger tympanic membrane to
have originated in the tympanic cavity, which indicates a defect in the
ft in a given size of ear canal, thus decreasing the acoustic pressure in
tympanic membrane. The tympanic cavity is not sterile and bacteria
the ear canal needed to produce perceptible vibrations in the cochlea.
found in the tympanic cavity are similar to those found in the
However, this anatomic arrangement means that debris tends to accu-
nasopharynx and not the external ear canal.
mulate at the junction of the ventral horizontal ear canal and the
a iesi a e a sun  ea aip au
tympanic membrane.
eq u a ue 'add Aa  a '(e io) ssa
The tympanic membrane is a concave, semi-transparent epithelial
(Fig. 50-2).
structure. The umbo is the most depressed part and is formed where
The epitympanic recess is located dorsally and is the smallest chamber.
the tip of the manubrium of the malleus pulls the tympanic mem-
It contains two of the three ossicles, the malleus and incus, and the
brane medially. The tympanic membrane is divided into two parts.
facial nerve canal. The ossicles have synovial articulations with each
The pars flaccida is the smaller, dorsal opaque portion that is pink,
 other, with fibrous ligaments for support.
The tympanic cavity proper (mesotympanum) is adjacent to the tym-
the large gray, semi-transparent ventral portion. In cats, it may be dif-
 panic membrane and contains the stapes and part of the malleus. The
ficult to appreciate the pars flaccida as it is much smaller. Epithelial
stapes is attached to the vestibular (oval) window, which communi-
migration begins with the germinal epithelium at the umbo, and
cates directly with the inner ear. The manubrium of the malleus
Kuouu unp paeuep aq aou pnous eaie sun aoaia
attaches to the fibrous layer of the pars tensa, and may be seen through
 The tympanic membrane has four layers. The outermost layer is a
the normal tympanic membrane as the stria mallearis. The manu-
continuation of the lining of the external ear canal. Medial to this is
brium of the malleus is much straighter in the cat compared to the
C-shape in the dog.
inner layer is composed of modifed respiratory epithelium, which
The tympanic bulla (hypotympanum) is the largest of the three com-
lacks goblet cells and cilia normally found in respiratory epithelium.
 partments of the tympanic cavity, and is located in the ventromedial
The tympanic membrane is thin in the center and thicker at the
part of the tympanic cavity. In cats, a bony shelf separates the tym-
 periphery, where the fibrous layers thicken to form the tympanic
 aa ise eq  a y ro  ud
588
Ear
Chapter
50
a small defect in the shelf located just lateral and caudal to the round
whether the disease is unilateral or bilateral. Unilateral disease is more
window in the medial caudal part of the tympanic cavity proper. This
consistent with foreign bodies, ear tumors, and polyps, whereas gen-
ladaid Aiaes suedu au uoy enq sjuedut ay on sae sayeu
eralized dermatopathies are more likely to be bilateral. Seasonal
via a myringotomy diffcult.
iea jo asne iuodu ue s upum suoeai siiale sisasns aseas
The bony eminence (promontory) is on the medial wall of the tym-
disease in cats. The age of the patient may also guide the diagnosis.
panic cavity proper, directly opposite the mid-dorsal region of the
as young animals are more likely to have mites, young adult animals
tympanic membrane. It may occasionally be visible through the tym-
 are more prone to allergies, and older animals more prone to tumors
panic membrane. The oval (vestibular) window is dorsal to the coch-
and immune-mediated disease The owner's approach to parasite
lear promontory and is coveredby thestapes. Medial to the promontory
 control should be ascertained as fleas and mites commonly affect the
is the round (cochlea) window of the inner ear The cervical sympa-
head and neck.
-qns susinos iadond aes sjuedu au yanou unu saaiau sa
 Other health matters are also important. Recently rescued cats may
mucosally across the promontory, and thus they are susceptible to
have unknown underlying medical disorders, free-roaming cats are at
 damage when performing a myringotomy or middle ear lavage.
rodi aq Aeu smeis ieiia pue 'saseasip snoibeuos jo ysu paseaiou
The medial wall of the tympanic cavity proper also contains the
Eustachian tube opening rostrally. The Eustachian tube is lined by
 tract vinus infection and retrovinus infection.
ciliated pseudostratifed columnar epithelium that includes goblet
The owner's normal treatment regime, response to prior treatment,
cells. The Eustachian tube is normally collapsed, but will inflate when
 and compliance with treatment should be determined.
the pressure in the tympanic cavity and medial aspect of the tympanic
The owner may report head shaking, ear twitching, fits of ear
membrane is equalized with the pressure on the lateral surface of the
 scratching, particularly after manipulation of the ear, change in eating
tympanic membrane. The tensor veli palatini muscle supports the
habits, change in behavior, and vocalization. Clinical signs may be
lateral wall of the auditory tube and contraction of this muscle and
unilateral or bilateral, persistent or intermittent, and acute or chronic.
the levator veli palatini keeps the pharyngeal opening of the Eus-
Pain when eating may indicate otitis media that has extended to
tachian tube open.
involve the tissues around the tympanic cavity and temporomandibu-
lar joint. A history of upper respiratory tract disease, e.g., sneezing.
Inner ear
ocular discharge, and nasal discharge may be present in cats with
ascending otitis media.
The inner ear is composed of the cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular
canals which are housed in a membranous labyrinth, surrounded by
a bony labyrinth in the petrous temporal bone, located deep to the 
Clinical signs
tympanic bulla dorsomedially.
Clinical signs of external ear canal disease include otorrhea, head shak-
Vibrations from the tympanic membrane are transmitted from the
aseasip iea aii io leues iea leuaixg iea au ie suuoieos pue g
malleus to the incus and then stapes. The stapes then transmits this
'sishieied aau ieey pue yino a suuado uo uied asnes A
vibration to the inner ear via the vestibular (oval) window and move-
Clinical signs of middle ear disease include shaking the head and
ment of the fluid in the inner ear (perilymph) converts mechanical
pawing at the ear. An intermittent and temporary tilt of the head,
energy (vibrations) to electrochemical energy (nerve impulses), which
caused by irritation, pain, and discomfort rather than neurologic dys-
is then transmitted to the auditory cortex in the temporal lobe of the
function, may be seen.
cerebral cortex. The cochlear (round) window is located at the caudal
 Involvement of the facial nerve will result in paralysis of the lip or
end of the promontory. It is covered by a mucous membrane and
 ear, widened palpebral fssure, reduced palpebral reflexes, and drool-
communicates with the inner ear. The round window functions as a
ing. Involvement of the cervical sympathetic trunk will result in
 pressure relief valve, bulging into the tympanic cavity as the pressure
Hormer syndrome (miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos, and protrusion of
rises in the inner ear.
the nictitans gland) and involvement of the parasympathetic fibers in
The vestibular system mediates the control of posture and move-
the facial nerve may result in keratoconjunctivitis sicca. An ophthal-
ments of the body and eyes relative to the external environment.
mologic examination may show signs of CNS disease in cats with
Sensory information from vestibular, somatosensory, and visual
 central vestibular syndrome.
receptors and motor information from the cerebelum and cerebral
Clinical signs of vestibular disease include a head tilt towards the
cortex are integrated and processed centrally allowing appropriate
affected side or wide excursions of the head if the disease is bilateral,
co-ordination of the relevant muscle movements. The vestibular
system is divided into a peripheral component located in the inner
to the affected side, or symmetric ataxia if both sides are equally
ear and a central component, located in the central nervous system
affected, and spontaneous horizontal or rotatory nystagmus, with the
(CNS). Three major CNS areas receive projections from the peripheral
fast phase away from the affected side. Nausea and vomiting may be
seen due to vestibular input to the vomiting center in the brainstem.
spinal cord, and the cerebellum.
Peripheral vestibular disease should be differentiated from central
vestibular disease (Table 50-1). Rarely, extension of inner ear disease
into the CNS may cause brainstem dysfunction. Neurologic signs
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
indicating middle ear involvement may be seen in 25% of cats with
 extermal ear canal tumors.
History
 Involvement of the inner ear may cause deafness (sensorineural
deafness), as may obstruction of the external ear canal, rupture of the
A detailed and logical history is of paramount importance and, in
tympanic membrane, disruption of the ossicles, and middle ear
common with other problems that are considered more purely 'der-
disease (conductive deafness). Conductive deafness is usually not
matological', will guidethe selection of additional diagnostic tests and
 complete and there may be differences between the ears in a hearing
may go a long way to providing a diagnosis.
impaired animal.
Important findings to determine include details of the onset, dura-
 Involvement of the nasopharynx is uncommon, but signs such as
tion, and progression of the clinical signs and a consideration of
 gagging, upper respiratory tract dyspnea, and stertor may be seen, with
589
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Table 50-1 Neurologic findings in vestibular system dysfunction
dinical signs
Peripheral vestibular disease
Central vestibular disease
Head tilt
Towards the lesion
Towards the lesion (or away from the lesion with paradoxical disease)
 Spontaneous nystagmus
 Horizontal or rotatory with the fast phase
Horizontal, rotatory, vertical and/or positional, with the fast phase
away from the side of the lesion, rarely
toward or away from the lesion; the direction may change with
positional 
head position 
 Paresis/proprioceptive deficits 
None
Common ipsilateral to the lesion
 Mentation
 Normal to disorientated
 Depressed, stuporous, obtunded or comatose
 Cranial nerve deficits
Ipsilateral CN Vll deficit 
Unilateral or bilateral CN V, VIl, IX, X and XIl deficits
 Horner syndrome
Common ipsilateral 
Uncommon
Head tremors
None
 Seen with concurrent cerebellar dysfunction
Circling
Infrequent, may occur toward side of lesion 
 Usually toward the side of the lesion
The oropharynx should be examined because of the close associa-
Box 50-1 Points to consider in a cat with suspected
tion of pharyngeal disease and middle ear disease, particularly from
ear disease
nasopharyngeal polyps and palatine defects. Pain on palpation of the
tympanic bulla or on opening the mouth may be seen with middle
1. Does the patient definitely have ear disease?
ear disease.
2. Is the ear disease limited to the external ear canal, the middle ear
 A neurologic examination should be performed to examine for the
 or the inner ear or some combination of these?
 presence of abnormalities that might indicate middle ear or inner ear
3. Is the ear drum intact?
disease, such as vestibular signs (ataxia, nystagmus, head tilt, and
 4. What is the primary cause or causes of the ear disease and are
circling or falling to the affected side), facial paresis, Horner syn-
there any predisposing factors or perpetuating factors?
drome and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. An ophthalmologic examina-
 5. What treatment is most appropriate?
tion may reveal evidence of inflammatory CNS disease.
 6. How often should re-examination be performed to monitor the 
 success of treatment?
Otoscopy
Otoscopy should be performed on every animal with otitis externa.
thick discharge draining from the Eustachian tube or the presence of
Many cats may require sedation or anesthesia for a complete exami-
a nasopharyngeal polyp.
nation. If a ruptured tympanic membrane is suspected, ideally the
Marked pain on palpation of the base of the ear canal and on trac-
examination should be performed under general anesthesia so that a
tion of the pinna may be seen in animals with otitis media.
cuffed endotracheal tube may be placed to prevent aspiration of fluid
and discharge from the Eustachian tube into the pharynx.
 Both ears should be examined, even in animals with unilateral
signs, as bilateral disease of different severities may be present The
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
less affected ear should be examined frst and a new otoscope cone
should be used for each ear. If a large amount of discharge is present,
Examination of the patient, using various means, is indicated to
the ears may need to be flushed before examination can be conducted.
answer the questions listed in Box 50-1.
In animals with marked erythema, proliferation, stenosis or ulcera-
tion, administration of topical or systemic corticosteroids for seven-
Physical examination
14 days may be needed to decrease the inflammation and pain and
 open up the external ear canals so that a full examination may be
Examination of the ear should be performed in any cat with skin
performed. The use of a video-otoscope (Fig. 50-3A), rather than a
disease and conversely, a dermatologic examination should be per-
hand-held otoscope (Fig. 50-3B) has a number of advantages to con-
formed in any cat with ear disease, as most dermatopathies will also
sider (Box 50-2).
affect the ear. A general examination of the patient is needed to deter-
To examine the ear, the tip of the otoscope cone should be intro-
 mine if the ear disease is the only abnormality, or if there are concur-
duced into the ear canal pointing ventrally, with concurrent upward
rent medical or dermatologic problems. Otitis may occur as a
and outward traction on the pinna. There is a ridge of cartilage on the
paraneoplastic syndrome, eg, in cats with mast cell disease.
dorsal surface of the ear canal where the vertical canal meets the hori-
Examination of the pinna for primary lesions, such as macules.
 zontal canal, and the otoscope must be passed below this ridge, while
 papules, plaques, pustules, and alopecia, as well as secondary lesions
 pulling on the pinna.
au Anuapi diay oi paad aq pinous siso pue aies se yons
 The lining of the normal ear canal is pink and glistening with few
nature of the pinnal disease.
hairs and the dermal blood vessels should be apparent One of the
The external ear canals are palpated for thickening, calcifcation.
first signs of inflammation in the ear canal is inability to see these
exudate and pain or discomfort. The external auditory meatus is
vessels as a result of thickening of the epidermis or dermal edema. In
examined for the presence of exudate, masses, and foreign material.
the presence of inflammation, the epidermis becomes reddened.
Pain on palpation of the ear canal and fluid within the canal increase
Excessive waxy secretions and ceruminous gland hyperplasia may be
the suspicion of otitis media associated with chronic otitis externa.
590
Ear
Chapter
50
 Ulceration of the ear canal is often associated with a Gram negative
infection, eg., Pseudomonas, but may also be caused by inappropriate
cleaning with cotton-tipped applicators. Foreign bodies such as plant
awns, impacted wax, and concreted otic preparations may be present.
Plant awns should be removed with forceps and impacted wax and
 otic preparation should be softened with ceruminolytic agents and
removed by flushing or with endoscopic forceps. Masses in the exter-
 nal ear canal should be biopsied with forceps.
The tympanic membrane is assessed for presence, integrity, color,
and texture. If the tympanic membrane cannot be assessed due to
debris in the external ear canal, this should be cleaned thoroughly to
allow inspection of the tympanic membrane. If the tympanic mem-
 brane cannot be assessed due to stenosis of the canal, then a number
 of tests may be used to assess its presence and integrity. A small diam-
eter (3.5 or 5 French) red rubber catheter may be inserted into the ear
A
canal until it stops and then gently removed and advanced to get a
feel for the rigidity of the 'stop: The 'stop' will be 'spongy' if the ear
drum is intact and more rigid if it is not intact and the catheter is
therefore contacting the medial wall of the tympanic bulla.
Alternatively, positive contrast ear canalography (see below) or tym-
panometry may be used. A warmed, colored solution (eg., fluorescein
Or povidone-iodine) may be infused via the ear canal in the conscious
 patient; the appearance of this fluid at the external nares or the patient
snorting it through the oropharynx indicates that the tympanic mem-
brane is not intact and the fluid has passed via the Eustachian tube
into the pharynx. However, this carries the risk of introducing poten-
tially ototoxic substances into the middle ear. A simpler method in
the anesthetized patient is to lavage the external ear canal with warm
saline and, if bubbles of air rise through the fluid when the animal
breathes, then the tympanic membrane is not intact.
 Otitis media may be present when the tympanum is discolored gray
or brown. An intact tympanum does not rule out otitis media.
B
although with otitis media the tympanic membrane does not usually
have a normal opacity and color, and a ruptured tympanic membrane
Figure 50-3 Equipment used for evaluation of the external ear canal and 
is not an absolute indicator of otitis media in the absence of other
tympanic membrane. (A) Video-otoscope. (B) Handheld otoscope.
abnormal findings. Bulging of the membrane towards the observer
may indicate fluid accumulation in the middle ear and retraction of
the tympanic membrane suggests a partially filled middle ear with
Box 50-2 Advantage of using a video-otoscope compared
 obstruction of the Eustachian tube.
with otoscopic examination
 It is not possible to differentiate a thickened tympanic membrane
caused by chronic inflammation from a thickened tympanic mem-
Higher degree of magnification 
brane caused by previous or current otitis media without advanced
Broader field of vision 
imaging, a myringotomy, or surgical exploration via bulla osteotomy.
Animals with otitis media and an open ear drum often have a copious
 Brighter illumination 
malodorous liquid discharge on otoscopy, with magnetic discharge
 Reduction in shadowing as the light is at the tip of the cone
along the floor of the horizontal canal.
 Electronic image capture
Ability to perform ear flushing and biopsies under direct visualization
Clinical pathology
Both cytology and culture have a role to play in the diagnosis of ear
disease and these tests are complementary to each other. Many infec.
progress to polyp formation. Defective epithelial migration, as a result
tions are polymicrobial with mixed infections of bacteria (cocci and
of damage to the tympanic membrane or inflammation of the ear
rods) and yeast. Cytology may reveal Malassezia, which would not be
canal, leads to the accumulation of cerumen, which may therefore
reported if only bacterial culture was performed. Conversely, culture
indicate previous or current ear canal disease. Recurrence of cerumen
may show bacteria that were not identifed on cytology as mucus may
 after removal indicates continued external ear canal disease. Cerumen
 protect them from cytology stains. Bacteria may be obtained from
in cats tends to be moist and is seldom dry and flaky as it can be
many samples, but the presence of a host inflammatory response on
in dogs.
 cytology suggests that organisms cultured are pathogens rather than
The presence, location, and degree of inflammation, stenosis, ulcer-
contamina nts.
ation, and proliferative changes should be noted. The size of the verti-
cal and horizontal canals and the type, location, and quantity of
Cytology
debris or exudate should also be noted. The consistency, color and
amount of any exudate should be determined. Samples should be
Cytologic examination of otic exudate is a simple, practical, and
collected for cytology and culture and sensitivity testing.
 cheap diagnostic test that provides rapid results to help identify the
591
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
infection, although leukocytes may be seen in other forms of ear
Cytologic examination of exudate should be repeated while treating
disease, eg., immune-mediated dermatopathies.
the disease and it should not be assumed that the changes present at
Cytology may also identify parasites such as Otodectes cynotis, which
 previous examinations are representative of the current status of the
is responsible for up to 50% of all cases of otitis externa in cats, as
ear canal.
well as other mites such as Demodex, Notoedres cati, and Neotrombicula
 The main use of cytology is to identify and characterize microbial
autumnalis.
 overgrowth or infection, which then guides therapeutic decisions and
 Cytology may also be used in the evaluation of masses involving
allows response to therapy to be monitored. Bacterial overgrowth is
the external ear canal.′ In one study of 27 masses from 25 cats, fine
-ui si aimno anoyaiaun pue ssop on paneduon sie un uooun
needle aspirate cytology showed a good level of agreement with the
fnal histologic diagnosis and was able to differentiate all inflamma-
of otitis in some cases, although this is less important than other
tory polyps from other tumors. However, cytology was less useful in
dermatologic testing.
differentiating between benign and malignant neoplasia, being correct
 Samples should be taken from both ears and should be taken
in 22 out of 27 masses (81.5%).7
before use of any cleaning agent or therapy. A cytology sample may
be obtained by using a cotton-tipped applicator inserted gently
Culture
into the external ear canal. Samples obtained from the deeper
horizontal canal are more clinically relevant than samples obtained
 Culture is needed to identify the species of bacteria and the antimi-
from the vertical canal, although this is best performed with the
crobial sensitivity of the isolates. However, culture should be used in
animal under anesthesia. In cats with otitis media, samples obtained
conjunction with cytology to avoid making therapeutic decisions
from the tympanic cavity are more representative. The swab is then
based on isolation of bacteria of no clinical relevance. Culture and
rolled onto a clean glass microscope slide, evenly distributing a
sensitivity testing may not be a cost-effective and relevant test, because
thin layer of material. Cerumen has a high lipid content and briefly
heating the slide will fix the material to the slide and avoid loss of the
sensitivity as topical agents reach very high concentrations in the ear
sample in the stain solvent. A simple, rapid in-house stain using a
canal.
modifed Wright's stain (e.g. DiffQuick) is adequate. A Gram stain
 In cats with otitis media, the most common bacterial pathogen is
is more time consuming and may not be necessary as most cocci
Staphylococcus intermedius, although other organisms including strep-
found in the ear are Gram positive and most rods are Gram negative.
tOCOcci spp. Pseudomonas, Proteus, Bordetella, Bacteroides,Fusobacterium.
If parasites are suspected, mounting the otic exudate in a few drops
 and Mycoplasma have been reported.* Bacterial resistance is not usually
 of mineral oil on a slide followed by a coverslip is suitable and this
a problem in feline otitis media compared with the situation in dogs.
should be performed in all cats with otitis externa. Examination
Bacteria of the same species isolated from the middle ear and the
for Demodex should similarly be performed in adult cats with
horizontal ear canal may display different antibiotic sensitivity pat-
pnuritic otitis externa as this condition is uncommon but certainly
terns in up to 80% of cases.?
underdiagnosed.'
 Dermatophyte culture is recommended in cats with otitis exterma,
 It is tempting to make conclusions about the etiology of the ear
particularly if they are young. free-roaming or have been recently
disease (e.g. parasites, bacteria or yeast) based on the color, texture,
acquired from a rescue shelter.
and smell of the discharge, but these observations are not reliable and
the diagnosis should rest on more objective tests.
Serology
 The normal cerumen is waxy and yellow and, due to the high
lipid content, does not take up stain and therefore a cytology slide
Serology for antigens or antibodies may be of use for some infectious
from a normal ear should be almost colorless. Normal cornified
diseases, e.g., Toxoplasma and Neospora. These tests may also be per-
 squamous epithelial cells and desquamated keratinocytes may be
formed on the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). CSF analysis may help to
seen. Small numbers of resident bacteria may be identified in 71% of
confrm central vestibular syndrome, but is generally not disease-
cats,2 usually Gram positive cocci: coagulase negative Staphylococcus
specifc. This should be performed after advanced imaging of the
spp., Coagulase positive Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp.
-osn paueu Aqeiajad io (io) Audeiouon pandoo Aq uieiq
Rods are rarely found in the normal ear canal, with the exception
nance imaging (MRI). The risk of CNS trauma and cerebellar hernia-
of Corynebacterium.23 Bacteria found in the presence of leukocytes
tion should be considered against the likely diagnostic benefit of
should be considered an abnormal finding. Malassezia is a normal
this test.
resident of the feline ear canal, being found in 23% to 83% of normal
cats,24 but it is also an opportunistic pathogen and is found in 64%
Biopsy
of cats with otitis externa. Abnormal fndings include increased
numbers of Malassezia organisms (greater than 12 organisms per
 Skin biopsy of the ear is an underused diagnostic test. It is recom-
high dry [x40 objective] feld).d Less than two organisms is considered
mended when an immune-mediated, proliferative or neoplastic
normal and two to ll is considered a gray zone. This cut off has
 disease is suspected.
a specificity of 100% and sensitivity of 63% for Malassezia infection
in cats.
Diagnostic imaging
 Bacteria identifed on cytology may be normal flora, bacterial over-
growth in the debris and on the epithelial surface, or true infection.
Diagnostic imaging is often useful in the diagnosis of ear disease,
Semiquantitative cytologic criteria may help to identify the clinical
mainly to investigate those parts of the ear that cannot be visualized
importance of bacteria. Four or fewer bacteria per high dry field may
directly on examination. Diagnostic imaging of the thorax and (other
 be considered normal, five to 14 is of unknown importance and 15
potential sites of metastasis) should be performed if neoplasia is
or more is abnormal. This cut off has 100% specifcity and 63%
suspected. Diagnostic imaging should be performed before otoscopy
sensitivity in cats. The presence of a large number of leukocytes, which
and certainly before administration of any medication or lavage fluid
are not usually found in normal cerumen, particularly if they contain
into the ear canal as these may mimic findings of otitis externa or
phagocytosed bacteria, also provides evidence in support of true
media and lead to a false positive diagnosis.
592
Ear
Chapter
50
The selection of the most appropriate diagnostic imaging technique
sinography may also be used in patients with chronic draining tracts
eai au pue payse suaq usanb ened au uo spuadap
after total ear canal ablation or accidental trauma to the ear canal (See
diagnoses being considered.1 For instance in an animal with otitis
Fig. 50-9B).
externa with suspected otitis media, radiography or CT is appropriate.
 Inner ear disease rarely produces signs visible radiographically.
Aue leaaau jou op sqdeigoipei j! uaaa Aeld oi aloi e Buiaey Io ym
abnormality In a cat with a suspected nasopharyngeal polyp. a CT has
e iea a a ui s e jo uap r as i
Ultrasound
nasopharynx, although these areas can still be imaged with radio-
Ultrasonography is not commonly used, but has several potential
ae ig ai s i a s us  r sr
advantages, as it is relatively quick, non-invasive and may be used in
otitis media, but assessment of the bony structures of the middle ear
conscious patients.1 In a normal animal, air in the external ear canal
is diffcult with MRl. In a cat with signs of vestibular disease, an MRI
and middle ear prevents transmission of ultrasound waves, but if the
provides the most useful information for evaluation of inner ear
external ear canal is filled with fluid, e.g., saline, or if the middle ear
structures, but a CT may be useful to assess the middle ear if otitis
contains soft tissue or fluid as a result of disease, then these structures
interna arose from otitis media.
 may be examined. In one study ultrasonography was more accurate
than radiography in the detection of fluid in the middle ear in feline
Radiography
cadavers, although both modalities were inferior to CT.18
Radiography is the mainstay of diagnostic imaging for the ear in most
Computed tomography
-oid pue uoad oi Asea Aiaaelai pue deau si l 'sasieid anead
duces a global view of the region being examined. However, great care
CT is more sensitive than radiography for examination of the ear.
must be taken to use good technique and positioning to get radio-
 particularly the midle ear, and forassessment of other structures such
graphic images of diagnostic quality. This usually means general
 as the draining lymph nodes. CT can also differentiate between soft
anesthesia for positioning. The greatest disadvantage is superimposi-
tissue and fluid within the middle ear and intravenous contrast will
m   e si rm 's  j 
allow the vascularity of a lesion to be identified. The principles of
imaging the head.
interpretation and diagnostic imaging findings with the various
Projections include lateral, dorsoventral or ventrodorsal, latero 20 °
disease processes are similar to radiography but fndings are more
ventral-laterodorsal oblique, rostro l0° ventral-caudodorsal closed-
readily identifed on transverse CT images as there is no superimposi-
mouth obliquell and rostro 30° ventral-caudodorsal open-mouth
tion of structures compared to radiographs. CT may therefore be of
oblique.12 The ventrodorsal view is better for evaluating a patient with
use for detection of soft tissue changes, delineation of tumors and
otitis externa, although positioning is easier forthe dorsoventral view.
detection of subtle bony lysis and proliferation.
Of the two rostroventral-caudodorsal oblique projections, the 10°
Caution should be exercised when evaluating the thickness of the
closed-mouth oblique is more accurate and easier to perform, although 
tympanic bulla wall in animals with fluid in the middle ear, as the
there is no difference in the accuracy of these views for the detection 
thickness of the wall of a fluid-flled bulla appears greater than that
of fluid in the middle ear.13
of an air-flled bulla, due to a volume averaging artifact.1?
Radiographs are useful for evaluating the osseous tympanic cavity
CT evaluation of the peripheral vestibular system is useful if radio-
and evaluating the external ear canals for chronic changes, such as
graphs have not provideda diagnosis, ifa mass lesion such as a polyp
stenosis and mineralization. In otitis externa, radiographic findings
[eiins ienuaod e si iuaned aut ji io Kiani paiapisuos st iowm io
include stenosis or mineralization of the wall of the ear canal and soft
candidate. However, CT is less useful for the evaluation of the central
sap io s e uasaiai ee au um ao anss
vestibular system.
The tympanic bulla is a thin-walled gas-filled structure with well-
CT has been found to be a more sensitive but less specific modality
defined, smooth borders. Sclerosis of the wall of the tympanic bulla
 for the diagnosis of middle ear disease although neither modality was
may be seen in older animals or following resolution of middle
able to detect early lesions associated with otitis media/interna when
ear disease. The external acoustic meatus is rounded with distinct
there was no osseous involvement.2 Another study showed that CT
smooth margins.
and radiographs have a similar sensitivity for detection of otitis
 In otitis media, sof tissue opacity in the tympanic cavity (represent-
 media.2l Sensitivity is increased if a smaller slice thickness is chosen.10
ing fluid or a soft tissue mass),. sclerosis of the wall of the bulla or 
Otitis interna is diffiault to diagnose with CT except where there is
petrous temporal bone, bony proliferation of the bulla or petrous
 marked destruction of the inner ear.
temporal bone, lysis of the bony wall ofthe tympanic bulla, and signs
of concurrent otitis externa may be seen. Lysis of the adjacent calvar-
Magnetic resonance imaging
ium may be seen with aggressive tumors. Radiographs are remarkably
insensitive for the diagnosis of middle ear disease in the absence of
MRI produces images with better softissue contrast than radiography
osseous changes.
or CT and is indicated if peripheral or CNS disorders are suspected,
Contrast radiography may be of use on occasion. Positive contrast
such as tumors, inflammatory lesions, or abscesses associated with ear
canalography, after instillation of a water contrast iodinated solution
disease.22 However, osseous lesions of the middle ear are difficult to
into the external ear canal, may be used to assess the integrity of the 
 assess with MRI and MRI requires general anesthesia. MRI is superior
tympanic membrane and to assess the integrity of the external ear
 to radiography in the detection of middle ear disease in cats.23
canal, e.g., in patients with suspected ear canal avulsion or stenosis,
 MRI provides superior soft tissue resolution that aids the diagnosis
and the success of any repair.i4-16 Water soluble iodine-containing
 of neoplastic and inflammatory diseases of the central vestibular
contrast medium (1-2 mL) is instilled into the ear canal with the
system.
patient either in lateral recumbency, or, preferably in ventral recum-
 MRI findings of middle ear disease include medium signal intensity
bency so that a dorsoventral projection may be used to compare
uq on asuas) mi uo (a) enq udi an u [a
both external ear canals at the same time. In normal canine ears, posi-
tissue) and hyperintense on T2W and enhancement of inner margin
tive contrast canalography was more sensitive than otoscopy in iden-
 of TB post-contrast. Soft tissue will enhance with gadolinium whereas
tifying iatrogenic tympanic membrane perforation.1 Positive contrast
fluid will not.
865
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
MRI findings of otitis interna are lack of signal intensity of the laby-
rinthine fluid on T2W sequences?4 and meningeal enhancement on
post-contrast T1 w sequences.2s
Sampling the middle ear and myringotomy
Samples of fluid from the middle ear are required to make a diagnosis
of otitis media. A myringotomy may be needed if the material in the
middle ear is too thick to aspirate (see Box 50-7).
Additional tests
Hearing test
 This is the simplest method of evaluating the hearing ability, although
it does not detect a unilateral hearing disability. The patient is
jo ino panpond si punos e pue juauuonaua ieiuey e ul paeid
Figure 50-4 Old laceration wound to the margin of the pinna left to
sight. The sound should be within the normal range of hearing
heal by second intention.
for the species and should be considered loud by the observer. A
response is considered positive if the animal appears starled and
looks around to fnd the source of the sound, whereas a response is
considered negative if the animal is not disturbed and its behavior is
healing may result in malalignment or pinnal deformity as a result of
not changed.
wound contraction.
Wounds that involve the cartilage take longer to heal by second
Tympanometry
intention as the cartilage support is lost and healing is delayed until
there is fibrous union of the cartilage This may result in pinnal
Tympanometry is the continuous recording of middle ear imped-
deformity. Surgical closure provides a more rapid and cosmetic result.
ance as the air pressure in the ear is systematically increased or
Sutures should be placed to appose the edges of the cartilage and the
Aanui aul jo ainseau aiduis pue 'piden 'aaisuas e si ll paseai
skin edges, either with separate sutures in each tissue plane, or with
of the tympanic membrane and the function of the middle ear. It
vertical mattress sutures with deep bites in the cartilage and superficial
involves closure of the external ear canal with a rubber plug which
bites in the skin.
contains three channels: one for introducing the sound stimulus,
Wounds that involve both skin surfaces and the cartilage will have
one for receiving the sound stimulus, and one to allow pressure
a better cosmetic outcome if sutured, although these wounds may be
variation. At the moment, this is more of a research tool than a
left to heal by second intention (Fig. 50-4). Lacerations on the ear
useful clinical tool.
margin may widen with time as a result of contracture if allowed to
heal by second intention, but if closed, wounds in this location may
Brainstem-evoked auditory responses (BEAR)
result in 'cupping' or folding of the ear margin as a result of contrac-
tion. Small wounds on the margin of the pinna may be treated with
This is used to assess the integrity and function of the peripheral and
 partial amputation of the pinna (subtotal pinnectomy) to avoid these
central auditory pathways and for indirect assessment of the closely
cosmetic changes.
associated vestibular pathways. This test is a recording of sound-
Traumatic wounds resulting in large wounds with substantial loss
evoked electrical activity in the auditory pathway between the cochlea
of tissue may be reconstructed with a distant direct flap from the
isat stui iog pambai si eisauisaue io uonepas xaos aotpne aui pue
adjacent skin, although the erect nature of the feline pinna makes
to be conducted. Small (27G) needle electrodes are placed subcutane-
ously in the skin of the head and connected to an amplifer. The brain
apposition of the pinna to the skin more challenging than the same
activity is measured after delivery of clicks at 10-20Hz through ear-
technique in a dog with a pendulous pinna.
 phones in the extermal ear canal.26-23
Aural hematoma
Aural hematoma (Fig. 50-5) is a common disorder of the pinna,
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE PINNA
resulting either from trauma, which may be self-trauma due to head
shaking or scratching, or external trauma, e.g., from a cat-fight wound,
Trauma
 or from immune-mediated disease.2? In cats, otitis externa associated
with ear mites is often noted and is usually unilateral. Hemorrhage
Wounds to the pinna are relatively common after cat fights, but they
results in sanguinous fluid accumulating between the cartilage and
have also been reported in cats with frostbite. These wounds are clas-
skin on the concave inner surface of the pinna, although analysis of
sified according to the depth of the wound. The wounds may involve:
this fluid suggests an exudate rather than frank blood.2 Further head
skin on one side of the pinna; skin on one side of the pinna and
shaking or self-trauma results in continuing bleeding and formation
cartilage; and full thickness defects involving skin on both sides ofthe
of a hematoma. Left untreated, the hematoma matures, leaving a
pinna and cartilage.
sanguinous seroma, and then granulation tissue forms on the wall of
the cavity. Contraction and fibrosis then result in pinnal deformity
left to heal by second intention after appropriate local wound man-
('cauliflower ear') and thickening.
agement as the cartilage will splint the wound and prevent deformity
Therapeutic options for aural hematoma comprise: identification
of the pinna. Larger lacerations that result in two-sided or three-sided
and, if possible, treatment of the underlying cause; prevention of
flaps should be closed primarily if possible, as second intention
further self-trauma, by using an Elizabethan collar and specific therapy
594
Ear
Chapter
50
Figure 50-5 Aural hematoma on the concave (inner) aspect of the
snouinbues jo uoeinunne ot anp aueleadde xaauo ui stnsan euuid
A
fluid.
for any underlying cause; drainage of the hematoma cavity; and appo-
nim saiaaid on suiaq moe on aree pue uys au jo uos
significant deformity.
 Drainage of the hematoma may be achieved in several ways. Needle
aspiration of the hematoma is the simplest method, but may not be 
effective if the hematoma is chronic and may need to be repeated if
the hematoma recurs before the cavity has been obliterated. Cortico-
steroids may be used to reduce local inflammation, reduce head
shaking and self-trauma, and suppress an autoimmune reaction if one
 ss uia aq Aed aie as n oerasad s
administration into the hematoma cavity has the potential to main-
tain the separation between the cartilage and skin and prolong
healing.
There are a variety of surgical options reported for aural hematoma
management31-3 (see Box 50-13).
Pinnal neoplasia
B
Tumors arising from the ear are uncommon in cats, and usually affect
Figure 50-6 Pinnal squamous cell carcinoma. Typical crusting, erosive,
the pinna and external ear canal. Benign tumors are less common than
and ulcerated lesions of SCC in a cat showing (A) early and (B) late
s uoisal aaeiaaid zuanay isou au ynoue 'so sueui
lesions in the same cat.
the inflammatory polyp. Benign tumors are less likely to be ulcerated,
tend to have a narrow base of attachment, are more likely to be lobu-
lated and typically do not invade the ear cartilage.37
 Clinical signs depend on the location and size of the tumor, degree
often actinically induced as a result of DNA damage following expo-
of ulceration and local invasion, and the presence or absence of
sure to solar radiation. Tumors are more frequent in regions with the
distant metastases. As with all tumors and suspected tumors, cytologic
highest solar radiation. In such regions, the incidence of cutaneous
or histologic diagnosis of the primary tumor and assessment of
SCC has been reported to be 27 cases per 100 000 cats.? Thin-haired
regional lymph node involvement and depending on tumor type,
and light-colored cats are at risk, with white cats being 13 times more
distant metastasis, is indicated.
likely to develop this tumor.* Lesions are most common where the
Many tumors of the pinna are actinically induced and therefore
hair is thin and exposure to the sun is greatest, i.e., pinna, especially
reducing exposure to UV light by keeping the cat indoors, by UV
the concave aspect and base, eyelids and nasal planum. SCCs are
shields on windows and by applying infant-safe sunscreen to the
discussed further in Chapter 20.
 pinnae and nose may prevent tumor formation.
Mutations in the p53 gene have been found in the majority of cats
with premalignant actinic lesions and SCC of the pinna. 40.41 No causa-
tive association between pinnal SCC and feline leukemia vinus (FeLV)
Squamous cell carcinoma (scc)
or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) has been found,42 but papil-
SCC is the most common tumor of the feline pinna (Fig. 50-6). SCC
lomavirus group antigens have been found in multicentric SCC in situ
aie siout asau ssaan on pasodxa sie paioios-iuil sae Alensn
lesions (Bowens disease).43.4
595
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
For peripheral lesions that are large enough, fine needle aspirate
cytology may yield a tentative diagnosis although the associated
 and allows the histologic assessment of margins. Pinnectomy is simple
inflammation may hinder this. For small, superficial lesions, exci-
to perform, cosmetically acceptable and the best option for long-term
sional biopsy is the most appropriate diagnostic step and histologic
local control (Box 50-12). In one study, 18 cats treated with surgical
examination should provide a definitive diagnosis with information
excision had no local recurrence and a median disease-free interval of
about vascular invasion and completeness of margins. Histologic
681 days and median survival time of 799 days.38
examination of pre-malignant lesions may yield a diagnosis of actinic
 Cryosurgery is less satisfactory but may be considered if pinnectomy
keratosis.
is not anatomically possible or if owners would not accept the cos-
 Evaluation for other primary lesions, particularly on the nasal
metic appearance. It has the disadvantages that only small (<5 mm),
planum and eyelids, assesment of the regional lymph nodes and, in
superficial lesions may be treated and no surgical margins can be
the more invasive tumors, thoracic radiographs or CT are indicated to
assessed. In one study, 12 cats with pinnal and eyelid lesions were
 a  si yo se   a ass
treated successfully with a complete response after one treatment
actinic lesions.45
cycle although cats with nasal planum lesions did not respond as
 Treatment options for SCC include wide surgical excision, often
well, with 20% being treatment failures.46
comprising pinnectomy (Fig. 50-7), cryosurgery, laser ablation, radio-
 Photodynamic therapy may be used for superfcial lesions, although
therapy strontium plesiotherapy, photodynamic therapy (Fig. 50-8).
tumor responses are variable and the disease-free interval is lower than
with other therapies, but the cosmetic effect may be better.47-4? The
photosensitizing agent may be administered systemically (e.g., alu-
minium phthalocyanine tetrasulphonate) or topically (e.g., 5-amino
levulinic acid). The initial response has been reported to be good (up
to 100%), but the duration has been short, ranging from two to 18
months.47-4? In one study. all aural lesions showed a complete
response, possibly because light is more able to penetrate the thin
tissue of the pinna.48
 Local hyperthermia has been used, with an overall response rate of
response rate or survival time and may cause side effects to the pinna
and external ear canal, such as ulceration and fbrosis. Strontium
plesiotherapy is effective for supericial lesions and is relatively
inexpensive.
 Intralesional  chemotherapy using  cisplatin,  (
carboplatin  and
5-fluorouracil have been used for nasal planum lesions and allow the
local administration of dnugs that would be fatal if given systemi-
cally.51,s2 Systemic chemotherapy with bleomycin and 13-cis retinoic
acid may provide a small improvement in disease-free interval and
Apparent clinical resolution of actinic keratosis and SCC has been
Figure 50-7 An adult cat with nasal squamous cell carcinoma that had
reported in one cat following topical therapy with 5% imiquimod
bilateral pinnectomy for pinnal squamous cell carcinoma some years
cream.55
previously.
 Further sun exposure should be avoided and all cutaneous sites
 predisposed to the development of this tumor should be monitored
for the development of new lesions.
 Other tumors that affect the pinna include basal cell tumor, heman-
gioma, hemangiosarcoma, soft tissue sarcoma, rhabdomyoma, mast
cell tumor, melanoma, and papilloma/fbropapilloma. For more
details on these tumors please see Chapter 20.
Dermatopathy
Dermatoses that affect the pinna may be described according to
the nature of the lesions, e.g., crusting/scaling, alopecia, ulceration
or plaques/nodules, and according to the etiology, eg., infectious.
parasitic, immune-mediated, and neoplastic These are listed in
Table 50-2.
 Although some dermatoses may only affect the pinna, most pinna
dermatoses are part of a more generalized disorder, which may be
limited to the skin or be systemic. A complete physical and dermato-
disorders are the domain of the dermatologist, the surgeon should be
-xa leoibins io Asdoiq aiinbai Aeuu Aau se suopuon asaul jo aieme
sion and they may be dermatologic indicators of local or systemic
Figure 50-8 Photodynamic therapy of an eyelid squamous cell carcinoma
ill-health that may require surgical management, eg., aural hematoma
lesion in an adult cat with recent nasal planum excision for SCC and a
in otitis externa, alopecia in hyperthyroidism, exfoliative dermatitis in
previous right pinnectomy for SCC.
thymoma.
596
Ear
Chapter
50
Table 50-2 Differential diagnoses for pinnal dermatoses
Etiology
Nature of lesion
Crusts/scales
Alopecia
Ulceration
Plaques/nodules
Infectious
Dermatophytosis
 Dermatophytosis
Leishmania
Dermatophytosis
Malassezia
Leishmania
Deep mycosis
Leishmania
Leishmania
 Feline cowpox virus
 Parasitic
Notoeores cati (scabies)Demodex
Ticks
Demodex
Trombiculosis
Lice
 Flea-bite dermatitis
 Allergic
Mosquito-bite
Eosinophilic granuloma
Mosquito-bite
hypersensitivity
Miliary dermatitis 
hypersensitivity
Food allergy
Atopy
 Hormonal
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperadrenocorticism and pinna folding
Immune-mediated 
Pemphigus
 Pemphigus 
DLE/SLE
DLE/SLE
Vasculitis
Vasculitis
Thrombovascular/cold
Thrombovascular/cold
agglutinin disease
agglutinin disease
Adverse drug reactions
Adverse drug reactions
Auricular chondritis
Auricular chondritis
Environmental
 Actinic keratosis
 Foreign body
Frostbite
Hereditary
 Primary seborrhea
Pattern baldness
Congenital hypotrichosis
Neoplastic
Epidermotropic T-cell
Epidermotropic T-cell lymphoma
Squamous cell
Squamous cell carcinoma
lymphoma
carcinoma
Basal cell tumor
 Epidermotropic T-cell 
 Hemangioma 
lymphoma
Hemangiosarcoma
Mast cell tumor
Melanoma
Epidermotropic T-cell lymphoma
Miscellaneous
 Trauma
 Feline pinnal alopecia
 Aural hematoma
Topical corticosteroid use
risk of developing otitis externa and work together with the primary
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE EAR CANAL
 Or perpetuating causes to result in clinical disease, but rarely cause
Otitis externa
to the persistence of the disease once established and prevent its reso-
lution (Box 50-3). As with many dermatologic conditions, otitis may
Otitis externa is the most common disease of the external ear canal,
be categorized into those diseases that are treatable and curable and
with a prevalence of 2-6% in cats.5° It is defined as inflammation of
those that may be controlled and managed.
the external ear canal with a multifactorial etiology. It is a syndrome
Compared to the dog, otitis externa is much less common in the
rather than a diagnosis and it should not be assumed that it is infec-
cat, which may reflect the fact that cats are much less likely to be
tious in nature. In cats, otitis is the third most common dermatologic
affected by a chronic skin disease that acts as a primary cause It tends
problem after abscesses and flea infestations.57 In some cats, extension 
to affect younger cats (one to two years old), ectoparasites are more
of the infection from the external ear canal and middle ear into the
common (responsible for approximately 50% of cases of otitis
surrounding soft tissues results in the development of a para-aural
externa), and the role of bacterial pathogens, in particular Pseu-
abscess and discharging sinus.58 Abscesses are almost exclusively
domonas, is less important.
unilateral.
 The successful management of otitis externa depends on identifica-
The factors involved in the development of otitis externa may be
 tion and treatment of both the primary cause and predisposing factors,
divided into:56,53 (1) primary causes, which directly initiate the inflam-
while considering whether the presence of perpetuating factors will
a aseaui yim 'sas sosiai () e ia a go uo
thwart the therapeutic plan. Failure to identify and address the primary
597
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 50-3 Causes of otitis externa
Primary causes
latrogenic factors
 Par asites
● Mechanical cleaning
● Otodectes cynotis
● Removal of hair
·Demodex cati
● Irritating topical treatment 
· Sarcoptes scabiei
● Systemic antimicrobial therapy selecting for resistant strains of
+Notoedres cati
bacteria
·Cheyletiella
Immunosuppression 
Trombicula
· FeLV
◆Ticks
· FIV
Foreign bodies
 Systemic disease 
Hypersensitivity and allergic diseases
● Metabolic disease
·Atopy
● Endocrinopathy
● Food allergy
Perpetuating causes
● Contact allergy
Bacteria
Keratinization disorders
●Staphylococcus intermedius
● Facial dermatosis of Persian cats
●Pseudomonas spp.
 Autoimmune diseases
 Streptococcus spp.
● Pemphigus foliaceous
Proteus spp.
· Pemphigus erythematosus
+ Pasteurella multocida
· Drug reactions
 E. cofi
Infectious agents (primary otitis media)
Klebsiella
BusejdooAn
●Corynebacterium spp.
Bordetella
●Enterococcus spp.
 Predisposing causes
Yeasts
 Congenital anatomic and conformational factors
·Malassezia pachyodermatis
 Acquired conformational factors 
+ Candida spp.
● Mass in the external ear canal
Chronic hyperplasia of the external ear canal
● Trauma to the external ear canal and pinna
Ulceration of the ear canal
● Stenosis of the ear canal
Stenosis of the ear canal 
● Hair in the ear canal
Otitis media
 Excessive moisture in the ear canal
 Chronic upper respiratory tract infection
and/or predisposing factors is the most common cause of chronic
resistant infection, and topical antifungal agents (e.g., clotrimazole or
recurrent otitis externa. Chronic inflammation of the ear canal leads
miconazole) when there is fungal infection, with systemic therapy
to the development of perpetuating factors (hyperplasia of the integu-
(fluconazole 50 mg PO q12-24h) or itraconazole (5 mg/kg PO q12h)
 ment, fbrosis of the ear canal, erosion and ulceration of the integu-
for resistant infections Secondary therapeutics include specifctherapy
ment, and otitis media), which may be the major reason for treatment
for ectoparasites and flushing of wax, debris, and discharge from the
failure, regardless of the primary cause. However, identification of the
ear canals. Short-term therapy with topical or systemic corticosteroids
 primary cause may not be possible until secondary infections and
may be required in animals with stenosis of the ear canals resulting
 predisposing factors are identified, treated, and eliminated if possible.
from chronic inflammation.
 In particular, bacterial and fungal pathogens involved in the process
 Flushing the ear canal under general anesthesia is necessary for the
are rarely the sole primary cause and therefore simply addressing these
resolution of many cases of otitis, particularly in chronic cases and
 pathogens alone may lead to treatment failure.
where topical therapy has not been effective [see below).
 If treatment is not effctive, recurrent infections with increasing
 likelihood of resistant organisms and secondary changes in the ear
anal, which wil then act as perpetuating causes, are likely. This may
Obstructive otitis
lead to a chronic end-stage ear, for which medical therapy will no
The most common causes are polyps, tumors, stenosis secondary to
longer provide a solution and a surgical salvage procedure is required.
inflammation, ear deformity as a result of untreated aural hematoma.
Primary otitis externa is not common in cats and generally it occurs
and concretions of debris in the ear canal. The clinical signs are
aui jo juauuaanu aun ui aueu e uaaq sey aiaui asnean
chronic, recurrent otitis externa/media, head shaking, and a malodor-
external ear canal to favor bacterial growth, especially when the patho-
gens are either small (Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Pas-
although that caused by polyps may be bilateral. Mast cell tumors,
teurella multocida) or large (E. coli) rods.
particularly in Siamese cats, may cause obstructive ear canal lesions.
 Initial therapy for pathogens is topical antimicrobial therapy when
 This is commonly a chronic condition and therefore otitis media may
bacteria are implicated, with systemic use in animals with severe or
be present and need specifc therapy. Patients have commonly been
598
Ear
Chapter
50
treated with a variety of antibiotics, and culture and sensitivity testing
identifed clinically in approximately halfthe cats. 7 Malodor, pruritus.
to ensure the use of an appropriate agent at the time of definitive
and signs of pain may be seen less commonly with malignant tumors
therapy to deal with the obstructive lesion is recommended. If the
and are rare with benign tumors. Secondary infection, as a result of
obstruction is caused by a mass, then surgical removal of the mass by
impairment of the normal epithelial barrier function, is frequent. The
traction (if a polyp) or removal of a part of, or the whole of the exter-
first diagnostic step is otoscopic examination, although as these
nal ear canal is required. If the obstruction is due to stenosis caused
tumors are usually painful a detailed otoscopic examination is diff-
by pinnal or ear canal deformity or chronic hyperplastic changes.
cult without chemical restraint.
then this may be improved with a short course of prednisolone
Cytologic examination of a fine needle aspirate is a useful screening
(1-2 mg/kg PO q24h for 14 days, then tapering over 14 days). This
test and will provide a diagnosis of ceruminous gland adenocarci-
noma in 86% of cases and a diagnosis of a benign tumor in 80% of
in animals with chronic disease For cats that fail to respond to therapy
cases.7 However, histologic examination of tissue remains the gold
with corticosteroids, then surgical resolution of the obstruction is
 standard for diagnosis.
indicated.
Clinical staging for malignant ear canal tumors comprises baseline
hematologic and biochemical screens, evaluation and aspiration of
Proliferative necrotizing otitis
the draining lymph nodes, and thoracic diagnostic imaging using
radiographs or CT. Radiographs or CT may demonstrate stenosis of
 This is a rare syndrome that manifests with sharply marginated ery
the ear canal, mineralization of the soft tissues, destruction of the
thematous crusted plaques with erosions and/or ulcers beneath them.
bony wall of the tympanic bulla or calvarium, and fluid or soft tissue
The lesions are present on the inner aspect of the pinnae, the external
within the tympanic bulla. MRI may be indicated in cats with neuro-
ear canal, and sometimes the pre-auricular region of the face. Histo-
logic signs that cannot be explained by middle ear disease alone Five
logic changes are striking, with parakeratosis, follicular acanthosis,
 of 56 cats with various carcinomas of the ear canal had evidence of
dyskeratotic epidermal cells, and folliculitis. The etiology is unknown,
 lymph node metastasis, but none had evidence of pulmonary metas-
but drug reactions have been proposed. Infection, presumed to be
tasis ante mortem, although metastases were found in one cat post
secondary, is often present, but responds poorly to antimicrobial
mortem.37
a au aq sieue aos u aimnis ssaan a aseasp au aia
 Surgery is the main mode of therapy for external ear canal tumors.
they are 12 to 24 months of age and in others there is a response to
 However, the invasive nature of these tumors means that complete
topical tacrolimus with or without prednisolone." It is seen primarily
 excision may not be possible. Conservative surgical techniques such
sodai aie aiaul inq 'ae jo syuou xis oi oml woiy suany BunoA u!
 as lateral wall resection (LwR) or vertical canal ablation (VCA) tend
 of older animals (three to five years old) being affected.60
to result in incomplete excision and early recurrence. A more aggres-
sive surgical approach, such as total ear canal ablation and lateral
Ceruminous cystomatosis or benign proliferative
bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO) is more likely to result in complete
excision.62 Adjuvant radiotherapy may be of use if clean surgical
ceruminous cysts
margins are not achieved and chemotherapy may be of use for tumors
This is a disorder of unknown cause that manifests by multiple, small 
with a high metastatic potential. The presence of neurologic signs at
(<2 mm) often coalescing papules, vesicles, nodules or plaques that 
the time of diagnosis, a diagnosis of SCC, or a carcinoma of unknown
are pigmented dark blue, brown or black in the external ear canal or
origin and histological evidence of invasion into blood vessels or
concave surface of the pinna. A yellow-brown fluid may be obtained
 lymphatics are associated with a poor prognosis.37
 on aspiration or puncture Many cats are unaffected by this disorder,
although in some cats the lesions may predispose to the development
of otitis externa as the lesions alter the conformation of the ear canal.
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
In other cats it is noted after otitis exterma. Biopsy may be needed to
This is the most common tumor of the external ear canal in cats.62.64
nule out neoplasia. In symptomatic cats treatment consists of surgical
Ceruminous glands are modifed apocrine sweat glands that underlie
removal of the cysts, lancing them with a blade or use of topical
the superficial epithelium andtheir secretory products, along with that
chemical cautery with silver nitrate or trichloroacetic acid.
 of the sebaceous glands and desquamated epithelium, make up
Neoplasia
than their benign counterpart in cats in contrast to dogs.64
 Ceruminous gland adenocarcinomas often destroy the adjacent soft
Tumors of the external ear canal are uncommon, representing approx-
tissues and may metastasize but this tumor type has the longest
imately 1-2% of all tumors in cats.37.61l External ear canal tumors are
median survival time ofthe malignant tumors f treated aggressively.37
more aggressive in cats compared to dogs, with more than 85% of
Following TECA/LBO the median disease-free interval was 42 months,
feline tumors being malignant.37 Tumors arise mainly from the epi-
with a one-year survival rate of 75% and a 25% local recurrence rate,
thelium and adnexal structures of the auditory meatus and both verti-
 e  s n a sy a a  s
 cal and horizontal canals are equally affected. Benign tumors include
respectively.62 Adjuvant therapy may be needed in patients with
ceruminous gland adenoma and sebaceous adenoma. The most
advanced disease. In one study of six cats with macroscopic and
common malignant tumor is the cenuminous gland adenocarcinoma,
microscopic disease treated with 48 Gy of megavoltage radiation, a
but SCC, sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma and carcinomas of
few cats achieved a complete response, but most eventually developed
unknown origin have also been described.
local recurrence or metastases.63
Tumors of the ear canal are often locally invasive, but slow
to metastasize, although some tumors present with a much more
Squamous cell carcinoma
malignant phenotype, with early spread to the lymph nodes and
lungs. The degree of local invasion is a prognostic indicator in these 
 SCC of the external ear canal is a very aggressive tumor. The tumors
tumors.37
are locally invasive, ulcerated, and painful. In this location, SCC is
 Clinical signs are typically aural discharge, which may be dark or
more likely to invade into the ear canal and adjacent structures
bloody and foul-smelling. and the presence of a mass that can be
and cause facial nerve paralysis, Horner syndrome, and deafness.
599
Section
7
The Head and Neck
A
B
C
D
Figure 50-9 Acute left ear canal avulsion in a young cat repaired surgically. Dorsoventral projection of the skull (A) pre-and (B) post-contrast showing
loss of gas shadow within the right external ear canal and lack of positive contrast filling the external ear canal. (C) A curvilinear incision is made 
caudal and ventral to the pinna. (D) The distal external ear canal is identified and stay sutures placed. (E) The proximal external ear canal is identified.
(F) The external ear canal is repaired with interrupted sutures.
Ear
Chapter
50
Eventually. invasion into the brain or brainstem may occur. These
tumors are difficult to excise completely and they do not respond well 
 Box 50-4 Treatment plan for otitis media
to adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy Meningeal carcinomatosis
and associated neurologic signs have been reported secondary to
1. Gain access to the middle ear, directly if the tympanic membrane
this tumor.'5
is not intact, or via myringotomy (see Box 50-7) if it is still intact 
2. Collect samples for cytology and bacterial culture
3. Flush the tympanic bulla, until the fluid removed is clear
Trauma
4. Infuse topical medications into the bulla 
Trauma to the external ear canal may be caused by road traffc
 5. Reduce inflammation with systemic corticosteroids
accidents and fght wounds. This may be serious enough to cause
 6. Administer systemic and topical antimicrobials 
separation of the auricular and annular cartilages15.66 or avulsion
7. Consider the use of systemic antifungal agents if Marassezia 
of the annular cartilage from the osseous external auditory
suspected or confirmed
au aeu iq aeuand een jo suis ane sg's
 8. Administer additional analgesia as required
ear canal may become stenosed or closed, with the development of
 9. Recheck frequently, e.g., every one to two weeks initially, and
a draining sinus.
re-treat two to three times
In acute cases the ends of the ear canal may be identifed and
10. Treat for a sufficient length of time, e.g. four to eight weeks 
jou Aeu siu sase yiuoiup aiou ul (a-os bu] uonisodde ul pamns
11.． Consider surgery in severe, chronic or refractory cases
be possible and a salvage surgical procedure, such as suturing the end
of the horizontal canal to the skin surface while leaving the vertical
ear canal in situ, a VCA or a total ear canal ablation may be
required 15,66,68
from the middle ear in cats with otitis media include streptococci and
Congenital disorders
staphylococci and organisms that are more diffcult to culture, such
Congenital absence of portions of the external ear canal is rarely
-iod sueau ou Aq s aino yanoue ,'vaapg pue rusdon se
encountered. Recurrent ear pain and draining tracts may be the result.
tive in all cases.
Similar surgical techniques as for trauma to the external ear canal,
 Cats may develop secondary otitis media as a result of damage to
including primary anastomosis of the ear canal, may be used.6?
the tympanic membrane from ear mites, a foreign body or by exten-
sion of a polyp through the tympanic membrane. Acute otitis media
 may be encountered after iatrogenic damage to the tympanic mem-
brane during cleaning or investigation of otitis externa.
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE MIDDLE EAR
 Infective otitis media is treated with systemic antibiotics for three
to six weeks in the frst instance. Ideally, the choice of antibiotic
Otitis media
should be based on culture and sensitivity testing of material obtained
by otoscopy (if the tympanic membrane is ruptured) or myringotomy
Otitis media is inflammation of the middle ear. It is a relatively
(if the tympanic membrane is intact). If concurrent otitis externa is
common disease process that often goes unrecognized. Otitis media
 present this should be treated.
'ssop yim paieduos seo ui uouuon ssal aq ot paunsse Aleiauag s
 Conservative management of otitis media may not be successful in
1o 'auana saiads anl e si sin iaau iea iou st ll ynoie
the longterm and a bulla osteotomy may be required to achieve surgi-
because it less recognized in cats. Otitis media may be diffcult to
cal drainage and to remove any abnormal tissue e.g., thickened epi-
diagnose as it is often masked by concurrent otitis externa. Because of
thelium or polyps. An LBO is indicated if there is concurrent external
this diffculty, in most cats with otitis media the disease is chronic.
 ear canal disease that is to be managed with a total ear canal ablation,
Otitis media may actually be easier to diagnose in cats compared to
whereas a ventral bulla osteotomy (VBO) is indicated if external ear
dogs as their ear canal is relatively short.
canal disease is absent or may be managed non-surgically.
 In some animals the disorder is asymptomatic and an incidental
Aaeu ay payan Aeu sugis ieu jo yoei ay yanoue osupuy
of the owner to recognize a problem or the clinician to identify any
 Treatment of otitis media
abnormality on examination. Fluid may be found in the middle ear
A framework of steps for the treatment of otitis media is listed in
of cats with no clinical signs of ear disease. This fluid may be associ-
Box 50-4.77
yons asasp ieseuous io zslajap aueied jo auasand aui um paie
 Administration of topical agents directly into the middle ear should
leu paadsns s! l! pue e'sisnuis pue euoyduAl leasuAieydoseu se
be done with caution after due consideration of the likely benefit of
au pms aun ul sien asaui ui suasand si uounysp aqn ueiunesng
therapy (i.e, successful resolution of the condition that has not
prevalence of non-neoplastic middle ear disease in 66 cats was 6%74
responded to more conservative measures) versus the potential adverse
and in another study of 3442 cats was 1.7%. with 44% affected bilater-
effects (i.e., ototoxicity). Topical agents normally recommended are
ally and 56% unilaterally. Only 10% of affected cats had clinical signs
fluoroquinolones (eg. enrofloxacin) and ticarcillin or ceftazidime.
related to middle ear disease, namely peripheral vestibular disease and
Neurologic complications after flushing of the middle ear may be
Horner syndrome.70
seen, but are usually transient and resolve within 24 hours. However,
Otitis media may be primary or secondary and can also be iatro-
hospitalization for at least 24 hours may be prudent so that the clini-
genic. In the cat, primary otitis media occurs as a result of infection
cian can assess the effect of the treatment and so that the cat may be
ascending via the Eustachian tube to the middle ear, following upper
fully recovered before discharge to the owner.
 respiratory tract infection or as a result of Eustachian tube dysfunction
as a result of nasopharyngeal disease or anatomic abnormalities in
Middle ear polyps
panloau suasoued au ieut pey au Aq pauoddns s! sul s'eaie siu
are consistent with respiratory tract pathogens. Organisms cultured
This condition is dealt with in Chapter 51.
601
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Neoplasia
Box 50-5 Vestibular disease in cats
Tumors affecting the middle ear are rare in cats and there is little
information on their true incidence and etiology. The few cases
· Cats with vestibular signs need a careful physical and neurologic
reported include carcinoma, SCC, adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, and
examination to determine whether peripheral or central vestibular
fibrosarcoma.45,76,7a-a6 Of these, SCC, which is also the most common
disease is present (see Table 50-1)
oropharyngeal neoplasm, is the most common tumor. Middle ear
If dinical signs of otitis externa or otitis media are present, then
tumors are locally invasive, but metastasis is rare and tends to be to
it is likely that the vestibular signs are associated with the otitis 
the lymph nodes.
media 
 Cats usually present with clinical signs of otitis media that is refrac-
 Otitis media can ocur without signs of otitis externa, making the
diagnosis of otitis media difficult. Neurologic examination and 
Or otitis externa, facial nerve paralysis, laryngeal paralysis, Horner's
diagnostic imaging may be required to make a diagnosis of otitis
 syndrome, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and exposure keratitis, and may
media
rarely extend into the pharynx. Clinical signs may not differentiate
between an inflammatory polyp and true neoplasia, as the neurologic
signs of secondary infection of a polyp may be severe.87
 Diagnosis via otoscopy may be posible if the tympanic membrane
is irregular, bulging or ruptured. However, diagnostic imaging, either
Table 50-3 Diseases causing central vestibular signs
CT, MRI or radiography, is normally required to demonstrate a mass
in the tympanic bulla, although this will not indicate the tumor type.
Type of disease
Disease
 Fine needle aspiration via the external ear canal may be possible and
Degener ative
 Cerebellar cortical abiotrophy
nation of tissue samples taken percutaneously may be possible if there
Lysosomal storage diseases 
is extensive invasion of tissues outside of the middle ear.
Surgery may be performed for local control, either via a LBO or
Anomalous
Hydrocephalus
VBO, depending on the involvement of the external ear canal, although
 Nutritional
Thiamine deficiency
 sissd s u s uxa ns aad
 Neoplasia 
Meningioma
radiotherapy may be indicated for long-term local control. Tumors are
 often not diagnosed until advanced disease is present, eg. marked
Lymphoma
ataxia and inappetence, and the prognosis is guarded to poor.
Oligodendroglioma
Medulloblastoma
Cholesteatoma
Toxic
Metronidazole
Cholesteatomas have not been described clinically in cats, although
they may be induced experimentally by ligation of the external audi-
Lead
tory canal.8?
Trauma
Vascular
Feline ischemic encephalopathy
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE INNER EAR
Surgery is rarely indicated for disease of the inner ear, but conditions
vestibular disease in cats are listed in Box 50-5.
affecting this area may occur as an extension of middle ear disease or
as complications of aural surgery, such as bulla osteotomy, ototoxic
auun aul jo saseasip way shnsan uounysap reinqsaa ieiaudad
agents, and ear flushing.
and middle ear affecting the receptors in the labyrinth and the ves-
tibular portion of cranial nerve Vll. Central vestibular dysfunction
results from disease affecting the brainstem and cerebellum. Central
Deafness
vestibular diseases are listed in Table 50-3 and are not considered
further here, but should be considered as differential diagnoses for
deafness may be sensorineural or conductive. Causes of acquired
cats presenting with vestibular disease.
deafness include drug toxicity noise trauma, infection, aging, middle
The three major differential diagnoses for cats with peripheral ves-
tibular disease are otitis interna/media, nasopharyngeal polyps (see
Deafness may be acquired following ear cleaning under general
Chapter 51), and idiopathic feline vestibular disease,?4.05 The damaged
anesthesia and concurrent vestibular dysfunction was noted in some
vestibular system can compensate over time; however, residual neuro-
logic deficits such as a head tilt are relatively common and recurrence
impaired hearing will be seen postoperatively after total ear canal
of clinical signs may be seen at times of stress, recurrent disease or
ablation.
important to manage the clinical signs such as inappetence, vomiting.
salivation, and nausea that accompany vestibular dysfunction.99-101
Vestibular syndrome
Common clinical signs of vestibular disease are head tilt, nystagmus,
Inflammation/infection
and ataxia, which may be present as single entities or a combination.
 Neurologic examination of the patient will allow differentiation of
Most animals with otitis interna have otitis media, and extension of
peripheral versus central vestibular disease (see Table 50-1), which
otitis media is the most common cause of otitis interna. 102 Bacterial
602
Ear
Chapter
50
otitis interna or labyrinthitis may cause peripheral vestibular dysfunc-
Idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome (IFVS)
tion. Organisms commonly isolated include Staphylococcus, Streptococ-
Cus, Pasteurella, Proteus, E. coli Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, and obligate
This is a disorder of peracute peripheral vestibular dysfunction, usually
anaerobes. Treatment comprises long-term (six to eight weeks) anti-
found in young to middle-aged cats, especially in the summer months.
biotic therapy. Refractory cases may need surgical drainage of the
No cause is known, although comparisons have been drawn with
Meniere disease in man, where abnormal endolymphatic flow Or
development of central vestibular signs, altered mentation, abnormal
posture and gait, cranial nerve deficits, and seizures, may be seen in
Bilateral disease is uncommon (less than l0%) and concurrent facial
Sisougoid aui pue sishleue dso pue lan Aq si sisouaeia 'sases araaas
nerve paralysis or Horner syndrome is not expected.
is good to excellent with surgical management and appropriate anti-
[eu pue aseasi iei Aroieidsai iaddn Aq papanaid aq Aeu sadl
 biotic therapy. despite the severe and apparently life-threatening
signs of excessive vocalization, which may be related to general diso-
presentation.104
 other causes of vestibular disease Treatment consists of supportive
Cryptococcosis usually causes central vestibular signs, but cats with
nursing care for the disorientation and anorexia. The prognosis for
peripheral vestibular disorders have been described. All animals
responded wellto surgical drainage and medical therapy with ketoco-
recovery is good, although this may take two to four weeks and
nazole fluconazole or itraconazole.05 Resolution of the neurologic
signs may take two to six weeks and often some neurologic deficits,
as a head tilt. In addition, recurrence of clinical signs may occur.?4
eg., a head tilt, remain.
Anomalous vestibular disorders
Neoplasia
Congenital vestibular disorders have been reported in Siamese and
Burmese kittens.28,102 Signs of peripheral vestibular dysfunction and
Tumors affecting the peripheral vestibular system are dealt with above
in the section on the middle ear, as these regions are commonly
concurrent deafness are seen at three to four weeks of age with clinical
improvement in three to four months. The cause is unknown.
or therapy may be considered as for midle ear neoplasia, but cure of
the disease and resolution of the neurologic signs are unlikely.
o  u o pqsap aq s oaa pe aa
FLUSHING THE EAR CANAL
 middle ear tumors with medial extension in two cats with prolonged
AND MYRINGOTOMY
 postoperative survival.106
Flushing the ear canal under general anesthesia is necessary for the
Ototoxicity
resolution of many cases of otitis, particularly in chronic cases and
where topical therapy has not been effective. In animals with marked
Peripheral vestibular disease may be induced by ototoxic agents, i..
those agents that may damage the cochlear or vestibular apparatus
pau au susng 'uoeeu Aq pasnis jeues iea a yo sisouas
to be delayed until the ear canal is patent following the use of topical
 Or systemic corticosteroids. Indications for otic flushing are listed in
so jo auasaid aul un sinp on aqeaad anou si auequa
Box 50-6. Flushing of the ear canal should be followed by a regime
au ui sin iey aun on ap oy snsan Aiixoioio z'eia
 of owner-administered ear cleaning once or twice daily and this
 cochlea or in the vestibular apparatus and results in hearing deficits.
should be demonstrated to the client prior to flushing, when the ear
vestibular signs or both, which may be very obvious or more subtle.
may be less painful. Ear flushing is described in Box 50-7.
In cats, vestibular signs tend to predominate whereas in dogs deafness
Myringotomy involves making a hole in the tympanic membrane
is more usual.
with a needle or myringotomy knife and sampling the contents of the
A large number of agents have been described as ototoxic or poten-
tially ototoxic, but much of the information is of poor quality as it is
middle ear and may be used as a diagnostic test in middle ear disease.
 In animals with otitis media and a persistent pressure change in the
anecdotal, based on extrapolation from other species, or found as a
result of using drugs in far higher concentrations than used
tympanic cavity, myringotomy will equalize the pressure and reduce
clinically.108-10 In addition, many reports describe ototoxicity experi-
 pain and is therefore therapeutic.
mentally in normal animals, whereas in animals with otitis, the sus-
ceptibility to ototoxic agents may be different. For further information 
Aural solutions and therapeutics
on flushing solutions and therapeutic agents see below.
Careful consideration should be given to the contents of any topical
 preparation used in the external ear canal, particularly if there is a
External trauma
Peripheral vestibular signs may follow head trauma, particularly
 Box 50-6 Indications for otic flushing
where there is fracture of the petrosal temporal bone or tympanic
bulla, or gunshot injury.!l This may be accompanied by facial nerve
 Failure of owner-administered topical therapy to resolve the
problem in a reasonable period of time, usually within four weeks 
 Of other injuries sustained as a result of the trauma.
 Presence of aural discharge that may harbor microorganisms and 
 prevent topical agents reaching adequate concentrations
 Suspicion of otitis media, foreign body or neoplasia 
latrogenic trauma
 If a full and detailed examination of the ear canal and tympanic
Peripheral vestibular disease may be seen after bulla osteotomy, par-
membrane and/or myringotomy is required
ticularly where vigorous curettage of the petrous temporal bone has
If foreign bodies are present
been performed.
E09
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
syndrome, vestibular, deafness). Most complications are transient, but
 Box 50-7 Ear flushing and myringotomy
permanent neurologic complications may occur and flushing the ear
canal should never be considered as a routine or prophylactic proce-
 The cat is generally placed in lateral recumbency with the caudal
dure. Complications are avoided by using good chemical restraint
head and neck elevated to allow fluid exiting the bulla via the 
 Eustachian tubes to flow rostrally out of the nares. Care should be
(general anesthesia), gentle atraumatic technique, avoiding ototoxic
taken to keep the flushing solution and associated debris and
agents, and either avoiding cenuminolytic agents or ensuring that
these agents are thoroughly flushed out with saline after their
 potential pathogens out of the patient's eyes.
administration.
Ear flushing
 Fluid in the middle ear will dampen hearing and fluid introduced
The ear canal should be alternately flushed and then suctioned to
during lavage of the middle ear may take seven to ten days to be
remove the instilled fluid to improve visibility. A syringe and a red 
absorbed, with resultant impaired hearing during this time. The
rubber or polypropylene catheter (3.5-5 French) may be used for
normal tympanic membrane heals in three to five weeks.
this purpose. Alternatively, a catheter may be attached to a bag of 
 uallaui ym papaoud abeael snonuluon pue aules pawem 
suction. Samples should always be collected for cytology and culture
and the need for a myringotomy should be considered.
PREPARATION FOR SURGERY
 Once samples have been taken for clinical pathology. a
ceruminolytic agent may be applied to break down waxy and
Preparation of the external surfaces of the ear may be readily achieved,
adherent materials and hasten the cleaning process. However, most 
but the external ear canal cannot be cleaned as effectively and it
 ceruminolytic agents are potentially ototoxic, so caution should be 
should be considered that surgery in this location constitutes clean-
ea aul peui rou si aueguau peduai aut t Aeined pasaxa
should be lavaged thoroughly with saline afterwards, particularly if 
contaminated or contaminated surgery. In animals with established
infectious otitis, then surgery may be classified as dirty, although in
 the tympanic membrane is perforated.
these patients, an effort to control the local infection may be made
Myringotomy
before beginning surgery. Thus perioperative antimicrobial prophy-
A 20G or 22G spinal needle of appropriate length (at least 1.5
laxis may be indicated, although some consideration should be given
inches) may be used. This is introduced into the pars tensa of the
to delaying antibiotic administration until samples have been obtained
tympanic membrane at either the 5 o'clock or 7 o'clock position 
for culture.
(.e., caudoventrally) to keep away from the germinal epithelium and 
 A pharyngeal pack should be placed whenever intervention (surgery
blood vessels overlying the manubrium of the malleus. Fluid is either
or otoscopy) is performed in a patient that might have a defect in the
aspirated directly, or 1 mL of saline is instilled and then aspirated 
tympanic membrane, as fluid may exit the tympanic bulla via the
with a syringe. Samples should be obtained for cytology and culture
auditory tube. The eyes should be protected with a topical agent to
and sensitivity, and this may be followed by therapeutic lavage.
 protect them against damage from the skin preparation agent.
clinical suspicion or knowledge that the tympanic membrane is not
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
intact.1o? Many ear-cleaning solutions contain a mixture of ototoxic
substances and, of these, chlorhexidine is probably the most toxic,
Lateral wall resection
 particularly in cats. Similarly, most otic preparations for the treatment
 of otitis externa contain potentially ototoxic agents. Other potentially
A LWR is the removal of the lateral wall of the vertical part of the
ototoxic agents in cats include aminoglycosides, furosemide, bumeta-
external ear canal, with subsequent apposition of the skin surface to
nide and fpronil. In humans, ethacrynic acid and antibiotics such
the integument of the remaining vertical canal (Fig. 50-10 and Box
as erythromycin, minocycline, chloramphenicol, vancomycin, and
50-8). It is indicated in the management of otitis externa where an
nq 'susis reinqnsan asne ot paodai uaq aaey a uxAukiod lenidon
improvement in the local microenvironment following the procedure
this has not been reported in cats. Treatment comprises stopping the
will allow for either resolution of the condition or improved access
 potentially ototoxic medication and provision of supportive care The
for treatment, for removal of small masses from the lateral wall of the
 prognosis for recovery is good in most cases.
vertical canal and, uncommonly, to gain surgical access to the hori-
 The following drugs may be considered safe, or perhaps more cor-
zontal part of the ear canal. It is important to realize that for most
rectly, less ototoxic: fluoroquinolones, aqueous penicillin G, some
animals with otitis externa, this procedure is not curative, and the
semisynthetic penicillins (carbenacillin and ticarcillin) and some
animal will need continued therapy. For cats with chronic otitis
cephalosporins (ceftazidime and cefmenoxime), clotrimazole, mico-
externa affecting the remaining external ear canal or otitis media, this
nazole, nystatin and tolnaftate, the aqueous forms of dexamethasone
 procedure is likely to be unsuccessful. This procedure is uncommonly
and fuocinolone, and some flushing agents (squalene and Tris-
 performed in cats.
Jo io 'ea apiu au go aeae y uos aes Auo au sz (ia
the external ear canal if the tympanic membrane is ruptured is a sterile
Vertical canal ablation
isotonic crystalloid, such as saline Antiseptics and known ototoxic
agents should be avoided.
A VCA is the removal ofthe entire vertical part of the external ear canal
with subsequent apposition of the ends of the horizontal part of the
Complications
ear canal to the skin (Box 50-9). It is indicated for otitis externa that
affects only the vertical ear canal, trauma, and small masses of the
Complications from ear flushing are more common in cats than dogs.
vertical canal. The advantages of this technique are that, compared to
although it is important to consider that some of these may also result
a total ear canal ablation, it is technically simpler, with fewer compli-
from the presence of uncontrolled otitis externa/media. Complica-
cations, and preserves hearing. The main disadvantage is that otitis
tions include pain and neurologic signs (facial nerve paresis, Horner
externa rarely solely involve the vertical canal, and usually persistent
604
Ear
Chapter
50
otitis externa in the remaining part of the ear canal renders this surgi-
A variation of this procedure, a subtotal ear canal ablation, has been
paad Auooun Aaa si aasns su aeg e aniuuoan i
recommended for animals with minimal pathologic changes in the
in cats.
distal ear canal.120 The technique involves resection of the proximal
A variation of this procedure, the 'pull-through' technique, involves
(ventral) half of the vertical ear canal and the entire horizontal canal.
 making an incision around the external auditory meatus and dissect-
The remaining distal (dorsal) vertical canal is then closed to create a
ing the vertical canal free of its attachments, before pulling it through
a defect in the skin made at the junction of the horizontal and vertical
circumference of the annular cartilage Potential advantages include
uis an iy se udo mau e u uan pue sieu
less dissection and maintenance of a normal ear carriage and potential
technique.114.115
 disadvantages include necessity for continued medical therapy if not
all the diseased tissue is removed.
Total ear canal ablation and lateral
bulla osteotomy
Box 50-8 Lateral wall resection
Total ear canal ablation (Fig. 50-12) is the excision of both the vertical
and horizontal parts of the external ear canal to the level of the
osseous external acoustic meatus (Box 50-10). A LBO is always per-
incisions are made in the skin, one from the tragohelicine fissure and 
formed concurrently to investigate the contents of the tympanic bulla
 one from the intertragic notch, approximately 1.5 times the length of
and manage concurrent middle ear disease.
the vertical canal. The soft tissue is then cleared from the lateral wall 
of the vertical canal and similar incisions are made in the vertical 
external ear canal, although other indications include chronic otitis
canal, removing approximately 50% of the circumference of the ear
externa, trauma, and congenital malformations.37,6264,8 104,1-9
canal. The resulting cartilage flap is reflected distally and the proximal
two-thirds is amputated, leaving a small portion ventral to the 
opening of the horizontal canal as a drainage board. The surrounding
skin is then apposed to the integument of the external ear canal with
 simple interrupted sutures of a monofilament non-absorbable suture 
material (e.g.1.5 M Nylon).
Box 50-9 Vertical canal ablation
The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency with the affected ear
uppermost (Fig. 50-11A). A circular incision is made around the
 external auditory meatus, and the incision is then extended ventrally
over the vertical part of the external ear canal (Fig. 50-11B). The
tissue of the parotid salivary gland is bluntly dissected to expose the 
vertical ear canal. Dissection of the vertical part of the external ear 
uassip sunia pue dheus jo ainxiu e y spaanod uaun leuen
making an effort to stay as close to the cartilage of the ear canal
as possible (Fig. 50-11C). When the vertical canal is fully exposed
 circumferentially the dorsal two-thirds of the vertical canal is
amputated. Incisions are made in the remaining vertical canal rostrally
 and caudally to the level of the junction of the vertical canal and 
Figure 50-10 A lateral wall resection was performed previously in this
horizontal canal, and the resulting flaps are sutured to the 
adult domestic short-haired cat. There is evidence of continuing otitis 
surrounding skin as dorsal and ventral drainage boards.
externa
A
B
E
Figure 50-11 Vertical canal ablation in an elderly cat with a ceruminous gland adenoma affecting the vertical ear canal. (A) The ear is manually
extended to tense the skin prior to making the first incision. (B) A T-shaped skin incision is made around the external ear canal opening and extending 
down distal to the ear canal. (c) The incision is extended around the external ear canal opening. (D) The vertical ear canal is dissected out by a 
combination of sharp and blunt dissection, keeping close to the cartilage. (E) At the end of surgery after resection of the vertical ear canal, dorsal
and ventral flaps are sutured to the surrounding skin, and the original skin incision is closed. (Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
605
Section
7
The Head and Neck
A
F
Figure 50-12 Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO). (A) The ear is clipped and prepared for surgery. (B) The external ear
 canal is dissected out. (c) The junction of the external ear canal and osseous external acoustic meatus and facial nerve are identified. (D) The external
ear canal is amputated from the osseous external acoustic meatus. (E) A lateral bulla osteotomy is performed. (F) The excised external ear canal is 
606
Ear
Chapter
50
Box 50-10 Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO)
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency with the affected ear
The opening to the bulla is enlarged with rongeurs by removing
uppermost. The neck is extended over a small sandbag or towel. An 
bone ventral to the external acoustic meatus. The bony shelf
incision is made around the opening of the external ear canal, which
between the small dorsolateral compartment and the larger
may be extended ventrally with a linear incision over the vertical ear
ventromedial compartment is opened with rongeurs. A curette is 
canal (Fig. 50-13A). The tissue of the parotid salivary gland is bluntly
used to remove the epithelial lining and debris from the tympanic
dissected to expose the vertical ear canal. Dissection of the external ear
'abaeupsip pue sugap arowan ot pasn s! uoons pue abeael pue eling
canal then proceeds with a mixture of sharp and blunt dissection,
Samples should be submitted for culture. The dorsal (epitympanic 
making an effort to stay as close to the cartilage of the ear canal as 
recess and auditory ossicles) and dorsomedial (promontory and
possible (Fg. 50-13B). This process proceeds deeper until the external
inner ear structures) regions are avoided to reduce the incidence
acoustic meatus is encountered. Care is taken to avoid the facial nerve,
of iatrogenic vestibular defects.11α A wound drain is not routinely
lea aul ot lepnen uaweaoy ploisewois aui ei lnys aul siixa yiym
used.
canal and courses rostrally around the ventral aspect of the ear canal.
The deeper tissues are closed with small gauge synthetic
The external ear canal is excised with a scalpel blade while protecting 
monofilament suture material in a simple interrupted or purse-string 
the facial nerve. Remnants of epithelium attached to the opening
suture, taking care to avoid the facial nerve. Final incisional closure is 
of the external acoustic meatus are removed.
routine (Fig. 50-13C).
B
A
 Figure 50-13 Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO). (A) A T-shaped skin incision extends around the opening of the
au pue jeuen iea luaxa aul jo buuado aut punoe panuuon s! uosui aul (a) iea ela aui lao Aleisip spuaxa pue jeuen ea euaxa
dissection is continued close to the ear canal down to the external acoustic meatus and a lateral bulla osteotomy is performed. (c) Final 
 appearance after skin closure.
Another variation of this procedure uses a ventrally based single
 Aural hematoma drainage
pedicle advancement flap to maintain normal ear carriage after total
ear canal ablation.121 The complication rate of this procedure was not
A surgical drain31.32 or teat cannula*3 may be implanted to provide
different from the standard procedure.
longer term continuous drainage (Box 50-13), but this may be
inefective if there is a substantial quantity of fbrin in the
hematoma cavity. Incisional drainage is usually needed for a chronic
Ventral bulla osteotomy
hematoma.
Postoperative application of a sterile dressing and a bandage pro-
VBO (Figs 50-14 and 50-15) is indicated for diagnostic and therapeu-
vides optimal aseptic care, may contribute to maintaining apposition
tic purposes in cats with middle ear disease (Box 50-11 ). This includes
between the skin and cartilage and helps to retain an implanted drain,
mass lesions of the middle ear, primarily middle ear polyps, but
including other tumors, and otitis media, where medical therapy
but bandaging the ear and head in cats can be difficult to maintain
alone or with myringotomy and lavage are not sufficient and where
 and achieve without complications.
there is no concurrent otitis exterma, for which a total ear canal abla-
tion and LBO would be indicated.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Pinnectomy
-lad si (7i-os xog] Aoioauud 1o ieouai euuid jeion io [eed y
 Surgery of the external ear canal and middle ear has the potential to
formed for resection of traumatic lesions or neoplasia. The most
be painful and a robust and effective analgesia plan should be made,
common indication is pinnal SCC (see Fig. 50-7).
with repeated assessment of the patient and adjustment of this plan
607
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
A
B
C
D
Figure 50-14 Ventral bulla osteotomy. (A) The cat is positioned for ventral bulla osteotomy with the head extended over a sandbag and the rostral
aspect taped down. (B) Multiple retractors are used to assist in exposing the ventral aspect of the tympanic bulla. (C) Removal of thick fluid from the
bulla after osteotomy. (D) Placement of a Penrose drain prior to closure.
as needed. A pre-emptive multimodal analgesic plan should be
gland. Patients with vestibular syndrome are often disorientated and
employed, with opiates and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
require additional nursing care, particularly with respect to eating and
0 uonepuienuon e si aaui ssaun) ianeiadoaid uaaia (saivsn)
drinking.
NSAID use), with additional opiates given during the anesthetic as
required (e.g., fentanyl infusion). Postoperatively, opiates, either as
bolus doses or as a continuous rate infusion, should be continued
along with NSAIDs. Local anesthesia may be used singly, e.g. as a
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
splash block, or as multiple doses, e.g., with a wound diffusion cath-
eter. Lidocaine or ketamine may be added as a continuous rate infu-
Most complications associated with surgical procedures of the ear
sion if additional analgesia is required.
result from total ear canal ablation and LBO. The complication rate
The use of antibiotics postoperatively depends on the assessment
in cats is similar to that in dogs, although there may be a greater
of standard criteria, such as the US National Research Council clas-
incidence of neurologic complications, particularly Horner syndrome
sifcation of the wound, the duration of the anesthesia and surgery.
and permanent facial nerve paralysis in cats compared to dogs .19
and the patient's general health status. Bandaging the ears is diffcult
to achieve satisfactorily and the use of a bandage which passes round
Hemorrhage
the neck has the potential to obstruct venous and lymphatic flow or
cause asphyxia, and these are not recommended. A patient with an
Intraoperative hemorrhage may be clinically significant, particularly if 
open wound or a surgical drain needs particular care of the wound
using standard aseptic technique.
carotid artery, but in most cases it is not. However, bleeding impairs
Patients with pre-existing or iatrogenic postoperative facial
the surgeon's view of the intraoperative site and this may increase the
nerve paresis or paralysis need to have an artificial tear replacement
risk of iatrogenic damage to structures in the surgical feld. Concerns
used to prevent the eye from drying due to the loss of the blink
about the significance of hemorrhage may result in the surgeon
[el au on Aidns sauiedaseied aul jo ssol aun pue asuodsan
rushing or abbreviating the procedure, which may increase the risk of
608
Ear
Chapter
50
A
B
Figure 50-15 Ventral bulla osteotomy in a domestic short-hair cat with a middle ear polyp and secondary otitis media. (A) The ventral aspect of the
tympanic bulla had been exposed by soft tissue dissection using a standard ventral approach. (B) A square section of the ventral bulla has been cut 
using an osteotome and mallet.
complications relating to incomplete removal of the integument from
 a w uauia aaas au jo in aau
the tympanic cavity.
cavity, although osteomyelitis of the auditory ossicles, inadequate
drainage of the middle ear through the Eustachian tube and damage
Acute wound complications
   oe a  as  ar c
therapy alone is usually not successful in resolving this problem and
Acute wound complications include incisional hematoma, incisional
surgical exploration of the tract and re-exploration of the middle ear
dehiscence extended wound drainage wound infection, and acute
via a lateral approach is likely to be needed.
cellulitis and abscessation. Wound contamination is difficult to avoid
and some degree of minor wound swelling, exudation or dehiscence
Nerve damage
uuane iaqny Aue sainbai kjaiei inq 'uouuosun iou si
Local wound care, establishing drainage and antibiotic therapy, fol-
latrogenic facial nerve damage is a relatively common complication
lowed by second intention healing will normally result in resolution
after total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy and is transient in
of these problems.
the majority of cases if the nerve has not been severed. Regular inspec-
Necrosis of the pinna is very uncommon and is normally caused by
tion of the eye and application of a tear replacement is required until
disruption of the proximal edge of the caudal pinnal margin.l18
the palpebral response returns. Horner's syndrome (Fig. 50-19) is
much more common in the cat than in the dog. and is generally
Fistulous tract
transient,!l7 lasting three to four weeks. Vestibular syndrome is very
uncommon and normally results from excessive and inappropriate
d faaniaosod doaaap Aeu einsy io pen suuep su v
qurettage of the dorsomedial region of the tympanic cavity (Fig.
to fistula development signs of fluid accumulation and pain in the
50-20). The clinical signs are usually temporary. Hypoglossal nerve
midle ear may be subtle including pain on opening of the mouth
defcits are very uncommon and may be associated with a VBO or
(yawning or eating) and scratching or shaking of the head. Clinical
extensive ventral dissection during a LBO. Pre-existing signs of vestibu-
examination often reveals marked pain on palpation of the previous
lar syndrome, particularly a head tilt, may persist after resolution of
surgical site and bulla. The most common reason for the fistula is
the cause of the problenm.
609
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
C
D
Figure 50-15, Continued (c) Removal of this bone gives good exposure to the bulla cavity, which is full of purulent fluid. Samples are collected for
analysis, after which the fluid is aspirated and the bulla flushed. (D) The tympanic bulla is shown after removal of purulent fluid and a small polyp: both 
bulla cavities were opened and flushed. Great care is taken not to damage nerves on the dorsomedial wall during surgery. (Couresy of Laura Owen.)
Box 50-11 Ventral bulla osteotomy
VBO is performed with the cat in dorsal recumbency, with the head 
tympanic bulla with a drill bit or Steinmann pin and hand chuck.
and neck extended over a sandbag (Fig. 50-14A). The maxilla may be 
The bone of the tympanic bulla may be chronically thickened or 
taped to the surgical table to stabilize the skull. With the cat
weakened by the presence of middle ear disease and care should be
taken when performing the osteotomy. The hole is then enlarged 
 to palpate. Other palpable landmarks include body and ramus of the 
with rongeurs. Samples of fluid or tissue are taken for culture and 
mandible, the digastricus muscle, which is a relatively large curved 
histology. This approach will provide access to the large ventromedial
tubular muscle that inserts on the caudoventral mandible, and the 
compartment of the bulla (see Fig. 50-2), which contains the round 
wing of the atlas.
window. Care is taken to avoid damage to the cervical sympathetic
A skin incision is made in a paramedian location, just medial to
nerves that lie on the surface of the promontory on the dorsomedial
 the digastricus muscle, approximately mid-way between the ventral
wall in this compartment. The ventral portion of the transverse
 aspect of the body of the mandible and the midline (Fig. 50-16A).
septum is then opened as for entry into the bulla and the hole 
 This incision is centered between the angular process of the mandible 
enlarged with rongeurs to gain access to the smaller dorsolateral
and the wing of the atlas. Blunt dissection is continued through the 
compartment, which is where most polyps originate. This bone is thin
 subcutaneous tissue and platysma and sphincter colli muscles. Blunt 
and fragile and should be removed with care. Making this hole as 
dissection is then continued between the digastricus muscle laterally
laterally as possible will reduce the risk of damage to the bone 
 Allepaw pal!uap! ane sapsnuu snssojbory pue snssojois aut pue 
promontory (Fig. 50-16C).
The lingual artery and hypoglossal nerve are identified on the lateral
 The origin of the polyp is removed by traction and any thickened 
 border of the hyoglossus muscle and are retracted medially with
lining of the bulla is removed by curettage. Care is taken to avoid 
this muscle. The linguofacial vein may be identified on the medial
curettage of the caudomedial and dorsal parts of the tympanic bulla 
border of the digastricus muscle further caudally and should be 
to prevent damage to the round and oval windows and the ossicles.
avoided.
The tympanic bulla is lavaged with saline and a passive or active drain
Exposure of the tympanic bulla (Hg. 50-16B) is achieved with
may be placed prior to closure if the bulla contains infected material
hand-held (e.g. Senn) or self-retaining (e.g.. Gelpi or Weitlaner)
that cannot be completely removed at surgery. The wound is closed
retractors. The soft tissue is elevated from the ventral aspect of the
by approximating the tissues in the same layers as encountered on
 bulla with a periosteal elevator and an opening is made into the
the approach.
610
Ear
Chapter
50
Box50-11
Continued
LATER
3&日
A
B
C
Figure 50-16 (A) The skin incision is made mid-way between the midline of the cat and the caudal ramus, centered over the tympanic bulla.
(B) The bulla is exposed. (c) The ventral bulla osteotomy in the tympanic bulla is made on the lateral aspect of the bulla, in order to avoid damage
'sapsnu jessojbody pue jessojbois Has puel Aeajis yeingipuew '5sn :Aaue epejonbul'7 :apsnu snssebip 'q :eing 'g Aotuowoud aui ol 
Box 50-12 Pinnectomy
 ear canal ablation, although many patients with obstruction to the
 external ear canal, a disrupted tympanic membrane, or middle ear
The pinna is transected at least 1 cm from the margins of the lesion
 disease will have impaired hearing prior to surgery and a change may
(Hg. 50-17A). Scissors can be used to perform the amputation. The 
 skin edges are then apposed with non-absorbable simple interrupted
 not be appreciated postoperatively.1
or continuous sutures, aiming to pull the thicker skin from the 
1! ylm buisodde pue abellen aul jo abpa aul laao anepuns xauon
Change in cosmetic appearance
the thinner skin on the concave pinna (Fig. 50-17B).
The resected pinna is submitted for histopathologic analysis 
 Removal of the external ear canal and loss of the external auditory
meatus will result in a minor change in the animal's cosmetic
B
Figure 50-17 Pinnectomy in an 11-year-old female neutered Burmese cat for squamous cell carcinoma. (A) The pinna is resected close to the base
using scissors, taking slightly more cartilage than skin to facilitate closure. (B) The skin is apposed using simple interrupted sutures. (Courtesy of Jane
La0/ow.)
611
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
 Box 50-13 Aural hematoma drainage
 An incision is made in the skin of the concave aspect of the pinna
 pue uuqy pue piny ewoas) suajuon aut pue ewojeway aul ou!
granulation tissue) are evacuated. Through-and-through mattress 
 sutures are then placed parallel to the blood vessels in the pinna to
avoid vascular compromise from the sutures, taking care to avoid the
vessels with the suture needle (Fg. 50-18). Alternatively, after the
skin is incised, the edges of the skin may be sutured to the wound 
bed with a simple continuous suture.34 An alternative to a single
large incision is the use of multiple smaller incisions, e.g.. created
with a 4-6 mm dermal biopsy punch35 or a carbon dioxide laser,36
although this method provides less access to drain any solid contents
from the hematoma cavity.
Figure 50-19 Marked Horner syndrome after ventral bulla osteotomy.
B
Figure 50-18 (A) Aural hematoma bulging on the concave inner
pinna. (B) An S-shaped or sinusoidal incision is made along the 
length of the hematoma to drain the contents. The cavity is then
 closed down with multiple through-and-through mattress sutures 
 placed parallel to blood vessels to avoid vascular compromise.
Figure 50-20 Horner syndrome and vestibular syndrome in a cat
following total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy.
appearance. Of more importance is the alteration in ear carriage, with
ventral deviation of the pinna, particularly if a large area of skin sur-
rounding the external auditory meatus is removed. This cosmetic
 Box 50-14 Reasons for failure of aural surgery in cats
change may be avoided by using a ventrally-based advancement flap
to provide more local skin for closure of the defect.121
Poor surgical technique, e.g. failure to drain the horizontal canal
properly
 Poor patient selection, i.e., chronic irreversible changes in the
Failure of surgery
remaining ear canal
 It is important to realize that LWR or VCA does not provide a solution
Failure to control the underlying ear disease
to all cases of chronic ear disease. The reasons for failure of LwR or
 Unremitting otitis media
VCA are listed in Box 50-14.
REFERENCES
1.
 Kontos V, Sotiraki S, Himonas C.
3.1
Uchida Y, Nakade T, Kitazawa K.
 5. Nardoni S, Mancianti F, Rum A, Corazza
Two rare disorders in the cat: demodectic
 Clinico-microbiological study of the
M. Isolation of Malassezia species from
 otitis externa and sarcoptic mange.
 normal and otitic external ear canals in
healthy cats and cats with otitis. J Feline
Feline Pract 1998;26(6):18-20.
dogs and cats. Nihon Juigaku Zasshi
Med Surg 2005;7(3):141-5.
 Tater KC, Scott Dw, Miller WH Jr, Erb
1990;52(2):41 5-17.
G.
Ginel Pl, Lucena R, Rodriguez JC, Ortega J.
HN. The cytology of the external ear
4.
 Baxter M. The association of Pityrosporum
A semiquantitative cytological evaluation
anal in the normal dog and cat. J Vet
 pachydermatis with the normal external
of normal and pathological samples from
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
 ear canal of dogs and cats. J Small Anim
 the external ear canal of dogs and cats. Vet
2003;50(7):370-4.
Pract 1976;17(4):231-4.
Dermat 2002;13(3):151-6.
612
Ear
Chapter
50
7.
De Lorenzi D, Bonfanti U, Masserdotti
21. Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ.
36.
.Dye TL, Teague HD, Ostwald DA.
C, Tranquillo M. Fine-needle biopsy of 
 Thrall DE. Radiographic and computed
Evaluation of a technique using the
external ear canal masses in the cat:
tomographic evaluation of otitis media
arbon dioxide laser for the treatment
 cytologic results and histologic
in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 of aural hematomas. J Am Anim Hosp
correlations in 27 cases. Vet Clin Pathol
1995;36(5):375-9.
Assoc 2002;38[4):385-90.
2005;34(2):100-5.
22.
Klopp LS, Hathcock JT, Sorjonen DC.
37.
London CA, Dubilzeig RR, Vail DM.
 8. Foster AP, DeBoer DJ. The role of
 Magnetic resonance imaging features of
et al. Evaluation of dogs and cats with
Pseudomonas in canine ear disease.
 brain stem abscessation in two cats. Vet
tumors of the ear canal: 145 cases
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 2000;41(4):300-7.
(1978-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc
1998;20(8):909-19.
23.
 Allgoewer I, Lucas S, Schmitz SA.
1996;208(9):1413-18.
9. Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski Jl.
 Magnetic resonance imaging of the
38.
Lana SE, Ogilvie GK, Withrow Sl, et al.
Hillier A. Microbial flora and
 normal and diseased feline middle ear.
Feline cutaneous squamous cell
antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2000;41(5):
 crcinoma of the nasal planum and the
isolated pathogens from the horizontal
413-18.
pinnae: 61 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
ear canal and middle ear in dogs with
24. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Penderis I, et al.
1997;33(4):329-32.
otitis media. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Results of magnetic resonance imaging
39.
 Dorn CR, Taylor DON. Sunlight
1998;212(4):534-8.
in dogs with vestibular disorders: 85
 exposure and risk of developing
10.
Garosi LS, Dennis R, Schwarz T. Review
cases [1996-1999). Jourmal of the
cutaneous and oral squamous cell
of diagnostic imaging of ear diseases in
 American Veterinary Medical Association
carcinomas in white cats. J Natl Cancer
the dog and cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
2001;218(3):385-91.
Inst 1971;46(5):1073-8.
2003;44(2):137-46.
25.
Mellema LM, Samii VF, Vernau KM,
40. Nasir L, Krasner H, Argyle DJ, Williams 
11.
Hofer P, Meisen N, Bartholdi S.
 LeCouteur RA. Meningeal enhancement 
A. Immunocytochemical analysis of the
Kaser-Hotz B. A new radiographic view
 on magnetic resonance imaging in
tumour suppressor protein (p53) in
of the feline tympanic bullae. Vet Radiol
15 dogs and 3 cats. Veterinary Radiology
feline neoplasia. Cancer Letters
Ultrasound 1995;36(1):14-15.
& Ultrasound 2002;43(1):10-15.
2000;155(1):1-7.
12.
 Bischoff MG, Kneller SK. Diagnostic
26.
Farley GR, Starr A. Middle and long
41.
Teifke IP, Lohr CV.
imaging of the canine and feline ear.
latency auditory evoked potentials
Immunohistochemical detection of
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
in cat. I. Component definition and
P53 overexpression in paraffin wax-
2004;34(2):437-58.
 dependence on behavioral factors. Hear
 embedded squamous cell carcinomas of
13. Hammond G), Sullivan M, Weinrauch S.
Res 1983;10(2):117-38.
cattle, horses, cats and dogs. I Comp
King AM. A comparison of the
27.
 Starr A, Farley GR. Middle and long
Pathol 1996;114(2):205-10.
 rostrocaudal open mouth and rostro
latency auditory evoked potentials in
42.
Hutson CA, Rideout BA, Pedersen NC.
10 degrees ventro-caudodorsal oblique
cat. Il. Component distributions and
Neoplasia associated with feline
radiographic views for imaging fluid in
dependence on stimulus factors. Hear
immunodeficiency virus infection in cats
 the feline tympanic bulla. Vet Radiol 
Res 1983;10(2):139-52.
of southern California. Journal of the
Ulltrasound 2005;46(3):205-9.
28.
 Strain GM, Tedford BL, Littlefeld-
American Veterinary Medical Association
14.B
Eom KD, Lee HC, Yoon JH.
Chabaud MA, Trevino LT. Air- and
1991;199(10):1357-62.
Canalographic evaluation of the external
bone-conduction brainstem auditory
43.
O'Neill SH, Newkirk KM, Anis EA.
ear canal in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
evoked potentials and flash visual
Detection of human papillomavirus
2000;41(3):231-4.
evoked potentials in cats. Am J Vet Res
DNA in feline premalignant and invasive
15. Tivers MS, Brockman Dl. Separation of
1998;59(2):135-7.
squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Dermatol
 the auricular and annular ear cartilages:
29.
 Kuwahara J. Canine and feline aural
2011;22(1):68-74.
surgical repair technique and clinical use
hematoma: clinical, experimental, and
44.
 Schwittlick Ul, Bock P, Lapp S, et al.
in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2009;38[3):
dinicopathologic observations. Am J Vet
 Feline papillomavirus infection in a cat
349-54.
Res 1986;47(10):2300-8.
with Bowen-like disease and cutaneous
16. Trower ND, Gregory SP, Renfrew H,
30.
 Kuwahara J. Canine and feline aural
squamous cell carcinoma. Schweiz Arch
Lamb CR. Evaluation of the canine
hematoma: results of treatment with
Tierheilkd 2011;153(12):573-7.
tympanic membrane by positive contrast
 corticosteroids. I Am Anim Hosp AssoC
45. Fan TM, de Lorimier LP. Inflammatory
ear canalography. Vet Rec 1998;142[4):
1986;22(5):641-7.
 polyps and aural neoplasia. Vet Clin
78-81.
31.
 Swaim SF, Bradley DM. Evaluation of
North Am Small Anim Pract 2004;34[2):
17. Benigni L, Lamb C. Diagnostic imaging
dosed-suction drainage for treating
489-509.
of ear disease in the dog and cat. In
aunicular hematomas. J Am Anim Hosp
Clarke RE. Cryosurgical treatment
Pract 2006;28(3):122-30.
Assoc 1996;32[1):36-43.
of feline cutaneous squamous cell
18. King AM, Weinrauch SA, Doust R,
32.
Joyce JA. Treatment of canine aural 
carcinoma. Aust Vet Pract 1991;21(3):
et al. Comparison of ultrasonography.
hematoma using an indwelling drain
148-53.
radiography and a single computed
and corticosteroids. J Small Anim Pract
47.
Hahn KA, Panjehpour M, Legendre AM.
 tomography slice for fluid identifcation
1994;35(7):341-4.
 Photodynamic therapy response in cats
within the feline tympanic bulla. Vet J
33.
Wilson JW. Treatment of auricular
with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
2007;173(3):638-44.
hematoma, using a teat tube. J Am Vet
as a function of fluence. Vet Dermatol
19.
 Barthez PY, Koblik PD, Hornof WJ, et al
Med Assoc 1983;182(10):1081-3.
1998;9(1):3-7.
Apparent wall thickening in fluid filled 
34. Weber HO. A technique for surgical
48. Peaston AE, Leach MW, Higgins RJ.
versus air flled tympanic bulla in
treatment of aural hematoma in dogs
Photodynamic therapy for nasal and
 computed tomography. Vet Radiol
and cats. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 
aural squamous cell carcinoma in cats.
Ulltrasound 1996;37(2):95-8.
1979;74(9):1271.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1993;202[8):
20.
 Remedios AM, Fowler ID, Pharr IW.
35.
 Neunzig Rl. A modifed surgical
1261-5.
A comparison of radiographic versus
 procedure for treating canine and feline
49.
 Stell Al, Dobson JM, Langmack K.
surgical diagnosis of otitis-media. J Am
 aural hematoma. Vet Med Small Anim
Photodynamic therapy of feline
Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27(2):183-8.
Clin 1983;78(6):927-9.
superficial squamous cell carcinoma
613
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
using topical 5-aminolaevulinic acid.
of 124 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
carcinoma involving the middle ear and
J Small Anim Pract 2001;42(4):164-9.
1996;32(5):448-52.
inner ear in two cats. J Am Vet Med
50.
Grier RL, Brewer WG, Theilen GH.
65. Salvadori C, Cantile C, Arispici M.
Assoc 1984;184(4):471-3.
Hyperthermic treatment of superfcial
Meningeal carcinomatosis in two cats.
82.
 Lane IF, Hall DG. Adenocarcinoma of
tumors in cats and dogs. I Am Vet Med
J Comp Pathol 2004;131[2-3):246-51.
the middle ear with osteolysis of the
Assoc 1980;177(3):227-33.
66. Clarke SP. Surgical management of acute 
tympanic bulla in a cat. J Am Vet Med
51.
Orenberg EK, Luck EE, Brown DM.
ear canal separation in a cat. J Feline
Assoc 1992;201(3):463-5.
 Kitchell BE. Implant delivery system:
Med Surg 2004;6(4):283-6.
83.
 Pentlarge Vw. Peripheral vestibular
 intralesional delivery of
67.
 Smeak DD. Traumatic separation of
disease in a cat with middle and inner
 chemotherapeutic agents for treatment 
 the annular cartilage from the external
ear squamous cell carcinoma. Comp
of spontaneous skin tumors in veterinary
auditory meatus in a cat. J Am Vet Med
Cont Educ Pract Vet 1984;6(8):731-3.
patients. Clin Dermatol 1991;9[4):
Assoc 1997;211[(4):448-50.
84.
Rendano VT, Delahunta A, King IM.
561-8.
68. Boothe HW, Hobson HP, McDonald DE.
Extracranial neoplasia with facial nerve
52. Theon AP, VanVechten MK, Madewell
 Treatment of traumatic separation of the
 paralysis in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
 BR. Intratumoral administration of
aunicular and annular cartilages without
Assoc 1980;16(6):921 -5.
arboplatin for treatment of squamous
ablation: results in five dogs. Vet Surg
85.
Stone EA, Goldschmidt MH, Littman 
 cell carcinomas of the nasal plane in 
1996;25(5):376-9.
 MP. Squamous cell carcinoma of the 
cats. Am] Vet Res 1996;57(2):205-10.
69.
 Coomer AR, Bacon N. Primary
middle ear in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
 53. Buhles WC, Theilen GH. Preliminary
anastomosis of segmental external 
1983;24[10):647-51.
ewaluation of bleomycin in feline and
auditory canal atresia in a cat. J Feline
86. Busch DS, Noxon JO, Miller LD.
anine squamous cell carcinoma. Am ↓
Med Surg 2009;:11(10):864-8.
 Laryngeal paralysis and peripheral
Vet Res 1973;34[2):289-91.
70.
 Schlicksup MD, Van Winkle T), Holt DE.
vestibular disease in a cat. J Am Anim
54. Evans AG, Madewell BR, Stannard AA.
 Prevalence of clinical abnormalities
Hosp Assoc 1992;28(1):82-6.
A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
in cats found to have nonneoplastic
87.
Cook LB, Bergman RL, Bahr A, Boothe
 treatment of squamous cell carcinoma
middle ear disease at necropsy: 59 cases
HW. Inflammatory polyp in the middle 
and preneoplastic lesions of the head in
[1991-2007). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 ear with secondary suppurative
cats. Am J Vet Res 1985;46{12]:2553-7.
2009;235(7):841-3.
 meningoencephalitis in a cat. Vet Radiol
55.
 Peters-Kennedy I, Scott Dw, Miller WH.
 Gregory SP. Middle ear disease associated
Utrasound 2003;44(6):648-51.
Apparent clinical resolution of pinnal
with congenital palatine defects in seven
Williams IM, white RAS. Total ear canal 
actinic keratoses and squamous cell
dogs and one cat. I Small Anim Pract
ablation combined with lateral bulla
arcinoma in a cat using topical
2000;41(9):398-401.
osteotomy in the cat. J Small Anim Pract
imiquimod 5% cream. j Feline Med Surg
72. Woodbridge NT, Baines EA, Baines SJ.
1992;33(5):225-7.
2008;10(6):593-9.
Otitis media in fve cats associated with
89.
McGinn MD, Chole RA, Henry KR.
56. August IR. Otitis externa. A disease of
soft palate abnormalities. Vet Rec 
Cholesteatoma induction. Consequences 
multifactorial etiology. Vet Clin North
2012;171:124-5.
 of extemal auditory canal ligation in 
Am Small Anim Pract 1988;18[4):
73.
 Detweiler DA, Johnson LR, Kass PH.
gerbils, cats, hamsters, guinea pigs.
731-42.
Wisner ER. Computed tomographic
mice and rats. Acta Otolaryngol
57.
Hill PB, Lo A, Eden CA, et al. Survey of
evidence of bulla effusion in cats with
1984;97(3-4):297-304.
 the prevalence, diagnosis and treatment 
sinonasal disease: 2001-2004. J Vet
90. Bergsma DR, Brown DS. White fur, blue 
 of dermatological conditions in small
 Intern Med 2006;20(5):1080-4.
 eyes and deafness in the domestic cat.
animals in general practice. Vet Rec
 74. Lawson D. Otitis media in the cat. Vet
J Hered 1971;62:171-85.
2006;158(16):533-9.
Rec 1957:69:643-7.
91.
 Strain GM. Aetiology prevalence and
58. Lane IG, Watkins PE. Para-aural abscess
75.
 Tos M, Wiederhold M, Larsen P.
diagnosis of deafness in dogs and cats.
in the dog and cat. J Small Anim Pract 
 Experimental long-term tubal occlusion
Br Vet 1 1996;152:17-36.
1986;27(8):521-31.
in cats. A quantitative histopathological
92.
 Strain GM. Congenital deafness and
 59. Murphy KM. A review of techniques for 
study. Acta Otolaryngol 1984;97(5-6): 
its recognition. Vet Clin North Am
the investigation of otitis externa and 
580-92.
1999;29:895-907.
otitis media. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
76.
Trevor PB, Martin RA. Tympanic bulla
93. Stevens-Sparks CK, Strain GM. Post-
2001;16(4):236-41.
 osteotomy for treatment of middle-ear
anesthesia deafness in dogs and cats
60. Mauldin EA, Ness TA, Goldschmidt MH.
disease in cats: 19 cases [1984-1991).
following dental and ear cleaning
Proliferative and necrotizing otitis
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1993;202[1):123-8.
 procedures. Vet Anaesth Analg
externa in four cats. Vet Dermatol
77. Gotthelf LN. Diagnosis and treatment
2010;37(4):347-51.
2007;18(5):370-7.
 of otitis media in dogs and cats. Vet
94.
Burke EE, Moise NS, de Lahunta A, Erb
61.
Legendre AM, Krahwinkel Dl. Feline
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
HN. Review of idiopathic feline
ear tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2004;34(2):469-87.
vestibular syndrome in 75 cats. J Am Vet
1981;17(6):1035-7.
78.
de Lorimier LP, Alexander SD, Fan TM.
Med Assoc 1985;187(9):941-3.
62.
 Marino Dl, MacDonald JM, Matthiesen
T-cell lymphoma of the tympanic bulla
95.
Negrin A, Cherubini GB, Lamb C, et al.
 DT, Patnaik AK. Results of Surgery
in a feline leukemia virus-negative cat.
Clinical signs, magnetic resonance 
in Cats with Ceruminous Gland
Can Vet J 2003;44[12):987-9.
imaging fndings and outcome in 77 cats
Adenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp
79. Fiorito DA. Oral and peripheral
with vestibular disease: a retrospective
Assoc 1994;30(1):54-8.
vestibular signs in a cat with squamous-
study. I Feline Med Surg 2010;12:
63.
.Theon AP, Barthez PY, Madewell BR.
cell carcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc
291-9.
Griffey SM. Radiation therapy of
1986;1 88(1):71-2.
96.
Bagley RS. Recognition and localization
ceruminous gland carcinomas in
80. Hayden Dw. Squamous cell carcinoma
 of intracranial disease. Vet Clin North 
dogs and cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 in a cat with intraocular and orbital
Am Small Anim Pract 1996;26(4):
1994;205(4):566-9.
metastases. Vet Pathol 1976;13:332-6.
667-709.
64.
 Moisan PG, Watson GL. Ceruminous
81.
 Indrieri RJ, Taylor RF Vestibular
97.
 Chrisman CL. Vestibular Diseases. Vet
gland tumors in dogs and cats: a review
dysfunction caused by squamous cell 
Clin North Am 1980;10(1):103-29.
614
Ear
Chapter
50
98. Thomas WB. Vestibular dysfunction.
106. Lucroy MD, Vermau KM, Samii VF.
externa in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
LeCouteur RA. Middle ear tumours with
Pract 1988;29(3):165-75.
2000;30(1):227-49.
brainstem extension treated by ventral
115. Tirgari M, Pinniger RS. Pull-through
99. Tighilet B, Lacour M. Pharmacological
bulla osteotomy and craniectomy in two
 technique for vertical canal ablation for
activity of the Ginkgo biloba extract
cats. Vet Comp Oncol 2004;2[4):
the treatment of otitis externa in dogs 
(EGb 761) on equilibrium function
234-42.
and cats. J Small Anim Pract 1986;27(3):
recovery in the unilateral vestibular
107. Merchant SR. Ototoxicity. Vet Clin North
123-31.
neurectomized cat. J Vestib Res 
 Am Small Anim Pract 1994;24[5):
116.
Day DG, Couto CG, Weisbrode SE,
1995;5(3):187-200.
971-80.
Smeak DD. Basal cell carcinoma in
100.
 Tighilet B, Leonard J, Lacour M.
108.
 Callaghan D, Culley CD. Ototoxicity in 
two cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Betahistine dihydrochloride treatment
the dog and cat. Vet Rec 1985;117(11):
1994;30(3):265-9.
facilitates vestibular compensation in the
291.
117.8
 Smeak DD, Dehoff wD. Total ear canal
cat. I Vestib Res 1995;5(1):53-66.
109.
Lane JG. Ototoxicity in the dog and cat.
ablation: clinical results in the dog and
101.
Tighilet B, Mourre C, Trottier S, Lacour
Vet Rec 1985;117(4):94.
cat. Vet Surg 1986;15(2):161 -70.
 M. Histaminergic ligands improve
Willoughby K. Chlorhexidine
118.
 Smeak DD, Kerpsack Sl. Total ear canal
vestibular compensation in the cat:
110.
 ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy for
behavioural, neurochemical and
and ototoxicity in cats. Vet Rec
1989;124(20):547.
management of end-stage otitis. Semin
molecular evidence. Eur J Pharmacol 
Vet Med Surg Small Anim 1993;8[1):
2007;568(1-3):149-63.
111.
 Podell M, Kerpsack SJ, Fenner WR. What
30-41.
Vernau KM, LeCouteur RA. Feline 
is your diagnosis? Prog Vet Neurol
102.
119.
 Bacon NJ, Gilbert RL, Bostock DE, White
vestibular disorders. Part ll: diagnostic
1992;3:21-3
RA. Total ear canal ablation in the cat:
 approach and diferential diagnosis.
112.
 LeCouteur RA. Feline vestibular diseases
indications, morbidity and long-term
J Feline Med Surg 1999:1(2):81-8.
- new developments. I Feline Med Surg
survival. J Small Anim Pract 
103.
LeCouteur RA, Vernau KM. Feline
2003;5[2]:101-8.
2003;44(10):430-4.
vestibular disorders. Part I: anatomy
113. Martin Barrasa JL, Lupiola Gomez P
120. Mathews KG, Hardie EM, Murphy KM.
and clinical signs. J Feline Med Surg
Gonzalez Lama Z, Tejedor Junco MT.
Subtotal ear canal ablation in 18 dogs
1999;1(2):71-80.
 Antibacterial susceptibility patterns of
and one cat with minimal distal ear
104. van der Gaag I. The pathology of the 
Pseudomonas strains isolated from
anal pathology. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 external ear canal in dogs and cats. Vet Q
 chronic canine otitis externa. J Vet Med B
2006;42[5):371-80.
1986;8(4):307-17.
Infect Dis Vet Public Health 2000;47(3):
 McNabb AH, Flanders JA. Cosmetic
105. Beatty JA, Barrs VR, Swinney GR, et al.
191-6.
results of a ventrally based advancement
 Peripheral vestibular disease associated
114.
Tirgari M. Long-term evaluation of the 
flap for closure of total ear canal
with cryptococcosis in three cats. J Feline
 pull-through technique for vertical canal
ablations in G cats: 2002-2003. Vet Surg
Med Surg 2000;2:29-34.
ablation for the treatment of otitis
2004;33(5):435-9.
615
51
pter
S.J. Baines
The pharynx is a small anatomic region that is often forgotten or
Nasopharyn
 Overlooked compared to the adjacent nasal passages, oropharynx, and
Laryngopharynx
oral cavity. However, a variety of clinical conditions relating to the
nasopharynx have been described, comprising infectious [viral, bacte-
nial, and fungal), inflammatory and neoplastic etiologies, along with
anatomic abnormalities and foreign bodies.' In cats with nasopharyn-
geal mass lesions, the most common inflammatory causes are polyps
Esophagus
-ul si asne sseoau uoun isou au pue 'sisoond pue
phoma.2 Surgical intervention for disorders of the nasopharynx is not 
commonly performed, with the exception of nasopharyngeal polyps.
stenosis and, occasionally, foreign bodies.
Trachea
Oropharynx
Figure 51-1 Diagram showing the regions of the pharynx in the cat.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 nerves, including the glossopharyngeal, vagus, hypoglossal, and cervi-
The pharynx is the crossroads where the ventrally located oral cavity
cal sympathetic nerves, run in this tissue. Adjacent structures include
can pass food to the dorsally located esophagus while the dorsally
'einqipueu aql 'sapou qdual ienqipueu pue leaguaeydonai au
located nasal cavity can conduct air to the ventrally located larynx and
 sublingual and molar salivary glands, and the hyoid apparatus.
trachea. The greatest risk of this design of the upper aerodigestive tract
 Surgical diseases of the oral cavity are described in Chapter 49, the
 pue 'pimy pue pooy paisagul qlim penl Aoiendsai aul jo gupooy s!
ear in Chapter 50, the larynx in Chapter 52, and the nasal cavity is
the pharynx has a number of mechanisms to avoid this. The pharynx
described in Chapter 54. This chapter will deal primarily with the
is equipped with valves to direct the flow of food, it is distensible so
nasopharynx, as many oropharyngeal disorders also affect the oral
it can receive large boluses of food, and it is muscular so that it can
cavity. However, the pharynx is a common space and diseases of the
move the boluses on quickly.
 nasopharynx may affect all parts of the pharynx. Extension of nasal
The pharynx comprises the caudal aspects of the oral and nasal
cavities at the confluence of the digestive and respiratory tracts. The 
and the chapters dealing with these diseases should be read in
 pharynx is a short fibromuscular tube divided into three compart-
onjunction.
xuaeydosuel aun pue xuieydoseu a 'xuaeqdono aun rshu
(Fig. 51-1)
Nasopharynx
The walls and roof of the pharynx are lined by an elastic mucous
membrane, beneath which sit three sets of horseshoe-shaped constric-
The nasopharynx is the caudal portion of the nasal cavity that con-
tors, with the muscles on each side meeting the contralateral muscle
nects the nasal cavity to the larynx. It extends from the choanae ros-
at a median raphe. These muscles arise from the hard palate, hyoid,
trally to the intrapharyngeal opening caudally. The choanae are fixed
and larynx and are known as the rostral, middle, and caudal constric-
apertures in the roof of the rostral aspect of the nasopharynx, either
tors. The caudal constrictor muscle is subdivided into the cricopha-
side of the vomer bone The intrapharyngeal opening is the opening
ryngeal and thyropharygeal muscles. The pharynx is surrounded by
of the nasopharynx over the caudal free border of the soft palate. Only
loose connective tissue, which allows it to dilate when needed. Vessels,
its floor is mobile and the rest of the nasopharynx moves little and
including the common, internal and external carotid arteries, and
remains patent. The pharyngeal tonsil is located in the nasopharynx 
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00051-2
617
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
and the auditory or Eustachian tubes open on the lateral wall of the
nasopharynx, via a 4 mm long slit, dorsal to the middle of the soff
 palate, immediately rostral to a small mucosal cushion. The intrapha-
ryngeal opening is closed during swallowing to isolate the nasophar-
 ymx and nasal cavity from the oropharynx and laryngopharynx and
 prevent reflux of food and fluid into the nasal cavity.
Oropharynx
The oropharynx is the caudal portion of the oral cavity, whose borders
are the soft palate dorsally, the root of the tongue ventrally, and
the tonsillar fossae laterally. The palatine tonsils are located in the
oropharynx, along with lymphoid tissue in the lateral walls of the
oropharynx and the base of the tongue (lingual tonsils). In the cat,
the palatine tonsil is very small and not covered by a mucosal fold.
The efferent lymphatics of the palatine tonsil drain into the retropha-
ryngeal lymph node. The muscular wall of the pharynx and the base
of the tongue act together during deglutition to move the food bolus
into the laryngopharynx.
Figure 51-2 A middle-aged cat was presented with open-mouth
breathing associated with an obstructive pharyngeal mass.
Laryngopharynx
The laryngopharynx is a short passage dorsal to the larynx that con-
 nects the caudal aspect of the nasopharynx to the proximal esophagus.
impair the passage of food into the digestive tract, but larger lesions
The pharyngeal muscles (constrictors, shorteners, and dilators) control
 may also obstruct the nasopharynx.
the size and shape of the nasopharynx and laryngopharynx and
 Obstruction of the nasal passages and nasopharynx may show a
co-ordinate swallowing.
similar stridorous respiration and it may be diffcult to differentiate
these clinically in the absence of other clinical signs such as sneezing
and nasal discharge which suggest nasal cavity disease. Disorders of
the caudal nasopharynx may encroach on the caudal turbinates and
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
cause sneezing. Dyspnea caused by nasopharyngeal disease should
not be life threatening since the animal can breathe via the orophar-
History
ynx. However, some animals will avoid mouth breathing. which will
exacerbate the clinical signs. Obstruction of the caudal nasopharynx
The owner should be asked questions about the animal's general
results in a stertorous respiration.
 physical condition, appetite ability to eat and drink, and activity level.
Cats may not show obvious clinical signs even with severe nasopha-
 Presence of more specific signs such as abnormal respiratory noises,
ryngeal obstruction. They are often reluctant to show open-mouth
coughing gagging, retching. regurgitation, vomiting. and dyspnea
breathing, but are able to ventilate with the mouth almost closed and
should be ascertained.
the lips parted. Closure of the mouth and examination ofthe animal's
breathing pattern and tolerance of this maneuver may help diagnose
Clinical signs
nasopharyngeal disease, but is not without risk in animals with
marked obstruction. Measurement of airflow at the external nares
The clinical signs of nasopharyngeal disease are stertor, open-mouth
with a glass slide or cotton wool offers a less invasive means of achiev-
breathing (Fig. 51-2), repeated attempts at swallowing. nasal dis-
ing this.
charge, and reverse sneezing. The clinical signs of oropharyngeal or
 Dyspnea caused by obstruction of the oropharynx is more readily
laryngopharyngeal disease are pain, anorexia, dysphagia, and stridor.
 diagnosed, as a mass or edema is usually apparent on clinical and/or
Coughing, vomiting, and regurgitation may also be present and it
oral examination, along with 'gargling type respiratory sounds.
may be diffcult to localize the disease to one portion ofthe pharynx
or differentiate pharyngeal from esophageal, laryngeal or tracheal
disease The presence of anorexia, drooling saliva, and weak swallow.
Dysphagia
ing efforts, which may not be associated with eating or drinking, typi-
Difficulty swallowing or dysphagia is usually due to obstruction of the
fes acute pharyngeal disease. In chronic pharyngeal disease, gagging
oropharynx or laryngopharynx, although large lesions in the nasophar-
and regurgitation or vomiting predominate and halitosis may be
ynx will encroach on the oropharynx and also cause dysphagia. Dys-
 noted with neoplasia or foreign bodies.
phagia resulting from an abnormality in the pharyngeal phase of
Cats with nasal disease more commonly have a history of nasal
swallowing is usually manifested by gagging, choking, and repeated
discharge and sneezing, whereas cats with nasopharyngeal disease
swallowing of the same bolus of food. Cats may also show repeated
more commonly have stertorous respiration, change in phonation,
attempts at swallowing or gulping when not eating. Coughing may be
and weight loss,? although nasal discharge and sneezing may still be
present if food is aspirated into the larynx. If swallowing is painful,
present.
the animal may attempt to eat, but then stop and turn away from the
food, often exhibiting drooling of saliva. If the cat gives up eating
very quickly, the dysphagia may simply be assessed as inappetence.
Dyspnea
although drooling saliva suggests pharyngeal disease as the cause. The
 Diffculty breathing is usually due to obstruction of the nasopharynx
cat may also paw at its nose and mouth, particularly with acute
 Or oropharynx. Small obstructive lesions of the laryngopharynx will
disease. Dyspnea and dysphagia may also result in aerophagia.
618
Pharynx
Chapter
51
Reverse sneezing
Reverse sneezing may accompany inflammation of the nasopharyn-
geal mucosa and is caused by asynchronous closing of the intrapha-
ryngeal opening independent of swallowing. This results in acute
onset of marked dyspnea with repeated short snoring sounds and
extension of the neck caused by forced inhalation via the nose against
a closed nasopharynx. The clinical signs are usually less marked in the
jo uaed siun jo uouoan Aq si sisouseia gop au un ueun i
behavior as animals do not often display these signs when presented
for examination. Symptomatic treatment comprises stimulation of the
swallowing reflex by massaging the throat or occluding the nares, so
aui jo uama uado-an Aeu suuado jeasuieydenui au iu
underlying nasopharyngeal irritation or inflammation may resolve the
problem.
Other signs
 The regional lymph nodes (mandibular and retropharyngeal) may
be enlarged with pharyngeal disease. Clinical signs of external ear
canal disease, including aural discharge and a mass may be present;
Figure 51-3 A pharyngeal mass is evaluated under a light plane of
anesthesia prior to endotracheal intubation.
pue sdkiod ieasueuoseu yioq rim payuapi uaaq aaey asar
lymphoma.
 Clinical signs of otitis media, peripheral vestibular disease and
 Hormer syndrome may be seen ifthe lesion also involves the tympanic
bulla or if the lesion obstructs the auditory tube Facial nerve dysfunc-
tion may be seen if a more extensive lesion has broken out through
the tympanic bulla. Invasive lesions of the nasopharynx (neoplasia.
cryptococcosis) may cause central neurologic signs if they erode
into the calvarium. A neurologic examination should be performed if
clinical signs suggest extension into the calvarium, particularly oph-
thalmoplegia and vestibular signs. A fundic examination should be
 performed if cryptococcosis is suspected.
Physical examination
Evaluation of the pharynx begins with watching the animal's behavior
at rest, listening for abnormal respiratory noises, such as stertor or
stridor, and then while eating or drinking. This is followed by exami-
nation of the external nares and the oral cavity in the conscious
 Figure 51-4 Spay hooks have been used to retract the soft palate
animal. Since pharyngeal disease and ear disease may be associated.
dlod jeabueudoseu e yi jen paziauisaue sun ui Alie son
the external ear canals should be examined at this stage.
 In a compliant animal, the soft palate may be palpated and pushed
-eidse juaaaid on 'uoneunexa aul iiedn nou saop siut ji aznea yi
dorsally to identify nasopharyngeal mass lesions, although only a
tion of blood or other fluids. The pharynx is a very sensitive area and
brief examination will be possible. For a right-handed operator, the
E Buiaey Pioae o dn ayem ot [eujue aut asne Aeu suoendiueu
cat's head is supported in the left hand, with the index fnger and
very deep plane of anesthesia, a local anesthetic technique such as
fourth finger on either side of the temporomandibular junction, with
topical administration of lidocaine trickled from the external nares or
the palm supporting the head. The mouth is then opened using pres-
direct administration to the pharyngeal mucosa may be used. This
sure from the middle finger on the mandible and then the right index
may also avoid excessive vagal stimulation from intrapharyngeal
au saeied yos aun aiedied cn ynou a oiu panpau si iauy
 manipulation, which may cause a clinically significant bradycardia.
effect of opening the mouth on the nature of any respiratory noises
is assessed.
Endoscopy
The oral cavity, soft palate, base of the tongue, palatine tonsils and
Anesthesia
laryngopharynx may be examined directly with a laryngoscope.
Physical examination of the conscious animal is followed by examina-
During initial examination, the soft palate may be elevated dorsally
tion of the pharynx under a light plane of anesthetic (Fig. 5l-3).
xuieuouei au azensa o iossaidp anut io ioenal e ym
 pidei ieu os uae snouaaeu ue yrm panpui aq pinoys eisauisay
and dorsal nasopharynx. The soft palate may be elevated dorsally
induction and rapid intubation and control of the airway can be
against the dorsal wall of the nasopharynx to evaluate for large
achieved in patients with an obstructive lesion. Use of an intravenous
obstructive lesions.
agent also allows anesthesia to be maintained without the presence
Once the animal is anesthetized, it may be placed in dorsal recum-
of an endotracheal tube if a more detailed examination of the pharynx
bency and a more detailed examination of the pharynx can be per-
is required without an endotracheal tube in place The endotracheal
formed. Palpation of the soft palate, followed by rostral retraction
tube cuff should be inflated, and the caudal pharynx should be packed
with an instrument, e.g., a spay hook, is performed (Fig. 51-4). In cats.
619
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
the cranial nasopharynx and choanae may be exposed in this manner.
In one series of 53 cats with nasopharyngeal disease, 23 cats [43.4%)
had soft palate palpation performed and in 82% of these a palpable
mass was identifed. Palpation is of limited value for masses located
dorsal to the hard palate, but diagnostic imaging or endoscopy (see
Chapter 9) will identify these.
Visualization of the nasopharynx is achieved by retrograde rhino-
scopy (see Chapter 9) with an endoscope passed into the oral cavity
and retroflexed 180°. A limited examination of the nasopharynx may
be achieved with a dental mirror and a light source and the soft palate
may be retracted with a tissue hook or stay suture to increase visibility.
On endoscopy, mass lesions may be visualized, although in some
cases visualization is obscured by pus, blood or mucus. Flushing of
the site with saline, either via the endoscope or via the external nares,
may clear the field and improve visualization. In one study of endo-
scopic examination of the choanae in 27 cats with signs of upper
respiratory tract disease gross abnormalities were identified in 85%
A
of the cats, with a mass [44%), rhinitis (25%), foreign bodies (7%),
follicles (3.5%), and deformed choanae (3.5%) being noted.4
A technique to perform nasopharyngoscopy via gastrotomy has
been described that allows the use of a larger endoscope which does
not have to be retroflexed, but since this involves an additional surgi-
cal approach it is not recommended unless there is no alternative
method of examination. However, this method does allow larger
diameter instruments to be used and has been successful in removing
a large (3.5 cm long) polyp.5
 The caudal nasal cavity and rostral nasopharynx may be examined
e passd aossopua aixay io aonue ( t-) piu e y
the external nares. If anterior rhinoscopy is also required, it is per-
formed after retrograde pharyngoscopy to avoid causing hemorrhage
that might obscure the view.
Diagnostic imaging
Radiographs should include the nasal and oral cavity rostrally and the
proximal trachea caudally, and should be taken at inspiration to
increase the volume of gas in the pharynx. The high inherent contrast
of this area allows delineation of the nasopharynx, oropharynx and
laryngopharynx, and soft palate. Examination of the nasopharynx is
impaired by superimposition of the bones of the skull and the pres-
B
ence of the endotracheal tube and other anesthetic monitoring
devices. If evaluation of the external ear canal and tympanic bullae is
Figure 51-5 A cat with a history of nasal discharge. (A) Lateral and
required, additional projections are needed. Masses, radiopaque
ilau anbedoen e mous ins aut jo sude oen leuosop (a)
foreign bodies (Fig. 51-5), and secretions may be identified with radi-
foreign body in nasopharyngeal meatus that was found to be a bell
 ography. but apart from these lesions, radiography may offer little
more information than a thorough endoscopic examination. In
animals where swallowing is impaired, or in whom the clinical signs
are suggestive of this, radiographs of the thorax should be taken to
rule out aspiration pneumonia and megaesophagus.
be seen in animals with nasopharyngeal masses, most likely due to
 Contrast radiographs following administration of contrast medium
obstruction of the pharyngeal opening of the auditory tube.78 Mag-
via the ventral nasal meatus may aid in the diagnosis of nasopharyn-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) examination may allow a better appre.
geal disease, e.g, stenosis.° Fluoroscopy is of theoretical use in the
ciation of the relationship of a soft tissue mass to the surrounding soft
evaluation of animals with dysphagia, but these examinations are very
tissues of the nasopharynx? (Fig. 51-7) and is the imaging modality
difficult to perform in cats. Ultrasonography may be of use for soft
 of choice if intracranial extension of a mass is suspected.?
tissue or fluid-filled masses encroaching on the pharynx, or assess-
ment of the retropharyngeal lymph node and may guide sampling of
Biopsy
these areas.
Computed tomography (CT), with and without contrast, is the most
 Diagnosis may require biopsy of a lesion, particularly masses that do
useful modality for evaluating the nasopharynx (Fig. 5l-6) and allows
 not have the gross appearance of a nasopharyngeal polyp. Fine needle
investigation of the status of the regional lymph nodes. Both bone
 aspirates or Tru-Cut biopsies may be taken under direct visualization,
O1 sueiodui si l! pue patenieaa aq Pinous smopuim anssi yos pue
taking care to avoid the large blood vessels that lie lateral to the
differentiate between a soft tissue mass and mucus in the pharynx.
pharynx. Anterograde flushing of the nasopharynx from the external
The nasal passages, extermal ear canals, and tympanic bullae should
nares may also allow pieces of tissue or foreign bodies to be recovered,
be assessed at the same time. Fluid within the tympanic bullae may
as well as producing temporary alleviation of clinical signs in animals
620
Pharynx
Chapter
51
A
B
a large heterogeneously enhancing nasopharyngeal mass. (A) Bone window (width 2000, level 350). (B) Soft tissue window (width 400, level 40).
A
B
Figure 51-7 (A) Sagittal and (B) transverse MRl images show a rostral nasopharyngeal mass that obstructs the majority of the nasopharynx.
where obstruction is due to a friable mass or thick fluid. In animals
with histology, although the agreement was poorest for lymphoid
presenting with clinical signs consistent with nasal or nasopharyngeal
disease, direct visualization of the nasopharynx and biopsy of any
hyperplastic lesions [1l cats), lymphoma (12 cats), carcinoma (five
cats), and sarcoma (two cats).
and is prefered to biopsies achieved via rhinoscopy.3 In one study of
38 cats with endoscopically detected nasopharyngeal masses, a histo-
logic sample of diagnostic quality was obtained in 34 of them (89%).?
SURGICAL DISEASES
Forty per cent of these cats also had a co-existent nasal mass.
 In another study of 27 cats with signs of upper respiratory tract
disease, histologic or cytologic samples were retrieved in 18 animals.4
Nasopharyngeal polyps are the most commonly described entity, but
Diagnoses included neoplasia (nine cats), rhinitis/hyperplasia (seven
this disorder may not be the most common disease. In a review of 53
cats), polyp (one cat) and cryptococcosis (one cat). In cats with a mass
cats with nasopharyngeal disease, the most common diagnosis was
u diod 'ss u eidoau sem sisou aun aueus a ie uoisat
paodau guaq sdaiod leaguieqdoseu ym 'se yo at ui euoyd
18%, rhinitis in 18%, and unknown in 9%. Thick tenacious mucus
in 28%. The remaining 23% of cats had other tumors including
may also appear as a mass lesion.? In 30 cats with nasopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, spindle cell carcinoma,
masses, squash preparation cytology showed a good agreement (90%)
rhabdomyosarcoma, and lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis/pharyngitis.
621
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
A
B
Figure 51-8 A cat with a history of inspiratory stertor. (A) A spay hook has been used to retract the soft palate rostrally and visualize a large
as ag uen yleis eidi aui pue uoe aae Aa paouan se dlod aul (a) djod leabueydoseu
 The mean age at presentation aids in prioritizing the differential diag-
Most affected cats are young adults, although polyps have been
au yo ae ua e ay siod ieasueuoseu yim sie-istl sisou
reported in older cats up to 15 years old. Clinical signs are referable
to an obstructive lesion at the level of the nasopharynx or disease of
are 10.7 years (range five-19 years).
the middle ear or extermal ear canal. Inspiratory dyspnea and stertor
are the primary signs, but dysphagia, gagging or reluctance to eat may
Polyps
adn sua-al asne aeu sod ueo uas aq ose
airway obstruction, either with normal activity2l or on recovery from
Nasopharyngeal polyp is the name given to a benign proliferation
anesthesia if a polyp is not suspected and diagnosed.19.20 Acquired
arising from the respiratory epithelium that may be found in the
megaesophagus has also been reported 10.22 which resolves on removal
a u so  jo a u i au xos
of the polyp. In one cat this was associated with a large (7 cm long)
middle ear or auditory tube and extends via the auditory tube into
nasopharyngeal polyp that extended into the cranial esophagus22
the nasopharynx (Fig. 51-8). In this location the polyp may grow to
Pulmonary hypertension, presumed to be due to chronic upper airway
a large size (>3 cm). A middle ear polyp is the name given to a polyp
obstruction, is reported in one cat. Clinical signs of nasal cavity
that originates in the middle ear and/or Eustachian tube and grows
disease, ie, sneezing and nasal discharge, are generally uncommon.
through the tympanic membrane into the external ear canal, although 
unless secondary infection extends from the nasopharynx to the nasal
the term nasopharyngeal polyp is often used to refer to both these
cavity. However, similar polyps may also be found in the nasal cavities,
entities. The middle ear mucosa may be diffusely inflamed with a
and clinical signs of nasal cavity disease such as sneezing, epistaxis.
polypoid lining. These may occasionally be bilateral, either at the
and stertor may be seen with polyps in this location.13,14
same time or sequentially.1.l In some cats, polyp tissue may be
A middle ear polyp is the most common mass identifed in the
-im [eseu au go sdiod Aroeuruyul tou'suomesof yoq ui suasaid
external ear canal in the cat. In most cats, the polyp does not extend
binates (IPNT) that may extend into the nasopharynx have also been
beyond the horizontal canal, but in some cats it may be visible in the
described as a distinct entity.13-15 These have been reported to be more
 external ear canal. Middle ear polyps may cause signs of otitis externa
common in Italyl4 than other European countries.
(e.g., head shaking, scratching at the ear, and aural discharge) or otitis
The cause of the polyps is unknown, although it has been proposed 
 media/interna (eg. Hormer syndrome [Fig. 51-9]. head tilt, ataxia, and
that they originate from a congenital defect (eg. remnants of the
nystagmus).
unu jo insai e se io e'aseasp iea aiiu io (g sauie ieiuoun
 Examination of the oral cavity may reveal ventral depression of the
inflammation, infectious or otherwise, which may either initiate Or
soft palate and resistance to gentle dorsal pressure on the soft palate.
 potentiatethe growth ofthe polyp. Soft palate hypoplasia was reported
Less than half of affected cats have a visible mass on physical examina-
in one cat with a nasopharyngeal polyp.1 The polyps are associated
        
of smaller or more rostral lesions. Large lesions may obstruct the
although it is not clear whether the polyp causes the inflammation or
larynx and may cause difficulty on endotracheal intubation. Radiog-
the inflammation causes the proliferation of the mucosa. Feline cali-
raphy or CT examination will reveal a soft tissue mass in the nasophar-
civirnus, which is an infectious agent known to colonize cats, has been
ynx, which may depress the soft palate ventrally. More than 80%
isolated from the nasopharynx of cats with polyps and from an
of cats have evidence of middle ear disease on diagnostic imaging
lou aaey saipns iauio iaaamoh oie auo ui daiod areeu
(Figs 51-10 and 51-11).24
consistently amplifed RNA or DNA of infectious agents, including
Yund io pai jo sseu e se ieadde sdkiod ieasuAieudoseu Kissoi
feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), feline calicivirus (FCV), Mycoplasma
friable tissue and are rounded, often with a long pedidle. They are
species, Bartonella species, and Chlamydophila felis from polyp tissue
composed of loosely arranged well-vascularized fibrous connective
and there was no difference in the amplification rates in normal and
tissue with scattered lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils,
affected cats. ll.20 In addition, a previous history of recent upper respira
covered by a layer of stratified squamous or ciliated columnar
tory tract infection is not commonly reported in cats with polyps.'
epithelium, which may be ulcerated. Inflammatory cells, primarily
622
Pharynx
Chapter
51
Figure 51-9 A cat with a nasopharyngeal polyp and associated middle
ear disease with right-sided Horner syndrome, showing miosis, ptosis,
and enophthalmus.
B
Figure 51-11 A cat with clinical signs of otitis media and otitis interna,
associated with the presence of a nasopharyngeal polyp. (A) Ventrodorsal
and (B) open-mouth rostrocaudal radiographic projections show 
A
thickening of the wall of the right tympanic bulla and increased opacity
within the bulla associated with otitis media.
lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages, are present within the
stroma.
 Nasal polyps arising from the nasal passages are solid and white to
uoy suisue sdaiod ieseu Kiesgoloisth et'uoeunuexa ssois uo yuid
the nasal turbinates consist of fbrous connective tissue and woven
bone and erythrocyte-filled spaces, covered by ciliated columnar epi-
thelium. These lesions have more in common with nasal hamartomas
'soiueuay se paqusap uaaq osie aaeu pue esueuny ul uas
Recommended therapy for nasopharyngeal polyps is traction/
avulsion,1723 ventralbulla osteotomy2325 orlateral bulla osteotomy
with total ear canal ablation12.2 depending on the location, with or
without post-treatment corticosteroids. Corticosteroid therapy has
been recommended for either polyps with middle ear involvement23
or for all polyps.? In one study. the recurrence rate after traction/
B
avulsion alone was 64% and after traction/avulsion and postoperative
corticosteroids at anti-inflammatory doses (1-2 mg/kg/day for two
Figure 51-10 A cat with a history of inspiratory stertor and otitis
pue aueid asaasue () diod leabueydoseu e otanp euauei
 r s ui  e ae (a o  Pin s
aural involvement was 0%.23 Recurrence was higher with aural polyps
{B} dorsal plane reconstruction CT images of the head show sclerosis
and thickening of the left tympanic bulla, filling of the bulla with 
(50%) compared to nasopharyngeal polyps (1l%). Overall, traction/
eabureydoseu buljenuane adky abel e pue 'jeajew buienuane adu
avulsion may result in a 33-55% recurrence ratel.23.27and this method
mass with a rim of contrast enhancement.
of treatment should be generally limited to those cats without an aural
623
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
component, where recurrence may be as low as 0%. A ventral bulla
Occasionally occurs in the pharynx, but advanced disease is usually
 Osteotomy (VBO) in patients with middle ear disease reduces the
present at presentation.
These tumors usually arise in the rostral nasopharynx and the nasal
 traction/avulsion followed by corticosteroid therapy is a suitable first-
cavity is usually spared. The clinical signs are stertor and dyspnea
line treatment for polyps, even if middle ear changes are present.
without nasal discharge, although some animals will develop large
Surgery, usually a VBO, may then be used if the condition fails to
obstructive lesions in the nasal cavity with no nasal discharge or
resolve or recurs, if the clinical signs are severe on frst presentation.
sneezing. If hemorrhage occurs secondary to the tumor, this may be
seen as epistaxis, but the blood may pass caudally and be swallowed
 Recurrence may recur months to years after removal.30
and then recognized as melena. Approximately 50% of cats with
sinonasal masses will show extension into the nasopharynx on CT
Pharyngeal neoplasia
examination.33
 Diagnosis may be by direct inspection or radiography or CT exami-
Most tumors of the nasopharynx are malignant Lymphoma is the
nation (Fig. 51-12). There are no gross or diagnostic imaging findings
most common nasopharyngeal tumor in the cat,31 followed by squa-
that allow differentiation of the histologic type and definitive diag-
mous cell carcinoma and soft tissue sarcomas. The most common
nosis requires a cytologic or histologic diagnosis. The prognosis
oropharyngeal tumor type is squamous cell carcinoma.32 Melanoma
DFOV
A
B
DFOV:9.69
C 44 of 195
IM:44 SE:8
D
Figure 51-12 (A) Right-sided Horner syndrome. (B) Transverse CT scan (bone window) shows fluid in both tympanic bullae and a large soft tissue 
pharyngeal mass. (C) Transverse CT scan (soft tissue window) post-contrast shows enlargement of the mandibular lymph nodes bilaterally. (D) On oral
examination under anesthesia there is ventr al displacement of the soft palate by the mass.
624
Pharynx
Chapter
51
difficult to provide more than a palliative reduction in tumor volume
[e a j aenid 'xedosu a ul pao aonaq 
with surgery for animals with carcinoma.
coughs while ingesting them. Other items reported are avian bones.41
'saipaau suimas pue s'saqet 'sieozaqoupun st'sauoq usy
Consistent signs of a grass foreign body are persistent dry coughing
Lymphoma
Lymphoma may affect the nasal cavity and may extend into the
 of the throat usually elicits a marked swallowing response. Foreign
nasopharynx.*4 In one study of cats with lymphoma of the nasal pas-
bodies usually cause an acute onset of clinical signs, which may
sages and nasopharynx, the nasal passages were the most common
worsen as secondary inflammation develops and pyrexia and halitosis
site (82%), with fewer cats having isolated nasopharyngeal lymphoma
ensue.41.42 Since cats are relatively fastidious eaters, identification of an
( 10%) or involvement of both sites (12%). Immunoblastic lymphoma
ingested foreign body should always prompt consideration of whether
is the most common histologic diagnosis and the majority are B-cell
the cat is exhibiting pica or polyphagia.
 jo uoodoid yaly e ui sisoup e piaia Au Aooa t'euudua
Diagnosis may be achieved by imaging or endoscopy (Fig. 5l-13).
cases, but some samples are misclassified as inflammatory lesions and
Care should be taken to differentiate osseous foreign bodies from the
normal lymphoid tissue.34 Panhyperproteinemia, usually due to dehy.
 mineralized hyoid apparatus. The foreign bodies may be covered with
dration, and hypocholesterolemia, associated with reduced appetite,
mucus or exudate (Fig. 51-14) or may be partially embedded in the
are seen in a proportion of cats.
mucosa, which makes identifying them and removing them more
Cats may have a long remission time after radiotherapy or chemo-
diffcult. Foreign bodies may also lodge in the oropharynx, particu-
larly in the piriform recesses, including the areas just lateral to the
survival times, although up to 30% of cats with nasal lymphoma will
 glossoepiglottic folds, and the tonsillar crypts.
develop lymphoma at other sites, notably the kidney, brain, and
 osle Aeu juauaaloau (sno) uaiss snoaiau enua g sapou ydu
arise by direct extension.′ CNS signs include oculomotor nerve def-
cits. A multicenter study of ll8 cats which were treated with either
radiotherapy alone, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. or chemother-
apy alone found no significant difference in survival times between
the three treatment groups, with mean survival times of 473 days for
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. 1431 days for radiotherapy alone.
and 320 days for chemotherapy alone.3 The inclusion of radiotherapy
in the treatment protocol did, however, significantly improve the
overall survival.
Sarcoma
Although squamous cell carcinoma affecting the head and neck is
more commonly seen in the oral cavity affecting the tongue, maxilla.
mandible, and buccal mucosa, it is occasionally found affecting the
mucosa of the soft palate and pharynx.?7 Sarcomas are uncommon,
but soft tissue sarcoma, osteosarcoma, and chondrosarcoma may be
 Figure 51-13 Retrograde endoscopic view of a grass awn foreign body
 encountered. Little is known about the most appropriate therapy and
 in the nasopharynx.
the prognosis.
Craniopharyngioma
 Craniopharyngioma (Rathke's pouch tumor) is derived from nests of
epithelium of the primordial craniopharyngeal  canal (Rathke's
pouch). Rathke's pouch is a diverticulum arising from the embryonic
buccal cavity, from which the anterior pituitary gland develops.
Craniopharyngiomas are composed of well-differentiated epithelial
elements, including cysts and ameloblasts, and bone The tumor is
usually noted frst intracranially, above the sella turcica, and the pha-
ryngeal component is secondary. Reports of this tumor in cats are
rare.3 Clinical signs include initial dyspnea and nasal discharge, fol-
lowed by cranial nerve signs, resulting in an abnormal appearance to
the pupil, blindness, and vestibular signs. There are no reports of suc-
cessful treatment.
Foreign bodies
Occasionally, foreign bodies may be encountered in the nasopharynx.
The usual route of entry is from the caudal pharynx rostrally into the 
direct entry from the nasal passages may occur. The most commonly
reported foreign body is a blade of grass that moves rostrally and
Figure 51-14 A grass awn coated with purulent material was removed
becomes trapped in the nasopharynx.39.40 Other items that are chewed
from a cat with a chronic history of nasal discharge and sneezing.
625
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Choanal atresia
This is the most common congenital nasal abnormality in humans
and is a common cause of neonatal respiratory distress. However, it
is rare in the cat.45 The cause is failure of the buccopharyngeal mem-
brane to break down, leading to unilateral or bilateral obstruction at
the level of the choanae. Although the condition in humans is often
U anssi os uaaq aaeu sieuue un paodan sase may aun 'snoasso
nature.
 The clinical signs are respiratory distress from birth. In bilateral
atresia, the animal must breathe through its mouth and clinical signs
are seen from birth, but in unilateral atresia, the airflow via the unaf-
fected side may be suffcient and diagnosis may be delayed until a
later date, or until other pharyngeal disease occurs. There will be
reduced or no airflow via the nasal passages on the affected side and
nasal discharge may be present.
 Diagnosis is via endoscopic examination and/or failure of a catheter
Figure 51-15 A spay hook has been used for rostral retraction of the
passed through the external nares to reach the nasopharynx. Treat-
Apog ubiaioy leabueydoseu e ym jen e ui aneled os
ment by balloon dilation and temporary stenting with a segment of
feeding tube, followed by systemic corticosteroids, has been reported.45
Removal of most foreign bodies may be achieved under direct visu-
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
alization following rostral retraction of the soft palate (Fig. 5l-15).
Small fragments of plant material may be removed endoscopically
 Congenital nasopharyngeal stenosis caused by soft palate dysgenesis
with grasping forceps or may be moved into the pharynx after flushing
has been reported in a cat with clinical signs, from eight weeks of
the nasal cavity from the external nares or by passing a small catheter
age.4 In this animal, the caudal free border of the soft palate was
or endoscope caudally from the external nares. If foreign bodies are
attached to the caudal pharyngeal wall, with only a small oval slit
located more rostrally, an incision in the soft palate may be required
allowing communication between the nasopharynx and the orophar-
for access, but this is not commonly required. The nasal cavity and
ynx. Clinical signs of inspiratory stridor were associated with marked
nasopharynx should be flushed with saline after removal of the
laryngeal edema. Resolution of the edema following treatment with
foreign body.
Oral corticosteroids resulted in resolution of the clinical signs apart
 Recovery is generally good, although one cat is reported to have
from a mild inspiratory stertor and no further treatment was pursued.
developed a permanent change in voice after lodgment of an osseous
Acquired stenosis of the nasopharynx may occur secondary to
foreign body in the pharynx.41
inflammation caused by upper respiratory tract infection, nasal regur-
gitation of food and/or fluid, possibly under anesthesia, ingestion of
Trauma
caustic substances, trauma, or surgery. A thin membrane of infamma-
tory origin develops across the nasopharynx, partially or completing
e uoy ley e Aq pasnes aq Aeu xuieydoseu aul o eun zuna
occluding it.47 Many animals show acute onset of clinical signs fol-
height ('high-rise syndrome'). A fissure of the hard palate with or
lowing upper respiratory tract infection, persistence of clinical signs
without the soft palate may be seen. The oral mucoperiosteum may
On puodsai in aey pue uoisaiaid al ym sruou leiaas io
also be split or may remain intact over the split hard palate. Penetrat
 medical therapy for upper respiratory tract infection.48
ing injuries to the pharynx, such as those caused by oropharyngeal
Clinical signs include snuffing respiratory sounds and partial nasal
stick injuries in dogs, are rare in cats.43 Clinical signs may be referable
obstruction, but nasal discharge is not common. Little or no airflow
to the traumatic injury itself, the presence of foreign material, or the
may be found at the level of the external nares. Stenosis of the
development of an absces and include oral pain, hypersalivation, and
nasopharynx may impair the normal function of the muscles and the
reluctance to close the mouth.
intrapharyngeal opening may not close during deglutition, thus result-
 Occasionally, cats will develop penetrating injuries to the pharynx
ing in reflux and worsening inflammation.
caused by playing with thread to which a needle is attached. Orthogo-
Endoscopic examination of the nasopharynx and choanae will
nal radiographic projections should be used to localize the needle,
show marked narrowing of the lumen (Fig. 51-16).4 Failure to be able
but removal may be either straightforward or very time consuming.
Care should be taken to ensure that the clinical signs match the pres-
ence of the foreign body, since this may be an old lesion.
graphs, CT or MRI will also provide a diagnosis (Fig. 5l-17).
Linear foreign bodies anchored in the oropharynx at the base of the
Histologic
examination of the excised tissue reveals diffuse
tongue may be encountered, although the clinical signs are referable
submucosal fibrosis with infiltration by lymphocytes, mast cells, and
to obstruction of and leakage from the proximal intestinal tract fol-
eosinophils, consistent with a diagnosis of chronic inflammatory
lowing plication caused by peristalsis against a fxed foreign body.
rhinitis.47
 Treatment options for nasopharyngeal stenosis are described
below.
Pharyngeal mucocele
Pharyngeal mucocele is uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.44 Clinical
Nasopharyngitis
signs of pharyngeal mucocele include dyspnea, gagging, and cough-
ing, and a ranula and cervical swelling may also be seen. Excision of
 Inflammation of the nasopharynx may occur with nasal cavity disease
the ipsilateral mandibular and sublingual salivary glands results in
Or separately. Nasal cavity disease may lead to secondary nasopha-
resolution of the problem (see Chapter 49).
ryngeal disease due to the exposure of the mucosa to draining
626
Pharynx
Chapter
51
should be considered as a differential diagnosis for acute onset clinical
signs referable to the pharynx.
Fungal nasopharyngitis
Fungal infection of the nasopharynx by Cryptococus, Aspergillus
phaeohyphomycosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, trichosporono-
sis, and sporotrichosis has been reported.2
Cryptococcus
 Cryptococcus usually affects the rostral nasal cavity, but nasopharyngeal
obstruction may be seen.? Extension to cause meningitis has been
reported. Two species, C. neoformans, which has a global distribution,
and C. gatti, which has a more limited distribution to Australia and
the Pacific north west of the US, have been isolated. Diagnosis is by
cytology and/or histology and culture of lesions. Serology, using a
Figure 51-16 Endoscopic evaluation shows marked nasopharyngeal
latex agglutination test, is a sensitive and specific test for cryptococcal
stenosis.
antigens.
 Removal of as much of the lesion as possible via flushing or surgery
is recommended to alleviate the airway obstruction and to reduce the
 bulk of the disease to be treated medically. Medical therapy with oral
itraconazole (50-100 mg per cat once daily with food) or fluconazole
adeaup s alozeuosenl papuauuosai st (utz-zibie iad su os-oe)
and may be used as the first-line treatment, although it may induce a
reversible hepatopathy, manifest by inappetence and vomiting at
higher doses. However, fluconazole penetrates the blood-brain barrier
even in the absence of inflammation and should be used if there is
CNS involvement. Medical therapy should continue until resolution
of all clinical signs and until the antigen titer declines to zero, which
may take three to 12 months.
Aspergillus
Aspergillus is an uncommon cause of nasal and nasopharyngeal disease
in the cat. This is a more aggressive disease in the cat than in the dog.
-Aueia s'maoson pue smtadsy eiauas au jo auny Aq pasne
cephalic cats seem predisposed, which contrasts with the predisposi-
tion of mesaticephalic and dolichocephalic dogs to the disease.2
Figure 51-17 CT image of the head reconstructed in the sagittal plane
Although some cats will present with primarily nasal passage
showing nasopharyngeal stenosis and obliteration of the nasopharyngeal
disease, there is a propensity for extension of infection beyond the
lumen. (Courtesy of Rob White.)
nasal passages and sinuses to involve adjacent structures such as the
orbit, palate, cribriform plate and nasopharynx.51 Up to 70% of cats
infected secretions.4? Inflammatory conditions of the oral cavity and
lesionin the caudal nasal passage or nasopharynx252
 oropharynx are common and include gingivitis-periodontitis related
to dental plaque and calculus, and gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
lesions followed by anti-fungal therapy with topical clotrimazole52-54
complex.50
or systemic drugs such as itraconazole (10 mg/kg PO q24h), flucona-
Causes of pharyngitis include trauma, foreign bodies within the
zole (7.5 mg/kg PO q12h), posaconazole (5 mg/kg PO q24h), vori-
pharynx or penetrating injuries, insect bites or stings, allergic reac-
conazole ( 10 mg/kg PO q24h), or caspofungin.51
tions, reaction to ingested caustic agents, infectious agents, lymphoma,
 chronic stomatitis-pharyngitis complex, and eosinophilic granuloma
Bacterial nasopharyngitis
complex.
The clinical signs are stertor, reverse sneezing, and dyspnea with the
Primary bacterial nasopharyngitis is uncommon, although secondary
mouth closed. On inspection the mucosa may appear diffusely
infection may be seen in animals with bacterial rhinitis, cleft palate,
swollen and erythematous and may be ulcerated.
oronasal fstula, foreign body, nasopharyngeal polyp, or incompe-
tence of the nasopharyngeal opening. Bacteria reported include
Bordetella bronchiseptica, Mycobacteria spp.. and Actinomyces spp.
Viral nasopharyngitis
 aq oe a ds r e saf 
This may be caused by FHV-1 and FCV infections. These pathogens
account for the vast majority of feline upper respiratory infections and
affect the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and pharynx. Pain on eating.
Feline chronic gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
anorexia, salivation, inflammation of the pharyngeal mucosa, and
complex
pain on palpation of the pharyngeal mucosa are the clinical signs.
This is an infammatory disease of unknown etiology characterized
Although this is not a surgical disease it is a common disease that
by lymphocytic/plasmacytic infiltration of the oral and pharyngeal
627
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
mucosa. Lesions are inflammatory, proliferative, and ulcerative. The
se paisaaans uaaq aaey sioey jo aqunu e inq 'umouqun st Asoloa
causative or contributory, such as bacterial, viral, and systemic disease.
Dental disease, diet, oral conformation, and genetic factors (eg..
immune status) may also be contributing factors.50
Clinical signs are anorexia, diffculty in eating, halitosis, and ptyal-
ism. Diffuse or focal inflammation, which may be proliferative or
ulcerative particularly along the gingival margins and at the lateral
oropharynx and glossopalatine arches, may be seen on oral examina-
tion. A thorough dental examination and FeLV/FIV testing should be
 performed. The diagnosis is confirmed with a biopsy of the affected
mucosa (eg., with a Keyes biopsy punch).
 In animals with dental disease appropriate dental cleaning, proph-
ylaxis and teeth extraction may result in a temporary improvement in
linical signs. Immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids and/
or other agents such as chlorambucil or gold salts may be required.
Antibiotics with an anaerobic spectrum such as metronidazole or
A
recurrence of clinical signs is often seen after stopping therapy.
Caustic agent ingestion
Cats are more selective than dogs and voluntary ingestion of caustic
substances such as phenolic or alkaline compounds is uncommon.
Electric burn
Electrical burns affecting the oral cavity and pharynx may be caused
by biting through an electric cable. Oral pain and ptyalism may be
 seen and many animals will have dyspnea from associated pulmonary
edema.
Nasopharyngeal turbinates
in brachycephalic cats
Nasal turbinates may protrude caudally from the choanae into the
nasopharynx in brachycephalic (eg. Persian and Himalayan) cats and
B
can easily be seen on retrograde pharyngoscopy.5 The median age at
presentation was lower for cats with nasopharyngeal turbinates
Figure 51-18 (A) A stay suture in the caudal border of the soft palate.
'shn 1i) 1noum asoun ueun (siea 1noy 0i oml atuei 'siea aanu)
(B) The stay suture is used to retract the palate rostrally.
range 6.5-16 years). While it is clear that these turbinates cause some
degree of airway obstruction, the significance of this clinical finding
is uncertain.
namely the nasal mucosa, the muscularis, and the oral mucosa.
Simple continuous sutures using small gauge synthetic monoflament
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
absorbable suture are recommended. Healing is usually rapid.
 Mandibular symphysiotomy has been described to improve access
E anbiuuat siun ul zs'uoisu aeled yos au eia xuieqdoseu aul c
 When performing pharyngeal surgery it is important that a cuffed
ventral midline incision is made through the skin from the basihyoid
endotracheal tube is used and the low pressure cuffis fully inflated to
bone to the rostral lip. extending through the mylohyoideus with
 prevent aspiration of blood and secretions.
separation of the paired geniohyoideus muscles. An incision in the
 mucosa is made rostrally in the midline and then deviating laterally
Surgical approach to the nasopharynx
at the frenulum. The mandibular symphysis is exposed and split and
gentle retraction exposes the genioglossus muscles. The genioglossus
Oral examination of the pharynx and rostral retraction of the palate
is bluntly separated from the geniohyoideus and severed close to its
with a hook (see Fig. 5l-4) or stay suture (Fig. 51-18) give good access
attachment on the mandible. The incision is deepened by blunt sepa-
to the nasopharynx in the cat. If this is not sufficient, then the rostral
 ration between the styloglossus and mylohyoideus. The incision in the
yos au u uosui auu e eia paueode aq Aeu xuaieudoseu
mucosa is continued caudally, lateral to the sublingual and mandibu-
aeed piey au ot iepnes isn uosu! leus e aq Aeu suorsaneled
lar salivary ducts to the level of the glossopalatine arch. This procedure
to gain access to the rostral nasopharynx, or may be extended caudally
is reported to be well tolerated, with animals eating soft food the day
to the caudal free border of the soft palate. Ideally, the caudal soft
after surgery and no complications have been described.57
 palate should be left intact to facilitate closure and help support the
A dorsal rhinotomy (see Chapter 54) with turbinectomy has been
tissue during healing. The incision may be continued rostrally with
described to remove IPNT with marked nasopharyngeal extension,13
an incision in the mucoperiosteum of the hard palate, followed by
but this is likely to be rarely needed.
628
Pharynx
Chapter
51
for nasopharyngeal polyps may be needed. Ventral or, rarely, a dorsal
rhinotomy may be needed to remove foreign material that cannot be
 retrieved non-surgically.
Ventral bulla osteotomy (VBO)
Vental bulla osteotomy is indicated for nasopharyngeal polyps if they
sy uo aiaaas aie suais ieiu aui ji uoisjnae/uonen iaye ina
Adde on juauoduos ieasuaieudosu ou si aaut jt io 'uoeuasand
traction to.23,30 The surgical technique is described in Chapter 50
[see Box 50-11)
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
 Treatment of nasopharyngeal stenosis in the cat involves surgical
resection of the obstruction, forcibly opening the narrowed area by
e jo zuauaseid Aq io aimade aul sagielua ieul amonus e jo aessed
stent to maintain a passage.
ue eia paad a u anss snouqa aul jo uoas 
incision in the soft palate (Fig. 51-20 and Box 51-1).15.47 This tech-
nique was reported to be successful in four cats, with no recurrence,
although dehiscence of the soft palate incision in one animal neces-
sitated a second surgery.47 However, other authors have described
recurrence of this condition with this technique.48,5s5 Ablation of
the membrane with a holmium: YAG laser has also been reported,
although this was not succesful. Resection of the membranous tissue
followed by reconstruction of the dorsal nasopharyngeal wall with an
paqasap uaaq sey xuieqdoseu jepnes aun woy de suaaueae
(Box 51-1).60 This technique was performed due to concerns about
B
 particularly if denuded mucosa is left in situ, as described in the cat58
Figure 51-19 (A) The soft palate is retracted rostrally by use of a small
8tBop pue
ae djod aul (a) paziiensi ag uen djod aul os jeisoway oinbsou
 Dilation (Box 51-1) is performed with surgical instruments [artery
removal by gentle traction showing the classic tail.
forceps), bougies or balloon catheters,.15,59.61 It usually produces a
prompt resolution of clinical signs, but recurrence in the short term
after one procedure has been reported, which was successfully
Removal of polyps: traction/avulsion
 managed by repeating the procedure.652.6l Recurrence of stenosis after
a single procedure has prompted other authors to try an alternative
If the polyp is palpable, it may be possible to displace it caudally into 
au sueadai iae uaas juauannidui uai-suoi aun inq 'anpanand
the oropharynx by caudodorsal pressure on the soft palate. If this is
-eiadotsod uondo isiy poos e sjuasaidai siu teu sisassns ainpaoid
not possible, the soft palate is retracted rostrally (Fig. 5l-19) and the
tively, corticosteroids have been given at various doses, from 0.25 mg/
base of the polyp examined. The polyp is grasped at its base or stalk
kg q24 h for seven days to 2 mg/kg q24h for ten days, then tapered.
with forceps and, after ensuringthat no pharyngeal mucosa is included
Long term, clinical signs are resolved or much improved, although a
in the forceps, gentle continuous traction is used to remove the polyp.
variable degree of stenosis at the site may be seen on endoscopic
Hemorrhage is controlled by pressure with a gauze swab. It is impor-
examination. Balloon dilation was reported to be unsuccessful in
tant not to crush the base of the polyp with forceps, otherwise it may
one case, but this involved introduction of a l0 French Swann-Ganz
break at this point leaving remnants attached to the middle ear or
catheter and 10 mm balloon via the oral cavity and only short-term
Eustachian tube The polyp should be examined to ensure it has a
corticosteroids were given, both of which may have contributed
long, tapered stalk (Fig. 51-19B).
to failure.58
The polyp should be submitted for histologic examination to
 Stents may be used to maintain patency while the denuded epithe-
confrm the suspected diagnosis and to rule out other causes of a
lium is restored to prevent recurrence. A braided wire prosthesis
nasopharyngeal mass, e.g. lymphoma.
(Wallstent, Schneider US Stent Division) was placed in one cat fol-
lowing failure of an open surgical approach and balloon dilation58
and a balloon-expandable metallic stent (Palmaz Genesis; Cordis)
Removal of foreign bodies
was placed in three cats.62 Granulation tissue formation, tissue
Foreign bodies may be removed by rhinoscopy, either from an antero-
ingrowth requiring placement of a covered stent and need to resect
grade or retrograde approach, with appropriate grasping instruments.
the end of the stent because of dysphagia, hairball entrapment, and
 Alternatively, flushing saline through the nasal passages from a rostral
discomfort during swallowing were complications reported, but were
to caudal direction may dislodge the foreign material. In animals with
-sip juamund io piosnu snoidos io/pue uoayul leuaioeq Arepuonas
covered stents are used in animals with complete nasopharyngeal
charge, treatment with antibiotics for a short period may resolve the
stenosis, animals with caudal stenosis have serial balloon dilation
infection so that the foreign material may be identifed. Caudal retrac-
 prior to stent placement, and l cm of unstented soft palate is left
tion of the soft palate with instruments or a stay suture as described
caudal to the stent.62
629
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
 Box 51-1 Treatment options for nasopharyngeal stenosis
Resection
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the mouth held in an
open position by use of a mouth gag. A midline soft palate incision is
made and stay sutures placed in the palate edges to retract them.47
 The obstructing membrane is excised by the use of iris scissors or 
small Metzenbaum scissors. The incision in the soft palate is then 
closed in three layers, namely the nasal mucosa, the muscularis, and 
the oral mucosa. Simple continuous sutures using small gauge
synthetic monofilament absorbable suture are recommended.
Resection and reconstruction60
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency. A midline incision is made in 
the soft palate to the level of the hard palate and the caudal edges
retracted by the use of stay sutures. The scar tissue forming the
obstructive membrane between the soft palate and dorsal 
nasopharynx is excised with iris scissors. Cannulation from the
external nares is repeated to verify that the passages are now patent.
The defect in the dorsal nasopharyngeal wall is then reconstructed 
 pue xuseudoseu jepnen aui wouy dey juawanueape apipad e yim
cranial laryngopharynx and closed in two layers (submucosa and 
mucosa) using small gauge synthetic monofilament absorbable suture
material. The incision in the soft palate is then closed in three layers,
namely the nasal mucosa, the muscularis, and the oral mucosa.
Simple continuous sutures using small gauge synthetic monofilament 
absorbable suture are recommended.
Dilation
A 5 French balloon catheter with a 10 mm or 15 mm balloon is 
introduced via the external nares to pass across the stenotic region,
either directly. or over a guidewire, if the balloon catheter cannot be
passed alone. A smaller catheter is usually passed first and then the 
effect of the procedure monitored either by direct visualization via 
retrograde pharyngoscopy9,60 or fluoroscopy.6 A larger catheter can 
then be passed if it is felt that the opening into the caudal nares was
J! awll juanbasqns e ie pajeadan aq uen aanpanoud aul llews oot ls
re-stenosis occurs.
Stenting62
 buanp pasn ane Adonsosonl snoaueinwis pue Adonsoulun xaljouay
balloon dilatation and stent placement. Stent sizes are determined on 
the basis of computed tomography measurements and stent 
availability. In one report on three cats, stents sized 8 mm × 16 mm, 
9 mm × 17 mm, and 9 mm x 19 mm were used.6z If there is a
complete membrane across the nasopharynx then dilation with a 
balloon, as described above, is performed first. Stent location is then 
identified via fluoroscopy and rhinoscopy and the stent centered over
the lesion; 1 cm of unstented soft palate should be left caudal to the
buimoliems buunp ansp eabureudoseu jewou lof mole on luans
enppui aul loy sanssaid papuawoan aul ol paneui ae shuans
balloons (& to 12 atmospheres or pressure).
 Recommendations have been made that covered balloon-
expandable metallic stents are used in animals with a closed 
membrane, although these are more expensive than the uncovered 
versions.6z A covered stent is not considered necessary with an open
 nasopharyngeal stenosis.
aag sey uosui uy (a) sisouais leabueudosn ) oz-is ane
made in the soft palate and the narrowed nasopharynx is visible. (c) The
stenotic area is resected. (Courtesy of Rob W/hite.)
630
Pharynx
Chapter
51
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Cats should be monitored in the immediate postoperative period for
respiratory distress resulting from pharyngeal edema. Rarely, a trache-
ostomy tube (see Chapter 46) may be needed on recovery. Intravenous
fluids are administered until the cat is able to drink voluntarily. Water
and then food may be offered once the cat has recovered and there is
no evidence of respiratory distress. Soft food should be fed for two to
three weeks in cats with nasopharyngeal disease or surgical interven-
tion of the nasopharynx. An esophagostomy tube may be placed in
m Aau eut papadsns s! l! j! Aains ot oud juaaddeut aie ey sie
not return to prompt feeding postoperatively. This includes cats with
marked vestibular syndrome undergoing a VBO.
Corticosteroids may be given if pharyngeal edema is present or it is
suspected it will develop. Antimicrobial agents may be indicated if an 
infectious process is present Potentiated amoxicillin represents a
good empirical choice, since the likely organisms are flora from the
 oral cavity and pharynx.
Figure 51-21 Right-sided Horner syndrome after removal of a
nasopharyngeal polyp by traction. This is a common complication and
resolved within two weeks of surgery.
COMPLICATIONS
respiratory obstruction still further. Prevention of hemorrhage
Inflammation, edema and infection
involves the application of the basic principles of hemostasis, avoiding
Swelling from inflammation and edema may be seen after manipula-
 methods that cause tissue trauma. Hemorrhage may be seen after
pue eunenl oi aaisuas kjanisimbxa aie Kaul se sanssil aul jo uon
sharp surgical procedures as well as after traction/avulsion of polyps
handling. Swelling causes increased airway resistance and increased
and balloon dilation of stenotic lesions. Conchal necrosis and nasal
negative pressure on inspiration, which will worsen airway obstruc-
discharge are also reported after balloon dilation of nasopharyngeal
tion and contribute to further edema and worsening airway obstruc-
stenosis.5?
tion. This complication is reduced by gentle atraumatic handling of
tissues and the use of fine, sharp instruments appropriate to their
Neurologic complications
purpose Stay sutures should be used instead of retractors where pos-
sible and electrosurgery should not be used for incision or hemostasis.
Damage to the facial and hypoglossal nerves is possible during
Anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids may be used if there is
surgery of the middle ear, although this is less likely in the cat than
pre-existing edema or if it is predicted to develop postoperatively.
the dog,25,26,63
Hormer syndrome (Fig. 5l-2l) is a common complication after
tory tract should be subject to continuous monitoring until the
 removal of nasopharyngeal or midle ear polyps. It can occasionally
dyspnea has resolved.
 Occur after traction/avulsion and is common after VBO, usually due
Wound infection and drainage is uncommon, even though proce-
to curettage of the ventromedial compartment In most animals, the
dures of the nasopharynx and middle ear are clean-contaminated to
clinical signs resolve in one to three weeks,12 although cats in which
dirty, due in part to the excellent blood supply. Dehiscence of the
 ioa o aiaun aie saam xis paq isiiad suis le
 palate incision is a potential complication.47
Aspiration pneumonia is avoided by using a cuffed endotracheal
uncommon.
tube and a pharyngeal pack if possible, ensuring adequate hemostasis.
Clinical signs of peripheral vestibular disease may be seen in up to
removal of all blood and fluid at the end ofthe procedure with suction
40% of cats, if curettage of the tympanic bulla is too vigorous and
and not feeding the animal until fully conscious with a normal swal-
causes damage to the round or oval windows or vestibulocochlear
lowing reflex. Pulmonary dysfunction caused by aspiration pneumo-
apparatus. These signs are generally transient in cats and resolve
nia may be exacerbated by pulmonary edema in those patients with
within two weeks.28 However, cats with preoperative vestibular syn-
respiratory tract obstnuction.
 drome may have persistence of clinical signs postoperatively, particu-
larly the head tilt.12
Hemorrhage
Many cats with nasopharyngeal polyps are deaf as assessed by brain-
stem auditory evoked potentials. In one study, none of six cats showed
Bleeding is common during procedures of the pharynx due to its
el a'pouad anadoisod aui u aqe ueay u suauaaoidu ue
excellent blood supply, although it is usually mild and manageable
of reformation of the tympanic cavity and damage to the auditory
with simple procedures, eg.. direct pressure However, continued
 ossicles during surgery has the potential to render the patient deaf.
hemorrhage may cause aspiration of blood into the lower airway
 Bradycardia after nasopharyngeal stimulation, necessitating admin-
and the development of pneumonia, and blood clots may exacerbate
istration of atropine, has been reported."
631
Section
7
The Head and Neck
REFERENCES
Haynes K), Anderson SE, Laszlo MP.
15. Henderson SM, Bradley K, Day MJ, et al.
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 2002;24(3):
Nasopharyngeal trichobezoar foreign
Investigation of nasal disease in the cat -
184-200.
body in a cat. J Feline Med Surg
a retrospective study of 77 cases. J Feline
32.
Cotter SM. Oral Pharyngeal Neoplasms
2010;12(11):878-81.
Med Surg 2004;6:245-57.
in the Cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2.
Barrs VR, Beatty JA, Lingard AE, et al.
16.
 Baker G. Nasopharyngeal polyps in cats.
1981;17(6):917-20.
Feline sino-orbita aspergillosis: An
Vet Rec 1982;111(2):43.
33.
Schoenborn WC, Wisner ER, Kass PP.
emerging clinical syndrome? Aust Vet J
17.
 Pope ER. Feline inflammatory polyps.
Dale M. Retrospective assessment of 
2007;85[3):N23.
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
computed tomographic imaging of feline
3.
Allen Hs, Broussard J, Noone K.
1995;10(2):87-93.
sinonasal disease in 62 cats. Vet Radiol
Nasopharyngeal diseases in cats:
18.
Bedford PGC, Coulson A, Sharp NJ.
Ulltrasound 2003;44:185-95.
A retrospective study of 53 cases
Longstaffe JA. Nasopharyngeal polyps in
34.
Little L, Patel R, Goldschmidt M. Nasal 
[1991-1998). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
the cat. Vet Rec 1981;109(25-2):551-3.
and nasopharyngeal lymphoma in cats:
1999;35(6):457-61.
19.
Parker NR, Binnington AG.
50 cases [1989-2005). Vet Patho]
4. Willard MD, Radlinsky MA. Endoscopic
Nasopharyngeal polyps in cats: Three case
2007;44:885-92.
examination of the choanae in dogs and
reports and a review of the literature.
35.
Haney SM, Beaver L, Turrel J, et al.
cats: 118 cases [1988-1998). JAm Vet
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1985;21[4):
Survival Analysis of 97 Cats with Nasal
Med Assoc 1999;215(9):1301-5.
473-8.
Lymphoma: A Multi-Institutional
 5. Esterline ML, Radlinsky MG,
20. Klose TC, MacPhail CM, Schultheiss PC,
Retrospective Study (1986-2006). J Vet
Schermerhorn T. Endoscopic removal
et al. Prevalence of select infectious
Intern Med 2009;23:287-94.
of nasal polyps in a cat using a novel
agents in inflammatory aural and
36.
 Sfligoi G, Theon AP, Kent MS. Response 
surgical approach. J Feline Med Surg
nasopharyngeal polyps from client-owned
of nineteen cats with nasal lymphoma to
2005;7(2):121 -4.
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2010;12[10]:
 radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Vet
6.
Boswood A, Lamb CR, Brockman
769-74.
Radiol Ultrasound 2007;48:388-93.
Dl, et al. Balloon dilatation of
21. Stanton ME, Wheaton LG, Render JA,
37.
Gendler A, Lewis JR, Reetz JA, Schwarz T.
nasopharyngeal stenosis in a cat. Vet
Blevins WE. Pharyngeal polyps in two
Computed tomographic features of oral 
Radiol Ultrasound 2003;44[1):53-5.
feline siblings. I Am Vet Med Assoc
squamous cell carcinoma in cats: 18 cases
. Chang Y, Thompson H, Reed N, Penderis
1985;186(12):1311-13.
(2002-2008). I Am Vet Med Assoc
7.
J. Clinical and magnetic resonance
22.
 Byron JK, Shadwick SR, Bennett AR.
2010;236(3):319-25.
imaging features of nasopharyngeal
Megaesophagus in a 6-month-old cat
38.
Nagata T, Nakayama H, Uchida K,
lymphoma in two cats with concurrent
secondary to a nasopharyngeal polyp.
et al. Two cases of feline malignant
intracranial mass. J Small Anim Pract 
J Feline Med Surg 2010;12[4):322-4.
caniopharyngioma. Vet Pathol
2006;47(11 ):678-81.
 23. Anderson DM, Robinson RK, White RAS.
2005;42(5):663-5.
8. Malik R, Martin P, Wigney Dl, et al.
Management of inflammatory polyps in
39.
 Riley P. Nasopharyngeal grass foreign 
Nasopharyngeal cryptococcosis. Aust Vet J
37 cats. Vet Rec 2000;147[24):684-7.
body in eight cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1999:75:483-8.
24.
 Seitz SE, Losonsky IM, Marrelta SM.
1993;202(2):299-300.
9.
De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Bottero E.
Computed tomographic appearance of
40.
Rocken H. Unusual foreign body in the.
Squash-preparation cytology from
inflammatory polyps in three cats. Vet
laryngeal-pharyngeal cavity of a cat. Prakt
nasopharyngeal masses in the cat:
Radiol Ultrasound 1996;37(2):99-104.
Tierarzt 1987;68:55.
cytological results and histological
 Ader PL, Boothe HW. Ventral bulla
41.
Rendano VT, Zimmer JF, Wallach MS.
correlations in 30 cases. J Feline Med Surg
 osteotomy in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp
et al. Impaction of the pharynx, larynx.
2008;10[1):55-60.
Assoc 1979;15(6):757-62.
and esophagus by avian bones in the dog
10. MacPhail CM, Innocenti CM, Kudnig ST,
26.
 Kapatkin AS, Matthiesen DT, Noone KE,
and cat. Vet Radiol 1988;29(5):213-16.
et al. Atypical manifestations of feline
et al. Results of surgery and long-term 
42.
 Phillipson MH, Leveque Jl, Leveque Nw.
inflammatory polyps in three cats. I Feline
follow-up in 31 cats with nasopharyngeal
A case report. Foreign body in the
Med Surg 2007;9(3):219-25.
polyps. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
pharynx of a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
11.
Veir JK, Lappin MR, Foley IE, Getzy DM.
1990;26(4):387-92.
1960;136:70.
Feline inflammatory polyps: historical.
27.
Harvey CE, Goldschmidt MH.
43.
Bright SR, Mellanby RJ, Williams JM.
clinical, and PCR findings for feline calici
Inflammatory polypoid growths in the
Oropharyngeal stick injury in a Bengal
virus and feline herpes virus-1 in 28 cases.
ear canal of cats. J Small Anim Pract
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2002;4(3):153-5.
J Feline Med Surg 2002;4[4):195-9.
1978;669-77.
44.B
 Feinman JM. Pharyngeal mucocele and 
12. Anders BB, Hoelzler MG, Scavelli TD,
28. Faulkner JE, Budsberg SC. Results of
respiratory distress in a cat. J Am Vet Med
 et al. Analysis of auditory and neurologic
ventral bulla osteotomy for treatment 
Assoc 1990;197(9):1179-80.
effects associated with ventral bulla
 of middle-ear polyps in cats. J Am Anim
45.
Khoo AM, Marchevsky AM, Barrs VR.
osteotomy for removal of inflammatory
Hosp Assoc 1990;26(5):496-9.
 Beatty JA. Choanal atresia in a Himalayan
polyps or nasopharyngeal masses in cats.
29.
 Trevor PB, Martin RA. Tympanic bulla
cat - frst reported case and successful
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2008;233(4):580-5.
osteotomy for treatment of middle ear
treatment. J Feline Med Surg 2007;9(4):
13. Greci V, Mortellaro CM, Olivero D
disease in cats: 19 cases(1984-1991).
346-9.
et al. Inflammatory polyps of the nasal
JAm Vet Med Assoc 1993;202:123-8.
46.
. Talavera Lopez I, Josefa Fernandez Del
turbinates of cats: an argument for
30. Lane JG, Orr CM, Lucke VM, Gruffydd-
Palacio MA, Cano FG, Del Rio AB.
designation as feline mesenchymal
Jones TJ. Nasopharyngeal polyps arising 
Nasopharyngeal stenosis secondary
hamartoma. J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:2
in the middle ear of the cat. J Small Anim
to soft palate dysgenesis in a cat. Vet J
13-19.
Pract 1981;22(8):511 -22.
2009;181[(2):200-4.
14. Galloway PE, Kyles A, Henderson JP.
31.
Hunt GB, Perkins MC, Foster SF, et al.
47.
 Mitten Rw. Nasopharyngeal stenosis
Nasal polyps in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
Nasopharyngeal disorders of dogs and
in four cats. J Small Anim Pract
1997;38(2):78-80.
cats: A review and retrospective study.
1988;29(6):341-5.
632
Pharynx
Chapter
51
48. Coolman BR, Marreltta SM, McKiernan
53. Hamilton HL, Whitley RD, McLaughlin 
a stent. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
BC, Zachary JF Choanal atresia and 
SA. Exophthalmos secondary to
1999;35(3):251-6.
secondary nasopharyngeal stenosis in a
aspergillosis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
59. Glaus TM, Tomsa K, Reusch CE. Balloon
dog I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1998;34(6):
Assoc 2000;36:343-7.
 dilation for the treatment of chronic
497-501.
54. Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Zimmer C, Greene 
recurrent nasopharyngeal stenosis in a cat.
49. August JR, Bahr A. Chronic upper 
CE. Fungal rhinitis and sinusitis in three
J Small Anim Pract 2002;43(2):88-90.
respiratory disease: principles of diagnosis
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;222[10):
60. Griffon Dl, Tasker S. Use of a mucosal
and management, In: August JR, editor.
1380-4.
advancement flap for the treatment of
Consultations in feline internal medicine.
 55. McLellan GJ, Aquino SM, Mason DR,
nasopharyngeal stenosis in a cat. J Small 
St Louis: Elsevier; 2006.
 et al. Use of posaconazole in the
Anim Pract 2000;41(2):71-3.
p. 347-60.
 management of invasive orbital
Glaus TM, Gerber B, Tomsa K, et al.
 50. Diehl K, Rosychuk RAW. Feline gingivitis 
aspergillosis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Reproducible and long-lasting success
stomatitis pharyngitis. Vet Clin North
Assoc 2006;42[4):302-7.
of balloon dilation of nasopharyngeal
Am Small Anim Pract 1993;23[1):
 56. Ginn JA, Kumar MS, McKiernan BC.
stenosis in cats. Vet Rec 2005;157(9):
139-53.
Powers BE. Nasopharyngeal turbinates in
257-9.
51.
Giordano C, Gianella P, Bo S, et al.
brachycephalic dogs and cats. I Am Anim
G2.
.Berent AC, Weisse C, Todd K, et al. Use of
Invasive mould infections of the 
Hosp Assoc 2008;44(5):243-9.
a balloon-expandable metallic stent for
naso-orbital region of cats: a case
 Qurley BM, Nelson AW, Kainer RA.
treatment of nasopharyngeal stenosis in
involving Aspergilus fumigatus and an
 Mandibular symphysiotomy in the dog
dogs and cats: six cases (2005-2007).
 aetiological review. I Feline Med Surg
and cat: a surgical approach to the
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2008;233(9):
2010;12:714-23.
nasopharynx. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
1432-40.
 52. Whitney BL, Broussard J, Stefanacci JD.
1972;160(7):981-7.
63. Little CIL, Lane JG. The Surgical Anatomy
Four cats with fungal rhinitis. J Feline
 58. Novo RE, Kramek B. Surgical repair of
of the Feline Bulla Tympanica. J Small 
Med Surg 2005;7(1):53-8.
 nasopharyngeal stenosis in a cat using
Anim Pract 1986;27(6):371-8.
8E9
tel
B. Kirby
Surgical conditions of the feline larynx are relatively uncommon.
equilateral triangles. The arytenoid cartilages articulate with the
Aoeuueu leaguiel pue 'iseldoau leaguel 'sisieied ieague]
cricoid and thyroid cartilages.
disease are the most common feline laryngeal conditions reported in
The vocal folds, thyroarytenoid muscles, and cricoarytenoid dorsalis
the veterinary literature. However, there are relatively few reports and
and lateralis muscles attach to the arytenoid cartilages. Movements
 these often involve single or small numbers of cats. Laryngeal trauma 
 produced by these muscles and the vocal folds, open and close the
and laryngeal foreign body are also sporadically reported.
rima glottidis, the laryngeal airway. There are two pairs of tissue folds
As in other species, the clinical signs of laryngeal disease in cats can 
at the cranial end of the feline larynx; the false vocal cords that lie
 be peracute in onset, severe, and rapidly fatal without appropriate
more cranially and laterally, while the true vocal cords lie more cau-
dally and nearer the median plane. The laryngeal ventricles are
 Orotracheal intubation challenging, particularly in emergency presen-
reported to lie between the true and false vocal cords on each side.2
tations of laryngeal disease. It is critically important to be prepared 
 However, laryngeal ventricles are also reported not to exist in feline
species.? To the author's knowledge, eversion of laryngeal ventricles
In this chapter the surgical treatment of the common laryngeal condi-
has not been described in the cat, though this is commonly observed
tions in cats will be described.
in dogs with brachycephalic upper airway syndrome.
The false and true vocal cords are most easily visualized by ventral
laryngotomy. The false vocal cords, often appearing tannish in color.
 extend from the arytenoid cartilages to the epiglottis. The true vocal
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 The larynx is situated between the pharynx and first tracheal cartilage
Epihyoid bone
Epiglottis
ring. It serves as a conduit for passage of air between the pharynx and
Stylohyoid
trachea. The larynx functions in phonation, regulation of airflow
bone
through its lumen, and protection of the lower airway during swal-
Tympano
lowing. The larynx consists of a set of complicated cartilages, liga-
Ceratohyoid bone
ments, and muscles (Figs 52-1 and 52-2). The five laryngeal cartilages
hyoid
cartilage
are the epiglottis, thyroid cartilage, cricoid cartilage, and paired aryte
-Basihyoid bone
noid cartilages. The epiglottis is the most rostral of the laryngeal car-
Thyrohyoid
tilages. It is triangular in shape and composed of flexible fbrocartilage.
bone
 Thyroid
It is attached by a fold of mucous membrane to the root of the
cartilage
the laryngeal opening during swallowing, allowing food and fluid to
Cricothyroid
pass over it andinto the esophagus. The thyroid cartilage isthe largest
ligament
of the laryngeal cartilages. It is U-shaped, continuous ventrally and
~Cricoid cartilage
forms approximately two-thirds of the circumference of the larynx. It
is attached cranially to the hyoid bone and articulates dorsally with
Anular
Tracheal
ligament
cartilages
the cricoid cartilage. The cricoid cartilage is signet ring shaped, with
its broader part dorsad. Its caudal border is connected to the frst
tracheal ring. It articulates with the arytenoid cartilages on each side
 Figure 52-1 The feline larynx ventral view (arytenoid cartilages not
in addition to its thyroid cartilage articulation. The paired arytenoid
visible) with hyoid apparatus on the right-hand side. (Medlical ilustrations
cartilages are pyramidal in shape, with the base and sides nearly
@ Wm. P Hamilton 2010.)
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00052-4
635
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
/M
nerves, innervating ipsilateral thyroarytenoideus, arytenoideus, and
Rostral
ATM
Arytenoid
cricoarytenoideus muscles. The cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle is
Epiglottis
cornu
cartilage
the only intrinsic laryngeal muscle responsible for abduction of the
Caudal cornu
vocal cords, thus its critical role in respiratory dysfunction in laryngeal
 Cricoid cartilage
paralysis.
 In all species studied, the left recurrent laryngeal nerve is more
commonly involved than the right in laryngeal paralysis. The left
-ADM
Thyrohyoid
recurrent laryngeal nerve has a longer course and fewer nerve fibers
bone
compared to the right, which is postulated to account for its suscep-
[ue gal o auana uo ao an pue anui on A
hemiplegia. Interestingly, experimental left recurrent laryngeal dener-
vation by resection of 30 mm length of the nerve in cats did not result
Ceratohyoid
in clinical signs of respiratory obstruction up to one month after
bone
Thyroid cartilage TM
CLM
surgery. At one month, functional electrical stimulation of the laryn-
CM
geal adductors restored mobility of the vocal folds and improved
Figure 52-2 Illustration of the intrinsic musculature of the feline larynx,
vocalization.'
lateral view with window in thyroid cartilage. ATM, arytenoideus
transversus muscle; ADM, arytenoideus dorsalis muscle (more commonly
referred to as cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle); TM, thyroarytenoideus
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
muscle; CLM, cricoarytenoideus lateralis muscle; CM, cricothyroideus
muscle; VM, ventricularis muscle. (Medical llustrations @ Wm. P Hamilton
2010.)
Clinical examination
Clinical signs of laryngeal disease in cats are often vague and non-
cords, appearing as whitish bands, extend from the arytenoid carti-
specific. Most commonly reported clinical signs include tachypnea or
lages to the thyroid cartilages. Conflicting reports of the presence of
dyspnea, inspiratory noise or stridor, dysphagia, weight loss, change
muscle in feline vocal cords exist, with one report stating that feline
in vocalization, coughing independent of eating, coughing and
vocal cords do not contain muscle, in contrast to the dog and horse,4
gagging when eating, and lethargy. Absence of purring is reported in
while another report cites extremely rapid twitching of the vocalis
uaaq sey sund jo uounsai pue siskieied jeasuiel ym sie
 muscle running within the vocal folds as the mechanism of purring.5
reported after surgery in some cats. Absence of purring and a change
The feline cuneiform and corniculate processes are inconspicuous
een sio lauei ym sen u paai ose si aio u
when viewed per os (Fig. 52-3A), while these structures are easily
stridor in cats with laryngeal paralysis has been described as frequently
identified in dogs (Fig. 52-3B). The larynx is elevated and depressed
having a distinct whistling component that can be less easy to recog-
by action of the thyrohyoideus and sternothyroideus muscles, respec-
nize as part of the respiratory cycle. Detection of this whistling sound
'auquau snosnu Aq paull si uaun leauel aul ian
may be facilitated by auscultation of the laryngeal region. Careful
The larynx is innervated by branches of the vagus. The vagus gives
 palpation of the cervical area to detect masses and compression of the
rise to the cranial laryngeal nerve which separates into an internal and
cranial thorax to assess for a mediastinal mass are also important in
External branch. The cricothyroid muscle is innervated by the external
 the physical examination of cats with suspected laryngeal disease.
branch, while the internal branch provides sensory innervation to the
laryngeal muscles and mucosal surfaces.&7 The recurrent laryngeal
obstruction must be undertaken with care to minimize the risk of
nerves separate from the vagus at the thoracic inlet. The right recurrent
iatrogenic induction of life-threatening dyspnea. Routine analysis
laryngeal nerve passes around the subclavian artery before coursing
of blood and urine is recommended to nule out concurrent
a a ya an am yau a d u pue a
nerve passes around the aortic arch on the left side before coursing
dinical  examination,  a  complete  neurologic  examination 
is
cranially.4 The recurrent laryngeal nerves terminate as caudal laryngeal
recommended.
Figure 52-3 (A) Per 0s endoscopic view of
 normal feline larynx. (B) Per os endoscopic
vew of normal canine larynx. (Photographs
Courtesy of Dr Nicole van lsrael, ACAPULCO
Cardiopumonary referrals, Masta, BE.)
A
B
989
Larynx
Chapter
52
Figure 52-4 Lateral cervical radiographic view showing laryngeal soft
tissue mass in a cat. Histologic examination of excisional biopsy of the
mass revealed pyogranulomatous inflammation.
Diagnostic imaging
Radiography
Radiographic examination of the thorax and neck is recommended,
but extreme care in restraint and positioning is required. Sedation or
Figure 52-5 Endoscopic view of a feline laryngeal soft tissue mass.
Histologic diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma. (Photograph courtesy of
general anesthesia may be required in some cases to obtain diagnostic
Jon Halfl Cambrioge University, UK.)
quality radiographs. Radiographic evidence of airway obstruction may
be observed, including hyperinflation of the lungs, prominent caudal
displacement of the larynx, and presence of air in the pharynx, larynx,
lesions, which can usually be sampled by fne needle aspiration or
esophagus, and stomach. Mass lesions in the larynx, cervical soft
sooid Adossosuiel naip ioy pambai s eisauisauy so iad Asdo
tissues, thoracic inlet, or thorax may be observed (Fig. 52-4).
for sedation and anesthesia appear to vary widely Similar to other
species general anesthesia may obliteratelaryngeal function in normal
Sonography
animals. Particular care is required to distinguish sedative or anes-
thetic drug-induced laryngeal paralysis from the clinical disease. Addi-
Sonographic examination of the larynx has been reported in 30 cats. 10
tionally, it is important to recognize the potential presence of
paradoxical laryngeal movement which could be mistaken for normal
in the normal cats was diffcult to identify. The presence and location
laryngeal abduction/adduction; this can be avoided by assessing laryn-
au pue sie auu u pauai Aiane aiam sasse pue sis go
authors considered echolaryngography likely superior to laryngoscopy
 geal movement in time with each phase of the respiratory cycle. Care
is also required to avoid contact with laryngeal structures during direct
for identification of cysts and soft tissue masses and cited the clinical
 laryngoscopy due to the propensity for laryngospasm in cats. Com-
advantage that echolaryngography could be performed in these
plete recovery of base-lineresponse after spraying the larynx of normal
animals without sedation or anesthesia. In eight cats with laryngeal
cats required 17-100 minutes for 2% lidocaine and 61-256 minutes
paralysis and/or laryngeal collapse, poor movement of the vocal folds
st uosuny eaguaiel jo juaussassy z Kpmis auo ui auiesopll %oi 1o
was observed, but further studies and further refinement of the tech-
therefore impossible following local anesthetic administration.
'sisieied leaguAiel ui asn sl ioy papaau aie anbu
A prospective, randomized clinical trial of anesthetic induction
agents for assessment of laryngeal function by videoendoscopy in
Computed tomography (CT)/magnetic resonance
healthy adult cats premedicated with methadone has recently been
imaging (MRl)
reported.1 Induction by slow infusion of midazolam and ketamine
The use of advanced imaging techniques in the evaluation of laryngeal
to effect preserved arytenoid movement better in comparison to
-eied ieasuiel o saupud n panodai uaaq sey ao au ui suopuo
induction with propofol or alfaxolone. However, arytenoid movement
ysis were identified by CT in unanesthetized dogs, including failure of 
was completely obliterated in three cats in the midazolam-ketamine
arytenoid cartilage abduction and a narrow rima glottis. CT and MRI
 group and three cats in the propofol group. The obliteration of laryn-
have not (to the author's knowledge) yet been evaluated in the cat,
 geal function in these normal cats highlights the diffculty of making
but based on the canine study these imaging modalities may have a
a definitive diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis in this species. Competent
role to play in the evaluation of laryngeal conditions in this species,
laryngeal protective reflexes were maintained in normal cats anesthe-
although the precise nature of their role remains to be fully defined.
tized with ketamine and administered barium suspension orally.14
Barium was aspirated into the pharynx and cranial part of the trachea
Laryngoscopy
in these cats, but not into the lower respiratory tract.
Administration of doxapram hydrochloride to stimulate more vig-
Definitive diagnosis of feline laryngeal disease is most often achieved
-Beip aul ul isisse ol sjuaned pazaysaue ul uoou ieaguaiel shoio
by direct laryngoscopy per os under a light plane of anesthesia. Direct
nosis of laryngeal paralysis has been described in healthy dogs'5 and
ue o aosuel piaupuy e ym paae aq ue Aosui
Aiayes g'les aul ul anbiuuoat imyasn e se ioune auo Aq papuauuoa
endoscope Direct laryngoscopy allows assessment of laryngeal func-
and effcacy of doxopram administration in cats with laryngeal paraly-
tion as well as observation for laryngeal masses (Fig. 52-5) or other
sis has not been documented, to the author's knowledge.
E9
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
 In the author's experience of direct laryngoscopy in cats with laryn-
discharged alive and there was no reported aspiration pneumonia. The
geal paralysis, changes observed grossly in affected cats are similar to
[iaeun sumoy saop u eomnaud uonse jo anuapiu
those observed in dogs with laryngeal paralysis, although much more
arytenoid lateralization is 8-18%. The authors concluded that the
subtle. Edema of the laryngeal mucosa is generally apparent, but
prognosis for resolution of respiratory compromise in cats with
erythema and hyperemia commonly seen in affected dogs is not a
laryngeal paralysis treated with unilateral arytenoid lateralization
-ien piouae aul jo uauaeldsp uepan sie u aimeay uauuoid
poos sieadde
tilages and vocal folds with resultant narrowing of the rima glottis
[eate s'sie 91 u sileied ieasuiel o Aps adsoa1 e ul 
wusedsouie ioy Aisuadoid aul yanouie 'sies u paneiaidde aq au
laryngeal paralysis was reported in 12 cats. In the cats with unilateral
and complete obliteration of the rima glottis in this species tends to
laryngeal paralysis, the left side was affected Three of the four unilat-
erally affected cats were managed medically, while seven of 12 bilater-
to avoid depressing the epiglottis with the laryngoscope blade in cats
ally affected cats were managed surgically. Long-term outcome was
during direct laryngoscopy, as this induces laryngospasm in most cats.
considered successful in four of seven surgically managed cats. A
-uael au suuosod yim lauaoi anuot aul uo uoean leiuei
variety of surgical techniques were used in these cats including unilat-
goscope blade directly ventral to the epiglottis allows good visualiza-
eral or bilateral arytenoid lateralization, ventriculocordectomy, and
tion of laryngeal function in most cats. Paradoxical movement of the 
partial arytenoidectomy. A retrospective study of ten cats, with aryte-
arytenoids and vocal folds as observed in dogs has not been observed
 by the author in cats with laryngeal paralysis.
et al.20 Nine of these ten cats had bilateral laryngeal paralysis. Con-
failure, hypertension, thyroid adenocarcinoma, and mycoplasma
SURGICAL DISEASES
 pneumonia. Of these ten cats, seven had unilateral arytenoid laterali-
zation, one had bilateral arytenoid lateralization, and two had staged
bilateral procedures. All three cats with bilateral procedures developed
Laryngeal paralysis
aspiration pneumonia and died.
No breed or sex predilection has been reported yet for feline laryngeal
 Although case numbers are small in these studies, the development
paralysis. A congenital form of laryngeal paralysis has been hypoth-
of aspiration pneumonia in all three cats with bilateral arytenoid
esized with the observance of laryngeal paralysis in kittens and cats
lateralization but in none of the seven cats with unilateral arytenoid
sieadde aseasp aut jo uoy su laamoy ase io sieak omi ueui ssa
lateralization in Hardie's study and in none of 14 cats with unilateral
to be exceedingly rare.7 In contrast to dogs, where laryngeal paralysis
arytenoid lateralization in Thunberg and Lantz's study suggests that
is most often considered tobe idiopathic or part of a poorly character-
unilateral arytenoid lateralization should be considered the current
ized general neuropathy, laryngeal paralysis in cats is often non-
 preferred technique.
idiopathic in origin. Feline laryngeal paralysis has been diagnosed in
Laryngeal masses
sarcoma, in extranodal lymphosarcoma, as an iatrogenic complication
of thyroidectomy and other surgical procedures of the neck, as a
'ies ul paoan uaaq aaey sasseu leauie iueuaieu pue uiuag
symptom of lead toxicosis, and as part of a progressive generalized
although laryngeal neoplasia is considered rare in both dogs and cats.
neuromuscular disorder.17.18 Unilateral laryngeal paralysis has also
In a 10-year survey of laryngeal neoplasia, 13 dogs and ll cats were
been observed in a cat with clinical signs of peripheral vestibular
reported.2 In contrast to canine laryngeal neoplasia, where no single
disease ataxia, and dyspnea diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the
-ad s xue a jo es 'pnuad a ro
tympanic bulla and Wallerian degeneration of the right recurrent
dominant in cats in this survey.2l However, six of nine cats with laryn-
laryngeal nerve. So-called idiopathic laryngeal paralysis also occurs
 geal neoplasia in a retrospective study of tracheostomy were diagnosed
in cats. However, the frequency of non-idiopathic etiology of feline
with squamous cell carcinoma while only one cat was diagnosed with
laryngeal paralysis warrants careful and thorough clinical and diag-
a ui p  oe s  ze's
nostic evaluation of all cats with suspected laryngeal paralysis for
larynx of cats.21-26
underlying specifc etiology.
 Inflammatory laryngeal disease (Fig. 52-6) resulting in acute upper
 Ninety-nine cats with a diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis were identi-
airway obstruction has been reported in eight cats in two separate
fied in a search of the Veterinary Medicine Data Base from January
u paoda ose sem asasp ieue aouu azza'suoeand
six of 27 cats with laryngeal, laryngotracheal, and tracheal masses,25
criteria for their evaluation of unilateral arytenoid lateralization
in three of 13 cats with laryngeal masses,22 and in two of seven cats
for the treatment of laryngeal paralysis in cats. Proposed etiology
with miscellaneous conditions of the larynx.2 This relatively high
auo] [enuasuos papnui sieuue asau ui siskieied leazuiel jo
incidence of inflammatory disease of the larynx in cats with laryngeal
cat), traumatic (two cats), idiopathic (seven cats), polyneuropathy/
mass lesions highlights the importance of a cytologic or histologic
polymyopathy (three cats), and iatrogenic (one cat). Concurrent
diagnosis both for treatment and prognosis. Neoplastic and inflam-
disease, most commonly azotemia, was reported in 11/14 cats. Ten of
matory lesions are not distinguishable on gross examination or radio-
14 cats were diagnosed with bilateral laryngeal paralysis, three were
 graphic examination. Feline inflammatory laryngeal disease is most
left unilateral, and one was right unilateral. All 14 cats were treated
commonly  described as granulomatous or 
 pyogranulomatous.
with unilateral arytenoid lateralization. Minor variations in technique
although neutrophilic and lymphoplasmacytic inflammation has
included degree of disarticulation of the larynx; suture placement
[arytenoid to thyroid versus arytenoid to cricoid cartilages); and type.
for cats with a diagnosis of lymphoid hyperplasia of laryngeal, laryn-
size, and number of strands of suture material used. Intraoperative
 gotracheal, and tracheal masses, as five of 27 cats with this diagnosis
 ( s i      s
on initial biopsy were subsequently diagnosed with neoplasia on
fracture of the muscular process in two and laryngeal displacement in
a second biopsy.25 A combination of surgical treatment (either by
one Postoperative complications were reported in seven of 14 cats
excision via ventral laryngotomy or, if accessible, per os) and pro-
(50%) but were treatable and/or considered minor. All 14 cats were
longed medical therapy with corticosteroids is recommended for
889
Larynx
Chapter
52
preferred by the author. Cutting needles should be avoided due to
the risk of accidentally cutting through the small and delicate mus-
cular process of the arytenoid cartilage.1" The author prefers fine oph-
thalmic instruments for feline ‘tie-back: Very fine small curved
mosquito forceps and cotton buds are useful for cricoarytenoid
disarticulation.
 The surgical technique used by the author is illustrated in a cadaver
(Fig. 52-7) and described in Box 52-1.28,2 The appearance of the
larynx before (Fig. 52-8A) and after (Fig. 52-8B) left unilateral aryte-
noid lateralization by this technique in a cat with idiopathic laryngeal
paralysis ilustrates the effect of the 'tie-back' procedure on the rima
glottidis area. To the author's knowledge, change in the rima glottidis
area in experimental cats or cats with naturally occurring laryngeal
 paralysis treated by unilateral arytenoid lateralization has not been
ym ssop ul paiodai sem yosz Aeau jo aseaiu ueau v paodai
naturally occurring laryngeal paralysis treated by unilateral arytenoid
Figure 52-6 Per os endoscopic view of feline laryngeal inflammatory
lateralization."?
disease diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology and confirmed by
histopathology at necropsy.
Ventral laryngotomy
Ventral laryngotomy may be used for removal of laryngeal masses in
cats,24.27 and it has been reported for surgical excision of a laryngeal
cyst.0 Ventral laryngotomy is also used for treatment of laryngeal
diagnoses.27
stenosis due to laryngeal webbing in the dog, but to the author's
knowledge this indication has not yet been reported in the cat. Tem-
sue jo unse io peu si ausn Aid
 PREOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS
eratively is recommended.
Cats with respiratory compromise are predisposed to acute functional
 The surgical technique of ventral laryngotomy is described in Box
 52-2.30 The author prefers 4/0 prolene on a taper-cut cardiovascular
 should be aimed at minimizing stress, with anesthetic premedication
needle for simple continuous closure of the laryngotomy incision in
the thyroid cartilage.
and induction in a quiet environment. Preoxygenation is useful, pro-
vided the method of delivering supplemental oxygen is not stressful
to the cat. Few cats tolerate a face mask for oxygen supplementation,
Laryngectomy
but most will tolerate a 'flow-by' technique. A tracheostomy kit and
surgeon should be readily available during the perianesthetic period.
Complete laryngectomy and permanent tracheostomy has only been
described in one cat for treatment of laryngeal adenocarcinoma.23
Unfortunately, this cat survived only three days after surgery. To the
author's knowledge, long-term survival following complete feline
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
laryngectomy has not been reported.
Arytenoid lateralization
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Unilateral arytenoid lateralization is considered the surgical technique
of choice for palliation of laryngeal paralysis in cats. The surgical
anp sop ueul se ui suualeu aiow paapisuon sl anbiuran
Continuous monitoring, particularly in the early postoperative period.
to the small size of the cat and the fragility of their laryngeal carti-
sdeuiad pue sapads Aue ul Aragins leausiel surmoos lenuassa s!
le au u Aueuis pauad s anbupan aui Klliaua ozt'sase
aq Aeu pue usedsoguiel on auoid aie Aaun se sies ul Aueinoed
and dog. with as many minor individual variations of technique as
more predisposed to laryngeal edema and laryngeal obstruction due
there are surgeons performing it There is only one specifc descrip-
to their small size.
tion of the surgical technique in cats2 where it is performed in a
 Postoperative care following feline arytenoid lateralization should
similar manner to the dog. However, unlike some of the variations
start with a smooth anesthetic recovery. Maintaining the endotracheal
in techniques well described in the dog, the cricothyroid articulation
tube for control of the upper airway for as long as possible is para-
was not disarticulated nor was the transverse arytenoid ligament
mount. Multimodal analgesic management, including administration
lao pns aaadsoan sin ui sie uan aul jo Aue ul paiasu
 of IV non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs when no contraindica-
surgeons also recommend leaving the cricothyroid articulation intact
tions (renal disease, hypotension) exist and microdose medetomidine
in cats to maintain stability of the cartilage 'chassis' and further
(1 μg/kg IV) prior to anesthetic recovery is used by the author for
comment that bilateral cricothyroid disruption leads to dorsoventral
-pe u 'shnsai poog ym sainpasoid ieiins aoteidsau iaddn aui
collapse of the rima glottides.7 The author performs arytenoid later-
tion to narcotic analgesia. Continuing oxygen supplementation by
alization in cats using a method identical with the technique she
face mask or flow-by technique following extubation also seems to be
uses in dogs, including cricothyroid disarticulation, transection of the
facilitated by the medetomidine administration. Frequent observation
interarytenoid sesamoid band, and the use of two prosthetic sutures,
for signs of laryngeal edema or progressive respiratory distress is rec-
ommended. Temporary tracheostomy (see Chapter 46) may be
material (4/0 polypropylene) on a taper-cut cardiovascular needle is
required postoperatively in cats with progressive laryngeal edema or
689
Section
7
The Head and Neck
B
C
D
G
4-0
Polypropylene
90cm
640
Larynx
Chapter
52
Box 52-1 Arytenoid lateralization
In cases of bilateral laryngeal paralysis either right or left arytenoid
the thyroid cartilage (Fg. 52-7F). The muscular process of the 
lateralization can be performed, based most commonly on the 
 arytenoid cartilage is identified. This is palpable as a small
preference of the surgeon and their dominant hand. Right-handed 
protuberance. The cranial laryngeal nerve is identified and avoided.
surgeons generally find the left lateralization easier to perform, while
The cricoarytenoideus dorsalis (CAD) muscle is identified, a fan-
left-handed surgeons tend to prefer the right. In cases of hemiparesis,
shaped muscle with the wide part dorsally and inserting on the
the procedure should be performed on the affected side of the larynx.
muscular process. The arytenoideus lateralis (AL) muscle is identified.
 The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency with a small roll under 
The CAD muscle is isolated caudally and the AL muscle cranially. A
the neck at the level of the wings of the atlas. The forelimbs are pulled
curved mosquito forceps is passed medial to these muscles (Fig.
 caudally and secured to the operating table. Care should be taken to 
 52-7G). The muscles are transected, leaving a portion attached to the
 avoid twisting the neck. A tape across the skull will help maintain
muscular proces. This portion of muscle can be grasped with a
straight positioning of the larynx. The surgical field is clipped and 
mosquito forceps or fine rat-tooth forceps during cricoarytenoid 
prepped before moving to the operating theatre to include the wing
disarticulation and placement of sutures. Direct handling of the 
of the atlas dorsally, the ventral midline ventrally, the caudal edge of 
cartilage of the muscular process is to be avoided.
the mandibular body cranially. and 2-3 cm cranial to the point of the 
 The cricoarytenoid joint is disarticulated by gradual stretching with
Didase aoy Alauinon padeap s! plely lenibans aul Allpnen lapinous
a fine curved mosquito forceps (Fig. 52-7H). Cotton buds are also
surgery and the ventral margin of the wing of the atlas is included in
useful in this maneuver to help break fibrous attachments. Some 
 the field for orientation.
surgeons prefer sharp transection with fine Metzenbaum or iris 
 The wing of the atlas and the dorsal border of the thyroid cartilage
scissors. The dissection is continued until the most medial edge of 
of the larynx (Fg. 52-7A) are identified by palpation. A skin incision is 
the articular face of the muscular process can be moved to the most
made approximately 4 cm in length centered over the thyroid cartilage
lateral edge of the articular surface of the cricoid cartilage. In the 
(Hg. 52-7B)
6 kg cat shown in Figure 52-7H, the articular face of the muscular
bujuienuiew pue uoipassip junjg pue dheus jo uojeuigwon e buisn
process is an oval measuring 2.5 mm × 3 mm.
 careful hemostasis with electrocoagulation, the platysma muscle and 
The interarytenoid sesamoid band can be transected blindly
subcutaneous tissue are dissected. In general this dissection will be 
 at this point. Many surgeons consider this step unnecessary. If
ventral to the jugular vein. The jugular vein can be reflected either
undertaken, this is a common point of inadvertent penetration 
ventrally or dorsally as needed. The confluence of linguofacial and 
 of the oropharynx.
maxillary veins to the jugular vein is usually visible in the cranial part 
The prosthetic suture(s) are pre-placed (Fg. 52-7K). The author
of the surgical field.
prefers two prosthetic sutures of 3/0 or 4/0 prolene double-armed on
 Dissection is continued to separate the sternocephalicus and 
a fine taper-cut needle (Fig. 52-7O). There are individual surgeon 
sternohyoideus muscles, reflecting the former dorsally and the latter
variations in suture placement. The author's personal preference is
ventrally. Alternatively, if the separation of these muscles is indistinct,
described.
the dissection is continued deeper by separation of muscle in the 
The cricoarytenoid suture is preplaced first (Fig. 52-7L). The needle
direction of its fibers. In the cranial part of the surgical field, the 
is passed from caudal to cranial and lateral to medial through the 
mandibular salivary gland is sometimes visible (Fig. 52-7C)
cricoid cartilage at the site of cricothyroid articulation. Taking care to
The thyropharyngeus muscle is identified and incised at the 
 avoid intralaryngeal nerve branches that may be crossing the field.
midpoint of the dorsal edge of the thyroid cartilage (Fig. 52-7D). The
the needle is passed from the articular surface of the muscular
incision is continued cranially and caudally using fine Metzenbaum 
process to the lateral surface and back again (mattress suture) (Figs
scissors to expose the full length of the thyroid cartilage and intrinsic
pue aunins s!ut jo spua aay aui uo paneid s! oinbsow v (r'lz-z5
laryngeal muscles (Fig. 52-7E). In the dog. there is a membrane deep
reflected caudally or dorsally during placement of the second suture.
aut asodxa ot paspu! aq isnu jeut apsnu snabuAueydoukui au1 o1
woy passed si alpaau aul paneid-aid si aunins piouaeoiaun aul
intrinsic laryngeal muscles. This structure is not apparent in the cat.
the lateral surface of the thyroid cartilage, then from the articular
Deep dissection cranial to the larynx must be avoided as perforation of 
 surface of the muscular process to its lateral surface and back again,
 the oropharyngeal mucosa may occur.
and finally from the medial surface of the thyroid cartilage to exit 
 The cricothyroid joint is disarticulated by transection with
Metzenbaum scissors. The thyroid cartilage is reflected laterally with
spaced in the muscular process as far from one another as possible.
baby Gelpi or Weitlaner self-retaining retractors or with a stay suture in
but well within the cartilage of the muscular process to avoid 
Figure 52-7 Arytenoid lateralization surgical technique in a feline cadaver. (A)} The cat is positioned in right lateral recumbency with a small roll under
the neck. Palpable landmarks for the skin incision are the larynx and the wing on the atlas. The jugular vein is not visible in this cadaver, but is usually
readily visible in the live patient by raising the vein with digital pressure at the thoracic inlet. (B} Skin incision. (c) The mandibular salivary gland
is visible cranially in the surgical field. (D) Blunt dissection to the level of the thyropharyngeus muscle covering the lateral surface of the larynx.
 The mosquito forceps are medial to the dorsal edge of the thyroid cartilage and displacing it laterally to illustrate the point for division of the 
thyropharyngeus muscle. (E}) Exposure of the left wing of the thyroid cartilage after longitudinal division of the thyropharyngeus muscle. (F) Lateral
displacement of thyroid cartilage with baby Gelpi self-retaining retractor after cricothyroid disarticulation. (G) Isolation of arytenoideus transverses and 
cricoarytenoideus muscles with curved mosquito forceps passed beneath the muscles at the level of transection. (H) Using mosquito forceps on the 
remaining cricoarytenoideus dorsalis muscle attached to the muscular process for manipulation rather than handling the muscular process directly, the
cricoarytenoid joint is disarticulated until the medial border of the articular face of the arytenoid cartilage can be lateralized to the lateral edge of the
l au yed s u  e pio a yn pssed uaag ae seu ans () aad li aee pi au o aet ee
pass of a horizontal mattress suture through the articular face of the arytenoid cartilage is in progress. (J} Second pass of cricoarytenoid suture in
horizontal mattress pattern through the articular surface of the arytenoid cartilage. (K} Pre-placed cricoarytenoid and thyroarytenoid sutures. (L) The
cricoarytenoid suture is tied first, displacing the muscular process caudally. (M) The thyroarytenoid suture is tied. (N) Simple continuous appositional 
closure of the thyropharyngeus muscle. (O) The author's preferred suture material (prolene) and needle (V-5 17 mm 1/2 circular double-armed
taper-cut) for feline arytenoid lateralization.
641
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 52-1 Continued
breakage of the muscular process or cut-through by the mattress 
ag Aeu pin abeael aut paneauad Auaiaapeu uaag sey esonu
sutures.
ayi umop mo Aeu pue pa lenibans ayt woy buleaddesp uaas 
The retractors or stay suture are removed, if still present, reflecting
trachea if the endotracheal tube cuff is not inflated.
the thyroid cartilage laterally. The cricoarytenoid suture is tightened 
The cut edges of the thyropharyngeus muscle are reapposed 
and tied first, observing caudal displacement of the muscular process.
with 4/0 monofilament absorbable suture material in a simple 
Ul (z-zs by) pal pue pauaubi uaul s! aunins plouaeoikui aul
continuous pattern (Fg. 52-7N). The wound closure is continued
a  ssod ensn au jo eisp eael siee a
routinely in layers.
observed at this time, but may be obscured by the thyroid cartilage.
 At the completion of surgery. the cat is repositioned and the 
uolpns Ag panowal s! pinly abeael aul pue pabeAel s! punom aul 
 sipojh ewu aut jo uoenjeaa loy paowan agnt leaupe opua
 or with swabs. The endotracheal tube cuff should remain inflated 
per os to confirm successful 'tie-back' (Hg. 52-8B) and to check for
 prior to lavage as it can be inadvertently punctured with the needle
penetration of the oropharyngeal mucosa. The cat can be reintubated 
in placement of the cricoarytenoid suture. If the oropharyngeal
following inspection of the larynx if necessary.
Figure 52-8 (A) Per 0s endoscopic view of the larynx
of a cat with bilateral laryngeal paralysis. Note the
erythema and edema of the laryngeal mucosa and 
narrow rima glottidis. (B) Per os endoscopic view of
the same cat pictured in A following left unilateral
 arytenoid lateralization. Note the relative increase in
 size and altered shape of the rima glottidis after 
sur gery.
Box 52-2 Ventral laryngotomy30
 In most cases, the cat can be orotracheally intubated at induction
presence of the temporary tracheostomy tube in the primary wound 
 of anesthesia, but temporary tracheostomy may be required 
in cases where it must remain in situ postoperatively.
[eabuiel aul oi ansodxa pue ssanne juapns uieh oi Alaalie ladoeu!
The subcutaneous tissue is dissected and the hyoid venous arch is
lumen. The surgeon and anesthetist must be prepared to change
identified, marking the cranial extent of the laryngotomy. The hyoid 
from orotracheal to tracheostomy intubation, thus a sterile cuffed 
 snaplokuouiais paied aul uoebil ainban pou pinous ype snouan
endotracheal tube or tracheostomy tube and sterile anesthetic circuit 
muscles are separated to expose the ventral larynx. The laryngeal 
tubing must be available.
impar vein on the ventral surface of the larynx requires ligation or 
 The surgical site is clipped and prepared to include the caudal
electrocoagulation if it is present.
 third of the mandibular bodies cranially, the shoulders caudally.
The ventral cricothyroid ligament and the cricoid cartilage are
jo uoeuiueuon liey pioae oi Allelael uibew juapns e pue
identified. In most cases, the cricoid cartilage can be left intact, but 
the field.
the cricothyroid ligament needs to be divided on the midline. The 
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency with a small roll under
ventral midline of the larynx is incised using a no. 11 or 15 scalpel
 the neck at the level of the larynx. The head is secured to the surgery
blade, beginning at the caudal aspect of the thyroid cartilage. The
table by tape across the rostral mandible. The front limbs are 
laryngotomy incision is extended cranially with the scalpel blade or iris
 positioned along the trunk and secured to the table. A vacuum
scissors until adequate exposure of the laryngeal lumen is obtained.
 positioning aid, trough, or sandbags can be used to maintain straight 
s! uonpuon eiu aul ioy areadoudde se uoiassp jeabueleul
 position on the operating table. Twisting of the neck or lateral
continued.
 deviation of the head or thorax is avoided to maintain normal 
The laryngeal lumen is lavaged prior to closure, ensuring presence
orientation of the larynx and trachea. The surgical field is draped
 of an inflated tracheal tube cuff prior to lavage. Lavage fluid is
routinely for aseptic surgery.
removed by suction.
 The skin on the ventral midline is incised beginning 1 cm cranial to
 The ventral laryngotomy is closed with 4/0 monofilament 
the palpable prominence of the thyroid cartilage and extending 1 cm
absorbable or non-absorbable suture material (personal preference of
the author is 4/0 PDs-ll or 4/0 prolene) on a fine needle in a simple 
intubation can be performed at this point if required, either by
 S! punom aul jo apuiewan aul uaned jeuoisodde snonuuo
extension of the primary skin incision to the level of tracheal ring 4-5 
closed routinely in layers. Tracheostomy incisions are not routinely 
 or by a separate skin incision on the ventral midline between tracheal
 closed. If a tracheostomy tube was used, it is usually left in situ after
rings 3 and 5. A separate skin incision for tracheostomy avoids the 
painban se awil jo polad aigeea e lot Aabins
642
Larynx
Chapter
52
respiratory distres. The cat should be maintained after surgery in an
area where it can be monitored closely with personnel and equipment
while 15% developed aspiration pneumonia and died as a result.20 In
for emergency tracheostomy nearby. Following arytenoid lateraliza-
a retrospective study of tracheostomy in 23 cats including 13 with
tion, the cat should be maintained on nil per os overnight to prevent
laryngeal masses, 40% of the cats studied had potentially life-
aspiration of food or liquid in an animal not fully recovered from the
threatening complications defined as total occlusion of the airway
effects of anesthesia. Maintenance IV fluid therapy is recommended
requiring immediate intervention or dislodgement of the tracheos-
until re-establishment of per os fluid intake The author does not
tomy tube.22 In this study, cats with laryngeal masses were more likely
recommend change in the normal diet or feeding management of cats
to have occlusion of their tracheostomy tubes than cats without a
following arytenoid lateralization. Continued antibiotic administra-
laryngeal mass. All cats were considered at high risk of complications,
tion should not be required postoperatively unless inadvertent pen-
'pansso Aiaaeiadoenu esonu jeaauiel au jo uena
sive airway secretions secondary to the laryngeal mass were postulated
Postoperative management in an intensive care unit is recom-
to contribute to this high complication rate.
 mended following ventral laryngotomy or laryngectomy in cats, with
Other complications of arytenoid lateralization include fragmenta-
particular care required for the temporary or permanent tracheostomy
tion or avulsion of the muscular process either intraoperatively or
present after surgery in these cases.
postoperatively. Penetration of the oropharyngeal mucosa intraopera-
tively is usually inconsequential, although antimicrobial therapy is
then warranted postoperatively. Wound complications such as edema,
seroma or infection are rare.
COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS
The prognosis for cats with laryngeal lymphoma treated with
multi-agent chemotherapy is favorable, with seven of eight cats in
The most frequent complications following laryngeal surgery are
one study achieving complete remission with a median survival
airway obstruction and aspiration pneumonia. The incidence of com-
of 173 days.31
plications in cats following laryngeal surgery appears to be higher than
 The prognosis in obstructive inflammatory laryngeal disease in cats
siseied ieuei ym se ti ul sop ui sapanid as aun iy
reported to date is variable and the preferred method of treatment has
treated by unilateral arytenoid lateralization, the postoperative com-
 not yet been determined. Long-term survival was reported in one cat
plication rate was 50%.1 Complications included pulmonary edema
managed by mass excision plus corticosteroid therapy.27 Two of five
secondary to fluid overload, single episodes of dyspnea, mild dys-
phagia, coughing and gagging when eating. and loss of voice. In a
although specifc details of treatment of these surviving cats are dif-
review of 26 cats treated surgically by various techniques for laryngeal
ficult to extract from the report.28
REFERENCES
1. Reighard J, Jennings HS. Anatomy of the
mobility of vocal fold and improves voice
15. Miller CJ, McKiernan BC, Pace J.
 cat. 3rd ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
 sounds in cats with unilateral laryngeal
Fettman Ml. The effects of doxapram
Winston; 1934. p. 246-51.
paralysis. Neurosci Res 2004;50:153-9.
hydrochloride (Dopram-V) on laryngeal
2. Sebastiani AM, Fishbeck DW. Mammalian
 Lascelles BDX, White RN. Tumours of the 
function in healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med
anatomy: the cat. Englewood: Morton
respiratory system and thoracic cavity.
2002:16:524-8.
Publishing Company;: 1998. p. 108-9.
BSAVA manual of canine and feline
16.
. McKiernan BC. Possible laryngeal
3. Hast MH. The larynx of roaring and
oncology. 3rd ed. Quedgeley: British
paralysis in a cat. Vet Med 2004;99:
non-roaring cats. J Anat 1989;163:117-21.
Small Animal Veterinary Association;
12-14.
4. Hardie EM, Kolata RJ, Stone EA, et al.
2011. p. 270-3.
17. Schachter S, Norris CR. Laryngeal
Laryngeal paralysis in three cats. J Am Vet
10.
 Rudorf H, Lane JG, Brown Pl, Mackay A.
paralysis in cats: 16 cases [1990-1999).
Med Assoc 1981;179:879-82.
Ulltrasonographic diagnosis of a laryngeal
jAm Vet Med Assoc 2000;216:
5.
.Weissengruber GE, Forstenpointner G.
cyst in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 1999;40:
1100-3.
Peters G, et al. Hyoid apparatus and
275-7.
18.
 LeCouteur RA. Feline neuromuscular
pharynx in the lion (Panthera leo), jaguar
11.
 Stadler K, Hartman S. Matheson J.
disorders. Proceedings of the North
[Panthera onca], tiger [Panthera tigris),
O'Brien R. Computed tomographic
American veterinary conference, Volume
cheetah [Acinonyx jubatus] and domestic
imaging of dogs with primary laryngeal
20, Orlando, FL; 2006. p. 709-12.
cat [Felis silvestris f. catus). J Anat
or tracheal airway obstruction. Vet Radiol
19.
Thunberg B, Lantz GC. Evaluation of
2002;201:195-209.
Ultrasound 2011;52:377-84.
unilateral arytenoid lateralization for the
6. Busch Ds, Noxon JO, Miller LD.
12.
 Dyson DH. Effcacy of lidocaine
 treatment of laryngeal paralysis in 14 cats.
Laryngeal paralysis and peripheral
hydrochloride for laryngeal
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2010;46:418-24.
vestibular disease in a cat. J Am Anim
desensitization: a clinical comparison of
20.
.Hardie RJ, Gunby I, Bjorling DE.
Hosp Assoc 1992;28:82-6.
techniques in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Arytenoid lateralization for treatment of
7.
White RAS, Monnet E. The larynx. In:
1988;192:1286-8.
laryngeal paralysis in 10 cats. Vet Surg
Brockman Dl, Holt DE, editors. BSAVA
13. Nelissen P, Corletto F, Aprea F, et al. Effect
2009;38:445-51.
manual of canine and feline head, neck,
of three anesthetic induction protocols on
21.
 Saik JE, Toll SL, Diters RW, et al. Canine
and thoracic surgery. Quedgeley: British
laryngeal motion during laryngoscopy in
and feline laryngeal neoplasia: a 10-year
Small Animal Veterinary Association:
 normal cats. Vet Surg 2012;41:876-83.
survey. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1986;22:
2005. p. 94-104.
14. Robinson EP, Johnston GR. Radiographic
359-65.
.Katada A, Nonaka S, Adachi M, et al.
 assessment of laryngeal reflexes in
22.
 Guenther-Yenke CL, Rozanski EA.
 Functional electrical stimulation of
ketamine-anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res
Tracheostomy in cats: 23 cases [1998-
laryngeal adductor muscle restores 
1986;47:1569-72.
2006). I Feline Med Surg 2007;9:451-7.
643
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
23. Vasseur PB, Patnaik AK. Laryngeal
dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
lateralization on rima glottides area in
adenocarcinoma in a cat. J Am Anim 
1982;18:557 -62.
dogs. Vet Surg 2003;32:62-8.
Hosp Assoc 1981;17:639-41.
27. Tasker S, Foster Dl, Corcoran BM, et al.
30. Smith MM, Waldron DR. Atlas of
24. Wheeldon EB, Amis TC. Laryngeal
Obstructive inflammatory laryngeal 
Approaches for General Surgery of
carcinoma in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc
disease in three cats. J Feline Med Surg
the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia: W B
1985:186:80-1.
1999;1:53-9.
Saunders Company: 1993. p. 36-9.
25. Jakubiak Ml, Siedlecki CT, Zenger E, et al.
28. Costello MF, Keith D, Hendrick M, et al.
44-7.
Laryngeal, laryngotracheal, and tracheal 
Acute upper airway obstruction due to
31.
Taylor Ss, Goodfellow MR, Browne Wl.
masses in cats: 27 cases [1998-2003].
inflammatory laryngeal disease in 5 cats.
et al. Feline extranodal lymphoma:
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2005;41:310-16.
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2001;11:205-10.
response to chemotherapy and survival 
 26. Harvey CE, O'Brien JA. Surgical treatment
29.
 Demetriou JD, Kirby BM. The effect of
in 110 cats. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:
of miscellaneous laryngeal conditions in 
two modifcations of unilateral arytenoids
584-92.
644
53
apter
Thyroid and parathyroid
T. Sissener
Diseases of the thyroid and parathyroid glands are the most common
gland is normally located slightly cranial to the left gland. Closely
indication for surgery in the neck of feline patients. Although they
associated with the thyroid glands are the much smaller and pale tan-
share a common anatomical location, the thyroid and parathyroid
colored parathyroid glands. Each side contains two parathyroid
glands are functionally very different The thyroid gland produces
glands, one located at the cranial pole and outside the thyroid paren-
thyroxine an important regulator of metabolic homeostasis. The para-
chyma (extermal parathyroid gland) and a second caudal parathyroid
thyroid glands are responsible for calcium homeostasis.' Diseases of
ue Aaains pue sasueup soqeiau punoyoid asnes ues spuel asa
gland). For this reason, the caudal internal parathyroid glands are
be very rewarding in correctly selected patients. This chapter provides
more difficult to visualize during surgery.
a comprehensive overview of thyroid and parathyroid surgical disease
 The thyroid glands are encapsulated and ductless. The major blood
in cats with a particular focus on surgical management of feline
supply to the thyroid glands is the cranial thyroid artery arising from
hyperthyroidism.
the common carotid artery on each side The artery enters the cranial
some cases after traversing a short distance through the cranial pole
 of the thyroid gland. A caudal thyroid artery arising from the brachy-
SURGICAL ANATOMY
cephalic trunk is present in some but not all cats.? Venous drainage
is through the cranial and caudal thyroid veins into the internal
The thyroid glands are a paired set of adenomatous glands located in
jugular vein.
the neck at about the level of the fourth through eighth tracheal rings.
The thyroid glands measure about 16 mm long. 4 mm wide, and
lateral but adjacent to the trachea itself (Fig. 53-1). The right thyroid 
 a  a r e a u   
glands are typically about 1-2 mm in diameter with the cranial exter-
Left cranial thyroid a.
nal parathyroid glands appearing well demarcated from adjacent
thyroid tissue There may be an isthmus of thyroid tissue connecting
Left parathyroid gland
the right and left thyroid glands in some feline patients,4 although
this is more common in humans. Cats may also have ectopic thyroid
Right parathyroid gland
tissue that can be located anywhere along the midline cervical area,
thoracic inlet, or in some cases the thorax.5 There has also been a
Left thyroid gland
aey sapms ,'anuon aul ui anss pioiu oioia rns yo uodan
Right thyroid gland
shown that 10-20% of hyperthyroid cats undergoing nuclear scintig-
Auap! ot and sganss pioy nsediady sdopa aaey Audei
Left carotid a.
hyperplastic ectopic thyroid tissue preoperatively can be a cause of
 persistent hyperthyroidism after surgery. There may also be ectopic
Recurrent laryngeal n.
 parathyroid tissue in up to 50% of cats that can be located in the
Right carotid a.-
 peritracheal fascia, mediastinum, or pericardium.27,9
Esophagus
 The left thyroid gland sits ventral to the esophagus and lateral to
Right vagosympathetic
the trachea. This position partially separates the left thyroid from
tunk
Trachea
direct contact with the left common carotid artery. Medial and slightly
dorsal to the left thyroid gland is the caudal laryngeal nerve which
must be protected during dissection. On the right side, the recurrent
laryngeal nerve is slightly dorsal to the right thyroid gland. The right
 Figure 53-1 Anatomy of the feline thyroid and parathyroid glands
common carotid artery and the right vagosympathetic trunk are
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00053-6
645
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
located laterally. Care must be taken to preserve these structures
lobe is palpated on two runs, the cat's head is released and reposi-
during surgery. Bipolar electrocautery hemostasis is strongly recom-
tioned for a third try. If this is also negative, a fnal try using more
mended to ensure bleeding does not obscure the surgeon's view of
fnger contact (typically the flat part of the midle fnger) is used.
these structures.
Comparison between this newer technique and the classic palpation
technique has found good within- and between-examiner agreements
for both, although due to familiarity the classic technique may be
preferred."l Wetting the neck fur with water or clipping the area can
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
also be helpful with either technique Palpation of a nodule in this
area is highly suggestive of a thyroid or parathyroid nodule although
Diagnosis of thyroid and parathyroid disease is generally made with
there has also been a report of bilateral dermoid cysts presenting as
a combination of palpation, consistent clinical signs, blood tests, and
enlarged thyroid glands in a cat. 12
patients, although less frequently when radioactive iodine treatment
is being planned. This is because the presence of ectopic thyroid tissue
Signalment and clinical signs
is less of a concern with this treatment modality. Since many of these
Thyroid and parathyroid disease of cats tends to affect middle-aged
se uons aseasip iuansuos juesyiuais aaey Aeu pue iapio aie shuand
and older patients. The reported age range is four to 22 years, but 95%
[nyssans pioae ot jueuodui si l! Xuedouopies io aimjey [eual
of cats with hyperthyroidism are older than 10 years.' Juvenile hyper-
examination and blood collection. This may cause the cat to decom-
thyroidism has also been reported in an eight-month-old cat.'3 Clini-
 pensate and experience a deterioration in clinical signs.
 cal signs of hyperthyroidism are often slowly progressive and include
 Physical examination is often rewarding. Palpation of the ventral
weight loss, polyphagia, vomiting. polyuria, polydipsia, increased
cervical area of the neck is performed by running two fingers gently
activity, restlessness, diarrhea, panting, and wea kness. Cats may appear
down either side of the trachea from the larynx to the manubrium
in thin body condition with an unkempt coat. Tachycardia, a gallop
while the neck is extended with the head in slight dorsal extension
rhythm, or heart murmur may be appreciated on auscultation. Some
(Fig. 53-2). The examiner may feel a thyroid 'slip' or small mass that
se any meay ansauon jo suis iiu ym jasaid Aeu sie
ds pioiaul e 'sases auuos ul apis iauia uo siasuy aul iapun sassed
hyperthyroidism can induce a secondary cardiomyopathy (hyper-
aq Aeu (sjanpou pioiu au io Aleiaeun aqedied aq kuo A
trophic or dilative).' Respiratory distress, weakness, and cardiac
close to the thoracic inlet and not palpable.2 A second palpation
arrhythmias may be present in these patients. Patients with larger
-uas e se paqusap sl siui o'paquosap uaaq osie sey anbiuaoan
cervical masses may have a cough, dysphagia, facial edema, and
quantitative technique using a scale of 0 to 6. Cats with non-palpable
Horner syndrome.
lobes are scored as 0. A score of 1 is assigned to a lobe that is barely
A small subset of cats may present with apathetic hyperthyroidism
palpable and 6 to a lobe approximately 2.5 cm or greater in length.
where the clinical signs are depression, anorexia, and weakness. This 
To palpate the right thyroid lobe the cat's head is held with the clini-
is reported in less than 5% of cases' and is not typical.
cian's left hand, the chin elevated to 45° from the horizontal and the
Parathyroid disease in cats is much less common, but affected
head turned 45 ° to the left from the vertical. The tip ofthe right index
animals may present with clinical signs consistent with hypercal-
fnger is placed in the groove between the trachea and the right ster-
 e i e ed a si s 
nohyoideus muscle just below the larynx and run down the groove to
inappetence, vomiting. and weakness may also be observed. Cardiac
the thoracic inlet. An enlarged lobe is typically felt as a 'pop: If no
changes are much less likely, although renal disease may be present
in patients with chronic hypercalcemia.'
Biochemical and hematologic investigations
Screening tests for patients suspected of thyroid or parathyroid disease
with hematology. biochemistry, and urinalysis is strongly recom-
mended. Blood sampling from the jugular vein is not recommended,
to avoid formation of a hematoma in the area.
a su  si   se 
mild erythrocytosis, high mean corpuscular volume, leukocytosis,
lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. These changes are consistent with a
stress response as a result of increased thyroid hormone levels. Blood
biochemistry result may reveal elevated alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), alkaline phosphatise (ALP), bilirubin, and lactate dehydroge-
nase [LDH). Interestingly, high serum liver enzyme levels do not seem
to be associated with abnormalities in hepatic parenchyma and liver
function, regardless of degree of increase Serum liver enzyme activi-
ties were shown to return to normal after control of hyperthyroidism
usunysp ieuar aaey osie Aeu se t Apns auo ut Adeiaut le yim
that is partially masked by the elevation of the renal glomerular filtra-
tion rate by hyperthyroidism. Azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
hypokalemia may also be seen.1.7
 Confrmation of hyperthyroidism is obtained by performing blood
thyroid function tests (Fig. 53-3). High serum total thyroid hormone
levels confirm hyperthyroidism. Measurement of resting total T4 (TT4)
levels is preferred over T levels. In cases where clinical signs are highly
Figure 53-2 Palpation of cats to detect thyroid glands
suggestive of hyperthyroidism but the TT level is not elevated above
646
Thyroid and parathyroid
Chapter
53
edema. Echocardiogram may reveal thickening (hypertrophic) or dila-
 Serum TT4 level elevated?
tion (dilative) changes to the atria, ventricles, and septum with
decreased myocardial contractility. Hypertrophic thyrotoxic cardiomy-
Yes
业
opathy may be reversible once the cat is euthyroid,but dilative thyro-
toxic cardiomyopathy is not.
 Hyperthyroid 
 Elevated repeat total
au ym si u un osie si u rsis
Yes
TT4 or serum free T4?
roidism, but is commonly clinically silent. The hypertension results
No
from the effects of increased β-adrenergic activity on heart rate,
contractility, vasodilation, and activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system.15 If hypertension does not resolve with treatment
using anti-thyroid drugs, treatment with the calcium blocker
 Radionuclide
T3 suppression test
or TRH stimulation test
amlodipine (0.13-0.3 mg/kg once daily) is recommended before
thyroid scanning
surgery.
Renal insufficiency is a common condition in older cats. It may be
masked by hyperthyroidism because ofthe increased glomerular fltra-
tion and renal perfusion that hyperthyroidism causes. Once the cat is
Consistent with
 treated for hyperthyroidism, these parameters decrease and the azo-
Yes
hyperthyroid?
temia and clinical manifestations of renal disease may worsen or
No
become apparent. Cats with azotemia noted before any treatment of
hyperthyroidism should be placed on a trial therapy of methimazole
Euthyroid
 Or carbimazole to evaluate the extent of renal insufficiency before any
definitive treatment is undertaken.
Figure 53-3 The diagnostic approach to feline hyperthyroidism.
Gastrointestinal disorders are also common in cats with hyperthy-
roidism. Clinical signs including weight loss, anorexia, vomiting, and
increased frequency of defecation are commonly noted. Since intesti-
nal lymphoma and inflammatory bowel disease are also seen in older
normal, repeat total T4 and free T4 (fT4) concentrations should be
cats, care should be taken to palpate the abdomen carefully on physi-
measured one to two weeks after the initial test. Serum fT4 concentra-
cal examination. Any persistent gastrointestinal signs after treatment
tions are more reliable than TT4 in part because non-thyroidal illness
 of hyperthyroidism warrant further investigation. A preoperative treat-
has more of a suppressive effect on serum TTa than fT4. Serum fT4 is
ment period with carbimazole or methimazole can be useful in
d ieou, pue usiiaiunada inoo yim sie aueu u paseau
increasing the weight of the cat and resolving some of the gastroin-
test results. If these tests are equivocal, radionuclide thyroid scanning
 testinal clinical signs before surgery.
is advised. The Ts suppression test and thyroid releasing hormone
stimulation test are also occasionally used in cats where TT4 and fT4
Diagnostic imaging
e panensuouap Apns sanai v st 'leoaima aie siuauainsau us
significantly higher risk of euthyroid geriatric cats becoming hyperthy-
 Imaging can be very useful in the evaluation of patients with thyroid
roid if they had thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) below the refer-
and parathyroid disease The two primary modalities used are ultra-
 ence range. Cats that became hyperthyroid within 14 months also had
 sound and nuclear scintigraphy. Plain thoracic and abdominal radio-
higher ALP levels and higher prevalence of goiter than controls.16
graphs are also helpful in the further evaluation of patients with
An elevated ionized calcium level is the most common biochemical
hypercalcemia or those suspected of having malignant disease, to rule
abnormality noted on cats with primary hyperparathyroidism. Isos-
 Out metastatic disease or mediastinal masses.18
thenuria may be seen on urinalysis. Azotemia may be occasionally
noted. It is essential to rule out other causes of hypercalcemia, espe-
Ultrasound
radiographs along with ultrasound of the abdomen and neck are
Ultrasound imaging of the thyroid and parathyroid glands requires
essential. Parathyroid hormone or parathyroid hormone-related
high frequency transducers in the 7.5- 10 MHz range.1′ Transducers in
 protein serum level tests of the radionuclide can also be utilized.17
this range allow resolution of smaller structures with better anatomi-
cal detail. In particular, this allows visualization of parathyroid adeno-
Concurrent diseases
mas that tend to be unilateral and can therefore help the surgeon plan
the procedure. Ultrasound is also useful in evaluating unilateral versus
Concurrent diseases are often seen in hyperthyroid cats either as
bilateral thyroid disease, as well as the extent of any localized invasion
a result of increases in thyroid hormone or because the cat is older
that may be a result of thyroid or parathyroid adenocarcinoma.20
and more susceptible to other co-morbidities. Since they can have a
Buiziesol u! inyday aq osle Aeu jaju! sieiou aui jo punosen
profound impact on anesthesia and long-term prognosis, it is impor-
ectopic thyroid tissue. Thorough preoperative evaluation of patients
tant to recognize these conditions before definitive treatment is
undertaken.
cardiac disease and ultrasonography of the urinary system to evaluate
Thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy may develop in cats with hyperthy-
the kidneys and bladder. This can be performed with lower frequency
roidism. This may either be hypertrophic or, less commonly, dilative
transducers.
cardiomyopathy. Tachycardia, pulse defcits, pounding heartbeat a
gallop rhythm, cardiac murmur, or muffled cardiac sounds secondary
Nuclear scintigraphy
to pleural effusion may be noted on physical examination. Electrocar-
diographic abnormalities may also be noted, including arrhythmias.
Hyperthyroid cats will have an increased uptake in the abnormal
increased R-wave in lead II, and widened QRS complexes.15 Thoracic
thyroid gland(s). Unilateral disease can be differentiated from bilat-
radiographs may reveal pleural effusion, cardiomegaly, or pulmonary
eral disease and ectopic thyroid tissue can also be identifed. Nuclear
647
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
also treated regardless of the anatomic location. High-dose radioactive
carcinoma and adenoma.° A comprehensive overview of nuclear scin-
-ies pioiAut jo juaunean aul ioy pasn uaaq osle sey Adeiaui auipo!
tigraphy is included in Chapter 8.
nomas.26.27 A comprehensive overview of radioactive iodine therapy
for feline hyperthyroidism is included in Chapter 8. The main limita-
tions of radioactive iodine therapy are the availability of treatment
facilities and costs.
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE
Medical treatment of hyperthyroidism typically consists of oral
THYROID GLANDS
medication with methimazole or carbimazole which block the syn-
thesis of thyroid hormone.28 Carbimazole is converted to methima-
The most common indication for surgery of the feline thyroid glands
zole after administration.2? Side effects of methimazole include
is removal of benign functional neoplastic thyroid tissue Surgery to
gastrointestinal upset, facial excoriation, neutropenia, and hepatic
excise thyroid carcinoma is also performed, although carcinomas
enzyme elevations.? Serious side effects such as agranulocytosis and
Occur in only about 2-3% of patients with hyperthyroidism.721 A
thrombocytopenia have also been reported with methimazole but not
u paodai uaaq osie aaey seuuape is pioiu pue is pioi
carbimazole and therefore carbimazole is preferred when available.
cats.22 These cystic masses should be considered as differential diag-
Restoration of euthyroidism will lead to a drop in glomenular filtration
noses but are still relatively uncommon (Fig. 53-4). Surgical proce-
 dures to remove thyroid masses are usually elective and patients will
thyroid drug until it can be determined whether correction of the
often be higher risk anesthesia patients that benefit from preoperative
hyperthyroid state will exacerbate the azotemia may be prudent.31
stabilization and a thorough preoperative workup.
Medical management is an important part of preparing a cat for
definitive treatment with radioactive iodine or surgical thyroidectomy
and can also be used for long-term treatment. However, one study
Hyperthyroidism
reported a significantly lower survival time for cats treated with methi-
aozaa io auone la ym paiean asoun snsian auone anoz
hormone levels produced by functional adenomatous or hyperplastic
thyroid tissue. It is the most common endocrine disorder of cats.21
ity of the owner to orally dose the cat, although alternate options for
The disease is bilateral in 70-90% of cats, resulting in enlargement
 medication delivery like transdermal patches have been developed.3
of the thyroid glands on both sides.17.23 Treatment options for
cats with hyperthyroidism include theuse of radioactive iodine, surgi-
available [Hill's Prescription Diet y/d, Hill's Pet Nutrition, Topeka,
cal thyroidectomy, and oral medication with methimazole and carbi-
KS). The goal of the diet is to decrease thyroid hormone production
mazole. Selection of the appropriate treatment will depend on a
 by limiting iodine uptake without the use of additional anti-thyroid
variety of factors including age, concurrent diseases, availability of
drugs. The diet also contains taurine and carnitine for cardiac health
and lower phosphorous and sodium levels to support renal
e uouy nyauaq Aeu sie auos 'sies le ui uondo isaq aui aq iou
function.
aaum seaie un uodo juaean poog e si Auoiapiaiau leiins
ment of concurrent underlying diseases such as renal failure and
accessibility to radioactive iodine treatment is limited and the owner
hyperaldosteronism.
wants to pursue treatment with curative intent. Thyroidectomy is also
Where available, radioactive iodine (13'1) is the treatment of choice
Ul io snp pioiau-ue oi aoueialon iood yim sieo ui uondo poog e
for most cases of feline hyperthyroidism. Anesthesia is not required
cats that are diffcult to medicate The surgical technique itself is well
and a single dose of radioactive iodine will result in normal thyroid
established and not particularly demanding, but concurrent diseases
function in 95% of cats.25 As the radioactive iodine is concentrated
in many patients can increase anesthetic and surgical risks.
 Other treatments, including percutaneous ultrasound-guided radio-
tissue normal tissue and the parathyroid glands receive only a small
au uqae  qa ueeay 
radiation dose.2.,25 In addition, ectopic hyperplastic thyroid tissue is
effective transiently but not permanently.34
B
Figure 53-4 (A) An eight-year-old female neutered domestic short-hair cat with massive goiter. (B) Dysphagia was associated with a space occupying 
unilateral non-functional thyroid cyst which on histopathologic analysis was reported to be a cystic thyroid adenoma. (Couresy of Jon Hall.)
648
Thyroid and parathyroid
Chapter
53
Thyroid carcinomas
showed that hyperparathyroidism was present in 84% of cats with
chronic renal failure.41 Despite the high incidence of secondary hyper.
Similar to thyroid adenomas that are physiologically active and
ym sies jo or ueu ssal ui snno eiuanead usiiueied
produce excess thyroxine, thyroid carcinomas can also be functional.
chronic renal failure.42 This type of hyperparathyroidism is not a
In these cases, clinical signs and laboratory blood test results will 
disease of the parathyroid glands itself and therefore surgery is not
often reflect similar physiologic changes. The definitive diagnosis of
indicated.
thyroid carcinoma requires histologic examination. Even with histol-
Ogy, thyroid carcinomas can be difficult to distinguish from adenoma.
Parathyroid neoplasia
Ultimately, the determination is made on the basis of capsular and
vascular invasion as well as evidence of metastatic spread.' Scintigra-
Parathyroid adenomas resulting in hypercalcemia have been reported
phy is unable to differentiate between thyroid adenomas and carcino-
in cats, either solitary or in conjunction with a thyroid adenoma.2243
mas, and in some cases non-functional carcinomas may not take up
 It is important to distinguish between parathyroid adenoma and para-
radioisotope.l8,35 The metastatic rate of feline carcinomas has been
thyroid gland hyperplasia that may affect all four glands. Parathyroid
ose ues seuoupies pioiAy Aieud s'%i se ya se aq ot pauodai
adenomas are typically solitary, unilateral, and often involve the exter-
be found outside of the neck, presumably arising from ectopic thyroid
-ns lm au pied ssaxa aul t ue pioieied ieu
 press the other three parathyroid glands to the point that they can be
cat with grossly normal appearing thyroid glands and normal serum 
diffcult to locate during surgery. Ultrasonongraphically, one para-
thyroxine levels.36
thyroid gland will be prominent Surgical excision of parathyroid
The recommended treatment for feline thyroid carcinomas is surgi-
adenomas is typically curative and the prognosis excellent as long
cal excision followed by radioactive iodine therapy.7 Complete, his-
as postoperative transient hypocalcemia is addressed. Primary or sec-
tologically clean margin excision of the carcinoma can be curative if
 ondary parathyroid gland hyperplasia involves all four glands and
there is no evidence of metastatic spread. If microscopic tissue remains,
surgical exploration or ultrasound will reveal symmetrical enlarge-
recurrence is common and will often be seen within weeks of surgery.
 ment of all four parathyroid glands. Primary parathyroid gland hyper-
adjunct therapy and can result in survival times ranging from ten to
 parathyroid glands in some cases. It is important to rule out causes of
41 months.2 Iatrogenic hypothyroidism can be a complication of the
high-dose radioactive iodine treatment. This may contribute to devel-
parathyroid glands.
opment of azotemia in cats with underlying mild chronic kidney
 Parathyroid adenocarcinomas have also been reported and are simi-
disease because it further reduces the glomenular fltration rate Thy-
 larly rare in the cat.45 These can also be functional and secrete excess
 roxine supplementation in these cases may be required.1.38
 parathyroid hormone The definitive diagnosis is made histologically
and surgical excision is recommended. Due to the paucity of clinical
data, the long-term prognosis is uncertain but may be fair to good if
the carcinoma has remained encapsulated or can be removed with
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE
clean margins.43
PARATHYROID GLANDS
In contrast to canine patients, primary disease or neoplasia of the
PREOPERATIVE STABILIZATION
feline parathyroid gland is rare.3 The most common surgical problem
with the parathyroid glands is iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism as a
result of removal of the parathyroid glands during surgery to remove
As most of the feline patients with hyperthyroidism are geriatric and
hyperplastic thyroid tissue. Primary hyperparathyroidism is some-
maximize the safety of anesthesia is important. Thyroidectomy is
times encountered in feline patients, primarily as a cause of parathy-
 generally an elective procedure. A thorough evaluation of the patient
roid adenoma. This results in clinical signs of hypercalcemia. The
is essential for a successful outcome. Discussion with the owner about
parathyroid glands are composed of chief cells that secrete parathyroid
the potential risks of anesthesia and surgery as well as the possible
hormone, an important regulator of ionized calcium in the body. The 
complications and other treatment options available should be
effect of parathyroid hormone is to conserve calcium within the body
performed.
and elevate serum calcium levels. A negative feedback loop and calci-
tonin produced from the parafollicular cells of the thyroid glands in 
Stabilization and medical management
response to hypercalcemia help maintain normal calcium levels.
Non-parathyroid malignant disease is the most common cause
Preoperative stabilization of the hyperthyroid cat with anti-thyroid
of hypercalcemia in cats.4 It is therefore important to differentiate
dnugs is preferred to minimize anesthetic and surgical complica-
humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy from primary parathyroid
tions. 1.46 The cat should preferably be made euthyroid by administra-
disease. Humoral hypercalcemia is caused by parathyroid hormone-
tion of methimazole or carbimazole for two to three weeks before
related protein (PTHrP) and not parathyroid hormone itself.
sh ien aun suryuo Kiaaeiadoaid juauanseauu dl wmas y Aalins
Lymphosarcoma, lymphocytic leukemia, granulocytic leukemia.
 euthyroid, is preferable, but the blood sample should not be retrieved
erythroleukemia, and squamous cell carcinoma have all been impli-
from the jugular vein to avoid the possibility of a hematoma in the
neck that might impede surgery. Methimazole should be administered
to assess both intact parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-
 preoperatively to the cat the day of surgery.
If preoperative treatment with methimazole or carbimazole is not
be useful in the further investigation of cats with hyperthyroidism and
well tolerated, a β-adrenergic blocking agent such as propanolol or
differentiating parathyroid gland from non-parathyroid gland disease.
 atenolol can be used. Atenolol (6.25-12.5 mg/cat once daily) may be
Chronic renal failure is commonly associated with increased secre-
 preferred due to its once-daily dosing regime and cardioselective prop-
tion of parathyroid hormone and hyperplasia of the parathyroid
 erties. Patients in congestive heart failure are first stabilized with diu-
glands leading to renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.3? One study
retics and digitalis before use of beta-blockers.
649
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Figure 53-5 Positioning and preoperative preparation of a thyroidectomy
patient. (Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
 One study found that approximately 30% of hyperthyroid cats were
hypokalemic preoperatively.? A preoperative electrolyte panel will
log aniy as auaseq e aiaond pue eialeoday Aue ea
ionized calcium. It is recommended that hypokalemic patients have
intravenous supplementation with fluids containing added potassium
 chloride until normokalemia is achieved before surgery.
Figure 53-6 Iris scissors and Adson thumb forceps are useful instruments
for performing thyroidectomy.
 Stabilization of cats with primary hyperparathyroidism and result-
ing hypercalcemia usually consists of preoperative fluid diuresis. Furo-
semide can also be used to help lower calcium levels.43
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Preparation for surgery
Thyroidectomy
The cat should be fasted the night before surgery but should be left
 There are four described methods for thyroidectomy (Box 53-1). In
with access to clean water. The ventral half of the neck is clipped from
Buiuaeu aiu As aie sanbiuuan iensdeenut au teauag
the level of the ears caudal to 2 cm beyond the manubrium. This
and time consuming because they require peeling the thyroid paren-
-adon pou si uoisiu aul jo uoisuaixa Aiessau Aue ieu sansia
chyma from the thyroid capsule All four methods sacrifice the inter
mised by inadequate clipping. The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency
 nal (caudal) parathyroid gland and the extracapsular technique
with a small rolled-up towel as a bolster under the neck to slightly
sacrifices both parathyroid glands. If the cat is bilaterally affected, it
hyperextend the neck (Fig. 53-5).
is recommended that both thyroid glands be examined frst before
 Instrumentation should include a pair of blunt ended Gelpi retrac-
starting dissection, to determine on which side the external parathy.
-aia ieiodia padn-au sioieai piauueu yim iuisisse ue io sio
roid may be easier to salvage. The external parathyroid glands are
trocautery forceps are essential to minimize hemorrhage and maintain
much smaller and pale tan colored in comparison to the darker
thyroid glands (Fig. 53-7).
for fine dissection and non-traumatic thumb forceps are also recom-
Care should be taken during dissection; manipulation and traction
mended (Fig. 53-6).
of the tissues around the external parathyroid may cause vasospasm,
aaia e ui sunsan Adns inosea a on aeuep io 'sisoqu
Anesthesia
likelihood of transient postoperative hypocalcemia. In cats with uni-
lateral hypertrophic thyroid tissue the contralateral gland may be very
Acetylpromazine and an opioid such as hydromorphone methadone.
small or in some cases not visible Staging bilaterally affected patients
 or buprenorphine are commonly used as premedication. This pro-
by separating the surgeries by three to four weeks has been advocated
vides good sedation and the acetylpromazine some protection against
 by some surgeons to avoid postoperative hypocalcemia. One study
arrhythmias. Some surgeons prefer to limit premedication and may
failed to demonstrate any difference in the incidence of hypocalcemia
only give buprenorphine The induction agent commonly used is
when an intracapsular technique was used, and the rate of hyperthy.
 propofol, but etomidate can also be used in well sedated cats.
roid recurrence is high because of regrowth of microscopic or gross
Aeu zti 'ansdes aul ch pauee sueuan pue saiaue ieu anss
used because the drug-induced tachycardia is counterproductive. Like-
significant hypocalcemia occurs in 6% or fewer cats when bilateral
wise, ketamine stimulates the sympathetic nervous system and is also
se auoi sv uoains pauaadxa ue Aq pauad si Auopapioii
 generally avoided.1
adequate support facilities are in place to effectively provide support
 Anesthesia should be maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane
and treatment of hypocalcemia should this complication occur, bilat-
after intubation. Halothane is avoided due to myocardial sensitiza-
eral procedures are typically safe to be performed by experienced
tion. Anesthetic monitoring equipment should include a blood pres-
surgeons.
sure measurement capability, pulse oximetry, electrocardiogram, and
an esophageal thermometer. It is important to keep hyperthyroid cats
Parathyroid autotransplantation
warm as they have little body fat. The rapid metabolic rate in hyper.
thyroid cats can increase the absorption, disruption, tissue uptake, and
Parathyroid autotransplantation is performed when parathyroid
inactivation of anesthetic agents.
tissue has inadvertently been dissected free or lost its blood supply
650
Thyroid and parathyroid
Chapter
53
pu e buisn paouan buia si eouape piou  i-es ana
Figure 53-8 Modified extracapsular thyroidectomy is being performed in
extracapsular thyroidectomy technique in a 14-year-old cat. The forceps 
Aae buia s ansde au i pae-us sap pio el e
is pointing to the external parathyroid gland. Note the color difference
 r  sa)pe poe a w e pas
between the darker thyroid gland and the paler parathyroid gland.
(Courtesy of Jon Hall.)
 Box 53-1 Thyroidectomy
The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the head extended and 
care taken that the cat is straight and symmetrical on the table. A
small rolled-up towel under the neck can serve to slightly bolster the 
neck upwards and contribute to better visualization. A ventral midline
incision is made from the larynx to the manubrium. The sternohyoideus 
 and sternothyroideus muscles are divided along the midline and held 
a ansoxa au buunp oean buuiea-as e y pea
trachea can be visualized at this point and the paratracheal fascia
lateral to the trachea can be bluntly dissected. Cotton-tipped swabs 
can be useful in gentle dissection of the area.
 The thyroid glands are located and inspected. Adenomatous thyroid
 O1 paeduon uau panoon umoa lo pan layep Allensn s! anssi pue
the typical tan appearance of a normal thyroid lobe. Unilateral patients 
may have an unaffected gland that is very atrophied, thin, and pale 
 and hard to visualize. Following identification of the adenomatous 
thyroid tissue, the external parathyroid gland should be identified. It 
may lie at the cranial pole of the thyroid lobe, cranial to the entire lobe
itself, or in rare cases over the middle or caudal part of the lobe. It is a
discrete, spherical, pale tissue about 1-3 mm in diameter. Blood supply
to the external parathyroid will be a branch of the cranial thyroid artery
that may be visible where it enters the gland or it may arise from
within the thyroid lobe.
 At this point, the adenomatous thyroid tissue is removed by one of
four techniques.
(A)
?
Modified extracapsular thyroidectomy
The modified extracapsular thyroidectomy removes all of the thyroid 
Figure 53-9 (A) Modified extracapsular thyroidectomy: careful removal 
parenchyma and capsule while sparing the external parathyroid gland 
 of the thyroid adenoma while sparing the external parathyroid gland.
by use of fine-tipped bipolar electrocautery and accurate dissection
euaxa aul aeds oi pasn s! loga ou awonaploikul seinsdenexi a)
around the periphery (Hg. 53-8 and Fig. 53-9A). The surgeon incises 
 ajnsdey piosyi aut :Auopapioikyt seinsdeneyul o) puelb ploukuresed
the capsule by use of a number 15 or 11 scalpel blade or iris scissors
and the external parathyroid gland are kept intact.
and continues the dissection carefully around the rim of the external 
aul oi Alddns poolg aul auasaud oi alen buet puejb piouruieyed
 parathyroid. The cranial thyroid artery is ligated downstream to the
Extracapsular thyroidectomy
bifurcation of the parathyroid vesel with fine 4/0 absorbable suture
 The extracapsular thyroidectomy technique involves removal of the
 material. The thyroid can then be removed with ligation of the caudal
whole thyroid gland with no attempt to spare the external
thyroid artery in those cats where it is present. This is the technique 
parathyroid gland (Fg. 53-9B). The cranial and (if present) caudal
 preferred by the author
thyroid artery are ligated.
651
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 53-1 Continued
Intracapsular thyroidectomy
 Modified intracapsular thyroidectomy
The intracapsular thyroidectomy technique is started by incising the
After the thyroid parenchyma is removed as with the intracapsular
thyroid capsule on the ventral surface. The thyroid parenchyma is 
technique above, the entire thyroid capsule is then also removed with
 gently teased away from the capsule by use of cotton tipped swabs
the exception of a small cuff of tissue directly around the parathyroid
and sharp dissection in some areas. The thyroid parenchyma including 
gland.
the internal parathyroid gland is removed but the whole thyroid 
 Closure consists of apposing the sternohyoideus and
capsule and external parathyroid gland are left intact (Fig. 53-9c).
sternothyroideus muscles along the midline with 3/0 absorbable
0l lersip jelatew aanins oyt yim paieb s! Aane piourut leuean aul
 aul jo aunsop auinou ylm buoje auouderajbod se ypns aunins
the branch that supplies the parathyroid gland. Despite meticulous
subcutaneous tissue and skin. It is recommended that the resected
dissection, this technique wil often leave microscopic or gross 
thyroid tissue be submitted for histopathologic analysis.
adenomatous tissue behind and recurrence rate of hyperthyroidism is
higher than with the other techniques.
during surgery. A small incision producing a 'pocket is made between
 muscular tissue in the adjacent area and the parathyroid gland placed
Table 53-1 Treatment options for hypocalcemia following
within it. The incision is closed with a simple interrupted suture of
thyroidectomy or parathyroidectomy
non-absorbable suture material to mark the area. Studies show that
serum calcium concentrations normalize after surgery much quicker
Drug
Dose
Comments
 in patients with autotransplantation than those where the parathyroid
Calcium gluconate
 Acutely: 0.25-
has been removed, but not as quickly as those that have had their
Monitor serum
10%
1.5 mL/kg slowly IV
ionized calcium
 parathyroid gland spared during surgery.48
to effect 
levels regularly.
In fluids: 5-15 mg/
Monitor heart rate
Parathyroidectomy
kg/hour IV
 during initial infusion
Parathyroidectomy alone is performed in those few cases with primary
Calcium carbonate
Oral tablets
Typically 500 mg 
25-50 mg/kg/day or
tablets that must be
hyperparathyroidism, typically due to a parathyroid adenoma. The
15-20 mg/kg/meal
divided
adenomas typically affect the cranial external parathyroid glands.
The adenoma is gently dissected out within its capsule with care to
1.25-Dihydroxywvitamin
 20-30 ng/kg/day for
Quick onset, short
avoid damaging the cranial thyroid artery as much as possible. In
D3 (calcitriol)
three days then
half-life
those cases where the internal parathyroid gland is affected, a modi-
 5-15 ng/day
fed extracapsular or modifed intracapsular technique (Box 53-1) can
 Dihydrotachysterol
0.05 mg once daily
Quick onset
be performed.
for three days, then
0.025 mg once daily
Alfacalcidol
0.05 μg/kg orally
Quick onset, short 
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
once daily
half-life 
0 Aiaeiadoisod sinoy 7 on gt pazedsoy iday aie sie iso
monitor recovery from anesthesia, provide analgesia, and provide
sanias pue 'ssausniau suuid 'ssiis 'snd ieey uiim
postoperative supportive care. The ionized calcium levels should be
It is estimated that about 60% of cats with severe hypocalcemia dem-
 measured at least once daily. The cat should be provided with a warm,
Alesidki si eisagieue aneiadoisod 'ul ianosai on ases alqeuojuon
10% calcium gluconate (0.25-1.5 mL/kg) slowly intravenously over
 provided with buprenorphine. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories are
10 to 20 minutes to effect Intravenous calcium supplementation is
avoided unless there is absolute certainty that underlying renal com-
then continued by placing 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate in 250 mL
promise is not present.
lactated Ringer's solution and administered at 60 mL/kg per 24
hours.' Vitamin D supplementation and oral calcium can be started
 once the cat accepts oral medication. This can be gradually tapered
over a four to ten week period by monitoring serum ionized calcium
COMPLICATIONS
levels on an outpatient basis (Table 53-1). The goal is to maintain
serum calcium levels in the low normal range to prevent clinical signs
Postoperative complications after thyroidectomy include hypocal-
while stimulating growth and function of atrophied parathyroid
cemia (hypoparathyroidism), laryngeal paralysis, Horner syndrome,
tissue.
recurrence of hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism.12.7,.23 Other less
 Laryngeal paralysis is typically a result of iatrogenic damage to the
-Uil pue yau al jo suams apnu ue suoeduos uouon
laryngeal nerves causing either neuropraxia or paresis of the nerves.
geal edema or spasm.?
The complication is avoided by careful and methodical dissection,
 Hypocalcemia is perhaps the most pressing complication postop-
eratively. If unilateral thyroidectomy is performed, hypocalcemia is
  a  pa aq ue ai ai
unlikely. Daily monitoring of ionized calcium levels and comparison
study reported the death of a cat within 72 hours of surgery that was
to preoperative levels is important Clinical signs of hypocalcemia are
thought to be caused by laryngeal edema from intubation or by bilat-
typically noted two to five days after surgery and include muscle
 eral recurrent laryngeal nerve damage. Although a rarely reported
652
Thyroid and parathyroid
Chapter
53
complication, arytenoid lateralization may need to be performed in
extreme cases (see Chapter 52).
PROGNOSIS
Recurrence of hyperthyroidism is most likely the result of incom-
plete resection of hyperplastic thyroid tissue at the surgery site or
iauas s uspioiuady rean on Auoapioiy iaye sisousoid au
ectopic hyperplastic thyroid tissue. Recurrence occurs within two to
 ally good as long as the patient is evaluated properly preoperatively
three years in 5-11% of cats after bilateral thyroidectomy. When using
and precautions have been taken to address any postoperative com-
the modifed intracapsular or modifed extracapsular techniques,
plications. One study reported a mortality rate of 2% after modified
intracapsular thyroidectomy.7 Even though the majority of these
tissue. Nuclear scintigraphy is recommended and repeat surgery or
 patients are older and may be affected by multiple concurrent diseases
radioactive iodine therapy considered. Some owners may elect to treat
that can all impact survival times, significant improvement in quality
with anti-thyroid medication. Preoperative nuclear scintigraphy can
 of life can be obtained by resolution of hyperthyroidism through
be helpful in case selection; the optimal treatment for cats identified
thyroidectomy.
with ectopic hyperplastic thyroid tissue is radioactive iodine therapy.
The prognosis after parathyroidectomy to treat parathyroid adeno-
unless the ectopic tissue is accessible to surgical intervention.
mas is thought to be generally good, with surgical excision typically
Although transient hypothyroidism is observed in feline patients
 resulting in resolution of clinical signs. Of the three reports of feline
  i e aq i o se i ii ia
 parathyroid adenocarcinomas in the literature, none were observed to
patients return to a euthyroid state, even those having undergone
have metastasized although one patient did develop chronic renal
bilateral thyroidectomy. Thyroid supplementation has been suggested
failure.22 Prolonged hypercalcemia and secondary nephrocalcinosis or
in some cases, particularly those that have received high doses of
radioactive iodine after resection of thyroid carcinomas.1.38
that case.
REFERENCES
1. Seguin B, Brownlee L. Thyroid and
10. Norsworthy GD, Adams Vl, McElhaney
19. Wisner ER, Nyland TG. Ultrasonography
Parathyroid Glands. In: Tobias KM.
MR, Milios JA. Palpable thyroid and 
of the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
Johnson SA, editors. Veterinary surgery
 parathyroid nodules in asymptomatic
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
small animal. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders;
cats. J Feline Med Surg 2002;4:145-51.
1998;28:973-91.
2003. p. 2043-8.
11.
Paepe D, Smets P, van Hoek I, et al.
20. Wisner ER, Nyland TG. Ultrasonography
2. Anderson DM. The Thyroid and
Within- and between-examiner agreement
of the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
Parathyroid Glands. In: Brockman Dl.
for two thyroid palpation techniques in
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Holt DE, editors. BSAVA manual of canine
healthy and hyperthyroid cats. J Feline 
1998;28:973-91.
and feline head, neck, and thoracic
Med Surg 2008;10:558-65.
21.
 Mooney CT. Pathogenesis of feline
surgery. Quedgeley: British Small 
12.
 Tolbert K, Brown HM, Rakich PM, et al.
hyperthyroidism. J Feline Med Surg
Animal Veterinary Association; 2005.
Dermoid cysts presenting as enlarged
2002;4:167-9.
p. 123-31.
thyroid glands in a cat. J Feline Med Sutg
22.
Phillips DE, Radlinsky MG, Fischer JR,
3.
.Drost WT, Mattoon JS, Weisbrode SE.
2009:11:717-19.
Biller DS. Cystic thyroid and parathyroid
 Use of helical computed tomography
13.
 Gordon JM, Ehrhart El, Sisson DD, Jones
lesions in cats. J Am Anim Hospi Assoc
for measurement of thyroid glands in
MA. Juvenile hyperthyroidism in a cat.
2003;39:349-54.
clinically normal cats. Am J Vet Res
JAm Anim Hospi Assoc 2003;39:
23.
.Kaptein EM, Hays MT, Ferguson DC.
2006;467-71.
67-71.
Thyroid hormone metabolism. A
 4. Gilbert SG. The Digestive and Respiratory
14.
Berent AC, Drobatz Kl, Ziemer L,
 comparative evaluation. Vet Clin North
 Systems. In: Gilbert SG, editor. Pictorial
et al. Liver function in cats with
Am Small Anim Prac 1994;24:
anatomy of the cat. Seattle: University of
hyperthyroidism before and after 13l|
431-63.
Washington Press; 1997: p. 40.
 therapy. I Vet Intern Medicine 2007;21:
24. Fanders JA. Surgical options for the
 5. Lynn A, Dockins JM, Kuehn NF, et al.
1217-23.
treatment of hyperthyroidism in the cat.
Caudal mediastinal thyroglossal duct cyst
15.
 Nelson Rw, Couto CG. Disorders of the
I Feline Med Surg 1999;3:127-34.
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:
thyroid gland. In: Nelson Rw, Couto CG.
25. Kintzer PP. Considerations in the
147-50.
 editors. Small animal internal medicine.
 treatment of feline hyperthyroidism.
6. Reed TP, Brisson BA, Schutt LK. Cystic
St. Louis: Mosby; 2003. p. G91-728.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
ectopic lingual thyroid tissue in a male
16. Wakeling J, Elliott J. Syme H. Evaluation 
1994;24:577-85.
cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;239:981-4.
 of predictors for the diagnosis of
26. Hibbert A, Gruffydd-Jones T, Barrett EL,
7. Naan EC, Kirpensteijn J, Kooistra HS.
hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet Intern
 et al. Feline thyroid carcinoma: diagnosis
Peeters ME. Results of thyroidectomy in
Medicine 2011;25:1057-65.
and response to high-dose radioactice
101 cats with hyperthyroidism. Vet Surg
17. Bolliger AP, Graham PA, Richard V, et al.
iodine treatment. J Feline Med Surg
2006;35:287-93.
 Detection of parathyroid hormone-
2009:11:116-24
8. Harvey AM, Hibbert A, Barrett EL, et al.
related protein in cats with humoral
27. Guptill L, Scott-Moncrieff CR, Janovitz EB,
Scintigraphic findings in 120 hyperthyroid
hypercalcaemia of malignancy. Vet Clin
et al. Response to high-dose radioactive 
cats. I Feline Med Surg 2009;11:96-106.
Path 2002;31:3-8.
iodine administration in cats with thyroid
9.
Welches CD, Scavelli TD, Matthiesen DT.
18.
Turrel JM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW.
arcinoma that had previously undergone
Peterson ME. Occurrence of problems
Cain GR. Thyroid carcinoma causing
surgery. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1995;207:
after three techniques of bilateral
hyperthyroidism in cats: 14 cases
1055-8.
 thyroidectomy in cats. Vet Surg 1989;18:
(1981-1986). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
28. Mooney CT. Feline hyperthyroidism:
392-6.
1988;193:359-64.
diagnostics and therapeutics. Vet Clin
653
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
North Am Small Anim Pract 2001;31:
35. Kintzer PP, Peterson ME. Nuclear
42. DiBartola SP, Rutgers HC, Zack PM, Tarr
963-83.
 medicine of the thyroid gland:
MJ. Clinicopathologic fndings associated
 29. Peterson ME, Aucoin DP. Comparison
Scintigraphy and radioiodine therapy.
with chronic renal disease in cats: 74
of the disposition of carbimazole and
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prac
cases [1973-1984). I Am Vet Med Assoc
methimazole in clinically normal cats. Res
1994;24:587 -605.
1987;190:1196-200.
Vet Sci 1993;54:351-3.
36.
 Knowles S, Uhl Ew, Blas-Machado U,
43.
 Kaplan E. Primary hyperparathyroidism
 30. Trepanier LA. Pharmacologic management
Butler AM. Intrapericardial ectopic thyroid
and concurrent hyperthyroidism in a cat.
in feline hyperthyroidism. Vet Clin North
carcinoma in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest 
Can Vet I 2002;43:117-19.
Am Small Anim Pract 2007;37:775-88.
2010;22:1010-13.
44.
 Bonczynski J. Primary
31.
 DiBartola SP, Broome MR, Stein BS.
37.
Waters CB, Scot-Moncrieff JC. Cancer of
hyperparathyroidism in dogs and cats.
Nixon M. Effect of treatment of 
emdocrine origin. In: Morrison WB, editor.
Cin Tech Small Anim Pract 2007;22:
hyperthyroidism on renal function in cats.
Cancer in dogs and cats. Baltimore:
70-4.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 1996;208:875-88.
Williams and wilkins; 1998. p. 599.
 45. Cavana P, Vittone V, Capucchio MT, Farca 
32. Milner RJ, Channell CD, Levy JK,
38.
.Williams Tl, Elliott J, Syme HM.
AM. Parathyroid adenocarcinoma in a
Schaer M. Survival times for cats with
Association of iatrogenic hypothyroidism
 nephropathic Persian cat. J Fel Med Surg
hyperthyroidism treated with Il.
with azotemia and reduced survival time
2006;8:340-4.
methimazole, or both: 167 cases
 in cats treated for hyperthyroidism. J Vet 
46.
 Birchard Sl. Thyroidectomy in the cat.
[1996-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Intern Med 2010;24(5):1086-92.
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2006;21:
2006;228:559-63.
39. Flanders JA. Parathyroid gland. In: Slatter
29-33.
33. Sartor LL, Trepanier LA, Kroll MM, et al.
D, editor. Textbook of small animal 
47.
 Flanders JA. Surgical options for
Effcacy and safety of transdermal
surgery. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.
 treatment of hyperthyroidism in
methimazole in the treatment of cats with
p. 1711-23.
the cat. J Feline Med Surg 1999;1:
hyperthyroidism. J Vet Intern Med
40. Klausner JS, Bell FW, Hayden DW.
127-34.
2004;18:651- 5.
et al. Hypercalcaemia in two cats with
 48. Padgett SL, Tobias KM, Leathers CW.
34. Mallery KF, Pollard RE, Nelson RW.
squamous cell carcinomas. J Am Vet Med
Wardrop Kj. Efficacy of parathyroid gland
 et al. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided
Assoc 1990;196:103-5.
autotransplantation in maintaining serum
radiofrequency ablation for treatment of
Barber Pl, Elliot J. Study of calcium
clcium concentrations after bilateral
hyperthyroidism in cats. J Am Vet Med
homeostasis in feline hyperthyroidism.
 thyroparathyroidectomy. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 2003;223:1602-7.
J Small Anim Pract 1996;37:575-9.
Assoc 1998;34:219-24.
654
J.F Ladlow
Diseases of the feline nose are relatively common and include neo-
the middle meatus and ventral meatus before forming the alar fold
plasia, rhinitis, foreign bodies, fungal infections, and polyps. Treat-
rostrally. Caudally, the ethmoturbinates extend from the midline eth-
ment protocols often include surgical techniques such as biopsies,
rhinotomy or nasal planectomy. Complications of nasal procedures
 presphenoid sinus and continue up into the frontal sinus. The ethmo-
can be major but these can be minimized by careful preoperative
diagnosis and planning.
(usually seven in the cat) and smaller, more superficial ectoturbinates.
The nasopharyngeal meatus is formed by the confluence of the caudal
ends of the dorsal, middle, and ventral meatuses and runs to the
choanae. The turbinates are covered by mucosa and act to direct the
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 inspired air into the meatuses and humidify inspired air prior to
 passage to the lungs. They also act as a heat exchange mechanism and
The nose consists of the nasal planum, the nasal cavities or fossae
remove inhaled foreign material.
divided by the nasal septum, and the choanae that mark the start of
The nasal planum is pigmented and consists of tough, thickened
the nasopharynx (Fig. 54-1). The nasal fossae are divided by a dorsal
keratinized squamous epithelium. The philtrum marks the midline
concha (the extension of an endoturbinate), a curved shelf of bone
and separates the two nares. The external nares are supported by
originating from the ethmoidal crest The dorsal concha (previously
the dorsolateral cartilage ventrolateral cartilage, accessory cartilage.
nasoturbinate) separates the dorsal cavity into the dorsal meatus and
and cartilaginous septum. The dorsolateral cartilage is the largest
the middle meatus. Ventrally, the ventral nasal concha (previously
of the nasal cartilages and merges with the ventral nasal concha
maxilloturbinate) extends from the conchal crest and divides into
(maxilloturbinate).
several delicate bony scrolls. The concha divides the nasal cavity into
 The olfactory receptors are located mainly on the ethmoturbinates
and thus are in the caudodorsal section of the nasal cavity. The nasal
mucosa is well vascularized and innervated. The blood supply origi-
Ethmoturbinates
Frontal
nates from the maxillary artery that arborizes into the sphenopalatine
cranial  caudal
sinus
and major palatine branches before continuing as the infraorbital
Olfactory lobe
artery. The sphenopalatine artery supplies the nasal conchae, and its
terminal branches are known as the caudal lateral nasal arteries. Lym-
Dorsal concha
 phatic drainage is to the retropharyngeal, parotid, and submandibular
Cribriform plate
lymph nodes.
Ventral nasal
 Sphenoidal
concha
sinus
Cartilages of
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
external nares
Orifice of
eustachian tube
Vestibule
in nasopharynx
Clinical presentation
Nasopalatine duct
Clinical signs of nasal disease include sneezing, stertor, nasal dis-
organ
charge epiphora, epistaxis, inappetence, dyspnea, and facial swelling
Figure 54-1 The nasal cavity of the cat, showing the position of the
 Or distortion (Fig. 54-2). The clinical signs are often non-specific and
may be associated with a variety of underlying diseases such as
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00054-8
655
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
cats, the overall diagnostic yield was 36%. However, in 16 out of 23
cats that underwent nasal imaging, rhinoscopy and nasal biopsy. a
specific etiological diagnosis was obtained, demonstrating that if nasal
disease is to be investigated the investigation needs to be thorough.2
Diagnostic imaging
 The nose can be imaged with radiography, computed tomography. or
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). For radiography, general anesthe.
sia is essential for optimal views. A complete radiographic examina-
tion of the nose would include a lateral and dorsoventral skull and a
dorsoventral intra-oral view; the latter being the most useful view. The
dorsoventral intra-oral view gives good detail of the nasal chonchae
and septum but requires non-screen film and thus cannot be per-
formed with digital radiography. If digital radiography is being used,
a ventro 30° rostral-dorsocaudal view can be used. In cases with sus-
pected sinus involvement, though the lateral view is useful, a rostro-
caudal sky-line or ventral 10° ventro-caudodorsal oblique sinus view
is helpful, although in some cats, particularly brachycephalic breeds,
Figure 54-2 An eight-year-old female neutered domestic short-haired
this can be a very difficult view to achieve and perfect Radiographic
cat with a right-sided nasal discharge of five weeks' duration. A nasal
abnormalities include soft tissue opacity, loss of turbinate detail,
carcinoma was diagnosed after rhinoscopy and biopsy.
lucent foci, displacement of midline structures, soft tissue opacity of
the frontal sinus, and facial deformity. Unfortunately most of these
infectious rhinitis, inflammatory rhinitis, tumors (such as lymphoma
changes can be seen in both rhinitis and neoplastic disease. In one
 Or adenocarcinoma), foreign bodies, hypertension, or trauma.
study of 64 cats, rhinitis was more frequently associated with a normal
Increased upper respiratory tract noise and dyspnea are more com-
radiographic appearance while neoplasia more frequently caused dis
monly seen with neoplasia than foreign bodies or rhinitis.'
placement of midline structures, unilateral soft tissue opacity, unilat.
 Signalment may be helpful in prioritizing the differential diagnosis 
eral loss of turbinate detail and evidence of bone invasion.There was,
list; viral rhinitis is more common in older kittens while neoplasia is
however, considerable overlap between the two groups although none
unusual in younger cats. A careful history is mandatory, including
of the cats in the neoplastic group had normal radiographic changes.
 outdoor exposure, vaccination status, contact with other household
Computed tomography (CT) is better at localizing and determining
 Or cattery cats, duration and progression of clinical signs, and response
the extent of nasal disease compared to radiography, but there is no
 si u s si s i sr   
 difference in sensitivity of detection of the presence of nasal disease.
have a history of cat flu. Cats with neoplasia tend to have a more acute
history than those with rhinitis.
Rhinoscopy
Clinical examination should include dental examination and
careful auscultation of the larynx. Nasal airflow can be assessed by
 Rhinoscopy allows direct visualization of the nasal cavity and biopsy
either holding cotton wool or thread in front of the nostrils or by
(at least the frst sample) to be guided. Some diseases such as nasal
looking for condensed water vapor on a microscope slide held in front
paieanl aq ue saipoq ugiaioy pue 'seuuoinueig jesuny seuoeuey
of the nose. This should be assessed for both right and left nares. If
appropriately with this technique Retrograde rhinoscopy is performed
epiphora is present, the patency of the nasolacrimal duct should be
first using a fiberoptic bronchoscope to examine the nasopharynx and
assessed with fluorescein dye. Facial deformity may be seen with neo-
choanae so that hemorrhage does not obscure the view. Anterior
plasia, fungal or mycobacterial disease whilst in oriental color point
rhinoscopy is then performed with a 2.7 mm or 0.9 mm diameter (for
ats, nasal depigmentation may reflect increased temperature associ-
smaller cats) forward-viewing rigid endoscope (for details on equip-
ated with chronic rhinitis. Depigmentation or ulceration of the nasal
ment and technique, see Chapter 9). Isotonic fluid can be used during
planum is commonly seen with nasal planum squamous cell
 rhinoscopy to flush away blood contamination and aid hemostasis.
arcinoma.
In one study of 4l cats with chronic nasal disease, a mass was evident
rhinoscopically in the 19 cats with neoplasia.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
Cytology, histology and culture
In feline nasal disease, cytologic analysis of samples from masses
-geip aneinooe Aiaielal e apiaoid ueo sanbiuupat qsenbs Aq paiedaid
ferential diagnoses, unfortunately there is considerable overlap
nosis; agreement between cytologic and histologic diagnosis had a
between most of the underlying diseases. Thus a careful diagnostic
sensitivity of 0.94 and a specifcity of 0.8l in one study of 30 cats.
approach is essential, involving blood profles (and ideally feline
With brush sampling. the results are far less reliable: one study of 12
leukemia virus (FeLV)/feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV) status).
cases had only a 25% agreement between cytology and histology. The
imaging (including rhinoscopy if available), and histology. It can be
different results are probably due to the diffculty in locating a repre-
diffcult to obtain a representative sample of tissue for biopsy unless
sentative sample of tissue rather than superficial mucosa with the
a mass is directly visualized on rhinoscopy and thus a histopathology
bnush techniques as compared to the deeper sample obtained from a
 piece of abnormal tissue with the squash technique. Cytologic analysis
progressive clinical signs warrants a repeat biopsy. It is also worth
will often yield a cell population suggestive of neutrophilic or sup-
considering that in approximately 50% of cases of rhinitis in cats a
purative rhinitis, indicating that chronic changes are not easily
diagnosis is not achieved after workup. In a retrospective study of 75
detected via cytology.* Even with biopsy and histology, incorrect
656
Nose
Chapter
54
diagnosis may occur as a result of the lesion being missed. Hence in
an elderly cat with rapidly progressive clinical signs, repeat biopsy is
indicated if a report of rhinitis is received, as neoplasia could still be
present.
 Sampling of nasal discharge is only of use where there is suspicion
of infection with a Cryptococcus spp., as cryptococci can be easily rec-
ognized in the discharge as a round organism with a lucent halo on
Romanowsky stains.?
ane saldues Asdoiq 'seuouiie lian snouens unueid ieseu iod
required to confirm the diagnosis. Cytology in the form of exfoliative
samples from the surface of the lesion is less invasive but often yields
predominantly inflammatory cells that may mask the presence of
neoplastic cells.
Culture of nasal samples is of use in neutrophilic suppurative
inflammation as antibiotic therapy can be tailored accurately to the
infection present. In other conditions, a positive culture result is often
obtained with the usual infective agents including Escherichia coli.
Pseudomonas spp.. Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus spp., Pasteurella
spp.. Serratia spp.. Klebsiella spp., and Proteus spp. Approximately half
the cases will have mixed infections. These bacteria, however, are
Figure 54-3 A nine-year-old male neutered domestic long-haired cat
usually secondary invaders and whilst antibiotic treatment may tem-
with a nasal lymphoma resulting in unilateral nasal discharge and
 porarily improve the nasal discharge, it is unlikely to resolve the clini-
distortion of the nose.
cal signs in the long term.
SURGICAL DISEASES
The diseases in the nasal cavity that may beneft from or require surgi-
cal input include neoplasia (predominately for biopsies or planec-
tomy), polyps, fungal rhinitis, nasal planum tumors, foreign bodies,
and chronic sinusitis.
Nasal and paranasal sinus tumors
Nasal and paranasal sinus tumors constitute about 5% of tumors seen
in the cat and are usually malignant. " They generally originate from
[an snouenbs yse 'suoupisouape se jo ds e yrm] unlauda
carcinoma, 20% adenomas and 10% from submucosal or minor sali-
vary gland origin) or are malignant lymphoma (30% of all nasal
tumors). B-cell lymphoma is more common than T-cell." Other rarer
tumors encountered in the nasal cavity include soft tissue sarcomas,
chondrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, plasmacytoma, basal cell carcinoma,
Figure 54-4 A six-year-old male neutered domestic short-haired cat with
melanoma, and mastocytoma.
a soft tissue sarcoma originating from the right dorsal nasal planum.
Common clinical signs include nasal discharge, dyspnea, facial
eiseidoau ioy siads iou aie suis aaun pue sixisida pue suis
cats with suspicious nasal lesions should have the other predilection
(Fig. 54-3). Seizures can be seen with olfactory neuroblastomas
sites inspected, such as the pinnae and eyelids. The typical history is
due to extension of the tumor into the brain.1l Cats with carcinomas
Ue ul ieay oi siiey ieu uoisal gus [eiyadns io ,yoieis, e jo auo
siom ieauidauou ym sies ueun ae iaio ue ie juasand on puan
older cat. The tumors have often been present for weeks/months
(12.8 years versus 8.8 years), and males are more frequently affected
before veterinary advice is sought. In cats, the lesion usually originates
than female, with a 60:40 ratio.1l Routine staging should be per-
from the external cornifed part of the nasal planum (Fig. 54-5). Initial
formed to check for lymph node metastasis (though this is rare) or
staging for nasal planum tumors consists of radiography of the skull
generalized disease, particularly affecting the kidney, in cats with nasal
and inflated thorax. For more extensive lesions, MRI or computed
lymphoma.
eae sas uu iens  nyasnaie () aeio
of the local submandibular lymph nodes although usually the meta-
Nasal planum tumors
static rate is low.
 Superficial lesions (grade Tis and small Tla, see Table 54-1) can be
The majority of tumors affecting the nasal planum are squamous cell
 treated with photodynamic therapy. strontium 90 brachytherapy.
carcinoma, although other rarer tumors, including basal cell carci-
noma or mast cell tumor, can occur on the planum (Fig. 54-4). Fungal
 ment may be required with both photodynamic therapy and stron-
granulomas do occur over the maxillary bone but tend notto originate
B) sroos Aanna aie snsat sauson ay nq Adea unn
from the actual planum. Squamous cell carcinomas are associated
54-6). Deeper lesions over 5 mm are likely to recur with the more
with exposure to ultraviolet light and thus pale sparse hair cover may
conservative therapies and surgical treatment in the form of nasal
predispose a cat to this disease. As multiple sites can be affected, any
 planum resection is advised.
657
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Figure 54-5 An early squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum in a
12-year-old male neutered domestic short-haired cat.
Figure 54-6 Appearance two years after photodynamic therapy (PDT)
treatment of a nasal squamous cell carcinoma in an eight-year-old male
Table 54-1 World Health Organization staging of feline nasal
neutered domestic short-haired cat.
squamous cell carcinoma
endoscopically, of which one had recurrence but was cured by a
Grade
Description
second treatment One cat had spontaneous resolution of clinical
Tis
 Carcinoma in situ 
signs without treatment.18
Superficial ulcerative/crusting lesion not extending through
the basement membrane
Fungal rhinitis
T1a
Larger lesion <1.5 cm, exophytic
Fungal infection in the nasal cavities of cats is rare, though over the
T1b
last 20 years several case reports can be found in the literature.20-26
T2
Ulcerative or infiltrative lesion of 2 cm or larger
Pre-existing nasal damage either due to a foreign body, lymphoplas-
T3
Larger lesion 2-5 cm or with invasion of subcutis
macytic rhinitis, feline rhinotracheitis virus or calicivinus, or neoplasia
may compromise nasal defense mechanisms and allow fungal infec-
T4
Invading muscle, bone or fascia
tions to take hold.20.22 Clinical signs usually consist of a mucopurulent
chronic nasal discharge with epistaxis, sneezing, stertor, and mandibu-
 lar lymphadenopathy. In cats with cryptococcocis nasal deformity may
be seen.
Nasal mesenchymal hamartoma/
The fungal species most commonly identified are Cryptococcus spp.
 inflammatory polyp
and Aspergillus spp., though Penicillium infection also occurs.27 Dis-
seminated aspergillosis is comparatively common and usually occurs
Nasal mesenchymal hamartomas are also known as inflammatory
in immunosuppressed cats28 though FeLV/FIV infection has not been
polyps but are distinct from nasopharyngeal polyps that originate
documented for the nasal cases.
from the bulla or Eustachian tube Nasal mesenchymal hamartomas
Cryptococcus affects males and females equally. with an over-
are frm or cystic as opposed to the firm pink masses that form
representation of younger cats (twoto three years)and Siamese, Hima-
nasopharyngeal polyps. Macroscopically, nasal mesenchymal hamar-
layan and Ragdoll breeds.22 The nasal cavity is the most commonly
affected site, with other predilection areas including the skin, espe-
connective tissue and woven bone that is covered by ciliated columnar
cially over the nasal planum where ulcerated lesions may be seen,
epithelium.1α Hence the terminology nasal mesenchymal hamartoma
lungs, and lymph nodes. Cryptococcocis can be diagnosed using an
-rsp si uisal aun se daiod aeu ueu adoidde au si
immunoassay for the crytococcal polysaccharide capsular antigen
ganized indigenous tissue.
 Nasal mesenchymal hamartomas present in young cats, usually less
of local disease is usually successful using azole anti-fungal drugs.27
than one year in age. Clinical signs include epistaxis, sneezing. sterto-
 In cases of aspergillosis, brachycephalic Persians and Himalayans
rous breathing. and mild facial deformity while nasal discharge is
are the most common breeds reported. This is the opposite of the
unusual. Occasionally, polypoid tissue is seen protruding through the
 canine cases that tend to be dolichocephalic breeds. There is no typical
-sae Ao aq ue au uuaqaie susi asau ynou e'saiu
age group that is affected. Orbital involvement occurs in about one-
sive with radiographic features of loss of turbinates and soft tissue
third of cases with signs including exophthalmos, epiphora, anterior
opacity within the nasal cavities (Fig. 54-7). Treatment consists of
uveitis, resistance to retropulsion, and prolapse of the nictitating
surgical excision, either via a rhinotomy (see below) or per-endoscopic
sauesasdo pue dossu ueeu qsi ssu auequa
removal. In one case series of five cats, three were treated
that are submitted for culture and histopathology (Fig. 54-8). Failure
658
Nose
Chapter
54
 Figure 54-8 Rhinoscopic view of aspergillosis fungal plaque. (Courtesy of
Prue Neath.)
Fungal infections of the subcutis
of the nose
The skin overlying the nasal bones is a predilection site for fungal
A
 granulomas along with, to a lesser extent, other extremity sites such
as digits and pinnae These occur in cats of all ages though the inci-
There is usually a history of a chronic non-painful subcutaneous
swelling, plaque, or non-healing wound that is non-responsive to
antibiotic treatment (Fig. 54-8). The usual infective agents are Alter-
naria spp. though others are reported including Mucor spp., Exophila
 siee s s ssa ss  ds
biopsy of the swellings with histologic evidence of fungal hyphae
along with fungal culture In the case of alternariosis, the hyphae are
hyaline and non-pigmented.
Treatment of alternariosis is most successful with surgical debride-
ment (Fig. 54-9) followed by anti-fungal medication, but it can also
be treated with protracted medication.32 Recurrence is common. Suc-
cessful treatment of the Mucor spp. case report involved five months
 of the second generation triazole posaconazole.33
Foreign bodies
D
Figure 54-7 (A) An intra-oral dorsoventral view of the nasal cavity in
Nasal foreign bodies that have been reported in the cat include grass
a three-year-old male neutered cat demonstrating an expansile soft tissue 
seeds, grass blades, air gun pellets, needles, stones, and canine
opacity in the right nasal cavity with deviation of the vomer to the left.
(B) A lateral skull radiograph shows increased opacity of the nasal cavity.
include nasal discharge and sneezing though facial distortion, cough.
The diagnosis in this case was nasal hamartoma (polyp).
lethargy, and lymphadenopathy are also reported.' Foreign bodies
may be retrieved by nasal flushing or rhinoscopy (Fig. 54-i0). Occa-
sionally, open rhinotomy approaches are required, particularly for
'mlis ul yal Jl gs'sialiad ung ie io qiaal se ypns saipoq uaiaioy iagie
to culture fungal infections other than Cryptococcus spp. is common
foreign bodies will cause inflammation and a chronic rhinitis that may
and histology reports of fungal hyphae, rhinoscopic findings of white-
be difficult to resolve even after the foreign material has been removed.
- pue seuonuee lesuny monan-anm io sanbeid/aseuosip Aei
binate destruction on imaging is diagnostic. Positive aspergillosis
Rhinitis
serology on ELISA is supportive of the diagnosis though false negative
results occur.20 Treatment protocols for aspergillosis include intranasal
Chronic rhinitis is both a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge that is
infusion of clotrimazole2l or systemic anti-fungal agents such as itra-
aided by classification of the inflammation by means of a biopsy.
conazole, fluconazole, and ketaconazole There are too few cases in
Clinical signs consist of a mucopunulent nasal discharge, often bilat-
the literature to give an accurate prognosis on feline nasal aspergillosis
eral. Rhinitis can cause abnormal turbinate architecture or even
though the cases treated with intranasal clotrimazole seemed to have
destruction visible on endoscopy or advanced imaging.
resolution of the infection in about 50% of cases. Orbital involvement
 In a retrospective study on rhinitis in cats, 20 cats had chronic non-
appears to be a negative prognostic indicator.22.30
specific rhinitis of over four weeks' duration. Of these 20 cats, acute
659
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
a four-year-old female neutered domestic short-haired cat that presented 
 with an abscess over the frontal sinus.
B
nares. This cat had no associated clinical signs.
feline herpes virus (FHV-1) and feline coronavirus (FCV). Chlamydo-
philia felis and Bordetella bronchiseptica are also capable of causing a
primary rhinitis.
 In cases of feline rhinitis that have frontal sinus involvement and
Figure 54-9 (A) A six-year-old female neutered cat with a fungal
are refractory to medical treatment, it is possible that infection of the
frontal sinus is producing a nidus of infection that is difficult to
of the skin lesion, the underlying nasal bone was found to be eroded.
dely us lexe leaoduan leadns e buisn pasop se pajap us aul ()
resolve. Surgical obliteration of the frontal sinus has been described
to try and resolve any frontal sinus contribution to the rhinitis.38.39
Results have only been reported in a limited number of cats and
neutrophilic inflammation was found in four cases, mixed lympho-
this procedure is not commonly performed, but out of six cats in one
 plasmacytic and neutrophilic inflammation in 14 cases, and two cases
series, four cats had resolution of signs following surgery and two cats
had chronic lymphoplasmacytic inflammation.? Culture of the nasal
showed improvement.3
discharge will usually yield bacterial growth, with the usual contami-
nants including Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas spp.. Streptococcus spp.
Stenotic nares
Staphylococcus spp., Pasteurella spp., Serratia spp., Klebsiella spp.. and
 Proteus spp. These bacteria are likely to be secondary infections as the
l u a      a
likely etiology of many cases of feline rhinitis is viral, particularly
54-ll) and Himalayan, have increased nasal resistance due to a
660
Nose
Chapter
54
combination of stenotic nares and incongruency between the size of
 can lead to permanent blindness and neurologic deficits. Likewise.
the shortened nasal cavity and the nasal conchae. Clinical signs consist
permanent carotid artery ligation is safe in the dog but this is not the
of upper respiratory tract noise, particularly stertor and occasional
case in the cat.42
labored breathing.40 The stenotic nares can be opened by a number
aul oi anp Aanleiadonsod anueaaddeui ot peal ue Aiasins jesen
 of different techniques that reduce the size of the dorsolateral nasal
lack of the sense of smell, obstruction of nasal airflow, and pain. In
cartilage. These include horizontal, lateral or vertical alaplasty, or
cats undergoing major procedures (rhinotomies, anti-fungal flushes.
 punch resection alaplasty.41
and nasal planectomy), it is worth placing an esophagostomy tube
(see Chapters 6 and 12) at the end of surgery, particularly in sensitive
 or fussy cats. If cats do resume eating quickly then the feeding tube
 can be removed easily but for the reluctant cat it is a stress free way
GENERAL SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
to supplement oral intake.
Prior to performing any nasal procedures, the owners should be ade-
quately prepared for postoperative complications and cosmetic altera-
tions. Most nasal procedures, even biopsies, tend to result in a few
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
days of hemorrhagic nasal discharge that can be profuse during sneez-
ing episodes. Clipping of the face even before resection of tumors or
Biopsies
surgical incisions can be disturbing to some owners. Preoperative
It is prudent to warn owners that more than one biopsy may be
owners and avoid the unfortunate scenario of tears on collection of
ssju ol Asea ll se aseasp leseu ul sisouseip e uieiqo ol painbai
their cat.
lesions, particularly if blind biopsies are being taken.
 The nasal mucosa is friable with a tendency to marked hemorrhage
 Biopsy techniques include blind biopsies, rhinoscopically guided
when traumatized. Hematology profles including coagulation pro-
biopsies, nasal flushes, and trephination though the maxillary bone.
files should thus be performed prior to planned procedures. In some 
As hemorrhage is likely in all these techniques, the pharynx should
surgeries such as rhinotomy and the combined nasal planectomy and
be packed as previously described (see above).
 premaxillectomy, there is the potential for rapid blood loss and blood
For blind biopsies, radiographs or advanced imaging should ideally
products should be available even though transfusion is rarely
be used to locate the approximate area of disease. A pair of crocodile
required. Blood-typing is thus advisable (see Chapter 5). In middle-
 Or cup forceps is measured from the nares to the medial canthus of
aged to elderly cats, biochemistry blood profiles are used primarily to
the eye and a piece of tape placed at this level to avoid damage to the
screen for concurrent disease.
cribriform plate. Multiple biopsies should be taken to try and maxi-
After induction maxillary nerve blocks, the introduction of local
mizethe chance of a diagnostic result Blind biopsies can also be taken
anesthetic such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine into the area of the
Alanbiqo ins s! teui pua ue um iajauie anes gI io als e suisn Aq
infraorbital canal provides very useful intraoperative and initial post-
au on anssad aau Adde on aus qu ol e on pauee pue
operative analgesia (see Chapter 2). Local anesthetic spray can also be
sample. Again, the stylet should be marked at the level of the medial
used in the nares prior to insertion of an endoscope or biopsy forceps
canthus to prevent over-penetration.
as this is a very sensitive area and sneezing or movement during rhi-
noscopy can result in hemorrhage and an obscured view.
channel will allow the passage of biopsy forceps alongside the scope
The pharynx should be packed with a mouth pack. This can be a
so the tips of the forceps are visible. The area of suspicion should be
swab or length of bandage to prevent aspiration of blood into the
biopsied frst The site of hemorrhage after the first biopsy can be
trachea and lungs. After completion of the surgery, the pharynx should 
flushed with cold isotonic fluids, thus allowing more guided biopsies
be carefully inspected and suctioned if necessary after removal of the
to be taken. A pair of crocodile or cup forceps can also be passed
mouth pack. Recovery of the cat with the head down allows blood to
 parallel to the scope rather than through the biopsy channel in the
 run out of the nares and mouth rather than into the pharynx.
scope, which allows bigger forceps to be used.
Useful surgical equipment includes an air powered burr that greatly
 Nasal flushes rely on high-pressure saline being flushed through the
aids rhinotomies, both ventral and dorsal. A Freer elevator is a good
 nares with a 20 mL syringe whilst the other nostril is digitally occluded.
tool for elevation of periosteum and for checking the depth of oste-
 The technique is repeated in each nostril two to three times to try and
Otomies. Ice cold saline is used to flush the surgical site or pack
anss jo sdun aaiel pia ue anua s pia anss azui
exposed nasal cavity and aids hemostasis. An accurate set of weighing
if masses are present that will be located on a swab which is packing
scales is required. Due to the potential for marked blood loss, swabs
the pharynx. After the procedure, the pharynx should be checked and
should be weighed during the procedure and, after the deduction of
suctioned if necessary to remove debris. There is a risk of cerebral
any fluids that were used, the increased weight in grams will give the
damage if the cribriform plate is damaged, though in one case series
blood loss in milliliters.
of 4l cases, of which 12 were cats, there was a 90% success rate of
With rhinotomies and more aggressive nasal planectomies, the neck
 obtaining diagnostic material with no major adverse effects.43
may be clipped for temporary carotid ligation whether this is planned
 If repeated nasal biopsies have failed to yield a diagnostic result,
as part of the procedure or as an emergency intervention after hemor-
any mass lesion seen on imaging can be biopsied via trephination
rhage. After a ventral cervical midline incision, the carotid sheath is
through the maxillary bone In this case, a small area is clipped and
identified and the carotid artery is carefully isolated and occluded
 prepped aseptically. After making a small skin incision, the bone is
either with a bulldog clamp or a Rummel tourniquet The advantage
perforated with a Michel's trephine or K-wire of large enough diameter
of using suture and Rummel tourniquet is that at the end of the pro-
to allow crocodile forceps to be passed into the nasal cavity. This
cedure the tourniquet can be removed from the incision without
 Bueuuo sioum ioy imyasn aq ues inq Aessau Aiaiei si anbiuua
 needing to open the wound again. The carotid artery can be occluded
from the maxillary sinus.
for 40 minutes with no detrimental effects. In the cat, carotid ligation
 In nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas, a superficial slice of the
 should be unilateral as the collateral vertebral blood supply is not as
 nasal planum taken using a scalpel blade often yields a diagnostic
developed as in the dog and thus temporary bilateral carotid ligation
result. Alternative biopsy techniques include punch biopsies or
661
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Aiisea Alensn si aeuouay aaeiadoisod Auy saisdoa leuoisiu
 The excised tissue should always be submitted for histopathology
 controlled with gentle pressure from surgical swabs.
examination. The pathologists are aided in their assessment of surgical
margins if the cut edge of the tissue is marked with Indian ink. Alter-
Rhinotomy
natively, a few tiny samples from the wound bed can be submitted
after excision of the tumor.
The nasal cavity can be accessed from a dorsal or ventral approach.
 The ventral approach ( Box 54-1) gives adequate exposure for explora-
tion of the nasal cavity44 and also gives a better cosmetic result with
less chance of subcutaneous emphysema postoperatively.45 The disad.
vantage of the ventral approach is that it involves working in the oral
cavity, which can limit manipulation of instruments and require a
pharyngostomy tube to be placed rather than an endotracheal tube.
The dorsal approach (Box 54-2) gives good access to the nasal cavity
but is more disfiguring. with a risk of postoperative subcutaneous
emphysema.
Nasal planectomy
Nasal planectomy (Box 54-3) is the treatment of choice for squamous
cell carcinomas of greater than 5 mm in depth that are likely to
-s ynoun ains siu 'saidear aaeasuo aro a yim i
figuring, results in a good functional outcome and usually contented
ul yo (aiemeun Aissod) pauaoun aie ieun sie yim 'siaum
appearance.
As the cosmetic appearance can be shocking, it is prudent to show
the owners photos of cats that have undergone the procedure to
'siaumo ison aueieadde aeiadoisod aul iog ay uaul aiedaid
though initially distressed by the cosmetic appearance, will adjust to
 it easily. Occasionally owners find the postoperative appearance better
 than the preoperative tumor particularly in the case of ulcerative
tumors.
 Figure 54-12 The use of stay sutures to increase exposure in a ventral
 Box 54-1 Ventral rhinotomy
rhinotomy.
e u! paunoas peay aul ylm Aouagqunoan jesiop u! paneid s! len aul
level position with tape around the maxillary canines.
If the oral cavity is compromised by the presence of an
endotracheal tube, a guarded pharyngostomy tube should be placed 
 Box 54-2 Dorsal rhinotomy
by making a small skin incision caudal to the hyoid apparatus onto 
the point of some large forceps such as Rochester carmalt that are
The cat is placed in sternal recumbency, with the nose positioned 
then used to bring the tube into the pharynx. It is then retroflexed 
abepueg lo qems e ylm payped s! xuAueud aul beqpues e uo jaaal
into the trachea. The pharynx is then packed with a swab.
 A midline incision is made from the medial canthus of the eye 
 The palate is then incised over the midline from the level of
rostrally over the nasal bone. The skin and periosteum are elevated 
 the canine teeth to the fourth premolars; any bleeding is stopped 
and retracted by stay sutures or Gelpi retractors placed in the tissues 
by swab pressure and sparing use of electrocoagulation. The
either side of the incision (Fig. 54-13A).
aen buyel auog aueled aul asodxa di pateaala s! wnaisonadonnu 
Hemorrhage is stopped by judicious use of bipolar electro-
to avoid the major palatine artery which runs alongside the dental
coagulation or swab pressure. A burr is used to gently burr through
arcade from the carnassial tooth (see Fig. 56-1), and stay sutures
the nasal bone and access the nasal cavity (Fig. 54-13B). If a burr is
 are placed either side, at both the cranial and caudal ends of the
not available, two holes can be made with K-wires and then 
Sl aunsodxa abiel e H (zl-ts bh) aunsodxa ureuiew on 'uoisou!
connected with rongeurs, which can then be used to extend the
required, a hinged mucoperiosteal flap of palate is raised and 
pasn aa uen meshie ue ialieuan ansodxa iot Aessanau se Ae
retracted
to cut a rectangular flap of bone although this technique is difficult 
 A burr is then used to gently burr through the palatine bone and 
in cats due to the confined incisional area.
access the nasal cavity/Unilateral or bilateral access can be obtained,
 After removal of the abnormal tissue or foreign body the nasal 
depending on the extent of the nasal lesion. If a burr is not available,
cavity is flushed with ice cold saline and the periosteum closed with
two holes can be made with K-wires and then connected with
relatively long-lasting suture material such as polydioxanone or
rongeurs which can be used to enlarge the cavity. Ice cold saline is
glycomer 631 and the mucosa and the skin is closed as a separate 
used to decrease hemorrhage and flush the nasal cavity to allow the
layer.
lesion to be visualized.
 A small piece of sterile tube is sutured into the wound dorsally 
After removal of the mass or foreign body, the palatine 
connecting the nasal cavity with the air to act as a drain for any
 mucoperiosteum is closed with a relatively long-lasting suture
al s! deb lews e Kaaeuanly saneinwnne jeul ale snoaueinogns
material such as polydiaxonone or glycomer 631 in a single layer
 at the dorsal aspect of the incision though this can easily become
using a simple interrupted suture.
occluded.
662
Nose
Chapter
54
Box 54-3 Nasal planectomy
The surgical clip is 1-2 cm from the planned surgical margins;
auol-auopod ainp e ylm paddad Aen leo aut pue paedand
solution (Fig. 54-14A).
The cat is placed in ventral recumbency with the mouth slightly
'yinow aut u! paneld axe sadeap aul beb yinow e buisn pauado
covering the endotracheal tube and over the maxilla, but the 
commissures of the lips are exposed in case they are required during
reconstruction.
 The surgical margins are planned to extend to 1cm from the 
visible edge of the tumor if possible. If a 1 cm margin is not possible
due to the size of lesion, a 0.5 cm margin will often result in clean 
surgical margins. After deciding on the surgical margins, the excision
line is drawn on the skin with a sterile marker prior to the incision.
 For small lesions, where removal of the nasal planum provides an 
adequate margin, the nasal planum and some of the underlying 
turbinates are sliced off using a scalpel with a number 10 or 15 blade
starting dorsally with a 360° incision and angling ventrally to leave 
the lips in place. A small strip of skin is left in place at the rostral lip
margins to aid reconstruction (Fig. 54-14B).
For larger tumors, or those situated more ventrally, the nasal
planectomy should be combined with a premaxillectomy. After 
incising dorsally through the skin onto the maxillary bone, a full
thickness labial incision is made perpendicular to the lip margin. The
lips are very vascular and hemostasis is provided by the cautious use
of electrosurgery, artery forceps, and ligation. Ice cold saline-soaked
swabs are used to wr ap the incised lip margins.
 The incision is continued through the subcutis and nasolabial
muscles to the maxillary bone. The rostral maxilla, nasal planum,
turbinates, and palate are then removed with an oscillating saw. Swift
uoebl lo sgems ieibans y padde aunssaad A pamot leoua
of the palatine arteries is the best way to control the hemorrhage.
Reconstruction
uen us aui papasan uaag sey wnueid jeseu aui Ajuo aaum sasen ul
B
be sutured to the maxilla using simple interrupted rolling sutures or a
purse-string suture. Simple interrupted rolling sutures are placed by
Figure 54-13 (A) A dorsal rhinotomy in a three-year-old male neutered 
anchoring the skin through holes made in the maxilla using K-wires
cat. This is the same case as shown in Figure 54-7. and the expansile
and are more difficult to place than a purse string but give a good 
nature of the hamartoma can be seen affecting the nasal and frontal
 Ol laisea pue laisey s! anins buuis-asand aul anueieadde pawsos
bones on the right. (B) Removal of the nasal bone with a burr revealed
perform but may result in more marked stenosis postsurgery. An
the hamartoma.
absorbable suture of 2M or 1.5M monofilament suture such as
polydioxanone is a good choice.
When the nasal planectomy has been combined with a
Anti-fungal flushing
premaxillectomy, unilateral or bilateral labial flaps are used to close 
the oral defect. The labio-gingival borders are incised as necessary to
A 1% solution of clotrimazole in propylene glycol has been described
about 1 cm. Suturing the labial submucosa to the palatine bone 
The cat is placed in dorsal recumbency with the pharynx packed with
using bone holes made with K-wires helps to prevent the formation
swabs. A 14 French (Fr) Foley catheter is introduced into the right
of a rostral oronasal fistula, which can occur if the lip-palatine
nares and advanced through the ventral meatus into the nasopharynx
sutures break down (Fg. 54-15).
where inflation of the balloon prevents leakage of clotrimazole into
A three-layer closure of palatine periosteum/ bone tunnels to labial
the pharynx. Size 8 Fr Foley catheters with the tips cut off are then
submucosa followed by oral mucosa medially and skin laterally is used.
placed into each nare and inflated to prevent rostral leakage Eight to
10 mL of clotrimazole solution is slowly and gently infused into each
 8 Fr catheter until back-leakage occurs. The solution is left in situ for
sinuses at the end of the procedure for a longer lasting anti-fungal
 an hour, turning the cat into each lateral after 15 minutes and topping
effect.46
up with solution as the cat is turned.
 The cat should be recovered with the head down to allow the anti-
 If frontal sinus involvement is present, the frontal sinuses can be
fungal solution to drain rostrally.
trephined (see below for detail) and debrided and 1% clotrimazole
infused through the frontal sinuses into the nasal cavity after ensuring
Sinus ablation
patency of drainage with saline. The ostium between the frontal and
sphenoid cavities and the nasal cavity in cats is large thus drainage
 Frontal sinus ablation (Box 54-4) is advocated for treatment of chronic
should be rapid. Clotrimazole cream can be inserted into the frontal
rhinitis with frontal sinus involvement. Obliteration of the frontal
E99
Section
7
The Head and Neck
A
D
Figure 54-14 Nasal planectomy in a 12-year-old male neutered domestic short-haired cat. (A) The preoperative appearance. (B) Removal of the nasal
A)
B
maxillectomy. (A) The initial surgical incision is made after marking the margins on the skin with a sterile pen. (B) Appearance after incising through
 all the soft tissues. Hemorrhage is reduced by the use of ice cold saline.
664
Nose
Chapter
54
Figure 54-15, Continued (C) An oscillating saw is used to section through the nasal bone after the soft tissues have been incised. (D) Reconstruction
is performed initially by incising along the gingival margin of the upper lips to advance the lip and recreate the philtrum. (E} Immediate postoperative
appearance of the nasal planectomy and premaxillectomy. (F) The six week postoperative appearance. Clean surgical margins were obtained and no 
recurrence was noted at two years following surgery.
sinus with curettage of the ethmoid conchae removes the infection
some cats being anorexic Oral food that is initially offered should be
within the bony cavity and allows drainage to be re-established. Fat
soft and pungent.
 grafts can be used to encourage ablation of the sinuses.31.32 Trephina-
 Analgesia needs careful consideration. For the frst 24 hours, once
tion and irrigation of the frontal sinuses without curettage produced 
the local anesthetic nerve block has worn off methadone is a good
t'an jous sem siun inq sie oz ui suis ieiue un suauaaoidu ue
analgesic choice for planectomies and rhinotomies. An opiate
with less sedative effects such as buprenorphine is then used with
Alaplasty
the addition of non-steroidal inflammatory drugs once food intake
is reasonable.
There are a number of techniques described for alaplasty (nares resec-
A buster collar may be required and if so will need frequent clean-
tion), including wedge resection (horizontal, vertical, and lateral) or
spuadap stu ynoui yam isty aul io aeid u yal aensh si su 'su
punch biopsy. A horizontal wedge resection allows a deeper slice of
 on the temperament of the cat. Grooming will also need to be assisted
tissue to be taken, which decreases the width of the alar fold ( Box 54-5).
 in the frst few weeks postsurgery. Immediately after nasal planectomy
 surgery the turbinates are exposed and bone is visible; however, a scab
rapidly forms over the exposed tissue and granulation tissue usually
covers the exposed bone within three weeks of surgery. In some cases,
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
the nasal aperture will initially need gentle cleaning with damp cotton
buds or swabs to remove food debris.
Although many cats will resume oral intake the day following surgery.
 If a drain is placed in the wound during a rhinotomy, this can be
the temporary disruption ofthe normal sense of smell combined with
surgical stress, possible discomfort, and medications will result in
subcutaneous emphysema occurs this is usually self-resolving in seven
665
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 54-4 Sinus ablation
The cat is initially positioned in dorsal recumbency and a piece of 
subcutaneous fat approximately 5 cm × 2 cm × 1 cm harvested from 
the ventral abdomen. The cat is then repositioned in sternal
recumbency with its head elevated on a sandbag and stabilized with
adhesive tape. A three-sided skin flap which hinges rostrally is made,
starting at the midpoint between the base of the pinna and the
lateral canthus of the eye, and then extending rostrally to the level of
the lateral canthus and then connecting the two incisions dorsally 
across the temporal area (Fig. 54-16A).
 The skin is elevated and retracted rostrally before a similarly
positioned bone flap is created with an oscillating saw (Fg. 54-16B).
The rostral side of the bone flap is scored with the saw to allow
the bone flap to be hinged rostrally. Using surgical loupes or an 
 operating microscope, the frontal sinuses are debrided and all the 
mucoperiosteal lining removed (Fig. 54-17). The ostium to the nasal 
cavity is checked for patency and increased in diameter, allowing the 
ethmoturbinates to be debrided. A piece of temporal muscle is then 
harvested and used to plug the ostium. The previously harvested fat
graft is placed in the sinus prior to closure of the bone flap and the
temporal fascia is resutured. The subcutaneous tissues and skin are
closed routinely.
Figure 54-17 Unilateral sinus obliteration in a 13-year-old domestic
short-haired cat that presented with chronic rhinitis refractory to medical
treatment. MRl revealed sinus involvement.
COMPLICATIONS
With all nasal procedures some nasal hemorrhage is expected on
recovery and for the following few days. Sneezing is common and can
result in epistaxis. Anorexia is possible after planectomies and rhi-
notomies but in the author's cases has only ever been short term in
duration.
(A)
 Dorsal rhinotomies can produce subcutaneous emphysema in the
first couple of weeks that is self-limiting and causes little morbidity.
Dehiscence of ventral rhinotomies can result in an oronasal fistula but
in a case series of 58 patients, including dogs and cats, only one inci-
dence of an oronasal fstula was seen.4 After both dorsal and ventral
 rhinotomies, a persistent nasal mucopurulent or serous discharge is
common due to the altered architecture of the nasal conchae and
skin flaps that can be used for reconstruction and the local subdermal
flaps are well vascularized (Fig. 54-19).
With nasal planectomies, dehiscence may be seen, usually of the
premaxilla reconstruction, and this is usually only a cosmetic issue
but the wound can be resutured if required. Nasal stenosis is some-
e Suisne si siut ji pasiaai aq pinous aoyuo leseu aul huaiedde saun
clinical problem. Mild nasal discharge may be noted after surgery due
B
to the increased size of the nasal orifice and inflammation associated
with exposure of the nasal turbinates. This is rarely a significant
Figure 54-16 Sinus obliteration. (A) A three-sided rectangular flap of 
skin is made and hinged rostrally. (B) A smaller rectangular section of
problem.
bone is cut and elevated to give access to the frontal sinuses.
Recurrence of nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas may be
often diffcult after surgery due to the close proximity of the eyes and
 to ten days' time and there is little point in trying to remove the accu-
brain. If further surgical resection is possible this is often the best
mulated air prior to this time. Skin sutures, if present, are removed
treatment.
ten to 14 days postsurgery under sedation or general anesthesia, and
Sinus curettage and obliteration can result in short duration sub-
the oral wounds after ventral rhinotomy are carefully checked at this
cutaneous emphysema. This is self-limiting and resolves in three to
stage to ensure adequate healing.
five days.
666
Nose
Chapter
54
Box 54-5 Alaplasty
The cat is placed in sternal recumbency and the nostrils prepped with 
povidone-iodine.
Lateral wedge resection
 An 11 blade is used to cut a wedge of tissue from the lateral
cartilage (Fig. 54-18A). Hemorrhage is rapid but stops when the
cut surfaces are re-apposed with a soft suture material such as 
 polyglactin 10. Pressure is also applied by a sterile cotton bud.
The sutures are left to fall out or removed two to three weeks 
postsurgery.
 Punch resection technique
The lateral cartilage is stabilized with forceps and a 2 mm punch
biopsy instrument used to remove a circular plug of tissue to 
the level of the alar fold (Fig. 54-18B). A 2-3 mm rim of tissue 
 is left medially and laterally after the plug is sectioned. The 
A
tissue edges are then apposed with simple interrupted 
sutures.34
B
A
C
B
 Figure 54-19 (A} Wound breakdown in a nine-year-old female neutered 
Figure 54-18 Stenotic nares correction. (A) Horizontal wedge
cat that had a chondrosarcoma removed from the maxillary bone. The 
 technique. (B) Punch resection technique.
 superficial temporal axial pattern flap had distal necrosis. (B) The wound 
was reconstructed with a local subdermal rotation flap. (C) Six months 
 postsurgery there is a good functional outcome with a reasonable 
cosmetic result.
667
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
PROGNOSIS
Box 54-6 Chemotherapeutic agents commonly used for
treatment of nasal lymphoma
Nasal tumors
COP: vincristine, cyclophosphamide, prednisolone
Both of the common nasal tumor types, lymphoma and carcinomas,
Wisconsin-Madison (WM): vincristine, L-asparaginase,
can be treated effectively, albeit palliatively with radiotherapy, both
Cyclophosphamide, prednisolone, doxorubicin, methotrexate
orthovoltage and megavoltage: lymphomas are far more radiosensi-
Prednisolone
tive. There are few case series of non-lymphomatous nasal tumors in
ot io saep sie jo auei au ui aie sau ieaians inq aeia a
 survival at one year for adenocarcinoma.48.4 Lymphomas tend to have
a better initial response to radiotherapy, with median survival times
(when death from progression of the nasal tumor was analyzed) in
u aeiaopei jo uoisnoui au inq sioiad adeiaouauo susn
the treatment protocol was pivotal for local disease control. 51 A variety
of chemotherapeutic protocols are commonly used for nasal lym-
phoma (Box 54-6).
 Little difference was noted in survival times of cats treated with
either COP or Wisconsin-Madison (WM) in a study of 149 cats with
lymphoma.52 Surgical debulking of nasal tumors prior to radiotherapy
 Or chemotherapy is not associated with improved survival times.53
Nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas
The one year survival rate after resection for nasal planum squamous
cell carcinomas in cats is over 80% and disease free intervals postsur-
gery are reported as more than 500 days54.5s(Fig. 54-20). There are
fewer long-term reports following the more radical surgery5 in cats
 but in the author's opinion and experience the results with combined
nasal planectomy and premaxillectomy are very similar to those of
 nasal planectomy.
Figure 54-20 The long-term cosmetic appearance following a nasal
Fungal rhinitis
planectomy. This cat had no obvious morbidity associated with the 
procedure
 The prognosis for cats with aspergillosis rhinitis is guarded, with reso-
lution of clinical signs in approximately half the cases treated. Orbital
involvement appears to be a negative prognostic indicator. 42 Cryp-
Sinus obliteration
tococcocis is easier to treat Cases that are localized to the nasal cavity
were responsive to azole anti-fungal medication such as itraconazole.
There are few published clinical case series of sinus obliteration. In a
 though therapy was often protracted (over a year) and relapse occurred
series of six cats, three of the cat owners reported excellent results
 in about one-third of cases.1α In cases where the infection had invaded
between 18 and 22 months postsurgery. Two cats were improved with
 m a u m a i n au c
only intermittent sneezing and discharge and one cat was lost to
without flucytosine was required.20
follow up.30
REFERENCES
1.
Henderson SM, Bradley K, Day Ml, et al
5. Galler A, Shibly S, Bilek A, Hirt R.
of 30 cases. J Am Anim Hosp AssoC
Investigation of nasal disease in the cat- a
Chronic rhinitis in cats: A retrospective
1992;28:149-55
retrospective study of 77 cases. J Feline
study. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd
9.
Reed N, Gunn Moore D. Nasopharyngeal
Med Surg 2004;6:245-57.
2012;154(5):209-16.
disease in cats. J Feline Med Surg 2012;14:
2.
 Demko JL, Cohn LA. Chronic nasal
6. De Lorenzi D, Bertoncello D, Bottero E.
306-15.
discharge in cats: 75 cases [1993-2004].
Squash-preparation cytology from
10.
Cox NR, Brawner WR, Powers RD, Wright
I Am Vet Med Assoc 2007;230:1032-7.
nasopharyngeal masses in the cat:
JC. Tumors of the nose and paranasal
6.
Lamb CR, Richbell S, Mantis P.
cytological results and histological
sinuses in cats: 32 cases with comparison
Radiographic signs in cats with nasal
correlations in 30 cases. J Feline Med Surg
to a national database [1977-1987). I Am
disease. J Feline Med Surg 2003;5:
2008;10[1 ):55-60.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1991;27:339-47.
227-35.
 7. Michiels L, Day Ml. A retrospective study
 Mukaratirwa S, van der Linde-Sipman JS.
Schoenborn WC, Wisner ER, Kass PP.
of non-specifc rhinitis in 22 cats and the
Gruys E. Feline nasal and paranasal sinus
Dale M. Retrospective assessment of 
value of nasal cytology and histopathology.
tumours. Clinicopathological study.
computed tomographic imaging of feline
J Feline Med Surg 2003;5:279-85.
histomorphological description and
sinonasal disease in 62 cats. Vet Radiol
8.
Cape L. Feline idiopathic chronic
diagnostic immunohistochemistry of 123
Ultrasound 2003;44(2):185-95.
rhinosinusitis: a retrospective study
cases. I Feline Med Surg 2001;3:235-45.
668
Nose
Chapter
54
12. Bexfeld NH, Stell AJ, Gear RN, Dobson
mycological assessment of 29 cases and
of the cat. J Physiol 1959;148:
JM. Photodynamic therapy of superficial
 Evaluation of treatment using orally
93-107.
nasal planum squamous cell carcinomas
administered fluconazole. I Vet Mycology
43. Ashbaugh EA, McKiernan BC, Miller CJ.
in cats: 55 cases. J Vet Int Med 2008;22:
1992;30(2):133-44.
 Powers B. Nasal hydropusion: A novel
1385-9.
27. Trivedi SR, Malik R, Meyer W, Sykes JE.
tumour biopsy technique. J Am Anim
13. Goodfellow M, Hayes A, Murphy S.
 Feline cryptococcosis: impact of current
Hosp Assoc 2011;47:312-16.
Brearley M. A retrospective study of
research on clinical management. J Feline 
44.
Holmberg DL, Fries C, Cockshutt J, Van 
strontium 90 plesiotherapy for feline
Med Surg 2011;13(3):163-72.
 Pelt D. Ventral rhinotomy in the dog and
squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
28.
 Ossent P. Systemic aspergillosis and
cat. Vet Surg 1989;18(6):446-9.
planum. J Feline Med Surg 2006;8:
mucormycosis in 23 cats. Vet Rec
169-76.
45.
Holmberg DL. Sequelae of ventral
1987;120:330-3
rhinotomy in dogs and acts with
14. Grier RL, Brewer WG Jr, Theilen GH.
29.
O'Brien CR, Krockenberger MB, Wigney
inflammatory and neoplastic nasal
Hyperthermic treatment of superficial
Dl, et al. Retrospective study of feline and
pathology: A retrospective study.
tumours in cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med
cnine cryptococcosis in Australia from
Canadian Vet I 1996;36:483-5.
Assoc 1980;177:227-33.
1981 to 2001:195 cases. Med Mycology
46. Sissener TR, Bacon Nl, Friend E, et al.
15. Stell Al, Dobson JM, Langmack K.
2004;42(5):449-60.
Combined clotrimazole irrigation
 Photodynamic therapy of feline
30. McLellan GJ, Aquino SM, Mason DR,
and depot therapy for canine nasal
 superfcial squamous cell carcinoma using
et al. Use of posaconazole in the
aspergillosis. J Small Anim Pract
 topical 5-aminolaevulinic acid. J Small 
management of invasive orbital
2006;47(6):312-15.
Anim Pract 2001;42:164-9.
aspergillosis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
47. Winstanley EW. Trephining frontal sinuses 
16. Theon AP, Madewell BR, Shearn Vl,
Assoc 2006;42:302-7.
in the treatment of rhinitis and sinusitis 
Moulton JE. Prognostic factors associated
31.
 Miller Rl. Nodular granulomatous fungal
in the cat. Vet Rec 1974;95:289.
with radiotherapy of squamous cell
skin diseases of cats in the United
48.
Mellanby Rl, Herrtage ME, Dobson JM.
carcinoma of the nasal plane in cats. J Am
Kingdom: a retrospective review. Vet Derm
Long-term outcome of eight cats with
Vet Med Assoc 1995;206:991-6.
2009;21:130-5.
 non-lymphoproliferative nasal tumours
17. Theon AP, VanVechten MK, Madewell
32.
 Dye C, Johnson EM, Gruffydd-Jones TJ.
 treated by megavoltage radiotherapy.
BR. Intratumoral administration of
Alternaeria species infection in nine
J Feline Med Surg 2002;4:77-81.
carboplatin for treatment of squamous
 domestic cats. J Feline Med Surg
49.
 Theon AP, Peaston AE, Madewell BR,
cell carcinomas of the nasal plane in cats.
2009;11[(4):332-6.
 Dungworth DL. Irradiation of non
Am J Vet Res 1996;57:205-10.
33.
Wray ID, Sparkes AH, Johnson EM.
lymphoproliferative neoplasms of the
18. Greci V, Mortellaro CM, Olivero D, et al.
Infection of the subcutis of the nose in a
nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses in
Inflammatory polyps of the nasal 
cat caused by Mucor species: successful
16 cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:
turbinates of cats: an argument for
 treatment using posaconazole. J Feline
78-83.
designation as feline mesenchymal nasal
Med Surg 2008;10(5):523-7
50. Haney SM, Beaver L, Turrel J, et al.
hamartoma. J Feline Med Surg 2011;13:
34.
Bostock DE, Coloe PJ
Survival analysis of 97 cats with nasal
213-19.
Phaecohyphomycosis caused by Exophiala
lymphoma: A multi-institutional
19. Chambers BA, Laksito MA, Fliegner RA,
jarselmei in a domestic cat. J Comp Path
retrospective study [1986-2006). J Vet Int
et al. Nasal vascular hamartoma in a
1982;92:479-82.
Med 2009;23:287-94.
domestic shorthair cat. Aust Vet Journal
35.
Knights CB, Lee K, Rycroft AN, et al.
 Sfligoi G, Theon AP, Kent MS. Response
2010;88:107 -11.
 Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Lilocladium
of nineteen cats with nasal lymphoma
20. Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Zimmer C, Greene
species in a cat. Vet Rec 2008;162:
to radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
CE. Fungal rhinitis and sinusitis in three
415-17.
Vet Rad Ultrasound 2007;48(4):
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2003;222:
36.
Planellas M, Roura X, Garcia F, Pastor J.
388-93.
1380-4.
Chronic rhinitis secondary to the
52.
Taylor SS, Goodfellow MR, Browne Wl.
21. Furrow E, Groman RP. Intranasal infusion
intrusion of a tooth into the nasal cavity
et al. Feline extranodal lymphoma:
 of clotrimazole for the treatment of nasal
of a cat. Vet Rec 2009;165:325-6.
response to chemotherapy and survival in
aspergillosis in two cats. I Am Vet Med 
37.
 Riley P Nasopharyngeal grass foreign
110 cats. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:
Assoc 2009;235:1188-93.
body in eight cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
584-92.
22. Barachetti L, Mortellaro CM, Di
1993;202:299-300.
53.
 Evans SM, Hendrick M. Radiotherapy
Giancamillo M, et al. Bilateral orbital
 38. Anderson Gl. The treatment of chronic
of feline nasal tumours. Vet Radiol
and nasal aspergillosis in a cat. Vet
 sinusitis in six cats by ethmoid conchal
1988;30(3):128-32.
 Ophthalmology 2009;12(3):176-82.
curettage and autogenous fat graft
54.
Lana SE, Ogilvie GK, Withrow Sl, et al.
23. Peiffer RL, Belkin PV, Janke BH. Orbital
 sinus ablation. Vet Surg 1987;16(2):
Feline cutaneous squamous cell
 cellulitis, sinusitis, and pneumonitis
131-4.
arcinoma of the nasal planum and
caused by Penicillum sp in a cat. J Am Vet
39.
 Bright RM, Thacker L. Fate of autogenous
pinnae: G1 cases. J Am Anim Hosp AssoC
Med Assoc 1980:176:449- 551.
fat implants in the frontal sinuses of cats.
1997;33:329-32.
24. Wilkinson GT, Sutton RH, Grono LR.
Am J Vet Res 1983;44(1):22-7.
55.
Withrow SJ, Straw RC. 1990 Resection of
Aspergillus spp. infection associated with
 40. Harvey CE. Surgical correction of stenotic 
the nasal planum in nine cats and fve
orbital cellulitis and sinusitis in a cat.
nares in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1990;26:
J Small Anim Pract 1982;23:127-31.
1986;22:31-2.
219-22.
25. Goodall SA, Lane JG, Warnock Dw. The
41.
Trostel CD, Frankel DJ. Punch resection 
56.
Lascelles BD, Henderson RA, Seguin B.
 diagnosis and treatment of a case of nasal
 alaplasty technique in dogs and cats with
et al. Bilateral rostral maxillectomy
aspergillosis in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
stenotic nares: 14 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
 and nasal planectomy for large rostral 
1984;25:627-33.
Assoc 2010;46:5-11.
 maxillofacial neoplasms in six dogs 
26.
Malik R, Wigney Dl, Muir DB, et al.
42.
Holmes RL, Wolstencroft JH. Accessory
and one cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
Cryptococcosis in cats:clinical and
 sources of blood supply to the brain
2004;40:137 -46.
669
55
T
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
K.M. Pratschke, K.D. Smith
 There are several indications for surgery of the maxilla and mandible
 The lips in the cat are small and relatively immobile compared to
in feline patients; this chapter will describe the indications and tech-
dogs. They form a large rima oris with the upper and lower lips
niques of mandibulectomy and maxillctomy. There has traditionally
 meeting at the commissure caudally. The lips consist of skin, muscle,
been an assumption that cats do not tolerate such procedures well 
and mucosa and contain numerous small scattered salivary glands.
pue uoudo uo paseq uaaq Aaaiel seq uodunsse siut qanouie
The cheeks form the buccal vestibule, which receives salivary secre-
anecdote with only limited documented information available for
tions from the parotid, molar, and zygomatic salivary glands. The hard
review. Indications for these procedures include oral neoplasia, non-
palate separates the oral and nasal cavities and is formed from the
neoplastic oral lesions, intractable infection, and traumatic injuries.
incisive, maxillary, and palatine bones. The oral aspect of the hard
The most commonly encountered oral tumors are squamous cell
palate is covered by thick mucosa with transverse folds (rugae) that
carcinoma (SCC) and fibrosarcoma, both of which are locally invasive
are continuous with the gingiva rostrally and laterally and the soft
and frequently invade bone. Maxillectomy and mandibulectomy
 palate caudally. The floor of the oral cavity is supported by paired
allow resection of these tumors with wide margins,l-4 and therefore
mylohyoideus muscles passing between the mandibular bodies. The
provide potentially curative treatment. Traumatic injuries such as bite
ventral oral mucosa has two protuberances to either side of the lingual
wounds, projectile injuries, and road traffc accidents may result in a
frenulum known as sublingual caruncles, marking the opening of the
degree of dysfunction that is not compatible with life, but which may
 mandibular and sublingual salivary ducts.
be addressed via maxillectomy or mandibulectomy in a way that
 The muscles of mastication attach mainly to the ramus of the man-
allows a good quality of life and normal or near normal function to
dible (Fig. 55-3). The temporalis muscle attaches to the coronoid
be restored.
process and the pterygoid muscles attach medially and caudally.
 Fractures of the mandible and disorders of the temporomandibular
ventral to the temporalis attachment The masseter arises from the
joint including ankylosis and locking-jaw syndrome are common in
 Zygomatic process and attaches to the ventrolateral surface at the mas-
the cat and these are covered in Chapter 26 of Feline Orthopedic
 seteric fossa. The digastricus attaches to the mandibular body.
Surgery and Musculoskeletal Disease.5
 Blood supply to the rostral skull and mandible is from branches of
the maxillary artery. The inferior alveolar artery enters the mandible
at the mandibular foramen then runs through the mandibular canal
supplying teeth before branching to exit through the rostral, middle,
 and caudal mental foramina. The infraorbital artery, palatine arteries
SURGICAL ANATOMY
and external ophthalmic arteries branch from the maxillary artery
medial to the rostral zygomatic arch. The infraorbital artery passes
The skull is a rigid structure made up of many bones, which articulates
through the infraorbital canal to emerge at the infraorbital foramen,
with the mandible at the two temporomandibular joints (Fig. 55-1).
supplying the upper dental arcade, nose and upper lip. The paired
 - 'ix a o le io ud y iui aai Au A
 minor palatine arteries run ventrally and supply the soft and caudal
sive, palatine frontal, vomer, zygomatic, and lacrimal bones, so a
hard palate. The paired major palatine arteries pass through the major
thorough knowledge of regional anatomy is essential. The mandible 
 palatine canals emerging at the major palatine foramen level with the
is comprised of two hemimandibles firmly united rostrally at the
caudal edge of the upper fourth premolar. Rostrally the sphenopala-
mandibular symphysis (Fig. 55-2). The horizontal part is termed the
tine artery branches from the major palatine artery to pass through
body and the vertical part the ramus. The permanent dentition of
the palatine fissure to supply the interior of the rostral nasal cavity.
the cat is coded 2(13/3-C1/1-P3/2-M1/1), although in the experience
 Lymphatic drainage is primarily to mandibular lymph nodes with
 of the authors use of this terminology is not consistent amongst vet-
regional drainage to both ipsilateral and contralateral retropharyngeal
erinary surgeons. The premolars are numbered 2-4 on the upper
nodes, the cervical chain, and then the prescapular and anterior
arcade and 3-4 on the lower arcade.
mediastinal nodes.
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOI: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00055-X
671
Section
7
The Head and Neck
10
Figure 55-2 Two views of the feline mandible are provided in this
A
figure, medial and lateral. 1, Premolar 3; 2, premolar 4; 3, molar 1: 4.
coronoid process;: 5, condylar process; 6. angular process; 7. mental 
foramina: 8, mandibular foramen; 9, mandibular symphysis.
B
A
Figure 55-1 Three views of the feline skull are provided in this figure,
lateral, ventrodorsal, and rostral. 1, Incisive bone; 2, canine tooth;
Figure 55-3 This picture illustrates the muscles of mastication on the
3. palatine fissure; 4, upper premolar 2: 5. maxilla; 6, upper premolar 3:
lateral skull and the insertions on the medial mandible. 1, Temporalis; 
7. palatine foramen; 8, upper premolar 4; 9. palatine bone; 10, upper
2, digastricus; 3. masseter: 4, attachment of mylohyoideus; 
molar 1; 11. zygomatic arch; 12, lacrimal bone; 13, frontal bone;
5. attachment of digastricus; 6, attachment of medial pterygoid;
14, nasal bone; 15, infraorbital foramen.
7, attachment of temporalis
672
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
Chapter
55
 Development of oral SCC has been linked with environmental factors
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
such as the use of flea collars, diet, and passive smoking.18 1 Affected
cats have a median age of 10-12 years and there is no sex predisposi-
tion. Grosy, the appearance is variable and may be proliferative or
Clinical presentation
ulcerative, underlining the importance of biopsy for accurate diagno-
Oral masses are often present for some time before the owner becomes 
sis. Invasion of bone is common in feline oral SCC and is often
aware of a problem and therefore may have reached an advanced stage
aggressive with osteolysis, infection, and associated tooth loss.20
 of development. Clinical signs commonly encountered include ptyal-
Regional lymph node metastasis occurs in less than 25% of cases and
ism that may be hemorrhagic, weight loss, dysphagia, inappetence,
distant metastasis is rare.17 In the dog. the metastatic rate is site
and halitosis. Other signs can include epistaxis, exophthalmus, and
dependent, with rostral tumors having a lower metastatic potential
tooth loss.
than caudal or tonsilar SCCs.21 There is currently no evidence that this
is the case in the cat. A syndrome of paraneoplastic hypercalcemia has
been described in two cats with SCC.22
Diagnostic procedures
Oral fbrsarcoma is the second most common oral neoplasm of cats,
A minimum database of hematology, senum biochemistry, urinalysis,
comprising approximately 13-17% of all oral tumors.17 Affected cats
and feline leukemia virus (FeLV)/feline immunodeficiency virus
have a median age of 10 years and there is no sex predisposition.
(FIV) status should always be obtained prior to further diagnostic
Grossly, lesions characteristically appear frm and solid. These are
procedures, and a thorough examination of the oral cavity under
locally aggressive tumors and bone involvement is common; however.
 general anesthesia is mandatory to fully assess the extent of disease.
the metastatic rate to regional and distant sites is low. In dogs the
As the majority of feline oral masses are malignant, full staging
lungs are the most common site for metastasis,2 but it is not clear if
is essential (see Chapter 14). Lymphatic spread is typically to the
this is the case in the cat.24
submandibular lymph nodes initially, then to the mediastinal and
Malignant melanoma is rare in cats, accounting for only 0.8% of
 prescapular lymph nodes via the cervical chain.? Distant metastatic
feline oral tumors in a ten-year survey carried out in 1989; unfortu-
disease may be to the lungs, or other organs depending on the primary
nately, more recent data is not available.1 Once again, it is locally
tumor type.
aggressive although metastasis has not been reported in the cat. Osteo-
 Diagnostic imaging is essential to assess the extent of the tumor and
sarcoma accounts for 2.4% of feline oral tumors and seems to be more
the invasion of local bone. Orthogonal radiographs of the skull as
commonly seen in the maxilla, although available numbers for analy-
well as intraoral views may be used to assess invasion of bone via lysis
sis are low and the data is now quite old so its reliability is uncertain.!
or new bone production. However, radiographs may underestimate
 Although one study suggested that mandibular osteosarcoma in cats
the extent of the tumor, as lysis is only evident once 40% of bone
is associated with a good two-year survival rate,24 two further studies
cortex has been destroyed.? Computed tomography combining
concluded that axial osteosarcoma carried a poorer prognosis with
plain and contrast images is very useful to assess maxillary masses
shorter survival times when compared with feline appendicular oste-
that extend into the nasal cavity, and caudal mandibular masses,?
 osarcoma. Other tumor types reported include salivary gland adeno-
and provides an enhanced level of detail over conventional
carcinoma, lymphoma, chondrosarcoma and osteoma, but these are
l'ou ydeisopei
 more rare occurrences. 16,25
In one study, just over half of cats and dogs with regional
lymph node metastasis from oral tumors had submandibular
Epulides and odontogenic tumors
lymph node enlargement,² although the likelihood of local
lymphatic disease varies with tumor type However, palpation of local
Epulis is a clinical 'umbrella' term used to describe any one of a
and regional lymph nodes is not a sensitive test for lymph node
group of diseases characterized by grossly visible gingival prolifera-
metastasis and, as a minimum, fine needle aspiration for cytology
tion; as such it does not constitute a histologic diagnosis.26 In
should be performed. There is an argument however, for performing
cats, epulides have been classified into four types: fibromatous, ossify-
either incisional or excisional biopsy in preference to aspiration
ing, acanthomatous, and giant cell. Fibromatous epulis was described
as this is a more accurate way of staging local disease.13,14 Tumor
as the third most common oral tumor in cats in the 1989 survey.
surface inflammation and necrosis mean that touch cytology prepara-
representing 7.8% of all feline oral tumors.16 However, a more
tions are often non-diagnostic or misleading and are therefore not
recent study showed most fibromatous epulides also had acan-
recommended.
thomatous and ossifying components so the true distribution
Biopsy is essential in determining the nature of an oral tumor. The
is diffcult to assess.2 Lesions may be solitary Or multiple, with
biopsy tract should form part of the tissue that will be excised and
multiple tumors being relatively common in cats under three years
should avoid normal peripheral tissues to prevent contamination. In 
old.26.27 Granulomas, which may be pyogenic or peripheral giant
humans, incisional biopsy of oral SCC results in transient release of
cell in nature, may resemble epulides grossy16.28 but peripheral
tumor cells into the blood but there is no supporting evidence for
giant cell epulis has been documented to show aggressive behavior
biopsy-induced metastasis in small animals and the overall prognosis
such as rapid growth, ulceration, and osteolysis, which is not typical
 ua su e asdo a paiaid paaeun sua
for most epulides.26
placed.15
Odontogenic tumors or ameloblastomas are tumors of the epithelial
cells of the dental lamina, and may resemble epulides clinically and
histologically.1 In dogs, fibromatous and ossifying epulides have been
st ii sie u inq 'seuoqy suaouopo ieiaudad se payisseial
SURGICAL DISEASES
inductive odontogenic tumors, also known less correctly as feline
Neoplastic diseases
inductive fbroameloblastoma, are unique to cats?? and are most com-
s suno u paqsap ae aa u iesi au u uaas uu
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common oral neoplasm in
and may be locally invasive although metastasis has not been
cats, comprising approximately 6l-80% of all oral tumors.16.17
described. Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumors are rare in cats
673
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
B
C
D
Figure 55-4 (A) Comminuted, open and contaminated rostral mandibular fracture in a three-year-old male neutered domestic long-haired cat that
had been involved in a road traffic accident. (B) Intraoral radiograph shows comminution and loss of some of the incisors and rostral mandible.
(C) The remaining rostral mandible and incisors were debrided. (D) Primary closure was possible.
and may be locally invasive but do not seem to metastasize.30 Odon-
Cats with severe dental disease can have resorption of the tooth root
o Axe aq e pue sie u paqsap uaaq ay sis oiuao
socket, periapical infection, abscessation, and periosteal new bone.
mandibular in nature.31
This must be differentiated from neoplasia and biopsy, with samples
taken for culture and histopathologic analysis used to help in the dif-
ferentiation. Removal of the offending tooth and debridement of the
Other surgical conditions
 offending alveolus should be curative in such cases.
Fractures of the mandible and maxilla may not always be amenable
to repair, depending on location and severity. In some patients teeth
may be absent, bone quality poor, periodontal disease may be severe,
GENERAL PREOPERATIVE
au ssed a aul ai au io tuasaid aq a sai
SURGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
an alveolus. In such cases partial mandibulectomy or maxillectomy
may offer a superior prognosis to primary fracture repair, with a better
quality of life and function (Fig. 55-4). To date, however, this treat-
 Despite the increasing use and availability of radiation and chemo-
ment concept is only poorly documented in the available literature,
therapy, surgery offers a faster, cheaper, and sometimes more reliable
and has been described in only a small case series in the dog?2 and
'sadk ioun Aueu iod sioum Pos isou ioy Adeia jo pouau
eoio jo ioaise stun aianeumoun ieue suea s sie u le ie iou
aggressive surgical resection with appropriate margins remains the
surgery is currently based largely on individual experience and clinical
treatment of choice. When planning surgery the objectives of the treat-
anecdote rather than on widely available evidence. Partial maxillec-
ment must be clearly defned, i.e., is surgery of curative intent, is it
tomy has been reported in the management of oronasal fistula in the
intended to debulk prior to adjunctive radiation, or is it solely pallia-
dog,*3 but there are no similar reports in the cat.
tive in nature?
674
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
Chapter
55
Margins
considerably wider clip. The planned reconstruction will also dictate
the clip: for example, ifthe use of an omocervical flap (see Chapter 19)
Tumors may be surrounded by a pseudocapsule (a mix of normal
is anticipated then the clip must extend down the neck for the appro-
and neoplastic cells) and/or a reactive zone (mainly inflammatory
 priate distance. The planned placement of a feeding tube at the end of
the procedure will also require additional preoperative clipping. The
and selection of appropriate margins. Removal of the tumor from
mouth and skin are prepared aseptically; in people, chlorhexidine is
considered most suitable for oral preparation,42 but there are no
cated but may be suitable when curetting a well-differentiated odon-
similar studies in animals and povidone-iodine is commonly used for
toma from the mandible. A marginal excision involves removal of the
oral preparation. Following aseptic preparation and draping, the
tumor by dissection in the reactive zone and is appropriate for
 planned margins of the incision are outlined with a sterile skin marker.
some benign tumors but never for a malignant tumor.3s Where the
tumor is malignant and local infiltration is expected, wide excision is
Maxillectomy
indicated. A benchmark of 10 mm is often used in veterinary medi-
cine, based on recommendations for resection of oral SCCs in
Maxillectomy is performed at varying levels based on the location and
humans.337 In reality, this margin has had little validation in veteri-
extent of tissue to be removed and may be rostral, central, caudal,
nary medicine and may not be universally applicable, particularly for
unilateral, or bilateral in differing combinations (Boxes 55-l and
a taimeu uaissase ioaaisau sal paiapisuo aie ieu sou
55-2; Fig. 55-5A,B).
locally invasive and infltrative tumors such as fibrosarcomas or feline
squamous cell carcinomas, on the other hand, may require margins
and involves excision of the incisive bone, rostral maxilla the incisors.
greater than 10 mm, and many surgeons will take 1.5-2 cm margins
and canine teeth. A bilateral maxillectomy can be extended caudally to
for oral sarcomas. This margin, however, is to a large extent arbitrary
the level of the second premolar although this extent of maxillectomy
in nature, and its use has not been validated for clinical cases. Wide
 has only been documented in dogs. A combined dorsal and intraoral
resection is typically achieved through partial mandibulectomy or
approach has been described in dogs for maxillectomy for tumors
involving tissues more caudal to the third premolar.47 The results
ibulectomy or rostral maxillectomy. 38
obtained in this study represented an improvement over previously
reported studies, and the authors postulated this was due to the better
exposure and access to the area afforded by the combined approach
Healing
 over the standard intraoral approach. There are currently no reports of
Tissues of the oral cavity will heal readily due to good blood supply:
this approach being used in a cat and it is likely that anatomic differ-
however, basic principles of good surgical technique remain impor-
ences mean it will be both less applicable and less appropriate.
tant and atraumatic tissue handling is essential. As most osteotomies
Given the 10 mm margins typically required around tumors, a uni-
lateral rostral maxillectomy would rarely be suitable in cats. Where
for irrigation with sterile saline during use to prevent thermal
there has been extension of the tumor into the adjacent buccal or
damage, although this is once again an approach that has not been
labial mucosa, reconstruction may not be possible using conventional
clinically validated and is based largely on opinion rather than evi-
 techniques and consideration may need to be given to the use of novel
dence. Oral tumor resections are considered clean-contaminated
techniques such as the temporal muscle flap (see Chapter 19).46
surgeries. In humans, such surgeries are considered to warrant pro-
Mandibulectomy
cephalosporins, and clindamycin have been suggested as the most
appropriate for perioperative use in cats, based on the typical oral
Partial mandibulectomy techniques are described based on the area
of mandible excised (Boxes 55-3 to 55-5; Fig. 55-5). Unilateral rostral
flora, but it should be borne in mind that this recommendation is
now over 15 years old.40
is less suitable in the cat as proper application of the 10 mm margin
around malignant tumors of the rostral mandible will usually incor-
Analgesia
porate the mandibular symphysis.°4 Bilateral rostral mandibulectomy
foreshortens the mandible and has many similarities to the unilateral
 Sensory nerve blocks of the infraorbital and inferior alveolar nerves41
rostral mandibulectomy, although the mandibular body is transected
provide excellent analgesia and can prevent central sensitization,
bilaterally rostral to the third premolar.
therefore they form a very useful part of a multimodal analgesic pro-
 Radical excision can be achieved by hemimandibulectomy and
tocol (see Chapter 2). Blocking the infraorbital nerve will desensitize
three-quarters mandibulectomy but there is only limited information
the upper dental arcade, the sof and hard palates ipsilaterally, and
available regarding how cats fare after this type of procedure with the
the muzzle Blocking the inferior alveolar nerve will desensitize the
majority of clinical experience being related to dogs.
lower dental arcade and chin.
Mandibular rim excision, where only the dorsal cortex of the man-
dibular body is osteotomized and the ventral cortex is maintained has
 been described in dogs.4 Although this has the advantage of main-
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
taining mandibular integrity, the small size of the feline mandible is
loy ueu iauo suonasa ioum ioy sies ui asn sii apnipaid ot Aia
'sapinda suiyisso io snoneuoiqy se ypns sasseu usjuaq
The patient is placed in lateral recumbency for most unilateral maxil-
lectomy and mandibulectomy surgeries although for bilateral proce-
dures dorsal or sternal recumbency may be preferable The oropharynx
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
is packed and hair is clipped on the affected side. The extent of
the clip is dictated by the planned procedure, so for a partial
hemimandibulectomy it may be adequate to clip ventral to the eye.
Oropharyngeal swabs or packing should be removed and the orophar-
whereas a maxillectomy involving partial orbitectomy may require a
 ynx suctioned prior to extubation. Cats dislike having to open-mouth
675
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
 Box 55-1 Rostral maxillectomy (Fig. 55-5A,B)
 The cat is positioned in either ventral or lateral recumbency depending
uoisnoud os abeuuoway suenjubis yim pate posse ag Aeu jeut 
s naisad pue eson leo aul auaajaid suoabans aul uo
should be made for availability of blood products should they be 
incised at the level of the preplanned margin. If the margin crosses 
required (see Chapter 5). Temporary carotid ligation prior to surgery
 the major palatine artery, this should be identified and ligated prior 
has been used to control severe hemorrhage in the dog.4z but this 
to division. Although bone may be cut with an osteotome and mallet,
technique cannot be safely used in cats due to the risk of both 
the control offered by a powered saw is preferred by many surgeons 
morbidity and mortality.43
although the precision of a small osteotomy and mallet may be useful 
 Closure of standard maxillectomy defects is achieved by raising a
for completion of osteotomy lines in areas that have limited access.
flap of vestibular mucosa-submucosa from the upper lip lateral to the
In the dog. various authors have recommended positioning the 
defect. The incision is started parallel to the lateral edge of the defect
 suture line over adjacent intact bone or leaving a flap of soft tissue to
then extended perpendicularly toward the lip margins. Dissection of 
allow easier closure. Given the relatively small size of the feline skull,
the flap is continued until the defect can be closed without tension 
'suibhew jenibans aut buisjuoudwon inoulm algissod Alaney ae sdely yns 
 and without drawing the lip into the mouth to an extent that is likely
 The maxillectomy line should extend dorsally to include the tooth
to result in trauma from teeth. Synthetic absorbable sutures are used 
roots; if they are inadvertently sectioned then any residual portions 
to attach the labial flap to the mucoperiosteum. Monofilament suture
 of root must be retrieved before closure. The nasal cavity is exposed
 will cause less tissue drag during closure. A two-layer closure has
following excision of the bone in a maxillectomy, and presurgical
been recommended to close submucosa and mucosa separately:
aeldoudde lauaym bupieban suawssasse apnpu! pinous buuueld
however, in reality this may not always be possible in the cat where 
anpanoud e s! sul saeuigunt leseu jo leaouan aunban l suibe
 tissues are very thin.
(A)
B
Figure 55-5 (A) Unilateral rostral maxillectomy: (B) bilateral rostral maxillectomy
Box 55-2 Central, caudal and hemimaxillectomy (Fig. 55-6)
The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency. The caudal osteotomy 
Extension of the technique across the midline is limited by the
required when performing caudal maxillectomy or hemimaxillectomy 
availability of soft tissue for closure. If the defect cannot be closed 
extends from the midline of the hard palate at the level of the upper
with a labial flap as previously described in Box 55-1. then
molar to the rostral base of the zygomatic arch. This can be combined
consideration should be given to the use of an axial pattern flap such
with resection of portions of the ventral orbit, zygomatic arch and
as the caudal auricular, omocervical or superficial temporal,4 possibly
ramus of the mandible as necessary (Fg. 55-10).
los euoppe apaoud oi dely apsnu jesoduat e ylm pauiguos
When performing central or caudal maxillectomy, transection of the 
tissue cover. Microvascular techniques may also be used to allow
infraorbital canal may be required. Ligation of the infraorbital vessels is
 ing stdely aay snoaueinooku lo (s!lesodual) seinosnw e buisn aunsop
 not possible in advance so this cut should be the final one in the 
access to the relevant equipment and expertise is likely to limit 
maxillectomy and suction should be used to identify, retrieve, and
routine application of these techniques.
ligate the infraorbital and sphenopalatine arteries as rapidly and 
 efficiently as possible.
676
 Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
Chapter
55
Box 55-2 Continued
A
B
Figure 55-6 (A) Central maxillectomy: (B) caudal maxillectomy: (C) hemimaxillectomy.
 Box 55-3 Hemimandibulectomy (Fig. 55-7)
pue esonw jeso aut xouagunan jelael ui jualied aui yin 
 transection of the digastricus caudoventrally, the mandibular foramen
periosteum are incised at the level of the pre-planned margin. The
is identified and the mandibular artery and vein ligated and 
symphysis is split to facilitate dissection and soft tissues elevated 
po paa si snwen leiaa aul uaeoy aui laua aaul se paasuen
subperiosteally as much as surgical margins will permit.
its muscular attachments (pterygoid, masseter, and temporalis), with 
To improve exposure caudally, the commissure of thelip may be
subperiosteal elevation of the muscles being a less traumatic option 
incised full thickness toward the angle of the mandible. Following 
where possible.
The temporomandibular joint is incised and disarticulated, taking
care to avoid the maxillary artery and its branches medially. Removal 
of the mandible is completed by dissection of remaining temporal 
muscle attachments from the coronoid process.
The exact method of closure is dependent on the extent of soft 
tissue resection, and as with the maxillectomy techniques there is no 
single description that will fit all cases. If labial and buccal mucosa 
Jauurs e buisn esoonu jenbugns ol pasodde aq Aew ll'sulewal
absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern or simple
interrupted pattern depending on individual preference. If surgery 
requires removal of the labial mucosa rostrally, the skin may be
sutured directly to the incisor gingiva. f the commissure was 
incised as part of surgery, it is closed in three layers, i.e., mucosa,
muscularis, and skin (Fg. 55-11). Advancement of the commissure 
(commissurorrhaphy) to the level of the first premolar or canine teeth 
has been described in dogs to prevent the tongue hanging from the 
mouth; however, it is unknown whether a similar approach would be
Figure 55-7 Hemimandibulectomy.
necessary or appropriate for cats.
breathe so if the nasal cavity has been entered and is therefore likely
Analgesia should be assessed regularly to ensure that appropriate
to be at least partially occluded from edema and blood clots the
levels are being provided; this will typically require a multimodal
patient should be monitored carefully for dyspnea.
approach.
The patient should be carefully monitored for the frst 12 hours
 Intravenous fluid therapy is continued at maintenance levels, with
following surgery in case of ongoing or recurring hmorrhage. Sedation
may be indicated if the patient becomes distressed, particularly if
is restored. Although the majority of canine patients will readily eat
this worsens respiratory function or causes recurrent hemorrhage.
with assistance within 24 hours of surgery, cats can be slower to eat.
677
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 55-4 Rostral mandibulectomy (Fig. 55-8)
 The cat is positioned in dorsal or lateral recumbency depending on the 
although this will sometimes not be possible if margins are to be
 surgeon's preference.
maintained .
The mandible is osteotomized at the symphysis and at the body 
 Unilateral rostral mandibulectomy
rostral to the third premolar using either an osteotome, air powered 
The soft tissue incisions are determined by surgical margins and the
saw or drill, depending on individual preference.
 oral mucosa and periosteum are incised at the level of the pre-planned
 The inferior alveolar artery should be ligated if possible, but in
margin. Care should be taken to ligate the middle mental blood
many cases hemorrhage from this vessel is best controlled through
vessels and to avoid the sublingual caruncle during dissection
the application of pressure and use of a hemostatic agent such as 
bone wax in the mandibular canal
-esosnu jeigel jo delt e buisien Ag papnsuosan s! pajap aul
submucosa and suturing it to the sublingual mucosa and symphyseal
gingiva.
 In the dog. unilateral rostral mandibulectomy may be achieved 
 without complete separation of the symphysis; however, this is
unlikely to be feasible in the cat.
Stabilization of the remaining hemimandible with implants and 
grafts has been described but this is generally not considered 
necessary.
 Bilateral rostral mandibulectomy
 The cat is positioned in dorsal recumbency. The soft tissue incisions 
are determined by surgical margins and the oral mucosa and 
periosteum are incised at the level of the pre-planned margin. Care 
should be taken to ligate the middle mental blood vessels and to 
avoid the sublingual caruncle during dissection although this will 
 sometimes not be possible if margins are to be maintained.
 The mandible is osteotomized bilaterally at the body rostral to the
third premolar using either an osteotome, air powered saw or drill.
depending on individual preference.
 The inferior alveolar artery should be ligated if possible, but in 
many cases hemorrhage from this vessel is best controlled through
the application of pressure and use of a hemostatic agent such as 
bone wax in the mandibular canal.
 Reconstruction can generally be achieved through suturing the 
labial mucosa to the sublingual mucosa without creating a labial flap.
It is important to ensure the margin of the lip is positioned in an
elevated position relative to the oral mucosa to prevent, or at least 
reduce, drooling.
Redundant skin may need to be resected from the chin to achieve
Figure 55-8 (A) Unilateral rostral mandibulectomy: (B) bilateral
a cosmetic closure. Where the lower lip has been resected to preserve
 rostr al mandibulectomy.
eaibui yosoui aui ot Apap paanins a Ae us 'suibe lenibans
 Box 55-5 Central and caudal mandibulectomy techniques (Fig. 55-9)
Central (or segmental) mandibulectomy
located masses or management of traumatic injuries. The vertical 
This technique involves removal of part of the body of the mandible
ramus may be removed via an approach made over the zygomatic 
wnansoad pue esosnu leso aul lejowaid puosas ayt ot lepnen 
arch. Osteotomy of the zygomatic arch is described but is not always
are incised at the level of the pre-planned margin, the osteotomy
necessary.
 An incision overlying the length of the arch is made and the
 performed as described previously, and closure again achieved by
raising a labial mucosa-submucosa flap.
temporal and masseter muscles are detached from the dorsal, ventral 
and medial aspects before the zygomatic arch is excised and wrapped
It should be remembered that devitalization and death of the teeth
in a blood-soaked swab. Dissection of the temporal and masseter 
rostral to the osteotomy will occur following full thickness segmental 
muscles is continued to the vertical ramus taking care to preserve
mandibulectomy. As malocclusion tends to occur after this procedure.
and dogs will commonly 'grind' the molars in the caudal mandible
 appropriate margins. The vertical ramus is osteotomized and 
removed, then the zygomatic arch may be re-attached at either end 
after surgery. techniques for mandibular reconstruction have been 
loy pagosap uaag lou aaey sanbiuupat sellwis t bop aut u! pagnsap
with orthopedic wire. Re-attachment of the masseter is achieved with
 cats and it is unknown whether they would be applicable or not.
synthetic non-absorbable suture looped around the zygomatic arch.
Care should be taken to close dead space. This technique has been
Caudal mandibulectomy
described via an oral approach,33 but this is not in common clinical 
Caudal mandibulectomy is not a commonly performed or required 
usage.
technique in veterinary surgery but may be indicated for caudally
678
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
Chapter
55
Box 55-5 Continued
A1
Figure 55-9 (A) Central mandibulectomy: (B) caudal mandibulectomy
Figure 55-10 This cat had a maxillary fibrosarcoma that necessitated
central maxillectomy combined with ocular exenteration and partial
from the dorsal head and neck.
loj euouipien lian snowenbs eingipueu e pey ien siul Ll-ss aune
which hemimandibulectomy was performed incorporating a full thickness
incision of the labial commissure to improve access. A local wound 
01 agni Awoisobeudosa ue s! se aneid u! s! lalauien (layeos) elsabjeue
enable provision of postoperative nutrition.
 -ioy uuo Aey aq oi paaiaiad si auaadeui io/ue eeus
lowing mandibulectomy and maxillectomy in cats and it may be
tomy feeding tube at the time of surgery (see Chapter 12). Prehension
and mastication may be affected by tension in the lips and a range
COMPLICATIONS
of soft food should be offered, although foods that have a paste-like
 consistency should be avoided due to the potential for them to seep
 As cats have minimal spacing between teeth, performing the osteot-
between sutures and cause local infection. Although there are no
omy cuts required for either mandibulectomy or maxillectomy
frm or clinically validated guidelines, water is usually offered six
without causing tooth root damage is diffcult Any trauma to the
to 12 hours following surgery and eating should be encouraged with
tooth roots may result in death of the tooth requiring either vital
 pulpotomy or extraction at a later date.
continued for one month and chewing hard objects should be
 In a retrospective case series of 42 cats undergoing mandibulectomy.
discouraged.
 postoperative complications were very common, in particular dys-
Excised tissue should always be sent for histologic evaluation to
phagia and inappetence.24 The majority of patients in this case series
confirm both the histologic diagnosis and to evaluate surgical margins
had either complete unilateral mandibulectomy or rostral bilateral
(Fig. 55-12), although it is important to remember that obtaining
mandibulectomy, and the authors reported an acute morbidity of
clear margins histologically may not prevent local recurrence of the
  sn u a a  
tumor. For this reason, ongoing periodic monitoring is advisable24
inappetence, ptyalism, mandibular drit, and tongue protrusion.
and oncologic re-evaluation should be considered every three to six
Long-term morbidity was reported in 76%. predominantly related
months regardless of margins obtained.
to dysphagia, inappetence, ptyalism, tongue protrusion, diffculty
679
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Aos iot pnugns a pnous paasan sanss ll z-ss an
ab uaaa bullt anueseadde ae ladoisod aul e-is ane
including both bone and soft tissues. Information regarding margins in all
aggressive surgical procedures is often better than anticipated by owners,
involved tissues is essential to assess completeness of excision.
s  an si s e u seu reo aey a auo Ae
immediately postoperatively in figure 55-10, and here at 12 months after
sur gery.
grooming, and dental malocclusion. Five cats were reported to never
Auo pa asu yo omn 'moy u iea on re au ua
nine and ll days after surgery and two more were euthanized at 37
and 68 days postsurgery. One of the five survived to 192 days when
d laddn au go uoeiaap ieipa saep xis oi aay ui aaiosan lm pue
it was euthanized for local recurrence. All five had undergone rela-
following rostral maxillctomy and upper canine tooth removal has
tively aggressive procedures, losing >50% of their mandible. An addi-
been reported to render the lip susceptible to trauma from the lower
tional factor regarding assessment of postoperative complications in
canines in dogs; the two reported feline cases in the literature did not
this series was that 12 of the 42 cats underwent adjunctive therapy
develop this complication. In one case series a single cat underwent
including chemotherapy and radiation therapy, both of which could
left maxillectomy, with no postoperative complications recorded.25 In
potentially play a role in inappetence Although this issue was men-
another series reporting the outcome following bilateral rostral maxil.
tioned in the discussion it was not evaluated. It is important to give
lectomy and nasal planectomy a single cat that underwent surgery was
due consideration preoperatively to the potential for a feline patient
anorexic for six days postoperatively but was reported to have normal
to effectively lose the ability to eat voluntarily following an aggressive
function and no complications at 66 months after surgery,? while
mandibulectomy procedure as some clients will not be willing to
pey saas piul e u Auonaxeu eed juamapun eu se aa
accept this type of complication.
no postoperative complications recorded. Two case reports document
 Mandibular drift (medial movement of the remaining intact man-
unilateral maxillectomy, one in a four-month-old kitten and the other
dible) occurs if there has been disruption of the mandibular symphy-
a two-year-old cat; in one report esophagostomy tube feeding was
sis or body and may result in severe malocclusion in the cat This was
 required for seven days postoperatively but follow up with the owners
reported as a long-term complication in 37% of cats that had man-
at seven months confirmed normal function.45.51
dibulectomy in the retrospective study of 42 cats previously cited.24
Although the numbers available for review are very limited it is
The same study reported ulceration of the hard palate by pressure
interesting that maxillectomy seems to have a lesser risk of complica-
from the lower canines following mandibulectomy in 18% of cases.
tions in cats and to have a far less profound effect on eating than does
Temporary interdental bonding has been suggested to prevent this
mandibulectomy.
but surgery to shorten or extract the canine teeth may ultimately be 
ueul iaaq ynu Aleiaua sl anueieadde paso aaneiadoisod
required.
most owners imagine (Fig. 55-13), but concern regarding likely altera-
Wound dehiscence is reportedly uncommon following mandibulec-
tions in cosmetic appearance is a common reason for refusal of
tomy, being seen in only 12.5% of the 42 cats, although no informa-
surgery. It can be valuable to have a library of pictures showing
tion was provided regarding the severity and extent of dehiscence.
patients following surgery to demonstrate the good cosmetic out-
Sublingual ranulae may occur several months after mandibulectomy
comes that can be achieved in many cases, as well as to assist discus-
but usually resolve spontaneously.24
sion of cases where the cosmetic change will be greater to help owners
 There are only limited references within the veterinary literature to
fully appreciate what they are agreeing to. Medial deviation of the
clinical cases where cats have undergone maxillectomy so it is diffcult
upper lip is often the only sign of a rostral maxillectomy, while more
to be sure how much of what we know about the procedure in dogs
caudal maxillectomies cause mild to moderate facial concavity. Uni-
 lateral canine tooth removal in rostral mandibulectomy often results
lectomy has been reported in 7-33% of surgeries.42.50 The vast majority
in protrusion of the tongue from that side. Bilateral rostral man-
Occur caudal to the canine teeth and may be avoided by tension-free
dibulectomy causes a more marked change in cosmetic appearance,
closure and careful surgical technique In some cases it may be appro-
with drooping of the lower jaw and difficulty maintaining the tongue
priate to pre-drill anchor holes for suture placement within bone
within the mouth.
on one side of the reconstruction if the use of soft tissue anchor
Despite complications, 83% of owners were satisfied with the
 points does not provide a suffciently robust closure. Subcutaneous
outcome of surgery following mandibulectomy in Northup's case
680
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy
Chapter
55
series of 42 cats, although a general observation that could be made
is that owner satisfaction tended to also reflect survival times and
and quality of life must be considered. Clients should be made aware
outcome.24
of this prior to surgery, and also of the fact that even with aggressive
papiene sueua sisougoidau Adeiauaasunpe Aqpamoloy aains
Progression of local disease is the most common reason for euthana-
 sia,22.24.52 and this may well reflect the tendency towards less aggressive
PROGNOSIS
resections in cats. Caudal oral SCC is, as a rule, less amenable to
therapy, resulting in a poorer prognosis.
 Tumor type, stage, and location are major determinants of prognosis
 Fibrosarcoma of the maxilla or mandible carries a better prognosis
where the primary disease is neoplastic. The prognosis for benign and
in the cat. Following mandibulectomy, a one-year survival of 67% was
non-neoplastic tumors is, on the whole, excellent As a general caveat,
reported in Northup's series of42 cats, regardless of local recurrence.24
there are only small numbers of cases reported and available for
This is similar to the situation in dogs with soft tissue sarcoma, where
review, and there seem to be quite wide variations in outcome amongst
the presence or absence of local recurrence has no influence on
these cases, so it is diffcult to be certain ofthe accuracy ofthe numbers
survival times or outcome. One report of a maxillary fbrosarcoma
 and percentages that are routinely quoted.
 treated by unilateral premaxillectomy showed no recurrence within
SCC carries a poor prognosis in the cat, with fewer than l0% of cats
two years.2
surviving to one year in one study,? although this was contradicted in
Mandibular osteosarcomas were associated with 83% two-year
a second, larger study, where 43% survival was identified at one year.24
survival following surgical resection in Northup's series.24 Although
Overall, it does appear that SCC is associated with a significantly
 specifc information regardingthe maxillary and mandibular osteosar-
shorter survival time compared to fbrosarcomas and osteosarcomas, 4
although this is complicated by the fact that the majority of docu-
both concluded that overall axial osteosarcoma carried a poorer prog-
mented cases of feline SCC were already stage 3 at the time of diag-
 nosis with shorter survival times when compared with appendicular
nosis and treatment, meaning that they had already progressed to
 confirmed local invasion of bone and sof tissues including muscles.
reported postoperatively compared to the dog.53,54
lymphatics, and nerves. There is a paucity of information regarding
 In a recent report on seven cats with mandibular and maxillary
outcome in stage l SCC managed with early aggressive treatment,
 Osteoma, three were euthanized, one was treated by maxillectomy, one
suggesting that many cases are not recognized at an earlier stage.
by mandibulectomy, and two with debulking. All four surviving cats
although it is also possible that aggressive treatment is not being
were reported to have acceptable quality oflife at one-year followup.25
E s arau passaoid Aaisia seu aseas a iun papuaoan
Fibromatous and acanthomatous epulides, although considered
single case report of one cat that had maxillectomy for aggressive
benign growths, may recur locally following marginal excision.2 In
maxillary carcinoma (poorly differentiated) that was reported as alive
the only report that documents cats with multiple epulides, 73% were
and disease free at 27 months after surgery, but this appears to be the
reported to havelocal recurrence following surgical resection; however.
Exception rather than the rule. Wide excision of the primary tumor,
a on p ae sm as a u ns  a
removal of the submandibular lymph node and radiation may offer
biopsy and was not a curative intent procedure so this information
an improved prognosis for oral SCC,24 but the potential adverse effects
should be interpreted with caution.27
REFERENCES
1. Emms SG, Harvey CE. Preliminary results
neoplasms in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
100 cases [1987-2001). J Am Vet Med
of maxillectomy in the dog and cat.
Assoc 1995;31(6):514-18.
Assoc 2003;222(9):1234-6.
J Small Anim Pract 1986;27:291 -306.
8.
 Reeves NCP, Turrel JM, Withrow SJ. Oral
14. Gilson SD. Clinical management of the
2. Salisbury SK, Richardson DC, Lantz GC.
squamous-cell carcinoma in the cat.
regional lymph node. Vet Clin North Am
Partial maxillectomy and premaxillectomy
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29(5):
Small Anim Pract 1995;25(1):149-67.
in the treatment of oral neoplasia in the
438-41.
15.
Kopfleisch R, Sperling C, Kershaw O.
dog and cat. Vet Surg 1986;i5:16-26.
 Forrest Lj. The head: excluding the brain
Gruber AD. Does the taking of biopsies 
3. Bradley RL, MacEwen EG, Loar AS.
 and orbit. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
affect the metastatic potential of tumours?
Mandibular resection for removal of oral
1999;14(3):170-6.
A systematic review of reports on
tumors in 30 dogs and 6 cats. J Am Vet
10.
 Van Camp S, Fisher P, Thrall DE. Dynamic
veterinary and humans cases and animal
Med Assoc 1984;184[4):460-3.
CT measurement of contrast medium
models. Vet J 2011;190:e31-42
4. Penwick RC, Nunamaker DM. Rostral
wash in kinetics in canine nasal tumors.
16. Stebbins KE, Morse CC, Goldschmidt
mandibulectomy: A treatment for oral
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2000;41(5):
MH. Feline oral neoplasia: a ten-year
neoplasia in the dog and cat. J Am Anim
403-8.
survey. Vet Pathol 1989;26(2):121-8.
Hosp Assoc 1987;23(1):19-25.
11.
Gendler A, Lewis JR, Reetz JA, Schwarz
17.
. Liptak JM, withrow Sl. Oral tumours. In:
 5. Voss K, Langley-Hobbs Sl, Grundemann
TComputed tomographic features of oral
Withrow Sl, MacEwen EG, Editors. Small
S, Montavon PM. Mandible and maxilla.
squamous cell carcinoma in cats: 18 cases
animal clinical oncology. Missouri:
In: Montavon PM, Voss K, Langley-Hobbs
[2002-2008). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Saunders Elsevier; 2007. p. 455-75.
Sl, editors. Feline orthopedic surgery and
2010;236(3):319-25.
18.
 Bertone ER, Snyder LA, Moore AS.
 musculoskeletal disease. Edinburgh:
12.
Herring ES, Smith MM, Robertson JL.
Environmental and lifestyle risk factors
Elsevier; 2009. p. 311-28.
 Lymph node staging of oral and
for oral squamous cell carcinoma in 
6 Berman E, Davis J, Stara JF. A dental chart
maxillofacial neoplasms in 31 dogs and
domestic cats. J Vet Int Med 2003;17(4):
of the domestic cat (Felis catus L.). Lab 
cats. J Vet Dent 2002;19(3):122-6.
557-62.
Anim Care 1967;17(5):511-13.
13.
Williams LE, Packer RA. Association
19. Snyder LA, Bertone ER, Jakowski RM,
 7. Smith MM. Surgical approach for lymph
between lymph node size and metastasis
et al. p53 expression and environmental
node staging of oral and maxillofacial
 in dogs with oral malignant melanoma:
 tobacco smoke exposure in feline oral
681
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Pathol
31.
 Gioso MA, Carvalho VGG. Maxillary
43. Hedlund CS, Tangner CH, Elkins AD,
2004;41(3):209-14.
dentigerous cyst in a cat. J Vet Dent
et al. Temporary bilateral carotid-artery 
 20. Martin CK, Tannehill-Gregg SH, Wolfe
2003;20(1):28-30.
occlusion during surgical exploration of
TD, Rosol TJ. Bone-invasive oral
32.
 Lantz GC, Salisbury SK. partial
the nasal cavity of the dog. Vet Surg
squamous cell carcinoma in cats:
mandibulectomy for treatment of
1983;12(2):83-5.
pathology and expression of parathyroid
 mandibular fractures in dogs: 8 cases
44.
 De Ley G, Leusen I. Cerebrovascular
hormone-related protein. Vet Pathol 
[1981-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc
reserve in the cat after acute bilateral
2011;48(1):302-12.
1987;191(2):243-5.
arotid occlusion. Arch Int Physiol
21. Theon AP, Rodriquez C, Madewell BR.
33. Salisbury SK Richardson DC. Partial
Biochim 1987;95(5):447-55.
Analysis of prognostic factors and patterns
maxillectomy for oronasal fstula repair
45.
Lester S, Pratschke K. Central
of failure in dogs with malignant oral
in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
hemimaxillectomy and reconstruction
tumors treated with megavoltage
1986;22(2):185-92.
using a superfcial temporal artery axial
 irradiation. J Am Vet Med Assoc
34. Verstraete FIM, Mandibulectomy and
pattern flap in a domestic short hair cat.
1997;210(6):778-84.
 maxillectomy. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim
J Feline Med Surg 2003;5[4):241-4.
22. Hutson CA, Willauer CC, Walder El, et al.
Pract 2005;35(4):1009-39.
46. Cheung LK. An animal model for
 Treatment of mandibular squamous
35.
 Salisbury SK. Maxillectomy and
 maxillary reconstruction using a
cell carcinoma in cats by use of
 mandibulectomy In: Slatter DH, Editor.
temporalis muscle flap. J Oral Maxillofac
mandibulectomy and radiotherapy: seven
Textbook of small animal surgery.
Surg 1996;54(12):1439-45.
cases [1987-1989]. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2003.
47.
Lascelles BD, Thomson MJ, Dernell ws.
1992;201 (5):777-81.
p. 561-72.
et al. Combined dorsolateral and intraoral 
23. Kosovsky JK, Matthiesen DT, Marretta
36.
 Batsakis JG. Surgical excision margins: A
 approach for the resection of tumors of
SM, Patnaik AK. Results of partial
pathologist's perspective. Advan Anatom
the maxilla in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
mandibulectomy for the treatment
Pathol 1999;6(3):140-8.
Assoc 2003;39(3):294-305.
 of oral tumors in 142 dogs. Vet Surg
37.
 McMahon J, O'Brien CJ, Pathak I, et al.
8
Arzi B. Verstraete FIM. Mandibular
1991;20(6):397-401.
 Influence of condition of surgical margins
rim excision in seven dogs. Vet Surg
24. Northrup NC, Selting KA, Rassnick KM,
on local recurrence and disease-specifc
2010;39(2):226-31.
et al. Outcomes of cats with oral tumors
survival in oral and oropharyngeal cancer.
49.
Harvey CE. Oral surgery. Radical resection
treated with mandibulectomy: 42 cases.
Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2003;41[4):
of maxillary and mandibular lesions.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006;42[5):
224-31.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
350-60.
38. Lascelles BD, Henderson RA, Seguin B.
1986;16(5):983-93.
25. Fiani N, Arzi B, Johnson EG, et al.
et al. Bilateral rostral maxillectomy
50.
Wallace I, Matthiesen DT, Patnaik AK.
Osteoma of the oral and maxillofacial
and nasal planectomy for large rostral
Hemimaxillectomy for the treatment of
regions in cats: 7 cases [1999-2009].
 maxillofacial neoplasms in six dogs
oral tumors in G9 dogs. Veterinary Surgery
J Am Vet Med Assoc 2011;238(11):
and one cat. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1992;21(5):337-41
1470-5.
2004;40(2):137-46.
51.
Padgett SL, Tillson DM, Henry Cl, Buss
26. de Bruijn ND, Kirpensteijn J, Neyens Il.
39. Page CP, Bohnen JM, Fletcher JR, et al.
MS. Gingival vascular hamartoma with
 et al. A clinicopathological study of 52
 Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgical
associated paraneoplastic hyperglycemia
feline epulides. Vet Pathol 2007;44[2):
wounds. Guidelines for clinical care. Arch
in a kitten. J Am Vet Med Assoc
161-9.
Surg 1993;128(1):79-88.
1997;210(7):914-15.
27.
 Colgin LMA, Schulman FY, Dubielzig RR.
40. Harvey CE, Thornsberry C, Miller BR,
52. Bradney IW, Hobson HP, Stromberg PC.
Multiple epulides in 13 cats. Vet Pathol 
Shofer FS. Antimicrobial susceptibility
et al. Rostral mandibulectomy combined
2001;38[2):227-9.
of subgingival bacterial flora in cats
with intermandibular bone-graft in
28.
 Rothwell JT Valentine BA. Peripheral 
with gingivitis. J Vet Dent 1995;12[4):
treatment of oral neoplasia. J Am Anim
giant-cell granuloma in a cat. J Am Vet
157-60.
Hosp Assoc 1987;23(6):611-15. 
Med Assoc 1988;192(8):1105-6.
41.
 Lemke KA, Dawson SD. Local and 
53.
 Kessler M, Tassani-Prell M, von Bomhard
29. Gardner DG Dubielzig RR. Feline 
regional anesthesia. Vet Clin North
D, Matis U. Osteosarcoma in cats:
inductive odontogenic-tumor (inductive 
Am Small Anim Pract 2000;30[4):
epidemiological, clinical and radiological
fbroameloblastoma) - a tumor unique to
839-57.
fndings in 78 animals [1990-1995).
cats. J Oral Pathol Med 1995;24[4):
42.
 Summers AN, Larson DL, Edmiston CE.
Tierarztl Prax 1997;25(3):275-83.
185-90.
et al. Efficacy of preoperative
54.
Heldmann E, Anderson MA, Wagner-
30. Bock P, Hach V, Baumgartner W. Oral
 decontamination of the oral cavity. Plast
Mann C. Feline osteosarcoma: 145 cases
masses in two cats. Vet Pathol 2011;48[4):
Reconstr Surg 2000;106[4):895-900;
(1990-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
906-10.
quiz 901.
2000;36(6):518-21.
682
57
tel
Eyelids and orbit
C.E. Plummer
The feline eye exhibits a variety of diseases that are not seen or are
 The eyelids are innervated by branches of the facial nerve (sympa-
uncommon in other species. There are a few specific indications for
thetic fbers and motor function) and by branches of the trigeminal
surgical procedures of the periocular structures and orbit and this
nerve (sensory function). The majority of the vascular supply to the
chapter will focus on these For further details of intraorbital and
eyelids originates at the lateral and medial canthi from branches of
cormeal surgery the reader is referred to specific ophthalmology texts
the superficial temporal, the external ethmoidal, and infraorbital
and the current literature as these techniques often require specialized 
a o ad si sa ar  a r 
equipment and training.
 parotid and mandibular lymph nodes. 14
Orbit
SURGICAL ANATOMY
 The feline orbit is relatively deep and, although it is not completely
formed of bone, it provides considerable coverage and protection for
Eyelids
the globe. The bones that compose the orbital walls in the cat include
the sphenoid, maxillary, lacrimal, zygomatic, and frontal bones. The
Eyelids are composed of several different tissue types. The outer layer
orbit is incomplete caudoventrally and laterally; the lateral aspect of
of haired skin covers a tarsal plate and musculature, which control the 
the orbital rim is completed by the thick, fibrous orbital ligament, and
movement and positions of the eyelids. The inner layer adjacent to
the caudoventral and lateral walls of the orbit, which do not consist
the globe is the palpebral conjunctiva, a thin, vascular tissue resem-
of bone, are bordered by the temporal, masseter, and pterygoid
bling a mucous membrane The eyelids function to protect and
muscles. The small bony portion of the orbital floor in the cat consists
support the globe. This is achieved by three methods: (1) they act as
 of a thin shelf of maxillary bone, which holds the last molar teeth. A
an initial defense against external dangers due to the presence of an
thick layer of fascial endorbita (periorbita) lines the inner bony and
active blink reflex; (2) they remove dirt and debris from the surface
soft tissue margins of the orbit. The contents of the orbit include the
 -sip pue pimy ieal aul jo suood anquuos kay (e) pue aka aui jo
globe with its muscular attachments, which originate at the orbit's
tribute it across the ocular surface.1-5
apex and traverse the orbit to insert on the globe, anterior to its
The skin of the eyelids is thinner and more pliable than in other
equator. These muscles consist of four bellies of the retractor bulbi
parts of the integument to allow for ease of movement The thin
muscle which envelop the optic nerve along its path from the optic
subcutaneous tissue attaches the skin to the deeper orbicularis oculi
foramen to the posterior aspect of the globe, four rectus muscles, and
muscle which controls eyelid closure. Additional subcutaneous
two oblique muscles. The ventral oblique muscle is unique in that its 
muscles allow for elevation of the upper eyelid (cormugators supercili
 origin is the medial orbital wall.
medialis medially and frontoauricularis laterally and the Miller muscle)
 An extensive vascular supply is present in the orbit, most of which
and elongation of the palpebral fissure {retractor anguli oculi latera-
 consists of various branches of the maxillary artery and their respective
lis).1.34 Meibomian (or tarsal) glands are present along the margins of
venous vessels which pass through the rostral alar foramen, the most
both the upper and lower eyelids and are responsible for producing
ventrally situated foramen. The internal ophthalmic artery enters the
the lipid fraction of the pre-ocular tear fluid. Their oily product exits
orbit through the optic foramen with the optic nerve. The third,
through a series of openings that appear as little grey dots along the
fourth, branches of the ffth, and the sixth cranial nerves, along with
lid margin. Cilia, or eyelashes, are not normally present in the cat,
some autonomic fibers, enter the orbit through the orbital foramen
although occasionally distichiasis, ie., lashes that exit through the
and provide both sensory and motor innervation. The zygomatic sali-
meibomian gland openings. are noted. Conjunctival goblet cells
vary gland is small and lies close to the maxillary nerve near the
produce mucin, which is also a component of the tear fluid.
ventral floor of the orbit The nictitating membrane, or third eyelid,
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00057-3
691
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Diagnostic imaging
 space of the orbit and acts as a cushion to support the globe.1-3
If surgical intervention in the orbit is anticipated, additional diagnos-
tic procedures are recommended. B-scan ultrasonography of the orbit
may provide useful information about the impact of the orbital
 disease on the globe and will often provide guidance for sampling of
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
a lesion, but computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) are better options to delineate the extent and borders
When evaluating a cat for eyelid or periorbital conditions the signal-
of the disease.7 A study in a cat that compared orbital echography.
ment, in particular the age and breed of the cat, is relevant. A full
skull radiography, CT, and MRI to assess a mass involving the orbit
history should be obtained from the owner in relation to how long
the problem has been present, vaccination history, and history of
border of the tumor.?
concurrent disease such as rhinitis, history of trauma, etc. A full inves-
tigation of eye problems should include an intraocular examination
Histopathology
and evaluation of vision.35
Prior to surgical intervention, histopathologic evaluation of a biopsy
Eyelid evaluation
specimen is advised to facilitate surgical and postoperative treatment
planning. Depending upon the exact location of the lesion within the
Evaluation of the eyelids should begin with an appreciation of sym-
orbit, sampling may be performed posterior to the bony orbital rim
metry between the two eyes. Is the abnormality unilateral or does it
Or via the oral cavity. Since the ventral orbital floor is bordered only
affect both eyelids? Is the patient able to perform a complete blink
aq Aeu ieiou isel aul on ioaisod anss ys a auoq Aq ild
when tactilely stimulated to do so (palpebral reflex)? Are swellings or
incised in order to access the ventral orbit A scalpel blade is used to
ulcerations present? Mass lesions are often obvious, but many neo-
incise the mucosa and a hemostat is gently and bluntly introduced
 plastic lesions in cats will be tissue destructive rather than prolifera-
through the incision, through the pterygoid musculature and the
tive; squamous cell carcinoma is the classic example Has the globe
periorbita into the orbit for blind sampling. Expansive lesions may
 position deviated resulting in passive eyelid instability, as occurs with
odn aqeiadde kiss aq  pue  iio au oun pua
enophthalmos and secondary entropion? Secondary blepharospasm
examination of the mouth. Care must be taken to avoid damaging the
is common with painful disorders of the eyelids and this spastic
maxillary artery as it courses along the orbital floor.l.2
trigeminal-facial nerve reflex may worsen the appearance of an eyelid
 If a diagnosis of a malignant proces in the orbit is determined, the
defect. Prior to and as part of the planning for surgical approaches to
 patient should have thoracic and abdominal imaging and potentially
eyelid abnormalities, a topical anesthetic should be applied to the eye
aspirates of the regional lymph nodes performed for staging purposes
in the conscious animal (prior to general anesthesia and sedation) in
(see Chapter 14).
order to allow determination of the extent of the underlying structural
problem. If the surgical plan is made without taking into account
the aggravating effects of blepharospasm, an inappropriate repair
SURGICAL DISEASES OF
may result.
The eyelids in the cat are tightly apposed to the globe and allow
THE FELINE EYELIDS
very little visualization of structures posterior to the corneoscleral
limbus. Compared to the dog, there is little redundancy of eyelid
Most eyelid disorders in cats willbe the result of either congenital and
tissue and facial skin, which makes blepharoplastic procedures more
developmental abnormalities or neoplastic diseases. Inflammatory
challenging.
conditions occur uncommonly and may be associated with infectious
For inflammatory and potentially neoplastic conditions, skin scrap-
agents (Demodex, dermatophytoses, myiasis, FHV-1), autoimmune
ings, fine needle aspirates or biopsies for histopathologic examination
disorders (pemphigus, lupus, eosinophilic complex disease).
or
and microbiologic evaluation are usually indicated. If there is suspi-
s(suoeai smup) spunoduos gueiul oi ainsodxa pue eunen
 ue soo   ua assp ss jo u
cal analysis of blood may be necessary.
 If a neoplastic condition is determined to be present, staging with
Ankyloblepharon
thoracic and abdominal imaging and lymph node aspirates (see
Ankyloblepharon is fusion of the eyelids to one another. It is physi-
 Chapter 14) may be indicated, depending upon the expected biologic
ologic in the kitten until postnatal days 10-14.4 If the eyelids remain
 behavior of the tumor.
closed beyond this time this indicates either incomplete development
of the eyelids and periocular structures or more likely viral conjunc-
tivitis [infection acquired from the queen either during parturition or
Orbit evaluation
-unuos u pansai sey ieu (uq sumoy saep may isiy au sun
Evaluation of the orbit should begin with an external examination
tival adhesions or symblepharon. When an infection is introduced to
assessing globe position, symmetry, and globe mobility, followed by
the conjunctival space beneath the fused eyelids, neonatal ophthalmia
 palpation of the orbital margins and retropulsion of the globe. If there
results, which requires manual (premature) opening of the palpebral
 is resistance to digital palpation and retropulsion, or the cat is unable
fissure Often these kittens will have gross swelling of their orbits and
to retract the globe, a retrobulbar space-occupying lesion is likely and
eyelids and may have purulent discharge exiting through a small rent
imaging should be pursued to determine the character and the extent
in the palpebral fissure If the lids are left apposed when such an
of the disease process. Inflammatory diseases of the orbit are often
infection is present, the ocular surface will be irreparably damaged
 a pe  ea a u ud a pan
and vision will be significantly impaired if not lost completely.
retracted, when the globe is retropulsed, or upon opening of the
To open the lids, frst topical anesthesia should be applied to the
mouth. With cystic and neoplastic lesions, the retropulse reflex is
lid margins and then one side of a small scissor or a mosquito hemo-
impaired, but usually elicits no significant discomfort.
stat is placed through the rent in the fissure and gently advanced and
692
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
Figure 57-2 Lower lid lateral canthal entropion in an eight-month-old 
 domestic short-haired cat.
Figure 57-1 Eyelid agenesis in a nine-month-old domestic short-haired
or the commissure of the lip. Various surgical techniques have been
employed. 1.10-14
There is also keratitis, evidenced by corneal vascularization.
Entropion
jou st ll 'uoisaupe au yeanq oi suieuu pll pasny aun guoie paneaaa
 Most cases of eyelid malposition in cats are because of entropion, i.e..
recommended to cut the fissure since it is very easy to miss the line
the inversion of the eyelid margin rolling toward the globe.315.16
 of fusion and cut the tiny lids themselves. Once the palpebral fissure 
Medial canthal entropion is almost universal in brachycephalic cats
is open, copious flushing should be performed to remove as much
and is one of the causes of tear overflow and staining at the medial
debris and infectious material as possible. Topical antibiotics and
corners.l3 In these cases, if irritation is minimal and the face can be
(sinoq inoy Aaaa] iaeaiaul Auanay patdde aq pinoys sueouqn
 kept suffciently clean, surgical repair is not always necessary. In cats
because the blink reflex and tear production are usually underdevel-
that develop full lid or lateral entropion, surgical correction is indi-
oped at this young age. If there are corneal ulcerations present when
cated.l.3.4,15 Most cats with entropion are only affected along the lower
eyelid and occasionally at the lateral canthus (Fig. 57-2). Careful
such as idoxuridine or cidofivir, should be started.
evaluation of the eyelid anatomy in affected cats is warranted since
many cases have not only entropion, but also excessive length to their
Eyelid agenesis
lower eyelid. In these cases shortening of the lower eyelid with a wedge
 The incomplete formation of a portion ofthe eyelid is known as eyelid
eyelid, is exceedingly rare in cats, and typically only results from cica-
agenesis or coloboma (Fig. 57-l). It is usually associated with an
trix formation.
absent eyelid margin.? The severity of this condition varies dramati-
cally among affected individuals.? The majority of cases have absent
Eyelid neoplasia
lid tissue and margin along the temporal portion of the dorsal eyelid.
Severe cases may have most of the upper lid missing, including the
 Since eyelid neoplasms in cats are usually malignant, it is fortunate
lateral canthus and portions of the lower eyelid as well. Mild cases 
that they are relatively uncommon, occurring with significantly less
may be managed medically with regular lubrication if minimal ocular
aul slea Apoq aui uo aiaymasia suseidoau snoaueino ueu Aouanbag
irritation is present. Most cases, however, benefit from surgical recon-
 prevalence of eyelid neoplasia increases with age in cats, but has not
struction of the abnormal lids in order to provide greater coverage for
been found to correlate with breed or gender. The most common
the globe and to minimize discomfort from exposure and scarring that
eyelid neoplasm in cats is squamous cell carcinoma. Other reported
can impair vision. In many cases, ocular irritation will occur not only
tumors include mastocytomas (Fig. 57-3), hemangiosarcomas and
due to absent tissue and an impaired blink mechanism, but also as
hemangiomas, fbrosarcomas, various neoplasms of glandular origin
the result of trichiasis, in which hair from the face is deviated toward
(adenomas, adenocarcinomas),. basal cell carcinomas (Fig. 57-4),
the cornea. Cats with eyelid agenesis often will have other ocular
abnormalities including microphthalmia, cataract, retinal dysplasia,
 mous cell carcinomas usually appear as ulcerated lesions along the
and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.? A thorough ophthalmic examination
eyelid margin with a crusting surface (Fig. 57-5). White cats seem to
should be performed to determine the extent of this congenital
-iaa si ara a roun stu jo juadoaaap au ioy uoaaid e aau
disorder.
dence for the role of actinic damage in the pathogenesis of this tumor.
 The surgical approach to this condition will vary depending upon
 Squamous cell carcinomas are amenable to various forms of treat-
the severity. In some cases, simple apposition of the normal margins
ment and wide surgical excision is often curative, although grafting
will suffice; other cases will require sliding advancement grafts 
(see
 procedures are usually necessary to fill the resultant defect of excision.
Boxes 57-4 and 57-5) or grafts of tissue from either the lower eyelid
Most other types of feline eyelid neoplasm are also amenable to
69
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
   zs si i aa  sxa i
'uoisioxa esgins ol Aqeioaey puodsai Aleiauas sies u splaa aui jo
A recent retrospective study described results in 33 cats with periocular
mast cell tumors, and reported that recurrences were rare and affected
cats had a median survival time of 945 days.20 Plesiotherapy with
strontium-90 is another treatment option, either as a sole modality or
in combination with surgical excision, that has excellent success
rates.20.21 However, extensive lesions or disseminated disease may be
best approached with systemic chemotherapy rather than excision or
are benign and resemble apocrine hidrocystomas are occasionally
noted in brachycephalic cats.1.22 Recurrence is common follwing
local excision of these lesions, according to the authors' experience
and that of other veterinary ophthalmologists.18
SURGICAL DISEASES OF THE FELINE ORBIT
Figure 57-3 An 11-year-old domestic short-haired cat with an eyelid
mast cell tumor.
In the normal state, the feline eye rarely develops traumatic corneal
ulcerations, exposure keratitis, and many of the other ocular condi-
tions frequently diagnosed in other species. However, the feline orbit
is relatively small, so when disease states occur, there is very little room
for expansion or swelling. Early deviation (exophthalmos, strabismus,
 protrusion of the nictitans membrane) of the eye and the orbital
contents is frequently accompanied by exposure keratitis, conjuncti-
vitis, and chemosis. Brachycephalic individuals tend to have more
shallow orbits and prominent globes, which may predispose them to
even earlier exposure issues.
Orbital neoplasia
The most common disorders of the feline orbit are neoplastic prolif.
erations. They tend to be malignant (9o%) and usually of epithelial
paodan auanbay isou aul ane seuouieo lan snouens s'u
orbital tumors in cats, followed by lymphoma (Fig. 57-6), fibro-
sarcoma and various bone tumors (Fig. 57-7).23 At least fteen differ-
ent tumor types have been reported within the feline orbit.23,24
Treatment strategies for each vary upon the extent of the lesion
and the known or supposed biologic behavior of that type of tumor.
 Figure 57-4 A 12-year-old domestic short-haired cat with an eyelid
Conservative surgical approaches to orbital neoplasms, which attempt
myxosarcoma.
to maintain the globe and vision, are usually associated with unac-
ceptably high rates of tumor recurrence. Hence, the treatment of
choice for orbital neoplasia is usually exenteration (see Box 57-7),
which involves removal of the entire contents of the orbit including
the globe. Orbitotomy techniques that spare the globe and seek
to remove focal abnormalities within the orbit are rarely indicated
in the cat and should be considered only in the case of small.
well-defined lesions (preferably non-neoplastic or at least non-
malignant). Advanced imaging of the head in cases of orbital neopla-
sia is strongly recommended because the incidence of concurrent
orbital, nasal and sinus disease is high due to the close proximity of
these spaces in cats.
Proptosis
Unfortunately, because of the rigid nature of the orbital support, when
a traumatic insult is sustained and the globe suffers injury, the great
amount of force necessary to affect the globe usually results in signif-
cant damage which may be vision or globe threatening. Proptosis, or
the capture of the eyelid margins behind the equator of the globe (Fig.
 Figure 57-5 A nine-year-old domestic short-haired cat with an eyelid
57-8), usually with anterior displacement of the globe, is often associ-
squamous cell carcinoma.
ated with significant facial and orbital trauma and fractures of the
694
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
A
B
Figure 57-6 (A) A 12-year-old Siamese-cross with orbital lymphoma. (B) A bulging mass lesion and hemorrhage was noted posterior to the last upper
maxillary molar upon oral examination of the cat.
A
B
Figure 57-7 Osteosarcoma in a 14-year-old cat. (A) There is exophthalmos, dorsolateral
C
strabismus and elevation of the third eyelid. (B) Viewed from above the anterior deviation of 
the globe can be better appreciated. (c) Radiograph shows extensive bony lysis of the orbit.
695
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
PREPARATION FOR EYELID AND
ORBITAL SURGERY
Due to the proximity of the lids to the sensitive ocular structures,
preparation of the surgical site must differ somewhat from other
sites on the body. Rather than cleaning and rinsing the eyelids with
alcohol, chlorhexidine and other traditional sterilizing agents, which
can be incredibly irritating and damaging to the corneal and conjunc-
jo uomos (os:i) ami e ieul papuamosai st ll 'eauida iean
povidine-iodine (solution, not scrub) be used to cleanse the site.22 At
least three scrubs of the skin with swabbing of the conjunctival for-
nices are recommended, followed by liberal rinsing of the site with
normal saline. Routine perioperative antibiotics (such as intravenous
cefazolin) are useful to limit the incidence of peri- and postoperative
infection.
 Regional anesthesia is not a necessary adjunct to general anesthesia
for eyelid procedures. And, in fact, the infusion of lidocaine or other
 injectable anesthetic agents may distort the anatomy of the eyelid
and alter the results of the procedure Once the surgical site has
been prepared, care must be taken to ensure that the globe remains
Figure 57-8 Traumatic proptosis in a kitten
lubricated throughout the duration of the procedure. Artifcial tear
or broad-spectrum antibiotic (triple antibiotic combination) oint-
ments can be applied sparingly. If these interfere with the surgical
procedure, sterile saline may be used to repeatedly and frequently
moisten the eye.
 If an orbital procedure such as enucleation or exenteration is to be
skull and mandible.25 In most cases of traumatic proptosis in the
performed, a retrobulbar block may be considered. These blocks are
cat, the affected globes are rendered non-visual and are so severely
more diffcult to perform in cats than in other species due to limited
damaged that they require enucleation.' The contralateral eye may
also be blinded by damage to the optic chiasm from the stretching
retrobulbar space in the feline orbit. It can be difficult to achieve
 proper placement of the injection. There are several approaches to this
forces placed upon the affected globe. These cats are usually seriously
block, but no matter which procedure is chosen, it is critical that the
injured and collapsed and should be triaged and treated frst for
shock, head-trauma, and concussive brain injury. If the globe can be
salvaged, it should be kept well lubricated until the cat is stable
A 1.5-2.5 inch 22 gauge needle that has been bent to the approximate
enough to undergo anesthesia and a temporary tarsorrhaphy per-
curve of the orbit wall can be inserted ventrolateral or dorsal to the
formed to provide for its protection.
globe through either the conjunctiva (for subconjunctival enuclea-
1oy uoeiedaid pue suuea iae uys paa al uanoiyi io (suon
transpalpebral enucleations) and advanced past the globe in a ventro-
Orbital inflammatory disorders
medial direction towards the opposite temporomandibular joint
until the base of the orbit is encountered. Regional retrobulbar
Orbital inflammatory disorders are fortunately uncommon in the cat.
and peribulbar anesthesia runs the risk of hemorrhage globe perfora-
Orbital cellulitis and abscessation may be associated with trauma,
tion, intravascular or subarachnoid injection, and vagal reactions, but
foreign bodies, dental disease, extension of inflammatory nasal or
sinus disease (especially if infectious), and rarely, immune-mediated
le'ost'uied aeiadonsod asearap pue
 inflammation.2 Most of these conditions respond appropriately to
medical therapy when the underlying etiology is recognized and
O Aessaau si ll j paiu u iensn si adea iens paan
establish drainage in the orbit (see above for details on accessing the
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES AND MANAGEMENT
retrobulbar space for diagnostics), to protect the globe if the function
OF EYELID DISEASE
of the eyelids is impaired and the proper distribution of the tear film
is not possible (temporary tarsorrhaphy), or to remove the eye if it
has been irreparably damaged (enucleation). Most inflammatory
Initial management of a developmental or neoplastic eyelid problem
orbital conditions that result in exophthalmos are associated with
is in most cases surgical, with adjunctive medical support. Ifa surgical
orbital, ocular, and oral pain and most patients have an inflammatory
 procedure for the feline eyelid is to be performed, the surgeon should
leukogram and may be febrile The exception is the condition known
 primarily consider the requisite functions of the eyelid and aim to
jo aueieadde pasos au isnl iou 'uoouny ieul aaoidul io aioisan
This disorder has been diagnosed with increasing frequency of late
the eye.
and usually has an insidious onset. Clinical signs include exophthal-
 mos, progressively decreasing ocular mobility, and exposure keratitis.
Tarsorrhaphy
The orbital tissues and eyelids become fixed in place by fibrous tissue.
It begins in oneeyebut eventually progresses to involveboth. Response
-aoid ieins ansinbai aui st (i-zs xog Adeuosien Areioduat y
to therapy (immunosuppressive therapy and radiation) is generally
dure for proptosed eyes that are salvageable and is also indicated when
poor and enucleation is often necessary when the exposure keratitis
an orbital condition has resulted in exophthalmos and cormeal expo-
 progresses to ulceration and perforation.
sure or if a facial paralysis has developed which impairs the animal's
696
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
ability to blink and protect its globe. .2.25 The tarsorrhaphy should be
Modified Hotz-Celsus
left in place until the blink reflex returns and the orbital swelling has
resolved; in most cases this will be a matter of two to four weeks. It
 The most commonly employed approach to entropion in the cat is to
is preferable to remove one tarsorrhapy suture at a time, rather than
perform a modifed Hotz-Celsus procedure (Box 57-3). The length
all at once, so that at least partial support for the globe is maintained
and shape of the skin-orbicularis oculi incisions vary depending upon
for an extended time.
the amount and area ofthe entropion correction necessary (Fig. 57-11).
Simple lid mass resection
Combination Hotz-Celsus with lateral
wedge resection
If a lesion to be removed involves less than one-third of the margin
If lower lid entropion is accompanied by excessive lid length, the
(Box 57-2).
modified Hotz-Celsus procedure may
/be combined with a lid
Box 57-1 Tarsorraphy
The cat is positioned in sternal recumbency and the eye aseptically
au puag suhnen ane suibhew paa aut fl Aabuns lot paedad
equator of the globe (e.g., with a proptosed eye), a lateral
paddi-sunia y waun aseaan o Aessanau aa l Auoouuen
tenotomy, strabismus or Metzenbaum scissors, a 5-10 mm full
thickness lateral canthotomy incision is made (perpendicular to the 
lateral canthus, as if extending the palpebral fissure laterally). The lids 
are then lifted from their inverted posture and repositioned in their
normal anatomic position. The canthotomy incision is then closed
with 4/0 or 5/0 non-absorbable suture with a figure-of-eight suture
(Fg. 57-9A) at the margin of the lateral canthus, followed by
interrupted sutures of the same material to close the remainder of
the incision. Next, two or three horizontal mattress sutures are
-uou o/t ylm aanss!y eagadled aut ssone pue buoje paneidaid 
absorbable suture material. These sutures should be placed only
partial thickness through the eyelid; care should be taken not to go 
through the palpebral conjunctiva so that the suture does not contact
 aun uo uoisuat si aaun uaun pasop si aunssy aut uaum eaunon au
A
?
lids, as in the case of a proptosis or extensive orbital swelling. stents
should be employed to minimize damage to the eyelid skin and the
oml y pasop si anss pllaul Audeuoset Aesodual h-is aunh
potential for pull-through (Fig. 57-9B). Portions of sterilized rubber 
 or three horizontal mattress sutures, prevented from cutting into the 
aul asodand siut lof injasn ahe buignt snouaae su! lo spueg
skin by stents (e.g. infusion tubing). (A) If a canthotomy has been
horizontal mattress sutures should be tightened slowly and the lids
performed, it is closed with a figure-of eight suture at the margin and 
lifted over the exposed globe rather than the globe being pushed 
simple interrupted sutures for the length of the incision. (B) These
back into the orbit.
sutures should be placed only partial thickness through the eyelid.
Using 4/0 or 5/0 non-absorbable suture on a cutting or micropoint 
needle. (In the diagram the suture is shown loose and untied so the 
 placement of the suture is clear. In the cat the suture will appose the
eyelids - no suture should contact the cornea.)
Box 57-2 Eyelid mass resection
pdase loy paedand pue Auagunoan jelanel u! pauoisod s! ien aul
Closure
surgery. There are two options to consider.
 For either technique described above, the defect is then closed in
Triangular wedge resection1.4
aldwis e ym lael leaunuo-osien daap e isy aul 'shael omi
continuous pattern of 5/0 to 6/0 absorbable suture. Care must be 
aul yonoul aeauad jou saop aunins aul reul ainsua on uaen
of the eyelid on either side of the defect or neoplasm so that the
incisions intersect away from the lid margin (Hg. 57-10A).
palpebral conjunctiva as corneal abrasions and ulcerations can result.
The external layer is apposed with 5/0 non-absorbable suture in an 
 The four-sided or 'house' technique32
interrupted pattern. The first suture placed in this repair is at the
Two parallel incisions are made on either side of the defect to be
eyelid. This suture is the most critical for ensuring proper alignment 
repaired or removed. These incisions should be perpendicular to the
 and should be a figure-of-eight suture (Fig. 57-10C; a modification 
eyelid margin and palpebral fissure. Two additional incisions are then
 of the cruciate mattress suture). The remainder of the skin 
made to connect the initial cuts in an intersecting manner (as with the
layer can be closed routinely with simple interrupted sutures
wedge). This procedure provides a larger surface area to distribute 
(Hg. 57-10D,E).
tension associated with wound apposition (Fig. 57-10B).
697
Section
7
The Head and Neck
Box 57-2 Continued
A)
?
D
au buole uosuat aseainap Aeu uosoxa papis-anot v (a) paouan si anssil jo abpam ssausui-ly v (o) uoasan pillaiduis ol-s aune
u e aeassa si u nns ui-any  ue piaa au asde  pid ag pinys anns y au  aul uui pneda
cuciate mattress suture, will accomplish this nicely. (D) The deep layer should not penetrate through the palpebral conjunctiva. (E) Final 
appearance.
A
IB
D
 Figure 57-11 (A} Bilateral lower eyelid entropion in an un-neutered male cat. (B) Trichiasis has occurred as a result of the lid inversion. (C) Immediate 
postoperative appearance after correction of the entropion with Hotz-Celsus. (D) Postoperative appearance at suture removal.
shortening procedure.1 The excessive length of the lower lid is esti-
figure-of-eight suture of 5/0 non-absorbable material. The modified
mated or measured with Jameson calipers. If the patient is only uni-
Hotz-Celsus (see Box 57-3) is then performed as usual.
laterally affected with entropion, it can be helpful to measure the
length of the lower lid of the non-affected eye for comparison. When 
Sliding skin graft
the surgeon has determined how much to shorten the eyelid length,
a full-thickness wedge resection is performed (see Box 57-2) in
The sliding skin graft, or H-plasty, is employed when a traumatic or
the lateral lower eyelid. The eyelid margin is then apposed with a
surgical defect involves greater than one-third of the eyelid margin
698
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
Box 57-3 Modified Hotz-Celsus (Fig. 57-12)
The cat is placed in lateral recumbency and prepared for aseptic
 simple interrupted pattern. Closure of the incision should begin in its 
surgery. A lid plate is placed behind the eyelid to prevent ful thickness
 center and split the distance between sutures until it is completely
incisions through the eyelid and damage to the globe. The initial 
closed and sutures are 1-2 mm apart. The suture knots should be 
incision is made 1-2 mm from the eyelid margin (usually where the
directed away from the globe or the near tags cut short and the far
skin pigmentation stops and the skin hair begins) through the skin into
tags left longer to facilitate removal. As the incision heals, wound 
the orbicularis oculi muscle. The length of this incision will depend
contraction will result in an additional 0.5-1 mm eversion.
upon the length of the lid that is affected by inversion. A second 
The Hotz-Celsus procedure can be modified further for medial 
eliptical incision that joins to the ends of the first incision is made
peudasupea ui uowuon si se yons (azl-is bh) uoidouua
ventral (or proximal) to the first; the width is dependent upon the
animals. A triangular incision is made at the medial canthus in the
amount of tissue that needs to be removed to evert the eyelid into its
lower eyelid wherein the tip of the triangle is opposite the lower
normal position. The delineated segment of skin with a small amount 
lacrimal punctum. This incision should not be deeper than the
of underlying muscle is removed with tenotomy scissors. The orbicularis
 orbicularis muscle or damage to the nasolacrimal puncta and 
muscle in cats may be difficult to discern; as long as the skin is excised
canaliculus can occur. Closure is routine with a simple interrupted
fully, a sufficient amount of adjacent muscle should accompany it. The
 5/0 non-absorbable repair.
resultant defect is then closed with 5/0 non-absorbable suture in a
A
B
（D)
 Figure 57-12 Modified Hotz-Celsus. (A) An eliptical incision delineates the tissue to be removed. (B) The skin and a small portion of the 
underlying orbicularis oculi muscle is excised. One suture is initially placed in the center of the surgical eyelid wound and then the subsequent
sutures placed. (c) Final appearance of Hotz-Celsus repaired with simple interrupted sutures. (D) Modification of the Hotz-Celsus for focal medial 
 canthal entropion.
[A
B
C
Figure 57-13 (A} Squamous cell carcinoma affecting the eyelid at the lateral canthus. (B) Immediate postoperative appearance after exision of the
neoplasm and repair of the resultant defect with two sliding skin advancement grafts, onein the upper lid and one in the lower lid. ( Postoperative
appearance. The palpebral fissure is shortened, but the lids are functional and there was complete excision of the tumor.
lamol pue iaddn yioq ioy aieudoidde si ainpanoid stul p'(t-ts xog)
anesthesia alone, negating the need for a second episode of general
eyelid repairs (Fig. 57-13).
anesthesia.
Lip-to-lid resection
Roberts-Bistner procedure
 The lip-to-lid procedure (Box 57-6) is useful for grafting of large
and modifications
defects in the lower eyelid following resection of neoplastic lesions334
Although there are innumerable surgical approaches to the correction
(Fig. 57-17).
of eyelid agenesis in the cat, the most common is the Roberts-Bistner
aa ram au u aad saunu e uesu sa
ORBITAL SURGERY
beneath the margin into the upper lid defect (Fig. 57-15).1 The donor
 area on the nictitans is left to heal by second intention. The base of
the conjunctival pedicle is transected three to four weeks following
 Because there is limited peribulbar space in the feline orbit, surgical
the initial surgery. This can usually be accomplished with topical
 procedures are more difficult to perform than in other species.
669
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
 Box 57-4 The sliding skin graft
 After full thickness excision of the lesion, two slightly diverging
eyelid to compensate for postoperative shrinkage and secured with
incisions are made with a scalpel blade in the eyelid, that are 
 5/0 non-absorbable simple interrupted sutures (Fg. 57-14C). The 
 approximately twice as long as the height of the defect (Fig. 57-14A).
sliding skin graft should be lined on its underside with mucosa,
Two equal sized triangles of skin are removed at the proximal tips 
Jo sheie aa lo panan ag uen reun eaunluos huaneie lauia
 of both incisions to accommodate the shifting of the graft into the
conjunctiva from elsewhere or free grafts of buccal mucosa. This
 defect. After liberal dissection to separate the skin graft from its
lining should be attached to the posterior aspect of the skin flap
underlying subcutaneous attachments, the graft is advanced into
with 6/0 absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern so that 
the defect, which will collapse the triangles (Fig. 57-14B). The graft
the knots are either buried or exposed on the skin side. A temporary
should be advanced 0.5-1 mm beyond the normal margin of the
tarsorrhaphy is helpful if there is tension on the advancement graft.
Figure 57-14 Sliding advancement graft. (A) The
margins of the graft to be advanced are determined 
by the size of the lesion. (B) Two triangular pieces of
skin are removed at either side of the graft's base to 
prevent dog-ears. (c) Once advanced, the graft is 
sutured in place and the triangles closed.
A
B
c
B
C
Figure 57-15 (A) Eyelid agenesis in the cat. Note the trichiasis and the extensive corneal vascularization. (B) Intraoperative appearance of eye during
Box 57-5 The Robert-Bistner procedure
The recipient bed is first prepared by dividing the lid skin that is
musculature. It is then rotated into the upper lid defect and sutured 
 present from the palpebral conjunctiva with either a scalpel blade or a
in place with 5/0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig.
pair of Westcott scissors (Fg. 57-16A). A scalpel blade is then used to
57-16C). The donor bed is reapposed similarly. If there is sufficient
 make an initial incision in the skin 2-3 mm ventral to the lower eyelid 
conjunctiva separated from the recipient bed during preparation of 
pajap pl laddn aui jo yibual au ueut labuol Aubis s! jeut uibyeu
the site, it should be used to cover the posterior aspect of the graft 
(Fig. 57-16B). A second parallel incision should provide a pedicle that is
 and sutured to the new lid margin with 6/0 absorbable suture in a
1.0 mm wider than the height of the upper lid defect. This pedicle is
uo pasodxao paung laui souy aul ylm uaned snonuiuon alduns
elevated with scissors and should include skin and orbicularis oculi
the skin surface.
A
(B
（D)
 Figure 57-16 Myocutaneous graft repair of eyelid agenesis. (A) The recipient bed is prepared by dissecting the underlying conjunctiva away from
the eyelid skin. (B) A pedicle of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle is harvested from the lower eyelid. (c) The skin graft is sutured in place in the 
recipient bed. (D) The Dziezyc-Millichamp modification harvests a pedicle of conjunctiva from the anterior face of the third eyelid to line the 
aa l pilaaa put aul uo pajap leaunuon aul Aleanel ase si! re paupee yal si apiad jeaunluo aul lenb us au jo aeans loaisod
left to heal by second intention.
700
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
Box 57-5 Continued
Modifications
anterior face of the nictitating membrane (Fg. 57-16D).20 A pedicle 
 Modification of this technique utilizes conjunctiva from other sources
graft of conjunctiva with its base at the lateral aspect of the nictitans
-zaiza aul pag huaidipan aul woy algeie yhnoua pou s! alaul !
is prepared with scissors then rotated 180° and apposed to the
Millichamp modification proceeds as above, but the conjunctiva used 
posterior surface of the skin graft and secured in place with 6/0 to
to line the posterior surface of the skin graft is recruited from the
7/0 absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern.
C
Figure 57-17 (A) Basal cell carcinoma of the lower eyelid. (B) Immediate postoperative appearance following excision of the neoplasm and repair of
the resultant defect with a lip-to-lid graft. (C) Postoperative appearance of eyelid margin following lip-to-lid repair. Mild ectropion is present.
Box 57-6 Lip-to-lid (Fig. 57-18)
For this procedure it is helpful to draw the proposed incisions with
carefully undermined and rotated into the position of the former
a marking pen before commiting to the cuts. The lesion to be 
eyelid margin. The oral mucosal defect is apposed with 4/0
removed should be excised from the lower lid full thickness in its
absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern. The graft is 
entirety with tenotomy or Metzenbaum scissors. Two par allel incisions
aut ol esosnu jeso sl! buisodde Aq aneld u! paunins Ajlu!
are made through the lip at a 45° angle to the commissure of the
remaining conjunctival edges with 6/0 buried simple interrupted 
lip beneath the lower eyelid. Once enough oral mucosa has been
paanins s! ljeab aut jo anejans snoauein aul saunins aigequosge
exposed and elevated with the lip graft so that when placed into
in a simple interrupted pattern with 5/0 non-absorbable material.
the recipient bed the missing conjunctiva is replaced, the oral
The cutaneous donor bed is closed similarly to repair the defect 
mucosa should be carefully split so that it remains within the oral
in the lip.
cavity while the skin graft from above continues to be harvested for
 A modification of this technique that places the lateral commissure
transfer. The rostral aspect of the lip graft incision is continued so that
of the lip in place of the lateral canthus to correct eyelid agenesis has 
it connects with the medial aspect of the eyelid defect. The graft is
been described.14
A
B
 Figure 57-18 Lip-to-lid resection. (A) The tissues to be excised and transposed are delineated. (B) A section of lip with oral mucosa is elevated.
 The oral mucosa is split, when enough has been harvested with the skin graft, to replace the conjunctival defect to be created with the lid excision.
 Once the eyelid defect has been created, the incisions between the lip and the lid defects are connected. (c) The lid graft is rotated into position 
pasoddean s! esosnu jeso buiuieuan aul aneid u! paanins pue
701
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Enucleation
Box 57-7 Indications for enucleation
Enucleation or removal of the globe, the eyelid margins, and the
nictitating membrane and its associated gland, is indicated in many
 Intraocular tumors are present that are not amenable to local
different situations (Box 57-7).
excision and are still confined within the globe, especially if they 
There are two main approaches to removal of the globe, the sub-
have resulted in secondary glaucoma 
conjunctival technique and the transpalpebral technique' (Box 57-8).
 Intraocular infections have destroyed the globe and are potential
 The transpalpebral technique is recommended in cases of ocular neo-
sources of systemic infection 
plasia or intraocular or ocular surface infections in order to decrease
 Proptosis of the globe has occurred with extensive damage to the
the chances of extension of disease into adjacent tissues.35 In all other
globe, rupture of multiple extraocular muscles or severing of the 
 instances, the choice of which procedure to perform is surgeon prefer-
optic nerve 
so aq paodan st aiuan ieaunuoqns a ynoie '
 Intraocular inflammation has destroyed the globe, resulted in
surgeons to be more rapid and associated with less intra and postop-
blindness and pain
erative hemorrhage. Also, the subconjunctival technique may be pref-
 Glaucoma is uncontrolled with medical therapy, especially if 
erable in cats as a matter of course since tissues are often easier to
buphthalmos is causing problems with corneal exposure
identify with this approach.3 In cases of refractory glaucoma wherein
 Extensive trauma to the globe or corneal defects that do not have
the globe has become enlarged, limiting the already limited space in
the possibility of successful repair
the orbit, it may be helpful to place a small gauge needle (30 or 25
 Congenital defects, such as microphthalmia when sight is not 
gauge) into the anterior chamber at the corneoscleral limbus to
present, result in chronic problems like conjunctivitis and keratitis
remove a small amount of aqueous humor to make the globe smaller
and facilitate manipulation of the globe within the orbit. If this
is done, the globe may become somewhat flaccid which can make
 Box 57-8 Enucleation
Ddase lot paedaud pue Auaqunan lelanel u! pauosod s! ien aul
sur gery.
Subconjunctival enucleation (Figs 57-19A,B,C)
ssossis wnequazia io snusigeas Kuoouat paddii-unig yi 
 a 5-10 mm full thickness lateral canthotomy incision is made 
A
(perpendicular to the lateral canthus, as if extending the palpebral
aul agoe aul jo ansodxa aee, l sll (le ael anss!
nictitating membrane may be removed at this time or following
pue padseh si aue guaw bueu aul aqoh aut po eaowa
retracted with forceps to allow visualization of its deep extent. Two
small hemostats are clamped at its base from either side and then it,
along with the gland at its base, is excised with Mayo scissors. Next 
the bulbar conjunctiva in incised 3-5 mm posterior to the limbus with
curved tenotomy, strabismus or blunt-tipped Metzenbaum scissors.
This incision is extended 360° around the globe. Blunt dissection is
then performed underneath the bulbar conjunctiva posterior to this
incision until the insertions of the extraocular muscles are identified.
The transection of these muscles is facilitated by introduction of a 
C
D
 small muscle hook to elevate the muscle from the sclera. The 
tendinous insertions of all four rectus muscles are cut, followed by 
Figure 57-19 Subconjunctival enucleation. (A) A lateral canthotomy is
transection of the oblique and retractor bulbi muscle insertions. The 
eaunuon aut ui uoisou! aoe v (a) ansodxa ateliey oi paojad
globe should at this time be mobile and may displace forward
is made. Blunt dissection underneath the conjunctiva will expose the 
dightly. There should be sufficient room to maneuver a small curved 
insertions of the extraocular muscles which are transected. (c) Once the
hemostat behind the globe to clamp the optic nerve and its adjacent
muscular attachments of the globe have been severed, the optic nerve is
vasculature. With curved Metzenbaum or enucleation scissors, the
clamped, then transected and the globe is removed. (D) The margins of 
optic nerve is severed anterior to the hemostat. If there is not enough 
the eyelids are removed prior to a two-layer closure
room for both instruments behind the globe, which is often the case
in cats, then the nerve should be clamped for a moment, then the
hemostat removed followed by transection of the nerve with the 
 scissor. In most cases, it is not necessary to place a ligature on the 
Transpalpebral enucleation
stump of the nerve and blood vessels. The globe is removed and the
 The palpebral fissure is sutured closed with 4/0 to 5/0 non-absorbable
orbit inspected. Bleeding vessels that can be identified may be 
suture in a simple continuous pattern (Hg. 57-20A). If the tags of
addressed with ligatures or point cautery. Direct pressure with a
suture are left long on either side of the fissure, they can be grasped
:bulzoo asnyp mols 4o dois Aew abuods jenibuns 
with hemostats to facilitate exposure of the surgical site. The
Next, 4-6 mm of the eyelid margins, including the lateral and 
eyelid skin is then incised circumferentially with a scalpel blade
 medial canthi are removed with scissors and any remaining conjunctiva
approximately 4-6 mm from the margins (to avoid the base of the
within the orbit is removed at this time.
glands in the lid margin). Care must be taken to incise the skin
702
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
Box 57-8 Continued
 and subcutaneous tissues alone, without penetrating through the
palpebral conjunctiva. Once the submucosa of the conjunctiva is 
reached and identified, blunt dissection with curved tenotomy.
strabismus or Metzenbaum scissors will continue posteriorly above
the conjunctiva until the fornices are passed and the sclera can be 
visualized. The extraocular muscles are identified and transected
(Fig. 57-20B). Once all the extraocular muscles are transected,
the optic nerve is clamped, transected and the globe is removed
B
(Fig. 57-20C).
Enucleation closure (Figs 57-19D and 57-20D)
If a silicone implant (see Chapter 10) is to be placed within the empty
orbit, it should be prepared by soaking in betadine solution followed 
by roughening or scarification by several incisions with a scalpel blade
to roughen its surface and improve its orbital retention. The implant 
will then be placed within the orbit and a mesh of suture placed 
A
C
across the orbit from the dorsal to ventral orbital rims to facilitate its
 positioning. A simple continuous pattern of 3/0 to 4/0 absorbable
suture will span the orbit over the implant with bites taken along
the orbital rims through the periorbita. If no implant is to be placed,
this meshwork may still be placed in an attempt to minimize the
D
depression of skin into the empty orbit that results from loss of
Figure 57-20 Transpalpebral enucleation. (A) The eyelids are sutured 
orbital contents. A standard two-layer closure of the remaining 
closed prior to the initial incision and an eliptical incision is made around 
subcutaneous tissue and skin over the orbit is then performed. The 
the closed palpebral fissure. (B) Blunt dissection of the subcutaneous 
subcutaneous tissues should be apposed with 4/0 to 5/0 absorbable
layers is performed until the insertions of the extraocular muscles are 
pasodde ag uaut Aew us aul uaned snonuiuon ajdwuis e ui aunins
identified and transected at their origins. Care must be taken to avoid
with either 4/0 to 5/0 non-absorbable interrupted sutures or 4/0 to
entering the conjunctival space surrounding the ocular surface when
5/0 absorbable suture in an intradermal pattern. If skin sutures are
performing this dissection. (c) Once all the extraocular muscles are
shep tl-ol iseal re loj aneld u! urewan pinous Aaun 'panouan ag ot
transected the optic nerve is clamped, then transected and the globe
following surgery.
is removed. (D) Closure is in two layers.
Box 57-9 Exenteration
The cat is positioned in lateral recumbency for surgery and prepared
will continue posteriorly above the conjunctiva until the fornices
Oys ot o/ yim pasop paanins s! aunss leagadied aul Alendase
 are passed and the sclera can be visualized. The initial incision is
non-absorbable suture in a simple continuous pattern. If the tags of 
extended caudally through the orbicularis oculi muscles of the eyelids
suture are left long on either side of the fissure, they can be grasped 
with hemostats to facilitate exposure of the surgical site. The eyelid
are incised as close to their origins as possible and the optic nerve is
skin is then incised circumferentially with a scalpel blade approximately
clamped and severed as in a routine enucleation. A periosteal elevator
4-6 mm from the margins (to avoid the base of the glands in the lid 
may be used to remove the periorbita from the orbital bones and the
margin). Care must be taken to incise the skin and subcutaneous
orbital lacrimal gland from the dorsal orbit. Once the globe and its
tissues alone, without penetrating through the palpebral conjunctiva.
associated tissues are removed, remaining connective tissue and fat 
Once the submucosa of the conjunctiva is reached and identified, blunt 
within the orbit may be excised if necessary. Closure is as in a routine
dissection with curved tenotomy, strabismus or Metzenbaum scissors
enucleation.
delineation of its margins more diffcult during the procedure, so care
 require removal of more skin that the eyelid margins alone and there
-sip si Bunp aqo ayi aeuep Agunmun ol nou uayet aq Pinous
is insufficient skin left to close the orbital defect, a caudal-auricular
Bunp aqog au uo uoen aaisarxa pioae ciaeiadu si a uoas
axial pattern flap may be used (see Chapter 19).37
enucleation in the cat The retrobulbar optic nerve [from the posterior
globe to the optic chiasm) is relatively short and traction on the dis-
eased globe during its removal may damage the optic chiasm and the
Opposite optic nerve, rendering the patient blind.3
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Exenteration
Eyelid surgery
Exenteration (Box 57-9) involves the removal of not only the globe,
 The most important part of the postoperative care of patients that have
but also the extraocular muscles and periorbita. This technique is
undergone some form of blepharoplasty is diligent attention to pre-
usually indicated when there is orbital neoplasia (Fig. 57-2l). The
venting self-trauma and dehiscence of the suture line The importance
orbital depression that results from exenteration is more marked that
 of this for the success of the procedure should be stringently stressed
that following enucleation alone In cases of exenteration which
to the caretaker. Rigid Elizabethan collars are the most common
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
B
C
orbital sarcoma. Note the dilated pupil which suggests damage to the optic nerve and the dull, lackluster appearance of the cornea, an indication that 
the ability to blink has been compromised. (B) Computed tomographic scan shows a mass in the ventral orbit causing exophthalmos. (c) Postoperative
appearance two weeks following exenteration.
means to limit the patient's ability to disturb the surgical site. Topical
swelling may be decreased with prompt and repeated (as long as it is
lubricants and broad-spectrum antibiotics are usually employed to
tolerated) application of a cold compress to the surgical site.
minimize the likelihood of irritation to the ocular surface and infec-
 tion of the surgical site Systemic antibiotics follwing surgery are not
usually necessary if appropriate perioperative antibiotics are used
COIMPLICATIONSANDPROGNOSIS
-iad si Aains an au ie juasaid si ssaaid snonajul ue ssaum
formed. If the patient is systemically able to tolerate non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents, such as meloxicam, these are helpful to
Eyelids
minimize pain and tissue swelling. Skin sutures should be left in place
Jo lenouai ameuad se 'iauol Aqeiajand 'sep tl ot uat sal le ioy
Complications of eyelid surgery may include suture dehiscence, infec-
sutures can result in dehiscence and lid defects and may necessitate
tion, recurrence of the original problem, trichiasis, cormeal ulceration,
additional surgery.
swelling, and discomfort Cats latently infected with FHV-1 may suffer
from recrudescent disease (conjunctivitis, corneal ulcers, upper respi-
ratory signs) initiated by the stress of general anesthesia, hospitaliza-
Orbital surgery
tion, and treatment
If proper sterile and careful surgical technique is employed in orbital
Orbit
-un alensn si suaed aul jo Aaaonai aiadosod au 'sanpaand
eventful. If preoperative retrobulbar anesthesia is administered (see
 The most common complications following enucleation and exenter-
 Chapter 2), the requisite postoperative analgesia will be minimized.
-aoid sueds aqoig ul g'sszt'uonaju! pue aaeuouay aie uoe
If they are not contraindicated by a systemic condition, non-steroidal
dures, damage to the globe, persistent displacement or deviation of
anti-inflammatory agents administered systemically usually signif-
the globe, exposure keratitis, corneal ulcerations that may progress or
be slow to heal, keratoconjunctivitis, blindness, and recurrence Or
-an 'auaai ro ssaoid aseas Ared aul jo uoissaioid
 are given, unless there is concern because an infectious process neces-
descence of infection, etc.) are possible. Prognosis is highly dependent
sitated the orbital surgery or removal of the globe. Postoperative
upon the etiology of the disorder.
REFERENCES
1.
 Gelatt KN, Gelatt JP. Small animal
5.
 Ollivier Fl, Plummer CE, Barrie KP.
8
Ramsey D, Gerding PA, Losonsky IM, et al.
ophthalmic surgery. Oxford: Butterworth-
Ophthalmic examination techniques.
Comparative value of diagnostic imaging
Heinemann; 2001. p. 46-124.
In: Gelatt KN, editor. Veterinary
techniques in a cat with exophthalmos.
Spiess BM. Diseases and surgery of the
ophthalmology. Ames: Blackwell; 2007.
Vet Comp Ophthalmol 1994;4:198-202.
anine orbit. In: Gelatt KN, editor.
p. 438-83.
9.
Belhorn RW, Barnelt KC, Henkind P.
Veterinary ophthalmology. Ames:
 Calia C, Kirschner SE, Baer KE, Stefanacci
Ocular colobomas in domestic cats. J Am
Blackwell; 2007. p. 539-62.
JD. The use of computed tomography
Vet Med Assoc 1971;159:1015-21.
3.8
Stiles J. Townsend wM. Feline
scan for the evaluation of orbital diseases
10.
Roberts SR, Bistner Sl. Surgical correction
ophthalmology. In: Gelatt KN, editor.
in cats and dogs. Vet Comp Ophthalmol
of eyelid agenesis. Mod Vet Pract
Veterinary ophthalmology. Ames:
1994;4:24-7.
1968;49:40-3.
Blackwell; 2007. p. 1095-164.
 Grahn BH, Stewart WA, Towner RA,
11.
 Dziezyc J, Millichamp Nl. Surgical
4. Stades FC, Gelatt KN. Diseases and
Noseworthy MD. Magnetic resonance
correction of eyelid agenesis in a cat. J Am
surgery of the canine eyelid. In: Gelatt
imaging of the canine and feline eye.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1989;25:513-16.
KN, editor. Veterinary ophthalmology.
orbit, and optic nerves and its clinical
12.
Wolfer J. Correction of eyelid coloboma 
Ames: Blackwell; 2007. p. 563-617.
application. Cn Vet J 1993;34:418-24.
in four cats using subdermal collagen and
704
Eyelids and orbit
Chapter
57
a modifed stades technique. Vet
of surgical excision [33 cases). Vet
ophthalmic surgery. Ill. Effect of
Ophthalmol 2002;4:269-72.
Ophthalmol 2010;13:26-30.
 povidone-iodine on the conjunctiva.
13. Esson D. A modifcation of the mustarde
21.
 Turrel JM, Farrelly J, Page RL, et al.
Arch Ophthalmol 1984;102(5):
 technique for the surgical repair of a large
Evaluation of strontium 90 irradiation
728-9.
feline eyelid coloboma. Vet Ophthalmol
in treatment of cutaneous mast cell
30. Ahmad S, Ahmad A, Benzon HT. Clinical
2001;4:159-60.
tumors in cats: 35 cases [1992-2002).
 experience with the peribulbar block for 
14. Whittaker CJ, Wilkie DA, Simpson Dl.
JAm Vet Med Assoc 2006;228:898-901.
ophthalmic surgery. Region Anesthes
 et al. Lip commissure to eyelid
 Cantaloube B, Raymond-Letron I, Regnier
1993;18:184-8.
 transposition for the repair of feline
A. Multiple eyelid apocrine hidrocystomas 
31.
 Skarda RT, Tranquilli Wl. Local and
eyelid agenesis. Vet Ophthalmol 2010;13:
in two persian cats. Vet Ophthalmol
 regional anesthetic and analgesic
173-8.
2004:7:121-5
techniques: cats. In: Tranquilli wl.
 15. williams DL, Kim JIY. Feline entropion: a
 Gilger BC, McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, editors. Lumb
case series of 50 affected animals 
Wright JC. Orbital neoplasms in cats: 21
and Jones veterinary anesthesia and
[2003-2008). Vet Ophthalmol 2009;12:
cases [1974-1990). I Am Vet Med Assoc
 analgesia. 4th ed. Ames: Blackwell; 2007.
221-6.
1992;201:1083-6.
p. 595-603.
16.
. Read RA, Broun HC. Entropion correction
24. Attali-Soussay K, Jegou JP, Clerc B.
32.
. Peiffer RL. Four-sided excision of canine 
in dogs and cats using a combination
Retrobulbar tumors in dogs and cats: 25
eyelid neoplasms. Journal of Canine
Hotz-Celsus and lateral wedge resection:
cases. Veterinary Ophthalmology 2001;4:
Practice 1979;6:35-8.
 results in 311 eyes. Vet Ophthalmol
19-27.
33. Pavletic MM. Mucocutaneous subdermal
2007;10:6-11.
25.
Gilger BC, Hamilton HL, Wilkie DA, et al.
plexus flap from the lip for lower eyelid
17. McLaughlin SA, Whitely RD, Gilger BC.
Traumatic ocular proptoses in dogs and
restoration in the dog. I Am Vet Med
et al. Eyelid neoplasia in cats: a review of
cats: 84 cases [1980-1993). J Am Anim
Assoc 1982:180:921 -6.
demographic data [1979-1989). J Am
Hosp Assoc 1995;206:1186-90.
34.
Hunt GB. Use of the lip-to-lid flap for
Anim Hosp Assoc 1993;29:63-7.
 Van der Woerdt A. Orbital inflammatory
replacement of the lower eyelid in five
18. Newkirk KM, Rohrbach BW. A
disease and psuedotumor in dogs and
cats. Vet Surg 2006;35:284-6.
 retrospective study of eyelid tumors
cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
35.
Wolf E. Enucleation of the globe. In:
from 43 cats. Vet Pathol 2009;46:
2008;38:389-401.
Bojrab M, editor. Current techniques in
916-27.
27.
Billson FM, Miller-Michau T, Mould JR,
small animal surgery. Philadelphia: Lea &
19. Dorn CR, Taylor DO, Schneider R.
 Davidson MG. Idiopathic sclerosing
 Febiger; 1990. p. 119-23.
Sunlight exposure and risk of developing
orbital pseudotumor in 7 cats. Vet
 36. Kuhns E. Enucleation of the eye by
cutaneous and oral squamous cell 
Ophthalmol 2006;9:45-52.
subconjunctival ablation. Vet Med Small
carcinoma in white cats. Journal of the
28.
 Bell CM, Schwarz T, Dubielzig RR.
Anim Clin 1976;71:1433-40.
National Cancer Institute 1971;46:
 Diagnostic features of feline restrictive
87.
 Stiles J., Townsend W, willis M, et al. Use
1073-8.
orbital myofbroblastic sarcoma. Vet 
 of a caudal auricular axial pattern flap in
20. Montgomery Kw, van der Woerdt A,
Pathol 2010. [Epub ahead of print] 
three cats and one dog following orbital
Aquino SM, et al. Periocular cutaneous
29.
 Apt L, Isenberg S, Yoshimori R, Paez JH.
exenteration. Vet Ophthalmol 2003;6:
mast cell tumors in cats: evaluation
 Chemical preparation of the eye in
121-6.
705
58
oter
Neurocranium
B.P. Melj
Intracranial tumors are relatively common in cats. Due to availability
the pituitary fossa bordered rostrally by the tuberculum sphenoidalis
 of advanced imaging techniques like computed tomography (CT) and
 and caudally by the dorsum sellae The third ventricle runs deep into
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a confrmed diagnosis of intra-
the posterior lobe (Fig. 58-1) of the pituitary gland. The pituitary
 cranial neoplasia is being made possible in an increasing number of
 gland is composed of the anterior lobe and a neurointermediate lobe.
affected patients. Furthermore, developments in the field of veterinary
 In the cat, the pars intermedia is a prominent layer, which can be visu-
neurology, anesthesia, emergency and critical care, neurosurgery, and 
 alized by immunohistochemical staining (Fig. 58-1).
radiotherapy have resulted in an improved prognosis following treat-
ment. However, the biggest challenge for the veterinary surgeon is
Vascular supply
early diagnosis of feline intracranial neoplasia, when clinical signs
may be non-specific, which would improve the outcome of neurosur-
The major venous sinuses into which the veins of the brain drain
gery and radiation therapy.
are the basilar, paired transverse, confluens, and dorsal sagittal sinuses.
 This chapter will cover surgical therapy of brain tumors, and other
The locations of these sinuses are generally used as landmarks for the
 operable neurocranial diseases in cats.
various surgical approaches to the brain and care should be taken to
avoid them. The middle meningeal artery and its rostral and caudal
branches supply the dura and the adjacent portions of the skull. The
SURGICAL ANATOMY
ethmoidal artery reaches the dura after passing through the ethmoidal
foramen and runs between the cribriform plate and olfactory bulb.
The intermal carotid arteries and the basilar artery give rise through
The skull and brain
the caudal communicating arteries to the arterial cerebral circle (of
Willis) at the base of the brain with the hypophysis at its center (Fig.
The feline skull is somewhat more accessible than the canine skull
58-2). Arterial branches sprouting from the circle constitute the arte-
al 'os 'ai a e pue as uao ssal on an
rial supply to the brain. Rostral, middle, and caudal cerebral arteries
increased mobility of the skull in relation to the cervical spine facili-
 originate from the circle and run between the gyri in the sulci. Also,
tates the caudal approach because it is possible to position and stabi-
the cerebellum receives blood from the circle by way of the rostral
lize the cat's skull in hyperflexion. The function of the feline skull is
cerebellar artery. The anterior lobe of the hypophysis has no direct
to protect the brain. The brain can be divided into three large regions:
arterial supply but receives blood from the median eminence through
cerebrum, cerebellum, and brainstem. The cerebrum consists of the
paired cerebral hemispheres that are separated by a longitudinal
long portal veins. The neurointermediate lobe receives a direct arterial
supply from the fused caudal intercarotid arteries and the caudal
fissure. The cerebral hemispheres are composed of cerebral cortex
hypophyseal artery. These run partly in the rostral intercavernous sinus
(gray matter) and underlying white matter. Each cerebral hemisphere
 and perforate the dura to connect directly to the neural lobe.2
contains a lateral ventricle that communicates with the third ventricle
through an interventricular foramen. The olfactory nerve originates
from the rostral extensions of the cerebrum, the olfactory bulbs. The
other cranial nerves originate from the brainstem. The cerebellum is
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
separated from the cerebrum by a transverse fissure that holds the
tentorium. The brainstem occupies the middle and caudal fossae of
Brain and the mass effect
the floor of the cranial vault and is continuous with the spinal cord.
It contains the third and fourth ventricle The thalamus, subthalamus,
Cats with signs attributable to a suspected intracranial mass may
hypothalamus, and epithalamus are components of the brainstem.
na suasaian aeu suis ieiu au pue saem leiaas ui suasa
 The hypothalamus is connected to the hypophysis, which resides in
underlying causes (Box 58-1).
@ 2014 Elsevier Ltd
DOl: 10.1016/8978-0-7020-4336-9.00058-5
707
Section
7
The Head and Neck
A
B
C
D
Figure 58-1 (A} Schematic sagittal median representation of the hypophysis in relation to the pituitary fossa. (B) PAS-Alcian Blue-orange G stain of a
sagittal section of the cat pituitary. The third ventricle runs deep into the posterior lobe (blue), which is surrounded by a thin rim of pars intermedia.
Sections of the cat pituitary stained with an antibody against (C) α-melanocyte stimulating hormone and (D) adrenocorticotropin, which illustrates that 
in the cat the anterior lobe extends upwards around the pituitary stalk. (Courtesy of Professor A. Rijnberk and Dr H.5. Kooistra.)
B
Figure 58-2 (A) Ventral view and (B) midline sagittal view of the
 arterial cerebral circle surrounding the hypophysis (shown in A but not
A
in B) on the base of the cranium.
708
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
usually damage the blood-brain barrier, resulting in enhancement of
Box 58-1 Underlying causes of cats presenting with
tumor tissue adjacent to unaffected brain tissue. In cases of skull
suspected intra cranial masses
trauma, CT is a better diagnostic procedure than MRI since it gives
more information on position of the skullfracture fragments. In cases
1. Primary mass effects due to the intracranial tumor
 of brain abscess, MRI or contrast-enhanced CT is diagnostic.
2.9
 Secondary effects of a mass in the bony calvarium that is affecting 
adjacent 'normal' brain tissue
3. An endocrine disorder due to an endocrine-active tumor, e.g..
Radiography
pituitary adenoma
Skull radiography is not a valuable diagnostic tool for differentiation
4. A combination of the above
 or localization of primary intracranial neoplasia, since mineralization
and invasion into bone are rare. Exceptions are hyperostosis adjacent
to the meningioma with invasion of the calvarium causing erosion or
complete calvarial disruption,1l invasion of the calvarium and brain
clinical signs
by local extension (eg., with skull osteosarcomas, nasal adenocarci-
nomas, and squamous cell carcinomas of the middle ear), and calci-
 The cat with an intracranial tumor is a diagnostic challenge since the
fication or mineralization of an intracranial neoplasm (e.g. with
mass effects can initially be absent or very subtle and clinical signs
meningioma).
vary from mild depression to secondary epilepsy.3-5 Also, pituitary
adenomas in cats manifest themselves by endocrinologic syndromes
(diabetes mellitus, acromegaly, and/or Cushing's syndrome) that may
Advanced imaging
delay the diagnosis of a large intracranial pituitary mass.° For further
As defnite therapy (surgery, chemotherapy. radiotherapy) requires
-s aua m se a ui suis ieu un s
 knowledge of the precise anatomic location and size of the intracra-
dromes, please see Chapter 35 and the sections below (Cushing's
 nial neoplasm, preoperative CT or MRI is necessary. In rare instances
disease and acromegaly).
a brain biopsy under image guidance (e.g. free-hand, CT-guided,
frame-aided or frameless stereotactic neuronavigation using CT or
functional pituitary adenomas) include subtle to overt altered behav-
MRI data) is indicated to determine the histologic type and best treat-
ior (eg., hiding, personality changes, lethargy poor appetite, disori-
ment option. Cats with suspected metastatic intracranial neoplasia
entation, and aggressive behavior), seizures, impaired vision, weakness
should have further imaging such as thoracic and abdominal CT to
(para-, hemi- or tetraparesis), and altered consciousness 
(e.g.
identify the primary tumor, to stage the tumor, and check for metas-
depressed, obtunded, stuporous, or comatose).7& The severity of clini-
tases elsewhere.
cal signs depends on the tumor location, size, invasiveness, and
 MRI is an excellent diagnostic tool for detection of intracranial
 i  a  a s aa r a 
tumors in cats and it provides important information to aid in the
an ataxic gait whereas tumors close to the optic chiasm will impair
-iad uaaq sy uniuei auay aul jo ln eiz'ada ioum jo sisouzei
vision. Behavioral changes (rather than seizures) are often the first and
Play-uay e io (eisal Z'o) iauseu uado piay-mol e Suisn pauoy
19 yo ams e ul 'siu ueq ym s ui suuy uu iso
closed magnet (1.5 Tesla).12 Transverse spin echo T1-weighted, proton
s'sis o  e    'i i  s
density-weighted, and T2-weighted images are usually acquired before
In another study of 125 cats with recurrent seizures, primary epilepsy
contrast injection. Transverse spin echo and gradient echo Tl-weighted
was compared with secondary epilepsy in relation to signalment.
images can be acquired after intravenous contrast injection (gadolin-
history, ictal patten, clinical and neurologic findings. Seizure etiology
ium dimeglumine, 0.1 mmol/kg).
was classified as primary in 47 (38%) and secondary in 78 (62%) cats.
 MRI and contrast-enhanced CT14,15 are the methods of choice for
Secondary epilepsy was caused by intracranial neoplasia in only 16 of
pituitary imaging as they can confrm the diagnosis of a pituitary
78 cats.
tumor (Fig. 58-3). When pituitary surgery is a treatment option, CT is
Abnormal clinical fndings associated with brain neoplasia include
 preferred to low-field MRI because of better resolution with modern
weight loss despite normal appetite, decreased and no appetite,
CT scanners and the ability to precisely define the surgical land-
decreased thirst, and bradycardia. Neurologic abnormalities include
 marks.16 Contrast-enhanced MRIi.17 and CT18.12 reveal the pituitary
seizures, circling, locomotor disturbances, visual deficits, hearing loss,
dimensions (height, width, length) and allow for calculation of the
altered states of consciousness, and head pressing. Acute post-retinal
pituitary height/brain area (P/B) ratio.20 However, it must be empha-
blindness may be the sole neurologic deficit.10 Neurologic signs alone
sized that the reference range for non-enlarged (P/B ≤0.31) versus
may be enough for neuroanatomic localization of the tumor. Charac-
Sh h! pue 'sauue ioy pausqeisa sem saed (reo< a/d) pareua
teristic neurologic signs of focal intracranial lesions affecting the fore-
the author's experience that this is somewhat different for felines. The
brain (seizures), cerebral cortex (head pressing), thalamus (personality
upper normal P/B ratio for the cat is most likely higher and in the
changes, visual defcits), brainstem (cranial nerve defcits), vestibular
range of 0.40, but this still needs to be established. Dynamic CT also
systems (nystagmus), and cerebellum (ataxia, intention tremor) may
allows for visualization of the neurointermediate lobe (NIL). and
help neurolocalization, but precise pinpointing to a specifc region is
 analysis of its enhancement, the so called 'pituitary flush: Distortion
often diffcult since neurologic examination in cats may be hampered 
Or displacement of the flush gives insight into lateralization [left/
by their unwillingness to cooperate, absence of cranial nerve deficits
 right) or dorsal/ventral localization of the adenoma.18
and overlap of neurologic signs.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Diagnostic procedures
Cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) analysis is rarely diagnostic for intracranial
When an intracranial mass is suspected, the imaging tool of choice is
 neoplasia but may be performed for purposes of differential diagnosis.
 MRI in most instances since mineralization and invasion into bone
The most common CSF abnormality associated with brain tumors is
by brain tumors are rare However, when MRI is not available contrast-
increased protein concentration; however, normal CsF does not pre-
enhanced CT is also a valuable diagnostic tool since brain tumors
 clude neoplasia.
709
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Medical treatment should be the frst line of treatment in head
trauma patients and is directed at reversing brain edema, hypoxia.
ischemia, and increased intracranial pressure and preventing infec-
tion. Stuporous or comatose cats presented with head trauma should
be initially treated with appropriate fluid therapy to maintain systolic
blood pressure The cat should be placed in an oxygen-rich environ-
ment (e.g, oxygen cage, nasal oxygen) and effcacy of oxygen sup-
plementation can be monitored with arterial blood gas analysis,
arterial blood pressure measurements through arterial catheterization,
electrocardiography, capnography, and pulsoximetry. Mannitol (20%)
in a dosage of 0.5-1.5 g/kg IV over 20 minutes (limited to three
-said ieueienu aseaiap ol paiasjuupe sl (sinoy tz iad sasnjoq
sure Furosemide (2.2-4.4 mg/kg IV) is synergistic in reducing intra-
A
cranial pressure Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (30 mg/kg IV.
repeat after six hours) given within 12 hours after trauma is thought
to help restore membrane integrity by removing free oxygen radicals
from the damaged brain area. Seizures can be controlled with anti-
convulsants [diazepam 0.5 mg/kg bolus IV, repeat if necessary: phe
nobarbital 2-5 mg/kg as a bolus IV, to effect). If the cat has an open
wound or open skull fracture, cephalozin (20 mg/kg IV, repeat every
eight hours) is started and continued orally for ten days.
When the cat is hemodynamically stable and medical treatment has
been initiated, CT or MRI is performed to localize the lesion. Skull
radiographs are not helpful in assessing intracranial trauma. CT is
preferable because it is quicker and better for imaging fractures and
associated acute hemorrhage than MRI.
 If the lesion is located in an area amenable to surgical decompres-
sion (i.e., through craniotomy) and is removable (eg., hematoma and
(see Box 58-2). Depressed skull fractures can be carefully reduced;
skullfragments are removed when they are embedded in brain paren-
 Figure 58-3 (A) Transverse T1-weighted MR image in a 10-year-old
male European short-hair cat with post-retinal blindness, aggressiveness
chyma. Underlying dura, arachnoid, and brain parenchyma are exam-
and hypersensitive behavior shows a large pituitary mass with a diameter
ined for hemorrhage If an epidural, subdural, or subarachnoid
of 17 mm. (B) Contrast-enhanced transverse CT image in a 14-year-old 
eneds ueiq e yim pa au si eoa au 'uaas si eaiea
castrated male domestic short-haired cat presented with mild clinical
and controllable suction. Small dural and arachnoid vessels are cauter-
signs of hyperadrenocorticism and central blindness shows a very large
ized with bipolar cautery and pieces of thrombin gel foam are used
pituitary tumor (A-B = 13.6 mm; C-D = 17.9 mm). CT is superior to MRI
to enhance coagulation. After hematoma removal the surgical feld is
for imaging the tumor mass in relation to bony landmarks.
gently irrigated with warmed sterile saline (NaCl 0.9%) solution.
aeldau jou aie suauij aney pue paso ou aie sieal ieind
SURGICAL DISEASES
Brain abscess
Trauma
leu Auanan aiuo sem in pue sies ui aiei Aiaaixa aie sassansqe uiei
the first well documented case was described, suspected to be second-
 Trauma to the feline calvarium occurs frequently and is mainly caused
ary to a bite wound.21 A nine-year-old male castrated European short-
by motor vehicle accidents, penetrating bites or gunshot wounds, falls,
 hair cat was presented with a six-day history of progressive depression
 and kicks. Severe trauma is generally necessary to cause signifcant
and ataxic gait. Neurologic examination revealed depression, absent
brain injury due to the protective musculature and calvarium. More
menace in the left eye, absent pupillary light reflex in the right eye.
Bupnput saunju! paieisosse aney stuaed eunen peay jo %os ueu
anisocoria, circling to the right, and delayed proprioception in all
thoracic trauma (pulmonary edema, pneumothorax, contusion) and
limbs. MRI showed a space-occupying right temporal lobe lesion adja-
fractures (spine pelvis, long bones, mandible, maxilla).5 Diagnostic
cent to a small defect in the temporal bone suggestive of a menin-
imaging of head trauma patients should include thoracic radiographs
 goencephalitis with concurrent abscess formation (Fig. 58-4). The
to assess for thoracic abnormalities.
site was surgically approached by a rostrotentorial craniectomy. A
 The cat's state of consciousness is usually altered to some degree
cerebral abscess was found and debrided. Propionibacteria spp. was
(depressed, obtunded, stuporous, or comatose). Cats with head
trauma should be carefully examined and both a general and neuro-
removed tissue demonstrated a subacute to chronic purulent encepha-
logic examination should be frequently repeated to assess ongoing
litis with extensive necrosis of brain tissue. Neurologic signs resolved
 pulmonary and myocardial changes and intracranial damage Ischemia
and hemorrhage in damaged brain disrupts cell-membrane integrity
weeks after surgery.
 by release of free radicals. Electrolyte disturbances in the damaged
brain can cause brain edema, which increases ischemia and hypoxia.
Neoplasia
 Both brain edema and accumulation of blood increase intracranial
The incidence of intracranial neoplasia in cats is approximately 3.5 per
further ischemia.
100 0oo. The most common primary brain tumor is meningioma.
710
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
Primary brain tumors other than meningiomas, such as gliomas
show hyperintensity of the mass lesion on Tl-weighted pre- and post-
[astrocytoma, oligodendroglioma), choroid plexus tumors, or epend-
contrast sequences (Fig. 58-6).? The dural tail sign seen on MRI is also
ymoma are rare in cats.
aiuuadau jo auasqe aam sa'euua g sais aia
The therapeutic options available for cats are rapidly expanding.
aql ul deano aul pue sasen auos ul uais lel leinp aul pue
co-existent with advances in the veterinary fields of anesthesia and
MRI appearance between different types of primary brain tumors
analgesia. In academia or specialized veterinary institutions the treat-
jo siseq au uo euiguuau jo sisouaeip anuyap e sapnipaid uao
ment options include neurosurgery, with total or subtotal resection of
imaging alone.
brain tumors, primary or adjuvant radiotherapy by linear accelerator
 Meningiomas, particularly those located over the cerebral convexi-
or intralesional radiation therapy, or medical therapy with chemo-
ties or in the frontal lobes of the cerebrum, may often be completely
therapeutic drugs or hormonal agents.
uo paseq sl sisougeip [euy (z-gs xog aas) Aiagins Aq paaouuan
sl  is ua  u m 
istry for vimentin, CD34, and E-cadherin is proposed to support
Meningiomas
a diagnosis of meningioma in surgical or postmortem samples.26
Meningiomas are mesenchymal tumors that arise from the dura mater.
 Studies have also shown that expression of metalloproteinase-2, pro-
arachnoid (most commonly), or pia mater. Feline meningiomas are
 gesterone receptor, and Ki67 holds some prognostic value in feline
- aa uaq aay suau anu q es aiaaa
meningiomas.27.28
Meningiomas are most commonly located over the cerebral hemi-
 Surgical removal of solitary meningioma in cats results in excellent
spheres but may also originate in other locations, e.g. rostral to the
long-term survival and is the first choice of treatment. In a series of
pituitary fossa in the area of the optic chiasm (Fig. 58-5). Meningi-
yo pap sie aai pue ains iae Aianeiauu pa ie auo 'se ua
omas grow slowly, accounting for the insidious onset of clinical signs,
suou oe on oml eiseldoau ieiqaian on paneiaiun aseas juanu
usually starting with behavioral changes. The average age of cats with
after surgery.2 In another study, four cats that had surgical removal of
meningioma is 12 years (range five to 17 years). A gender predilection
solitary meningioma had a mean survival time of 485 days, with two
has not been identified, although some reports suggest a higher inci-
cats surviving more than two years after surgery.* A report of 17 cats
dence in male cats. All breeds of cats appear to be affected by menin-
with meningioma treatedby surgical removal indicatedthatthree died
giomas. Diagnosis is confrmed with MRl: meningiomas typically
recurrence atthree months, nine months, and 72 months after surgery.
and the remaining ll cats survived without tumor recurrence for 18
 sns a is (s  ual s  
caniotomy in 42 cats with meningioma indicated a median survival
Figure 58-4 Transverse T1-weighted image in a nine-year-old male
castrated European short-hair cat with a history of depression and ataxic
gait. A space-occupying. contrast enhancing lesion is present in the right 
Figure 58-5 High-field (1.5 Tesla) MRl in a 10-year-old male European
temporal musculature and right temporal cerebral lobe. A midline shift 
short-hair cat with post-retinal blindness, aggressiveness and 
with compression and displacement of the right and lateral ventricle is
hypersensitive behavior. Sagittal T2-weighted gadolinium-enhanced MR
apparent. After craniectomy and dural incision a yellow viscous discharge
image shows a large hyperintense intracranial mass in the planum
was found, confirming the diagnosis of cerebral abscess.
sphenoidalis with extension into the pituitary fossa.
A
B
Figure 58-6 (A) Transverse, (B) parasagittal, and (C) dorsal T1-post contrast (gadolinium) T1-weighted MR images in a 12-year-old cat with a history
tumor close to the skull bone (A). Surgery and histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of meningioma.
711
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
of 26 months (range three days to 54 months) and the overall survival
E Ul zg's123 0m1 1e %05 PUe '12aA auo 1e %99 'sY1uowl 9 1e %1 S2M
auo 'sie xis u suoiuuau jeouat jo ieaoai leins uo joda
cat died immediately postoperatively and five cats survived with a
median survival of 20 months (range six to 30 months) but all died
 Or were euthanized because of tumor regrowth.33
 In contrast, there is a significant morbidity and mortality associated
with the surgical removal of neoplasia other than meningiomas, espe-
cially when these are located in the caudal fossa and brainstem. In
[eaoual leed adk xoum jo sisouseip anss e Supioid ot uoie
 of a brain neoplasm may relieve signs of cerebral dysfunction and, in
turn, may render an animal a better candidate for other forms of
therapy. Cytoreduction lessens the volume of tumor available for
A
Kdeiaun uoeiei se qns 'saan iuaean iaqo gusn Adeia
se ae ym pauoeaie aq isnu uonpaio io Asdo ieins
seeding of a tumor to previously uninvolved tissue is a risk.
Pituitary gland adenomas
Pituitary adenomas are considered benign tumors although in humans
they have been reported to invade surrounding tissues such as the dura
mater, the cavernous sinus, and the sphenoid sinus.34 Due to their
extension and infltration of regional structures, these invasive adeno-
s u uasi iins ae aa j ai i e a s
-euo ian ui Aisiaa iaieai e mous sie ul seuape Aeiimd 
teristics than their canine counterparts. In addition to corticotroph
(ACTH cell) adenomas, causing pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocor-
seouape (has Ho) qdonoieuos pue te'aseasip sgunusng io wsin
causing acromegaly,35 a melanotroph (o-MSH cell) adenoma? and
double [ACTH and GH cell) adenomas37.38 have also been described
B
in cats. Prolactin (PRL) cell adenomas (prolactinomas) have not been
described in cats. Endocrinologically non-functioning pituitary
Figure 58-7 (A) Lateral view of a six-year-old Persian cat with pituitary-
tumors occur in older cats and comprise 9% of the feline intracranial
dependent hyperadrenocorticism showing alopecia and a thin and 
uo paya sseu iouml ol anp suais pigoloinau ol speal ieul eiseldoau
wrinkled skin with folds. The urinary corticoid/creatinine ratio was 73 ×
the brain.?
10-6 which is above the upper limit of the reference range (42 × 10-6).
(B) At four months after trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy the hair coat
Cushing's disease
had regrown on the abdomen and flank of the cat and the UccR was 
Cortisol is the main glucocorticoid released by the adrenal glands in
1.3 x 10-6.
cats. Thus endogenous glucocorticoid excess is essentially hyperadren-
Dcorticism. Prolonged exposure to inappropriately elevated plasma
concentrations of free cortisol leads to a variety of signs consistent
with Cushing's syndrome In cats, pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
corticism is a rare disease of middle-aged and older animals? and the
disease is the result of excessive ACTH secretion by a pituitary
adenoma. The pituitary lesions producing the excess of ACTH range
puaixa Aeu seuouape Aiemd 'sioun aiel pue seuouape ot sa
and infltrate into surrounding tissues such as cavermous sinus, dura
mater, brain tissue, third ventricle and rarely, sphenoid bone These
are called invasive adenomas, whereas only the exceptional tumors
associated with extracranial metastasis are called carcinomas. Cortico-
troph adenomas may co-occur with somatotroph adenomas in the cat
and these are called double adenomas.37,38
Many clinical signs can be related to the actions of excessive gluco-
corticoids, i.e, increased gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis and protein
catabolism. The cardinal physical features are central obesity and
Figure 58-8 A 17-year-old castrated male cat, referred because of
atrophy of muscles and thinning of skin. In addition, polyuria and
problems controlling its diabetes mellitus. In addition to polyuria.
polydipsia and polyphagia are often dominant features. Depending
 polydispia, and weight loss, there was alopecia and muscular weakness
  s a s p ae go u a u
pue g-ol x e) shep anlinoasuon omi uo syoon leseg sbal puiy aul u!
from cessation of shedding, no regrowth of clipped hair, some thin-
88 × 10-6) were above the upper limit of the reference range (42 × 10-6).
After three oral doses of 0.1 mg dexamethasone per kg body weight 
ning ofthe coat, to alopecia and a thin and wrinkled skin (Fig. 58-7A).
the UCCR decreased to 9 × 10- indicating pituitary-dependent
The skin thinning and the immune suppression make the animals
hyperadrenocorticism. CT revealed the pituitary to be moderately
prone to skin lesions and skin infections (Fig. 58-8). The polyuria is
enlarged (height 4.2 mm, width 4.0 mm) with displacement of the
known to be due to both impaired osmoregulation of vasopressin
neurohypophyseal flush.
712
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
release and interference of the glucocorticoid excess with the action
of vasopressin. In cats, the cutaneous manifestations are initially less
pronounced than in the dog. Furthermore, glucocorticoid excess gives
rise less readily to polyuria/polydipsia in cats, and it may become
 obvious only when diabetes mellitus develops.
 Cats are susceptible to the diabetogenic effects of glucocorticoids.
In the majority of the described cases of feline hyperadrenocorticism
the disease was associated with diabetes mellitus and the suspicion of
hyperadrenocorticism has often arisen specifically because of insulin
enous glucocorticoid excess increases blood pressure. In cats with
 hyperadrenocorticism decreased thyroxine (T4) concentrations can be
found, as a consequence of altered transport, distribution, and metab-
olism of thyroxine, rather than hyposecretion. Clinical neurologic
manifestations of the disease are only observed when the pituitary
asaul oplaja ssu e asne o yanoua aaiel aq ot sdojanap oum
-d ea uu na uo ae saeuqe sonu
petence, and mental dullness.
 The tests for diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism are described
in Chapter 35. Resistance to glucocorticoid feedback is significantly
correlated with the size of the pituitary gland. Large tumors tend to
be more resistant to the suppressive effect of dexamethasone due
to their size, and they often release ACTH precursors like pro-
opiomelanocortin (POMC). There is also a report of a cat with a
melanotroph pars intermedia adenoma with extremely elevated
plasma concentrations of α-MSH and no evidence for ACTH-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.36
 Diagnostic imaging may help to complete the picture of the physical
and hormonal changes that can be associated with hyperadrenocorti-
cism (see Chapter 35).35 Ultrasonography of the adrenal glands and
CT or MRI of the pituitary (see above) and adrenal glands are the
imaging techniques now most frequently used, especially in the search
for the location and the characterization of the source of the hormone
Figure 58-9 (A) Contrast-enhanced transverse CT images through the
EXcess. This visualization is imperative in institutions where hypophy-
pituitary fossa in a seven-year-old European short-hair cat with Cushing's
disease. The urinary corticoid/creatinine ratio was 77 × 10-6 (reference 
range 8 × 10-6 to 42 × 10-5). The pituitary (arrows) is not enlarged and is
are best visualized with contrast-enhanced CT (Fig. 58-9) and for
3.5 mm high, 4.7 mm wide, and the pituitary height/brain area ratio is
pituitary irradiation using a linear accelerator the exact pituitary zones
0.36. (B) At three months after trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy, the 
for intense radiation need to be outlined with MRI or CT.
UCCR was 2.3 x 10-6 and there was complete remission of signs of
Spontaneous recovery of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
hyperadrenocorticism. There is no contrast enhancement in the pituitary
is rare and life expectancy in severe cases is usually less than one year
fossa, and the third ventricle is indicated (arrowhead)
if the disease is left untreated. Death may ensue as a result of compli-
cations such as heart failure, thromboembolism, or diabetes mellitus.
a yo ao ae 'u a ie  s i u
after 19 months in one cat In two of four cats that had concurrent
disease may be followed for some time with measurements of urine
 diabetes mellitus, insulin treatment could be discontinued at one and
cortisol/creatinine ratio (UCCR), although the usefulness of UCCR is 
five months after hypophysectomy. 41 Prognosis after hypophysectomy
debatable due to a high rate of false positives. To minimize the risk
pue aseasip susixa-os Aq pauruaiap si sies ui aseasi sguusng iog
for false positives repeated urine samples are needed that are collected
thorough presurgical screening is imperative The main advantage for
in a stress-free environment The treatment of pituitary-dependent
long-term survival, compared to approaches at the adrenal level, is in
hyperadrenocorticism should ideally be directed at the elimination of
the prevention of neurologic problems that may occur as a result of
the stimulus for the augmented production of cortisol, i.e., the pitui-
an expanding pituitary tumor.
aisap isl a u uoanas hioy aissaxa au sui uisal Aie
decrease in the tumor mass and peritumoral edema, but concurrent
Adeau uoneed papaau si juaunean urssanddns ieouaie
sphenoidal hypophysectomy (see Box 58-3) in the treatment of cats
 does not usually reduce the hypersecretion of ACTH sufficiently so
short-term and long-term substitution therapies, pituitary surgery is
 additional therapy at the adrenal level is required.42-47
an effective treatment. It can only be performed in specialized institu-
Treatment of adrenal-dependent disease is described in Chapter 35
tions with intensive perioperative care and where imaging techniques
and in the literature.42-47
such as CT and MRI enable assessment of localization and size of the
pituitary gland prior to surgery. In a study of seven cats that underwent
Acromegaly
hypophysectomy for Cushing's disease, two cats died within four
 In cats, chronic hypersecretion of growth hormone (GH) by a func-
weeks after surgery of non-related disease In the five remaining cats.
tional pituitary adenoma causes acromegaly.35 The clinical signs are
hyperadrenocorticism went into clinical and biochemical remission
 dominated by concurrent insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus. Although
(follow-up periods six to 46 months). Hyperadrenocorticism recurred
aau uanay suseau um se u paziuoai uaq st iaae
713
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Table 58-1 Signalment, imaging data, and insulin
Table 58-2 Basal plasma hormone concentrations in three
requirements in three diabetic cats with acromegaly
Awopasaydoday Aa patean Alebawone ym siey yage
treated by hypophysectomy
Hormones
Values
Reference
 Parameter
Cat 1
Cat 2
Cat 3
values
Cat 1
Cat 2
Cat 3
Breed
DS
DS
DS
Thyroxine
22 (1.7)
11 (0.8)
11(0.8)
15-45
Gender
MC
MC
FC
(nmol/L [μg/dL])
(1.2-3.5)
Age (years)
11
10
10
Cortisol 
211 (7.3)
203 (7.0)
NA
12-263
([p,6n] 7/owu)
Body weight (kg)
7.2
9.4
4.3
(0.4-9.5)
ACTH (ng/L)
26
21
21
CT pituitary height (mm)
4.5
13.3
5.2
15-358
α-MSH (ng/L)
257
82
NA
29-503
CT pituitary width (mm)
4.2
13.4
8.3
GH (μg/L)
51
>100
>50
0.8-7.2
CT pituitary length (mm)
4.7
14.0
4.0
GH (μg/L) one
2.4
3.1
CT pituitary height/brain area (P/B)a
0.50
1.41
1.9
0.8-7.2
0.60
year after HX 
Insulin demand (total IU/day) before HX
100
200
17
IGF-1 (μg/L)
3871
2497
1136
39-590
Insulin demand four weeks after HX
0
0
0
IGF-1 (μg/L) one
113
34
76
39-590
DS. Domestic short-haired cat: FC, female castrated; HX, hypophysectomy;
year after HX
MC, male castrated.
Basal plasma concentrations of cortisol, ACTH, o-MSH, GH, and IGF-1 before HX
Reference P/B for cats: P/B <0.40.
are means calculated from two values. The data are presented in Sl units (and 
traditional units in brackets). HX, hypophysectomy; NA, not available. Reference
values for ACTH, o-MSH, and cortisol,5l and GH and IGF-1.52
CT
120 
1001
80
/(n)
60
40
20
 jul/07
aug/07
okt/07
nov/07
dec/07
jan/08
Date (month)
Figure 58-10 An 11-year-old castrated male diabetic cat with
Figure 58-11 Insulin requirements over a six-month period in a diabetic 
acromegaly showing increased body weight and a dull hair coat. Plasma
(XH) Auonasudodku leplouauds-sue Aa paea Aebawone yi je
concentration of GH was 51 μg/L (reference range 0.8-7.2 μg/L) and of
IGF-1 3871 μg/L (reference range 39-590 μg/L).
e
 have been few reports of experience with treatment. Usually, treatment
 confirmed by measuring elevated plasma concentrations of insulin-
 of the diabetes is aimed at regulation of glucose levels with insulin
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1); GH measurements are restricted to insti-
medication, but as long as the primary cause remains untreated
aul ostt(Z-gs aiqel) Aesse H aiqeal e oi sssre aney ieu suon
insulin requirements usually increase over time and can become
 pituitary-adrenocortical system can be further investigated by measur-
ing plasma concentrations of α-MSH, ACTH, and cortisol. The basal
paai panodai uaaq sey Aains Aied Aq
plasma concentrations of c-MSH, ACTH, and cortisol are usually in
Affected cats are usually male and castrated and approximately ten 
the reference range (see Table 58-2). but acromegaly and Cushing's
years old (Table 58-1). They present with insulin-resistant diabetes
 disease may occur simultaneously in diabetic cats due to double ade-
 mellitus, ravenous appetite, coarse facial features, a dull hair coat, and
nomas.37,38 The plasma total thyroxine concentration can be within
sometimes increased interdental spacing, a combination of features
the reference range (Table 58-1) or can be decreased due to compres-
that is well-described in feline acromegaly (Fig. 58-10). The ravenous
sion and atrophy of the unaffected pituitary gland by a large adenoma
appetite and the combined anabolic actions of hyperinsulinaemia (in
(secondary hypothyroidism).
the initial stages) and the excess GH, lead to an increase in body
 Pituitary imaging (see above) supports the diagnosis of a pituitary
weight. In a 24-hour glucose curve, the plasma glucose concentrations
adenoma (Figs 58-9 and 58-12A), and in cats with acromegaly the
palatum molle may be thickened, which may be evident on a sagittal
ing insulin resistance (Fig. 58-ll). In general practice acromegaly is
reconstruction of the CT images (Fig. 58-12B). This may also be noted
714
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
A
B
castrated male cat with acromegaly. The pituitary is enlarged, measuring 
4.5 mm in height, 4.2 mm in width, and 4.7 mm in length. The pituitary
A
20 μm
(moue) puel6 aui jo apis lesiop pue jubiu ayi oi paneidsip s! ysnly
indicative of a pituitary adenoma on the left and ventral side. (B) Sagittal
reconstruction shows the thickened palatum molle (arrowhead) between 
the tracheal tube and sphenoid bone.
25-
HX
15
6u]
10
20 μm
R
Aebawone ym jen e ui ewouape Aeinid ydooewos tl-s ane
(A} Adenomatous nodule comprised of acidophilic cells with uniform
一
24
HX
5
24
nuclei and low mitotic index; hematoxylin and eosin staining. (B) Positive
Time (hours) around hypophysectomy (HX)
immunocytochemical staining of the adenomatous tissue for growth
hormone.
Figure 58-13 Plasma growth hormone concentrations 24 hours before 
and one, three, five and 24 hours after hypophysectomy (HX) in a 
diabetic cat with acromegaly.
Recovery from surgery is rapid in acromegalic cats; the cats will start
to eat and drink within 1 or 2 days after surgery or they may be force-
fed through an esophageal tube The insulin demand rapidly decreases
during the approach for trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy:4 the soft
from presurgical values to zero values within four weeks after surgery
(see Table 58-1 and Fig. 58-11).48 The explanation for this dramatic
sphenoid bone in thick folds. During hypophysectomy (see Box 58-3)
-Audoday iaye yaam isiy ayi ui aseaap yog e ueut anou asuodsi
the pituitary is carefully examined and, when possible, non-affected
sectomy) may be the immediate decrease in GH levels, which is
pituitary tissue (normal specimen) and adenomatous pituitary tissue
evident from the five-hour postoperative GH profle (Fig. 58-13). The
Aoueosy auni g aeedas paal s (uuiads ou)
and immunocytochemistry. When the pituitary adenoma is success-
 ible damage to the insulin responsiveness of pancreatic endocrine and
fully removed, plasma GH concentrations show a rapid decline within
 peripheral tissues. This is in sharp contrast with insulin-resistant dia-
five hours after hypophysectomy (Fig. 58-13). Microscopic examina-
betes mellitus caused by Cushing's disease in dogs, which is usually
tion of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections of specimens 
irreversible.
may show uniform adenomatous nodules of acidophilic cells with
Medication after surgery consists of desmopressin, cortisone acetate,
infltrative growth pattern in pre-existent pituitary tissue (Fig. 58-14A).
 and thyroxine as described previously.215 Polydipsia further resolves
Additional immunohistochemical staining for ACTH, α-MSH, and
at home. Basal UCCRs, measured in two consecutive morning urine
e ul 'euouape Aed au yo a an au yuos oi papaau si Ho
 samples collected at home at six months after surgery, are usually
typical pituitary GH cell (somatotroph), adenoma nodules stain posi-
below the reference range (8 x 10- to 42 × 10-").53 At one year after
tive for GH (Fig. 58-14B) whereas cells in the pre-existent pituitary
surgery, remission of acromegaly should be confirmed by normaliza-
tissue stain sporadically positive for GH and ACTH.
715
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Octreotide was introduced recently to evaluate the potential effective-
 ness of octreotide treatment in acromegalic cats.* Those responding
favorably might be candidates for long-acting release (LAR) octreotide
treatment The recently introduced GH-receptor antagonist pegviso-
mant has been reported to be effective, safe, and well tolerated in
humans with acromegaly.6 However, as long as there are no species-
 specific antagonists, this approach is not an option for dogs and cats.
Non-functioning pituitary adenoma
The non-endocrine manifestations of pituitary adenomas result from
pressure by the tumor on adjacent structures in the brain. In addition,
such cats may have anterior pituitary failure. Large pituitary masses
can cause partial or complete anterior pituitary hormone deficiency.
In principle, deficiency of all six major hormones (LH, FSH, GH, TSH,
ACTH, and PRL) can occur. The interpretation of results of supra-
pituitary stimulation tests may pose problems when there is also
hormone excess that may affect the secretion of other pituitary hor-
g sanuanasuon aq ose Aeu jauareua aend au t'sauou
posterior lobe function. The following hormone deficiencies may
Figure 58-15 The same cat as in Figure 58-10 at one year after
occur. In the adult cat, GH deficiency is not easily recognized as a
peu ien aul uonenipaw unsui sainban labuol ou Auopasudodu
 pathologic syndrome, although longstanding GH deficiency may lead
resumed its normal behavior at home and had developed a healthy
to less activity, muscle atrophy, and skin atrophy with alopecia. Total
full hair coat. Plasma concentration of growth hormone was 2.4 μg/L
or partial TSH defciency is often part of hypopituitarism and results
(reference range 0.8-7.2 μg/L) and of IGF-1 113 μg/L (reference range
in hypothyroidism. Secondary adrenocortical failure may occur late
39-590 μg/L)
in the development of large pituitary tumors. The resulting cortisol
 deficiency may contribute to the gradual deterioration of the animal
and a relatively trivial illness or anesthesia may precipitate vascular
Apoq u uieg e on supeal 'uaiy uian Aeu ien aun yo aadde au
 collapse. Gonadotropin deficiency in female cats may remain unno-
weight (Fig. 58-15). This increased food intake may lead to obesity.
ticed because of the naturally long interestrous intervals. In male cats
which in turn causes peripheral insulin resistance and ultimately may
the continuing decrease in gonadotropin secretion results in testicular
lead to diabetes mellitus. The exact reasons for this are unclear but it
atrophy. The testes are very small and soft and the unchanged epidi-
 dymis is more easily delineated than it normally is. Posterior pituitary
food intake has been disturbed by the enlarged pituitary.
Cryohypophysectomy has been reported in two cats. In one cat this
to the pituitary fossa, but more common when the suprasellar exten-
resulted in diminished insulin resistance, but GH and IGF-1 data were
-saisai sasnes pue shueieuodau au sassaiduos sioum iaiel jo uois
-pua pue uoeioaap siolonau pamoys ie aul s alqelieae jou
sion of the supra-optic and paraventricular nuclei with vasopressin
deficiency and diabetes insipidus.
to enrofloxacin medication.5 In the other cat, cryohypophysectomy
 Continued suprasellar expansion of the tumor exerts pressure on
led to persistent insulin resistance and no signifcant lowering of
the diaphragma sellae mater, the hypothalamus and, if the expansion
plasma IGF-1 concentrations.56 
is suffciently rostral, the optic chiasm. Lateral suprasellar extension
sq aieae auay iy iuaan paodai auana isou a
been radiation therapy. In five cases cobalt 60 (gamma) radiation
expanding tumor can be expected to cause headache and visual feld
lowered the insulin requirement transiently and reduced the size of
defects in the cat, but because of the lack of an autoanamnesis, the
-uaiu) ioeiaasse iauil ypm u ies auo ul zss'loum Amid aul
veterinarian must initially often rely on rather vague and non-specifc
energy X-ray) radiation was used, insulin resistance was reduced but
symptoms. These include lethargy, a tendency to seek seclusion, and
the plasma IGF-1 concentration remained elevated and acromegaly
Aieid e uoy oaa sseu e jo uoiidsns aui aiadde ui aseaiap e
continued as an active disease process.58 Beta radiation reduced the
tumor may be supported by the owner's description of the animal's
insulin requirement only slightly in one cat but linear accelerator
tendency to lower its head to avoid being patted. In cats this may also
radiation reduced the insulin dose in another cat by half.5? Radiation
lead to increased aggressiveness towards the owner and strangers and
therapy is variably successful, primarily because of the partial and
is probably due to headache. Progressive enlargement of the mass
ed se yns saiouqe iionaau aiaas ol asu ai k
head pressing, and circling. There may be continuous vocalization
betic control in 13 of 14 cats and complete resolution of diabetes
(howling). Seizures usually do not occur. Very large pituitary tumors
may cause pressure on the optic chiasm to such an extent that visual
IGF-1 concentrations were also measured after radiotherapy, changes
disturbances are noticed by the owner.4 Physical examination can
 in the concentration of IGF-1 did not reflect the clinical improvement 
reveal a variety of signs, including dullness, one or more of the above
in glycemic control. In six cats, IGF-1 concentrations remained within
neurologic signs, weight loss due to increasing anorexia, and occasion-
 the range considered diagnostic for acromegaly.61
ally mydriasis with or without anisocoria. Papillary edema is occasion-
 Medical treatment with the somatostatin analog octreotide?5 and a
ally found on ophthalmoscopic examination.
 dopamine agonist2 has not been successful in reducing the insulin
The mass effects may also have a very sudden character. The syn-
m an i a ul ee m s ui s
 drome in humans and dogs known as pituitary apoplexy is character-
somatostatin analog octreotide, plasma GH concentration was nor-
ized by the peracute occurrence of headache, vomiting, visual
malized,4 but in four others octreotide had little or no effect on serum
impairment, and loss of consciousness.'5 It is caused by either hemor-
GH levels.?5 A pre-entry test with a single intravenous injection of
716
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
q saop ul paquosap uaaq mou sey auoipuas siul puea Aeiid
twice daily). The owners usually report that this treatment brings
not in cats. The three most severe canine cases were presented in an
 about some improvement in alertness and also in appetite if the
emergency situation with sudden-onset collapse, and severe depres-
animal had been anorectic. Especially when by virtue of its size the
sion; in two of these dogs there was loss of vision with bilateral
tumor has already had neurologic effects, the improvement, if any.
mydriasis. In four dogs there was a large corticotroph adenoma with
will be only temporary. Immediate corticosteroid administration is
aui sisus e yons ui xadode Aie yo paiadsns sase ui paieiu!
was most likely part of the hemorrhagic diathesis due to idiopathic
 dose should be four to five times the long-term substitution dose.
thrombocytopenia.d5
 In principle there are three options to reduce the size of the pitui-
 Indications of low basal functions of peripheral endocrine glands.
i.e, a low plasma concentration of thyroxine and a low urinary corti-
Most experience with medical treatment has been gained in dogs with
coid excretion, may support the suspicion of anterior pituitary failure.
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Dopaminergic drugs such
However, the diagnosis of partial or total hypopituitarism should be
as bromocriptine did not effectively decrease cortisol production,
made by demonstrating the deficiencies of pituitary hormones. This
but in a recent study using the dopamine D2 receptor agonist caber-
can be accomplished by stimulation tests with hypophysiotropic hor-
goline better results were obtained. Cabergoline has a higher affnity
mones such as GHRH, GnRH, CRH, and TRH. Measurement of the
for the D2 receptor and has a longer half-life than bromocriptine.
respective pituitary hormones (GH, LH, ACTH, PRL, and TSH) permits
Despite the fact that D2 receptors are only moderately expressed in
 assessment of pituitary reserve capacity.4
tumorous and non-tumorous dog pituitaries,67 17 out of 40 dogs
Contrast-enhanced helical CT and MRI provide imaging of the
responded to cabergoline with decreased cortisol production and
pituitary with high spatial and contrast resolution, allowing the iden-
decreased tumor size. Among the non-responders there were many
tification of pituitary enlargement and its relationship to surrounding
 dogs with large pituitary tumors.68 Whether this medical strategy is an
structures and bony anatomic landmarks for surgical intervention
option in cats with non-functioning pituitary adenomas remains to
(Fig. 58-16). 14 Dynamic helical CT and MRI allow visualization of the
be investigated.
posterior lobe. Inability to visualize the posterior lobe in very large
 Hypophysectomy (see Box 58-3) is used successfully in the treat-
ment of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and acromeg-
fciency (Fig. 58-17).18
aly,48 and with increasing experience the technique also allows the
Anterior pituitary failure can be treated by substituting for the defi-
-ueip u uo z-I oi dn sioum Aiimd suuouny-uou yo [eaoual
cient hormone production by the target glands. Since gonadal hor-
eter Total or subtotal removal of large and giant pituitary tumors with
mones are not essential, treatment amounts to oral administration of
mass effect gives immediate relief, resolution of neurologic signs, and
thyroxine (10-15 μg/kg twice daily) and cortisone (0.25-0.5 mg/kg
return of appetite The cat can resume a normal life for many months
B
Figure 58-16 (A} Sagittal and (B} transverse contrast-enhanced CT of the skull in a four-year-old female castrated domestic short-haired cat with
depression and anorexia. A large pituitary mass was detected measuring 16.5 mm in height, 18.8 mm in width, and 19.6 mm in length. The pituitary
height/brain area ratio was 1.90.
A
B
C
esen ale pio-e-it e ui sabi  pauaia-i (unu) iseo isod-i iesop () pue jibesp (a) 'asase () l-s ana
domestic short-haired cat with a history of depression, circling. and ataxic gait. A hyperintense pituitary mass was found.
717
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
to years after surgery. In cases with return of the pituitary mass a repeat
trans-sphenoidal pituitary debulking is an option to control the tumor
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
growth over time.
P uaum sies u paesipui s! (si iandeuo as) Adeiaun uoeiped
Craniotomy and craniectomy
pituitary tumor is causing neurologic abnormalities."? It reduces
the size of the tumor and thereby the neurologic manifestations.
Craniotomy in the cat requires specific medical and anesthetic man-
For cats a median survival time of 17.4 months has been reported.60
agement with respect to intracranial pressure and blood flow, antibiot-
Keimd ui uonpan idoid e asneo iou saop adeiaui uonei
ics, anticonvulsants, and diuretics. Proper anesthetic management ( see
hypersecretion, and cats with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
Chapter 2) includes arterial catheterization, appropriate induction
cism or acromegaly may require continued medical treatment Cats
and maintenance agents, and modest hyperventilation (end-tidal
carbon dioxide approximately 28-32 mmHg). Arterial catheterization
treatment after the completion of a series of fractionated radiation
is used to constantly monitor arterial blood pressure and end-tidal
therapy treatments.7 Acute side effects of radiation treatment include
capnography is used for continuous monitoring of carbon dioxide.
local skin changes (erythema, hair loss, leukotrichia), pharyngeal
Periodic arterial blood sampling for carbon dioxide levels aids anes-
mucositis, and mild otitis externa. The risk of late side effects hearing
thetic monitoring. Modest hyperventilation using a mechanical ven-
impairment, brain necrosis/fbrosis) depends on the volume of brain 
tilator reduces arterial carbon dioxide, decreases cerebral blood flow.
tissue treated, and the daily and the total dose of radiation adminis-
and lowers intracranial pressure. Autologous blood donation before
tered.6? Recently, brachytherapy. or interstitial radiation therapy has
surgery is considered safe for cats undergoing craniectomy for resec-
been introduced in domestic animals; by intralesional injection of
tion of meningioma.72
radioactive holmium-166 microspheres for treatment of giant pitui-
 The craniotomy/craniectomy procedure is described in Box 58-2.
tary adenomas, tumor shrinkage is accomplished.71 Whether this
The term craniectomy is used when the bone flap that is created
suan sie ui seouape Areim guuoouny-uou aiel iog siom
during craniotomy is not replaced. The most common approaches
to be investigated.
to the feline calvarium are: (1) rostrotentorial transparietal or
Box 58-2 Craniotomy and craniectomy
Most craniotomies are performed with the cat in sternal recumbency. A
used to remove neoplastic tissue. Suction should be used with care
head stand, a vacuum cushion and/or surgical tape is used to stabilize
 since normal brain parenchyma has a weak consistency and is easily
the head (Fig. 58-19). In general, craniotomy starts with a skin incision
damaged or sucked away when the tip of the suction device locks on
(Fig. 58-20A) and detachment of the temporal muscle mass from the
unaffected brain tissue. To prevent this, a small 1 cm × 1 cm piece of
skull (Hg. 58-20B). Bipolar electro-coagulation is used for hemostasis.
gauze may be placed on the tip of the suction device to protect the
The outline of the craniotomy is marked with a sterile pencil or with 
brain tissue. In this way the suction device can also be used as a dull
the electrical or air-powered burr. Usually three (triangular craniotomy)
dissector between tumor and normal brain tissue.
 or four (rectangular craniotomy) holes are burred, stopping short of
 With meningiomas there is usually a sharp border between tumor
the dura mater. The burr holes are connected with grooves that are
and normal brain parenchyma and the tumor may roll out of the 
carefully deepened until a paper-thin inner cortical lamina separates
calvarium (Fg. 58-20E). Meningioma tissue has a firmer consistency
the burr from the dura mater. Hemorrhage from venous sinuses within
than brain tissue and it may help to put a retraction suture through
the bone itself is plugged with bone wax. Using fine neurosurgical
the center of the tumor. Other primary brain tumors are less firm and 
 probes and Kerrison punches the remaining inner cortical bone layer
debulking is done based on abnormal color (gray, glassy-like, dark)
 on the bottom of the grooves is broken away or removed with the
and consistency (necrotic, hemorrhagic, mucoid, cystic compartments)
 punches, thereby isolating the craniotomy flap from the feline skull
and available imaging during surgery. It is essential for the veterinary
(Fig. 58-20C).
neurosurgeon to develop some sort of comparative instinct between
 The bone flap is carefully lifted with a periosteal elevator or 
intraoperative real time dimensions (sizes and volume) and 
 pediatric brain spatula by detaching the dura mater from the inside
elep buibewi aul wony Alaalie ladoaid panseau saniea aale leduon
 of the bone flap (Hg. 58-20D). Care is taken not to damage the 
set. This way the neurosurgeon can safely assess when it is time to
middle meningeal artery. The bone flap is removed and stored in sterile
stop the debulking procedure as the borders between normal and 
 solution but is usually not replaced (craniectomy). From this moment 
tumor tissue become less well defined.
on it is important to use some sort of magnification, either
adosonu bue ado ue yo (uojenubeu xt-e) adnol buje lado ue 
the brain (e.g.. in meningioma) or a defect where part of the brain
(10x magnification). Before incising the dura mater, stay sutures (e.g..
has been removed (e.g.. in glioma) and this cavity is filled up with
laew eanp pasodxa aul u! paneid Alienibaieis ae (auouexoiprlod 0-9
thrombin gel foam. For limited craniotomies the bone flap is not 
to allow lateral reflection of the dura after incision. By lifting the dura
mater with the sutures, the dura mater can be carefully incised with
craniectomy combined with frontal sinus craniectomy). a gamma-
 an arachnoid knife.
irradiated calvarial allograft has been described to repair the calvarial
With a meningioma the tumor usually arises from the dura itself
defect in a cat with a psammomatous meningioma.73 when the dura
and then the dura mater needs to be circumferentially excised together
mater cannot be sutured a fascial transplant (from the temporal
with the tumor. In gliomas the dura mater can be preserved and used
muscle) can be sutured to the dura mater to close the calvarium. After
for closure after tumor extraction. With peripheral brain tumors, the 
osteotomy of the zygomatic arch, the bone continuity is restored with
saod lenibansnau ym paoidxa Anaen ae suibe lon
cerclage wire or monofilament sutures. The temporal muscle is 
lelodig yr pazlainen ag uen lowni aul ot buipeal sjassaa llews
reflected over the craniotomy opening and re-attached to its insertion
electrocautery. Diffuse hemorrhage can be controlled with thrombin
on the midline (Fig. 58-20F). The wound is closed in a routine manner.
gel foam. Suction devices with a controllable degree of suction are
The surgical specimen is sent for histopathology (Fig. 58-20G).
718
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
A
?
Figure 58-18 Schematic outline of the feline skull for (A) rostrotentorial craniotomy, (B) unilateral transfrontal sinus craniotomy, (C) bilateral
tr ansfrontal sinus craniotomy, and (D) suboccipital craniotomy.
transtemporal craniotomy (Fig. 58-18A) with or without osteotomy
of the zygomatic arch: (2) unilateral (Fig. 58-18B) or bilateral (Fig.
58-18C) transfrontal sinus craniotomy: (3) caudotentorial craniot-
omy: or (4) suboccipital craniotomy (Fig. 58-18D). Craniotomy
0l ainsoxa aaoidui ot paypou io pauquos aq ues saupeoidde
various aspects of the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum.74
Trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy
pituitary fossa and parasellar region (Fig. 58-2l). The protocol
described in Box 58-3 has been used successfully for hypophysectomy
in cats with pituitary adenomas by the author.41 After premedication
pofol (5 mg/kg IV). The trachea is intubated, and inhalation anesthe-
 sia is maintained in a semiclosed system with a mixture of isoflurane,
nitrous oxide, and oxygen. Analgesia is provided by sufentanil admin-
istered by an IV pump at a rate of 2.5 μg/kg/hour. Electrocardiography.
capnography, pulsoximetry, and invasive or non-invasive measure-
ment of blood pressure are used to monitor the cat during surgery.
 Figure 58-19 Positioning (dorsal view) of a cat with a cerebral 
Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg IV) and hydrocortisone
 meningioma for left-sided rostrotentorial craniotomy. The head is
(1 mg/kg IV) are administered before surgery. During surgery the cat
 supported by a vacuum cushion.
719
Section
7
The Head and Neck
D
F
Figure 58-20 Rostrotentorial craniotomy in a 12-year-old cat with a history of seizures due to an extra-axial meningioma. (A) Following skin incision,
(B) the temporal muscle is detached from the calvarium. (c) The bone flap is isolated with an electrical burr and punches and (D) removed. (E) The
meningioma is removed. (F) The tempor al muscle is re-attached.
720
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
receives lactated Ringer's solution (50 ml/kg IV). Trans-sphenoidal
inq sgop ioy Aisnoaaid paqosap se pauoad st Auoiasaqdodau
with some modifcations adapted to the feline species.215.75.76
Immediately after removal of the pituitary gland, treatment is
started with hydrocortisone (1 mg/kg IV) every six hours, and desmo-
 pressin, one drop into the conjunctival sac every eight hours.7 After
surgery, the antidote atipamezole (0.25 mg/kg IV) is administered.
 Postoperative analgesia is achieved with buprenorphine (0.3 μg/kg
 IV) every eight hours. Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid are continued
at a dose rate of 20 mg/kg IV every 12 hours. The cat has to recover
in an intensive care unit Fluid administration consists of a combined
 IV infusion of a 0.45% NaCl and 2.5% glucose solution supplemented
with 10 mEq KCl/500 mL. The infusion rate (50 mL/kg/24 hours) is
guided by central venous pressure measurements (reference ranges,
0-5 cm saline pressure) through a jugular infusion line. Plasma
sodium and potassium concentrations and osmolality are measured
 before and immediately after surgery and at 8, 24, and 48 hours after
surgery. Drinking is allowed as soon as the cat is awake The Schirmer
2CM
tear test (STT) is performed on the first day after surgery. When the
cat resumes drinking and eating. oral substitution therapy is started
by administering cortisone acetate, 1 mg/kg every 12 hours and thy-
roxine, 10-15 μg/kg every 12 hours. Once at home the dose of corti-
Figure 50-20, Continued (G) The surgical specimen is sent for
histopathology.
sone acetate is gradually lowered (in cats with Cushing's disease) over
Figure 58-22 Positioning of the cat for trans-sphenoidal
Figure 58-21 Trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy. Oral approach to the
hypophysectomy. The upper jaw is fixed to a metal bar attached
brain.
to the side of the operating table and the neck is supported.
Box 58-3 Trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy
The cat is placed in sternal recumbency and the upper jaw is fixed
einppuad lad isowle xueudoso aut jo ma panuisqoun ue uoabans
to a padded metal bar attached to the side of the operating table 
to the plane of the sphenoid bone. The mouth and surgical field are 
(Fig. 58-22). The head and neck are supported by a vacuum cushion
irrigated with 10% povidone-iodine solution. The cuff of the tracheal
 and care is taken not to hyperextend the neck, for which the cat is 
tube is re-checked for adequate pressure. Following draping. the 
particularly vulnerable (risk of brainstem necrosis). The head is fixed with
surgical field is bordered by the metal bar behind the feline teeth
elastic bandage and tape to the metal bar and the lower jaw is gently
dorsally, the commissure of the lips laterally, and the base of the
reflected downwards with elastic bandage. The cuffed tracheal tube is
tongue ventrally. A gauze sponge is placed in the oropharynx to
taped beneath the tongue to the lower jaw and reflected laterally out
prevent blood or irrigation solution from leaking into the larynx.
of the surgical field. The surgeon is positioned in front of the operating
 Orientation is obtained by identifying the pterygoid hamular
table, facing the cat. The table is tilted at a 40° angle, which gives the 
 processes. The soft palate is incised in the midline with an electrical
721
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
Box 58-3 Continued
laterally. At this point a 3.3x operating loupe is essential to provide
buuado ue yooy paddi-lleg 'pajbue a06 llews e yl!y uoiesigubew
is created in the bone by breaking away the paper-thin flakes of the 
s0t (iooes) ww e e pue buig-dn a0t ww l  euwel jesiion lauu!
up-biting Kerrison bone punch is used to enlarge the opening created 
in the inner cortical lamina of the sphenoid bone.
 The size of the opening that is necessary for pituitary tumor
Aeinnid ul suoisuawip loun Aeinnid au a pauap s! leaoua
adenomas with a diameter of 10 mm the opening can be extended
rostrally into the air-filled sphenoid sinus (Fig. 58-24). The color of 
the pituitary is usually normal (pinkish-white oval structure) in
non-enlarged pituitaries and gray. brown or dark blue in enlarged 
Allensn ae sasnuis snouaaen aut saleniniid pabyeua ul salleinid
displaced laterally and are not visible through the burr hole. The dura 
ue o ajuy ienibuns ll ou e yiim uaned aieonn e ui pasoui s! late
arachnoid neurosurgical knife. Immediately following incision, the 
pituitary tissue starts to protrude through the dural opening. The 
pituitary tumor margins are carefully explored on the left and right
lateral margins and on the upper surface of the tumor. On the caudal
side the separation between the pituitary and the dorsum sellae can be 
explored with the probe. The pituitary tumor is detached from the 
fossa circumferentially using a small 90° angled ball-tipped probe.
Figure 58-23 Anatomy of the trans-sphenoidal approach. The
 mucoperiosteum has been incised in the midline and is reflected 
 except for the caudal attachment to the dorsum sellae which will be
laterally to expose the sphenoid bone. The bones and their sutures
preserved as long as possible since it contains the caudal hypophyseal
artery to the neurointermediate lobe. Extraction of the pituitary tumor
are indicated.
is done with fine surgical neurosurgical grasping forceps and controlled
 surgical knife over a distance of 1-2 cm between the hamular
suction, which will break the pituitary stalk from the hypothalamus.
 processes. The palatine mucosa is retracted with a small Gelpi retractor
Pituitary tumor fragments are collected separately (tumor adenoma
 and two stay sutures, exposing the pterygoid bones and their 
specimen, non-affected specimen, neurointermediate lobe specimen)
 caudoventral angles, and the pterygoid hamular processes, which can
in formalin for histology and immunocytochemistry (Fig. 58-24).
be palpated with a small probe. The slit-like orifices of the Eustachian
Severance of the caudal attachment of the pituitary to the base of 
tubes are identified at the base of the pterygoid bones at the level of
the dorsum sellae will usually cause a small arterial hemorrhage that 
the hamular processes. A small piece of gauze is placed in the caudal
can be best dealt with in the final phase of pituitary tumor extraction.
nasopharynx. The mucoperiosteum is incised in the midline using
The stump containing the artery that is attached to the base of the 
 electrosurgery and reflected laterally using a periosteal elevator.
dorsum sellae can easily be cauterized with bipolar electrocautery.
thereby exposing the outer cortical lamina of the sphenoid bone.
Incision of the dura mater and detachment of the pituitary is
The basisphenoid and the presphenoid bones and their fissures are
followed by leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the chiasmatic
identified (Hg. 58-23). The position of the burr slot is determined by
cistern. After removal of the pituitary, the CSF emerging from the 
 correlating the location of the pituitary fossa and pituitary gland to 
infundibular recess can be seen to ebb and flow with respiratory
the caudal edge of the pterygoid hamuli with sequential, contrast-
doy papadsui s! essoy leasydodhy aul len aul jo shuawaaou
enhanced CT images that are available in the operating room. The
completeness of hypophysectomy and using a small swab of
shape of the outer cortical lamina of the sphenoid bone, visible on the
thrombin gel foam and limited suction with a 2 mm suction cannula
transverse CT images and in the surgical field, is also helpful in
any remaining pituitary tumor fragments are removed. The edges of 
determining the correct location for burring. In the cat, on the midline
the incised dura mater retract in a ring bordering the opening of the
from rostral to caudal, a prominent ridge in the presphenoid bone is 
inner cortical lamina of the sphenoid bone. The infundibular recess,
 visible which flattens in the basisphenoid bone and turns into a groove
which gives access to the third ventricle, is sometimes visible in the 
in the direction of the occipitosphenoid bone. Access to the pituitary
rostral half of the ventral hypothalamic surface. The base of the 
fossa is obtained with an air-powered burr and bone punches.
dorsum sellae marked by the caudal border of the pituitary fossa is
Between burring episodes, the surgical field is flushed with 0.9%
carefully explored with the ball-tipped probe for pituitary remnants.
 sodium chloride solution for cooling and removal of bone debris.
The intact half-moon shaped cavernous sinuses are observed laterally
Burring progresses from the outer cortical table of the sphenoid bone,
Completeness of hypophysectomy is assessed by the surgeon during 
through the middle cancellous bone, to the inner cortical table. The 
surgery by the following criteria: (1) unobstructed view of the
latter, forming the bottom of the burr slot, is identified when the red 
hypothalamus and the opening to the third ventricle, and (2) absence 
cancellous layer is replaced by a white inner cortical table.
of pituitary remnants on careful exploration of the hypophyseal fossa 
The sphenoid bone in cats at the level of the pituitary fossa is usually
 and the dorsum sellae with a ball-tipped probe.
 not thicker than 5 mm. In the cat, the rostral part of the solid sphenoid 
 The opening to the pituitary fossa is filled with a piece of
bone continues into an air-filled sinus and in the burring process this
absorbable gelatin sponge to prevent oozing of blood and CsF. The
may be opened (Fig. 58-24). In pituitary macroadenomas with rostral 
 gauze in the caudal nasopharynx is removed. The burr slot in the
 extension, this air-filled sinus may actually facilitate tumor debulking 
sphenoid bone is filled with bone wax and the mucoperiosteum is 
 since the thin layer of bone on the bottom of the sinus is easily
closed when possible. The soft palate incision is closed using two 
separate layers of polyglactin 910 sutures. The mucosal layer facing
from the cancellous bone is controlled with bone wax. Burring is
the nasopharynx is dosed with a simple continuous suture pattern
discontinued when the pituitary tumor becomes visible through the
and the mucosal layer facing the oropharynx with simple interrupted
 paper-thin inner cortical layer bordered by the blue cavernous sinuses 
sutures. The gauze in the caudal oropharynx is removed.
722
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
A
B
C
D
Figure 58-24 (A) Intraoperative ventral view during trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy in an 1 1-year-old cat with acromegaly due to a pituitary
ua seu snuis piouauds pall-ie aul ros lepiouauds-suen aui yonoui algis s! lon Aeinid aun pue paean si aeled hos aul ( 'a) ewouape
pue Aoosl iot suas s! uawads eibans aui uopasudody lalv (a) agoud e yi paoidxa s! pue Aeinid aui oi lesou pauado
immunocytochemistry.
a period of four weeks to 0.25 mg/kg, every 12 hours. Desmopressin
is discontinued at two weeks after surgery. Antibiotic treatment
-uupe leio jo sisisuos pue Aianneadoisod saep tI ioy panuuos si
istration of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid, 12.5 mg/kg every 12
hours. Drinking behavior is monitored by the owner for at least four
weeks after surgery by recording daily water intake. If there is persist-
ent polyuria after discontinuation of desmopressin, this treatment is
sansau auoq aq si uissan rg dn mon pansa
(UCCR in Cushing's disease and plasma GH and IGF-1 measurements 
in acromegaly (Table 58-2)) and imaging (Fig. 58-25).
A
B
Figure 58-25 Transverse contrast-enhanced CT of a 10-year-old
male castrated domestic short-haired cat with diabetes mellitus and
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
acromegaly (plasma growth hormone (GH) >100 μgyL) due to a
pituitary adenoma (A} before and (B) 3 months after trans-sphenoidal
hypophysectomy. At three weeks after surgery the cat no longer required 
After surgery of the neurocranium, cats should recover in a padded
cage (Fig. 58-26) in an intensive care unit and be given analgesics.
remnants were visible on CT, and at one year after surgery plasma
anticonvulsants, corticosteroids, diuretics, antibiotics, and oxygen 
growth hormone was 3.1 μgyL (reference range 0.8-7.2 μg/L).
723
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
[ejueioenu) Aiasins ioy uoneipul au uo paseq uoeuauajddns
neoplasia, pituitary adenoma with endocrine syndrome, cranial
COMPLICATIONS
 trauma). In addition, monitoring during the first days after surgery
should include serial general and neurologic examinations, blood
 The most common complications associated with craniotomy, craniec-
hematology (eg, packed cell volume), electrolytes (e.g.. sodium.
tomy, brain parenchymal resection, and cranial trauma include
-said snouan pue leae sasieue ses pooiq (Aaelouso 'unisseiod
uncontrollable brain swelling, brain herniation (Fig. 58-27), increased
sure measurements, and urine output. For postoperative care after
cranial pressure seizures, hemorrhage, and infection. In case of
 trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy, please see above.
incomplete resection of cranial neoplasia, recurrence of the mass effect
 Discharge from the hospital depends on the patient's status and
may occur in the long term.
 Owner compliance Cats need to be scheduled for routine follow-up
 The most common complications after hypophysectomy include
examinations by neurologists, endocrinologists and/or neurosurgeons
hypothalamic damage and hemorrhage, brainstem necrosis, post-
 adAi ioum pue uopuos iau uodn supuadap sjeaiaui snojuea j
operative coma and apnea, electrolyte (sodium and potassium)
 In cases of cranial trauma and resection of meningioma or pituitary
disturbances, infection, punulent rhinitis, nasal stridor, dehiscence
lauoos ou inq pasodnd si suiseui ym uoeniea-an 'seuouape
of the soft palate (Fig. 58-28), and aspiration pneumonia. In the
than three months after surgery with CT or MRI. Anticonvulsant
long term the most common complication is recurrence of the endo-
therapy and adjuvant therapy (eg., chemotherapy and radiotherapy)
crine syndrome [acromegaly or Cushing's disease) or pituitary mass
are re-evaluated.
regrowth.
A
Figure 58-27 Postmortem dorsal view of the brain of a cat that
underwent right-sided rostrotentorial craniotomy for a large meningioma.
R
The tumor was completely resected and the bone flap was not replaced.
In the intensive care unit the cat's neurologic condition rapidly worsened 
Figure 58-26 (A) Postoperative view after left-sided craniotomy for an
on the second day after surgery with coma and death. The brain shows
extra-axial meningioma. (B) Recovery of the cat in a padded cage on the
an elevated area of cerebral swelling and herniation at the level of the 
intensive care unit.
cr aniotomy site.
724
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
PROGNOSIS
Unfavorable prognosticators for intracranial disease and surgical
resection include severe neurologic deficits at initial presentation,
rapidly progressive disease course, presence of irregular borders on
 brain imaging, technical inability to provide surgery with or without
radiotherapy, co-morbidity in old cats due to co-existent diseases like
renal dysfunction or diabetes melltus.7 The prognosis for cats with
non-meningioma intracranial neoplasia is usually unfavorable.α The
prognosis for cats with resectable meningiomas (e.g.. clean margins
on imaging and histology, absence of invasive behavior, single versus
multiple locations) is excellent.24.132 Local regrowth of feline menin-
giomas (like anaplastic meningiomas) after surgical resection occurs
Prognosis after hypophysectomy for Cushing's disease in cats is
determined by co-existing disease and thorough presurgical screening
Figure 58-28 Dehiscence of the soft palate in a six-year-old Russian blue
at three weeks after trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy for Cushing's
treatment for feline acromegaly caused by pituitary somatotroph
disease. Top is rostral.
adenoma are very promising.48 Diabetes mellitus is completely revers-
ible after surgery (Table 58-1).
REFERENCES
1.
 Done SH, Goody C, Evans SA, Stickland
versus secondary epilepsy in 125 cats.
[2001-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc
NC. Veterinary anatomy volume 3. The
J Feline Med Surg 2010;12:910-16.
2009;235:409-14.
 Dog & Cat. 2nd ed. London: Mosby:
10.
 Seruca C, Rodenas S, Leiva M, et al. Acute
17.
Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP.
2009.
postretinal blindness: ophthalmologic.
Voorhout G. Thin-slice three-dimensional
2.
 Meij BP. Hypophysectomy as a treatment
neurologic, and magnetic resonance 
gradient-echo magnetic resonance
for canine and feline Cushing's disease.
imaging findings in dogs and cats [seven 
imaging of the pituitary gland in healthy
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
cases). Vet Ophthalmol 2010;13:307-14.
dogs. Am I Vet Res 2006;67:1865-72.
2001;31:1015-41.
11.
Gutierrez-Quintana R, Gunn-Moore DA,
18. Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP, van 
. Lorenz MD, Coates JR, Kent M. Stupor or
5.
Lamm CG, Penderis J. Feline intracranial
den Ingh TS, et al. Dynamic computed 
coma. In: Lorenz MD, Coates JR, Kent M,
meningioma with skull erosion and
tomography of the pituitary gland
editors. Handbook of veterinary
tumour extension into an area of skull 
in dogs with pituitary-dependent
neurology. 5th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier
hyperostosis. J Feline Med Surg 201l;13:
hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med
Saunders; 2011. p. 346-83.
296-9.
2003;17:773-80.
4.
 Seim HB Ill. Surgery of the Brain. In:
12.
Troxel MT, Vite CH, Massicotte C, et al.
19. Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP.
Fossum TW, editor. Small animal surgery.
 Magnetic resonance imaging features of
Voorhout G. Dynamic helical computed
 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier; 2007.
feline intracranial neoplasia: retrospective
tomography of the pituitary gland in
p. 1379-401.
analysis of 46 cats. J Vet Intern Med
healthy dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
5.
LeCouteur RA, Withrow Sl. Tumours of
2004;18:176-89.
2007;48:118-24.
the nervous system. In: withrow Sl, Vail
13.
 Mattoon JS, Wisner ER. What's under the
20.
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA,
DM, editors. Small animal oncology. 4th
cat's hat: feline intracranial neoplasia and
Rijnberk A. Corelation between
ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2007.
magnetic resonance imaging. I Vet Intern
impairment of glucocorticoid feedback
p. 659-85.
Med 2004;18:139-40.
and the size of the pituitary gland
6.
.Meij BP, Kooistra HS, Rijnberk A.
14.
Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Voorhout G.
 in dogs with pituitary-dependent
Hypothalamus-pituitary system. In:
 Meij BP. Imaging of the pituitary gland
hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol
Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS, editors. Clinical
in dogs with pituitary-dependent
1997;152:387-94.
endocrinology of dogs and cats.
hyperadrenocorticism. Mol Cell
21.
Wouters EGH, Beukers M, Theyse LF.
Hannover: Schlutersche; 2010. p. 13-54.
 Endocrinol 2002;197:81-7
Surgical treatment of a cerebral brain
7. Troxel MT, Vite CH, Van Winkle Tl, et al.
15.
 Meij BP, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A. Progress 
 abscess in a cat. Vet Comp Orthop
 Feline intracranial neoplasia: retrospective
 in transsphenoidal hypophysectomy
Traumatol 2011;24:72-5.
review of 160 cases [1985-2001). J Vet
for treatment of pituitary-dependent
22.
 Forterre F, Tomek A, Konar M, et al.
 Intern Med 2003;17:850-9.
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats.
Multiple meningiomas: clinical,
8. Tomek A, Cizinauskas S, Doherr M,
Mol Cell Endocrinol 2002;197:89-96.
radiological, surgical, and pathological
et al. Intracranial neoplasia in 61 cats:
16.
 Auriemma E, Barthez PY, van der
fndings with outcome in four cats.
localisation, tumour types and seizure
Vugt-Meijer RH, et al. Computed
I Feline Med Surg 2007;9:36-43.
patterns. J Feline Med Surg 2006;8:
tomography and low-feld magnetic
23.
 Tomek A, Forterre E, Konar M, et al.
243-53.
resonance imaging of the pituitary gland
Intracranial meningiomas associated with
9. Pakozdy A, Leschnik M, Sarchahi AA,
in dogs with pituitary-dependent
cervical syringohydromyelia in a cat.
et al. Clinical comparison of primary
hyperadrenocorticism: 11 cases
Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 2008;150:123-8.
725
Section
7
 The Head and Neck
24. Nafe LA. Meningiomas in cats: a
39. Galac S, Reusch CE, Kooistra HS, et al.
ratios in cats with hyperthyroidism. J Vet 
retrospective clinical study of 36 cases.
Adrenals. In: Rijnberk A, Kooistra HS.
Intern Med 2004:18:152-5.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 1979;174:1224-7-
editors. Clinical endocrinology of dogs
54.
Abrams-Ogg ACG, Holmberg DL, Stewart 
25.
.Graham JP, Newell SM, Voges AK, et al.
and cats. Hannover: Schlutersche; 2010.
WA, Claffey FP. Acromegaly in a cat:
The dural tail sign in the diagnosis of
p. 93-154.
diagnosis by magnetic resonance imaging
meningiomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
40.
 Fracassi F Mandrioli L, Diana A, et al.
 and treatment by cryohypophysectomy.
1998;39:297-302.
Ptuitary macroadenoma in a cat with
Can Vet J 1993;34:682-5.
26.
 Ramos-Vara JA, Miller MA, Gilbreath E.
diabetes mellitus, hypercortisolism and
55.
Abrams-Ogg ACG, Holmberg DL, Quinn
Patterson JS. Immunohistochemical 
neurological signs. J Vet Med A Physiol 
RF, et al. Blindness now attributed to
detection of CD34, E-cdherin, claudin-1,
Pathol Clin Med 2007;54:359-63.
enrofloxacin therapy in a previously
glucose transporter 1, laminin, and
41.
 Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS.
reported case of a cat with acromegaly
 protein gene product 9.5 in 28 canine
Rijnberk A. Transsphenoidal
 treated by cryohypophysectomy. Can Vet J
and 8 feline meningiomas. Vet Pathol
hypophysectomy for treatment of
2002;43:53-4.
2010;47:725-37.
 pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
56.
Blois SL, Holmberg DL.
27.
 Mandara MT, Pavone S, Mandrioli L, et al.
in 7 cats. Vet Surg 2001;30:72-86.
Cryohyophysectomy used in the treatment
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix
42.
 Duesberg CA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC.
of a case of feline acromegaly. I Small
metalloproteinase-9 expression in canine
et al. Adrenalectomy for treatment of
Anim Pract 2008;49:596-600.
and feline meningioma. Vet Pathol
hyperadrenocorticism in cats: 10 cases
57.
Goossens MM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW.
2009;46:836-45.
(1988-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc
et al. Cobalt GO irradiation of pituitary
28.
Adamo PF, Cantile C, Steinberg H.
1995;207:1066-70.
gand tumors in three cats with
Evaluation of progesterone and estrogen
43. Watson Pl, Herrtage ME.
acromegaly. I Am Vet Med Assoc 
receptor expression in 15 meningiomas
Hyperadrenocorticism in six cats. J Small
1998;213:374-6.
of dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 2003;64:
Anim Pract 1998;39:175-84.
58.
Littler RM, Polton GA, Brearley MJ.
1310-18.
44.
Daley CA, Zerbe CA, Schick RO, Powers
Resolution of diabetes mellitus but not
29. Lawson DC, Burk RL, Prata RG. Cerebral
RD. Use of metyrapone to treat pituitary.
acromegaly in a cat with a pituitary
meningioma in the cat: Diagnosis and
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat
macroadenoma treated with
surgical treatment of ten cases. J Am Anim
with large cutaneous wounds. J Am Vet 
hypofractionated radiation. J Small Anim 
Hosp Assoc 1984;20:333-42.
Med Assoc 1993;202:956-60.
Pract 2006;47:392-5.
30. Niebauer GW, Dayrell-Hart BL, Speciale J.
45. Moore LE, Biller DS, Olsen DE.
59.
Kaser-Hotz B, Rohrer CR, Stankeova S.
Evaluation of craniotomy in dogs and
Hyperadrenocorticism treated with
 et al. Radiotherapy of pituitary tumours
cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 1991;198:89-95.
metyrapone followed by bilateral 
in five cats. J Small Anim Pract 2002;43:
Gallagher JIG, Berg l, Knowles KE, et al.
adrenalectomy in a cat. J Am Vet Med
303-7.
Prognosis after surgical excision of
Assoc 2000;217:691-4.
60. Mayer MN, Greco DS, LaRue SM.
cerebral meningiomas in cats: 17 cases 
46.
 Skelly Bl, Petrus D, Nicholls PK. Use of
Outcomes of pituitary tumor irradiation
[1986-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc
trilostane for the treatment of pituitary-
in cats. J Vet Int Med 2006;20:1151-4.
1993;203:1437-40.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat.
61.
 Dunning MD, Lowrie CS, Bexfield NH,
32. Gordon LE, Thacher C, Matthiesen DT,
I Small Anim Pract 2003;44:269-72.
et al. Exogenous insulin treatment after
Joseph Rj. Results of craniotomy for the
47.
Neiger R, Witt AL, Noble A, German AJ.
hypofractionated radiotherapy in cats 
treatment of cerebral meningioma in
 Trilostane therapy for treatment of
with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly.
42 cats. Vet Surg 1994;23:94-100.
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
J Vet Intern Med 2009;23:243-9.
33. Forterre F, Fritsch G, Kaiser S, et al.
in 5 cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:
62.
Abraham LA, Helmond SE, Mitten RW.
Surgical approach for tentorial
160-4.
et al. Treatment of an acromegalic cat
meningiomas in cats: a review of six
48. Meij BP, Auriemma E, Grinwis G, et al.
with the dopamine agonist L-deprenyl.
cases. Feline Med Surg 2006;8:227-33.
Successful treatment of acromegaly in
Austr Vet I 2002;80:479-83.
34. Meij BP, Lopes MB, Ellegala DB, et al. The
a diabetic cat with transsphenoidal
63.
Higham C, Chung TT, Lawrance I, et al.
long-term significance of microscopic
 hypophysectomy. I Feline Med Surg
 Long term experience of pegvisomant 
dural invasion in 354 patients with
2010;12:406-10.
therapy as a treatment for acromegaly.
pituitary adenomas treated with
49.
Berg Rl, Nelson Rw, Feldman EC, et al.
Cin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2009;71:
 transsphenoidal surgery. J Neurosurg
Serum insulin-like growth factor-l
86-91.
2002;96:195-208.
 concentration in cats with diabetes
64.
Allgoewer I, Grevel V, Philipp K, et al
35. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al.
mellitus and acromegaly. J Vet Intern Med
Somatotropic pituitary adenoma with
Acromegaly in 14 cats. J Vet Int Med 
2007;21:892-8.
lesions of the oculomotor nerve in a cat.
1990;4:192-201.
50.
 Niessen Sl, Petrie G, Gaudiano F, et al.
Tierartztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere
36. Meij BP, van der Vlugt-Meijer RH,
 Feline acromegaly: an underdiagnosed
1998;26:267-72.
van den Ingh TS, et al. Melanotroph
endocrinopathy? J Vet Intern Med
65.
 Bertolini G, Rossetti E, Caldin M. Pituitary
 pituitary adenoma in a cat with diabetes
2007;21:899 -905.
apoplexy-like disease in 4 dogs. J Vet
mellitus. Vet Path 2005;42:92-7.
51.
Javadi S, Slingerland Ll, van de Beek MG.
Intern Med 2007;21:1251-7.
37. Meij BP, van der Vlugt-Meijer RH,
et al. Plasma renin activity and plasma
66.
Rijnberk A, Mol JA, Kwant MM, Croughs 
van den Ingh TS, Rijnberk A.
 concentrations of aldosterone, cortisol,
Rj. Effects of bromocriptine on
Somatotroph and corticotroph pituitary
adrenocorticotropic hormone, and
corticotrophin, melanotrophin and
adenoma [double adenoma] in a
 alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone in 
corticosteroid secretion in dogs with 
cat with diabetes mellitus and
healthy cats. J Vet Intern Med 2004;18:
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
hyperadrenocorticism. J Comp Path
625-31.
J Endocrinol 1988;118:271-7.
2004;130:209-15.
52.
 Norman El, Mooney CT. Diagnosis and
67.
De Bruin C, Hanson JM, Meij BP, et al.
38.
 Slingerland U, Voorhout G, Rijnberk A,
management of diabetes mellitus in five
Expression and functional analysis of
Kooistra Hs. Growth hormone excess and
cats with somatotrophic abnormalities.
dopamine receptor subtype 2 and
the effect of octreotide in cats with
I Feline Med Surg 2000;2:183-90.
somatostatin receptor subtypes in canine
diabetes mellitus. Dom Anim Endocrinol
53.
 de Lange MS, Galac S, Trip MR, Kooistra
Cushing's disease. Endocrinology
2008;35:352-61.
HS. High uninary corticoid/creatinine
2008;149:4357-66.
726
Neurocranium
Chapter
58
68. Castillo VA, Gomez NV, Lalia JC, et al.
holmium-166 microsphere in domestic
74. Forterre F, Jaggy A, Rohrbach H, et al
Cushing's disease in dogs: Cabergoline
animals with inoperable tumors. Tijdschr
Modifed temporal approach for a
treatment. Res Vet Sci 2008;85:26-34.
Diergeneeskd 2009;134:532-3.
rostro-temporal basal meningioma in a
69. Mayer MN, Treuil PL. Radiation therapy
72. Fusco JV, Hohenhaus AE, Aiken SW.
cat. J Feline Med Surg 2009;11:510-13.
for pituitary tumors in the dog and cat.
et al. Autologous blood collection and
75. Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van den Ingh TS.
Can Vet I 2007;48:316-18.
transfusion in cats undergoing partial
et al. Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in
70. Brearley MJ, Polton GA, Littler RM.
Caniectomy. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 beagle dogs: evaluation of a microsurgical
Niessen Sl. Coarse fractionated radiation
2000;216:1584-8.
technique. Vet Surg 1997;26:295-309.
therapy for pituitary tumours in cats: a
73.
O'Brien CS, Bagley RS, Hicks DG, et al.
76.
. Meij BP. Treatment protocols. Pituitary.
 retrospective study of 12 cases. Vet Comp
Gamma-irradiated calvarium allograft
Hypophysectomy In: Rijnberk A, Kooistra 
Oncol 2006;4:209-17.
 cranioplasty in a cat following brain
HS, editors. Clinical endocrinology of 
Van de Bovenkamp CG, Meij BP, Stassen 
 tumor removal. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
dogs and cats. 2nd ed. Hannover:
QE, et al. Administration of radioactive
2010;46:268-73.
Schlutersche; 2010. p. 315-16.
727
Index
Note: abbreviations used in the index are: FISS
Adenocarcinoma
Alaplasty, 665, 667b, 667f
= Feline injection site sarcomas; SIRS =
apocrine glands of the anal sac, 334
 Albumin, serum
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
ceruminous gland, 599
decreased concentrations see
Page numbers followed by 'f indicate figures.
chemotherapy, 165
Hypoproteinemia
't' indicate tables, and 'b' indicate boxes.
colorectal, 329-330, 330f
nutritional assessment, 56
mammary. 222-223, 222f-223f, 228-229
Aldosterone, 393-395
A
nasal, 154
Alfentanil, 16t, 26
pancreatic, 381, 381f
Alginates, 182t
Abdomen
parathyroid, 649
Alkalosis, 11
anatomy, 81, 245-246, 269-270, 281, 361
pulmonary, 543-544
Alopecia
anesthesia/analgesia see Anesthesia and
salivary, 576, 577f
feline paraneoplastic, 216
analgesia, abdominal surgery
small intestine, 317-318, 318f
radiation-induced, 157, 157f-158f
celiotomy, 245-251, 285-286
thyroid, 87, 87f
Alternariosis, 659
diagnostic imaging. 80-84
uterine, 459
Ameloblastoma, 673-674
drains, 47, 47f, 117-118, 118f 122,
Adenoma
Ameroid constrictors, 111-112, 112f, 368-371,
287-288
adrenal gland, 398f, 399
370f
endoscopy see Gastrointestinal endoscopy:
see also Cushing's disease below
Amputation, FISS, 237
Urethrocystoscopy
pancreatic, 381
 Anal surgery see Anus
instruments, 114, 133-136, 134b, 134f,
parathyroid, 649, 652
Analgesia see Anesthesia and analgesia
258
pituitary. 712-718
Anemia
insufflation effects, 254-255
acromegaly, 713-716, 714f-715f, 714t, 723f
anesthesia, 16
interventional radiology, 88f
Cushing's disease, 712-713, 712f-713f, 725
blood transfusions, 11, 16, 49-50
laparoscopic surgery, 253-265
hypophysectomy, 398, 719-723
immune-mediated hemolytic, 35, 76f
palpation, 8-9, 8f, 271
non-endocrine effects, 716-718, 717f
postoperative, 33-35
peritoneum,281-288
thyroid, 87, 87f, 648f, 649, 651f
 preoperative considerations, 11, 50
postoperative nursing care, 41, 45-48
Adenomatous polyps, 316, 316f
Anesthesia and analgesia, 15-27
preoperative considerations, 11-12
Adhesives, tissue glue, 111
abdominal surgery, 19, 47
stapling, 113t, 114, 335, 351
Adnexa see Skin and adnexa
adrenal gland, 397-399
wall of
Adrenal gland, 81, 248t, 393-399
gastric, 307
excision in FISS, 236, 237f-238f
neoplasia, 394-399, 394f, 397b
gastrointestinal, 20
hernias, 269-279
hepatobiliary, 20, 347-348
 Abdominal testicle, 454
see Cushing's disease
laparoscopic, 255
Abrasion injuries, 178t
Adrenalectomy, 397-398, 397b, 398f
pancreatitis, 379, 379t
Abscesses
Adrenaline see Epinephrine
portosystemic shunt, 366b
abdominal, 284
 Adrenocorticotrophic hormone [ACTH), 396,
urogenital, 20-22
brain, 710, 711f
396b, 712-713
anemia,16
liver, 348
Advancement (sliding) flaps, 196, 196f-197f,
balanced anesthesia, 15, 16t
lung. 548-549
199, 200b, 200f, 698-699
brain surgery, 26-27
pancreas, 380, 380f
Agglutination tests, 35, 35f
cardiovascular disease, 23-24
Absorbent dressings, 182-183
Aggression, stress reduction, 67-74
current medication risks, 10
Acemannan, 182t
Air accumulation
diabetes, 10, 17-18, 58-59
Acidosis
thoracocentesis, 474b, 508, 527, 527f
diaphragmatic surgery. 22b,526
anesthesia, 20
wound/body cavity drains see Drains, surgical
drugs available for, 15-16, 16t, 19
 preoperative considerations, 11-12
Air rifle injuries, 186-187
emergency equipment, 39-40
Acromegaly, 713-716, 714f-715f 714t, 723f
Airways
emergency resuscitation, 16, 17t
Activated coagulation time [ACT), 34-35
postoperative obstruction, 39-40
epidural, 19, 23
 Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT),
postoperative suction, 484, 485f
fluid administration, 16
34-35
se aiso Respiratory system; Trachea
 gastrointestinal endoscopy. 93
729
Index
head and neck surgery, 24-25
anal sacculectomy, 339, 340b-341b, 340f
Biopsies
ear, 607-608
anal sacculitis, 333-334, 339
abdominal organs, 249-250, 259-261,
eyelid, 696
anatomy. 325
259b, 349-351, 383, 409
laryngoscopy, 637
anogenital clefts, 332, 337, 339f
ear problems, 592
larynx, 639-643
atresia ani, 331-332, 331b, 331f 331t, 339.
gastrointestinal endoscopy, 92, 94-96, 94f
 mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 24b.
340f
laparoscopic, 259-261, 259b-261b, 350-351
675
rectovaginal fstulas and, 331-332, 337,
lung disease, 543, 550
orbit, 696
338f
nasal, 661-662
hypoproteinemia, 17
urethrorectal fstulas and, 331
 respiratory endoscopy, 99-100
 inhalational anesthetics, 15
proctoscopy, 327
skin tumors, 209-210
injectable anesthetics, 15
Anxiety reduction, 67-74
techniques, 142-145, 349-351
 nerve blocks see Nerve blocks
Aortic arch anomalies, 293, 293f, 297b, 297f,
thoracoscopic, 488-490, 490f
obesity, 18
489f
urethrocystoscopy, 102-103, 102f
postoperative pain, 42,45, 47, 190, 205
Aortic thromboembolism, 88
Biopsy instruments, 133, 134f
 postoperative recovery from, 39-40
Apocrine glands of the anal sac (ASGC), 334
forceps, 92, 94,134f
premedication/sedation, 15, 16t, 26b, 93,
Appetite stimulants, 62, 164
liver biopsy, 136, 249
97-98, 180, 476
Arytenoid lateralization, 639-643, 640f-641f,
Bite wounds, 184-186, 186f-187f
preoperative starvation, 17, 56-59
641b-642b
secondary peritonitis, 284
reconstructive surgery, 205
Aspergillosis, 548-549, 627, 658-659, 659f
thoracic wall, 497-498, 501-502
respiratory tract endoscopy, 97-98, 100
668
thoracoscopic-assisted exploration, 490f
rhinoscopy, 100
 Aspiration pneumonia, 36f
 traumatic abdominal hernias, 274-275, 276f
skin and adnexal problems, 18-19
Atresia ani, 331-332, 331b, 331f, 331t, 339,
Bladder, 423-431
thoracic surgery, 22-23, 22b, 45, 476, 484,
340f
anatomy, 423, 423f
487-488, 496, 526
rectovaginal fistulas and, 331-332, 337, 338f
Boari flap, 413b
lung. 22b, 549-550
urethrorectal fstulas and, 331
calculi (cystoliths), 425-426
trachea, 535
Atresia coli, 330
diagnostic imaging, 83, 424, 424f-425f
thyroid surgery, G50
Atropine, 17t
surgical removal, 425-426, 428-429
wound catheter infusion systems, 19, 19f
Aural surgery see Ear
cystectomy, 426-427, 430, 431b, 431f
wound management, 179-180, 190
Avulsion injuries, 178t, 181f
cystoscopy/urethrocystoscopy, 100-101, 102f,
Angiography
chin, 579, 582, 583b, 583f-584f
424-425, 428
CT, 75, 76f, 82, 83f, 404
ear canal, 600f 601
cystotomy, 428-430, 428f-430f, 429b-430b
MRI, 82
trachea, 534, 534f, 536
diagnostic imaging. 81, 83-84, 84f, 424
portosystemic shunt, 82, 83f
Axial pattern flaps, 197, 198f, 200-203
 ectopic ureter, 427
 Angiotensin converting enzyme-inhibitors, 10
axillary wounds, 190, 191b, 192f-193f, 202f
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 247f, 248t
Ankyloblepharon, 692-693
palatal defects, 689-690, 689b
laparoscopic-assisted cystoscopy, 428
Anogenital clefis, 332, 337, 339f
Axillary wounds, 189-190, 191f-193f, 202f
laparoscopic images, 260f
Anorexia, 163t, 164
neoplasia, 426-427, 428f, 430
 Antibiotics see Antimicrobials
B
palpation, 46-47, 47f
 Anti-cancer drugs see Chemotherapy
 perineal hernia and, 279
Anticoagulants
Balfour retractor, 135, 135f
 postoperative care, 430-431
anesthetic risk, 10
Ballistic injuries, 178t, 186-187, 187f
 postoperative complications, 431
blood collection bags, 50 
gastric perforation, 304, 304f
 preoperative considerations, 427-428
heparin, 35
secondary peritonitis, 284
radiation morbidity scoring scheme, 158t
Antidiuretic hormone [ADH), 17t, 31-32
Balloon dilatation, esophageal strictures, 293,
rupture, 426
Anti-emetics, 61-62
295-296, 296b, 296f, 298
anesthesia, 20-21
Antiepileptic medications, 15-16
Bandages, 180-184
diagnostic imaging. 83-84, 426f
brain surgery patients, 27, 48
free skin grafts, 205
 preoperative considerations, 12
 gabapentin see Gabapentin
postoperative nursing care, 43, 46f
uroperitoneum,426
portosystemic shunt, 365, 371
pressure, 118
tube cystotomy, 428-430, 430b, 430f
Antimicrobials
Basal cell carcinoma, 211, 211f
urachal diverticula, 427
bite wounds, 185-186, 502
eyelid, 693,701f
urination monitoring, 46-47, 47f 430-431
non-healing wounds, 189, 189f
lip, 578f
Blood cell hemopoiesis, 164-165
prophylactic, 10-11, 35-36
 Basal energy requirement (BER), 60
 Blood coagulation see Coagulation
bite wounds, 502
Beckman retractors, 136f, 137
Blood flms, 33-34, 34f
chemotherapy, 165
Bedding, 71-72, 72f
Blood flow, cerebral, 26
gastric surgery, 306
Beta blockers, 10
Blood pressure
intestinal surgery, 11-12, 334, 334b
Bicarbonate, for acidosis, 12
cardiovascular resuscitation drugs, 17t
mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 675
 Bile stones see Cholelithiasis
hyperaldosteronism, 394f 395
peritonitis, 285
 Biliary tract see Liver and biliary tract
hyperthyroidism, 647
pyothorax, 511-512
 Biochemistry panel
measurement, 4-9, 5b, 5f
septic cats, 37
 hyperadrenocorticism, 396
portosystemic shunt, 366-367, 370
urethral surgery, 439
liver and biliary tract disease, 346
in sepsis, 37
 Antiplatelet drugs, 10
minimum database, 9-10, 177-179
Blood transfusions, 49-53
Antiprogestins, 222
pancreatic disease, 376-377
administering, 52, 52f
Anus
portosystemic shunt, 362-363
anemia, 11, 16, 49-50
anal sac impaction, 333, 333b
skin tumors, 209
blood product storage, 51, 53
anal sac neoplasia, 334, 339
thyroid and parathyroid disease, 646-647
blood types, 49-50, 51f, 53 
730
Index
blood volume estimation, 52, 52b
preoperative considerations, 26
Cardiovascular system
collection from donors, 50-52, 51b, 52f
radiotherapy. 156, 713
anesthesia and analgesia, 23-24
cross-matching, 50, 51b, 53
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), 97-99, 543
CT-angiography, 76f
during anesthesia, 16, 49
Bronchoesophageal fistulas, 535
diagnostic imaging. 77-80
emergency, 49, 50b
Bronchoscopy. 96-99, 97b, 97t
examination, 7-8, 8f
hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers, 53
Bronchotomy, 535-536
fluid therapy. 13, 31
hypoproteinemia, 11, 17
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 10,
heart see Heart
transfusion reactions, 49-50, 53, 53f
10b
hyperkalemia, 20, 20b, 20f
Blood vessel sealing devices, 133-135, 135f,
Buprenorphine, 19, 21t, 42f
hyperthyroid cats, 13. 31
137, 258-259
Burn wounds, 178t, 186, 628
laparoscopic surgery, 254-255
Boari flap, 413b
Butorphanol, 19
postoperative monitoring. 40
Body assessment, 55-56
 preoperative considerations, 12-13
Body condition scores [BCS), 56, 571
c
radiation morbidity scoring scheme, 158t
Body fat estimation, 55-56, 56b
 rheolytic thrombectomy. 88
Body mass index (BMI), 55-56
Cages, 70-71, 71f, 71t
vascular ring anomalies, 293-294
Body surface area (BSA), 162, 162b, 162t
Calcium
Carriers, 68, 68b, 69f
Body temperature
hypercalcemia, 646, 649-650
Castration, 451-455, 452b, 452f-453f
measurement, 9, 41
postoperative hypocalcemia, 33
cancer risk reduction, 146
postoperative monitoring. 40-41
Calcium channel blockers, 10
colonic entrapment following, 329
postoperative nursing care, 41, 41f
Calcium gluconate, 12, 17t, 33
silicone prostheses, 114, 114f
 postoperative pain recognition, 42
Calculi see Cholelithiasis; Cystoliths;
Catgut sutures, 107
in sepsis, 37
Urolithiasis
Catheters
thoracotomy, 476
Cancer, 141-149
chemotherapy administration, 164
warming methods, 37, 37f, 41, 41f, 179,
biopsy techniques, 142-145, 209-210
emergency re-intubation, 39
186, 476
chemotherapy. 149, 154-156, 161-166, 226,
urethral, 435-439, 437f, 439f, 445
Body weight
239, 546
urinary, 46-47
after neutering, 467
diagnostic imaging. 141
wound catheter infusion systems, 19, 19f
anti-cancer drug dosing, 162, 162b, 162t
diagnostic surgery, 145-146
Caudal superficial epigastric (CSE) axial
daily monitoring, 56, 56f
excised mass examination, 149, 237
pattern flaps, 197, 203, 203b, 203f
 energy requirement calculations, G0, G0b
multimodal treatment, 149, 154-156, 216,
Cecum, 246, 248t
indications for nutritional support, 55b 
239, 239t,546
Celiotomy, 245-251
postoperative, 29, 31f
neoplastic pleural effusion, 516
abdominal anatomy, 245-246
preoperative assessment, 55-56
non-healing wounds, 187, 189f
biopsy procedures, 249-251
weighing scales, 69-70
palliative surgery, 146
diaphragmatic defect repair, 526-527
see also Obesity
 postoperative chemotherapy/radiotherapy.
exploratory, 246-247, 246f-247f
Bone
149, 154
peritonitis, 285-286,286f
cutting instruments, 136, 136f, 481
 preoperative chemotherapy/radiotherapy.
postoperative care, 250
late radiation toxicity, 158, 158t
149, 154
Cell biology
osteotomies see Osteotomies
preoperative considerations, 26, 141-145,
anti-cancer drugs, 161-162, 164-165
Bone marrow suppression, 163t, 164-165
146b
radiation effects, 151-152, 152b, 152f,
Bougienage, 293, 295-296, 297f, 298
principles of surgery, 146-149, 146b-147b
156-157
Bowel clamps, 135, 135f
radiotherapy. 149, 151-157, 239t
wound healing. 172, 172f, 172t
Bowls, food/water, 72
regional lymph nodes, 147, 211
 Cellophane banding, portosystemic shunts.
Brachial plexus block, 18, 19f
surgical margins, 146, 216, 237, 675
112, 368-372, 370f
Brachytherapy, 152, 156
treatment surgery, 146, 216
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), 26
Bradycardia, 36-37, 562-563
umor staging. 142, 142t, 210, 211b
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, 709
Brain
types of metastases, 147f
Ceruminous cystomatosis, 599
abscesses, 710, 711f
see also specific tumors and sites
Cesarean, 21-22, 464-466, 465b, 466f
anatomy. 707
Cannulas
Cheek, 571
anesthesia and analgesia, 26-27
Japaroscopic surgery, 258
Chemotherapy, 161-166
anti-cancer drug toxicity, 164
 thoracoscopic surgery, 488, 489f 
administration, 163-164, 163t
imaging. 77f, 84-85, 709
Capillary refil time, postoperative monitoring.
contraindicated drugs. 163
intracranial pressure, 26
40
drug dosing. 162, 163t
traumatic injury, 710
Caprolactum sutures, 107t, 109
drug selection principles, 162b
tumors see Brain tumors; Pituitary tumors
Carbon dioxide insufflation
drugs used in, 163, 163t
Brain tumors, 707, 710-726
laparoscopy, 254, 256
FISS, 166, 239-240
antiepileptic treatment, 27
thoracoscopy. 487-488, 491-492
mammary tumors, 226
clinical signs, 709
Carboplatin, 163t, 165
mode of action, 161-162, 163t
raniectomy, 718-719, 718b
Cardboard boxes, 71-72, 72f
nasal lymphoma, 668b
caniotomy, 26, 26b, 710-711, 718-719,
Cardiac surgery see Heart
 pulmonary neoplasia, 546
718b, 719f-721f, 724
Cardiogenic shock, 38
safe handling of drugs, 166, 166b
CSF analysis, 709
Cardiomyopathy
side effects, 163-165, 163t
diagnostic imaging, 85, 85f, 709
anesthesia, 23-24
specific tumor types, 165-166
mass effects, 707, 709b, 716-718, 717f
diagnostic imaging, 78-80
with surgery/radiotherapy, 149, 154-156,
meningioma, 26, 85, 85f, 711-712, 711f,
doxorubicin associated, 165
239, 546
718-719, 724f, 725
thyrotoxic, 647
therapeutic index, 161-162
pituitary see Pituitary tumors
Cardiovascular resuscitation, 17t
Chest see Thoracic surgery
731
Index
Chevalier-Jackson forceps, 296-297, 298f
pancreas, 378
Craniotomy, 26, 26b, 710-711, 718-719, 718b,
Chin diseases, 579, 582, 583b, 583f-584f
portosystemic shunt, 82, 83f
719f-721f, 724
Chlorambucil, 163t
angiography 75, 76f, 82, 83f, 404
Crash kits, 40, 40t
Cholecystectomy, 354, 354b
brain, 84-85, 709, 713-715, 713f, 715f,
Crush injuries, 178t, 185-186, 408
Cholecystitis, 351-352
717f
thoracic wall, 498, 501-502
Cholecystocentesis, 347
ear disease, 593
Cryohypophysectomy, 716
Cholecystoduodenosotomy (CCD), 354-355,
FISS, 234, 234f
Cryosurgery, squamous cell carcinoma, 596
355f
Jarynx, 637
Cryptococcus spp.G27, 658
Cholecystography, 346, 347t
lung, 76f, 476f, 542, 542b, 542f, 544,
Cryptorchidism, 450-451, 450f, 454b,
Cholecystojejunostomy (CC)), 354-356
546-547
454f-455f
Cholecystotomy, 353-354
pharynx, 620, 621f
laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy, 261-262,
Choledochoenterostomy, 354-356
pleural disease, 509
264b, 264f
Choledochotomy, 353-354
thoracic, 78, 80, 474-475, 476f, 496
Crystalloids, 37
Cholelithiasis, 346, 347t, 351-352
wound management, 186, 187f
Cushing's disease (hyperadrenocorticism),
Cholesteatoma, 602
Congenital conditions
395-398, 712-713, 712f-713f,
Chondrosarcoma, 214f
anogenital clefts, 332, 337, 339f
725
thoracic wall, 499
atresia ani, 330-331, 339
Cyclophosphamide, 163t, 164-165
Chylothorax, 510t, 512-513, 512f-513f, 513b,
rectovaginal fstulas and, 331-332, 337,
COP protocol, 165,166t
561
338f
FISS, 240
omentalization, 517
urethrorectal fistulas and, 331
Cystadenoma, biliary, 348-349, 349f
pericardectomy, 517, 561
ectopic ureter, 409, 414, 427
Cystectomy, 426-427, 430, 431b, 431f
prognosis,518
female genital tract, 458-463, 459f
 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra
thoracic duct ligation, 491, 516-517
heart
(CEH-P), 459-461, 462f, 465
Cisplatin, 163, 163t, 166
 patent ductus arteriosus, 558-562, 563b.
Cystitis, hemorrhagic, 165
Cleft lip, 578
566
Cystography, 83-84, 424
 Cleft palate see Palatal defects
vascular ring anomalies, 293-294
Cystoliths, 425-426
Clinical examination see Physical examination
heritable coagulopathies, 10, 34
diagnostic imaging. 83, 424, 424f-425f
Clinical records, wounds, 179, 179b
hernias, 270-273
surgical removal, 425-426, 428-429
 Closed suction surgical drains, 120-122,
male genital tract, 450-451
Cystomatosis, ceruminous, 599
120b-121b, 120f-121f, 287
palatal, 683-684
Cystonephropexy, 418
Clotrimazole, 663
peritoneopericardial hernias, 521, 522f,
Cystoscopy/urethrocystoscopy, 100-103, 102f,
Clotting factor deficiencies, 10, 34-35, 50
523-525, 525f, 527-529, 528f
424-425, 428, 435
Coagulation
pharynx, 626
Cystotomy, 428, 428f-429f, 429b
disseminated intravascular, 35, 50
pleuroperitoneal hernias, 521-522,
tube, 428-430, 430b, 430f
hepatobiliary disease, 347-348, 356
526-527, 527b, 529
Cysts
postoperative anemia, 33-34
portosystemic shunt, 361-372
enteric duplication, 332
preoperative vitamin K, 50, 347-348
urachal diverticula, 427
intrapericardial, 559
testing. 10, 33-34, 35b
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 12-13, 79
liver, 348
Coat see Hair
Conn syndrome [hyperaldosteronism].
mediastinal, 517
Colectomy, 327, 329, 335-337, 335b-336b,
393-395, 397-398
pancreas, 380
336f, 339-341
Constipation
prostatic, 451, 451f
Collagens, wound management, 182t
after ovariohysterectomy/castration, 329
Cytology
Collars, 42, 45f 180, 665
defnition, 325-326
diagnostic by FNA, 142, 143t
Colloid osmotic pressure (COP), 11
megacolon, 327, 329
ear disease, 591-592
Colloids
non-surgical management, 328b, 328t
lung disease, 543, 545-546
 hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers, 53
 perineal herniation and, 329
nasal disease, 656-657
hypoproteinemia, 11, 17
postoperative, 341
peritoneal effusions, 283t, 284
Colocolostomy, 335
Consulting rooms, 68-70
septic effusions, 36f, 283t, 284
Colonoscopy. 92-93, 96, 327
 Contrast radiography
splenic disease, 388
Colopexy, 279f, 337, 338b, 338f
abdominal wall hernias, 271, 272f
Coloplasty, 335
diaphragmatic hernias/ruptures, 524-525,
D
Colorado acute pain scale, 42, 43f-44f
524b
Colorectal disease see Large intestine
ear disease, 593
Deafness, 589, 594, 602, 611, 631
Colostomy, 337, 337b, 339-341
esophageal disorders, 292, 298f
Debakey forceps, 137, 137f
Common bile duct (CBD)
gastric disorders, 302
Debnidement
anatomy, 346
Jarge intestine, 326
dressings for, 181-182, 181f-182f
choledochoenterostomy, 354-356
pharynx, 620
by maggots, 183
choledochotomy, 353-354
small intestine, 314-315, 314f, 318f
non-healing wounds, 187, 189
diagnostic imaging, 346
urogenital, 83, 84f, 403-404, 424, 435
 Defecation problems, 325-326
 trauma repair, 356
Convulsions see Seizures
after rectal surgery, 341
Communication with owners see Owners
Cortisol
short bowel syndrome, 342
Complete blood count (CBC), 9-10
hyperadrenocorticism, 395-396, 712-713
see also Constipation; Obstipation
Computed tomography (CT), 75
postoperative care, 398
Degloving injuries, 178t, 181f
abdominal,82,82b
Cranial sartorius muscle flaps, 276-277
Dehydration
kidney and ureter, 404, 404f
Craniectomy, 718-719, 718b
fluid therapy see Fluid therapy
large intestine, 327
Craniopharyngioma ( Rathke's pouch tumor),
preoperative considerations, 11-12
liver and biliary tract, 347
625
signs of, 6, 7t
732
Index
Dexamethasone
peritoneal, 287-288
trauma, 600f, 601
emergencies, 17t
postoperative care, 45, 46f-47f, 47, 122
ulceration, 591
suppression test, 396, 396b
prophylactic use, 117
wentral bulla osteotomy 138, 607,
Dexmedetomidine, 16t
thoracic, 45, 46f, 117, 121, 121f, 480-485,
608f-612f, 609, 610b
Dextrose infusions, 17-18, 18t
482b
vertical canal ablation, 604-605, 605b,
Diabetes mellitus
timing of removal, 122-123
605f, 612
acromegaly, 713-716, 714t
tube drains, 119, 119f, 123
history taking, 589
anesthesia, 10, 17-18, 58-59
Dressings
inner ear, 589, 602-603
hyperadrenocorticism, 713
absorbent, 182-183
otitis interna, 602-603, 623f
preoperative starvation, 17, 58-59
changing, 180, 181b
middle ear
Diagnostic endoscopy see Endoscopy.
debriding, 181-182, 181f-182f
anatomy, 588-589
diagnostic
frst aid, 179
clinical signs of disease, 589-590
 Diagnostic imaging see Imaging, diagnostic
free skin grafis, 205
Eustachian tube, 589
Dialysis, peritoneal, 410, 411b
moisture-retaining, 183, 183f
examination, 590
Diaphragm, 521-529
nanocrystalline silver, 183-184
myringotomy, 594, 603-604
anatomy, 521, 522f
postoperative nursing care, 43, 45, 46f-47f,
neoplasia, 602-603
diagnostic imaging, 77-78, 79f, 80, 81f,
47-48
otitis media, 591, 593, 601, 623f
521-522
pressure bandages, 118
polyps see Pharynx, polyps 
exploratory celiotomy, 248t
primary layer, 180-184
postoperative care, 607-608
hernia/rupture, 305, 305f-306f
Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA),
 postoperative fistulas, 609
acquired pleuroperitoneal, 522-523,
55-56
sampling, 594, 603
524b, 524f, 526-527,526f 527b, 529
Duodenostomy tubes, 126, 126b
 tympanic membrane evaluation, 591,
anesthesia, 22b, 526
Duodenum
591f, 594
adenomatous polyps, 316
otoscopy, 590-591
521, 522f, 523-525, 525f, 527-529,
anatomy, 313
ototoxic agents, 603
528f, 559
cholecystoduodenosotomy, 354-355, 355f
pinna
 congenital pleuroperitoneal, 521-522,
cholecystotomy, 354
anatomy, 587
522f, 526-527, 527b, 529
endoscopy. 96
dermatoses, 596, 5971
diagnostic imaging, 79f, 80, 81f
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 247f, 248t
examination, 590
instruments for, 137
 gastroduodenal ulceration/perforation,
hematoma, 594-595, 595f, 607, 612b, 612f
sliding hiatal, 521, 523f, 525-526, 528b,
304-305, 304f, 309f, 311t
neoplasia, 595-596
528f, 529
gastroduodenostomy, 311t
pinnectomy, 604, 610-612
surgical techniques, 526-529
Duplication cysts, enteric, 332
trauma, 594, 594f
timing of surgery, 526
Dyschezia, 325-326, 341
radiation morbidity scoring schemes, 157t
SIS grafts, 112, 112f
Dysphagia
skin tumors, 211f-212f
 thoracic wall reconstruction, 503
 mandibulectomy and maxillectomy.
vestibular system, 589
Diathermy 133-135, 135f
679-680
dysfunction, 589, 590t, 602-603, 602t,
Diet see Nutrition
 pharyngeal disease, 618
609
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
Dystocia, 462-463, 463t
Eating see Nutrition
35, 50
Echocardiography, 79
Distant flaps, 196-197, 198f, 199-200,
E
patent ductus arteriosus, 558-559,
200f-201f, 201b
558f-559f
Dobutamine, 17t
Ear, 587-612
 pericardial effusion, 561, 561f
 postoperative oliguria, 21
anatomy, 587-589, 587f
Ectopic ureter, 409, 414, 427
sepsis, 37
anesthesia, 24, 24b
Elbow skin fold, 190, 191b, 191f
Dogs, cat stress and, 67, 69f, 70
brainstem-evoked auditory response, 594
Electric burns, 628
Dopamine, 17t
deafness, 589, 594, 602, 611, 631
Electrocoagulation devices, 134-135, 135f,
 postoperative oliguria, 21
diagnostic imaging. 592-594
258-259
sepsis, 37
diagnostic procedures, 590-594
Electrolyte abnormalities
Doppler ultrasonography
external ear canal
anesthesia, 20-21
blood pressure measurement, 4, 5b, 5f
anatomy, 587-588
hyperaldosteronism, 394-395
patent ductus arteriosus, 558-559, 559f
ceruminous cystomatosis, 599
postoperative, 32-33
portosystemic shunt, 82
dinical signs of disease, 589
preoperative considerations, 11-12
Doxorubicin, 163t, 164-165
congenital disorders, 601
uroperitoneum, 285
FISS, 240
xamination, 590-591
see also Hypercalcemia; Hyperkalemia
mammary tumors, 226
flushing. 603-604, 604b
Elizabethan collars, 42, 45f, 180
specifc tumor types, 165-166
lateral bulla osteotomy, 605-612,
Embolism, pulmonary, 548
Doyen bowel clamps, 135, 135f 
606f-607f, 607b
 Emergency anesthesia equipment, 39-40
Drains, surgical, 43, 117-123
lateral wall resection, 604-607, 605b,
 Emergency blood transfusions, 49, 50b
abdominal, 47, 47f, 117, 122, 287-288
605f, 612
 Emergency boxes, 40, 40t
active, 120-121
neoplasia, 598-601, 605
Emergency management
 see also Drains, surgical, closed suction
otitis externa, 597-599, 598b, 604-605
 pleural disease, 508
alternatives to, 117-118
IG5-06S Xdo3s010
tracheal disruption, 532, 537
dosed suction, 120-122, 120b-121b,
postoperative care, 607-608
 Emergency resuscitation, 16, 17t
120f-121f 287
 postoperative complications, 608-612
Emphysema, 549, 549f
passive, 118-119
preparation for surgery, 604
Endoscopic retrograde cholangio-
Penrose, 118-119, 119b, 119f, 122
 proliferative necrotizing otitis, 599
 pancreatography (ERCP), 347
Index
Endoscopic surgery
Etomidate, 23-24
hemipelvectomy, 234f, 236, 236b,
gastrointestinal stapling. 114
Eustachian tube, 589
236f-237f
laparoscopy, 253-265
Exenteration, 703, 703b, 704f
osteotomies, 234f, 235-236
Endoscopy, diagnostic, 91-103
Exercise, postoperative, 42, 45f
prognosis, 239-240
biopsy technique, 94, 94f
Extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction (EHBTO),
scapulectomy, 234f, 235-236, 235b
cancer, 141
346-347, 352-355, 352b, 352f
tumor staging. 234
cystoscopy/urethrocystoscopy. 100-103,
Eye
 Feline intestinal sclerosing mast cell tumor.
424-425, 435
enucleation, 114, 702-703
214, 318
flexible endoscopes. 91. 96
exenteration, 703
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
gastrointestinal, 91-96, 292, 327
hemorrhage with hyperaldosteronism, 394,
FISS, 233
general considerations, 91-92
394f
serological testing. 10
larynx, 637-638, 637f, 642f
Horner syndrome, 609, 612f, 624f
 Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
pharynx, 619-620, 619f
lid see Eyelid
101, 436, 436f 439
respiratory, 91, 96-100, 533
physical examination, 4-6, 5f-6f
 Feline orofacial pain syndrome (FOPS),
nigid endoscopes, 91-92, 96
portosystemic shunt, 362f
573-574
 Endotracheal tubes
radiation morbidity scoring schemes.
Female genital tract, 457-467
causing rupture, 534-535, 534f
157t-158t
anatomy, 457-458, 457f
emergency re-intubation, 39
surgical instruments, 137b, 137f, 138
cesarean, 21-22, 464-466, 465b, 466f
Gl endoscopy. 93
Eyelid, 691-704
diagnostic imaging. 458
lung surgery, 549-550, 550f
agenesis, 693, 693f, 699, 700f
neoplasia, 458-459,463
respiratory tract endoscopy, 97-98
anatomy. 691
neutering, 21, 463-464, 466-467
for tracheal surgery, 536
ankyloblepharon, 692-693
ovariectomy
Enemas, 328t, 334
entropion, 693, 693f, 697-698, 698f
laparoscopic, 261, 262b, 263f
urethrography 435
Hotz-Celsus procedures, 697-698.
mammary gland disease and, 146, 222,
 Energy requirements, calculating. 60
698f-699f, 699b
463
 Enteral nutrition see Tube feeding
lip-to-lid resection, 699, 701b, 701f
technique, 460, 461f 464-465
Enterectomy, 319, 320b, 320f-321f 322
neoplasia, 212f, 693-694, 694f
ovaries
Enteropexy, 316
mass resection, 697, 697b, 698f-699f,
congenital abnormalities, 458
Enterotomy, 319, 319b, 320f-321f, 322
699, 701f
cysts, 458, 459f
Entropion, 693, 693f, 697-698, 698f
 Roberts-Bistner procedures, 699, 700b-701b,
neoplasia, 458-459
Enucleation, 114, 702-703, 702b-703b,
700f
 owarian remnant syndrome, 459, 465
702f-703f
sliding skin grafts, 698-699, 700b, 700f
owariohysterectomy
Environmental stress reduction, 67-73
tarsorrhaphy, 696-697, G97b, 697f
age to neuter, 463, 464t
 Eosinophilic granulomatosis, 575-576
anesthesia, 21, 464
Epicardial pacemakers, 562-563, 564b-565b,
F
colonic entrapment after, 329, 329f
564f-565f 566
gravid (en bloc), 465, 466f
Epidural anesthesia, 19, 23
Fasting se Starvation
laparoscopic, 261, 263f, 264b
Epinephrine, 17t
Fat, body
mammary gland disease and, 146,
Epithelial skin tumors, 210-213, 210t
abdominal, 81
222-223. 463
squamous cell see Squamous cell carcinoma
estimation, 55-56, 56b
for pyometra, 465b, 466
Epitheliotrophic lymphoma, 215
Fearful cats, 41-42, 41b
technique, 460b, 460f-461f, 464
Epulides, 673-674, 681
fear signs, 67, 68f
timing. 463-464
 Erythrocyte pyruvate kinase (EPK) defciency, 10
stress reduction, 67-74
postoperative complications, 466-467
Esmolol, 17t
 Feces, impacted see Obstipation
reproductive cycle, 458
Esophageal feeding tubes, 48f, 60, 60f-61f,
Feeding bowls, 72
uterus
126t, 127-129, 128b, 128f
 Feeding tubes see Tube feeding
 congenital anomalies, 459-463, 459f
Esophagoscopy. 93-95, 94f-95f
 Feline chronic gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis
 cystic endometrial hyperplasia and
Esophagotomy, 297-298, 298b-299b
complex, 627-628
pyometra, 459-461, 462f, 465
Esophagus, 291-298
 Feline facial pheromones (FFPs), 70
dystocia, 462-463, 463t
anatomy. 291-292,291f
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV),
eversion, 462
endoscopy, 94f, 292, 292f, 296-297
serological testing, 10
exploratory celiotomy, 248t
 pyloric stenosis and, 304
 Feline inductive odontogenic tumors, 673-674
extrauterine fetuses, 463
surgical diseases, 95, 95f, 292-295
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 284
hysterotomy, 465, 465b, 467
diagnosis, 292
granulomas, 316-317, 316f
laparoscopic images, 260f
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 248t
 Feline injection site sarcomas (FISS), 233-241
neoplasia, 459
foreign bodies, 294-299, 294f
chemotherapy, 166, 239-240
owariohysterectomy see Female genital
gastroesophageal intussusception, 305,
clinical signs, 233-234
tract, ovariohysterectomy
308
epidemiology, 233
prolapse, 462
hiatal hermias, 305, 308, 521, 523f
imaging. 234
pyometra, 459-461, 462f, 465-466, 465b
525-526, 528b, 528f, 529
radiotherapy. 153f 155-156, 155f-156f,
torsion, 462, 462f
neoplasia, 295, 297-299
238-240, 239t
vagina, 457-458, 457f, 463
strictures, 292-293, 293f 295-296, 296b,
surgical excision, 234-237
vulva, 457-458, 463
296f 298, 298f
amputation, 237
Female urethra
vascular ring anomalies, 293-294, 293f,
basic technique, 235b, 236f
anatomy, 433-434, 434f
296, 297b, 297f, 298
body wall excision, 236, 237f-238f
diagnostic imaging. 435, 435f
tube feeding via see Esophageal feeding
closure, 237, 238f
hypoplasia, 438, 438f
 tubes; Nasoesophageal feeding tubes
decision making, 234-235
see also Urethra
734
Index
Femoral hernias, 272-274, 274b
fluid composition, 31-32
Gastrinoma,382
Femoral nerve block, 19
head trauma, 710
Gastroduodenal ulceration/perforation,
Femoral pulses, measurement, 7, 8f
hypoproteinemia, 11, 17
304-305, 304f, 309f, 311t
Fentanyl, 16t, 23-24,26
limited fluid volume resuscitation, 13
Gastroduodenostomy, 311t
Fibrin/fbrinogen degradation products ( FDP).
peritonitis. 285
Gastroesophageal intussusception, 305, 308
35
pulmonary contusions, 13
Gastrointestinal endoscopy, 91-98
Fibroadenomatous hyperplasia see
rate of administration, 31
upper Gl, 92-96, 93f, 292, 296-297
Fibroepithelial hyperplasia
resuscitation, 13, 17t, 37
Gastrointestinal tract
Fibroepithelial hyperplasia, 220-221,
routes of administration, 30, 31f
anesthesia and analgesia, 19-20
221f-222f, 221t, 222b
sepsis, 37
anti-cancer drug toxicity, 163t, 164
Fibrosarcoma, 214f
SOAP protocol, 29
endoscopy see Gastrointestinal endoscopy
oral, 575, 584, 673, 681
volume required, 30-31, 31b
hyperthyroidism and, 647
thoracic wall, 499
Force-feeding, 125
 peritoneal contamination, 282, 284
Fibrosing pericarditis, 561
Forceps
preoperative considerations, 11-12
Fight or flight response, 67
biopsy, 92, 94, 134f
radiation morbidity scoring schemes, 157t
Fine needle aspiration (FNA), 142, 142b-
Chevalier-Jackson, 296-297, 298f
stapling. 113t, 114, 335
143b, 143f, 143t
Debakey, 137, 137f
see also Esophagus; Large intestine; Pharynx;:
lung tissue, 550
Galiban suture holding, 135, 136f
 Small intestine; Stomach
mediastinal disease, 475f
grasping. 136, 136f
Gastrojejunostomy, 311t
skin tumors, 209-210
Mixter (right-angle), 137, 137f
Gastropexy, 308b
 Finochietto retractor, 136-137, 136f
ophthalmic surgery, 137f
Gastroscopy, 94-96, 95f-96f, 302
First aid treatment, 179
Satinsky clamps, 137, 137f
Gastrostomy feeding tubes, 61f 126t, 129,
Fistulas, 178t, 186f
typical surgical kits, 134b, 134f
130b, 130f, 298, 302f, 307-308, 308b,
bronchoesophageal, 535
Foreign bodies
309f
middle ear, 609
bronchus,99
Gastrotomy, 307, 307b
oronasal, 683-684, 684f
esophagus, 294-299, 294f
Gelpi retractor, 136, 136f
see also Palatal defects
lung, 548, 549f
Genitourinary tract see Urogenital tract
rectocutaneous, 332
nose, 659, 660f
Glioma, 85, 85f
rectovaginal, 331-332, 332f, 337, 338f
pharynx, 99-100, 625-626, 625f-626f,
Glossectomy, 580, 580b, 580f-581f
urethral, 331, 438
629
Glucose, diabetic patients, 17-18, 18t, 58-59
urethrorectal, 331, 438
small intestine, 313, 313f-314f, 315, 319,
Glue, tissue, 111
Fits see Seizures
320f
Glycomer 631 sutures, 106t-108t, 109
Flail chest, 22b, 497, 498f, 501, 501b, 501f
stomach, 301, 303-304, 303f
 Glycopyrrolate. 17t
anesthesia, 22b
tongue, 576
Gonadotropin deficiency. 716
Flaps, 195
trachea, 533, 536
Gosset retractor, 135, 135f
muscle, 204
wound management, 178t, 180. 188f
Grafts, 195, 197-206
abdominal hernia repairs, 276-279, 278b
Frostbite, 178t
pedicle see Flaps, skin
bilateral mastectomy, 225, 227f
 Fundus, examination, 5-6, 5f
sheets and meshes, 112, 198-199
body wall defects, 236
 Fungal disease
surgical techniques, 203, 204b, 204f
thoracic wall reconstruction, 502-503,
nasal, 658-659, 660f, 663, 668
Granulation tissue
502b
pharyngeal, 627
wound healing. 172-173, 173f-174f
 omental pedicle see Omentum flaps
pulmonary, 548-549
wound management, 181f, 184
 palatal defect reconstruction see Palatal
 Furosemide, 17t
Granulomas
defects
brain surgery, 26
eosinophilic, 575-576
skin (pedicle grafts), 195-197
 postoperative oliguria, 21
feline infectious peritonitis, 316-317, 316f
advancement (sliding), 196, 196f-197f,
pulmonary, 548-549
199, 200b, 200f, 698-699
G
vaccination reactions, 241
axial pattern, 191b, 197, 198f, 200-203
Grooming behaviour, 42. 73
distant, 196-197, 198f, 199-200,
Gabapentin, 15-16
Growth hormone (GH)
200f-201f, 201b
brain tumor patients, 27
acromegaly, 713-716, 714t, 715f
injection site sarcoma surgery, 237
 head and neck surgery, 24
deficiency, 716
random, 195-197, 196b
Galiban forceps, 135, 136f
rotating/transposition, 196, 197f
Gallbladder
H
wound healing. 174
anatomy, 345-346
wound management, 180
cholecystectomy, 354, 354b
Hair
axillary wounds, 190, 191b, 192f 202f
cholecystitis, 351-352
chemotherapy-induced loss, 165
see also specific flaps above
cholecystoduodenosotomy, 354-355, 355f
coat examination, 9
Fluid, peritoneal, 281-284, 283t, 287, 426
cholecystojejunostomy, 354-356
 paraneoplastic alopecia, 216
Fluid accumulation
cholecystotomy, 353-354
radiation-induced loss, 157, 157f-158f
after reconstructive surgery, 206-207
diagnostic imaging. 81, 346-347, 347t
 radiation morbidity scoring schemes.
 drainage see Drains, surgical
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 248t
157t-158t
negative effects, 118b
laparoscopic images, 260f
Halothane, 20, 23, 26
pleural disease, 508
Gallstones (cholelithiasis), 346, 347t,
Halsted's surgical principles, 146, 146b
Fluid therapy, 30-32
351-352
Hamartoma, nasal, 658, 659f
cardiovascular conditions, 13, 31
Gambee suture pattern, modifed, 320, 321f
Handling cats, 3-4, 4f, 29, 30f
during inhalational anesthesia, 16
Gastrectomy, 308, 310f 311t
stress reduction, 67-68, 70, 70b, 72f
electrolyte abnormalities, 32-33
Gastric surgery see Stomach
Harmonic scalpel, 133-135
735
Index
Head and neck, 571-584
stabilization procedures for failure of 23b
Hernias, abdominal wall, 271-277
abscesses, 575, 575f
surgical approaches, 562
femoral, 272-274, 274b
anatomy, 571-572
symptomatic bradycardia of cardiac origin,
inguinal, 272-274, 274b
 anesthesia and analgesia, 24-25
562-563
perineal, 277-279, 278f-279f, 329
biopsy, 574
tamponade, 490-491, 559-561, 561b
traumatic, 274-277, 275f-277f, 276b
chin diseases, 579, 582, 583b, 583f-584f
thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy, 647
umbilical, 271-272, 273b, 273f
ear see Ear
 traumatic myocarditis, 24
Hernias, congenital peritoneopericardial, 521,
eye see Eye
se also Cardiovascular system
522f, 523-525, 525f, 527-529, 528f,
eyelid, 691-704
Heart rate
559
facial pheromones, 70
cardiovascular resuscitation drugs, 17t
Hernias, congenital pleuroperitoneal, 521-522,
facial reconstruction, 196-197, 200f 203,
hyperkalemia, 20
522f 526-527, 527b, 529
582
hyperthyroid cats, 13
Hermias, hiatal, 305, 308, 521, 523f, 525-526,
feline orofacial pain syndrome, 573-574
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 23-24
528b, 528f, 529
inflammatory disorders, 575-576
measurement, 7
Hetastarch (hydroxyethy] starch), 11, 17
 intracranial tumors see Brain tumors;
 postoperative pain recognition, 42
Histiocytosis, feline cutaneous, 215
Pituitary tumors
SIRS, 36-37
Histologic grade-prognosis link, 228f
Jarynx see Larynx
se also Pulse
Histology, excised masses, 149, 679, 680f
 mandibulectomy and maxillectomy.
Heart rhythm
Honey dressing products, 182t, 183, 183f
671-681
hyperthyroid cats. 13
Horner's syndrome, 609, 612f, 624f, 631, 631f
neoplasia, 574-575, 584
symptomatic bradycardia, 562-563
Hospitalization
see also specifc parts of the head and nech eg
 traumatic myocarditis, 24
inpatient monitoring, 29-30, 39-40, 40b
Nose
Heat pads, 37, 37f, 41f
stress of, 67-74
neurocranium, 26, 26b, 707-725
burn wounds from, 186
Hotz-Celsus procedures, 697-698, 698f-699f,
see aiso Brain tumors
Hemangiosarcoma, spleen, 390-391
699b
nose see Nose
 Hematological analysis see Blood analysis
Human serum albumin (HSA), 11
 oral cavity see Mouth
Hematoma, aural, 594-595, 595f, 607, 612b,
 Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
orbit, 691-704
612f
(HHM), 33
palatal defects, 683-690
Hemipelvectomy, FISS, 234f 236, 236b,
Hydration
 parathyroid see Thyroid and parathyroid
236f-237f
assessment, 6, 6f 7t
 pharynx see Pharynx
Hemoabdomen/hemoperitoneum, 387-388,
fluid therapy to maintain see Fluid therapy
surgical instruments, 133-135, 134b, 134f,
390-391
preoperative considerations, 11-12
138
Hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers (HBOCs),.
Hydrocolloid dressings, 1821
 thyroid see Thyroid and parathyroid
53
Hydrocortisone see Cortisol
tongue see Tongue
Hemophilias, 10, 34
Hydrogel dressings, 181-183, 181f-182f, 182t
tonsils, 571, 579-580, 579f, 584, 584b
Hemopoietic cells, 164-165
Hydroxyethyl starch (hetastarch), 11, 17
traumatic injury, 26, 48f, 575-576, 710
Hemorrhage
Hyperadrenocorticism see Cushing's disease
chin avulsion, 579, 582, 583b, 583f-584f
after castration, 454-455
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn syndrome),
Healing of wounds see Wound healing
affer ovariohysterectomy, 466-467, 467b
393-395, 397-398
Hearing tests, 594
after perineal urethrostomy, 443
Hypercalcemia, 646, 649-650
Heart, 557-566
assessing transfusion need, 49
Hyperglycemia
anatomy, 557-558
aural surgery 608-609
postoperative risk of, 59
cardiogenic shock, 38
bladder, 427-428
traumatic brain injury, 26
diagnostic imaging. 78-79, 78f, 558-561
hemothorax, 515-516, 515f
Hyperkalemia
doxorubicin complications, 165
hepatic, 348, 356
postoperative, 32
epicardial pacemakers, 562-563, 564b-
 intraocular with hyperaldosteronism, 394.
urogenital disease
565b, 564f-565f, 566
394f
anesthesia, 20
hyperthyroid cats, 13
nasal surgery. 661
postoperative, 32
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 23-24, 78-79
 patent ductus arteriosus, 566
urethral obstruction, preoperative
murmurs, 8, 12-13, 23, 558
 pharyngeal surgery, G31
considerations, 12
patent ductus arteriosus, 558-562, 563b, 566
postoperative anemia, 33
uroperitoneum, 285
 pericardial anatomy, 557-558
rhinoscopy, 100
Hypernatremia, postoperative, 32-33
pericardial disease, 559-561
thoracic wall surgery, 504
Hyperprogesteronism, 394, 394f 396-397, 399
chylothorax, 561
see also Hemostasis
Hypertension
constrictive, 561
Hemorrhagic cystitis, 165
hyperaldosteronism, 394f, 395
fbrosing pericarditis, 561
Hemostasis
hyperthyroidism, 647
 intrapericardial cysts, 559
laparoscopic surgery, 258-259
portal, 366-367, 370
pericardectomy, 490-491, 491b, 491f,
mastectomy, 224-225
Hyperthermia, postoperative, 41
561-563. 566
tests of primary, 10, 10b
Hyperthyroidism see Thyroid and parathyroid.
 penicardial efusion (PEF), 59-561, 560b.
tests of secondary, 10, 34
hyperthyroidism
560f
vessel sealing devices, 133-135, 135f, 137,
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
penicardiocentesis, 561, 561b
258-259
anesthesia, 23-24
 peritoneopericardial hernia (PPDH), 521,
Hemothorax, 515-516, 515f
diagnostic imaging. 78-79
522f, 523-525, 525f, 527-529, 528f,
Heparin, 35
Hypocalcemia, postoperative, 33
559, 560f
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 361, 365, 371
Hypokalemia
surgical approach, 562
Hepatobiliary system see Liver and biliary tract
hyperaldosteronism, 394-395
radiation morbidity scoring scheme, 158t
Heritable coagulopathies, 10, 34
postoperative, 32
sounds, 8, 13
ee also Congenital conditions
Hyponatremia, postoperative, 32
736
Index
Hypophosphatemia, postoperative, 33, 60
head and neck, 138
Kidney, 401 -420
Hypophysectomy, 398, 713, 717-725,
laparoscopic surgery, 258
anatomy, 401, 401f
721b-722b, 721f 723f, 725f
staplers, 113-114, 113t
anesthesia, 20-21, 21b
Hypoproteinemia
thoracic surgery. 113-114, 136-137, 476,
anti-cancer drug toxicity, 165
anesthesia, 17
477b
biopsy 250, 259-261, 261b, 409, 410b, 410f
 preoperative considerations, 11
thoracoscopic surgery, 488
chronic disease (CKD), 12-13, 20
Hypospadia, 451
Insufflation, gas
 congenital uterine anomalies and, 459
Hypotension, cardiovascular resuscitation, 17t
Japaroscopy. 254, 256
cystonephropexy, 418
Hypothermia
thoracoscopy, 487-488, 491-492
descensus, 418
in sepsis, 36-37
Insulin
diagnostic imaging. 81, 83, 84f, 402-404
warming methods, 37, 37f, 41, 41f, 179,
acromegaly, 714-716, 714t
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 248t
186. 476
anesthesia and, 10, 17-18, 18t, 58-59
neoplasia, 409, 411
wound management, 179
Insulinoma, 382
nephrostomy tubes, 410, 410f
Hypoventilation, thoracic wall surgery, 504
Intensive care units, 39-40
nephrotomy, 411, 411b, 412f
Hypovolemic shock, 38
Intercostal nerve block, 23
 obstructive jaundice, 348
Hysterotomy, 465, 465b, 467
Intercostal thoracotomy, 477, 477t, 478b,
perinephric pseudocysts, 408-409.
478f-480f, 485, 526
408f-409f
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
perirenal urinoma, 408-409
endotracheal tubes, 39
peritoneal dialysis, 410, 411b
Idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome (IFVS),
thoracotomy, 22
 postoperative oliguria, 21
603
Internal obturator muscle flap (lOMF),
pyelolithotomy, 411, 411b, 411f
Imaging. diagnostic, 75-88
perineal hernia repair, 277-279, 278b,
thyroid and parathyroid disease, 647, 649
see aiso named modalities and organs
278f
 transplantation, 418-420,419f-420f
Imaging, interventional radiology 87-88
Interpleural anesthesia, 23
trauma, 405-408, 407f, 411
 Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA),
Intersex diseases, 451
ureteronephrectomy, 411, 411b, 413f
35
Interventional radiology 87-88, 88f 
urolithiasis, 83, 404-405, 404f-405f 411
CT-angiography, 76f
Intestinal disease see Large intestine; Small
Immunomodulation, 59
intestine
L
Implants, surgical, 105
Intra-abdominal pressure (IAP), 254-255
palatal defects, 687, 687f
Intracranial pressure (ICP), 26, 26b
Laboratory database
portosystemic shunts, 111-112, 368-372
Intracranial tumors see Brain tumors; Pituitary
hernias, 271
sheets and meshes, 112-113
tumors
hyperadrenocorticism, 396
see aiso Meshes, surgical
Intubation, emergency equipment, 39
liver and biliary tract disease, 346
silicone, 114
Intussusception
lung disease, 543, 545-546
se also Stents
gastroesophageal, 305, 308
pancreatic disease, 376-377
Incisional biopsy, 143t, 145
small intestine, 314-316, 314f-316f, 319
portosystemic shunt, 362-363
Incisions see Wounds, surgical
lodine therapy, radioactive, 156, 648
 preoperative, 9-10, 141
Incontinence, urinary, 101, 443, 445-446
lodine-123 scintigraphy, 86, 86t
respiratory disease, 474-475, 475f, 509
Infections
Isoflurane, 21t, 26
skin tumors, 209
biliary, 347-348
wound management, 177-179
chemotherapy risk, 165
see also Cytology
eyelid, 692
Laceration injuries, 178t
nasal, 658-660
Jackson-Henderson approach, PDA ligation,
Jung.549
nasopharyngeal, 627
563
tongue, 575-576
peritoneal, 282, 284-285
Jackson Pratt abdominal drain, 122, 122f, 287
Lactomer, 106t
postoperative, 35-36
Jejunostomy tubes, 60, 61f, 126, 126b
Laparoscopes, 257f, 264
nursing care, 43
lejunum
Laparoscopy, 253-265
reconstructive surgery, 207
adenocarcinoma, 317-318, 318f
αyptorchidectomy, 261-262,264b, 264f
sepsis, 36-37
adenomatous polyps, 316, 316f
cystolith retrieval, 428
surgical drains, 122
cholecystojejunostomy 354-356
equipment, 256-259,257f-258f
wound management, 179, 181-185, 189,
endoscopy. 96
owariectomy, 261, 262b, 263f
189f
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 247f, 248t
Ovariohysterectomy, 261, 263f, 264b
see also Antimicrobials, prophylactic
full thickness biopsy, 249f
pneumoperitoneum, 254-256
Inflammatory response
gastrojejunostomy, 311t
tissue biopsy, 259-261, 259b-261b,
peritoneal, 282, 2821
intussusception, 316f
350-351, 383
SIRS, 36-37, 36b, 282
serosal patching for peritonitis, 286
Laparotomy see Celiotomy
wound healing. 172, 172f, 172t
short bowel syndrome, 322
Large intestine, 325-342
Infraorbital nerve block, 24-25, 25f, 675
Joints, radiation morbidity scoring. 158t
anal sac conditions, 333-334, 339
Inguinal canal, 269-270, 270f
Jugular vein, 7
anastomosis, 114, 334-336, 336f 342
Inguinal hernias, 272-274, 274b
anogenital clefts, 332, 337, 339f
Inguinal testicle, 454, 454f-455f
K
atresia ani, 331-332, 331b, 331f, 331t, 339,
Injection site sarcomas see Feline injection site
340f
sarcomas (FISS)
Kennels (cages), 70-71, 71f, 71t
rectovaginal fstulas, 331-332, 337, 338f
Inpatient monitoring, 29-30, 39-40, 40b
Ketamine, 16t, 21t, 23
urethrorectal fstulas, 331
Instruments, surgical, 133-138
 brain surgery, 26
atresia coli, 330
abdominal surgery. 114, 135-136, 258
head and neck surgery, 24
colectomy, 327, 329, 335-337, 335b-336b,
general, 133-135, 134b, 134f
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 23-24
336f, 339-341
LEL
Index
colocolostomy, 335
Linea aiba {midline), 245-246, 248-249,
metastatic neoplasia, 80, 81f, 546-547
colopexy, 279f, 337, 338b, 338f
269
primary neoplasia, 544-545, 544f, 547
coloplasty, 335
Lingual surgery se Tongue
embolism, 548
colostomy, 337, 337b, 339-341
Lip
emphysema, 549, 549f
colonoscopy, 92-93. 96, 327
anatomy. 571
foreign bodies, 548, 549f
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 247f, 248t
cleft, 578
granulomas, 548-549
full thickness biopsy, 249
lip-to-lid resection, 699, 701b, 701f
Jaceration injuries, 549
duplication cysts, 332
neoplasia, 578
lobe torsion, 547-548
entrapment afer neutering surgery. 329
Lipidosis, hepatic, 350f
lobectomy, 546, 551-553, 551b, 552f-554f,
megacolon, 326-329, 327f, 335-337, 336f
Lithotripsy, laser, 426
554b, 555
neoplasia, 329-330
Litter trays, 69-70, 72-73
metastatic neoplasia, 80, 81f, 546-547
pelvic fracture malunion and, 335-337, 337f
Liver and biliary tract
pneumonectomy, 552, 554b
perineal hernias and, 277, 279, 279f 329
anatomy. 81, 245, 345-346, 345f
pneumonia, 36f, 549
proctoscopy, 327
 anesthesia and analgesia, 20, 347-348
pneumothorax, 549
rectal prolapse, 332-333, 332f, 333b
biliary diseases, 351-353
primary neoplasia, 543-546
rectocutaneous fstulas, 332
bile peritonitis, 284, 353
radiation morbidity scoring schemes.
rectovaginal fstulas, 331-332, 332f, 337, 338f
cholecystitis, 351-352
157t-158t
short bowel syndrome, 342
cholelithiasis, 346, 347t, 351-352
staples/stapling, 113-114, 551-552,
stapling, 114,335
extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction,
552f-553f
urethrorectal fstulas, 331, 438
346-347, 352-355, 352b, 352f
thoracoscopy. 489-490
Larynx, 635-643
 biliary procedures, 353-356
thoracotomy, 22-23, 551-552, 552f
anatomy. 635-636, 635f-636f
CBD trauma repair, 356
thromboembolism, 548
arytenoid lateralization, G39-643, G40f-
cholecystectomy, 354, 354b
Lymph nodes
641f, 641b-642b
cholecystotomy, 353-354
biopsy, 250
diagnostic imaging, 637, 637f
choledochotomy, 353-354
gastric, 301
xamination, 6, 8, 636
complications, 356
 oncological surgery, 147
inflammatory disease, 638-639, 639f 643
decompression, 353
mammary glands, 219, 220b, 220t, 224,
laryngectomy, 639
diversion techniques, 354-356
228
laryngopharynx, 618
sphincteroplasty, 356
 mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 673
laryngoscopy, 637-638, 637f, 642f
sphincterotomy, 356
tumor staging. 211
masses, 638-639, 643
diagnostic imaging, 81, 346-347, 347t
Lymphangiography, 516
paralysis, 638-639, 642f, 643, 652-653
portosystemic shunt, 82-83, 82f-83f,
Lymphoma
wentral laryngotomy, 639, 642b
363-364
chemotherapy. 165
Laser lithotripsy, 426
diagnostic tests, 346
colorectal, 329-330
Lateral bulla osteotomy (LBO), 605-612,
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 248f, 248t
cutaneous, 215, 215f
606f-607f, 607b
laparoscopic images, 260f
cutaneous paraneoplastic conditions, 216
Lateral thoracic (LT) axial pattern flaps, 197.
diagnostic imaging. 76f 85
200-203, 202f
abscesses, 348
epitheliotrophic, 215
Lateral thoracotomy, 477
biopsy, 136, 249, 250b, 250f, 349-351
gastric, 96f, 305
 Latissimus dorsi, thoracic wall reconstruction,
cysts, 348
intestinal, 317, 317f
502-503, 502b, 502f
hepatectomy, 351, 351b
laryngeal, 643
Lavage
laparoscopic biopsy, 259-261, 261b,
nasal, 668
peritoneal, 287
350-351, 350f
 nasopharyngeal, 100f
wounds, 180, 180f
lobe torsion, 348
orbital, 695f
Laxatives, 328, 328t
lobectomy, 351, 351b, 351f
 pharyngeal, 625
colonoscopy. 93
neoplasia, 348-349, 349f, 353-355
radiotherapy. 154
Lidocaine, 17t, 23-24
portosystemic shunt, 82-83, 82f-83f,
renal, 409
Ligasure system, 134-135, 135f
111-112, 361-372
thymic, 514
Ligating dividing stapler (LDS), 113t, 114
traumatic injury, 348, 354-355
tonsillar, 580
Lights,133,134f
Lobular hyperplasia see Fibroepithelial
Lymphoreticular mast cell tumors, 214
Limbs
hyperplasia
Lymphosarcoma
bandages, 43, 46f
Local anesthetics, 24-25
hepatic, 349f
FISS
Lomustine (CCNU), 163t
intestinal, 317
amputation, 237, 238f
Loop suture biopsy, 349-350, 350f
hemipelvectomy, 236
Loupes, 133,134f
M
 normal cutaneous anatomy. 190
Lumpectomy. 224
skin and adnexal conditions, 18-19
Lung. 541-555
Macrophages
wound management
abscesses, 548-549
 peritoneal inflammatory response, 282
assessment, 179-180, 179f
anatomy, 541, 542f
wound healing. 172, 172t
axial pattern flaps, 197, 200-203
anesthesia and analgesia, 22b, 549-550
 Maggots, wound management, 183
axillary wounds, 189-190, 202f 
biopsy, 543, 550
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl), 75-76,
distant flaps, 196-197, 198f, 199-200,
bullae, 549
76f-77f 77t
200f-201f, 201b
contusions, 13, 22b, 80
abdominal, 82
dressings, 181f
diagnostic imaging. 77-80, 541-542
brain, 84-85, 85f, 709, 710f
free skin grafts, 197-198
contusions, 80
meningioma, 85f, 711, 711f
non-healing wounds, 189f, 190
CT, 76f, 476f, 542, 542b, 542f, 544,
 pituitary mass, 717f
Limited fluid volume resuscitation, 13
546-547
ear disease, 593-594
Index
larynx, 637
mandibulectomy techniques, 675, 676f,
Monitoring of patients, 29-30, 39-40, 40b
liver and biliary tract, 347
677b-678b, 679f
Morphine, 19
pharynx, 620, G21f
margins, 675, 679
brain surgery, 26
thoracic, 78
maxillectomy techniques, 675, 676b, 676f,
 Morphine + ketamine [MK), 16t
 Magnifying instruments, 133, 134f
679f
Mouth
Maintenance energy requirement (MER), G0
Mannitol, 26
anatomy. 571
Male genital tract, 449-455
Mast cell tumors, 213-214, 213f
buccal mucosal bleeding time, 10, 10b
anatomy, 449
colorectal, 329-330
eosinophilic granulomatosis, 575-576
neoplasia, 146, 451
eyelid, 693-694, 694f
examination, 572, 572f
penis, 449, 449f-450f, 451
small intestine, 318
feline orofacial pain syndrome, 573-574
see also Male urethra
splenic, 214, 390-391
infraorbital nerve block, 25, 675
prepuce, 449, 451
thoracic wall, 499
lip. 571, 578
prostate, 451, 451f
Mast cells
 mandibular nerve block, 25
radiographic characteristics, 81
peritoneal, 282
mental nerve block, 25
scrotum, 449-451
wound healing, 172, 172f 172t
neoplasia, 574, 673
testis, 450-451
Mastectomy
fbrosarcoma, 575, 673
cancer risk reduction, 146
bilateral, 225, 226b, 226f-227f
prognosis. 584
castration, 451-455, 452b, 452f-453f
unilateral, 224-225, 224b, 225f
squamous cell carcinoma, 154-155, 155f,
colonic entrapment after castration, 329
 Maxilla
189f, 574, 673
αyptorchidism, 450-451, 450f, 454b,
anatomy. 671
se also Mandibulectomy and
454f-455f
dental disease, 674
maxillectomy
laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy, 261-262.
fractures, 674
oropharynx see Pharynx
264b, 264f
surgical resection see Mandibulectomy and
see also Mandible; Palatal defects; Salivary
neoplasia, 146, 451
maxillectomy
glands; Tongue; Tonsil
silicone prostheses, 114, 114f
umors, 154-155, 155f, 673-674, 681
Mucoceles
Male urethra
Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 26
gallbladder, 352
anatomy, 433-434, 434f, 449, 450f
Medetomidine, 16t, 21t
salivary, 577
diagnostic imaging. 435, 436f
brain surgery, 26
 Mucous membranes
perineal urethrostomy, 439-443, 440b-
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 23-24
buccal mucosal bleeding time, 10, 10b
441b, 440f-442f, 445-446, 450f
Median sternotomy, 477-480, 481b, 481f-
feline chronic gingivitis-stomatitis-
 transpelvic urethrostomy, 444b
482f, 485, 517, 562
 pharyngitis complex, 627-628
we also Urethra
Mediastinum, 507
 hydration status assessment, 6
Mammary gland disease, 219-229
diagnostic imaging. 78
 postoperative monitoring. 40
anatomy. 219
fne needle aspiration, 475f
Muscle
benign lesions, 220-221, 221t
masses, 513-514, 514f, 517
abdominal wall, 269-270, 270f
fbroepithelial hyperplasia, 220-221,
thoracoscopic biopsy, 490f
thoracic wall, 495, 496f
221f-222f, 221t, 222b
Megacolon, 326-329, 327f 335-337, 336f
 Muscle flaps, 204
benign tumors, 221-222, 221t
Melanoma, 210t, 212f 213
abdominal hernia repairs, 276-279, 278b
diagnosis, 219-220
oral, 673
bilateral mastectomy, 225, 227f
inflammatory lesions, 221t
 pulmonary metastases, 490f
body wall defects, 236
malignant tumors, 221t, 222-223
Meningioma, 26, 85, 85f, 711-712, 711f
thoracic wall reconstruction, 502-503, 502b
bilateral mastectomy, 225, 226b,
caniotomy, 718-719, 719f-721f, 724f
502f
226f-227f
postoperative prognosis, 725
Muscle mass scoring (MSs), 56, 58t
chemotherapy 165, 226
Mental nerve block, 25, 25f
 Musculoskeletal system
clinical staging, 221t
Mesenchymal hamartoma, 658, G59f
diagnostic imaging
lumpectomy, 224
Mesenteric lymphangiography, 516
extra-thoracic region, 77-78
molecular markers, 229t
Mesenteric volvulus, 316, 319, 322
 intrathoracic psoas muscle, 78, 78f
novel treatments, 228
Meshes, surgical, 112-113
late radiation toxicity, 158b, 158t
 prophylactic ovariohysterectomy/
FISS, 236
thoracic wall anatomy, 495, 496f
ovariectomy, 146, 463
thoracic wall reconstruction, 503-504,
see also Bone; Muscle
radiotherapy, 226
503f
Myiasis, 183
unilateral mastectomy, 224-225, 224b,
traumatic abdominal hernias, 277
Myocardial diseases see Cardiomyopathy
225f
 Mesothelioma, peritoneal, 285
Myringotomy, 594, 603-604
Mandible
Metabolic acidosis, 11-12
anatomy. 671
Metabolic alkalosis, 11
N
chin avulsion injuries, 579
Methadone, 19
dental disease, 674
side effects, 42f
 Nanocrystalline silver dressings, 183-184
fractures, 671, 674
Methylprednisolone, 17t
 Nasal surgery see Nose
resection see Mandibulectomy and
Microscopes, 138
 Nasoesophageal feeding tubes, 60, 61f,
maxillectomy
Microvascular dysplasia, 363
126-127, 126t, 127b, 127f, 129
symphysiotomy.628
Midazolam, 21t, 23-24
 Nasopharynx see Pharynx
umors, 154-155, 155f 673-674, 681
Minimally invasive surgical procedures see
 Neck see Head and neck
Mandibular gland see Salivary glands
Laparoscopy: Thoracoscopy
 Necrosis, skin sloughing secondary to, 178t
 Mandibular nerve block, 25. 25f
Mixter forceps, 137, 137f
 Necrotizing otitis, proliferative, 599
Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 671-681
Moisture-retaining dressings 183, 183f
Necrotizing sialoadenitis, 576-577
analgesia, 24b, 675
Molar gland see Salivary glands
Needle core biopsy, 142-144, 143t, 144b,
anatomy, 671, 672f
Molecular markers, mammary tumors, 229t
144f, 350
739
Index
 Needles
neoplasia
Omentum
biopsy, 134f
diagnostic imaging, 656
anatomy, 301-302
suture, 110, 110t, 111f
nasal planum, 657, 657f-658f 662, 666
as autogenous wound drain, 118, 118f
Neoureterocystotomy, 414-415, 416b,
nasopharyngeal lymphoma, 100f
bilateral mastectomy, 225, 227f
416f-41 7f
radiation therapy 154, 154f-155f 212f,
peritonitis. 286
 Nephrostomy tubes, 410, 410f
668
 Omocervical (OC) axial pattern flaps, 197,
Nephrotomy, 411, 411b, 412f
sinus tumors, 657,657f
203, 203b, 203f
 Nerve blocks
planectomy, 662, 663b, 664f-665f,
Omphaloceles, 272
head and neck surgery. 24-25, 675
665-666, 668f
Oncological surgery see Cancer
intercostal, 23
rhinitis, 656, 658-660, 663-665, 668
 Operating microscopes, 138
 orbital surgery G9G
rhinoscopy, 96-100, 97b, 656
Ophthalmic surgery see Eye
skin and adnexal conditions, 18-19
rhinotomy, 662, 662b, 663f 665-666,
Ophthalmoscopy, indirect, 5f
Nervous tissue
667f
Opioids
anti-cancer drug toxicity, 164-165
sinus ablation, 663-665, 666b, 666f, 668
analgesia, 15, 19, 23
late radiation toxicity, 158b, 158t
stenotic nares, 660-661, 660f
brain surgery, 26-27
 adiation morbidity scoring schemes.
Aders as Auderaus iean
head and neck surgery, 24
157t-158t
Nurses, 73-74
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 23-24
se also Brain; Spinal cord
Nursing care
 postoperative analgesia, 42, 42f
Neurocranium, 707-725
definition, 39
 postoperative hyperthermia, 41
abscesses, 710, 711f
postoperative, 39-48
Oral cavity see Mouth
anatomy, 707
Nutrition, 55-63
Orbit, 691-704
craniectomy. 718-719, 718b
abdominal surgery, 46, 59, 288
anatomy. 691-692
caniotomy, 26, 26b, 710-711, 718-719,
esophageal, 298
enucleation, 702-703, 702b-703b,
718b, 719f-721f, 724
intestinal, 321-322
702f-703f
hypophysectomy, 398, 713, 717-725,
short bowel syndrome, 322
exenteration, 703, 703b, 704f
721b-722b, 721f 723f, 725f
anti-cancer drugs and, 164
inflammatory disorders, 696
neoplasia, 710-718, 725
anti-emetics, 61-62
neoplasia, 694, 703
 see also Meningioma; Pituitary tumors
appetite stimulants, 62, 164
proptosis, 696-697, 696f
 traumatic injury, 710
brain surgery, 48, 48f
tarsorrhaphy, G96-697
 Neurological problems
decision tree for route of, 61f
Oronasal fstulas, 683-684, 684f
ear and
dressing changes and, 180
see also Palatal defects
 brainstem-evoked auditory response, 594
energy requirement calculations, 60
 Oropharynx see Pharynx
examination, 590
enteral, 46, 59-60, 61f, 321
Osteochondromatosis, thoracic wall, 499,
nasopharyngeal polyp removal, G31
see also Tube feeding
499f
vestibular system, 589, 590t, 602-603
feeding bowls, 72
Osteosarcoma, 499, 673, 681
portosystemic shunt, 361, 365, 370-371
 indications for supported, 55b
orbital, 695f
Neutering
 mandibulectomy and maxillectomy.
Osteotomies
female cats, 21, 463-464, 466-467
677-680
FISS, 235-236
male cats, 21, 452-454
nasal surgery, 665
lateral bulla, 605-612, 606f-607f, 607b
see also Castration; Female genital tract,
neutering. 467
 mandible and maxilla see Mandibulectomy
owariohysterectomy
parenteral, 46, 59-60, 61f, 125, 321
and maxillectomy
Neutropenia, 164-165
re-feeding syndrome, G0
pelvic fracture malunion, 337
Neutrophils, wound healing, 172, 172t
tempting cats to eat, 60-61, 61f, 164
sternal, 481, 481f-482f
 Nictitating membrane, 4, 6f
timing of postoperative, 59, 321
ventral bulla, 138, 607, 608f-612f, 609,
Nitrous oxide, 22, 26
 tube feeding see Tube feeding
610b, 629
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Nylon sutures, 107t-108t, 109
Otitis externa, 597-599, 598b, 604-605
abdominal surgery, 19-20
Otitis interna, 602-603, 623f
anesthetic risk, 10
0
Otitis media, 591, 593, 601, 623f
brain surgery, 26-27
Otoscopy 590-591
head and neck surgery 24
Obesity
Ototoxic agents, 603
robenacoxib, 15
anesthesia, 18, 18b, 18f
 Ovariectomy see Female genital tract.
Norepinephrine, 17t
neutering and, 467
ovariectomy
Nose, 655-668
nutritional status assessment, 55-56
 Ovaries see Female genital tract, ovaries
alaplasty, 665, 667b, 667f
 Obstipation
 Ovariohysterectomy see Female genital tract,
anatomy, 655, 655f
 after ovariohysterectomy/castration, 329,
 ovariohysterectomy
antifungal flushing, 663
329f
Owners
biopsy 661-662
megacolon, 327-329
advice for, 67, 68b, 70b, 73-74, 73b
culture of nasal samples, 657
perineal herniation, 329
communication with, 73-74, 73b
cytology. 656-657
Obturator foramen, hernia repair, 276-277
FISS, 241
diagnostic approach, 656-657
Octreotide, 716
 Oxygen carriers, hemaglobin-based, 53
foreign bodies, 659, G60f
Odontogenic tumors, 673-674
Oxygenation
fungal infections, 658-659, 660f, 668
 Oliguria, postoperative, 21
brain surgery, 26
 mesenchymal hamartoma/inflammatory
Omental pedicle flaps, 205, 206b, 206f, 207
lung surgery, 549-550, 550f
polyp. 658, 659f
as autogenous wound drains, 118, 118f
 pleural disease, 508
nasoesophageal feeding tubes, 60, 61f,
axillary wounds, 190, 191b, 192f-193f
 postoperative emergencies, 39-40
126-127, 126t, 127b, 127f 129
chylothorax, 517
thoracic surgery, 473-474, 474f, 484, 484f
 nasopharynx see Pharynx
 thoracic wall reconstruction, 503, 503f
Oxyglobin?, 53
740
Index
P
Pectoral muscle flaps, 503, 503b
nasopharyngitis, 626-628
Pectus excavatum, 496-497, 497b, 497f, 497t,
neoplasia, 574, 621-622, 624-625, 624f
Pacemakers, 562-563, 564b-565b, 564f-565f,
500-501, 500b, 500f
polyps, 621-624, 622f-623f, 629, 629f, 631,
566
Pelvic diaphragm, 270
631f
Packed cell volume (PCV)
Pelvic fracture malunion, megacolon,
rhinoscopy, 99-100, 100f
minimum database, 9-10
335-337, 337f
 traumatic injury, 626
 transfusion calculations, 52
Penis, 449, 449f-450f, 451
Pheromones, feline facial, 70
transfusion triggers, 16, 49
see also Male urethra
Phimosis, 451
Pain recognition, 41-42, 41b, 43f-44f
Penrose drains, 118-119, 119b, 119f, 122
Phosphate, postoperative hypophosphatemia,
Pain scales, 42, 43f-44f
 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG)
33. 60
Palatal defects, 683-690
tubes, 61f, 126t, 129, 130b, 130f
Photodynamic therapy, 596, 596f
anatomy, 683, 683f
Pericardectomy
Physiologic wounds, 178t
hard palate reconstruction, 685-687
chylothorax, 517, 561
Physiotherapy. postoperative, 42
auricular cartilage free grafts, 686, 687b
partial, 490-491, 491b, 491f
Pinna see Ear, pinna
buccal mucosal flaps, 686, 687b, 687f
subtotal, 561-562, 563b
Pituitary tumors, 85, 712-718
mucoperiosteal flaps, 685, 685b,
surgical approaches to, 562
acromegaly, 713-716, 714f-715f 714t, 723f
685f-686f
total, 563, 564b
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease),
 mucoperiosteal releasing incisions, 685
Pericardium, 559-561
395-398, 712-713, 712f-713f, 725
prosthetic appliances, 687, 687f
anatomy. 557-558
hypophysectomy, 398, 719-723
soft palate advancement flaps, 686, 686f
chylothorax, 517, 561
non-endocrine effects, 716-718, 717f
temporal muscle transfer, G87
constrictive disease, 561
radiotherapy 156, 718
soft palate reconstruction, 687-689
fbrosing pericarditis, 561
 Plasma transfusions, 11, 17
 angularis oris axial pattern flap. G89-690,
intrapericardial cysts, 559
Platelet function testing, 10, 10b
689b, 689f
 pericardectomy se Pericardectomy
postoperative anemia, 33-34, 34f
axial pattern flaps, 689-690, 689b
pericardial effusion, 559-561, 560b, 560f
Pleura, 507-518
buccal mucosal flaps, 688-690, 689b,
 pericardiocentesis, 561, 561b
anatomy, 507, 507f
689f
peritoneopericardial hernia, 521, 522f,
chylothorax, 491, 510t, 512-513, 512f-513f,
 pharyngeal wall flaps, G89
523-525, 525f, 527-529, 528f, 559,
513b, 516, 518, 561
releasing incisions, 687-689, 688f
560f
emergency management, 508
 soft palate mucosal flaps, 687-689, 688f
surgical approach, 562
hemothorax, 515-516, 515f
Palliative surgery, 146
Perineal hernias, 277-279, 278f-279f, 329
Jymphangiography, 516
Pancreas, 375-384
Perineal urethrostomy, 436, 438-443,
mediastinal masses, 513-514, 517
abscesses, 380, 380f
440b-441b, 440f-442f, 445-446, 450f
neoplastic effusion, 516
anatomy, 245, 375-376, 375f-376f
Perineum, 270
 pneumothorax see Pneumothorax
biopsy, 250, 259-261, 260b, 260f, 383,
Peritoneal dialysis, 410, 411b
pyothorax, 510-512, 510t-511t, 518
383b
Peritoneopericardial hernia (PPDH), 521, 522f,
thoracic duct ligation, 491, 516
cysts, 380
523-525, 525f, 527-529, 528f, 559
thoracoscopy, 509
diagnosis of disease, 376-378
Peritoneum, 281-288
thymectomy, 517
exploratory celiotomy. 246, 247f, 248t
anatomy, 281,281f
Pleural effusions, 507-508
neoplasia, 349f, 377t, 381-384
neoplasia, 284-285
diagnostic imaging. 78-79, 78f, 508f-509f,
pancreatectomy, 382-384, 384b
peritonitis, 36-37, 47f, 281
509
pancreatitis, 376t-377t, 378-380, 378b,
bile, 284, 353
etiology, 509, 510t
378f, 384
diagnosis, 282-284
Jaboratory analysis, 509
pseudocysts, 380
feline infectious, 284, 316-317
neoplastic, 516
rupture, 380-381, 381f
intestinal surgery, 322
thoracocentesis, 474, 474b, 474f 476f, 508
traumatic injury, 380-381, 381f
pathophysiology, 281-282, 282t
Pleuroperitoneal hernias, congenital, 521-522,
Pancreatitis, 378-380
primary, 284
522f, 526-527, 527b, 529
acute necrotizing, 378, 378b, 380, 380f
secondary, 284
Pleuroperitoneal ruptures, acquired, 522-523,
acute suppurative, 378
surgical management, 285-287, 304-305
524b, 524f, 526-527, 526f, 527b, 529
 chronic non-suppurative, 378
tertiary, 285
 Plication, intestinal, 316
surgery. 379-380
physiology, 281
Pneumocolonography, 326
therapy, 379-380, 379t
uroperitoneum, 282, 284-285,426
Pneumocystography, 424
Papilloma/cutaneous papillomatosis, 210
Personnel, veterinary, 73-74
Pneumonectomy. 552, 554b
Paracostal hernias, 275
Pethidine, 19
Pneumonia, 36f, 549
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Pharmaconutrition, 59
Pneumoperitoneum
autaneous, 216
Pharynx, 617-631
intestinal perforation, 283, 283f, 304
Jung. 544
anatomy, 617-618, 617f
laparoscopy. 254-256
thymic tumors, 515t
anesthesia, 619, 619f
Pneumothorax, 80f, 514-515
Paraproteinemia, 10
biopsy, 620-621
causes, 515b
Parasympathetic nervous system, 301
choanal atresia, 626
CT images, 476f
Parathyroid se Thyroid and parathyroid
diagnostic imaging, 620, 620f-621f
of pulmonary origin, 549
Parenteral nutrition (PN), 46, 59-60, 61f 125,
endoscopy 619-620, 619f
thoracic wall surgery, 504
321
foreign bodies, 99-100, 625-626, 625f-
thoracoscopy 487-488, 488b, 491-492
 Parotid gland see Salivary glands
626f, 629
 Poliglecaprone sutures, 106t-108t, 107-108
Pasteurella spp., 184-186
nasal turbinates, 628
Polyamide sutures, 107t-108t, 109
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 558-562,
nasopharyngeal stenosis, 626, 627f, 629,
 Polybutester sutures, 107t, 110
563b, 566
630b, 630f
 Polydioxanone (PDS) sutures, 106t-108t, 109
741
Index
Polyester sutures, 107t, 110
nutritional status, 55-56
female genital tract, 458, 458f
Polyglactin 910 sutures, 106t-108t, 108
organ systems, 11-13
hernias, 271, 272f
Polyglactin mesh, 112
 physical examination, 3-9. 70
kidney and ureter, 83, 84f, 402-404
 Polyglycolic acid (PGA) sutures, 106t-108t,
pre-existing conditions, 10-11
large intestine, 326
108-109
problem-based, 9, 9f
liver and biliary tract, 346, 347t
Polyglycomers, 107t
see also Endoscopy. diagnostic; Imaging.
pancreas, 378
 Polyglyconate sutures, 108t, 109
diagnostic
peritoneum,283,283f
Polyglytone sutures, 106t-108t, 109
Preoperative blood transfusions
small intestine, 314, 314f
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 10
anemia, 11, 16, 49-50
stomach, 302, 302f-303f
Polypropylene meshes, 112-113, 503-504, 503f
hepatobiliary disease, 12, 50
urethra, 435, 435f-436f
 Polypropylene sutures, 107t-108t, 110
hypoproteinemia, 11
ear, 593
Polyps
obstructive small intestinal disease, 11
interventional, 87-88, 88f
adenomatous, 316, 316f
Preoperative fasting. 17, 56-59
larynx, 637, 637f
 nasal inflammatory (mesenchymal
Preoperative stress reduction, 67-74
nose, 656
hamartoma), 658, 659f
Prepubic tendon, 269, 270f
pharynx, 620, 620f
pharyngeal, 621-624, 622f-623f, 629, 629f,
hernias/rupture, 275-277, 276b
skin tumors, 209
631, 631f
Prepuce, 449, 451
skull, 709
Polyurethane dressings. 182t
Pressure bandages, 118
thoracic, 77-80, 79f-81f, 474-475, 475f,
 Polyurethane feeding tubes, 128b
Pressure sores, 178t
496
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) feeding tubes, 128b
Primary portal vein hypoplasia, 363
diaphragmatic hernias/ruptures, 521-522,
 Popliteal lymphangiography, 516 
Proctoscopy, 327
524-525, 524b, 524f-525f
Portal atresia, 367
Progestins, 222
lung. 541-542
Portosystemic shunt, 361-372
Prokinetic agents, colonic, 328, 328t
pleural effusion, 508-509, 508f-509f
anatomy, 361
Prolapse
trachea, 532-533, 532f-533f
diagnostic imaging. 82-83, 82f-83f,
rectal, 332-333, 332f, 333b
Radionuclides, scintigraphy see Scintigraphy
363-364
uterine, 462
Radiosurgery, stereotactic, 15153
medical treatment, 363t, 365
Propofol, 21t, 26
Radiotherapy. 149, 151-157
surgical management/techniques, 111-112,
Proptosis, 696-697, 696f
acromegaly, 716
367-370
Prostate, 451, 451f
FISS, 153f, 155-156, 155f-156f 238-240,
Prostheses
239t
364f
meshes see Meshes, surgical
four 'R's' of, 151, 152b
 Positive contrast peritoneography, 524b
 palatal defects, 687, 687f
indications for, 153-154
 Postoperative complications, 29-38
silicone, 114, 114f
lymphoma, 154
anemia, 33-35
Prothrombin time (PT), 35
mammary tumors, 228
disseminated intravascular coagulation, 35
Pseudocysts
morbidity scoring schemes, 157t-158t
electrolyte abnormalities, 32-33
pancreas, 380
nasal tumors, 154, 154f-155f 212f, 668
emergency boxes, 40, 40t
 para-ureteral/perinephric, 408-409,
oral tumors, 154-155
fluid therapy, 30-32
408f-409f
 pinnal SCC, 596
infection, 35-36, 122
Pseudohealing. 173-174
pituitary tumors, 156, 718
monitoring for, 29-30, 39-40, 40b
Psoas muscle, intrathoracic, 78, 78f
radiation biology, 151-152, 152b, 152f,
shock, 36-38
 Pulmonary surgery see Lung
156-157
 Postoperative nursing care, 39-48
Pulse
radiation delivery devices/techniques,
abdominal surgery, 45-48
 measurement of femoral, 7, 8f
152-153, 152b, 153f
basic parameters, 40
 postoperative monitoring. 40
radiation physics, 151-152
head and neck surgery 48
postoperative pain recognition, 42
surgery/chemotherapy/radiotherapy
movement, 42
see also Heart rate
combinations, 149, 154-156
pain recognition, 41-42, 44f
Punch biopsy, 143t, 144-145, 145b, 145f
thyroid disease, 156, 648-649
recovery from anesthesia, 39-40
Puncture wounds, 178t
toxicity. 156-157
skin and adnexal surgery, 42-43
Pyelography, antegrade, 403-404
umor response, 156-157, 157b, 1571
 temperature, 41
Pyelolithotomy,411,411b,411f
Random flaps, 195-197, 196b
thoracic surgery, 43-45
Pyloric stenosis, 304, 304f, 308, 310f-311f, 311t
Rathke's pouch tumor, 625
Potassium abnormalities see Hyperkalemia;
Pyloromyotomy, 311 t
Reception areas, 67, 69f, 69t
Hypokalemia
Pyloroplasty, 308, 310f-311f, 311t
 Reconstructive surgery
Practice personnel, 73-74
Pyometra, 459-461, 462f, 465-466, 465b
body wall defects, 236, 237f
Prednisolone
Pyothorax, 37, 510-512, 510t-511t, 518
flaps and grafts see Flaps; Grafts
anesthetic risk, 10
Record-keeping, wounds, 179, 179b
COP protocol, 165, 166t
Q
 Rectal disease see Large intestine
Pregabalin, 15-16
 Rectal temperature, 9
Premedication/sedation, 15, 16t, 26b
Quad protocol, 21, 21t
 postoperative nursing care, 41
Gl endoscopy. 93
 postoperative pain recognition, 42
respiratory tract endoscopy. 97-98
R
Rectocutaneous fstulas, 332
thoracic surgery, 476
Rectovaginal fstulas, 331-332, 332f, 337,
wound management, 180
Radioactive iodine therapy 156, 648
338f
Preoperative assessment, 3-13
Radiography. 75
Re-feeding syndrome, 60
cancer patients, 141-145
abdominal, 81-83
Re-intubation, emergency equipment, 39
history taking, 3, 55
bladder, 424
Remifentanil, 16t, 26
laboratory database, 9-10, 141
esophagus, 292,293f
 Renal surgery see Kidney
742
Index
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
Sarcoma
wound healing, 171-174
[RAAS), 394
feline injection site see Feline injection site
wound management, 177-190
Respiratory patterns, 473. 474t
sarcomas (FISS)
see also Flaps; Grafts
 Respiratory rate, 8
nasal, 657f
Skin staplers, 113
common terms, 473t
non-injection site, 214-215, 214f
Skin tenting hydration and, 6
 postoperative fluid therapy. 31
oral, 575, 584, 673, 681
Skull
postoperative monitoring. 40
orbital, 695f
anatomy. 707
postoperative pain recognition, 42
 pharyngeal, 625
fractures, 710
Respiratory sounds, 8, 473
spleen, 390-391
see also Neurocranium
Respiratory system
thoracic wall, 499
Sliding (advancement) flaps, 196, 196f-197f,
diagnostic approach, 473-475
Sartorius muscle flaps, 276-277
199, 200b, 200f, 698-699
diagnostic imaging. 77-80, 474-475
Satinsky clamps, 137, 137f
 Sliding hiatal hernias, 521, 523f, 525-526,
 physical examination, 8, 473-474,
Scapulectomy, FISs, 234f 235-236, 235b
528b, 528f, 529
473t-474t, 508
Sciatic nerve block, 19
Small-bore wire-guided thoracic drains, 121,
thoracocentesis, 474, 474b, 474f, 476f
Scintigraphy, 83, 85-87, 347, 347t, 363
121f, 480, 483-484, 483b, 483f-484f
diaphragm see Diaphragm
thyroid and parathyroid disease, 86-87, 86b,
 Small intestinal submucosa (SIS), 112, 504 
endoscopy 91, 96-100
86f, 86t, 647-648
Small intestine, 313-322
impending crisis indicators, 473b
Scissors, 134b, 134f, 137f, 138
adenomatous polyps, 316, 316f
lung see Lung
Scrotal (inguinal) hernias, 272-274, 274b
anastomosis, 114, 319, 320b, 321f
pleura see Pleura
Scrotum, 449-451
anatomy.313
 postoperative nursing care, 48
Sedation see Premedication/sedation
anti-cancer drug toxicity, 163t, 164
 radiation morbidity scoring schemes,
Seizures
biliary diversion techniques, 354-356
157t-158t
brain surgery patients, 27, 48
biopsy, 319
 respiratory rate see Respiratory rate
portosystemic shunt, 365, 370-371
fuill thickness, 249, 249b, 249f 251
stents, 115, 115f
Seldinger-type thoracic drains, 121, 121f 480.
laparoscopic, 259-261, 261b
 thoracic see Thoracic surgery
483-484, 483b, 483f-484f
endoscopy. 96
trachea see Trachea
Semitendinosus muscle flap (SMF), 277-279
enterectomy, 319, 320b, 320f-321f, 322
see also Larynx; Pharynx
Sepsis, 36-38
enterotomy, 319, 319b, 320f-321f, 322
Resting energy requirement ( RER), GO. GOb
chemotherapy risk, 165
feline infectious peritonitis granulomas,
Resuscitation drugs, 16, 17t
 peritonitis se Peritoneum, peritonitis
316-317, 316f
Retractors
Septic shock, 36
foreign bodies, 313, 313f-314f, 315, 319,
abdominal, 135, 135f-136f, 246
Seroma formation
320f
thoracic, 136-137, 136f
mammary gland surgery, 228
 gastroduodenal ulceration/perforation.
Retrovirus testing, 10, 35
 prophylactic surgical drains, 117
304-305, 304f, 309f, 311t
Reverse sneezing. G19
Serosal patching, peritonitis, 286
gastroduodenostomy, 311t
Rheolytic thrombectomy, 88
Sevoflurane, 21t, 26
intussusception, 314-316, 314f-316f 319
Rhinitis, 656, 658-660, 663-665, 668
Shear injuries, 178t
laparoscopic biopsy, 259-261, 261b
Rhinoscopy 96-100, 97b, 656
Shock
laparoscopic images, 2G0f
Rhinotomy, 662, 662b, 663f, 665-666,
postoperative, 36-38
mesenteric volvulus, 316, 319, 322
667f
thoracic trauma patients, 496
neoplasia, 317-319, 317f-318f
Rib
wound management, 179
short bowel syndrome, 322
fractures, 77f, 80, 80f
Short bowel syndrome, 322, 342
stapling, 114
intercostal thoracotomy, 478, 478f-480f
Sialodenitis, necrotizing, 576-577
surgical management/techniques, 319
removal in FISs, 236
Silastic buttons, 687, 687f
trauma, 317, 317f
retractors, 136-137, 478, 478f-480f
Silicone feeding tubes, 128b
 gastroduodenal perforation, 304-305,
thoracic wall anatomy, 495
Silicone implants, 114, 114f 
304f, 309f, 311t
thoracic wall reconstruction, 503, 503f
Silk sutures, 107t, 109
viability criteria, 319
thoracic wall resection, 502
Silver dressings, 182t, 183-184
wound edges, 319
Right-angle (mixter) forceps, 137. 137f
Sinus tracts, 178t
 Sneezing, reverse, 619
Ring and hook retractor, 135, 136f
Skin and adnexa
SOAP protocol, 29-30, 30b
Robenacoxib, 15
adnexal tumors, 211
Sodium, postoperative abnormalities, 32-33
Roberts-Bistner procedures, 699, 700b-701b,
anatomy, 171, 174b, 190.195
Sphincteroplasty, 356
700f
engrafiment properties, 174, 174b
Sphincterotomy, 356
Rotating (transposition) flaps, 196, 197f
eyelid, 691
Sphygmomanometry, Doppler, 4, 5b, 5f
Ruptures, definition, 270
flaps see Flaps
Spinal canal lymphoma, 76f
&e also Hernias, abdominal wall
grafts see Grafts
Spinal cord, radiation toxicity, 158
hyperadrenocorticism, 395, 395f 712-713,
Spleen, 387-391
s
712f
anatomy, 387, 387f
late radiation toxicity, 158, 158t
exploratory celiotomy, 246, 248f
 Salivary glands
 mammary glands see Mammary gland disease
hemoabdomen/hemoperitoneum, 387-388.
anatomy, 571-572, 572f
postoperative nursing care, 42-43
390-391
mucocele, 577
radiation morbidity scoring schemes.
laparoscopic images, 260f
necrotizing sialoadenitis, 576-577
157t-158t
neoplasia, 214, 389b, 389f, 390-391
neoplasia, 576, 577f
skin loss wounds, 178t
normal radiographic characteristics, 81
 postoperative complications, 584
tumors, 209-216
splenectomy, 390-391, 390b
ranulas, 573f
se also Feline injection site sarcomas
torsion, 389
resection, 580-582, 581b, 582f, 583b
(FISS); Squamous cell carcinoma
traumatic injury, 388-389, 389f
743
Index
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 211-213,
Sublingual gland see Salivary glands
pleura see Pleura
212f
Suction, 133, 134f
thoracic wall, 495-504
head and neck, 574, 579, 579f
Sufentanil, 16t
anatomy, 495, 496f
chin, 579
Sunburn, 178t
bite wounds, 497-498, 501-502
ear, 595-596, 595f-596f, 599-602
Surgery tables, 254, 254f
cinical signs of disease, 495-496
eyelid, 596f, 693-694, 694f 699f
Surgical drains se Drains, surgical
cush injuries, 497-498, 501-502
lip, 578f
 Surgical implants see Implants, surgical
FISS, 236
mouth, 154-155, 155f, 189f, 574, 584,
 Surgical incisions see Wounds, surgical
flail chest, 22b, 497, 498f, 501, 501b, 501f
673
 Surgical instruments see Instruments, surgical
neoplasia, 498-499, 498f, 502-504, 502b
nose, 154, 154f-155f, 212f, 596f, 658f,
 Surgical meshes see Meshes, surgical
pectus excavatum, 496-497, 497b, 497f,
6581, 662, 666, 668
Suture forceps, Galiban, 135, 136f
497t, 500-501, 500b, 500f
tongue, 576
Suture materials, 105-106
reconstruction, 502-504
see also Mandibulectomy and
absorbable, 107-109
trauma patients, 496
maxillectomy
needles, 110
thoracoscopy 254-255, 487-492
multicentric, 212
non-absorbable, 109-110
thoracotomy see Thoracotomy
 non-healing wounds, 189f
reactions to, 110-111
traumatic injury
treatment, 154, 166, 212
size conversions, 106t
 acquired pleuroperitoneal ruptures, 
pinna,596
tissue glue and, 111
522-523, 526-527, 526f, 527b, 529
Staff, veterinary, 73-74
Suture patterns, 106, 106f-107f
anesthesia, 22b, 24
 Stainless steel sutures, 107t, 109
Suture placement, 106, 173-174
bite wounds, 490f 497-498, 501-502
Staplers/stapling, 113-114, 113t, 335, 351
Suture removal, wound healing, 171-173
preoperative considerations, 13
lung, 113-114, 551-552, 552f-553f
Swallowing problems see Dysphagia
radiology. 80, 80f-81f
Starvation
Syringe feeding. 125
wound management, 177-179
Gl endoscopy. 93
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Thoracoabdominal (TA) staples, 113-114, 113t,
postoperative, 59
(SIRS), 36-37, 36b, 282
114f, 552f-553f
preoperative, 17, 56-59
 Systemic mastocytosis, 214
Thoracocentesis, 474, 474b, 474f, 476f, 527,
re-feeding syndrome, 60
527f
Stay sutures
T
 Thoracodorsal (TD) axial pattern flaps, 200,
abdominal access surgery, 256f
201f-202f, 202b
cystotomy procedures, 247f
Tarsorrhaphy, 696-697, 697b, 697f
axillary wounds, 190, 191b, 192f-193f 202f
 gastric surgery, 307, 307f
Technetium (Tc) scintigraphy, 83, 86, 86f, 86t,
Thoracoscopy, 254-255, 487-492
Stents, 115
347
Thoracostomy tubes, 480-484, 482f
biliary, 353
Technicians, 73-74
cardiac surgery, 566
colonic, 330
Teeth
placement, 482b
 intraluminal esophageal, 296
infraorbital nerve block, 25
postoperative care, 45, 484-485
nasopharyngeal stenosis, G29-630
 mandibular nerve block, 25
thoracic wall surgery 504
placement, 88, 88f
mental nerve block, 25
 transthoracic esophagotomy, 299
tracheal, 115, 115f, 538-539, 538b, 538f
severe dental disease, 674
see also Small-bore wire-guided thoracic
ureteral, 88f, 115, 115f, 405, 406f, 413,
Teletherapy. 152
drains
415b
 Temperature see Body temperature
Thoracotomy, 477-484
urethral, 115, 445
 Temperature management units, 37, 37f
anesthesia and analgesia, 22-23, 476, 484
 Stereotactic radiosurgery, 152-153
Tenesmus, fecal, 325-326, 329, 341
drains, 480-485, 482b, 482f-484f
Steroids, brain surgery, 26-27
Tension gastrothorax, 305, 305f
heart surgery, 562
Stomach, 301-311
Testis, 450-451
intercostal, 477, 477t, 478b, 478f-480f, 485,
abdominal stapling, 114
castration, 451-455, 452b, 452f-453f
526
anatomy, 301-302, 301f-302f
cancer risk reduction, 146
lateral, 477
diaphragmatic rupture, 305, 305f-306f
colonic entrapment following, 329
median stemotomy, 477-480, 481b,
endoscopy (gastroscopy), 94-96, 95f-96f,
silicone prostheses, 114, 114f
481f-482f, 485, 517, 562
302, 303f
αyptorchidism, 450-451, 450f, 454b,
transthoracic esophagotomy, 299
esophageal hiatus, 305, 308
454f-455f
vascular ring anomalies, 296, 297b
foreign bodies, 301, 303-304, 303f
laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy, 261-262,
Thrombectomy, rheolytic, 88
gastroduodenal ulceration and perforation,
264b.264f
Thrombin time (TT), 35
304-305, 304f, 309f 311t
neoplasia, 146, 451
Thrombocytopathia
gastrostomy feeding tubes, 61f 126t, 129.
Thoracic duct ligation (TDL), 491, 492b, 516
acquired, 10, 35
130b, 130f, 298, 307-308, 309f
 Thoracic surgery
disseminated intravascular coagulation, 35
neoplasia, 96f 305, 308, 310b, 310f, 311t
anatomy. 77-78, 495, 496f
inherited, 10
normal radiographic characteristics, 81
anesthesia and analgesia, 22-23, 45, 484, 496
 postoperative anemia, 33-34
pyloric stenosis,304,304f 308, 310f-311f
diagnostic imaging, 77-80, 177-179,
 Thromboembolism
311t
474-475, 496
aortic, 88
 Stones see Cholelithiasis; Cystoliths;
diaphragm see Diaphragm
pulmonary. 548
Urolithiasis
drains, 45, 46f, 117, 121, 121f, 480-485,
Thymic tumors
Stress reduction, 67-74
482b, 482f
causes, 514t
Strictures
heart see Heart
 paraneoplastic syndromes, 515t
esophageal, 292-293, 293f, 295-296, 296b,
instruments, 113-114, 133-137, 134b, 134f,
see also Thymoma
296f, 298, 298f
136b, 136f, 476, 477b, 499, 500t
Thymoma, 154, 514, 514t
urethral, 442
lung see Lung
feline exfoliative dermatitis, 216
Subcutis, wound healing, 173-174
 physical examination, 7-8
resection, 517, 517b, 517f
744
Index
Thyroglossal duct cyst, 576
Transporting cats, 67, 68b
reimplantation (neoureterocystotomy).
Thyroid and parathyroid, 645-653
Transposition (rotating) flaps, 196, 197f
414-415, 416b.416f-417f
anatomy. 645-646, 645f
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, 398, 713,
renal descensus, 418
see also scintigraphy below
717-725, 721b-722b, 721f, 723f, 725f
stents, 88f, 115, 115f, 405, 406f, 413, 415b
hypercalcemia, 646, 649-650
Traumatic myocarditis, 24
trauma, 405-408, 411
hyperthyroidism
Trocars
ureteronephrectomy, 411, 411b, 413f
clinical signs, 646
laparoscopic surgery, 255-256, 256f, 258
ureterotomy, 413, 414f, 415b
concurrent diseases, 647
thoracic drains, 121, 480, 482b
ureteroureterostomy, 411-413, 413b, 413f
 scintigraphy, 86-87, 87f, 647-648
thoracoscopic surgery, 488, 488b
urolithiasis, 83, 404-405, 404f-406f, 411,
screening tests, 646-647
Tube drains, 119, 119f, 123
413
treatment, 156, 648-649
Tube feeding. 125-129
Urethra, 433-446
see also Thyroidectomy
duodenostomy tubes, 126, 126b
anatomy, 433-434, 434f, 449
hypocalcemia, 33, 652
esophageal, 48f 60, 60f-61f, 126t, 127-129,
cystoscopy/urethrocystoscopy. 100-103,
hypothyroidism, 653
128b, 128f
424-425, 435
neoplasia, parathyroid, 649
gastrostomy, 61f, 126t, 129, 130b, 130f, 298,
feline lower urinary tract disease, 436, 436f,
neoplasia, thyroid, 87, 87f, 648-649, 648f
307-308, 309f
439
palpation, 646, 647f
jejunostomy, 60, 61f, 126, 126b
fistulas, 331, 438
parathyroid autotransplantation, 650-652
nasoesophageal, 60, 61f, 126-127, 126t,
hypoplastic, 438, 438f
parathyroidectomy. 652-653
127b, 127f, 129
neoplasia, 438, 445
scintigraphy, 86-87, 86b, 86f-87f, 86t,
re-feeding syndrome, G0
perineal urethrostomy, 436, 438-443,
647-648
Tumors see Cancer
440b-441b, 440f-442f, 445-446,450f
thyroidectomy se Thyroidectomy
 Tympanic membrane
prepubic urethrostomy, 443, 443f-444f,
Thyroid-stimulating homone (TSH), 716
anatomy. 588
444b
Thyroidectomy, 13, 87, 156, 648, 650,
evaluation, 591, 591f, 594
resection/anastomosis, 444-445, 444b, 444f
651b-652b, 652-653
Tympanometry, 591, 594
rupture, 436-438, 437b
TIME mnemonic, 181b
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKls), 166
imaging. 77, 83-84, 437f
Tissue glue, 111
primary repair, 445, 445f
Toileting, litter trays, G9-70, 73
U
wound healing. 438-439, 439f
Tomotherapy. 152-153
stents, 115, 445
Tongue
Ulceration, 178t
 transpelvic urethrostomy, 443-444, 444b
anatomy. 571
external ear canal, 591
Urethrocystoscopy/cystoscopy, 100-103,
foreign bodies, 576
gastroduodenal se Gastroduodenal
424-425, 428, 435
glossectomy, 580, 580b, 580f-581f
ulceration/perforation
Urethrography, 83-84, 84f, 435, 435f-436f
inflammatory disease, 576
Ulltrasonic vessel sealing device, 133-135
 Urethrorectal fstulas, 331, 438
mandibular nerve block, 25
Ulltrasonography (Us), 75
Urethrostomy
neoplasia, 576, 576f
abdominal
perineal, 436, 438-443, 440b-441b,
thyroglossal duct cyst, 576
adrenal gland, 393, 394f, 713
440f-442f, 445-446, 450f
traumatic injury, 575-576, 575f
large intestine, 326-327
prepubic, 443, 443f-444f, 444b
tumors, 154-155, 155f
liver and biliary tract, 346-347, 347t
transpelvic, 443-444, 444b
Tonsil (palatine), 571, 579-580, 579f, 584,
pancreas, 378, 378f 381f
Urinalysis (UA), 9-10
584b
peritonitis, 283-284, 283f
Urinary bladder see Bladder
Total ear canal ablation (TECA), 605-607,
portosystemic shunt, 82, 363, 363f
Urinary catheters, 46-47
606f-607f, 607b, 611-612
small intestine, 314, 314f-315f
intestinal foreign bodies, 319, 320f
Total plasma protein (TP), 9-10
spleen, 388
 Urinary incontinence
Tourniquet injuries, 178t
stomach, 302, 302f
after urethral surgery, 443, 445-446
Trachea, 531-539
urogenital tract, 83, 402-403, 424, 425f,
urethrocystoscopy. 101
anatomy, 531, 532f
435. 458
Urination
avulsion, 534, 534f, 536
chronic wounds, 188f
 after urethral surgery, 445
bronchoesophageal fistula, 535
Doppler sphygmomanometry. 4, 5b, 5f
monitoring. 46-47, 430-431
collapse, 535
ear disease, 593
 toileting preferences, G9-70, 73
diagnostic imaging. 532-533, 532f-533f
larynx, 637
Urine
emergency management, 532, 537
patent ductus arteriosus, 558-559, 559f
postoperative leakage, 443, 445
endoscopy. 533
respiratory disease, 474-475, 475f, 509,
 postoperative oliguria, 21
endotracheal tubes see Endotracheal tubes
509f, 542, 545
Urine specifc gravity, 9-10
foreign bodies, 533, 536
thyroid and parathyroid disease, 647
Urinoma, perirenal, 408-409
iatrogenic rupture, 534-536, 534f
Umbilical hernias, 271-272, 273b, 273f
Urogenital tract
masses, 533-534, 533b, 534f, 536
Urachal diverticula, 427
anatomy. 246
resection/reconstruction, 536, 536b,
Uremia, thrombocytopathia, 10
anogenital clefts, 332, 337, 339f
538-539
Ureter
cystoscopy/urethrocystoscopy 100-103,
stents, 115, 115f, 538-539, 538b, 538f
anatomy, 401-402
424-425, 428, 435
surgical techniques, 535-538
cystonephropexy, 418
diagnostic imaging. 81, 83-84, 402-404,
Tracheostomy, 537-538, 537b, 537f
ectopic, 409, 414, 427
424
Tracheotomy, 535-536, 538-539
interventional radiology. 88f
hyperkalemia, 12, 20, 32
Tramadol, 15
laparoscopic images, 260f
interventional radiology, 88f
 Transfusions see Blood transfusions
neoplasia, 409
laparoscopic images, 260f 
Transitional cell carcinoma, bladder, 426, 427f
 para-ureteral pseudocysts, 408-409,
leakage into peritoneal cavity, 282, 284, 426
Transplantation, kidney, 418-420, 419f-420f
408f-409f
stents, 88f, 115, 115f
745
Index
trauma
Vestibular system,589
pseudohealing, 173-174
 diagnostic imaging. 83
dysfunction, 589, 590t, 602-603, 602t, 609
second intention cutaneous, 172-173, 172t,
urethrocystoscopy, 101
Veterinary personnel, 73-74
185, 195
see aiso Bladder; Female genital tract; Kidney:
Veterinary practices, stress reduction in, 67-74
small intestine, 318-319
Male genital tract; Ureter; Urethra
Video-assisted thoracic surgery see
subcutis, 173-174
Urography, 83, 84f, 403, 403f
Thoracoscopy
urethral surgery, 438-439
Urolithiasis
Vincristine, 163t, 164-165
Wound management, 177-190
bladder see Cystoliths
COP protocol, 165, 166t
axillary wounds, 189-190
feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD),
Vital signs, postoperative monitoring. 40. 40b
ballistic injuries, 178t, 186-187
436
Vitamin D acronym, 9b
bite wounds, 184-186, 186f-187f
kidney and ureter, 83, 404-405, 404f-406f,
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy, 10, 34, 50,
burn wounds, 178t, 186
411, 413
347-348
chronic wounds, 178t, 187-190
Uroperitoneum, 282, 284-285,426
Volvulus, mesenteric, 316, 319, 322
dosure options, 184, 185b, 185f-186f
 Uterus se Female genital tract, uterus
Vomiting, anti-cancer drugs, 163t, 164
traumatic abdominal hernias, 274-277,
Vulva, 457-458, 463
275f-277f, 276b
V
wound types, 178t
see also Flaps; Grafts
Vaccines
Wounds, surgical
FISS, 233, 240-241
Waiting rooms, 67, 69f, 69t
antimicrobial prophylaxis, 10-11
granulomas. 241
Wards, 70-73, 71f
classifcation, 11t
Vacuum-assisted wound closure, 184, 184f
Warming methods
cosure see Staplers/stapling: Suture 
Vagina, 457-458, 457f, 463
burn wounds from, 186
materials; Suture patterns; Tissue glue
Vascular access ports (VAPs), 52
hypothermic patients, 37, 37f, 41, 41f, 179
dehiscence, 122, 178t, 207
Vascular ring anomalies, 293-294, 293f 296,
thoracotomy, 476
abdominal surgery, 251f 322
297b, 297f, 298
Water bowls, 72
mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 680
Vasculitis, skin sloughing secondary to,
Weight, body see Body weight
palatal defects, 690
178t
Wet-to-dry dressings. 181-182, 181f-182f
drains see Drains, surgical
Vasopressin [ADH), 17t, 31-32
Wound catheter infusion systems, 19, 19f
dressings see Dressings
Ventilation
Wound healing. 171-174
healing, 171-174, 185
brain surgery, 26
axillary wounds, 189-190
incomplete closure, 117-118
laparoscopic surgery, 255
chronic wounds, 174, 188-190
 postoperative infection see Infections.
 thoracic wall surtery, 504
dinical applications, 173-174
postoperative
thoracoscopy, 487-488
colorectal surgery, 334-335
 postoperative nursing care, 43
thoracotomy, 22-23, 476, 477f
cutaneous anatomy, 171, 190
 postoperative pain recognition, 41-42
Ventilators, 22, 22t
engrafiment properties, 174. 174b
wound catheter infusion systems for
Ventral bulla osteotomy (VBO), 138, 607,
frst intention cutaneous, 171-173, 185,
analgesia, 19
608f-612f, 609, 610b, 629
186f
Ventral laryngotomy, G39, G42b
flaps, 174
Z
Vessel sealing devices, 133-135, 135f, 137,
indolent pockets, 173-174, 174f
258-259
mandibulectomy and maxillectomy, 675
 Zygomatic gland se Salivary glands
746